A MERRY AND Pleasant Comedy: Never before Printed, called A Shoo-maker a
Gentleman.

As it has been sundry Times Acted at the Red Bull and other Theaters, with a
general and good Applause.

Written by W. R. Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks, and are to be sold by John Cowper, at his Shop at
the East End of St. Paul's Church at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1638.

The Printer to the honest and High-spirited Gentlemen of the never decaying
Art, called the Gentle Craft.
NOne but to you (as whom of right it does concern) I thought good to present
this Play: which though written many years since, ought not therefore to be
slighted: I confess we have better for Language in these our exquisite and
refined Times, yet for the matter and Subject, none of a more delightful and
pleasant Style; for it is well known to you (Gentlemen Cordwiners) that every
year you do celebrate the Feast of Crispine, and Crispianus, not in a mean
and ordinary way, but with a great deal of Ceremony, keeping it as an Holyday,
feasting and entertaining your friends and neighbors. And likewise it has bin
so well approoved by you in the acting of it upon the Stage, and that with your
loud alarums, (I mean your clapping of hands) that I could not choose but
commend it to you now in Print: for it is a Play that is often Acted; and when
others fade and are out of date, yet this does endure to the Last: I know it
may come short of that accuratenes both in plot and style that this witty age
does with greater curiosity acquire, I may thus excuse; that as Plays were
then, some twenty years agone, it was in the fashion. Nor could it have found
a fitter or more seasonable publication than at this time; when the glory of
our Nation is so much admired, and the valor of our English so much esteemd,
that it is sought for by foreign Natives, as you may read^ in this Subject we
have in hand; but I leave it to your perusal and imitation; and return to you
my brave spirited Gentlemen Shoo-makers, upon whom, and for whose sakes I have
published it; wishing you all that have their courages and forwardnes, their
noble Fates and Fortunes: So hoping you will go through stich, I leave thee to
Fare well.

The Actors Names.
A^lured, King of Britain. Elred and Offa this Kings two sounes, borrowing
the Names of Crispine and Crispianus. Sir Hugh, a Prince of Wales, and a Suitor
to Winifred. Amphiabel, a Nobleman. Maximinus and Dioclesian, the Emperors of
Rome. Nobleman and Warriers.
Bassianus, Lutius, Rutullus,
Roderick, King of Vandals. Hul^^^ke, King of Goths, Enemies to the Emperor. A
Nuntius from the Emperor Dioclesian. A Roman Captain. Soldiers and other
Attendants. Three Contrymen. A Shoemaker. Barnaby and Raph his Journymen. A
Queen, Wife to King Allured, and Mother to Crispine and Crispianus. Winifred,
a Virgin of Wales. Leodie^, Daughter to the Emperor Maximinus. A Nurse, who
attends her. Sisley, the Shoomakers Wife.
A Shoo-maker, A Gentleman.
Act. 1.
Enter Allured wounded, Elred, Offa, and the Queen. Alarm. King. AWay, stand
off, prop not a falling Castle with
Your weak strength, it is sinful Charity, and
Desperate folly to meet a mischief, whose
Entertainment is assured destruction: leave me
I pray savegard your own lives.

Queen. Oh Royal Sir, it is you that do despair,
Wounds are not always mortal.

Ellred. Dear sir let them be dressed:

King. You tire me out of breath with vain delays, as well
May you give life unto a stone, a senseless statue;
My life's but lent to bid you shun your deaths, and in that too
Heavens mercy is miraculous, yet you will not hear me:
Again I charge you as a King; yet none regards
Declining Majesty; then as a husband, and a Father here;
Do thou love me?

Quee. Approve it in my death, if thou mistrust it Allured.

King. Have you duty, you Phaenix of my age, for though
Two persons be distinguishable, yet ought there be but one
Combined heart in your fraternall union, your knees promise.

Both. Our duties are much lower.

King. Then here I charge ye for to leave the Field,
Fly from death, he is now in persuite of ye:
Fly from the Tyrant, for this unhappy day
Those bloody Persecutors Maximinus, and Dioclesian,
Display their by neckt Eagle over Britain,
While she lies under as a bleeding prey,
One Talent here is fastened.

Enter Amphiabell, and Sir Hugh. Hugh. Fly Noble Princes, we have stood out
the utmost
Of the day, till hope had lost his anchorage,
Therefore fly, and seek some other day for victory.

Amphi. How fares the King?

Al. Ene one the Virge of Bliss, O dear Amphiabell.
Noble Sir Hugh, what more could I have wished, then breath
To thank your kind assistance in this hapless day:
Oh take an equal jonyter with my Sons, from this cold Oracle
All I bequeath is Counsel for your safety, fly the slaughter,
For dying men are half Prophetical, if you abide
A longer stay you fall: oh do not make me guilty of your deaths
That drew you hither to expire your breaths, this path I
Progress but avoyde my way, you need not haste
To an assured danger: Farewell my love, my blessing here
Shall fall, perform my will, else Fate avert it all:
Thou can not boast grim death: I did not yield,
Nor fell by Agues, but like a King in the field.

Quee. Aye me distressed Queen.

Amphi. Your griefe's incurable, remember the will of your dead Lord,
And be a good Executrix, fly from persuing danger:
And you Royal youths must seek some shelter to secure
Your lives; away, it is all our Fates.

Elr. I could better dye on him that slew my Father.

Offa. Take my company in that, dear Brother.

Qu. So make a Mother prove unnatural, I will defend the foe
Through this breast you pass unto him, have ye forgot your Father?

El. No, we will reveng his death:

Quee. And kill your Mother first.

Hugh. What think ye Princes, that we left behind
The smallest attome of a seeming hope, when we
Forsook the field, you will not think so?

Elr. What Is your Counsel?

Am. Take on some course disguise, what poverty is it
But will be rich, being your lives protection.

Offa. Instruct and aid us some superior power,
Which do behold our forced necessity

Eld. Brother, it shall be thus; some poor Soldier slain in the
Battle will we change habits with: so it may be thought
That we are slain, and stay the bloody Inquisition.

Offa. It Is well advised, we will not assay to mend it:
This effected Mother, we will come and take our leaves.

Eld. What for your self Madam?

Qu. Here will I stay, until my eyes like briny Pyoners
With their continual Cadence, have dug up
A woeful Sepulcher, for these sweet Corpse;
And if these sterrill Founts prove weak, and dry,
Here will I kneel till death has cloyd his Gorge,
And left the putrefaction, the mortal dampe
Shall kiss me to his company for ever.

Am. Oh Madam, these are but fruitless apprehensions,
And savoureth not of that discreet virtue has been ever in you:
Your story has been filled with Temperance, Care, and Patience,
And all these forbid this barren Sacrifice, loose not your self
In the great loss of your dear Husband,

Hugh. Madam, if you dare trust your person to my protection,
I will Conduct you safe into North Wales,
Where Powes my Lord, and Father, yet maintains
A petty Royalty: Thither if please you wend,
We Will either keep or loose our selves with you.

Am. Alas Sir Hugh, little can you promise of safety there,
For from fair Winifred, the only Daughter, and Heir
To Dun-wallis, I have received too true intelligence;
The Barbarous Romans have supplanted peace,
Putting to sword, and torture all, that bear the
Name of Christians: Nay, even the right Amphiabell
Did hold is now so ruinate, I have not left
One Subject to command.

Hugh. Heard you this from virtuous Winifred?

Am. Much more of woe, the virtuous Maid her self
Has left off State, forsaken Royalty,
And keeps a Court so solitary, as it seems Within a cry, follow, follow.
More like a Cloister, then a Royal Palace.
Hark, our enemies pursue us, if we stay
We must resolve for death.

Hugh. Madam, either injoyne us for your safe Conduct along
With us, or here defend your life to the last breath?

Qu. Neither I beseech you gentlemen, will ye accept a poor widows
Thanks, for all your loves, it is a thin gratitude;
But it is all I have; I beseech ye haste away,
If you do other, I Will not thank you for it.
For here i will stay, and warm this cold remainder,
Until some fiend, sent from the infernal pit,
Does separate by force, what Heaven has knit.

Hugh. Then to the best protection of the Heavens,
We leave you to be comforted. Exit.

Qu. That shelter cover you.

Enter Eldred, and Offa. Eld. Come dear Brother, these poor habilliments may
find
Surer footing, than the rich Robes which Royalty is clad in:
If they do, we will bless the happy Transformation.
Mother, your blessing; nothing else we want
To further the issue of our unknown fate,

Qu. Take it, O take it in an hour of sorrow, but leave that all with me,
So you have all I can bestow upon you: follow, within follow.
But mentally, I Will still be blessing of you, and never cease
Hark, it is time you are gone, away; I charge ye on your duties.

Offa. But where is your own safety?

Qu. Leave me, and haste you hence I say,
I Will take my blessing often if you delay,
And plant my curse instead; Eldred, and Offa, you are my Sons,
I charge you to obey me.

Eld. Eldred and Offa are already gone, for with our habits we
Have changed our names, when such you hear of,
Oh let your prayers still bless them, with happy memory.

Qu. I Will never part with that remembrance:
Obey me and be gone.

Offa. With constant hope, that though vaild honor bear an
Ecliptic stain, our sun will pass it, and shine bright again

Exit. Qu. So, now come you Tyrants, here you shall find me
Praying for curses on your cruelty.

A Flourish. Enter Maximinus, Dioclesian, Leodice, Albon, Bassianus, and
Rutullas. Max. Now equal Caesar, brave Dioclesian, the days at leisure
To return thee thanks for ayding Maximinus in these wars,
In happy time thy succor came from France,
To make us Conquerors of Britain, which else might
Yet have been a doubtful day: when thou want aid,
Bid Maximinus come with this joint force,
We Will make the world our own.

Dio. Rome shall not loose its name, the worlds Commander,
Till this knot unties; perpetual be it, till Rome erects
Our golden Statues, placed by Saturn, and great Jupiter,
And there be deified, to bless all those which may succeed
But in these designs, let us remember high deserving
Albon, whose valuor was not seconded this day
By any single Arm.

Max. It was the best, the shout and full applause
Was only Albons, for which unto thy Knighthood late
Given in Rome, we add the stewardship of Great Britain
Under Maximinus, and Dioclesian: go to thy Barony
Of Verrolam, two legions there shall still attend one thee,
To quell and persecute these Christians:
Who will not stoop unto our Roman God,
Shall feel the stroke of our revengfull Rod.

Al. Albon shall still as substitute to Rome
Observe, and keep her high imperial Doom.

Max. Bassianus, be you Competitor with Lord Albon,
And with severity, through the conquered Cities pursue
The Christians to their Martyrdomes: -- Whose that?

Qu. I Will answer for my self; Tyrant a Christian, a husbandlesse
And Childlesse Christian, yet one so daring unto misery,
She throws a Challenge, to the worst thou can,
Defiance to thee thus; Oh were it poison to swell this
Tyrants bosom till it burst, and fall thus low.

Max. Ha ha ha, misery makes her desperate, thou add'st a
Triumph woman to our state, to brandish forth such
Fruitless Menaces; to Prison with her, we will think of
Further torments: I Will prostetute thy body to some Slave,
And if the issue prosper, make him a Hangman.

Qu. And such an other may thy Daughter have.

Leo. Choose for your self Lady, I have an eye to pleasure
My self?

Max. We Will hold no dispute with women, away with her:
Rochester Castle shall be your palace? you are like to keep
A hard House on it.

Qu. Like the Court thou keepst.

Max. No more words, away with her.

Qu. My words I Will better spend in Prayers to Heaven,
But if I chance to Curse, I Will think on thee:
My Royal Plants, Heaven guard from their full gripe,
Fall Fate on me, my time and days are ripe. Exit.

Dio. Oh Brother Caesar, in this British calm we will pas again
Over to stormy France, the Goths, and Vandalls have outpast
The bounds, and over the Rhine past into Burgandy, our work
Must be to reverberate, and drive them to Confined
Germany, while you persever, with an awful hand,
To keep our conquered foes beneath your feet; give not those
Frighted Welch-men time to breath:
But if again you doubt of what you can, you know your
Friend called Dioclessan?

Max. Your words are mine if you have need in France, we will Feast,
And bring you to the British shore, then part unto our work.
Our Daughter Leodice, we will leave to keep her court at Canterbury,
Rutullus, take it to your charge, to see erected one the
Conspicuous promonts of our Land, Beacons, which may stand
In ken of other, by whose sudden fires on the least invasion, we may be called
to Arms.

Rut. It shall be done.

Dio. A careful Policy, be my Tutor to teach me Military Discipline,
Fly Brason Oratrix, all lingued fame,
And tell at Rome of Maximinus name:
Say Dioclesian too will bring a Crown,
To bind thy seven fold Head with high Renown: Flourish.
Say like two Jove's, when our Dread Thunders burl'd,
Our sable Eagle strikes through all the world. Exeunt omn.

Enter discovered in a Shop a Shoemaker, his Wife spinning, Barnaby, two
Journimen. Shoo. Good boys, fine knaves, yerke it home, good ware will away,
When bad lies dead on our hands, there is no thrift in that;
Spin in a fair thread Sisly, let not my journimen want,
The Wars has lamed many of my old Customers, they cannot
Go a hie lone, bad world for us, but a wet winter, will wear
Out Shoo-leather, and make amends,
We Will cut it out if it do Boys?

Bar. Your journimen shall mount then Master, for my foots in the Stirrup
Already, ply your work Mistress, we always bring
Your labors to good ends I Will warrant ye.

Sis. Why Barnaby, thouseest I am at des^ance with my work
Till it be done, for I am always spitting on my toe.

Shoo. Good wench Sisly, there shall no Corns grow on thy toes
For that, thy shoes shall be large enough,
Finely shall thou go, and tread upon Neates Leather.

Bar. I Will eat the feet if she do Master;

Wife. Eat my feet goodman knave?

Shoo Misconstruction Sis, thou mistakes Barnaby, heel eat
Neates feet, none of thine; but Beef shall be thy food boy,
As good as the Major of Feversham cuts on's Trencher,
And Drink as strong as the Statute affords.

Bar. Statutes are strong, Master, therefore we should have strong drink:
I had rather wear Lace by the Statute, than drink if it be small.

Shoo. Good drink in thy throat if thou speak in earnest:
But Ralph, what price bears Ballets? no Music in Feversham?

Ralph. Faith sir your statute Beer has taken my pipe
A hole too low, it cannot reach Ela.

Shoo. I Will have that fault mended boy, but we must drink strong drink, as we
show our Religion, privately.
It Is dangerous to be good Christians now a days.

Bar. I am afraid there will be too many Christians sir,
Because many use to go a Pilgrimage Barefoot;
And that is an ill wind for our profit.

Shoo. No more talk of ill winds Barnaby, we will sing away sorrow
Strike up Ralph, I Will wash thy whistle anon boy.

Ralph. Well sir, I Will scour it first if I can then, Sings.

Enter Crispianus, and Crispinus. El. Brother, here is a life to mock at state,
and stain her surly
Greatness: who would venture to walk upon the Icy path
Of Royalty, that here might find a footing so secure:
Here Is harmony indeed, a fearelesse sport,
A joy our young years seld, has at Court.

Offa. I Brother, would we were of this Fellowship.

El. Do think we could forget our former ease
And fall to labor?

Offa. Why not? that was not without troubles of the mind,
And methinkes to exchange for the bodies labor, were a far
Freer good; to sing with homely cheer,
Were sweeter far then to feed fat with fear.

El. We Will put it then in practice, heaven grant we may
Find entertainment: good speed unto your labors Gentlemen.

Sho. Gentlemen, we are good fellows no Gent. yet if gentleness
Make Gentility we are Gentlemen: My pretty youths,
Would you ought with us you speak so friendly?

El. No more then we shall deserve sir.

Wife. And you are worthy of that in faith.

El. Sir, we are youths whom the rough hand of War has ruined,
And made desolate, our friends and means are parted from us,
Our friend's in Heaven, our means within the gripe of enemies
Both in accessuble thus much we are, Fatherless, friendlesse;
Succourlesse and forlorn, what we may be, lies yet within
The grant of some kind Master, that may instruct us in
Some honest Trade, to get our living by.

Shoo. Pretty spoken youths by Saint Anthony,
How do thou like them Sisly?

Wife. Yes truly husband, if they will do as well as they say,
I like 'em very well; good faces as faces goes now a days,
Prithee sweet heart be kind to 'em, and entertain 'em
If they like our Trade.

Bar. Oh good Master entertain 'em, we want junior prentises
For under work.

Ralph. Do sir, keep good faces in your shop?
Twill draw the Custom of pretty wenches the better.

Shoo. House-keeping's chargeable, men must have good meat.

Wife. They will work and earne their meat I Will warrant ye.

Shoo. What are ye, Brethren?

Both. In love and nature sir, the nearest Brethren.

Wife. It Is pity they should be parted then, if they love so well.

Shoo. Your Names?

Chris. Chrispianus mine.

Crispi. Mine Crispinus.

Shoo. Good names, good names, well boys on this condition
I will entertain you, I need not doubt your truths, and
Honesty, you have such fair and promising out sides:
But I must have you bound for seven years, and then
You are your own men, and a good trade to get your livings by.

Both. Withal our hearts,
And happy are we in your kind acceptance.

Sho. You shall be mine, then give 'em entertainment Barnaby.

Bar. New Aprons and Capps here, for a Couple of Gent.
So on with your Breast plate, this Cap makes thee a graduate,
You are come amongst Bacularious, beare-up your heads boys,
We Will teach ye to bristle, wax better and better, last to
The 12, then set foot in the stirop and have at all.

Shoo. Show them their tools, and give them entrance Barnaby

Enter Rutullus and Soldiers, bearing the Queen to Prison. Qu. Sir, I have
not been used to this hard travel,
If you dare mittigate your Masters Cruelty,
And let me rest a little, i will thank you for it.

Rut. It Is not in our Commission, but I Will dispense a little.

Shoo. Who is this I pray sir?

Rut. The Queen going to Prison, to Rochester Castle,
Do you not know her?

Shoo. Alack, alack.

Qu. My eyes are not deceaved, they are my Children.

Cris. It Is our Mother Offa, take heed our tears do not discover.

Cri. Pray heaven they do not, I fear my eyes will be kind traitors.

Qu. Dare ye be so kind, to afford a distressed woman a stool?

Wife. I dare do that Madam, Crispinus, reach a stool.

Qu. On thy knee Child, why do thou kneel to me?

Cri. It Is my duty Madam, misery has not changed your name,
Tho bated of your power, you are my Queen still.

Qu. Heaven bless thee for it, I have stolen thee a blessing.
Would thou add something too?

Cri. I would be as Dutiful as my Brother, Madam.

Qu. Is he thy Brother, blessing on you both:
This was a happiness beyond my hope, that I should once more Bless
My Children really, keep in thou woman's frailty,
Grief Chain my Tongue, least thou betray the utmost
Of my hopes, my tears may find excuse.

Rut. Why weeps those boys?

Cris. Alas Sir, it is often times the barren fruits of subjects
Loves, when they behold their Prince; but much more
Will the Flux of sorrow sir abound, when they behold
Them thrown to misery.

Rut. You're very kind

Wife. Kind boys they are, indeed they shall fare near the worse,
I could e'ne weep my self, to see my boys so kind hearted.

Rut. Madam, you do but trouble 'em, and win some drops
From them, that they would spare if you were absent.

Qu. It Is your trouble sir, they could be content with this kind
Expense, a longer sojourne, but you instruct me well:
Farewell, I can but thank ye, that is all I have
To give for your kind youths -- what will my tongue do,
Pray use them well, so much the more cause
They were kind to me.

Rut. Madam will you go?

Qu. We talk of no stay, let not your have make me
Unthankful pray, and bar my thanks for kindness,
But I have done: On to my house of woe, yet since we must,
Delay the more annoyes this comfort, yet heaven to my sorrows gives,
In midst of Tyranny my children lives. Exit.

Wife. The world treads not upright, methinkes
It had need of a good workman to mend it.

Sho. Peace Sisly, no problems, no figures, no woman's Rhetoric,
The tongue may undo the whole body, Tausume, there
Is Greek for ye wife, let us keep good consciences with in doors
How ere the wind blows abroad, it is honester deceit
To seem bad and be good, than to seem pure and be a knave,
Go too, good soles will carry out bad upper leathers,
It Is a bad time I can tell ye, but why were my boys
So passiionate, to weep at the Queens distress.

Cris. Alas sir, who could choose, passion me thought
Did make me apprehend strange fautasies, I made
The case mine own, supposed my Mother had bin
Haled to Prison; some would have pittyed her, though
But a mean woman, much more at such a Sovereigns fall.

Cri. I Brother, and suppose her Sons, though Royal,
Had seen our mother as we saw her, in Princely compassion
Perhaps they would have done the like.

Cris. No doubt, nay Master without offense, it was your fault too,
For in your eye I spide a pearl of pity.

Shoo. Good faith thou say true, I could do no less, neither
Do I discommend ye for it, it is a good bosom where mercy dwells.

Wise. I, their Compassion of women shall loose 'em nothing,
If they be but dutiful to their Master, and just to their Dame.

Shoo. Enough of Ceremony: What Is a clock Barnaby?

Bar. The chimes of my belly has gone, it should be past twelve.

Shoo. Provide dinner Sir, Master, journimen, and Prentises,
One Table serves for all; we feed as all fellows;
Shut up shop, this is afternoone's holy day in honor of
My two new Prentises, and this caveat for all, keep your
Bosoms locked, we may be good Christians, but not show it
Abroad, less in our Charity in times of blood
When tyrants Reign, it is dangerous to be good. Exeunt.

Enter Winifred in a black veil, Amphiabell, Saint Hugh, Howell and Lords.
Soft Music. Win. Ce se, cease, it is too loud, thistel-talenoise betrays
Our privacy, which we desire more than thronging Visitants,
What is it you would have of me, i will give my state to any of ye all,
Take it away, and give me here only my self to Govern;
More is too much to impose on my poor weakness.

Hugh That is too much Sweet Lady, do not task your happy virtues
To so hard a proof, there is no strict injunction sealed,
To bar the passage to a Nuptial Bed, that is a statute by
Self will decreed, to make Hymen a bond slave.

Win. O good Sir Hugh, how long have you laid a fruitles siege
Unto a Port that is impregnable; I thank ye, and must needs
Acknowledge my love, if I had such a Lunacy, to be a debt
To you, you have deserved it were it worth Receite.

Lord. Then give desert his due? leave of these nice points of cold
Virginity, and warm affection in the sweet embraces
Of a Noble Hu^band, fitter for your state than this Cloister habit.

Hugh. So shall you win a second po^er to yours, this Noble Prince
Will with a husband be a strong defense
Against your enemies.

Lor. Add to necessity, a proved Loyalty, a love that will not
Claim equality, but bound unto.

Win. No more, no more I pray, while sure my foes would not
This Cruel be, to encounter me at such unequal odds,
So many Soldiers against a silly woman, you cannot call
This Conquest if ye win: I claim the Law of Arms,
A friendly parley ere the Battle join, the time
Let it be now; I crave the friendly Respite of a month,
Mean time, let me hear no more Love Alarmes, then will
I either yield ye up the Fort, or stand in the defiance.

Lord. So so sir Hugh, there is now some hope.

Hugh. A promising fair hope, more than my three years service
Had before, a month sweet Beauty, O let it be more to show
My love wears humble Constancy, let it be two, or three.

Win. I take you at your word, it shall be three sir Hugh, in which time,
I lock, by virtue of this hand and tongue, your hand from any
Suite that founds but love, you shall not name the word
Within my Presence, it is breach of peace if ye do.

Hugh. You have locked the Closset and keep the Key of it.

Lord. Come then sir Hugh, since you have trust with love,
Lets deal with Arms another while, that when our foes
Come, they may perceive that we expect 'em.

Hugh My Life's my Countries, and I Will offert for them:
Three months I go a banished man from hence,
yet this I Will borrow from beauteous excellence,
When my white Plume shall in the field be spread,
My word of courage shall be Winifred. Exeunt Hugh and Lords.

Win. Alas good Prince, I can but pity thee,
And grieve because my pittie's pitiless;
Like a misers Alms, God help; without Charity:
For I shall never quite thy laboring love.
No Prince Amphiabell, you have wedded me to a Celestial
Bridegroom, you have taught my ignorance a knowing intellect:
It Is well begun, and who would not persevere
To Love that love that lives, and lasts for ever?

Am. I come to strengthen you fair Winifred, so to continue
I hope I need not, yet not so strictly to Virginity
As to the Christian Faith; for Wedlock is an ordinance from Heaven,
Though Junior to the single purity
In this chaste Wedlock, does the Conquest win,
She knows the tree forbid, it will not sin.

Win. But I have made a vow, think then what danger a relapse
Would be, and you will grant my best Virginity;
And I will further show what Heaven has done,
To aid my female Resolution, you then will bid
Me cross the book of love, and Read of nothing
But that text above.

Am. You promised me no less.

Win. I Will make it good:
See you this spring, here a pretty stream begins his head,
So late it was a parching drought had ceased our verdant grass,
Here did I sit in Contemplation, lifting to Heaven my Orisons
For present succor, but swifter then my thought,
All Potent Heaven a Miracle had wrought:
That Ba^ren seeming Ground brought forth a Spring
Of such sweet waters, as it had not been cursed in the old worlds
Deluge, I caused it then thus to be dug and framed
By hand of men, and coming still to see it as before,
A Heavenly shape appeared, and blessed it more;
Gave it that power as heaven had so assigned,
To cure diseases, help the lame and blind:
For which poor people their poor thanks to tell, Music.
Calls as I would not, Winifreds Well.

Am. It Is wonderful!

Win. Hark, these sounds did I hear when that Celestial
Body did appear, let us with Reverence attend aloof,
Your eye or ear shall have a further proof.

Enter, an Angel ascends out of the Well, and after descends again. Ang. With
this the sign that holy Christians wear,
When in the Field their Standers they up Rear
Against the foes of Heaven; with this Tipe,
That when they receive the Seal Regenerate,
Gives them their Christian name, with this I bless again
This hallowed spring, who seeks Redress with a believing heart,
Here he shall find ease, take power to cure the
Leaprous disease, give legs unto the Cripple, blind their Sight,
So that their blessings be received aright:
To misbeleevers turn into a curse,
Who seeks a Cure in scorn, disease him worse;
This Heaven has done for truth, it is but young,
And needs a Miracle to make her strong,
The time will come when men shall here not see,
Then let the world express fidelity:
Good Prayers have power to fetch an Angel down,
And give a mortal an Immortal Crown.

Music here descends. Am. I need no more confirm ye beauteous Maid,
My self i will task unto some dangerous end,
I Will take disguise, and straight to Verolome
And to the face of persecuting Albon
Our friend and fellow Knight, i will tell his curse
If he persist in Barbarous Cruelty,
I Will throw my life in hazard, if I fall,
Tell Christians keep my true memorial.

Win. Which first leave here with me, you shall do well,
Here will I keep my Court, here will I dwell,
Here let the Roman Tyrant shed my blood,
Here they shall find me doing all the good
A poor wretch can, what heaven has blessed before,
I as a second means will help the poor.

Am. To that I leave thee most virtuous maid,
Oh might it of Amphiabell be said;
His good intendment had so happy end,
To make a Christian of a blouddy fiend,
I come to try thee A^bon.

Win. Oh may it prove.

Am. Thus we depart Lady.

Win, Where meet, it is decreed above. Exit.

ACTVS SECVNDVS.
Enter Leodice, and Nurse. Leo. Nurse?

Nu. Madam?

Leo. Are the shoo-makers gone that brought my Shopes?

Nu. I know not Madam; shall I see?

Leo. My shoe wrings me so it goes to the heart of me.

Nu. Marry the Gods forbid Lady.

Leo. How? does the Gods forbid to Marry wench?

Nu. I hope not Madam, I should be sorry they should.
For the hopes that I have yet as old as I am,
Shall I go call your Shoo-maker?

Leo. Pre^hee do, but stay a little;

Nu. A little stay may make me look too late.

Leo. Thou sai'st true, call 'em then, yet hark, 'twere as good not,
The fault cannot be mended now:

Nu. But you may let him know his fault,
And heel mend it another time.

Leo. I thou say true in that, do, hark are thou go.

Nu. Venus bless us, what cross measures are in your head!

Leo. How Is that, you will not control your Princes will ye?
Is it not stately to be Fantastical, go call the
Shoo-maker yet you shall not neither.

Nu. Ene as you please, Madam, both either, or neither.

Leo, You shall do all, go, yet answer to me first.
Was this young Shoo-maker ere here before?

Nu. I think not Madam, it is some young Prentice
Your old shoo-maker of Feversham has got.

Leo. Wast not a pretty youth?

Nu. I have seen a worse face in better clothes.

Leo. He drew my shoes on finely, quietly.

Nu. He would do well if he knew the true length
Of your foot Madam.

Leo. It Is that he wants, he must know it
Call him again.

Nu. I will: If you doubt call me back. Exit Nurse.

Leo. The length of my foot, a pretty figure
If he be a good Anatomist, he may by one quantity
Guess at another, and in the end take the whole bodies length
Ha, some strange fantasies are crept within me, I Am not
Acquainted with, it is a pretty youth if I may credit my
Judgment at the first sight, and what is that to me, and
Why not to me as well as to another: I am alone, and why
Should I fear to tell my self my thoughts, I could love him,
This tastes well of my tongue; Oh, but the coursenes of his condition
Offends my stomach, when I should digest it, some Sectarist
Now to scrwe and wrest a Text from his native sense, would
Help me well in this, what am I, a woman, what is he a men*
Where Is the inequality? my blood Royal, his perhaps ignoble,
Whence springs that fount that runs all Royalty, it is the Sea
It self, the lesser Rivolets and running Brooks are those of
Common sense, yet all do mix and run in one another,
What are Titles, Honors bestowed ad Regis placitum, should
My Father make that shoo-maker a Lord, then were he Noble,
Yet where is his blood refine, tush tush, greatness is like a
Glistering stone, more precious in the esteem than in the virtue:
So, I am well called out of my contemplation.

Enter Nurse with Crispinus, and Barnaby, with Shoes on their Arms. Nu. Come
sir, you must answer a default to my Lady.

Leo. Who made my shoes sir, they pinch me?

Bar. Indeed sweet Lady you must pardon this young man, it is
His fault, he has not yet the true handling of his work, he
Cannot go through stich yet, I hope your Ladyship knows that
I have yorkt as well for you, as any Cordwainer in Kent
Or Canterbury could do, and for a tunable heel I think
I have played my part.

Leo. A tunable heel, I prithee English it.

Bar. A creake Madam, for a Musical creake, nere a boy in Feversham
Yet went beyond me: in time my Junior will do pretty well,
Hee'^ raw yet, at the change of his voice heel creake far
Better than he does yet.

Nu. And why was the creake of shoes first devised sir?

Bar. O for great cause for sooth, to hide faults, for if a gentlewoman
Such as your self, should chance to play too loud of her wind
Instrument, the creake of the shoe will cover the noise.

Leo. You're pleasant sir, and what is this a Prentice?

Bar. Alas Madam, I would be loath to discredit the young man,
He Is but a col^ yet, a subsi^^r as they say, I brought him along to the
Court to show him fashions, and to instruct him how to handle a
Ladies Leg, to draw home his work, and teach him his nill ultra
How far he may go.

Leo. And how farr's that, which are your bounds?

Bar. Non ultra crepitum as they say, this once learned, he
Shall come alone hereafter.

Leo. You have done well sir, and so no doubt will he by my
Instructions; what is thy name?

Cris. Crispinus Madam.

Nu. Were thy Parents of this profession?

Cris. I have forgot Madam

Leo. Is it so long since thou lost them?

Cris. But since these last wars Lady, yet as I remember they were
Better then my present profession.

Nu. He speaks well, sure there is some hard characters which I
Understand not: I like not these shoes, you must make an easier part?

Cris. I Will do my best to mend it Madam.

Leo. You promise well, let them be of your making then, that I
May see how near you will come to your promise.

Bar. Alas Madam, heel pinch your toes if I do not instruct him,
He Is but a cobbler yet.

Leo. No matter, I Will hazard his good will, to morrow let me have
An other pair, and bring them your self.

Cris. I shall attend your Highness.

Leo. Come hither view my foot well, you must be better
Acquainted with it.

Cris. Is it not here they pinch you Madam?

Leo. No it is a little higher.

Bar. Away, away for shame, did I teach you that carriage?

Leo. Now sir what will you do?

Bar. Teach him the true behavior, hear, level me a leg
Here, now stretch him outright upon your thigh, and then
You may come to your work finely, I have found the fault now
You are pincht in the very cranny.

Leo. You have hit it Sir.

Bar. I told you so, a man of a longer standing will do
Always better then a puny, he shall mend it I (...) you Man

Leo, I hope he will: well, fail (...) ^omorrow,

Cris. I will not Madam, my duty to your Highness.

Bar. If he do Madam, you know your old man, for ya^ke and Seame, and handling
ware in his kind, you cannot put your egg in a better workemans hands though I
say it sweet Lady. Due gat a whee. Exit Crisp. and Bar.


Leo. There is an Idol or bed in his eye, that I could ever worship
And if I should, sure he would bless me, love and folly,
Inseperate and joint companions, you are too violent upon
Me now; to beat affection with such down right strokes
On a Mechanicke drudge, a base, how base? how base? is there no President
That great Ladies have yoakt their underlings in fellowship?
I take some counsel, on it Nurse.

Nu. Shall I call the shoo-maker again Lady?

Leo. Out witch, do know my thoughts: the shoo-maker, and why
The shoo-maker? I thought of him, why call him?

Nu. Nay I know not Madam.

Leo. Thor't in love with him, I believe thou art, if I were certain
That thou were so base, I Would banish thee my presence; nay,
My Father should banish thee the bounds of Britany, out old doting fool.

Nu. Madam why chide you me? I will not love your shoo-maker.

Leo. My shoo-maker minion.

Nu. Does he not make your shoes? therefore your shoo-maker:
But think not Lady I can be so base being so near your presence,
To love such a groom, if but for your credit sake.

Leo. Yet as great as you have doted on as base as he.

Nu. Yet that is no president for me, I have known Ladies remove
Their stable grooms into their bed-chambers, and lower offices then
That too: o'twas a policy, and hereafter may be in fashion for
Great Ladies to match with their inferiors, because the woman
Adding no dignity to the man, nor loosing her own, still keeps
Supremacy, he waits as dutiful on her trencher as when
He was her servant.

Leo. Have thou History for this?

Nu. Twenty of mine own knowledge, that I have seen in my days.
(...) my closet, then thou shall tell me some, if thou
P^^^ (...) again, if I find president I Will
Follow it, (I Will else begin my self,) if there be none
Let after Ladies coat me down for one. Exeunt.

Enter Amphiabell as an Hermit, and Albon. Al. Thou constant friend what title
shall I give, due to thy merit;
It Is more then a friendly part to fetch from hell, friends turn
At misery, they abide long that part at prison doors, the
Best lasts but till death, but thou have stood the renovation of
A second life; what may be given him for an epethite
That of a tyrant makes a profelite?

Am. You cannot add unto the happiness Amphiabell has found
In honored Albon, joint with my own Salvation, I desire your
Partnership Christianity, which as a second means
I have confirmed.

Al. I am your poor Disciple, my tutor Mr. but friend I call you by
No other name, although I derogate from your Princely Office
Cause I will follow you, if not proceed, ever through the
Jaws of persecution; I will not trust your person to the danger:
Let this help your haste, although Prince of Wales, yet in the
Course you take you may chance need
This drudging god of fools to help you speed.

Am. He take your love for what I shall not need I shall bestow where
There is need enough, with this memorial I leave you Sir.
(...) but this Emblem of a Christian, not as a thing material
(...) wail you, but for the strengthening of your memory, you shall
At sight of this still keep in mind, all those instructions I have
Read to you; and verueous Lord, what in your power and greatness
You may afford unto distressed Christians: be free in Charity.

Al. Let me approve without a boast, the action of my love; this in the
Open face of tyranny, I Will daring wear: and in approbation of
Such an Alter, Sacrifice my blood: but sweet friend hear of me,
Behold it not: I would not have you lost.

Amphi. You shall prevail.

Al. Put me in your prayers, that mercies white hand may cross
The debt book wherein I stand above my height in goare, this
Hand has done an act of bloody persecution.

Am. Trouble not your bosom, your end shall crown
The bad that is past, with a more full renown. Exit Amphi.

Flourish. Enter with Drum and Colors, Maximinus, Basseanus, Rutullus, with an
Army. Max. Where is Lord Albon?

Al. Here Maxeminus.

Max. What, thy Sword sleeping in thy scabberd Knight? thou ar^
Too gentle in thy Stewardship, these Hidra headed Christians
More increase thy persecution; speak Prince of Knights, for
Such an honor we bestowed on thee: why art not wading in a
Sreame of blood? true Romans use to swim in such a flood.

Al. But I am an English man.

Max. Yet substitute to Rome.

Al. Not.

Max. Is this Albon?

Al. Not persecuting, but Christian Albon.

Bass. See great Emperor, in your face he wears, the daring
Badge of Christianity.

Al. Yes Emperor, read in this book, if by this abstract
Thou can understand, the Volume is within.

Max. It Is as we suspect, that painful Schoolmasters Am. is heer^,
Make swift and careful search through Virulome,
Lop him and the head is perished.

Al. You Will search too late.

Max. Where is he traitor?

Al. Gone, I have convaide him hence.

Max. Why did thou not fly for thine own safety?

Al. No, I have deserved to feel a Tyrants sword, because my sword
Was glazed in tyrany; I am in debt for blood, make thou it even,
Tyrants and fiends are officers to heaven.

Max. Hale him to the Temple, or force him kneel unto our Roman god, or kill
the henticke.


Al. Kill me first, or I shall spurn thine Idol.

Max. If he recant not, torture, no mercy show.
A recreant friend worse than an open foe.

Al. I am blessed in curses, now Albon shall be tried,
Man is gold oar, when he is purified Exit Alb.

Max. A second limb is from our body cut, in Albons relapse; it is
That pedant Prince, that seminary Knight Amphiabell, that
Poisons thus the current of our State: Bassianus, with two Roman
Legions pursue that Cambriam sectarist Amphi: his flight
Will be to Wales, lay desolate the confines of that superstitious
Virgin, that with her sorcerous devotion works miracles,
By which she draws Christians, faster then we can kill 'em:
Let her feel our vengance.

Bass. As Max. wills, where Ceser bids strike Bassianus kills.

Max. What means this?

Enter Rutullus, and Nuntius. Rut. A messenger from Dioclesian.

Nun. Fair and Royal greetings, with them entreating great Max.
Some present succor in this Gallia Wars, Allerick King of
Goaths has entered France, with ods of strength against Dioclesian;
A breathing truce is yet concluded on, until the Callends of
The following month, in which there is a day prefixed for battle,
For this he craves thy aid from Brittany, that Romans still
May write victori^.

Max. We, or our best of help he might command, by virtue of that
Love he lent to us: Rutullus, collect 10000. ablest Britains
By our express command, let them be mixed with two Roman Bands,
With both pass the Sea, and in our name greet Di^ole: Say we
Do wish our personal Arm with him, did not increasing troubles
Stay us here: so should it be; the rest we will write to him,
Rutullus haste, this must not be delayed: Bassianus to thy charge,
My self to mine, our works are one to scourge the Christians,
Blood is the theme we treat in Roman hand,
We Will write the comment large over all the Land. Exeunt.

Enter Leodice, and Nurse. Leo. Nay prithee tell it on Nurse.

Nu. Good faith I am weary Madam, I never knew my tongue
Would tire before: you have not let me close mine eyes to night.

Leo. Did not I watch with thee?

Nu. But I am old, when I was young, love would have kept me waking.

Leo. So could a young Bachelor yet, widow, I prithee finish but
Thy last discourse amongst all thy Cotations of men made;
Great that were ignoble borne, this I most desire; was
Dioclesian joint ceaser with my Father, that often has made
Rome gorgeous with his triumphs, but of so mean descent
As thou reports?

Nu. A Scriveners son, no better verily, there is many Bonds yet in Rome
uncanceld, where he is subscri'd a public notary.


Leo. And yet is that no blemish to his son?

Nu. Not at all Madam, nay I could come nearer were I sure it
Would not offend your Grace.

Leo. My Grace be pledge, out, prithee speak freely?

Nu. As I have heard great Maximinus Father, your Fathers
Father Madam, was but even a Smith, that with his labor
Hammered out his living.

Leo. It Is true, I have heard my Father boast it, yet had I forgot it.
Oh Majesty! thou may mest the memory, it loses all Records
That are beneath us, now no more: prithee see if my
Shoo-maker be come yet, I Will walk abroad perhaps to take the air.

Nu. It Is now my every mornings work to watch the coming of
Your shoo-maker: pray Venus my Lady tread not her shoes awry,
She changes her shoes so often. Exit Nurse.

Leo. I have not slept to night, I shall be tame if I be if I be kept th^^ (...)
My former words, I say thou art a Suitor to my woman?

Cris. Madam, in this revived memory I protest.

Leo. Thou shall not swear and lie, I Will make it plain
To thy confession; art not her shoo-maker?

Cris. Yes Madam.

Leo. Then her Suitor; I am a Roman sir, and speak that tongue;
Is not a Suitor a Shoo-maker?

Cris. My trade, in that sense I confess it Lady,
And so far I am a Suitor to your Highness.

Leo. I would thou were, in the plain English sense,
Thou should have then few nayes.

Cris. I trouble you Madam.

Leo. Not: since I am so far in discourse with you, I Will bring it
To some end: suppose shoo-maker my woman did love you, and
Would have me to speak for her, what answer should I have?

Cris. Madam, this intercourse, you have vouchsafed so kindly with
Your Servant, somewhat inboldens me.

Leo. Be bold, and say what answer shall I have?

Cris. She Is old.

Leo. Old! this is a new answer; will not her dignity, wealth,
And Estate, make her young again?

Cri. I could not choose by supposition so, if I durst speak freely.

Leo. You would have one young then I perceive?

Cris. Since I am free to speak, I would Lady; young for my eye, and
Rich to mend my state: but alas Madam, I am a prentise and must
Not wed.

Leo. For doubling of your prentiship?

Cris. Nay, I might treble that doubling, for to a wife
I bind me to a perpetual prentiship.

Leo, So 'twere one you loved, 'twere pleasing servitude?

Cris. I think it were Madam.

Leo. Dare you venture on a wife of my choosing?

Cris. If both parties were agreed Lady.

Leo. That Is no venture, I Will promise she shall be young, good
Parentage, honest, let her beauty commend it self.

Cris. It pleases Majesty some times to make sport with humble
Vasselage, so do you with me Lady.

Leo. You are too hard of belief, I mean plainly, I have^
Some skill in Magic, what would you give
To see her amply personated in a glass, that must be your wife?

Cris. I would venture a chiding to stay so long: what my this mean?

Leo. I could by Metroposcopie read thy fate here in thy forehead;
By Chyromancie find it in thy Palm, but these are petty
Arts, no I Will show thee by speculatory magic, her face
In this glass; kneel sir, for it must be done with reverence
I tell you: now tell me what thou see?

Cris. I see a shadow Madam.

Leo. It Is but a shadow, hold up thy right hand and look again,
What see thou now? any substance yet?

Cris. I know not Madam, I am inchaunted with your Magic

Leo. How like her now, has she a good face?

Cris. It Is very well made Madam.

Leo. Who does she resemble?

Cris. Your self, I think Lady.

Leo. I, she is very like me.

Cris. I would she were not.

Leo. Why would not have her like me?

Cris. Because no like's the same.

Leo. It Is too long to dally, away with shadows, and imbra^^
The substance, in troth I love thee; nay, do not fear -- I Will
Share all dangers with thee.

Cris. Danger Madam, were she brow'd like Nemisis,
Tuskt with Scorpions stings, as keen for spoil as an
Incensed fury, I would stand in this quarrel against her
Open throat: but do you not dally with a poor wretch?

Leo. Wrong not my love with doubt, look I Will pay thee back
Thy duty given to me, thou art my better by virtue of my
Honorable love, I make thee here my head: Thou shall
No more descend unto my foot, here thy work shall be,
Whilst in thine eyes two wanton Cupids skip,
Thou shall lay Velvet touches on my lip.

Cris. Faith Madam, your lips deserve better than your foot,
That Is two pild velvet, this must needs be three:
Nay since you have raised me above the instep
I Will reach at the highest now.

Leo. Yet all is not done, two pair of Rosy cheeks shall tie them on:
Shall I not need to fear thee?

Cris, Not, I Will quell your fears, for now I Will put my life
Into your hands, to manifest the virtue of my love, for
Heaven has been a motive to your love: For know sweet,
It Is no base contract, but of the Royalst Blood in Britany:
Love would not so have forced you to an error, Crispinus
Is but borrowed, a poor shroud to keep my life in, Offa is my
Own, the youngest Son to the late vanquished Alured,
Eldred my Brother, both supposed slain, yet live within a
Parralell disguise; I am no richerthan I was before,
But in that clouded Title.

Leo. If I could love thee better than I did I should, but in troth
I cannot, but for the safest guardian of thy life, it is in my
Heart, and that shall be plucked out ere it be found to harm thee.

Cris. What Is then to be done?

Leo. Our instant Marriage, that is the surest way, hazard a
Chiding for thy negligence, and linger here about the
Court to night, to morrow morning in some humble
Habit we will steal the guardian; it shall be my task
(...) provide the Churchman.

Cris. There shall not want a Bridegroom.

Leo. May I ever lie alone if there want a Bride, and that is a
(...) that I should be loath to endure, mean time be this the contract,
(...) the word of troth.

Cris. The morning and a Priest shall make one of both.

Leo. There goes my heart.

Cris. I Will keep it till to morrow.

Leo. Shut night, sweet Phebe on thy swiftest Arrow. Exit Leo.

Cris. What pretty flies in loves sweet web do lurk,
I must be Married, then unto my work. Exit Cris.

ACTVS TERTIVS.
Enter Sir Hugh. Hugh. My three months banishment I have observed,
And now the dated limit gives me leave to re-aproach my
Interdicted Saint; once more sweet love I do invoke thy
Power, to bless my poor unspotted Sacrifice, the offering
Of a loving loyal heart: This is the customary retirement
Where daily she frequents, this speaks her name, and speaks
Her virtues in a bubling murmur, which many ages after her
Ascent up to that glorious Asterisine above, shall keep
And tell to long Posterities, within this liquid Oracle shall be
Read, heaven wrought a miracle for Winifred, here I Will Li^^ dow^
Awaite, and while my tongue takes rest, solace my thought.

Enter Winifred, with a book^ and a servant. Win. Return and give notice to
Amphiabell, that I am walked
Abroad, as he entreated.

Ser. I will Madam.

Win, His company is sweet fellowship; wanton folly, thou have
No harbor in Amphiabell, but high and holy meditations,
Rare virtues in a Prince, the example's good, and I will follow
It; yea if thou go into the Militant Field of Martyrdom.
Ha, who is that? this is not the company that my desires do with*

Hugh. Nay stay sweet Virgin, rather let me leave the place,
Whose presence offends the place; yet, if you vouchsafe,
Offend I may by your construction, but not by willing heart.

Win. I fear your method sir, would I might err in false
Supposition, speak and I Will tell you.

Hugh. My three months exile is expired.

Win. And you have well observed it?

Hugh. Then give me leave to re-atempt my suite, which I have
Kept a painful sojourner in my unquiet bosom.

Win. 'Twas your own tyranny to add to my injunction, I craved
But one month, and you would proffer three.

Hugh. 'Twas folly in my duty.

Win. Which still you do persi^t in, for since you left me
I am contract and wedded.

Hugh. Am I out rivald?

Win. War not with heaven sir, to that is tied my Nuptial
Gordion, within you house ofstarres the Bridegroom sits,
And there the Spousall chamber is prepared, you are the
Golden Himoneall flames, whose spherick Music,
Chaste Hallelujahs sing, to celebration of my Virgin rights:
Oh labor not then to divorce me thence, since all the fruit
Will be but vain expense: my love is fixed, and we have
But one love; you seek for that below that is gone above.

Hugh. You are too obstinate.

Win. O chide your self sir, it is your own sin, you are too obstinate
To persevere against a decree of Fate: be this the final answer to
Your suite; if ever mortal man have attribute of Winifreds Husband,
'T shall be Sir Hugh, if it be debt to any'tis your due.

Hugh. A desperate debt, hopeless of recovery.

Win. And as the test to your fair seeming love, whether it Noble
Were or counterfeit, by its best virtue here I charge you Sir,
To move no further questions at this time, for if you speak
I will not answer you; you may in silence stay:
Thus do I turn setting the world a part,
Here fix mine eyes, and with mine eyes my heart.

Hugh. Thou gilded poison, my tongue is silent, but my unquiet
Thoughts will still take leave, to think of thy perverse
Unkind disdain; I Will think thee peevish, and blame all
Thy Sects for thy self sin, for thou were all to me;
Vanish all State, and Wales bow to the yoke of Tyrants
Servitude, noe defensive stroke shall this Arm lift
To save me from thy thrale: rest there regard less honor,
And take a fall before thy pride; hence forth some
Humble mean, that will afford but merit to my pain,
Shall be my lives traffic, I Will never mind
This, or too fickle, or too cruel kind,
But thus conclude, for thee I prove accursed,
Extreme in both, thou art both best and worst. Exit Hugh.

Enter Amphiabell. Win. Whose there Amphiabell?

Am. Yes virtuous Lady.

Win. Thou abidest still.

Am. To death: Christians tire not till they be out of breath,
Life labors here, at death the wage does come,
Which Tyrants pay in Crowns of Martyrdom.

Enter Bassianus, Lutio, and Romans. Bass. We forage unresisted: soft who are
these?

Lut. Ceaze first, and then examine.

Am. Two, that will neither fly, nor resist your force.

Bass. Then you will surely dye Amphiabell.

Am. Yes.

Bass. And the holy Virgin.

Win. So, unhappy Tyrant.

Bass. The Triumphs of our Wars; here persuite shall stay,
In your surprise we have achieved the day.

Win. Ring out your triumphs loud, it is a large boast,
You have gained much, and we have nothing lost.

Bass. Thou art a traitor Capital to Rome, from whence thy
Knightly honors were derived, 'twas thy seditious
Heresy that wrought the wrack of honored Albon, even
This Lady have thous seduced, a merciful sommons now calls
His last to thee, turn unto Rome, and worship give unto
Our Golden gods.

Am. No, I will not; when I crave mercy, give it.

Win. Thou debuty tyrant, this place is hallowed; do not awake
the thunder, if it strike, the boult will fall down
Perpendicular, and strike thee under mercy.

Bass. Ha, ha, ha; what pretty dreams these Christians
Apprehend: They say your well is very Sovereign to cure the
Itch, I have got a scab, to day I Will try the virtue of your
Virgin water, it is good for sore eyes too, is it not? mine
Are some thing Rhumaticke.

Win. Do, play with Lightning till it blasts thee.

Lut. Oh! here is hell, witchcraft, my eyes are lost, this sorcerous
Poole has taken away my sight: witch He find thee out,
And break thy Magic, by drawing of thy blood.

Bass. Has wounded me.

Win. Lay hold upon him, he will do more mischeife else.

Lut. Guide me to the divill.

Win. Thou art going right blindfold, hold fast his hands, I will be
Charitable unto my persecutors: now see the change,
Virtue, abused turns unto damage more,
By help of heaven thus I thine eyes restore.

Lut. Ha, is it day again?

Win. Will thou understand from whence thy succor comes?

Lut. From Apollo, and Jupiter, the gods of Rome,
Who would not see a witch abuse their creature, away with
Her to the fire till she be burnt and dead, mine eyes
Will stand in fear within my head.

Bass. Let them be guarded unto Verolome, where first they shall
Behold the dreadful sufferings of revolted Albon,
As you look on, and see his tortures please, follow destruction.

Win. Come constant friend, now comes the wished day,
The path to bliss is through a thorny way. Exeunt.

Enter with a Trumpet, Rutullus, Shoo-maker, and his Wife. Shoo. One out of my
house my Lord? I am the Princes Shoo-maker,
Will not that excuse me?

Rut. My Commission's strict, let me see your household.

Shoo. I know not which to part with believe me sir,
But you shall see them all, Ralph, Barnaby, Crispinus,
Crispianus, appear my boys?

Enter Ralph and Crispianus. Shoo. Look, here is most of my store.

Rut. The worst of these will serve; but here is not all.


Shoo. Barnaby, where is Barnaby?


Wife. That knave will still be backward: why Barnaby.


Enter Barnaby, with a Kercher on. Bar. Oh, oh, oh.


Shoo. Why how now Barnaby, what fallen sick of the sudden Ba^? Oh Master, I
have such a singing in my head, my toes are Crampt too.


Shoo. What from head to foot already, where lies thy pain? Here, here about
my heart Mr. I have an Issue here too,


Bar. Oh Master, if you did but feel what a breath comes out, You would stop
your nose in it.


Wife. Come, come, you are a lazy knave, you must be pr^^t for a Sould^^^


Bar. Oh dame, I Will confess and be hanged rather then I Will be pressed.


Cris. The Drums and Trumpets will revive thee man.


Bar. Alas, if I hear any noise I Am a dead man.


Shoo. Ralph, what say thou, will thou serve the King?


Ral. I cannot serve a better Mr. if the King does entertain me, I Will do him
the best service that I can.


Cris. I beseech you sir let me excuse the rest: I have a mind
To meet a foe in the field, meethinks I could perform
Some worthy act, that at my back return,
You should be proud to say my Servant did it.

Shoo. Ye, say thou so boy? I like thy forwardness,
But I Would be loath to leese thee yet.

Wife, Alas man the boys young, his tender limbs are scarce Well joynted yet,
let Ralph, or Barnaby, undertake that task, It Is sitter for either.


Bar. Oh a little aqua-composita^: good dame, I have a quaking Ague come upon
me.


Wife. A fever lurden have you not? you lazy knave you,
Will thou let a boy out dare thee?

Cris. Good dame persuade him not against his heart, such brave designs As
Soldiers undergo, should not be forced, but free and voluntary. A Coward in a
Camp more spoils an Army by faint example of his frozen blood, than a full
Squadron of the daring'st foes Surprising ^t advantage.


Rut. A forward spirit,
Such a fair promise cannot want performance:
Thou shall be my choice; accept thy presse-money, and for the hopes
That I expect from thee, thy Rank shall not be common.

Wife. Alack, alack, the Boy is forward, but far unable; Sir pray spare him
and take either of these.


Bar. Oh, I have a stitch in my Elbow here; a little Parmacadi^s.


Wife. A false stitch I warrant thee, the Wars will pick it out.


Shoo. Peace Sisl^; Boy, since thou art so forward, I will not stay
The freedom of thy spirit; so I might hinder thee from better hopes
Than my poor substance could endow thee with: go,
And good fortune keep thee company; if thou return'st, thou shall
Be welcome still. I must be willing though against my will,
To leave thee Boy.

Wife. And welcome shall thou be to thy Dame boy; if there come but a leg on
thee back, the worst member thou have, shall be welcome to me; lame or blind,
if thou comm'st back, thou shall want no Hospitall-pention as long as I live.


Shoo. Gramercy for that Sis; I Will fell all the shoes in my Shop Before my lame
Soldier shall be kept in an Hospital.


Crispia. Your loves are Parent-like, not as to a servant, but a child:
The Heavens in safety keep you; my prayers in duty shall be
Here at home, when my body's distant. I beseech you Sir,
Commend me to my Brother ^ Raph, Barnaby farewell.

Bar. Farewell good Crispian. I shall never see thee more.


Crispia. Tush, fear not; nay, if e're I do return, I Will bring home Stories
that we will turn to Meeter, and sing away our work with 'em.


Bar. Farewell Crispianus.


Crispia. Master and Dame, once more I bid farewell, It Is brave to dye where
Trumpets ring the Knell.


Rut. Come Crispianus.


Wife. Well, go thy ways, and take the kindest youth with thee, that e're set
foot in the stirrup.


Shoo. How now Barnaby, art any thing better yet?


Bar. I am somewhat better than I was Master; I do begin to feel my self
better and better.


Wife. Oh you are a cunning counterfeit knave sirrah.


Bar. O Mistress, there is always policy in Wars as well as blows: if it
be good sleeping in a whole skin, it must needs be bad sleeping in a broken
one; and he that cannot sleep well, it is a sign he cannot drink well; and
he that does not drink well, never digests his meat well; and he that digests
not his meat well, it is a sign he h'as not a good stomach; and he that h'as
not a good stomach, is not fit for the Wars. I did think it better to stay
at home truly Master.


Shoo. The end is, thou had rather work than fight Boy: I had rather thou
should too: but I wonder I hear not of Crispinus yet.


Wife. Truly man I am afraid he is pressed at Canterbury.


Enter Crispinus. Crisp. All the way 'twixt this and Canterbury will not afford
me
An excuse sufficient for tarrying so long out of my Masters house:
The truth I dare not tell, 'twere better lie than confess my
Lying with the Emperors Daughter, though the case be honest,
Being my Wife: Well, somewhat it must be, I know not what yet;
If I endure a rough chiding for my pains, it is but sauce to sweet Meats.

Shoo. Look, look Wife, he is come: why how now Crispinus, How comes it you
have stayed so long?


Wife. O you are a fine loytering youth, what, lie out of your Masters house!


Crisp. Your pardon once good Dame, I was in no bad company.


Wife. Who knows that sir? you frighted both your Master and me ^ We thought
you had been pressed for a Soldier, as your Brother is.


Crisp. So now my Dame h'as helped me to an excuse: Why truly Dame that was my
fear; I was saine to shroud my self in the Court all night for fear of the
press.


Shoo. Nay then 'twas well done Boy, I would not have lost thee too.


Wife. I, I, the flower's plucked, but the weed remains; thy brother that is
gone, would not have served me so.


Shoo. Peace good Eve, no more words, the excuse is honest.


Wife. I, I, you will mar 'em all: but he had better been a sleep.


Bar. Well Cozen Hugh, I will do my best to instruct thee:
But you must take heed there be no Turky-cocks in your work.

Hugh. When I understand the English Sir, I Will observe you.


Bar. Your Turky-cock is as much as to say, Coble, coble, coble; You must take
heed of cobling.


Shoo. Come on good fellow, I Will teech thee a good Trade:
A Gentleman, if he want better means, may live well by it;
And this I Will promise thee after some term of years to make thee free:
Or if thou dye, and that is a Christians best
I Will see thy bones laid quietly to rest. Exeunt.

Enter Dioclesian, the Eagle borne before him at one door, at the other,
Huldrick and Rodrick, Kings of the Goths and Vandalls, with their Army. Diocle.
Advance the Roman Eagle, and command
Our armed Legions to troop close, and stand.

Rod. The Romans are in fight, Drums beat a parley.


Diocle. Death blurre their parley, we will not answer
The thunder of their Drums: our Eagle shall not nesell by base
Ravens, but to peck out their eyes; our Swords shall answer
The Thunder of their Drums, the Roman Caesar holds scorn
To parley with such servile Nations, as you the barbarous Vandalls
And Goths, poor frozen Snakes, that from the Northern cold
Creep to the warmth of the Suns Western fires,
Troubling our fertile Lands, and like starved sheep,
You spoil the Countries with a line you keep in Regions beggarly.

Hul. Dioclesian, hear me.


Diocle. What croakes the Raven?


Hul. Proud Roman this: if here thou longer stay,
He Will peck thine Eagles eyes out, make thee a prey
To his stern Gripe, whose dismal beak now sings the sudden ruin

Diocle. Of two barbarous Kings.


Rod. Insulting Tyrant, stop thy scandalous breath,
Thy blood shall find us Kings and Soldiers both:
We are a swelling Sea, and our own Barks,
Not large enough to bound us, are broke forth
Like a resistlesse Torrent to o'rewhelme and drown
In blood all Nations that withstand us.
Thou see already Germany is ours; so shall fair France be,
At least those parts that lie upon the Rhine, and fertile Burgundy ^
Which if thou grant before the Battles join,
We will retire, and leag^e with thee and Rome.

Diocle. Ha, ha, ha; must Lions be enforced to league with Wolves.


Hul. If thou deny it,
By the glorious Sun, and all the Deities our men adore,
We Will forage up to Rome and Italy, and fit
In triumph in your Capitol: the Vandals and the Goaths shall carve
Their fames as deep as now the Romans do their Names:
Raise up as many Trophies, and as high,
In brazen pillars of their victory.

Diocle. Poor Flies, behold the Eagle, and give over;
Strive not to cope with strength beyond your power,
For us she spreads her wings as far and bright,
As in a Day the Sun rides with his light,
And that is the universal Globe of Earth:
Europes proud throat we tread on:
Afric and Afia our Eagles talents gripe,
The Lords of Rome fadome both Land and Deep.

Rod. New Lords new Laws renew,
As you of others, we will be Lords of you.

Diocle. We Will hear no more; call up the Britain Soldiers
Our Brother Maximinus sent unto our aid, let 'em begin the battle,
Fight like Romans: Remember this, your enemies are base;
Let your Swords work like Sithes confound these swarms,
And sweep these Locusts hence with conquering Arms. Exen^t.

Alarm. Enter Roderick and Huldrick with Soldiers at one door, at the other,
Crispianus and Britains, fight and drive off the Vandals. Enter Roderick and
Huldrick. Rod. These Romans fight like devils.


Hul. Spirits infernal could not charge so hotly;
Disgraced in the onset: Counsel Roderick, what is to be done?
Our men slye, not able to endure 'em.

Rod. Knit all our Nerves in one;
Renowned Huldricke hye to thy Troops,
And with thy vali^nt Goth^ assail the Romans
In their hinmost Flanks, and break into their maine Battalia;
Whilst here I stay, and hold the Britains play.

Hul. I like it well; divided Arms thrive best,
This day we will climb the losty Eagles nest. Exit.

Enter Dioclesian. Dioc. Turn thee base Vandal.


Rod. Roman it is thee I seek.


Dioc. And thou have found me;
He teach thee speak the Roman Language.

Rod. And thou shall learn from me the Art of War,
And Discipline of Arms the Vandals teach.

Dioc. A Fencer it is agreed.
The School trick thou shall learn at first blow. Alarnm.

Rodericke has Dioclesian down: Crispianus fights with Rodericke and rescues
him; and beats off Rodericke. Dioc. What art thou that have saved me?


Cris. A Soldier: What art thou so faved?


Dioc. An Emperor.


Cris. Thou art saved then by a Warlike Britain soldier:
And had ^as many lives as drops of blood,
^de spend them all to do great Caesar good.

Dioc. I thank thee: follow thy fortunes, and go on;
The gods of Rome fit on thy weapon still:
The battle ended, see me in my Tent.

Cris. I will. Exit.


Dioc. Immortal gods!
How crept a Kingly spirit into a breast so low!
How now, how goes the day? Enter a Roman.

Romans Bloody and dismell; Huldrick K. of Goths entered our Ranks,
And like a Whirlewinde, sweepes, and beats down our maine,
Battalia, ferzing by force the Roman Eagle.

Dioc. How Traitor?


Romans Believe it fir it is lost, and now in triumph
Over his Plume she claps her wings on high,
With ecchoing shout of present victory.

Dioc. The Roman gods forbid: Let a Trumpet call up the Britains to recover it.
Exit.


Enter Huldricke King of Goths. Hul. Yield thee proud Roman, the sable Ravens
plume ^ath struck thy Eagle blind, and blasted Rome.


Dioc. Hand of thou barbarous slave;
I still can boast my state's Imperial.

Hul. Tut, that Title's lost, thou art now
Within my power: fly to King Rodericke,
And glad his ears with news of what you see,
And with our Drums proclaim the victory.

Enter Crispianus with Eagle and Soldiers. Cris. Base Goth look up, and see
here hovers Eagle Winged victory, recoverd from thy troops.


Hul. God's Death lost again.

Dioc. Fight Warlike Britains, free your Emperor.

Cris. We shall, or dye:
This holds the Goths death; this thy liberty.

Alarm: Crispianus fights with his sword in one hand, and the Eagle in the
other: he kills Huldricke, and frees Dioclesian. Dioc. Twice is my life
indebted to thy valor:
Admired Soldier, if I win the day,
Never had Britain Soldier such a pay
As thou shall have.

Cris. Talk not of debts, or pay, let us hence and fight;
As long as I have breath I Will hold your right.
Soldiers troop close, our task is not yet done;
I Will keep your Eagle till the battaile's won.

Dioc. Keep it with fame.

Crisp. Even to my latest breath. Exit.

Dioc. The glory's thine, thou have saved me twice from death.

Alarm: a shout within: Enter Rodericke and Vandals. Rod. This Britains are
all Devils,
And amongst them there is one master Devil,
That bears the face of a base Common soldier;
Yet on his horns he tosseth up our Vandals.
Now, what News? Enter a Captain.

Cap. Rodericke fly, and save thy life;
Huldrick the King of Goths is slain.

Rod. I out go him in life, he me in fame:
In spite we will after him with glorious wings,
A bloody field is a brave Tomb for Kings.

Cap. Hazard not all at one cast, since you see
The Dice runs high against ye; but give way,
Set not the board when you see fortune play:
Winning the maine no safety it is to fight.

Rod. How then?

Cap. Over the Rhine my Lord make speedy flight;
The wheel of Chance may turn, and the dice run
For us to get, what now our foes have won.

A shout within: Enter Crispianus and the rest, driving off the Vandals: he
takes Rodericke prisoner; a retreat sounded: Enter Dioclesian with victory.
Crisp. Now to the Royal hand of Caesar I resign
The high Imperial Ensign of great Rome;
And with it, this wild ^usked Boar, the stubborn Vandall,
Snared in the toils, and conquered by this sword;
I could have served his head up at your board:
But since for glory, more than blood we strive,
I Would rather have a Lion ^ane alive.

Dioc. Noble thou art, as valiant,
And this day thy only sword the greater half
Has won, and we must pay thy merits.
What Is thy name?

Crisp Crispianus sir.

Dioc. Of what birth or fortunes.

Crisp. You may read them here, writ on my bosom sir:
A common Soldier, yet were my Parents
Good and generous, they dead, and I down sinking in my state,
As others do, I swore to cross the Fate
that crossed me: and when all hopes else did fade,
I got my living by an honest trade:
A Shoemaker my Lord, where merrily,
With frolic mates, I spent my days, till when,
Being pressed to wars amongst my Contrymen,
Hither I came, and here my prize is played,
For Britains honor, and my Masters trade:
This Vandall is my Prisoner: frown not sir,
Great looks can nere put down a Shoemaker.

Rod. Your fortune rises sir, and I must bow:
I was nere in the Shooemakers stocks till now.

Dioc. Renowned Crispianus, royal thanks shall to our brother
Maximinus fly, for sending such a Soldier.
Kneel down, and rise a Britain Knight;
Hence forth bear Arms and Shield;
Thou have won thy honor truly in the field.
Besides our gift, the ransom of this King
I freely give; and that thy same may sing a lofty note,
Back to thy Country lead these Britain Soldiers,
Over whom I make thee head; and to the Emperor
Maximinus thou shall bear such Letters from our self,
As he shall rear and swell thine honors,
And when we in France have laid
These Whirle-windes that now shake the State,
We Will cross the seas to Britain after thee.

Crisp. The gods with Garlands crown thy victory.

Rod. What ransom you set down I Will truly pay,
And drow my forces back to Germany,
There to confine our selves; the Vandals knee
Now humbly bows to the Roman Emperie.

Dioc. And that obedience Roderick we will embrace.
Lead Crispianus to receive the Ransom:
Vandall and Goths; nay, Rome her self shall swear,
She never met so brave a Shoemaker. A Flourish. Exeunt.

ACTUS QUARTUS.
Enter Crispinus and Leodice with child. Cris. Be comforted my dear Leodice.

Leod. How can I want sweet comfort, having thee? alack, that
Pleasure stolen, being back returned, should taste so sower:
It seems a shallow Ford, when first it is tried;
But when the depth we found,
It is a gulf of raging whirle-pooles found.

Cris. I know it Princely Love, and fear the event;
Love in the paths of danger ever went:
The morning flames of our desires burn bright,
And shall do still in scorn of fortunes spite,
If you but feed the fire.

Leod. O me! it is this I fear,
The burden in my womb our deaths do bear.

Cris. Why should thou fear the knot our hearts has tide?
Had heavens strength to it; and heaven will sure provide
For thos^ whose names and faiths are written there.

Leod. What veil can now be drawn to hide our cares,
Or keep this secret from our Fathers ears.
Of our stolen marriage?

Cris. Stay, lets devise.

Leod. It must be a thick cloud darkens the Sun:
This day my Father sits to cast deaths doom
Upon the Christians: and that doom I know
The fruit this Land brings next, must be my woe.

Cris. I prithee peace, the clock of misery goes always
Too true: yet let me f^^ it now.

Leod. Dearest I will.

Cris. Do this then; if the Emperor call for thee,
Besicke and keep thy chamber,
Until I get some place for thy delivery.

Leod. Swear to me one thing first.

Cris. What ever thou desire.

Leod. Then as thou art Princely bred, I charge thee swear,
That as above the world I hold thee dear,
Thou will not leave me, whatsoever Thunder
My Father throws at thee:
Kings frowns can be but death:
From thee I Will never part unto my latest breath.

Cris. By all the truths that man ere swore by,
No force of strength shall part us.

Leod. Peace, no more, I Will ask thee pardon for this base
Mistrust: kiss thy gentle cheek, loving and mild:
I know thou can not leave thy wife and child.
O me, I shall forget my present safety:
Dear heart stand by.
Nurse, Who Is within there? Nurse.

Enter Nurse. Nurs. Anon sweet mouse.

Leod. Sweet honey Nurse,
If the Emperor my father asks for me,
Say I am not well, and keep my chamber.
You Shoemaker a word,

Nurs. Yet more work for your Shoemaker, well, well, You play the wagge, and
I the lie must tell.

I fear me there is a shoe wrings her in the instep, of my young Shooe-makers
making: such fellows as he cannot choose but be slippery companions; for
first they know the length of a Ladies foot, and then they have such tricks
to smooth her shoe, and tickle her sole; as I protest, if I were a Shoemaker
my self, it would make my teeth water: what a sweet thing it is, to have a
round sweet, plumpe, delicate Calve of a Ladies leg lie roling on his thigh,
whilst he lies smoothing her fine silk stocking, slippes his hand to her
garters, and sometimes higher birlady; I have been served so my self: there is
many a Gallant, I can tell you, would give all the shoes in's shop to have a
shooe-makers office in a morning: Well, well, I say nothing, but I suspect
something: Pity of me, she is as broad behind as I am, and round enough
before: I doubt me he has made her a pair of short-heel'd shoes with a
turne-over: Come sweet Mouse, have you given instructions to your Shoemaker?
Why what a fellow art thou, can not find a Last to fit her yet?


Leod. Yes Nurse, he has fitted me now.

Nurse. That Is well:
You must be careful sirrah, you must take true measure,
And fit her to ahaire, I charge you.

Cris. I warrant you Mistress.

Nurse. Mistress! gods me; I am a Madam sir knave, though I am a Nurse, I can
tell you: Go too, learn your duty, and you shall work to me too: when you
have done with my Lady, you shall take up my leg too: Come sweet honey. Exit.


Leod. Ade^ my comfort.

Cris. Even so my heart goes from me:
O what waves swim Lovers in ^ of fears, of hopes, of cares,
Of discontents, terrors, and dispaires.
A thousand fears do now my poor heart shake,
What medcine's best? Counsel, and that I Will take.

Enter Barnaby, Raph, and Hugh. Bar. Come, come, an you be men, make haste:
You it is a hanging matter; the Emperor and all the Prisoners
Are gone by already.

R^ph. Stay, stay, here is our fellow Crispin, let us take him with us. Will thou
go along Crispin?


Cris. Whither should I go? prithee tell me,
What make you all at Canterbury?

Bar. Not to buy the Cat a Bell Crispin, but to make loyter-pins.
For this day Boy, we have made holy at Feversham,
Shut up shop, thrown by our shooe-thred, and washed our faces:
And now my Master and Dame, and all of us are come
To see the Emperor, and the Christians that must dye to day.
They say there is a fine young Queen amongst them:
Prithee go along with us.

Cris. In sadness I cannot.

Bar. In madness now I care not:
For our shoes are made of running lether,
And therefore we will gallop no man knows whether.
Farewell Crispine: shall see my Dame come chasting this away anon,
'Cause we ran away from her: Come fellow Hugh,
Thou art so sad now, I prithee be merry. Exit Barnaby and Raph.

Hugh. I Will follow straight, although to meet my ruin;
The Princess Winifred is doomed to die,
And I in death will bear her company. Exit.

Cris. Misery of times when Kings do kill,
Not armed by Law to do it, but by will.
From these deep woes that my poor Country bears
Heaven save the Queen my Mother, Fates are just,
And till the thread be spun, none turn to dust.

Enter the Shoomakers Wife sweating. Wife. Fie, fie, fie;
Heaven for thy pity how am I used to day!
Here be youths indeed to run away, and leave me in this order.
Do I keep one, two, three, four, and five journey-men,
Besides Prentises, uprising and downe-lying,
And do they all bob me of this fashion?
How now, art thou there Crispine? that is well:
Did you see your fellows?

Cris. Yes my good Dame; they are all before you.

Wife. Then I Will have you before me too, but not so far as they are:
Fie, fie, see how I sweat with following them:
Come sir, though they gave me the slip, you will not serve me so I hope.
Go before, and man me.

Cris. O my good Dame!

Wife. How now Crispine, what is the matter Boy?
Why are so many Chancery Bills drawn in your face?
Now, where sits the wind that you blow so?
What ayl'st thou?

Cris. I have ever found you a kind loving Dame, nay, a good Mother
Both to my self, and my poor Brother Crispianus.

Wife. Bless him good Heaven, upon what ground soever he tread:
He was an honest fellow, and a good servant,
And so he shall find, if e're he come
From the wars again.

Cris. Oh my go^d dame, I to your ears must now unlocke
A secret, which, if ere you blab abroad --

Wif. Never by my Holy dame;
Yet I have much ado to keep my ownesecrets,
But I Will keep thine I Will warrant thee.

Crisp. Nay look dame, my life and death lies on it.

Wif. Let what will lie on it,
^^ shall nere be talked of by me.

Crisp. I Will thank ye then;
This it is, but you will say nothing?

Wif. Do think I am a woman or a beast?

Cris. Nor be angry with me?

Wif. Here Is a do indeed,
Thou have not got a wench with child have?

Cris. You have found my grief,
Good dame, indeed I have.

Wif. Out upon thee Villain.

Cris. Nay good Dame.

Wif. Hence you Whore-master knave,
Gods my passion, got a wench with child,
Thou naughty pack thou have undone thy self for ever:
Precious coals, you are a fine youth indeed,
Can you cut out no shoes but of Ducks leather,
With a wanion? has your Master so little doings,
Your tools must be working abroad in a forrainers shop?

Cris. Sweet Dame, you swore
You would say nothing.

Wif. Nothing, hang thee villain, I Will cry it at the Market Cross:
In Faith, is your Aul so free for smocke-leather?

Crisp. Good Dame.

Wif. By these ten fingers I Will double thy years for it:
Oh that I knew the Queen, I Would slit her nose,
And tear her eyes out of her head in faith.

Enter Shoemaker. Shoo. How now, what is the matter that it thunders so?

Wif. Oh, you are as good a Master too o'th to the side: you look to your
Prentises well; one of your men has been at greene-goose fair; but he shall
pay for the sauce I Will warrant him.


Shoo. What Fair? what Sauce, goody gander-goose?

Wif. Nay, it is no matter, as he likes this, let him dance the shaking of the
sheets another time.


Shoo. What sheets dame Guiniver? what dance I pray ye?

Wif. Marry uptailes all: do you smell me now?

Shoo. I smell an Ass head of your own: what is all this troe?

Cris. Pardon me Sir.
Unless you stand my friend,
Alas I am but dead.

Wif. Dead, hang ye Rascal, hang ye; you were quick enough when you laid
your Whore on her back, to take measure of her new shoes: Would you think it
Husband, this young knave has got a wench with child.


Shoo. Hoyda, and is this the shaking of the shoetes you talk of, goodwife
Snipper Snapper: s'foote I like him the better fort: he is of your husbands
trade, you old whore, and he has metal in him: do scould for that, hold
your tongue with a pox.


Wif. I, I, one Whore-master will take part with another still.

Shoo. Peace Walflit, leave gaping.
A wench with child? s'fut in my my capring days I have done as much my self
Sis.


Wif. I, beshrow your heart for your labor.

Shoo. Peace Sisley, I shall sow up your lips else;
Let me talk with my Prentise:
Have got a maid with child say?

Wife. A maid, marry hang her whore.

Shoo. Yet again, keep your Clacke, I Will slit your tongue else. Speak my young
Cock-Sparrow, what merry wagtaile have thou been b^lling with?


Cris. O Sir, if any but my dame and you should know it,
I were lost for ever.

Sh^o. Mum, mum for my part Boy; and you Margery Magpye, Keep your tongue from
chattering, or by the mary maskins I Will tickle your gaskins: Come, say, what
Didapper was it?


Cris. The Emperors Daughter Sir.

Shoo. Who, the Princess?

Wife. Out upon thee Traitor.

Shoo. Sfoot will Bow-bell never leave ringing? will the perpetual motion of
your old chaps never leave sounding? I shall beat your clapper out anon for it:
Ah sirrah, go too boy, no Court-mustard serve your turn but the Emperors
Daughter? This is fine in faith.


Wife. He Will smoke for it I warrant him.

Shoo. Why Wiperginie, prating still I say? thou have drawn on her shoe
handsomely by the Mass: Prithee tell me, how could thou being but a poor
Shooemaker, climb up to a Court-bed-sted?


Wife. He Will climb to the Gallows for it.

Shoo. Why Knipperdolin, is the Devil in thee?

Cris. I have climbed farther Sir; she is now my Wife,
And I have married her.

Wife. Hoyda.

Shoo. Hush madge Howlet, leave hollowing.

Cris. That very day my Brother was pressed forth --

Wife. You pressed her at night, did you?

Shoo. G^unting still you Sow-guelder?

Wife. Thou art a Coxcombe and a Claperdudgion: ^ost thou see now, I was never
so called in my life as thou call'st me. Thou may be ashamed on it: this it is
to let thy Prentises have their swing, and lie out at nights thus.


Shoo. Sweet Pigsnie, let me entreat thy patience:
Alas poor youth, we must needs help him.
W^y I commend him that he shoots at the fairest mark:
What an excellent show an Emperors Daughter will make in a
Shooemakers shop!

Wife. She Will spin a fair thread I warrant you:
How will he maintain her troe ye?

Cris. She knew my fortunes e're she married me,
And now your selves shall know them:
I and my Brother that thus have served you like Prentises,
Are Princes both, and Sons to Alured, late King of Britain.

Sho. How! my right Worshipful Prentise! Stands bare

Wife. Ha, is he a Kings son Husband?

Shoo. Make courtsie to your man you whore.

Cris. The Emperor Maximinus slew my Father,
And put the Queen my Mother into Prison:
What mean you gentle Master, pray be covered.

Shoo. No by my faith Sir,
You are a better man than the Master of my Company.

Cris. And seeing all my hopes lie dead save in her self,
I loved, revealed my self, and married her;
Yet I entreat you both -- Nay gentle Master,
I am your Prentice still, pray stand not bare.

Shoo. Well, well, for this once I will boy; now you old Gigumbob, you never
had two such men to man you.


Wife. Nay truly Husband, I ever thought they were some worshipful man's
sons, they were such mannerly boys still.


Cris. All I entreat of you, is some advice
To get my fair Leodice from Court, and then some secret place
Where she might be in safety till her sweet delivery,
And then I Will dare misfortune.

Wife. Blessing of thy heart, I like thee well thou have such a care of thy Wife:
therefore if thou could but steal her from the Court, and bring her hither,
she should lie in, and be brought to bed at my house* and no body know it I
warrant you.


Shoo. I marry Tib-tattle basket, how should we do that wench?

Cris. That Is all my care indeed, to steal her thence.

Wife. Come, come, leave it to me Boy, I see, a woman's wit must help at a
pinch still Boy: Mark this device, and if you like it, do it, and thus it is:
Soon at night thou shall hire some friend to fire ^ Tree upon the Coast at
Dover, as near the Beacons as can be possible, by which means the men that
watch the other Beacons, seeing that in flames, and supposing some Enemy
landed, will presently fire all the rest, and so on a sudden set both Court,
City, and Country, an^ all in an uproare, in which time if you and she cannot
bestirre your stumps, and run both away, would you were whipped in faith.


Shoo. An excellent pate to trouble the whole Commonalty;
The plot is good in faith Boy.

Cris. I like it well, and will acquaint the Princess with it.

Enter Barnaby and Raph crying. Bar. Raph. O Master and Dame, Dame and Master;
O lamental le day! now or never.

Sh^o. How now Knaves, tole one Bell at once, and leave jangling.

Bar. O pitiful Master, intolerable Dame, I am the fore-bell, and ^^'as ^ung
all in many a time and often with you Dame: but now I must ^ing out mine own
eyes in tears, in dolor, and most doleful k^ells: My fellow Hugh is taken,
And condemned like a Christian.


Wife. O horrible!

Shoo. Peace Bag-pipe: my man Hugh condemned,
How comes that?

Bar. O Master, your man Hugh is not the man you took him for; not plain Hugh,
but Sir Hugh, a Knight of fame.


Shoo. How? a Knight of the Worshipful Company of the Cordwainers?

Bar. Nay, by St. Davie, he is more, he is a Welsh Prince,
And son to the King of Powes in South Wales,
Though he but a Shooemaker here.

Shoo. Passion of me, what a brood of Princes have I brought up!
And why is my right honorable Servant to be put to death?

Bar. As we were going to see the Christians, he spied his old Love Queen
Winifred amongst them, and at the very sight he looked as green as a leeke,
an^ so rusht in amongst them; took the Lady by the Lilly-white hand, railed on
the Roman gods, defied the Emperor, and swore he would dye if she did.


Shoo. Is there no help to save him?

Raph. None in the World, except he leave to be a Christian.

Bar. It Is true Sir, all the Sergeants and Officers that came to arest him,
pitying his case, persuaded him to be no good Christian, as they were: then
there was a Broker said he would lay his soul to pawn, he could not prosper
if he were a Christian; nay, the Iaylor cries out on him, and says, if he
continue a Christian, he will use him like a Dog.


Shoo. Alack the day;
I Am sorry for my honorable boot hailer:
Go and comfort him; I Will see him anon tell him.

Bar. Nay, stay sweet Master,
'Twas never seen that a Shoemaker and his men
Were base Bassilomions, but true bonus socius,
Up se freeze, though we cannot get him from prison,
I Will sell my coat from my back, ere a Shoemaker
Shall want: Let us show our selves Cavaleeres
Or Cobblers: come every man his twelvepence
A piece to drink with him in prison.

Shoo. A good motion: boon boys, fine knaves;
I like you well when you hang together:
Hold my brave Journey-men,
There Is a double share for me.

Crisp. And mine with all my heart in faith.

Wif. And cause he is a Knight, thou shall have my shilling too.

Bar. I thank you Dame:
Nay, we will never leave a brother of our
Company, as long as flesh and bones
Will hang together.

Shoo. Away boys, go you before;
Joane jumble breech your Dame and I will follow,
Cherish him up, tell him he shall not want;
He lives not in the world could ever say,
A Shoemaker from his friend did flinch away. Exeunt.

Flourish: Enter Maximinus, Bassianus, Lutius, Officers; Albon and Amphiabel in
their shirts, as from Torments. Max. Resolve me yet, you stubborn Christians,
Cannot the several tortures which we do inflict,
Yet melt the Iron of your hardened hearts,
To make you bow unto our Roman gods?
Speak, will you obey our hest?

Amph. None but the hests of heaven.

Alb. A thousand deaths have not the bitter stings
As are the pains we have felt in torturing;
Yet Tyrant we will endure ten thousand more,
And laugh in deaths face, e're we our faiths give over.

Max. Renowned Albon, on thy head I Will set
A Crown of gold.

Alb. To make me heaven forget: Never.

Amph. Never.

Max. Let me yet win thee foolish man:
Remember what honors we, and Dioclesian
Heapt upon thee: giving thee the style
Britains Stewardship,
The Prince of Knights,
Lord of Varlome.

Alb. And in thy Rackes, thy Irons, Gibbets, and thy Wheel,
Do I more honor, and more comfort feel,
Than all those painted smoakes by thee bestowed
Of me: my Country may thus much boast: Albon
Stood firm and fixed, in spite of tyrants wrath,
Britains first Martyr for the Christian faith.

Max. But not the last:
For to thy scorn I Will add millions of
Christian flames, to death and tortures.

Lut. Dispatch these first.

Max. I will dragge them hence in Chains to
H^lnurst Hill, three miles from Verolome,
Where Albons Lord, there after blows,
And spightfull buffettings, for honor of his
Knighthood, once held the chief,
He shall have a Knight to be his Heads-man.

Alb. That stroke shall well be given,
That makes room for a soul to fly to heaven.

Max. This fiend Amphiabel,
From whose damned Teate he sucked this poison,
Shall there be bound by a fixed stake,
To which nailed fast, the Navell of his belly
Being opened, then with your sword prick him,
And force him run about like a wheel,
Till he has spunne his Guts out: and that dispatched,
Saw off his traitorous head.

Amph. Caesar in greater triumph nere was led.

Max. Away with them; Albon's the first shall dye:

Alb. Thou honour'st me amidst thy tyranny: come on dear friend,

Amph, Eternity protect us to our end:
Fight nobly then.

Albon. To my latest breath:
I go to a wedding (friend) and not to death.

Max. Go dragge 'em hence; this day we will
Quaffe the blood of Christians: call forth more:
So perish all will not our gods adore.

Enter Hugh, Winifred, and Shooe-makers. Bar. Nay fellow Hugh, or noble Sir
Hugh, remember it is not every man's case to dye a Christian; prithee leave it
then, and save thy life; the Roman gods are as good gods as e're tro^e on a
shoe of leather: and therefore sweet Hugh we may get their custom, and
bring 'em to our shop, and so we shall be Shooe-makers to the gods.


Hugh. You trouble me, I pray leave.

Bar. Leave thee, not as long as thou liv'st In Faith.

Max. What are all these?

Bar. Men that respect a Christian no more than you do, Sir you need not
fear, there is not a good Christian among us.


Max. Honest fellows:
Back, and give the Prisoners room.

Win. Come my constant friend:
Noble Sir Hugh at last farewell join hand^
We never shall touch one another more,
When these we sever; thou long have
Loved me; truer never was found,
That both in life and death keeps faith so sound:
All that my love can give thee for thy pains
I Will marry thee, but death must bid the banes:
Never to wedding was such honor given,
Our weding dinner must be kept in heaven.

Hugh. At which Angels shall wait:
Saints be our guests, our souls the wedding couple,
And the feast joy and eternity; our bridal room
The Hall of heaven, where hand in hand we will come,
Martyrs to dance a measure, which begins
Unto the music of the Cherubins.

Max. Mean time, even here you both shall dance with death;
Yet if our Gods you will serve, prolong your breath.

Hugh. It Is life we seek to loose; Tyrant strike home,
They are but walls of clay which thou beast down.

Max. Call a Hangman, flea that
Villain straight, and tear that woman's
Flesh with burning Pincers.

Win. We both are ready Sir,
Yet hear me Maximinus: by all the Rites
Of honor I conjure thee, in Law of woman-hood,
Let not my body be a Villains prey;
But since I am a Queen and spotless Virgin,
Let me choose my death.

Max. Because thou once were daughter to a King
Enjoy thy wish, so death may forth with strike,
Meet him in any shape thou best shall like.

Win. Be sure it shall:
Be thou the chief mourner at my funeral.
My earthly love farewell; thy cheek I Will kiss,
We Will meet anon within the land of bliss:
Follow my footesteps thou shall soon be there:
Courage good heart, to dye I cannot fear.
I Will be the first, and teach thee how to dye,
Leading the way to sweet felicity.
Come Tyrants lanch my arm, to death I Will bleed,
Sweet blood was shed for me, and mine I Will sheede.

Max. Dispatch and lanch her arm, but save the blood
The which this day to holy Jupiter I Will sacrifice.

Win. My dearest friend farewell,
In one house shortly we will for ever dwell.

Hugh. The storm of death now comes,
Bear up brave sail.

Win. I feel no storm; but oven the merriest gaile
That ever life was driven with: Oh how sweet a
Dream me thinks I now am in;
Angels do run to meet and welcome
Me unto the Land of bliss,
Singing I have spunne a golden thread

Hugh. That thread of gold weave still.

Win. I do; farewell: make haste to meet -- Dies.

Hugh. In faith I will, in a whole Camp of Martyrs; blessed Fate
She Is gone for ever to an Angels state.

Max. Dispatch him; and dragge her body hence.

Hugh. It Is sister to the Saints; oh give it reverence.
Why do I linger here, my love being gone?

Bar. A right Shoemaker, he loves a woman.

Hugh. Merciful Tyrant set me on deaths wings,
That I may bear a part where my love sings
Eternal Hymns of joy; blessed love I come, as soon
As I can set forth out of this house of earth and clay:
When shall this stroke be given,
That I may mount and meet my love in heaven?

Max. Flea him alive:
Yet stay, because you are so love-sicke, we will give
You a drink to cure it: Power into a Cup
His sweete-hearts blood, and give it us.

Hugh. It Is precious Wine, holy, and good.

Max. And you shall quaffe your fill:
So, put in Poison, spice it well;
There drink thy last, and sink with her to hell.

Hugh. Oh let me kiss this heavenly cup of all my happiness:
Dear Love to thy blessed souls eternal goodness,
I drink this health, filled to the brimme:
Two hearts did never so in one stream swim,
As thine and mine shall now; and though thy blood
Be poysond, this our loves keeps firm and good.
My Country men and fellow Shoo-makers,
As of my best of friends I take my leave:
We many times together have drunk healths,
But none like this: yet I Will begin to you all;
But here you shall not pledge me.

Bar. Yes, and 'twere Aquavitae we would pledge thee.

Hugh. The love which I so found in you,
Even in my latest hour, I Will not forget,
But to you all begin my lasting love,
Never did fair society of men more please me: you are a trade
Of fellowships best mixture, nobly made.

Bar. We are Shooe-makers, and so.

Hugh. My being amongst you, thus shall you prefer,
To say a Prince was once a Shoemaker.
For which you now shall raise your skill aloft,
And be called gentlemen of the Gentle craft.

Bar. Oh noble Sir, Hugh.

Hugh. Could I give Indian Mines, they all were yours;
But I have naught to give, nor ought to take,
But this my farewell; therefore for my sake,
When Death has seized my flesh,
Take you my bones, which I bequeath
Amongst you to be buried.

Bar. Take no care for thy winding sheet, sweet Hugh, for never was gentleman
of the Gentle craft so buried as thou should be, if thou had drunk thy
last.


Hugh. Now trouble me no more:
Upon this stage of death I set my foote^ to all farewell,
Angels shall clap their wings to ring my knell,
And bid me welcome to the land of rest,
Where my immortal love lives ever blessed:
A health dear soul I Will drink to thee: so, so,
H^w soon he fades, that now so fresh did grow!
Fly up my soul to heaven, my sins sink to the earth;
Thus do I s^^le my holy Christian faith.

Ralph. O noble Sir Hugh, oh lamentable Hearing.

Max. Conveigh that other body hence, and give it
^uriall as befits her state: for this, bestow
It on these shooemakers, as he bequeathed it.

Bar. No Shooemakers now Sir, but the gentle Craft
Shall see it buried in state and pomp.

Max. Use your own pleasures; where is Bassianus?
How chanced our Daughter, bright Leodice,
Came not to see these slaughtred Christians?

Bas. She keeps her Chamber Sir.


Max. Is she not well? let her be kept with care,
And to the gods of Rome these Trophies rear. Flourish, exit Maxim.

Bar. Well my Masters, I could fi^de in my heart to rail upon this Emperor
Mr. Minus, but that I doubt he will make us all die like Christians, and that he
shall never do as long as we live I warrant him.


Raph. We Will watch him for that in faith.


Bar. So let him pass then, and let us lay our sinodicall heads together, to
know what shall become of Sir Hugh.


Raph. Let Us all join together, and bury him.


Bar. How like a Christian thou talk: what before he be cold? then we
should use him as many rich heirs desire to use their fathers: No, because he
was a Prince, and did such honor to our Trade, we will bury him like a Prince
and a Shooemaker.


All. Agreed, agreed.


Bar. You know he gave us the name of the Gentle Craft, and if we should give
him an ill word now, 'twere a shame in faith.


Raph. That Is true; how shall we do then to honor him?


Bar. Marry thus fellow-gentlemen, of my fellow Hughs making, to requite his
kindness, because he dyed a Christian, he shall no more be called Sir Hugh,
but St. Hugh, and the Saint for ever of all the Shooemakers in England.


All. O brave, brave Bar^aby: St. George for England,
And St. Hugh for the Shooemakers.

Bar. An you be Gentlemen, hear me: you know besides, h'as given his bones
amongst us. Now you must not think as if a Butcher had given us a dozen of
maribones to be picked.


All. Well, well, how then?


Bar. Marry thus; in memory of his gift, all our working-tool^^, from this time
for ever, shall be called St. Hughs bones.


All. Brave, brave, that shall stand for ever in faith.


Raph. I, but which of our tools shall we call so?


Bar. Marry even all fellow Raph, all the tools we work with: as for example,
the Drawer, Dresser, Wedges, Heele-block, hand and thumb-lethers, Shooe-thrids,
Pincers, pricking-aule, and a rubbing-stone, Aule, Steel, and Tacks,
shoo^-haires, and Stirrups, whetstone, and stopping-sticke, Apron, and
Paring-knife, all these are Sir Hughs bones. Now sir, whatsoever he be, that is
a Gentleman of the Gentle Craft, and has not all these at his fingers ends, to
reckon them up in Rhyme, shall presently up with him, and strapado his bum.


All. An everlasting Law renowned Barnaby.


Bar. Nay, hear me sing like a Swan, or a Sowter: Furthermore, if any
Journey-man shall travel without these tools, now called St. Hughs bones, at
his back, and cannot slash, cut, and crack coxcombes, with brave Sword and
Buckler, long sword, and quarter-staffe, sound a Trumpet, or play o'th Flute,
'or bear his part in a three man's Song, he shall forfeit a Gallon of wine, and
be counted a Colt as long as his shoes are made of running lether: Speak,
is it agreed on?


All. Agreed, agreed, agreed.


Bar. We Will take up the body then.


Raph. I Will have a leg of him.


1. And I another.


2. And I another.


3. And Ilo help thee Raph.


Bar. With reverence and with silence then: For as we have made these Laws in
remembrance of him, so it shall not be a miss to make it the sweeter, to
reckon up our tools, and put them in meeter, and instead of a Deirge, I think
it fit time and reason to reckon Sir Hughs bones in Rhyme:

The Drawer first, and then the Dresser,
Wedges and Heele-blocks, greater and lesser;
Yet it is not worth two Ganders feathers,
Unless you have the hand and thumb-lethers:
Then comes your short-heeles, Needle, and Thimble,
With Pincers and pricking Aule, so neat and nimble:
Rubbing-stone next, with Aule, Steel, and Tacks,
Which often will hold when the shooe-leather cracks:
Then Stirrup, stopping-stick, with good Sow-haires,
Whet-stone, and cutting-knife which sharply pares;
And lastly, to clap Saint Hughs bones in
An Apron that is made of a jolly sheep skin,
And thus to all Shooemakers we bid adieu,
With triumph to bury the famous St. Hugh. Exeunt.

ACTVS QVINTVS.
A cry within, arm, arm, arm; then enter a sort of Country people at
several doors. All. Arm, arm, arm; what shall we do neighbors?

1. The Beacons are on fire, and my heart freezes in my belly.

2. They are fired round about us, and all the Country in an uproare;
My very nose drops with fear.

3. If our Enemies find us in these cold sweats,
We are all sure to go to th pot for it.

4. Therefore let us go to the pot first;
For when the Drinke's in, the Wit's out:
And when the wit is out, we shall fight like mad men.

1. Content, and as we go, let us raise the Country.

All. Arm, arm, arm.

Enter Bassianus and Latius. Bas. What Alarum's this?
Why cry ye so like mad men?

1. Because we have no weapons in our hands Sir.

Lut. Why are the Beacons fired?

2. We are all afraid to think on it;
They say the Enemy is landed Sir.

Bas. Stand you here like sheep,
When danger beats so rudely at your doors?

4. There let 'em beat, he shall not be let in for me.
The Enemies are landed men, and therefore we will go by water:
Come neighbors.

Within. Arm, arm, arm.

Lut. The cry is still raised, let us put the Court in Arms,
And certify the Emperor.

Bas. With all the speed that may be,
Arm, arm, arm Exeunt Bassian. and Lut.

2. Let us be wise neighbors,
And whilst they cry Arms, Exeunt Neighbors, the cry continued.
Let us cry legs, and trust unto our heels.

Enter Crispine and Leodice. Cris. The stratagem takes rarely, come fair
Leodice,
This tumult in the Court gives means to fly.

Leod. Thus folded in thine Arms I wish to dye.

Cris. Talk not of Death, live, and be blessed for ever,
No frown of Fate two faithful hearts can fever. Exeunt.

Within. Arm, arm, arm.

Enter Emperor and Lords with weapons drawn. Max. My Horse and Armor
villains:
High Jupiter protect us; what neglect is this,
The Beacons fired, and a whole Land asleep,
When Foes come armed in Thunder?
Guard the Court, see to our Daughters safety,
I fear these sudden tumults have disturbed her. Enter Shoomakers with staves.

All. Arm, arm, arm.

Bar. An you be men, show your selves so.

Max. Why do you cry thus? say, whither run ye?

Bar. Out of our wits I think Sir;
The Beacons all along the Seacoast burn most horribly.

Max. And what is the cause on it?

Bar. Because they are a fire Sir: Ten thousand Kentish men
Which woeful taile's to tell, are knocked down like sheep Sir:
The Enemy is landed at Sandwitch, set a shore at Dover,
And arrived at Rumny Marsh: hark, I hear the Drums already. A low march.

Max. I am amazed, what Drum is this?
Stand on your guard.

Bar. I would your Guard were here for us to stand upon,
That we might reach the further: Come, fear nothing Sir;
Let your Lords and you stand by, and see
How we Shoomakers will thrash 'em.

Enter Crispianus with Drum and Soldiers richly attired. Cris. Health to the
Emperor from the Roman State.

Bas. These are our Britain friends, new come from France.

Max. Whom at your landing saw you up in Arms,
That fright the Country thus?

Cris. None my good Lord, not any;
From France and Dioclesian thus I bring
These Britain Soldiers back tryumphant home:
The black storm there is laid, and sure these fears
That bring these homebred terrors, all are fa^s^:
And as I guess, the firing of the Beacons,
Was at the fight of Dioclesians Fleet,
That with himself now rides in Dover-rode,
And is by this on shore: and how in France the die of War has run
His ^aj^sty in these Imperial Letters certifies.

Max. Thanks for thy news,
We Will read them straight.

Bar. By St. Hugh bones we were all afraid of our own shadows, we shall have
no cussing now I see. Enter Lutius.


Max. What news brings Lutius?

Lut. Comfort my Lord, the errour's found;
The sudden fire that kindled all this fear,
Is now quenched out; the cloud that threatened storms,
Is turned to drops of heat: some knavish fellow
Hard by the Seacoast set a Tree on fire,
Which seen, men thought that Dover Beacon flamed,
And so fired all the rest, and raised the Alarm.

Max. I am glad it is no worse; run Bassianus,
And sing this comfort to our Daughters ears,

Bas. I shall my Lord. Exit Bas.

Max. These Letters of your noble Victories
Are as your self most welcome, on whose head
Our brother Dioclesian lays the glory of the
Conquest over the Vandals and the Goths:
He writes, he gave unto thy manly Thigh
The sword of Kight-hood, wishing us to add more
Honors on thee, which at his arivall,
His, and our hand shall do with royal bounty.

Cris. I am your lowly Vassal, royal Sovereign,

Bar. Do hear fellow Ralph,
Me thinks I should know this Captain;
He looks as like Crispianus as can be?

Enter Bassianus. Max. Now Bassianus, speak, how fares our daughter?

Bas. Alas my Lord, the Court is all in mourning,
The Princess with this sudden fear
Is fled the Court, not to be found by any.

Max. Not to be found, why where is her Nurse?

Enter Nurse. Bas. See here she comes.

Max. Speak doting Beldam; where is my daughter.

Nur. Fie, fie, fie, I have not so much wit left
As to tell ye where I am my self, O my side,
Pray let me breath a little;
When this hurly burly began in the Court,
She ran, and I ran; she haild, and I pulled;
She cried, and I roared; but her fear being
Stronger than my old bones, away whipped she
Out at the Court-gates, and I fell in a found,
Stark dead in faith; had not a Gentleman Usher
Come by and clapped me soundly, I Would been
Past telling Tales by this time. Oh my Back.

Max. Oh dismal chance
Search every room; This dismal clamor
May so fear her blood, that death may
Seize her haste: if in the Court you miss her;
See It proclaimed, that whosoever brings me
Her alive, goes laden with rewards;
If nobly borne, we give her him to wife:
Make haste, slip not an hour,
While I set on to meet the Emperor. Exit.

Bar. I say it is he; I Will speak to him what ere come on it.
Crispianus?

Crisp. My honest fellow Barnaby!

Bar. O Rumpes and Kidnyes, did not I tell you so?

Ralph. Honest Crispianus, welcome from France.

Crisp. I thank you: how does my Master?

Bar. In health, and brave as Holly:
So art thou me thinks.

Crisp. The fortune of the wars: is my Dame well too?

Bar. The old wench still: she keeps the mark in her mouth

Crisp. And how does my brother Crispine?

Bar. Oh he is the foreman of the shop since you went^
Nay, we have news to tell thee anon when we are
Drinking; we have given over the Shooe-makers
Cloakes now, and are become Gentlemen
Of the Gentle Craft, and all our working
Tools are called Saint Hugh's bones.

Crisp. That Is excellent.

Enter Shoemaker. Shoe. How now my tall trencher men,
What make you amongst Courtiers?
What my Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum,
The Basseius manus, my noble Crispianus:
And how does the brave Monsiers in France,
My brave Shevaleere? As I am a Gentleman
Of the Gentle Craft, thou art welcome.

Crisp. I thank your love and kindness Sir.

Shoe. Away my strong Beer drinkers;
There Is a Noble in English, go drink a health
To Saint Hugh's Bones; I must have
Some speech in private, and enter parley
With my Man of War.

Bar. As long as this Drum will strike,
We Will fight it out with pike and pot:
We Will drink a health to you both Master. Exit.

Shoo. Away my fine leather sellers,
Shrink awhile in the wetting; whilst thus
I salute my right worshipful Cordwainer:
For I hear say the Knightly Dub a Dub
Has been laid on thy shoulders.

Crisp. It pleased the Emperor so to honor me.

Shoo. He honors me and all my company by it ^
By Saint Hughs Bones thou shall take the
Wall of thy Master now in faith boy.

Crisp. The Wall, not so Sir.

Shoo. And the Kennell too by the Spreech-awles^
Nay Sir, I know more than you think I do:
Your Brother has song the three man's song,
And told all in faith: you were
Once my Princely Prentise.

Crisp. Sir If my brother has disclosed
To you our Births, I do conjure you,
As my dearest friend, for to conceal it.

Shoo. Mum, mum boys,
As close as my Currier and I in a Tavern
On a monday morning: tut, my Princely
Prent^se, thy brother knows that I am leather
That will hold all waters when he trusts
Me with a secret: Hark in thine ear boy,
Has got a Wench with child byth' mass.

Crisp. How, a wench with child?

Shoo. Yes, and a great one too:
No less than the Emperors daughter,
And she is as big as she can tumble:
Has entered the best Chamber in the Court,
Has tickled her shooesole for a girl or a boy
By this time; and hark once more,
She lies in at my house too, but mum; no more words boy.

Crisp. Pray heaven you catch no hurt by it,
For the Emperor sends forth wondrous search to find her.

Shoo. No matter,
She shall be welcome home when e're she comes,
I hope she is delivered too by this time,
For I heard such a Catterwalling,
And my wife stirs up and down that she stinkes:
Nay more, the Beacons were fired on purpose
To steal her from Court, and only
By the knavery and policy of
Gillian Ginger-taile my wife.

Crisp. The accident is strange;
See, here comes my Dame and Brother.

Enter Crispinus, and Shooe-makers wife with a child. Shoe. Gods me she is
delivered:
Ha boy, art come? come hither Crispine,
Know ye this Shevaleere?

Crisp. My dearest Brother.

Crispian. I am glad to see you:
I hear strange news brother.

Crisp. If from my Master Sir the news did come,
It Is true, and I Will with life maintain.

Shoo. Look here old Sis,
Your other Prentise is come.

Crispian. My gentle Dame.

Wife. Sweet Crispianus, welcome home from the wars;
Nay sir, your brother has been in Arms too:
Do you you see what exployts has done?

Shoo. Is It a boy wife?

Wife. A boy I Am sure,
Has a Purse and two pence in it:
Nay come Sir, you shall kiss your kinseman:
Here Is his Fathers own nose in faith.

Crispian. A Princely babe,
The eye of Heaven look on thee,
And may thou spread like to the
Bay Tree, which the whole year springs,
And through this land plant a whole race of Kings.

Crisp. Nor shall he scorn,
Till that race be run,
To call himself a Prince,
Yet a Shooe-makers son.

Shoo. Of the Britains blood, Royal in faith boys:
Let no man therefore henceforth take it scorn,
To say a shooe-makers Son was a Prince borne.

Crispian. Good Fate succeed it:
Brother my Master has told all your strange proceedings:
Have you heard of the Proclamations?

Crisp. Yes, and mean ere long
To use it for my profit.

Crispian. Till when, muf^e this Son
In some dark Cloud, whilst I at Court
Wait on the Emperor, that is gone to
Meet great Dioclesian; Fortune
May turn her Wheel, and we
May stand as erst we did,
And with our own beams shine.

Crisp. Play you your game at Court, the next trick's mine.

Shoo. And by Saint Hugh,
Though I neither shuffle nor cut,
I Will hold Cards too.

Wife. And I Will not fit out, though I turn up Noddy.

Crispia. Work wisely then, and part.

Shoo. Do so till time ripen, which being known,
A Shooe-makers subtle wit shall then be shown. Exeunt.

Trumpets sound: Enter Dioclesian, Maximinus, Bassianus, Latius, with Drum
and Colors. Max. Great Dioclesian, our renowned Brother,
In France your happy and tryumphant deeds
We here in Britain thus congratulate:
The Vandall and the Goth we hear, have paid
The price at full for daring insolence.

Diocl. Even with their bloods they have:
Their daring and their downfalls fill one grave,
And yet our Conquest had not spread such wings
But for those Britain forces you sent over:
They from the French Field plucked the noblest Flower,
And of them all, a Soldier too, whose Fame
I cannot sing too much, carried the name
Of Honor from us all: his good sword flew like Lightning,
And where it went, o'rethrew: the King of Goths
Called me his prisoner, but then this brave Opponent
Fetched me off in ransom with his blood, and that being done,
He like a Lion on the Vandall run:
Took him, and closed the battle in his fall,
The work was bloody, rough, and Tragical;
And therefore for my love pray crown his head
That twice saved mine: It is a man, whose Fate
Vpheld the glory of the Roman State.

Max. The man you sent, and praise so Royal Sir,
Shall ever live within our Princely favor;
One call the Captain hither.

Bas. Here he comes. Enter Crispianus.

Max. Brave Soldier, your high spoken merit
Breathed from an Emperors love, claims due regard
From his and our hands: cast therefore but your eye
On all the Kingdom, what you can espy to please you,
Ask, and take it.

Diocl. Which we will confirm brave Crispianus,
Make thy princely boon worthy thy fame,
And such as may beseem great Maximinus and Dioclesian,
The Masters of the triple world, to give,
And by our gods thou shall the same receive.

Cris. I humbly thank my Lords;
I Will ask no Gold, nor Lands, nor O^fices; but thus high,
To beg a prisoners life and liberty.

Max. A prisoner noble Sir, what is he?

Crisp. It Is a sad Queen, my Mother Royal Sir,
Imprisoned by your Grace at Rochester.

Max. King Allureds Queen thy Mother?

Cris. Yes my good Lord, my Kingly Father slain,
I and my brother did disguised remain,
Till I was pressed for France.

Diocl. This wonder does amaze me:
Is Crispianus then a Kings son found?
'Twas voye'd abroad, thou and thy brother dyed in the battle.

Cris. Fame speaks not always troth: I ^^ve,
But of my brother what is become, as yet I have not heard.

Max. Thou here shall live right dear in our regard;
Lutius by this our Signet free the Queen from Prison,
And give her knowledge of her Princely son:
O were our Daughter found, so much I love thee,
Thou should enjoy my bright Leodice.

Diocl. We thank our Brothers love to grace our friend,
For to his worth we can no gift extend.

Max. What shouts are these? Look out. A shout within: Enter Nurse.

Nurs. Out of my way Sir: oh my heart!

Max. Why what is the matter?

Nurs. The matter say ye? pray let me gape alittle;
^was out of my wits before with fear, and now for joy.
Oh my heart, I think in my conscience I have not so much wind left in my
belly as will blow out a Candle:
The Princess, the Princess Sir.

Max. Ha? my Daughter?
Say, where is she?

Nurs. O my sweet Lambkin's found,
And come to Court too.

Max. Where? who found her?

Nurs. A pretty handsome stripling by my Holydame;
Her own Shoemaker belike, poor duckling:
She was wandering, and he met with her;
And belike she had worn out her shoes, and he fitted her finely:
So drew on her shoes first, and drew her to Court after;
And he and all the Company of the Gentle Craft Sir,
Brings her home most sumptuously.

Max. With ^usicks sweetest strains conduct 'em in,
Our sorrows wither, as our joys begin.

Music: Enter Shoemaker, and other in their Liveries, then Leodice and Wife
with the Child: Crispine bare-headed before, Barnaby and the rest after:
Leodice kneeles, and Maximinus embraces her. Max. Life cannot be more welcome;
which is he
Doubles my joys in my Leodice?

Nurs. This is the youth that doubles 'em:
O my sweet Honey-^uckle, have I found thee again?

Max. I Will treble his rewards for finding her:
And to be sure my Daughter, not to loose thee more,
Great Emperor see
To do all honor unto this Prince, and thee,
I give my only daughter for his wife.

Leod. His wife my Lord?

Max. By my Daughter:
Though a stranger to thee, he is a Prince borne,
Son to a King, and well deserves thy love.

Leod. Here Is one deserves it more, he saved my life
When I was almost dead with grief;
These can witness it.

Bar. It Is very true Sir; when she was the lost sheep,
He was the Shepherd that found her;
When she was a cold, he covered her;
Nay more, when she was hungry, he filled her belly:

Wif. Here Is one, if it could speak, would be a witness to that.

Leod. And by the Proclamation, your self are bound
To let this young man marry me:
I Will swear I Will wed with none, except this Shoemaker.

Max. Sure her sudden fright has made her mad:
Was she not frantic when thou foundst her first?
Nay, she is mad still; how dare you stand this scorn?
This is a Prince, that but a beggar borne.

Leod. A Beggar? look on this Babe:
It Is his own; it is Princely borne,
And a Shoomakers son.

Max. Fond Girl.

Leod. Good Father hear,
You know not what brave men these shoomakers are.

Bar. It Is known we can get Children Sir.

Max. How am I vexed with fools and mad men!

Leod. I do beseech you Sir, my Royal Father,
Take this lovely Child to kiss, and bless it.

Max. Defend me Jupiter, she is mad,
Stark mad.

Diocl. Why does the fair Leodice
So vex her Kingly Father
With so base a brat?

Cris. Zoonds base?

Shoe. Peace knave, peace:
What will thou do?

Leod. Base Brat?
Alas, had the poor fool a tongue or power to speak,
He Would swear you did him wrong:
By all our gods it is as nobly borne
As the proudest here.

Max. Strange frenzy,
Why does my Daughter so dishonor me?

Leod. I take but this poor Child's part, and so should you:
For look you Father, this base Brats Mother
Lay in my Mothers belly; were she alive,
She would acknowledge it, and comfort give,
And it shall call you Grandsir if it live.

Max. Here Is strange and dark Enigmaes,
Speak plain, whose Child is it?

Leod. This shoomakers.

Max. And yours?
'Slife he has layne with her,
She Is his Whore; attach the Villain,
Tortures shall force his baseness to confess it.

Cris. Most Royal Sovereign,
Suffer not wrath to kindle in your bosom,
His baseness and mine run even in one stream:
It is my brother, Princes by birth, the King of Britains sons;
Our names Eldred and Offa; for these names
Of Crispine and Crispianus we but borrowed
To keep our lives in safety.

Max. Can this be true?

Leod. Father it is, and this long since I knew,
Loved, and then married, a twelve Month since:
This token, could it speak, would tell you all.

Max. Whom Heaven would save from danger, never can fall.
My blessing compass both:
Nurse, what say you to this?

Nurs. Nay, I was asleep when 'twas done in faith.

Diocl. She winkt a purpose. Enter Queen.

Lut. The Queen my Lord.

Max. Most welcome, and most wished for,
Royal Princess, your fetters off,
Imprisonment we here take off,
Go, embrace your sons.

Quee. O my dear sons!

Max. With them receive your Daughter
To your love: Wonders has fallen
Since you have a Prisoner been;
You, and your Sons, and we are grown a kin.

Quee. Fame spread abroad the wonder,
And the fame of our dread Lords the
Emperors, which in stead of death
Has given an happy passage to our lives.
But Royal Sir, should I forget this shoemaker,
We break a bond, wherein we all stand bound:
My sons of you has loving Parents found.

Shoo. Faith Madam,
I did the best I could for 'em:
I have seen one married to the Emperors daughter.

Bar. Would you had married me no worse.

Max. You all have done your best
To make our comforts full: for which we will pay
Rewards to all, and crown this happy day.

Bar. We have a boon my Lord the Emperor.

Max. What is it?

Bar. That seeing these two Princes,
Fellow servants with us, being of the Gentle Craft,
May have one Holy Day to our selves.

Max. What Month would you have it kept in?

Bar. The five and twentieth of October,
That none of our Trade may go to bed sober.

Max. Take it:
These lines of Fate thus in one circle met,
If Dioclesian please shall here close up.

Dioc. In what circumference?

Max. Thus; it is more honor to make Kings,
Than be such: then let these twain,
Being English borne, be Britain Kings again.
This in the North shall rule.

Dioc. This in the South:
Brave Crispianus, to requite thy deed,
Great Dioclesians hand shall Crown thy head. A Crown presented,

Max. To Crispine this:
And this rich gift beside;
The fair Leodice to be his Bride.

Crisp. I have an humble suit unto your Highness.

Max. What is it my Son?

Crisp. It Is this;
A Church then, and a beauteous Monastery
On Holmhurst-Hill, where Albon lost his head,
Offa shall build; which I Will St. Albons name,
In honor of our first English Martyrs fame.

Max. Build what Religious Monuments you please,
Be true to Rome, none shall disturb your peace.
Set forward Princes, Fortunes Wheel turns round;
We Kingdoms lose, you the same hour sit Crowned.
And thus about the World she spreads her wings,
To ruin, of raise up the Thrones of Kings.

FINIS.

