GOOD NEWS and BAD NEWS.

By S. R.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his Shop within the
Hospital gate in Smith-field. 1622.

To the Reader.
AS oftentimes as friend his friend does meet,
And with salute each other kindly greet,
The second speech that commonly they use
Is to enquire straight, Pray what Good news?
The ear for novelties still harkens out
After the tales which tongues do spread about,
And many a one most wicked does devise,
To feed the world, with false deluding lies;
Because men are so apt for to inquire,
And after rumors have so great desire:
But here is no imitation of such men,
Good news, and bad, presented by a pen,
That to your view such humors does present,
As by the good you may the bad prevent:
Here Is choice and change of both sorts to be had*
Full of variety, Good news, and Bad.
S. R.

An Epigram, upon a jest of Will Summers.
WILL SUMMERS, once unto King Harry came,
And in a serious show himself did frame
To go to London, taking of his leave,
Stay William, (quoth the King) I do perceive
You are in haste, but tell me your occasion,
Let me prevail thus, by a friends persuasion:
Quoth he if thou will know, I Will tell thee, Marry
I go to London for Court news old Harry.
Go thither from the Court, to hear Court-Newes?
This is a trick Summers, that makes me muse;
Oh yes (quoth William) Citizens can show
What Is done in Court ere thou or I do know.
If an Ambassador be coming over,
Before he do arrive and land at Dover,
They know his Masters message and intent
Ere thou can tell the cause why he is sent.
If of a Parliament they do but hear,
They know what laws shall be enacted there:
And therefore for a while, adue White Hall,
Harry, I Will bring thee news home, lies and all.
To Make-tale and Carry-tale.
IT were good news to any honest mind,
That we could such a reformation find
Amongst our wandering wits and giddy brains,
That they would cease their sottish idle veins
Of intermedling (as they daily do)
With things their calling has no claim unto.
Gross ignorance presumptuously will prate
Of serious matters that concern a State,
Dull understanding never heeds his own,
But other men's affairs, that must be known,
Blockish-conceit, will boldly take in hand,
That he Church government does understand
To want (what he has need of) Reformation,
And this is grown to such a graceless fashion,
That we the common custom may forbear
Used when men meet, What Is the good news you hear?
And to another question may proceed,
What lies abroad? and then you are sure to speed.
You shall have them by whole sale quickly vented,
It Is wondrous strange how people are contented
To have themselves deluded in this sort,
By every flying fained false report;
How itching ears do entertain all stuff,
If it be named News it is good enough.
One says a traveler (a friend of his)
Is new come home, and he has told him this.
Another says as he in Paul's did walk,
He heard the news whereof two Knights did talk:
Another he has news is very rare,
And heard it sitting in a Barbers chair:
Another he is furnished very strange,
With news new taken up at the Exchange.
And thus about from man to man it flies,
Was never such an age for telling lies.
Make-tale, and Carry-tale, a work are set,
Father of lies has caught them in his net,
They are his own and he emploies them still,
And so I leave them to his cursed will.
The good News and the Bad, that here is told,
Both take foundation on a better hold,
For when this book is over read by you,
I Will lay the price, you will confess it is true.
Good News.
A Wealthy Citizen that di'd of late,
Did leave his wife a very great estate,
Su^m'd up in Thousands to her hearts content:
All sorts of suitors to this widow went;
As Courtiers, Lawyers, Citizens, Divines:
But she unto a Gallant Knight inclines,
And would be Madam'd, Worshipped, Ladifide,
And in the Leather-carted fashion ride.
The match was made, the marriage consummate,
Her Ladyship was graced, in pomp and state,
With all content unto her hearts desire,
So bravely proud, that all her friends admire.
Their old acquaintance quite aside was laid,
Her worship highly scorned shop-keeping trade:
Friends, kinsfolks, neighbors, are inferior all,
She much disdaines, What lack ye, at a stall.
Bad News.
FIe upon giddie Fortune, and her wheel,
Unconstant, and as slipperie as an Ecle:
From Kitchin-maid, to Mistress she arose,
From mistress unto Madam, ^p she goes:
And there a year or two ^^s Lady swagger,
Then turns about, and sends her down to beggar*
Her dearest Knight (whom so she just may call)
What with his debts, and what with Have at all,
Lay hidden like a savage in his den,
For fear of Bayliffes, Sergeants, Marshals men:
And she does on her Virginals complain,
I wail in woe, my Knight does plunge in pain.
Good News.
A Usurer met late with a Divine,
At a friends house, where they together dine,
And entering good discourse, the Preacher took
Occasion to condemn out of Gods book,
The sinful trade that money-mongers use,
Beginning with Gods Law unto the Jews;
And so throughout all ages, how the best
Of holy men did usury detest:
And that there never any Saint has bin,
Would venture soul upon that wicked sin.
The Usurer that heard his zealous speech,
Repented, and Gods mercy did beseech;
In his defense not knowing what to say,
But free confessed his heart had gone astray:
And from that day would restitution make,
And ten in the Hundred utterly forsake:
To Hospitals most liberal he would give,
To prisoners, that in misery do live.
Almes-houses for the poor he will have made,
And repair Churches, ruinous decayed:
High ways and bridges he would likewise mend,
And bountiful benevolence extend
To schools of learning, yea would thousands give
To pious use, while he had time to live.
And so detesting damned usury,
Learn every day unto the world to die.
Bad News.
AFter he did this godly motion choose,
He walking home, where sitting in a muse,
His man comes in, and to him sadly spoke,
Sir, he you sent me to this morning's broke.
He Is gone for Ireland the Neighbors say,
And what he owes never intends to pay.
Another of his servants comes in,
And tells him as bad news where he had bin:
One that should pay five hundred pounds together*
Had taken Ludgate, and was new gone thither.
Now out upon them Villains both, he said,
Is this a world to have restitution made?
Give unto Hospitals that will for me,
And tarry Knaves in prison where you be.
Build Almes-houses, you that have mind thereto,
I with my coin have somewhat else to do.
Mend Bridges, you that over bridges goes,
For you shall make no bridge (friends) of my nose.
And for your Churches with decayed wall,
Get Briefes and beg, or let your Churches fall.
Mine owne's mine own, upon my self to spend;
I Will trust to none, Gold's my assured friend.
Good News.
LAdy, thou shall not lack while I have land,
Money we will have ready at command.
The wealthy Citizen is my Casseere,
The fool has money, and I Will sell him dear.
How brave I sold the Farm a month ago,
Oh that I had good store to utter so.
This ready money gives a man content,
For Tenants come but lingering in with Rent:
When I for Hundreds have a present use,
And ask to borrow, straight there is an excuse,
I cannot sir, I have it not to spare,
It makes me scorn fellows that are so bare:
I Will have my purse with money furnished still,
Sell Meadow, pasture, arable, I will;
And so be ready for to make supply,
Gentilities best ornaments to buy.
We Will have a Coach, like Chariot of the Sun,
With hautie Horses, for our Iades be done.
New Suits for thee and I, at least some ten
New Liueries for all our Seruing-men.
And thus to credit Madam we will ascend,
That vulgar sort our worships may commend.
Bad News.
SIr Nimble-touch makes his possessions fly,
And on his ready money does rely:
Heel be admired for bravery, out of hand,
And where his father left him spacious land,
A journey to him, for to walk about,
He by a nimble policy found out,
To shorten tedious steps ore bridge and style,
And bring his land in compass of a mile.
A pretty walk to give himself content,
And save much trouble in receiving rent.
But now his worship has much charged bin
With laying out, having no coming in,
And finds most true what he before did say,
That ready money ever will away.
Now land is sold, and money gone in goods,
He calls out, Andrew, I am in the suddes;
I had good tenements, I had fair land,
But of that suit, others have cleared my hand.
And I am left A melancholy Knight,
As Ploydon said, The case is altered quite:
What remedy against Fortunes raging fits,
But live like other lacke-lands, by my wits?
Good News.
TWo canting rogues, that old consorts had bin,
And cage, and stocks, met often kindly in:
That had been sharers long and many a day
Of what they got upon the common way,
Did accidental at an alehouse meet,
And in this manner one another greet;
What Roger, well met rogue, old fellow beggar,
When did we two like boon companions swagger,
As we have done, thou know in youthful prime,
How do thou thrive mad slave this farthing time?
This copper age, what, come they roundly in?
Yes faith, the trade has never better bin.
Pence, and few giuers we had heretofore,
But farthings now, and giuers there is good store,
Men, Women, servants, Children, all are able,
I tell thee fellow, this is comfortable.
There Is never a day that I abroad do roame,
But I bring copper like a Tinker home.
Knock for Tobacco, call for ale, hang sorrow,
Godblesse you Master, will bring more tomorrow.
Bad News.
THus at their ale, and pipe of smoother sitting,
And boasting each to other of their getting,
Within short time they plyde the liquor so,
As drunk as beggars both, they could not go,
And fell to quarrel of old matters done
When they their begging partnership begun;
Thou cheat'st me once of twenty pence quoth one,
Unto thy conscience it is plainly known:
I cheat (quoth he) thou lie in thy throat,
Thy company has cost me many a groat:
Thou can not say that I have cut a purse,
Thou have broke into houses, and done worse,
Stolen sheets from hedges, broke up doors by night
And deserved hanging, if thou had thy right.
With that together by the ears they fall,
The Constable on the other side the wall
Was drinking with a friend, and for aid knockes,
To carry drunken beggars to the stocks;
From thence he sent them to another coast,
And made their pasport from the whipping post.
Good News.
A Shepherd sitting on a pleasant bank,
In Summer Sunshine where the grass grew rank,
And natures paintments, red, and yellow, blew,
With colors plenty round about him grew,
Espide at sea a gallant ship did sail
With calm, and mild, and favorable gale.
Oh (quoth the shepherd) what a pleasant thing,
To see a vessel with a canuase wing
Glide on the waters, fly upon the floods,
And coast from place to place, with man and goods:
I Will be no longer land-man on this hill,
But I Will to sea, let him keep sheep that will.
So selling all his cattle at good rates,
Turns merchant, fraughts a bark with figs and dates.
Buys pen-worths, better not in seven year,
And understands where he may sell goods dear.
So taking leave with friends he vowed and swore,
He was a fool to stay so long a shore.
Bad News.
IMagine now our shepheard's under sail,
Where raging storms, and tempests so prevail,
The ship, with all the goods is cast away,
And the young merchant beggered in a day,
Comes poorly home, from Neptunes raging deep,
And takes his trade again, of keeping sheep;
And sitting pensive on the grassie shore,
He spied a ship came sailing as before,
In mild calm weather on a sunshine-day,
Whereat he shook his head, and thus did say,
I once had wealth, and got an honest gain,
In my content of calling taking pain:
My flocks did prosper, and my self did thrive,
Till such a flattring show did make me strive
To get sea fortunes, which I now repent,
That had enough* and could not live content,
But God bless all Masters and Masters mates,
And farewell ship, I Will deal no more with Dates.
Good News.
AN ancient bachelour did long forbear
Because of household charge he stood in fear;
And would not marry, till he heard of one
Was stored with money, but of children none,
Good huswife, and most sparing of her purse,
She shoud be his, For better, and for worse.
Thus looking out, and searching with a care,
To have a wealthy match unto his share,
At length upon a wench he chaunc'd to light,
Childlesse, and rich, unto his humor right,
As greedy as himself being wholly bent,
And here is a match unto his hearts content:
He does rejoice and boast amongst his friends,
That his good fortunes to such height extends,
For such a complete wife, from head to foot,
He would not change for thousands given to boot.
And thus with joy he does embrace his Bride,
Holding himself risen upon right side,
That he had grace so luckily to choose,
Oh Joyful happy admirable news.
You bachelors, beware take heed (he said)
Let no young man run rashly on a maid:
Thei'r proud and poor, and must be long a wooing,
Then prove bad huswiues to a man's undoing.
But take a widow to augment thy state,
That has good leases, household stuff and plate,
Gold, linen, woollen, pewter, and good brass,
And welcome widow, Tut a maids an ass.
Bad News.
THe bachelor, (after his wooing pains)
Mary's the widow with her golden gains,
And live together loving man and wife,
Some fortnight after ere they fell to strife.
But two weeks past grew such a stormy shower,
He never saw calm weather till this hour.
His name of John is turned into back,
She tells him, that her money clothes his back:
And that he was a needy rascal knave,
And she has made a man of such a slave.
Her words (last week) of love, sweet heart, and joy,
Are turned to villain, rogue, and beardlesse boy,
And tells him further that it is her shame,
That she has graced him with a husbands name,
Being unworthy wretch to wipe her shoes:
Friends this is bad, and yet we have worse news;
For it is too true (as all the neighbors knows)
From railing words she falls to swaggring blows,
And scratcht his face, in fury broke his head,
Yea in her choler kicked him out of bed.
He shall not walk before her in the streets,
Nor meet with her between a pair of sheets.
She is his better, many a degree,
And vows her best bags he shall never see.
Here Is a brave match for money, is it not?
This bachelor has a rich widow got.
But he does wish, in grief and anguish pang'd,
That he were buried, or his wife were hanged.
And now a maid, as poor as poor may be,
Is worth ten thousand widows, such as she.
Good News.
WHen country Nanne, the milkemaid-lasses left,
She came to London very neat and deft,
To seek preferment, and her fortunes raise,
Being indeed (as all the parish says)
A handsome wench and likely to do well,
If with a London Mistress she might dwell,
Even according to her hearts content
Into a right good service Annis went:
As good a Mistress as she could desire,
And as good wages as she did require.
After she two years kitchen maid had served,
So well by her good carriage she deserved,
That to be chamber maid she did ascend,
And therewithal her wages much did mend,
Now like a Gentlewoman she does go,
And country maids admire to see her so,
Telling their friends, with all the speed they can,
They will be Londoners like Mistress Anne.
Bad News.
HEigh ho, bad news as ever came to town,
From London to the countries carried down;
Alas poor wench, a scuruy serving man
Has (out upon him) bin with country Nan,
And given her such a knauish overthrow,
She is as big as ever she can go:
The case is altered, 'twill no more be said,
There goes the kitchen or the chamber maid;
But this is she changed (the world knows how)
From maid that was to be a servant now.
And that same wicked fellow that did this,
Does vow and swear the Child is none of his,
But sets it light, and makes thereof a scoff,
And thinks in Knavery thus to bob her off:
But heel be talked withal ere one month ends,
For the poor wench has sent for all her friends,
And then it will be proved plain, at lagre
That he is the man must bear the Nursing charge.
Since Nans Virginity past help is lost,
They Will teach him what a maidenhead will cost,
What law will do he shall be sure to find,
Because he bears such baseness in his mind.
Mean while, be it a daughter or a son,
No remedy, it is so lately done.
Nans Master and her Mistress both abhor it,
But what says she? They cannot hang her for it.
Good News.
GOod news is come for Goodman Groutnols son,
His wretched father with the world has done:
Dead as a dog that lies in a ditch.
And now the youth means to go thorough stitch,
And be a gallant in his golden days,
His father was a simple man he says:
For though he gathered store of worldly pelf,
Why yet he did not understand himself,
He was for profit evermore prepared,
But for Gentility he never cared.
A plain blunt fellow still a plodding an,
But Christopher will be another man.
He will not have his arms a month to seek,
For he has been with Heralds but last week,
And will have something for himself to show,
Although it be a Cuckoe or a Crow:
Nay, and perhaps (if all things fall out right)
He may before he goes to grave, turn Knight,
But he will make no boasting, let that rest,
Kit will be ever Iouiall as the best*
His father was a good old man he says,
And for his death, he gives God hearty praise.
Bad News.
NOw for the city is young Groutnoll bound,
Where humors for to grace him may be found:
Fr^st he must learn to dance, and dance he will,
Then to the noble science for some skill,
If any roaring boy should chance to swagger,
And challenge him at rapier and at dagger,
In Tauernes then his credit must appeate,
Where still his purse does all the reckoning clear,
Dinners and suppers, drunken healths to any,
He does discharge the bills unto a penny,
To sharkes, that are his daily feasting friends
He gives, maintains, and what they will borrow lends
Falls in with cheaters that can cog a Die,
And still his open purse lets money fly:
And thus he revels it still spending on,
As if he were in haste, to see all gone,
Which by his lavish hand, being brought to pass,
His consorts censure him an idle ass,
A gull that suffered all men to deceive him,
And so unto the Counter-hole they leave him.
Good News.
FRiends I protest by my Gentilitie,
Your Citie's full of rare civility:
Where I have been most bravely used of late,
By worthy citizens, as I Will relate:
Since my arrival out of foreign parts,
In measure, far beyond my poor deserts,
I cannot pass through any street or lane
But barehead courtesy does entertain
My worship with what lack you, wondrous kind:
And credit with all sorts of trades I find,
My word for wares they never yet forsook,
But take my hand familiar to their book.
I go my self, or send by any token,
It Is ready ere the message be half spoken,
Much in commodities I could proceed,
More then my use has any cause to need,
Therefore I Will try my further credit rather
With ten ith'hundred, that old penny father;
To shop-mens books my hand no more will deal,
I am for Scriueners now, with hand and seal.
Bad News.
WHat hungry fellows does the city breed?
That will not spare a Gentleman in's need,
But even by mere extremities do strive,
And gape as they would eat a man alive:
My London lodgings are all haunted so
With wicked spirits, that I am feign to go
Into the Suburbs, there to seek some charm,
That may secure me from the catchpoles harm;
And there by chance I met with a conceit,
Which in my mind I daily must repeat.
All Grocers spice you freely may embrace,
Only take heed you touch not of the Mace,
Nor is it for your freedom's ease and good
To walk the street, that is called by name of Wood,
Poultrie refrain, for that's a meat will binde-you,
And of all seekers, let not Sarieants find you:
Keep back your feet from their In-countring ways,
For they will salute you with a frightfull phrase
As, Gentleman, at such a suit I rest you,
This vexing word will very much molest you.
Good News.
GOod lucke's, good news a man would think it were,
And here is a tale of good-lucke you shall hear,
One had a Legacy of forty pound
Which came in clear, as if 'twere money found:
This he imployes in diverse kind of things,
Which benefit unto the buyer brings.
For all he bought it was exceeding cheap,
Double and treble profit he did reap;
A horse, for which he did but five pound pay
Was sold for fifteen, ready coin, next day.
Suits of apparel, cloakes, and store of plate,
Great penny-worths and at an easy rate;
Pawnes came in plenty, upon bills of sale
Made lawful purchase, if the pay-day fail.
Thus in short time beginning with a gift
Of forty pound, he made such shuffling shift,
He was a man of hundreds in account,
And did in terms of credit so amount,
Within the parish he a great sway bore,
Which made them wonder, knew him base before;
That in so short a time, wealth flowed so fast,
And beggar got on horseback in such haste.
Bad News.
THe speech is true, Experience proves no less,
That goods ill gotten meet with ill success;
Where God does bless, happy abundance springs,
And greatness grows, of many little things:
But whereas wealth by wicked means is bred,
A curse will fall upon the getters head.
For all the bargains that this wretch had made,
Was out of theeuing, and of brokers trade:
Stolen goods were sold unto him at best hand,
Upon dear price his chapmen did not stand,
Because it cost them only but the taking,
And it is termed cloak, cup, or linen making:
I made (says one) this ruff, this sword, this hat,
So what the Broker bought, the thieves made that.
But after this same making comes a marring:
The proverb says, when thieves do fall to iarring,
By that means true-men do regaine their own,
And this is often manifestly known:
Contention comes, and that so ouerswaies them,
The Devil owes a shame, and then he paies them.
Good News.
FRom Neptunes rough encountering dreadful deep*
And Eolus, that stormy quoile does keep:
With furious blasts amids the liquid waves,
Making the waters winding sheets and graves:
A Merchant did in safety retire,
And brought home goods, which to his hearts desire
He sold for profit, and for ready pay:
But in the time that he had been away,
He found, (to his exceeding chiefest joy)
His wife delivered of a gallant boy.
Which never in her life had child before,
This did enlarge his gladsome heart the more,
To find his fortunes were so fair and good,
As first escape the Ocean's raging flood:
With extreme hazard of his goods and life,
And then receive such welcome from his wife;
As husband, here behold your master-prize,
This little boy that has thine own gray eyes:
Unto it, let thy kindest love be shown,
For on my credit ( Sweet-hart) it is thine own.
Bad News.
THis gladsome father, and rejoicing mother
With much contentment do enjoy each other:
Their little one does such affection seal,
And every hurt of their distaste does heal,
Nor thought, nor word, nor deed did pass between
The parents, not a cloudie look was seen,
Until a gossip of the gaggling crew
Into a humor of contention grew
With her familiar friend, the merchants wife,
Revenging of her quarrel with their strife.
And told the husband she did greatly doubt
That* he was mighty wronged, (if truth came out)
I will not (quoth she) for a thousand pound
A makebate 'twixt a man an's wife be found:
But I know somewhat that would breed a scabbe,
Yet pardon me I never was a blabbe,
We know that little said is soon amended,
The blind eats many a fly, what is past is ended,
These quenish terms such jealousy allured,
He grew horn mad, and still remains vncur'd.
Good News.
A Hasty fellow of a froward nature,
Was married to a mild and gentle creature,
Which was most willing to content him still;
But he of disposition was so ill,
With every triflle he a fault would find,
Which made his wife entreat him very kind,
That he in writing would his mind explain,
What things she should perform, and what refrain:
He was content, and writ his wife a book,
And bade her often thereupon to look,
For in the same he plainly had expressed
What she should practice to content him best:
And matters that displeased him to omit,
She very kindly gave him thanks for it,
Vowing she would a willing scholar be
To learn those lessons did with peace agree,
Which she in memory would still retain,
And cross the devil in his makebate vein:
All stormy tempests shall be mildly laid,
I Will please my husband now by book she said.
Bad News.
THe world being now a little better mended,
To walk and see a friend they both intended,
Some two mile out of town, and merry make,
So frolique, till the husbands cap did ache,
And he must needs (at evening somewhat late)
Return home reeling with a drunken pate:
No friends persuasions could with him prevail
To sleep away the headache of the ale,
But home quoth he, come wise, we are homeward bound,
I like old Harry, mean to stand my ground,
And so along goes drunkard, through stitch,
Until he came unto a scuruie ditch:
Into the same down from the bridge he falls,
And then, help wife, a hand sweet wife he calls,
Husband (quoth she) to help forth ditch or brook,
As I remember is not in my book,
And therefore first I will go home and see
Before you get a helping hand of me;
If it be written I shall lend a lift,
I Will do it willing, else your self shall shift.
Good News.
A Suitor, that a wealthy widow pli'd,
To grace out his bad fortunes did provide
Upon his credit, for an outward show,
That gallantly he might a wooing go,
His hat new blocked, and golden banded too,
His Ruff he wore like some Sir reverence do:
His suit the Tailor trusted him withal;
For sword and russet boots, he in did fall
With Cutler, and the gentle craft: Beside
He had a gallant gelding to bestride,
That graced his worship above all the rest,
Esteemed to be a twenty pounds-worth beast;
And all that was his carcass outward case,
(Except his bodkin beard and naked face)
Were freely come to hand, by Best-be-trust,
His bravery might be compared just
Unto the bird trimmed up in the ancient tale,
Had each their plumes, then naked as my nail
Well, to the widow now we let him ride,
And bid him welcome home on the other side*
Bad News.
BEing arrived at his wished port,
He does begin, most eloquent to court,
And makes account by inkhorne terms to get
One to maintain him, and discharge his debt,
But she is a wench has wit to hold him to it,
And overthrows her lover horse and foot,
Telling him that her self, and her estate
Is not to be obtained with verbal prate
Of love, and fancy, by the gods decreed*
Therefore bestow it pray on some that need:
I have a friend whose love and faith I know,
You Are welcome sir, there is all I can bestow.
With that she leaves him and departs away;
Surely (quoth he) this is no wooing day,
Some scuruy Plannet is become my foe,
That at the first I should have this cross blow:
Well, I will try another widow yet,
And if no better comfort I do get,
In spite of Fortune, (look she never so grim)
My horse I Will rifle, though I borrowed him.
Good News.
FOrtune was constant in inconstancy,
The second widow gave him the deny,
More scornful and disgraceful then the first,
Which made the wooer swear he was accursed
To venture all the credit that he had,
And be so bravely to the fashion clad:
Yet still rejected, being a proper man,
(Though good for nothing) did resolve him than
To have a rifling for his borrowed beast,
And get some twenty pound by the hand at least,
Retires to London, singles out an Inn,
Inuites all his acquaintance, friends and kin,
That of all loves they would on such a day
Be sure to meet him, without all delay,
He had a Gelding cost him fifty pound,
A brauer beast did never pace on ground;
And he should spoil him being too too free,
A most rank rider, (as brave gallants be)
And therefore he was willing to forgoe-him,
And even amongst their fortunes to bestow-him.
Bad News.
THe rifling time being come that he had set,
His friends according to their promise met,
A great assembly, a good supper made,
And every one his ventured money pai'd,
To his content: thought he, why here is good doing:
Why this is better far then scuruy wooing,
Betoyl'd about a wife, and cannot get her,
Widows be hanged, for I like horse flesh better.
But see the mischief fortunes spite did bring,
To make his rifling a mere trifling thing:
No sooner they to throw the dice begin,
But comes the owner with a Serieant in;
And claims the gelding which was at the stake,
This did amongst them an amazement make,
For every man his money back did claim,
Which was returned with a cheating shame;
Oh scuruy world, quoth he, how cross things goes,
The next will be the Tailor, for my clothes:
My wooing overthrown, my horse play marred,
As I am Gentleman, this nips me hard.
EPIGRAM.
TWo that had been aboard a Burdeux bark,
Came reeling through Ratcliff in the dark,
And to secure them from al stumbling harm
They linckt together loving arm in arm;
But as they came along the gravel pit,
The one of them got such a reeling fit,
That from his fellow down the bank he fell,
And lying on his back, cried, Hey da Nell:
Why here is a town is e'ne well governed right,
Keep open seller doors this time a night?
Where art thou Robin, to his fellow calling?
Who up the bank, through the dirt was crawling.
Marry (quoth he) I knock and call for beer,
And there is not a rogue will answer here,
Therefore as true as this good light does shine
I am a climing to pull down their sign:
And I am searching all the seller here,
To find the taps and let out all the beer,
The knaves shall know they have not used us well,
Why here is a town brave governed, Hey da Nell.
Epigram.
ARuin'd gallant, in's declining age,
Calling his life in question, in a rage
Did vow, and swear, and to himself protest,
He was a villain, slave, a brutish beast:
Such Sunshine fortunes as his days had known,
And might have free inioy'd them as his own,
To let them pass with Time, and glide away,
And no sure hold upon good hap to lay,
I might have had a widow once (quoth he)
That would have made at least a Knight of me,
And like a gull, a whoreson coxcome ass,
Unto another fool I let her pass:
I might have had an office, that would clear
Have brought me in two hundred pound a year*
And lived at ease, gone up and down to brave it;
But like a goose, I let another have it:
I might have had good land to live upon,
But like a Woodcocke all is sold, and gone:
I might have been a scholar, learned my Grammar,
But I have lost all like a Ninnie-hammer.
Epigram.
EXperience out of observation says,
Six sorts of people keep their fasting days,
Which if you will in order have them known,
Then thus they are distinguished every one.
The sick man fasts because he cannot eat,
The poor man fasts because he wants meat,
The miser fasts, with greedy mind to spare,
The glutton fasts, to eat a greater share;
The Hypocrite, he fasts to seem more holy,
The virtuous man to punish sinful folly:
But at all these, the drunkard in his quaffing,
In scoffing manner does deride them laughing,
And says, I am for none of all these six,
Fast they, or feed, I am for drinking tricks:
With Pipe and Pint, I entertain my diet,
Sack and Tobacco, keeps my stomach quiet;
I do not care for ouer-cloying dishes,
So that I may attain to these two wishes,
The Vintner still to draw me of the best,
And when the reckoning comes, why let that rest.
Epigram.
HOw am I vex't, that must keep in a door,
Only for fear to pay a Tapsters score!
A slave that is bound in conscience to forbear,
For I have graced his house in lying there:
But I have vowed revenge, the villain dies,
Only my weapon at the Cutlers lies,
And I do linger to redeem it thence:
Beer and Tobacco is my most expense,
A lousy lodging and a scuruy diet,
And this it is, which puts me out of quiet.
It is against my conscience for to pay him,
I can show reason why I do delay him.
My diet, ever ouer-rost, or raw,
My cans were always nic'kt against the law,
My washing and my w^inging was but base,
And I count all worth nothing, here is the case,
Yet there be Seriants wait me for arrest,
In-countring fellows, which ^id di^gest,
Oh that another mad horse there would be,
To catch the Serieant would be catching me.
Epigram.
GIlbert, this glove I send thee from my hand,
And challenge thee to meet on Callis sand,
On this day month resolve I will be there,
Where thou shall find my flesh I will not fear.
My Cutler is at work both day and night,
To make the sword wherewith I mean to fight:
If I do fail thee, at the time and place,
Account me to descend of cowards race;
If thou neglect, and do not meet me then,
I Will make thee odious unto Martial men.
This challenge past, the challenger at Dover,
Imbarks for Callis, and being half way over,
Grew mighty sea-sicke, and did back retire,
Having by vomit purged out all his Ire:
Oh wretch (quoth he) to quarrel most accursed,
My heart does faint, my very gall does burst.
I was a villain to intend this fight;
But if I do escape this fearful flight,
Unto the field a farewell I will give,
And nere draw sword in anger while I live.
Epigram.
A Pocket-picker most exceeding brave
(For true men's purses did maintain the knave)
In suit of Satin, cloak with Velvet lin'de,
His golden hatband, gilded rapier shined,
His russet boots, and spurs, in all complete,
Which he maintained, by pilfring theft, and cheat;
Being at assizes in a country town,
And standing near a seely simple clown,
With bold audacious, and outfacing look
The rusticks purse out of his pocket took,
Who very fearful of his furious show,
Shrunk back amongst the throng and let him go.
Within a little space a cry was made,
A cutpurse, cutpurse, all the people said,
When he that lost his purse the noise did hear,
He thr^ng'd among the crowd and got him near,
And said (when he perceived proofs made duly)
My Lords, his Worship had my purse too, truly.
They smiling said, In sign that we abhor it,
We Will be so bold as hang his worship for it.
Epigram.
A Fellow that had been excessive trading,
In taking liquor in beyond his lading,
Of Claret, and the Spanish Malligo,
That Is legs unable were upright to go;
But sometime wall, and sometime kennell taking,
And as the phrase is used, Indentures making;
Was met with by a most unhappy boy,
That at the drunkards sight did greatly joy,
To put a jest upon the reeling mome,
Having a birding piece to carry home:
He with the same does thus begin his jest,
Presents it against the drunkards breast,
And leuels at him, making fire fly,
The drunkard loud, did murder, murder, cry;
Oh cruel rogue, and bloody slave quoth he*
Help, help, this villain means to murder me;
Sir (quoth the boy) you greatly do mistake,
This needless clamor, and outcries to make,
I do protest I mean your self no harm,
I only shoot the fox under your arm.
Epigram.
WHen Hodge comes home, he will tell his vather news
Shall make the good old clown admire and muse;
For he has memory so able strong,
Shall find him tales for all the winter long;
He came not up in vain to London, no,
Hodge has seen that his father nere shall know
Of wenching matters, but he will keep that in
And tell him other sights, where he has bin;
As of the Tower, and the Lions there,
Of Paris garden, and the Bull and Bear,
Of Westminster, what monuments there be,
And what two mighty Giants Hodge did see
With fearful countenances in Guild Hall,
The old Exchange, the new Exchange and all.
The water-workes, huge Paul's, old Charingcrosse,
Strong London Bridge, at Billinsgate the Bosse.
Nay Hodge has seen ships, boats, and barges, which
Swim about London in a great large ditch,
And he has vowed he will not iogge away,
Tell he has seen some pretty puppet play.
Epigram.
TOm Tempest fell at strife with Steven Storm,
And fel'd him with a pintpot from a form,
Storm roused himself, and fiercely did rebound,
At cruel Tempest, with a stabbing wound;
But it was done in a most coward kind,
In his breech backward, where he breaks wind;
The Vintner (being of the separation)
Comes in and lends his wisest exhortation,
Tempest, and Storm (my windy brethren both)
In sadness and in truth, without an oath,
You are to blame to draw that Iron tool,
And make my civil house a fencing school,
This is the force of your excessive wine,
I rather will take down my bush and sign,
Then live by men of riotous expense;
In peace I say, Brethren depart you hence.
I will not take a penny for the shot,
And furthermore, I Will melt that bloody pot,
Which is polluted thus with sanguine gore,
All Is paid, you are welcome when you are out of door.
FINIS.

