SIR THOMAS OVERBVRY, OR THE POISONED KNIGHTS COMPLAINT.
TIME REVEALEH^TRVTH



REVENGE.
IVSTICE^WIL^RIGHT AL^WRONGS^



POISONED.



Within this house of Death, A dead man lies,
Whose blood like Abels up for vengeance cries:
Time has revealed what to truth belongs,
And Justice sword is drawn toright my wrongs:
You poisoned minds did me with poison Kill,
Let true Repentance purge you from that ill.

GReat powerful God, whom all are bound to love,
How graceless bad, does Man (thy Creature) prove?
Thy Supreme Creature over all the rest,
(In number numberless to be expressed,)
To whom thou gave grace to be his guide,
Reason with Understanding, and beside,
Thy Law to be direction for his ways,
Which unto Sinners view, thy Judgments lays,
Those fearful plagues pronounced for ugly Sin,
Which with the first created, did begin,
Who by the Law of Nature understood,
To make a difference of bad deeds and good.
By which enlightening, that is given us,
No Nation Heathenish, and Barbarous,
(Farthest remote from true religions light)
But can distinguish betwixt wrong and right,
Those that to Christ did never yet belong,
Can tell they do amiss, when they do wrong,
And that there is a Justice to be done,
And shameful actions, which they are to shun,
Yet never age, since Nature first began,
Wherein man was not Devil unto man,
In practicing most opposite to kind,
Inhumane actions out of bloody mind.
Behold the first that in the World was borne,
With his rejected Sacrifice of Corn,
Because his Brothers gifts more grace did yield,
Lift up his hand against him in the field,
And with a cruel heart obdurate ill,
Did innocent pure-thoughted Abell kill.
When Ioab sent for Abner (as a friend)
He came to Hebron, for a peaceful end,
Where, as in arms he lent a cheerful smile,
He gave his heart a mortal stab the while.
Gods holy History has many more
Humane records, Innumerable store,
What intercepting has there bin of lives,
By Pistolls, Stabbing, Powder, Daggers, Knives:
Drowning and Hanging, and strange murdering?
As second Edward, sometimes Englands King,
Whom an incarnate Devil did torment,
With red hot Spit into his fundament.
Some in their beds have acted tragic Scenes,
As those two Princes, which by Glosters means,
(Their cruel Uncle, Fathers unkind Brother)
Villains between the sheets to death did smother.
Some in unwonted manner done to death,
As George the Duke of Clarence lost his breath,
When with heels upwards he was strangely put,
To suffer drowning in a Malmesey But.
Yet besides all these damned plots to kill,
And thousands more from Hell transported still,
The Devil has a poison working Art,
In which of late I shared a mortal part.
A Rapier drawn, and at thy heart aimed just,
May be put by and made a broken thrust:
A Dagger offered for another pain,
Has bin returned into the stabbers brain:
A Pistol shot with an intent to kill,
Has mist the mark, and party living still:
But this life-killing poison, cureles foe,
The bodies hopeles, helples overthrow:
Brings with it nothing but pale deaths command,
Depriving life with a remorseles hand.
Oh sacred Justice! evermore renound
In thy vprightnes of revenge late found:
Proccede with vengeance as thou did begin,
To punish Caines most bloody crying sin:
Let not a murderer remain concealed,
Nor breath alive when being once revealed:
This is the suite wronged Innocents do crave,
This is the Justice that the Heavens will have.
Samuel Rowlands.

Imprinted at London for John White.


