The book named the Royal.

^ego. Colligo. ^^^do. (...). (...). (...). Re

HEre follows ye table of the ^ubtyces of this present book entytled and named
Ryal which speaks first of the ten commandments.
First of the two tables of the law which god delyuerd unto Moses for to
preche to the people. Ca. primo. Of the first commandment. Ca. ii. Of the
first commandment of the law. Ca. iii. Of the second commandment of the
law. Ca. iiii. How one ought to love his neighbor. Ca. v. Here follow ye.x.
commandments of ye law particular. vi. Of the iii. first commandments
partyculer and ye first thing that a subget owes to his lord. Ca. vi. Of the
second thing yt a subget owes to his lord. vii. The third thing yt a
subget owes to his lord Ca. ix. Of the seven other commandments
apperteynyng to the love of his neighbor Ca. x. Of the.xii. artycles of the
faith Ca. xi. Of ye be that saint Johan theuangelyst saw in thapocalyps Ca.
xii. The deuysyon of the seven deedly sins. Ca. xiii. Of the branches of the
sin of pride. Ca. xiiii Of the first branch and of the first bowgh. Ca.
xv. Of the second bowgh of the first branch. Ca. xvi. Of the third bowgh.
Ca. xvii. Of the second branch of pride. Ca. xviii. The third branch of
pride Ca. xix. The fourth branch which is ambycyon. Ca. xx. The.v. branch
which is vaynglorye. Ca. xxi. The.vi. branch is ypocrysye. Ca. xxii.
The.vii. branch of pride. Ca. xxiii. The second heed of the beast. Ca.
xxiiii. The third heed of the beast of hell is Ire. Ca. xxv The first war
of the sin of ire. C. xxvi. Of ye sin of slowth ye clerks call accidie.
Ca. xxvii. Of pusyllamynyte of delayeng and werynes. Ca. xxviii Of delayenge to
do well. Ca. xxix. Of the sin and vice of neclyge^ce. Ca. xxx. Of forgetting
and the vice yt comes thereof. Ca. xxxi. Of the vice of latchednes. Ca. xxxii.
Of evil points of sloth. Ca. xxxiii. Of the sin of auerice. Ca. xxxiiii Of
diverse manners and spyces of vsurye. Ca. xxxv. The.ii. manner of vsurye Ca.
xxxvi. Of theft. Ca. xxvii The.iii. branch of the sin of aueryce. Ca.
xxxviii The sin of challenge. Ca. xxxix Of seven manners of the sin of
challenge. Ca. xl The fytte branch of aueryce. Ca. xli Of the sin of
symonye. Ca. xlii. Of the first bough of symonye. Ca. xliii. Of ye sin of
malignite yt comes of aueryce. Ca. xliiii Of marchaundise. Ca. xlv The.ix.
branch of auaryce. Ca. xlvi Of the sin of lecherye: Ca. xlvii Of diverse
estates of lecherye. Ca. xlviii. Of the sin of glotonye. Ca. xlix Of the
sin of the tongue. C. L. Of the sin that is in idle words. C. li. Of the
sin of auauntynge. C. lii Of evil sayers of other. C. liii Of the sin to
say lesynges. C. liiii. Of the sin of periurye. C. lv Of the sin and peril
yt is in chiding. C. lvi Of the sin of murmr. C. lvii. Of the sin and
peril that is in rebellyon. Ca. lviii. Of the sin of blasphemye. Ca. lix.
That this life nys but death as it appyereth Ca. lx. How man lives deyenge in
this world. Ca. lxi. How a man ought to live holyly and learn to do well. Ca.
lxii Of.iii. manners of goods spyrytuell. Ca. lxiii. Of the goods of tortune.
Ca. lxiiii. Of the goods of nature. Ca. lxv. Of the goods of grace. Ca. lxvi.
What virtue is honorable good. Ca. lxvii. Of vecay sapyence or wisdom. Ca.
lxviii. Of the prowess of ye knights of Ihesu christ. Ca. lxix. Of ye very
seygnorye yt gives grace and virtues. C. lxx. Of very fraunchyse. Ca. lxxi.
Of very noblesse. Ca. lxxii. That charity is most grettest of virtues. Ca.
lxxiii. Of two manners of goods delectable. Ca. lxxiiii. Of virtues in
special. Ca. lxxv. The seven petycyons and requestys that been contained in the
holy pater noster. Ca. lxxvi. wherefore you say fader our / and not fader mine.
Ca. lxxvii. Why it is said qui est in celis. Ca. lxxviii. How sanctificetur
nomen tuum is expowned. Ca. lxxix. The.ii. petycyon and request of ye pater
noster. Ca. lxxx. The.iii. petycyon and request of ye holy pater nr^. Ca.
lxxxi. The fourth petycyon and request. Ca. lxxxii. The.v. petycyon and
request of ye pater noster. Ca. lxxxiii. The.vi. petycyon and request of ye
pater nr^. Ca. lxxxiiii. The seventh petycyon of the pater noster. Ca. lxxxv.
Of the seven gifts of the holy ghoost. Ca. lxxxvi. They be called gifts for
three reasons. Ca lxxxvii. Why ye gifts of the holy ghost be called gifts.
lxxxviii. why there be seven gifts and no mo ne less. Ca. lxxxix. Of.vii.
virtues / whereof three ben deuyne / and.iiiii. cardynall. Ca. lxxxx. Of the
four cardynall virtues. Ca. lxxxxi. Yet of the four cardynall virtues. Ca.
lxxxxii. Of the virtue of attemperaunce. Ca. lxxxxiii. Of the virtue of
strength. Ca. lxxxxiiii. Of the virtue of Iustyse. Ca. lxxxxv. How a man ought
to take fro him the.vii. dedely sins. Ca. lxxxxvi. Of the gift of holy
dread. Ca. lxxxxvii. Of four rotes of the sin of pride. Ca. lxxxxviii. Of
the virtue of humylyte. Ca. lxxxxix. Of the virtue of humylyte. Ca. C. Of him
that is very humble. Ca. Ci. Of him that is humble of heart. Ca. Cii. How a
man ought to hate pride. Ca. Ciii. Of diverse estates of pride. Ca. Ciiii. Of
thensygnement and doctrine of our lord. Ca. Cv. Of the pryuyte that god has
to the soul. Ca. Cvi. Of the comparyson of the mustard seed to the love of
god. Ca. Cvii. Of the gift of holy dread and pity. Ca. Cviii. Of seven manners
of love spyrytuell. Ca. Cix. Of the seven gifts of the holy ghoost and first
of the gift of science. Ca. Cx. Of ye second degree of equity and ryghtwysnes.
Ca. Cxi. Of the third degree of the virtue of equity. Ca. Cxii. Of ye fourth
and fyfthe degree of ye virtue of equity Cxiii. Of the syxte degree of the
virtue of equity. Ca. Cxiiii. Of the seventh degree of ye virtue of equity. Ca.
Cxv. The virtues against ye seven dedely sins. Ca. Cxvi. How one ought to
live in the (...) estate. C. Cxvii Of ye deuysion of virtues after ye
philosophers. C. xviii Of the first virtue magnanymyte. C. Cxix Of the virtue
of france or trust. Ca. Cxx Of the virtue of surte. Ca. Cxxi. Of the fourth
degree of the virtue prowess. Ca. Cxxii Of ye fyft degree of the virtue of
prowess. Ca. Cxxiii. Of the syxt degree of ye virtue of prowess. Ca. Cxxiiii
Of the spyrytuell battle against sin. C. Cxxv Of the first battle against
all vices. Ca. Cxxvi Of very repentance of heart. Ca. Cxxvii How a man ought to
confess him. Ca. Cxxviii. Of the virtue of the yeft of counseyll / and of god
/ and merit that is therein. Ca. Cxxix. Of the degrees of the virtue of mercy.
Ca. Cxxx. ye branches of ye virtue of mercy and of alms. ca. Cxxxi The
seven branches of mercy on the lift side and the first branch. C. Cxxxii
The second branch. Ca. C.xxxiii The third branch. Ca. Cxxxiiii. The
fourth branch. Ca. Cxxxv. The fyfte brau^che of mercy. Ca. Cxxxvi. The.vi
brau^che of mercy. Ca. Cxxxvii The:vii branch of mercy. Ca. Cxxxviii. How a
person ought to do alms. Ca. Cxxix Of the life actyfe and of the life
co^templatyfe. ca Cxl Of the virtue of chastity the first degree. Ca. Cxli The
second degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca. Cxlii She third degree of the
virtue of chastyte. Ca. Cxliii The fourth degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca.
Cxliiii The.v. degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca. Cxlv The vi degree of the
virtue of chastyte. Ca. Cxlvi. The.vii. degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca.
Cxlvii. Of the first estate of them that been hole and chaste of body. Ca.
Cxlviii. The second estate of them yt ben corrupt Ca. Cxlix. The third
estate and the fourth estate. Ca. CL. The fyfthe estate of chastyte. Ca. Cli.
The.vi. estate of the virtue of vyrgynyte and chastyte Ca. Clii. The seventh
estate of the virtue of chastyte. Ca. Cliii. Of the gift of sapyence. Ca.
Cliiii. Of the first degree of sobrenes and of mesure. Ca. Clv. Of ye second
degree of sobrenes and of mesure. Ca. Clvi Of ye.iii. degree of sobrenes and of
atte^perau^ce. Ca. Clvii. Of ye.iiii. degree of sobrenes.and of mesure Ca.
Clviii. The v. degree of sobrenes and of mesure. Ca. Clx. The.vi degree of
sobrenes and of attemperau^ce. Ca. Clx. The.vii. degree of sobrenes and of
attemperau^ce. Ca. Clxi.
Explicit
Our fader that art in heaven sanctified be thy name thy kingdom come to us /
thy will be done in earth as in heaven / our daily bread give us to day and for
give us our de^^ as we forgive our de^^s. and led us not in to te^ptaco^n but
deliver us from evil. ame^



The five commandments of the church. The sondayes here thou mass and the
^estes of commandment. Of thy sins thou the confess at the leest one time
of the year. And thy creator thou shalt receive / at Eester humbly. These
feestes thou shalt halowe / that been given the in commandment. The four
ymbres bigyles thou shalt feste (...) the ^^me entyerly.




Here after ben contained and declared the x commandments of the law which
our lord delivered unto Moses the prophet for to preche to the people for to
hold and keep. Capitulo. primo.
FOr to have and to come unto ye knowelege of the.x. commau^deme^tes of the
law ye which every creature reasonable is holden for to keep for to have life
pardurable. It is to wete ye sith yt creacyon of humayne creature four laws
have be^. The first law is called ye law of nature. Which is none other
thing but knowelege of good and evil by the which we know that which we
ought to ensyewe after reason / and also that which we ought to fle / that is
to do other that which we would after reason should be done to us. And not to
do to other ye / which we would after reason should not be done to us. And
this law gave god to man and to woman in his creacion / and that same law
every creature reasonable ought to keep / and by Ignorance not to be excused /
sith they have understanding of reason. The ii. law comes of the devil to
dystroye the law of nature aforesaid / and that is said law of concupyscence
which was put in the creature reasonable by the sy^ne of Inobedyence / which
was in our first fader / for to fo he dysobeyed to god by sin / the body
humayne was obeyssaunt to the soul and to reason entyerly / but as so ne as he
had dysobeyed god / the body by concupyscence dysobeyed to reason. Of which it
happeth often / how be it that the creature by ye first law of nature knew the
good to be done / and the evil to be eschewed. Always by concupyscence and
folysshe plesaunce is left ye right Judgment of reason / and is enclyned to do
the contrary and this says saint powle / that he found a law in his membris
/ yt is to wete the said law of concupyscence which gaynsayed to the law of
reason which was in the soul / and of this law of concupyscence set by syn^e
in the creature. None escaped but only Ihesu and the glorious virgy^ marie.
The.iii law is said ye law wryton which was delyuerd for the creature / yt
by the law of concupyscence would enclyne him against the Judgment of reason
to do evil / to withdraw him to do sin for doubt of punycyon / and this
law was delivered to moses and to the children of Israhel. The.iiii. law is
said of love and of grace which is none other thing but to love god and his
neighbor. And was delivered by cause yt the law of scripture which for
dread to be punysshed withdrewe the creature to do evil was not suffycyente /
for how well that it empesshed the deed / as touching the work. Nevertheless
it empesshed not to the creature the will too do evil / the which thing is
deedly sin / as oftentimes as it is concluded in ye thing that should be as
to the deed / and this.iiii. law of love is in two commandments pryncypally
comprysed The first is this. Thou shalt love thy god with all thy heart / with
all thy soul / with all thyn entendement / and with all thy might. The.ii. is
that you shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And these two commandments
be so conjoined that the one may not be accomplysshed without that other.

Of the first commandment. Ca..ii.
FOr to have the knowelege of the said first commandment ought for to be
known that.ii. things enclyne us to love god. The first is to here gladly for
to speak of him and often / for naturally when we here of any person said great
good / we ben enclyned to praise and love him / and therefore to go often to holy
church to predycacio^s and sermons / is to a creature great vtylyte and
prouffyte. The second thing is to think often and to have in my^de the great
benefaytes that a creature has received / and receives every day of god / for
naturally we ben enclyned to love them that done us good. This love of god is
acquyred and gotten by these two things in a creature and is kept and
multyplyed by.ii. other things. First for to withdraw and take away his heart
fro the love of temporal goods. For the heart may not be parfyte in diverse
things / and therefore none may love god and the wordly things together
perfytly. Secondly for to have steadfast pacye^ce in trybulaco^n and to suffer
it for ye love of god / for ye thing that love has most travail for / and
by most pain is gotten / ought to be most loved / and most dear worthily
kept / and this sapyence is much necessary and prouffytable to all them that
will go with god / For thus as says holy scripture / by many trybulacyo^s
behooves us to enter in to the realm of heaven. And this manyfesteth and
shows to us the lives of saints / ye which for to come to god have so much
suffered and endured. After it is to wete / that to thaccomplysshement of the
said commandment.iiii. things admonesteth the creature. The first is to have
in mind contynually the goods that the creature has received of god. as
said is tofore. For when ye creature consydereth that he has received of god
body and soul / and all other gods yt he has / spyrytuall and temporal /
the perils also which he has escaped. The glory of heaven which he has
apparayled to us. The creature humayne shall Judge yt he owes to love god with
all his heart. The.ii. reason is to have in consyderacion the great puyssaunce
/ excellence / and nobles of god. And with that the great mysery and pouerte of
our self / by the which consyderacyon ye creature shall Judge / ye when he
shall love god with all his heart / he shall serve him with all his might / which
yet he does full little unto the regard of his great excellence nobleness and
puyssaunce. And therefore the creature humayne should always the more for to
enforce him to love / to serve / and for to honor god. The third reason is to
take away the love and affection of worldly things as said is to fore. For
where all the heart suffyseth not for to love almighty god suffycyently /
considered his great excellence noblenes and puyssaunte magnyfycence as is
tofore said / then he that puts in his heart the love of things temporell
/ the which ben but stynkynge fylthe and ordure to the regard of god / seems
well that he does to god great velony / and in this case he loves not god
with all his heart after the said commandment / for of so much as ye heart of
ye creature is set to love other thing than god of so much it is less in
god. The fourth reason is to keep him self and to put from him all sins and
in especyall deedly sin / for no creature being in deedly sin may love
god. For by deedly sin the creature offends god and is pryued and out of
grace / which thing is contrary to his love.

Of the first commandment of the law. Ca. iii.
WE ought then according to the said first commandment to love with all
our heart The which thing the creature does / wha^ in all his works his
entencyon is ryghtfull and after gods will. For the entencyon of the creature
is such virtue that he render his works and operacyon after god good or evil
/ and therefore what so ever work that the creature do if his entencion be evil
the operacyon and all the work is without merit / and converted fro it / in to
do evil / hereof it is said in the gospel by our savior Ihesu christ / if thyn
eye be evil all thy body is derke. That is to say if thyn entencyon be evil
/ all thy works ben derke and in sin and without merit. And therefore it
behooves to render the work of the creature good and merytorye and that his
entencyon be ryghtfull according to gods will. But because that for to
render the work of the creature good and merytoryous according unto god /
suffyseth not only good entencyon. But it behooves also to have the ryghtfull
entencion and good will like as it may appyere in him / that will stele and
take other mennys goods for to nourysshe and feed the pour people / For
thentencyon of the will to give for gods sake to the pore people is good. But
ye will to stele or take away other men's goods is evil for to so do. And
therefore that deed shall be evil / and may not be excused. For by cause that an
evil work for any good entencyon may not be excused It is said after in ye
commandment / that ye creature ought to love god with all his soul. That is
to say that his will accord in all his works to the will of god / and this
demand we of god when we say our pater noster when we pray god that his will
be done in us. Also by cause that yet for to accomplisshe ye said commandment
/ suffyse not only good entencyon and good will it is after said in the same
commandment / that the creature ought to love his god with all his
entendeme^t and understanding. That is to say that in thentendement of the
creature be no deedly sins delybered by consenting ne concluded. For all
consentynges concluded in thing that should be as touching the deed of deedly
sin / though so be that the deed be not done outward as touching the work
that any thing ensie we thereof / yet it is deedly sin. And the creature
being in deedly sy^ne may not love god as above is said Also by cause yt yet
for taccomplysshe the said commandment suffyse not only good entencyon and
good will as touching the works withoutforth / and that in thentendement of
the creature grows deedly sin by consenting / but it behooves that the
creature put and employe all the strength and puyssaunce that he has in good
works and deeds. Just and virtuous / that they be to thonoure and worship of
almighty god and to ye salvation of him self and his neighbor. It is said
afin the foresaid commandment that the creature out for to love his god with
all his might and with all his strength. And therefore all they that put and
employe all their might and strength in the werkys of sin / done against the
said commaundemenet and sin deedly. Thus it appyereth clearly that for
taccomplysshe the said first commandment pryncypall. The creature ought to
give unto god entencyon / will / entendement and all his strength and good will
by the manner that is aforesaid.

The second commandment of ye law is how each man ought to love his
neighbor. Ca..iiii.
FOr to have knowleche of the second commandment pryncypall aforsayd
touching the love of his neighbor whom the creature ought to love as him
self. It is to wete that to ye love of our neighbor four things ought to move
us. First for by cause that we all ben children of god by creacyon. And
naturally brethern and systers love that one that other. And thus we ben all
members of Ihesu Christ / which is our heed and one membre loves another
naturally. Secondly to this ought to bring us the love and obeyssaunce that we
owe to god as aforesaid is / which commands us to love our neighbor.
Thyrdly to this love ought to bring us the commynycacyon which is emonge
creatures humayne. For our lord Ihesu christ made us all and created / for us
all he has suffryd paynfull death And to us all he has apparaylled the glory
and ye beatytude of heaven / if we lose it not by sin. And naturally every
creature of one lykenes / of one form / and of one semblaunce loves and
ought to love the other / like as we se in bestes and birds that each love
other. And him that is to him like and his parayll. And therefore every creature
that loves not his neighbor myspryseth not only against the law dyuyne /
but also against the law of nature. The fourth thing that to this love ought
to bring is the prouffyte that comes thereof. For when a creature loves well
another he desires his prouffyte his honor / his sauement / and purchases it
gladly. By these four things aforesaid appears clearly that we ought to love
our neighbor as our self / and this love is in five things. First when one
loves his neighbor truly / that is to say for the well of him / and that is
in him / and nothing for his own propre. To ye knowelege of which thing is
to wete among reasonable creatures / three manners of love ben founden.

Here is contained how one ought to love his neighbor. Ca. v.
THe first is when a creature loves an other creature for the prouffyte and
vtilyte that he doothe unto him. And this love is not very and parfyte. For
when that the prouffyte fails / the love fails also. The second is when a
creature loves an other creature for her beauty / and the pleasure and delight
that he takes therein This love is not veraye. For she fails when the
pleasure or delight does fade away and fail The third is when for the love
of our lord all mighty and for the well of him the creature loves a another
creature. And this love is great and very / and according to god. Secondly
when one loves his neighbor ordynatly that is to wete less than god. Thus as
the creature owes to love him self less than god. And this techeth us our
sauyoure Ihesu Christ when he says. He that loves fader or mother or his
brother or sister or his chyldern or or any other thing more than me. He is
not worthy to have me / how shall it be known. Saint Gregory enseygneth it to
us / that the works of without forth done for a creature show the love that
one has unto him withinforth. For naturally one does gladly which he weneth
that it ought for to please or her that he loves. And also by this it apperyth
clerly / that when any manner of creature leueth to do unto the works. The
which according to god he is holden and bounden For to do other werkys
contrary unto the pleasure of the creature / then he loves that creature
more than he does God. And also in this doing he myspreyseth a gaynst the two
commandments aforesaid and also synneth dedly. Thyrdly the love a fore said
is wha^ the creature loves his neighbor by dedys. Also that is for to say not
by words only / but also in fate and deed to procure in him his profit and to
empress and let his damage with his power as he does to him self. Fourthly
when a creature loves his neighbor in times. That is also for to be
understand also well in the of his aduersyte: and also in pouerte / as in the
time of his richesse / and also of his prosperyte. For in especyall in the time
of his aduersyte / and also of his pouerte the very friend is proved. And
fyfthly when the creature loves his neighbor holyly. That is to say yt ye
creature ought not to love another for to draw him unto sin / or for to be
his fellow in evil works. As ben they that accompanye them to rob and
stele other men's goods / or do other evil and wicked deeds. For after
reason thou sholdest not Judge that thou ought do such things. After the
five things that every creature ought to render unto his neighbor after the
said second commandment / is to wete that two things shows pryncypally
the love when it is in the creatures. The first is for to have pacyence and
compassyon in myscheyf and in the aduersyte or pouerte of other For one
excuses and pardons gladly and lightly the defawte or offense of the person
that he loves / and these be signs of great love. The.ii. is humylyte which
causes pacyence. For comynly when a person is proud he knows not his
defautes. But despyseth the other by presumpcyon / and may not supporte yt
defawtes that he Iugeth in them. But he is Impacyent And without forth he
shows and manyfesteth often anger and dyspleasaunce. But by cause that the
said commandment for to love his neighbor as him self was by the Jews and
pharysees evil vnderstonden / and may be and is yet by many other. For they
hold yt they ought love them that loves them / and to hate them that hate
them / and for their neighbor they understood only their frendys It is to
understand that when love or hate is in a creature.ii. things ben to be
considered / that is to wete the nature that he has and the sy^ne or defaute
of him / every creature of god after his nature / ought for to be byloued / but
his sin and defawte ought for to be despised and hated. And after this
foresaid exposycyon ought for to be vnderstonden the commandment that Ihesu
christ made to his appostles for to love their enemies. For the nature humayne
we ought to love / and to do well to them that hate us / and pray for them that
do to us evil / and yt persecute us. But we owe always to hate their sy^nes and
their defautes. Nevertheless we may well / and it is lefull to us to desire
the dystruccyon of a creature obstynate in evil and in sins / and that
destroys holy church / and domageth and hurts other. For the desire of
this is to desire the good of other / and nothing the evil / to the end that
he cease to do evil / and persevere in evil. And not only for his
dystruccyon. Such people when they have desired after thentendement aforesaid
ben called after thappostle the mynysters of god.

Here after follows the.x. commandments of the law pertyculer. Ca. vi.
NOw it is to wete that these two pryncipall commandments aforesaid were
given to Moses / when god delivered unto him ye law in.x. commandments
partyculer. The which commandments every creature reasonable is bounden for
to keep / for to have the life and glory pardurable. The three first have
regard to the dyleccyon and love of god according unto the pryncypall
commandment tofore said. And ye seven other partyculer apperteyneth to the
love and to the dylection of his neighbor / according to ye other
commandment pryncypall ensyewynge. And of the same.x. commandments there
ben two affyrmatyues only the which enduceth the creature for to do well /
and.viii. other negatyues which defend to do ill The cause is for so much as
for to keep him from doing evil / is the puyssaunce of the creature for ye
fre will that he has to the which he may not be constrained / but to do
well is not in the puyssaunce of the creature / but it is the special grace of
god.

Of the three first commandments partyculer. Capitulo. vii.
FOr to have the knowledge of the.iii. first commandments apperteynynge to
the love and dylecco^n of god. It is to wete that a veraye subgect owes to his
lord three things / the which the creature owes unto god soueraynly. The
first is faith or fydelyte / that is to say that thonour / service / and
obeysaunce that the subgect owes to his lord / and the sygnoury that he ought
to have over him be not by him delivered to an other. For in such a case he
should be holden for a traytre and for false and evil. And upon this was given
of god to Moses the first commandment ye which is such. Thou shalt not
adoure no strange god. That is to say / the obeysaunce / honor and service
that the creature ought to do to god / like as it is devised upon ye first
commandment pryncypall / he shall in no wise do unto any other than to god.
Against this commandment does and sin mortally all the people that entremet
them of dyuynacyons / of sortyleges and sorceryes. For after saint Austyn such
things may not be made ne done without to have any or some couenauntes with
the devil / by the which all such things ben said and made. And therefore all
such people be cursed and excomenyed of holy church. And yet also all they
that hold and believe that the planettes and the sterres govern ye souls of
the creatures. For god only governs man and woman / and for to serve man and
woman they ben made and created. Thyrdly all they that in any other manner
thing what so ever it be that set more their hope in than in god / be it in
goods temporell or in creatures or that more love them than god. The which
happeth when for such love / or for to get such a thing / the creature
dysobeyeth unto the commandments of god and of holy church. Fourthly all
they that for to obey to them and to do their pleasures make their subgectes
and servants to dysobeye the commandments of almighty god and holy
church. Fyfthly and all they that in such a case obey unto the creature. And
yet also all them that more believe to their own wit than they do unto the
commandments of god / and to the ordynaunces of holy church. As do they
that retche not to know ye commandments of god / the artycles of the faith
/ and all other things that of necessyte ben to be believed / kept / and
holden for to have glory and life pardurable. But many believe for to get heaven
by their folysshe presumpcyon. And therefore they will govern them at their
pleasure and will / and yet all they that for to have the delectacyons and the
eases of ye flesh and of their bodies dysobey to god and to his
commandments.

The second thing that the very subget owes to his lord. Ca. viii.
THe second thing yt ye very subget owes to his lord / and in especyall to
god / is that he ne say ne do thing yt may be to his vylonnye / or to his
Iniurye or dishonor. And upon this was delyuerd the second commandment
apperteynynge to ye love of god which is such. Thou shall not take the name
of thy god in vain. That is to say for to afferme and do believe thing the
which thou say or do / thou shalt not swear the name of god / but for
things the which ben very table and for good and Just cause. And in case of
need and of necessyte. For oath is ordained for to set an end in things
lytygyous and debatefull / of the which faith or demonstraunce may in none
other wise be known but by oath and true swery^ge. And in this was restrained
to the christian that / which was granted to the Jews. For it was leful to
them to swear and not to be perjured. But to the christian people is not only
defended to pariure and forswere him self / but also to swear Except in caas
of necessyte as said is And therefore it is said by our savior Ihesu Christ if
thou wylt any things afferme or deny late thy word be / it is thus / or it is
not thus / and if thou make oath of haboundaunce / but in caas of necessyte it
is evil and it is sin And the cause of this restraynte or defense is by
cause that the creature has no membre so feeble ne to ye keeping may by a
creature be less set / then in the tongue And to this purpose says Saint
James thappostle / that all nature of beestys / of birds and of serpentys may
be dompted and taken by the creature humayne but no ne may not / nor will not
refrain and with hold his tongue / ne keep him from evil saying or of
ouermoche superfluous speaking / sclaundrynge and detraccyon? And therefore
says the holy appostle saint James yt the man is perfyte and wise that sets
to his tongue such guard that he myspryse not ne sin not in his speaking. And
for that fraylnes the creature that uses or accustometh him for to swear
periureth or forswereth lightly. The which thing of him self is deedly sin
when the periurynge is made in ernest and by delyberacyon / and the most
gretest sin that is after / is for to adoure strange gods / which is said
sin of ydolatry. And therefore not to take the name of god in vain by the
manner that said is / was the second commandment given of our lord to moses
as tofore is said.

The third thing that the very subgecte owes unto his lord. Ca. ix.
THe third thing that the very subgect owes to his lord and soueraynly to
god / is service / and upon this was delivered to Moses the third
commandment apperteynynge to the dyleccion and love of god and is such as
follows. Thou shall halowe and sanctyfy the sunday / that is to say. Thou
shall cease the said day fro all worldly works / and in especyall of the
works of sin. And that day thou shall occupye thy self and employe the in
the preasynge and in the service of almighty god in knowlegynge the benefaytes
and the grace that thou have of him. And god would that by the Jews the sabot
day should be employed in his preasynge and his service. In mind of that
which he had made and fourmed all things / and the seventh day he ceased /
and did rest for to make new creatures. And by the christian people in the
steed of the foresaid Sabotte day that the Jews hallowed. The day of the sunday
has been ordained in my^de of the recreacyon of the creature reasonable made by
the resurrexcyon of our savior Ihesu christ / Which a rose on such a day. And
semblably the saints / and the solempnytees commanded by the church for to
be kept and also like as the sunday ought every creature to employe in the
praysynge and lounynge to god and of his saints and to seace and rest erthely
and also worthily works / and also in especyal fro sin. And in especyall the
creature ought to cease of two things / first fro all works temporal /
erthely / and also corporell except four cases. The first is for to have the
necessyte of his life. The second also is for the necessyte of the life of his
neighbor. The.iii is for the necessyte of holy church The fourth is for the
auctoryte of his sovereign and his commandment: when in such days he
commands to work for any causes Just and reasonable. In which four causes
it is lefull to a creature upon the said day for to do work corporell. The
second thing whereof the humayne creature ought for to cease in especyall
upon the said days is to do sin / and in especyall for dedly sin / for how
well that a creature ough for to keep him self from all sin and in especyall
fro deedly sin. Nevertheless sin done in the said days is much more
grievous than in other days. The third thing whereof a creature ought to keep
him in the said days is of ydlenes / for to be idle is cause of over much
evil and of sins and in especyall on the said days ought a creature to
occupye and enbesye him in three things. First in making sacrefyce to god of
hy^ self / and of all that he has and in especyal a creature ought on ye said
days to give hy^ self to god by devout oraysons and prayers. And to have
great sorrow and bitter repentance of his sins. Secondely a creature ought
to occupye him in the louenge and praysynge of his maker and creator. And
because that in the mouth of a sinner / praysynge is not pleasant to god
every creature ought to make clean his heart from all sins by bitter
repentance / by devout confession and by penance. Thyrdly a creature ought to
occupye him in the said days in doing almesses for the love of god / of such
goods as god has given to him / to to them that have need and necessyte / and
more largely ought to be given in the said days than in other. Also yet in ye
days of the feestes of saints ye creature ought to turn his entendement in
the consyderacyon of three things. First the creature ought to consider the
great lyberalyte and largess of god that the saint of whom the feast is / for
a little service that he has done to god. God has so gretely rewarded and
guardoned that has given to him glory and Joy pardurable with him And with
this god will that of his creatures he be honored and praised in this world.
And by this co^syderacyon ye creature ought to be all toward god / and ought
desire with all his heart to doubt / to love and serve devoutly and
perseuerauntly such a lord the which pays so well and truly his virtuous
servants. Secondely a creature ought in his heart to ymagyn and think of the
glory and Joy inestymable that the saint has with all mighty god / which is
so great that heart humayne may not think ne mouth express ne speak / and
by such consyderacyon he desires to have such well / And by this the
creature desires with all his heart to serve / love and also to dread god /
the which for this gives such well to a creature. Thyrdly a creature ought
consider in the said days the great myserye of him self the diverse
trybulacyons / afflyccyons / maladyes / and evil accydentes / fortunes and
seruytudes / and many moo parylles that been every day in this poor world. And
by this consyderacyon a creature ought to have ye world in despyte / and not
to preyse worldly things / and to serve god with all his power. And to desire
to be out of this myserye / for to have the great Joy and glory of heaven
which the saint has with god.

Here after folowen the seven other commandments / apparteynynge to the love
and dyleccyon of his neighbor Ca. x.
AFter the three commandments aforesaid apparteynynge to the love and
dyleccyon of god Follow the seven other apparteynynge to the love of his
neighbor according to the second commandment pryncypall aforesaid. For
to have the knowleche of them / is to wete / that the creature that loves his
neighbor after the said commandment / ought to have.ii. things / that is
to wete not to do evil / and for to do well. And therefore of the said seven
commandments partyculer / the first enduceth and excyteth the creature to do
well. But how be it that every creature is bounden to do well to his neighbor.
Nevertheless he is most bounden by especyall to do good to tho persons that
to him be most nygh and most conjoined. And therefore the said first
commandment of these vii. enduceth and admonesteth the creature to do well /
and commanded to honor serve and aid fader and mother / which ben the
persons most conioynt to us / and too whom we ben most holden after god.
And it is such / honor thy fader and mother to the end that thou have good
and long life upon the earth. The cause wherefore we ought to honor our faders
and moders / is for ye great benefaytes that we receive of them in three things
pryncipally. First the child receives of fader and mother his being For
therefore the child ought to bear to them more gretter honor and obeyssaunce
than too any other after god. Secondly the child receives of fader and mother
nourisshynge in his chyldehode. And therefore the child is bounden to govern
them in their old aege / and of his goods for to admynystre unto them their
necessytees after his power if they have need Thyrdly the child receives of
fader and mother techynge and doctrine. And therefore in all things / that be
not against god the child owes to obey to them / and in this doing.v.
things ben promised of god by the prophet to ye child. First grace in this
world and glory perdurable in ye other. Secondly long life which ought not
to be nombred in the nombre of years / but in the nombre of good virtues. And
in life which is without sin. Thyrdly joy and lygnage of children. Fourthly
fame or renomme lowable. Fyfthly rychesses. After it is to wete that some be
not said fader for cause of carnal generacyon / but for many other causes.
Sum ben said fader / and to each of them we ought for to bear honor and
reverence. First some be said fader for good and holy doctrine / and good
ensaumple that they have given and showed of good and holy contemplatyf life. As
the apostles and other saints / for by their holy doctrine they have made as
children of Ihesu christ by faith. And to them we ought to bear honor /
reverence / and obeysau^ce / not only with the mouth / but by ensyewynge their
works / and their good and holy lives and doctrine. Secondly some ben said
fader for the admynystracyon that they have of god / like as the prelates ben
of holy church / to whom we ought to give honor in obeynge to them and to
their commandments / as to the mynysters of god. Thyrdly some be said fader
for the guard and defense that they ought to do their people as ben the king
/ the prince and other lords which have the people to govern and to keep.
and them we ought to love and honor and to them obey by subjection / for
their power comes of god. Fourthly some ben said fader / and ben to be
honored for the we le and good that is received of them / as ben they that
socoure the poor in their necessyte / as fader by pity and by compassion.
Fyfthly some be said fader and ought to be honored for their old aege / as
ben the people which ben of great aege.

AFter the said first commandment partyculer touching the love and dyleccyon
of his neighbor / which enduceth and somoneth a creature to do well. Folowen
the other.vi. which defend to a creature to do evil. And therefore that
among all the euylles that a creature may do to another / the gretest evil is
to sle him / and this was given to moses in the second commandment of
the.vii. and is. Thou shall not slay / that is to wete creature reasonable of
thy propre will and auctoryte. To the knowleche of which commandment is to
wete that after holy scripture been slain creatures reasonable in many manners /
First by smiting in the body and hurtynge in such manner that death ensyeweth
thereof / and this is not only against the second co^mau^demente pryncypall a
fore said which commands him for to love his neighbor as himself. But it
is against nature for naturally all thyngees like and semblable love each other
Secondly by gyuynge counseyll favor or aid and tends a creature to slay a
another bodyly / or to make him to fall into dedly sin. Thyrdly in making
conforte and also aid unto a creature for to sle a another corporally or for to
cause him for to fall in to dedly sin. Fourthly in consenting him self to
ye bodly death of another spyrytuall as touching to dedly sin / as to make a
another for to fall. The which consenting is understand / as oftymes as I may
let a another fro death corporal or spyrytuall as touching dedly sin and I
let hy^ not. By this it appears clearly enough that a creature sometime sleeth
a body / by iniurye done to his body in such wise that death ensyeweth. And
sometime the soul for to make it fall in to dedly sin and sometime body and
soul to gyder / by sleynge him self or a woman great with child living. The
second commandment defends him too do evil to a person conjoined in
marriage and that is this. Thou shalt do none aduoutrye / that is to say with
a woman conjoined to a another by marriage thou shalt have no commyxyon / or
flesshely company. Ne a woman also married with any other man tha^ her husbo^de
and it is to wete yt man and woman in doing a gaynst the said commandment,
sin first a gaynst ye law of god which has defended auoutrye by ye said
commandment / and yet they sin against the law of god / by the which it
is said / that this which god has conjoined by marriage / that by man it may
not be deceuered ne departed. In gyuynge over his body by carnal copulacyon to
another. For after the holy scripture man and woman by marriage ben constytued
tweyne in one flesh. Yet eft they sin against the sacrament of marriage made
in the face of holy church. By the which man and woman promytte their troth
to other. By virtue of the which oath the body of the man lo^geth to the woman
/ and the body of the woman is to the man / and ne ought not to be abandoned ne
delivered to other by co^myxcyon carnal / always how well that in the things
aforesaid they sin deedly as said is yet the offense and sin of the woman /
that abandoneth her body to an other man than her husbonde by company carnal /
and commyxcion / is more greter when children or lygnage ensues than is of the
man. For with the sy^nes aforsayd she commytteth theft / in gyuynge to her
husbonde heirs for to succeed to him of an other man than of himself / and by
this the woman co^mytteth sacrylege / treason and theft. And in other cases the
sin of the man yt has commysed aduoutrye / is to be reprehended more than
of the woman / by cause that he ought for to have more greter knowledge / and to
be more strong for to keke him from sin / than the woman which is frail /
and deceived lightly by concupyscence. Also a man is ordained and constytued
heed and master of the woman / and in doing that sin he gives to his wife
evil ensample. And also it is to wete that by ye commau^demente aforesaid is
not only defended aduoutrye of ye man and woman assembled by matrymony / but
also all fornycacion co^myxcion / and flesshely company between man and woman
other than in lawful marriage is deedly sin / and deffended by the said
commandment / and to hold the contrary is heresye. For to take away fro
god that which is given and consecrate in ye holy sacrament of baptesme for to
give to a creature is more great Iniurye and mysprysion and more greter sin
than to take it fro a creature. Then sithe that it is defended that such
Iniurye be made to a creature by more stronger reason / it ought in no wise to
be done unto god. Also yet against the said commandment ne mespryseth not
only man and woman by aduoultry and fornycacyon as touching ye deed or fayte
/ but all the times yt for to do it they have the will delyberyd and
concluded. Without the deed be done or follow it is deedly sin / and also
all byholdynges touchynges and kyssynges made by deliberacion for to come to
the deed of carnal co^myxcion and fornycacion as well by man as by woman out
of marriage. Without that the deed ensyewe / is deedly sin / and is defended
by the said commandment. The.iii. commandment defends to do evil to
another in his temporell goods yt is. Thou shall do no theft. Against this
commandment myspryse and synnen deedly all they that pryuely and secretly
take others goods in entencion to reteyne them against the will of him or
them that owe them / and this manner of taking is theft. Also all they that
manyfestly or openly by force and by vyolence takes the goods and herytages
of other men's / and this manner of taking is called rauyne / and it is
gretter deedly sin than is theft. In this sin fallen the princes and
lords yt with out cause reasonable / leueye / and reyse upon their people
tayllage / aids / and Indue subuencyons / and that for auaryce makes evil
and wicked ordynaunces upon their people. For after saint Austyn. All wicked
sygnourye is theft. And after the said saint Austyn such people and such
lords ben called the great thieves. Also all they that retain the hyre and
salary of other / and that they owe to other. For this is against Justice / that
will that every man be rendered that which is his. Also all they that in fayte
of marchaundyse by delyberacyon and in deed aduysed commyse and do falsehode or
damage to other. Also tauerners and sellers of wine that put water with the
wine that they sell / or put in the same of less value and of less price than
that which is in ye vessel / and sell all at one price. Also against this
commandment myspryse and sin all they that do usury / which is co^mysed
and made in many manners / some time openly / that is to wete when a creature
leneth money to an other / and by a certain covenant shall have profit
thereby / some time preuely and secretly / and that is in diverse manners. First
when a creature leneth to an other gold or silver / or any other thing and
for ye more greter suerte to be paid again / is delivered in his hand some
thing that of the same comes prouffyte / as meadows / vynes / or other
herytages / and if he receive the said prouffyte without that he will any
thing rebate of that which is lent. Secondly when for ye more suerte to have
again that which has be lent / a person has received pledge / as horse /
or other beestes / of whom the usage has done him prouffyte / and will no
thing rebate therefore as before is said. Thyrdly when ostage is delivered to
some for the payment of some fynaunces. And therefore he takes his dyspences
upon ye said hostages during the time: Fourthely when any fynaunce is due to
any person / and of the payment of the said fynaunce / he gives delay for
certain prouffyte that is made for that cause. Fyfthly when a creature is
accustomed to by rentes or other things / by such co^dycyon / that if within
certain time his money be not rendered ne paid again / he shall have that
thing / and for the time of the said being he byeth it for less than it is
worth. And he sees clearly that he has sold that has not / ne shall not
have at the term power to pay ne to render that which is lent. And if he have
not the power in this hope and will / he gives him time of rechate or byenge
again / that then he shall have the prouffyte of the thing / and with that
he shall have again all that he has lent without any thing to rebate thereof.
Also when any person gives term of payment for the thing that he has sold
and for the abydy^ge of his payment he has sold it more derer than it is
worth or of value. Also when a creature byeth any thing yt shall be delyuerd
unto him at certain time to come / and for the abiding the delyueraunce of
that thing / he byeth it for less than it is worth. Also when a creature
accompanyeth him with another in the fayte of marchaundyse / and delyuereth his
money by such couenaunte that he shall be felawe and partyner in the gain /
and bear no thing in the loss. And upon this case of usure is co^prysed the
manner for to deliver beestes to delynge that shall not dye / which ben called
beestes of iron. That is to say / supposed that they dye or perysshe / he that
takes them to moyson or delynge shall deliver them again And he that has
delivered them shall not bear no part of the loss / but in the gain he
shall have his part. Also when a creature byeth any rent / heritage / revenue
/ or other thing that shall be paid to him at certain term by such
condycyon / that if he be not paid at the said term / he shall give for every
day or for every weke sum thing for the forberynge / and for the defaulte
of payement ye byer leueyeth and receives the said pain or thing. Also when
for to abide the payement of that which is lent of him that so owes the
pressed or debt is received seruyse or werkys and labors bodily. Also against
the said commandment mespryse and sin deedly that bye dygnytees espyrytuell
and benefyces / and all other that commyse symonye. Also all they that by force
of tyranny holden temporal seygnoryes and lordeshyppes / and in all the cases
aforesaid / the creature is holden to restore all that which he has had and
received of any other against the said commandment. After the three
commandments to foresaid which defend to do evil by work follows
the.iiii. which deffendeth to do evil in hurtynge or doing wrong to other
by word / and that is this. Thou shall not speak against ye neighbor false
wytnes / against this commandment tryspacen and synnen mortally all they that
accusen other in falls Judgment / also all they that Iudgen falsely / also all
they that by detraccyon of saying evil of other take aweye their good name /
and fame. Also all they that recyten and taken pleasyr and delight in saying
and recountynge that which they have herd say and recyte in deffame of other
/ also all they yt allow the words of a creature said in the deffame / and
anoyenge of another. Also by the said commandment is defended all lesynges
that is co^mysed in many manners. Sometime in things which beholds the faith
of holy church to the spyrytuall hurt of an other / and to his dampnacyon in
delyuerynge unto him false doctrine / and against the truth of the faith of
holy church Sometime in things that been to the damage and grefe of another as
touching his gods temporell / and in these two cases all lesynges is found
deedly sin. Sometime a lesynge is said and commysed in his propre deed by
humylyte / as does some people which accuses the^ self in confession by
humylyte of that which they have not done. And fro such a lesynge ought a
creature much for to keep hy^ and for to be ware right gretely there of / for
such humylyte is wicked. For after the saying of saint Austyn. Like as a
creature ought not for to hele ne hyde in his confession that which he has
done. In like wise ought he not for to say that which he has not done.
Sometime a creature lies in his own deed for shame. That is to wete when he
says some thing which he weneth be true. And in sayng it he auyseth him and
knows him self that it is not so. And nevertheless for shame he dare not
withdraw that he has said / according unto the truth. And sometime a
creature lies for to have some prouffyte thereby / or for to escape some
peril. Sometime for to do prouffyte unto an other. Or to deliver or keep him
from some peril or for to empesshe his prouffyte. Or to let his damage Also
sometime the creatures makes lesynges or lies or Iapes or plays / and for to
glad and enjoy the people with which they are in company with all. And
from all these lesynges after the saying of sweet saint Austy^ A creature
ought all way to keep hy^ fro making of lesynges. For every lesynge that a
creature makes is sin. And the two first ben deedly sy^nes / and the other
by evil custo^ may bring a creature to deedly sin / after these.iiii.
commandments aforesaid which defend to do evil by work and by word
follow ye other two which defend the will of lyberte to grieve and do evil
to another. The first deffendeth ye will to hurt another in his gods teporall.
And that is this. Thou shall not coueyte the thing of thy neighbor Against
this commandment mespryseth and synneth a creature sometime mortally or deedly
/ that is to wete as often as by delyberacyon he coueyteth and would have the
goods of another and against reason. Sometime venyally that is to wete when he
coueyteth ye goods of another. But he would not have them but by reason as for
ye prys that they be worth / and by the good will of him or them that owe
them. The second commandment defends ye will delybered or concluded to
coueyte ye wife of another man for to have carnal company with her. For to
have the knowleche of the said commandment it is to understand that in.iii.
manners concupyscence carnal is in a creature First in the heart when it is by
consenting delybered and concluded. To this purpose says our savior Ihesu
Christ / that he that byholdeth a woman by carnal concupyscence / that is to
say by a will concluded to have her company flesshly in his heart / he has
commysed fornycacyon / and synneth deedly. Secondly in the mouth in expressing
and declarynge the evil desire that is in the heart by consenting ye which
conse^tynge is called deedly sin / thyrdly in work when the evil purpose or
consenting is done in deed. After it is to wete yt.iiii. things pryncypally
keeps a creature fro falling into the sin of concupyscence. The first is to
flee evil company and all occasyons yt given and moeuen cause of
concupyscence. As for to frequent and to se women often and to here speak of
them. The.ii. is to put out and not remember in his heart the evil thoughts
and the temptacyo^s that come by the things that he has seen and to chastyse
his body and hold in penance and afflyccyon. The.iii. is to have recours to
god by devout oryso^ and prayer when flesshely temptacyon comes in requyrynge
devoutly his help. The fourth is also in occupyenge himself in good works
according to god. And always to fle ydlenes which is cause of all evil. Thus
it appears clearly by the cmaundementes aforesaid and declared that the
creature that loves god has of necessyte for to do three things. First yt he
adoure and worship but one god after the first commandment partyculer.
Secondly that the name of god he receive not in vain after the second
commandment. Thyrdly that he honor god after the third commandment In
like wise a creature yt loves his neighbor has of necessyte to do.vii.
things. The first is yt he do honor and reverence due after the.iiii.
commandment The second yt he do none evil ne Iniurye by work. First as
touching to his person after ye.v. commandment. Secondly as touching the
person to him conjoined after the.vi. commandment. Thyrdly as touching to
his gods after the.vii. commandment. Also do not ne bear damage by his word
after the.viii commandment. Ne also by thought and will concluded First when
he coueyteth his wife after the.ix. commandment. Secondly as touching to
coueyt his things after the.x. commandment. The which god give us grace to
accomplysshe. Amen.

Thus ends the commandments of the christian law which each man ought to
hold and keep entyerly for to have the life and glory pardurable. Deo gracias

Here follows the twelve artycles of the faith made by the.xii. apostles.

S. Peter. S. Andrewe. S. james ye more: S. Johan. S. Thomas. S. james ye less




These ben the.xii. articles of the christian faith which every man ought too
believe fermely. For otherwise he may not be saved / if he have understanding
and reason in himself and they ben.xii. artycles after the nombre of the twelve
apostles / which establysshed them to hold and keep / of whom the first
apperteyneth to the fader The second to the sone / and ye.iii. to the holy
ghost For this is foundement of ye faith to believe in the holy trynyte. That is
in the fader / and in the sone / and in the holy ghoost one god in.iii.
persons Al these artycles ben contained in the great Credo and in the little
credo / the which the.xii. apostles made / of which each of them made and
set a clause of whom the first is this.

The first article of the faith capitulo..xi.
S. Phylyppe. S. Barthylmew. S. Mathewe. S. Simon. S. Jude. S. Mathyas.




I Believe in god fader all might creator or maker of heaven and earth / this
article made saint peter saying. Credo in deum patrem omnipotem creatorem celi
and terre. The.ii. apperteyneth to the sone as touching his deyte / that he is
god / and that is this I believe in our lord / sone of the fader / and in this
we ought for to believe that he is semblable and egall unto the fader and to all
things the which apperteyne unto the deyte / and is one thing with the fader
/ sauf the person which is other than the fader as touching thumanyte. This
article made saint Andrewe saying. Et in Ihesum xp^m filium eius vnicum dn^m
nostrum. The.iii. article is of the co^cepcyon of christ / and was conceived of
the holy ghost and borne of Marye. That is to say that he was conceived in ye
vyrgyn Mary. And by the virtue of the holy ghost and nothing of man / and that
the vyrgyn Marye abode always vyrgyn and tofore and after. This article set in
saint James the more saying. Out conceptus est de spiritu sancto natus ex maria
virgin. The fourth article pertayneth to the passion of Ihesu christ / that is
to say that he suffered under Pylate his passion. The which Pylate was
prouoste and Judge for the time in Iherusalem for the Romans. And of him was
Ihesu christ Iuged wrongfully at the request of the right felon Jews and
crucyfyed and deed and laid in the sepulcre and dyscended in to hell. This
article made saint Johan theua^gelyst saying. Passus sub poncio pylato
crucifixus mortuus et sepultus / descendit ad inferna. The fyfth article is of
the resurreccyon of Ihesu christ. That is to say The third day he arose fro
death. This article made saint Thomas saying. Tercia die resurrexit a mortuis.
The.vi. article is of the ascencyon of Ihesu christ / That is to say. He
ascended unto heaven and sytteth upon the right side of god the fader almighty.
This article made saint James the less sayng. Ascendit ad celos sedet ad
dextram dei patris omnipotentis. The seventh article is of the coming of our
sauyoure Ihesu christ unto the dome or Judgment. That is to say. From thens he
is come for to Judge the living and the deed. This article made saint Phelyp
saying. Inde venturus est iudicare viuos and mortuos The.viii. article is to
believe in the person of the holy ghost. This article made saint bartylmewe
saying. Credo in spiritum sanctu^ The.ix. article is to believe in the holy
church of rome and in thordynaunces of holy church. This article made saint
mathewe saying. Sanctam ecclesiam catholicam. The.x. is to believe in the holy
sacrament and by the same holy sacrament is made remyssyon of sy^nes to all
them that receive him worthily. This article made Saint Simon saying.
Sanctorum co^muniouem remissionem peccatorum. The.xi article is of the general
resurreccyon in propre bodies. This article made saint Jude brother of saint
Simon saying. Carnis resurreccione^. The.xii. and the last article is to believe
heaven to be life pardurable. This article composed and made saint mathye saying
vitam eternam Amen.

Thus ends the twelve artycles of the faith.
Of the beast that saint Johan the evangelist saw in thappocalyps capitulo.
xii.
THe holy appostle saint Johan the evangelist in the book of his reuelacions ye
which is called apocalips says that he saw a be which issued out of the sea merueyllously desgysed and much dredefull. For the body of the beast was
of a leoparde / the feet of a beex the throat of lion / and he had.vii. heedes
/ and.x. horns above and above the.x. horns.x. crowns / and saint Johan saw
that this cruel be has power and might too fight against say^tes and to
overcome them / and to conquer them. this be so cruel / so cou^terfayted /
so diverse and so dredefull / sygnyfyeth ye devil yt is full of sorrow and of
bytternes. The body of this be was as says saint Johan like to a liopard
For in like wise as the lyoparde has diverse colors / In like wise has the
devil diverse manners of engyns for to deceive and to draw the people to sin.
The fete of the beast were of a beer. For in like wise as the bear has the
might and strength in his fete and in his arms and holds right strongly /
and byclyppeth fast that which he has under his fete and embraces with his
arms. In semblable wise does the devil them yt he embraces and has beten
down by sin. The throat of the lion was in him for his great cruelte.
The.vii. heedes of the said be / ben the seven chyef and pryncypall sins /
by the which sins the devil draws unto him as it were all the universal
world. For oftymes it happens that many persons fall in some throat of
these seven heedes. That is for to understand of ye seven deedly sins. And
therefore says saint Johan the euangelyst that the said be had power against
the saints / for in the earth is none so holy a man that parfytelye may
eschew all the manners of sins / that of these.vii. heedes / and of the.vii.
deedly sins descend / without special pryuylege and grace of god / like as
it was in the virgyn mary / which never did sin / or in another saint after
the special grace that he had of god / like as the glorious vyrgyn marye had
special and synguler grace of god above all other creatures The.x. horns of
the beast sygnefye the brekynge of the.x. commandments of the law of our
lord / which the devil pourchaceth as much as he may that the creature
break them / in like wise as he purchaceth that ye creature fall in the.vii.
deedly sins toforesayd / or in so^me of the branches of them. The.x.
crowns of the said be sygnefyen ye vyctoryes that the devil has upon the
sinners / by cause that he has made them for too break ye ten commandments
of the law of our lord

Herafter follows the deuysyon of the.vii. deedly sins ca. xlii.


THe first heed of the beast is pride. The second envy. The.iii. ire.
The.iiii. slouthe. The.v. auaryce. The.vi. glotonye. The.vii. lecherye. Out of
the.vii. sins deedly descends all manner of sins and therefore be they
called chief of vices / for they ben chief of all vices and of all sins be
they deedly or venyall. Eueryche of these seven deedly sins is departed in
many parties / and first we shall speak of the sin of pride. This was the
first sin and the beginning of all evil when the angel Lucyfer for his
great beauty and his great vnderstondy^ge he would have been above all other
aungelles and would compare to god that so good and fair had made him / and
because he took such pride in him he fell from heaven in to hell and became a
devil / and all his company with hy^. All proud men resemble this Lucyfer /
which will be above the other / and be more praised / more allowed / and more
enhaunced than the other / which ben better and of more value than they be.
This sin of pride is over peryllous / for it blyndeth man and woman / so that
they know not ne se not the peril wherein they be by sin. This is the right
strong wine of the devil / and the most especyall of the which he enyureth
or makes drunk ye great lords and ladies / the bourgeyses / the rich / ye
noble and valiant persons / and generally all manner of people. But in
especyal the great lords and ladies in such manner that they know not them
self / ne se not their defautes / ne their folyes ne their sy^nes / This is ye
most peryllous malady of all other. Truly he is in great peril to whom all
treacle torneth to veny^ / like as doctrine and chastysynge does to proud.
For ye more men chastyse and blame them of their defautes / so much more be
they angry and defend them. Pride is the first daughter of the devil / and she
that has most gretest part in his heritage. Pride warreth against god and his
goodness and all graces / and against all the good works that been in the man.
For pride makes of alms sin / and of virtue vice / and thus is pride a
thief to god / and with the goods that one ought get heaven / he makes him
wyn hell. This sin is the first. For it assauteth the knights of our lord
/ and that last leueth them. For when the knights of our lord have
ouercomen and vaynquysshed all other vices and sins. Then assaute them
most strongly the sin of pride and of vain glory.

The branches of ye sin of pride ben these. Ca. xiiii
THe sin of pride deuydeth him and departs in so many parties that uneath
they may be nombred. But there ben in this sin.vii. pryncypal parties /
which ben as.vii. branches that issue and grow of an evil rote. Of which
the first branch is dysloyalte or untruth. The second dyspyte. The third
is surquydrye which some call presumpcyon. The.iiii. folchaste / which is
called ambycyon. The fyfthe vaynglorye. The.vi. ypocrysye. The.vii. evil and
foul shame of well doing. To these seven parties and branches appertain all
the sins that grows of pride. But eueryche of these seven branches have
many small bows.

The first branch is dysloyalte or untruth. Ca. xv.
THe first branch of pride is dysloyalte / which deuydeth him in to three
branches. The first is evil. The second is werse. The third is worste. That
one is vylaynous. That other is wode. The third is renyenge. Vylanous general
is in all sy^nes / for no sin is without vylonye. But the vylony of which we
speak here specially that grows of pride is a party of dysloyalte / which
is called of clerks Ingratytude that is unkindness. That is to say forgetynge
of god and of his yeftes / that men thank not our lord ne give him laud and
praysynges thereof. But he forgeteth and renders evil for good and velonye for
curtesye. This vylonye does every creature to our lord god when he forgeteth
his goodness grace and yeftes / and yeldeth not to him therefore praysynges and
thanks like as he ought to do. But oftymes fyghteth in evil custom and usage
against the will of god. This is much great vylony wha^ a person receives
great bounte and goodness / and daygneth not ones to say gramercy / yet is the
vylonye greter when one sees / and when he forgeteth. But ye slouthe is over
great when a person receives all way the bountees and renders always evil
for good / who then bethought him well and took head of ye bountees and goods
that god has given and done to him and does contynuelly fro day to day / for
he has no goods / but god has given them to him. Ne goods of nature / as
beauty / health strength of body clear understanding and natural wit as of
the party of the soul. Ne goods of fortune as rychesses / honors / and
hautesses. Ne goods of grace / as ben virtues / grace / and good works. well
ought such one to thank god / and honor doubt and love hy^ with all his gods
/ for one bounte requires and asks another.

Of the.ii. bough of the first branch Ca. xvi.
THe second bough of dysloyalte that grows of pride is woodnes. That man is
holden for wode that is out of his wit / in whom reason is gone and
departed. Then he is a right great fool and well may be said out of his wit
and wode that in good ernest wastes destroys / and sets in evil usage the
gods that been not his / but ben the gods of his lord of which he must
straytely count and give a reckoning / that is to wete the time that he has
lost / and how he has employed his time / and of the temporal goods how he
has used them the which he had in keeping / and has dyspended them in
folyes / in outrages / and in evil vsages tofore the eyes of his lord that is
god. Ne has not pourueyed him to render his account / and knows well that he
must reken and wot not when / ne the day / ne the hour. Such folly is called
forcenery or woodnes. Of this vice and of this sin ben the great proud men
yt use right evil ye gods yt god has lent them.

Of ye.iii. boughe of dysloyalte. Ca. xvii
THe third boughe of dysloyalte that comes of pride is renyenge he is well
renyed that ye land which he holds of his lord puts in ye hand of his
enemy / and does to hy^ homage. This sin do all they ye sin mortally For
in asmoche as in the^ is they do homage unto the devil. And become servants
and caytyues of the enemy and render to him all that they holden of god /
both body and soul. And all other things that they have they put in the
service of the devil. And how be it that such folk say and call them
christian / they renye god by work / and show that they ben not. But in three
manners a man is called renegate or renyed / and falls christian. Or for by cause
that he byleueth not that he ought like as does the bougre or the heretyke /
and the apostata that renyeth his feythe. Or by cause that they break ye feythe
that they believe / like as done they that been pariured / and be lie their
faith. Or by cause the believe more tha^ they ought to do / like as done
deuynours. Sorciers / and the charmerers which use and work by tharte of the
devil / and all they that in such evil werkys believe and set their hope
sin deedly. For all these things ben against the feythe / and therefore holy
church for bedeth and deffendeth them These been the manners of desloyaulte
which is the first branch of pride.

The second branch of pride capitulo.xviii.
THe second branch of. Pride is despyte / which is a much great sin /
and how well that deedly sin be not without despyte of god / Yet alwey after
that we here speak / in this despyte specially may one sin in three manners: Or
by cause that a person preyseth not ryghtfully another in his heart like as he
ought to do. Or by cause he bears not reverence ne honor there as he ought to
do. or by cause he obeys not aryght them to whom he ought to obey. Now
thy^ke right well dylygently in thyn heart how often times you have mysprysed here
in which thou haste in thyn heart / thyn own self and other falsely praised.
And the better dyspraysed dyspyted and ye wors praised / and how often thou
haste despised in thyn heart them that been of more value than thou art. And
how thou haste despised them for some forayne grace that god has given to the
Or for noblesse / or for beauty / or for prowess / or for stre^gthe of body /
or for lyghtnes. Or for what so^euer other good that it be / by ye which thou
haste praised more thy self than thou ought to do / and the other thou
haste less praised than thou ought. After think how many times thou have
borne little honor and reverence to them that thou ought. First to god
and to his sweet mother and to all the aungelles and saints of heaven. For there
is none but thou have trespaced to by dyspyte or by Irreuerence. In that thou
have often times evil kept ye feestes and holy days. After think how many
times thou have served evil our lord Ihesu christ. Or in that / yt thou have
not not gladly herd his service / ne said his hours / ne herd his sermons.
And when thou wenest to here the mass in the church or the holy sermons thou
Ianglest and bourdest tofore god. and let other to do well / after think
how thou haste many times done little honor to the body of Ihesu christ when
thou see him / or when thou receyuest him. In this thou art not worthily
apparaylled ne made ready by confession and by repentance. Or by adventure that
wers is thou have received him in deedly sin thy self wetynge. The which
thing is a great dyspyte unto god as to crucyfy hy^ After think how unto thy
sweet felawe / and to thy good keeper thyn angel which all way is with the /
and all way keeps ye / how many velanyes thou have done to him in so much as
thou have commysed sin tofore him / after think how oftyme thou have be
inobedyent to thy fader and to thy mother and to them to whom thou ought
obbeye and bear honor. If thou wylt in this manner record thy life thou shalt
see that thou have ofter sinned in this manner of pride which is called despyte
/ tha^ thou can recounte or tell /

Of ye.iii. branch of pride / yt is arrogance. Ca. xix
THe third branch of pride is arrogance which is called surquydrye or
presumpcyon / that is to wete when a man weneth more of him self than he ought.
That is to say that he weneth to be of more valor than he is worth / or to
know more / or to mow more than other. This sin is the fortress of the
devil. For he keeps and nouryssheth all ye great sins. This sin shows
him in many manners by work and by word. But namely he shows hy^ in vi.
manners. That is to wit in syngularyte. For the proud surquidrous yt weneth to
be more of valewe and power / and to know more than the other / daygneth not
to do as the other do which ben of more value than he is. Also he will be
synguler in his werkys. This is the first sin for which surquydrye shows
him in work or by deed. The second folly is enterprise of great dyspences of
his own or of other for to be preysed and renoumed. And that he be holden the
more large and ye more curteyse. The third evil that grows of surquydrye is
folysshe empryse of leude stryffe. For thus says Salamon / emonge ye proud
men ben always stryues and plees. The.iiii. boughe of this branch by which
the proud man shows the pride of his heart is auauntynge / which is a much
foul sin to god and to the world / he that auau^teth him is like unto the
cuckoo that can sing no thing but of him self / this sin is foul in him /
that by his own mouth auanteth him / of his wit or of parage / or of his
werkys or of his prowessys. But this sin double in them that follow and
flatre these vauntours / and losengers / and suffer them for to preyse them
and for to say of them that they durst not say and for to lie and for to
cry their oublyes. The fyfthe tacke of this branch is derysyon. For that is
the custom of ye proud surquydrous / for it suffyseth not enough to despise
the other in his heart / that has not the grace that he weneth to have / but
he makes his mockeryes / and derysyons. And yet that werse is he scorneth and
mocketh the good wise men / and them that he sees be good and honest /
which is a much great sin and perylous. For by their evil tongues they
let much people to do well. The.vi. boughe of this brau^che is rebellyon.
That is when a man is rebel to all them yt would him good For if one repreue
ye proud surquydrous he deffendeth him / if one chastyse him anon he is angry
/ if one cou^ceyll him he byleueth it not but his own wit. This is a
peryllous maladye that may not suffer yt he be touched and to whom every
medycyne torneth to venym. It is an evil thing to murmr / but much werse
is rebellyon / rebellyon is a vice of the heart which is hard and froward and
diverse / that will always that his will be done and his sentence holden / and
kept and will that all other bow and enclyne to him / and he shall not bow
ne humble himself unto no manner person. This is the hard heart of the word
of salamon which may not fail to come to an evil end / and like as murmr
is against god and against man right so is such an heart that is rebel against
god and against men. This sin and this vice which is called rebellyon
departs and deuydeth him in to four branches. Such an heart is repugnante
and rebel to believe counceyle and to suffer chastysynge / and to receive
doctrine if any of their friends would counceyle and show their prouffyte / or
their defautes / he dayneth not to take heed there to ne here it. But because
that they have spoken he will ye more gladlyer do all the contrary. And on the
other party they be much rebel to the counceyles of our lord / as to the
counceyle of the holy gospelles / of ye other holy scryptures / and sermons. To
which they be bounden to do and to accomplysshe the will of god for to have
glory perdurable. And the devil lies tofore them either Impotence / or youth
or aege / or other evil reasons / so that at the last they may nothing do.
After when men repreue and chastyse them / they defend them as a bore so
that they will not know their folyes / and so much more as they excuse them /
so much more is their sin Also it is when god smyteth / chastyseth / or
corrects them to the end they should know their sins and their defautes /
and that to the end they repent and amend them. They conne him no thank but
despise him saying. O what have I trespaced / what will god do with me And thus
they murmr against god. Thus does and say the foles. For that the which
should be tryacle and purgaco^n of ye soul it tourneth to them veny^ / and the
medycyne torneth to ye death. After they be of so diverse wits yt they know no
good doctrine. But always defend their sentence what soever it be / and in yt
wise they fall often error and in false oppynyons / in heresies and myscreau^ce.
Blasphemye is also as says saint. Austyn when one byleueth yt which he ought
not to believe. But especyally we call blasphemye when one myssayeth of god or
of his saints / or of his creatures or of his sacraments that be made in holy
church / this sin blasphemye is done in many manners as in the saying in his
mind or thought / as done the heretykes / or when it is said by couetyse of
wynnyng. As done the enchauntours or the sorceryers. Or when it is said by
dyspyte as done these great swerers / that sweren so vylaynously by god / by
his blessed mother and by all his saints / which is a much horrible thing to
here and to harken. Such folk ben like an hounde enraged and wood that byte
and know nothing their master ne lord. This sin is so great that god
punyssheth it sometime openly like as we have said tofore / when we speak of
the evil and wicked people. Of this sin says god in ye gospel / that it
shall never be pardoned ne foryeuen in this world ne in that other / That is
to say uneath he shall be forgyuen / by cause that uneath he repents him /
or it may be perauenture that he shall never repent him

Of the.iiii. branch which is ambicion. Ca..xx.
THe fourth brau^che of pride is ambycyon. That is an evil desire to amounte
and rise high. This sin is ye pan of hell in which the devil fryeth his
frytours / This branch stratcheth him in many manners on the right side and on
the lift side. For they that desire to wax hye and rich will playse sum /
and thereof grown many sins / like as it were on the right side. That is to
wete losangerye / flaterye seduction / adulacion / folyly geuynge / and folyly
despendynge / by cause they should ben holden large and curtoys / unto other
they will noye and grieve and thereof comen and sourde the sins on the lift
side. As for to myssaye of him whom he will gryeue for tenhaunce him self /
and give too that other blame. And that wers is / that he desires ye death of
him / that holds that thing for which he entendeth and desires / and of
this brau^che grows stryues. Treason / evil counsayll / and conspyracyons.

The fyfthe braunce is vaynglorye capitulo. xxi.
THe fyfth branch of pride is vaynglorye. This is folysshe pleasure or vain
praysynge. That is when any feleth in his heart a reioysynge of that / that is
or weneth to be preysed of sum thing that is in hy^ or weneth to have. And
would be preysed or yt / of which he ought to preyse god. And by ye vyane
glory takes aweye fro god yt which is his. For of all manner goods what
someuer they be / he ought to have yt honor and the glory. And to us the
prouffyte. Vaynglorye is the great wind that bears down the great toures and
ye great steples. The great castellys and the great forteresses / and dryueth
down to therthe the great forestys / and makes the great montaygnes to quake
and shake. These ben the hye men and the most valyauntes / the great princes
and the great lords. This is ye penny of ye devil by which he byeth all the
fair wares in ye fair of this world and markettes. These ben good works.
And for because that there ben three manners of goods ye which the man has of
god / and that ye devil will bye them with his penny. Therefore this branch
departs him in three bows out of which sourde so many sins ye no clerk
may nombre them. These.iiii. manners of goods that the man has of god ben the
goods of nature the goods of fortune and ye goods of grace. The goods of
nature ben the goods that a parsone has by nature as toward the body / or
toward the soul. The goods of the party of ye body ben health reaulte
strength prowess good faconde / good voys and lyghtnes of body. The goods of
the party of the soul been clear understanding / clear wit to understand
and reteyne. Subtle engyne for to find good memory and mind virtues
naturell by the which a man is more naturally curtoys than another or more
large or more debonayr / or more attempred or more gracyous / or to be well
ordained. Of all these yeftes ought every man to praise and thank god / serve
and honor him. For fro god comen all these goods that we may have but the
proud man sells them to the devil for the false money of vayn glory. And
fyghteth often ageyn god with all the goods than he has lent to him / which
ben here above declared. How many persons have accustomed to sin often by
vaynglory in diverse manner / every man may Judge in him self. In the goods of
fortune ben hyghnes / honors rychesses / delyces and prosperytees / ye which
ben called in many manners. For when dame fortune has turned her whele. And
has raised a man and has set him in the most highest degree of her whele as a
wind mylle does / and unto the most highest mount and come all the.xii.
wyndes and blow meruayllously with the wind of vaynglorye. For when that he
is so hye raised in prosperyte / he thinks in his heart on his great
dygnyte. After in his prosperyte. After in his riches. After on the great
company that follows him. After on the fair meney yt serves him. After in
his fair manoyrs. After on his fair horse. After on the plente of of his
fair robes. After on thapparayle of his lodging in vessel and in beds /
and in other manner harneys that is fair and noble. After on the great
presents and on the great feestes that been made to him over all where he
gooth. After on his great renoume and his great loos and praysynge which
flees all about / wherein he Ioyeth and gloryfyeth the very caytyf in his
heart that he wot not where he is. These ben the.xii. wyndes of vaynglory / yt
is to say / manners of temptacyons of vaynglory / which they have that been in
this hye estate / or in ye world / or in relygyon / or clerk / or lay man.
The goods of grace ben virtues and good works. Against these goods blows
sometime the wind of vaynglory / and oftyme throws down the most gretest
trees and the most hye. These ben the most wise men / and it is to wete that
in good virtues and good works the devil tempts by sin of vaynglorye in
three manners: That one is in the heart withinforthe when a person enjoys him
of the good that he has done pryuely / as of prayers / and oryso^s or of pryue
good works / and weneth that he be better with god than he is. That other is
when he suffers a folysshe gladness come in to his heart of that he hereth / or
sees his good fame or renoume and yt he is reputed and holden for a good and
noble wise man. The third is when he desires and secheth and purchases
praysynge loos and good fame / and in yt ente^cyon he does his good deeds and
works nothy^ge for god proprely but for the world.

The.vi. brau^che of pride is Ypocrysye. Ca. xxii.
THe.vi. branch of the sin of pride is Ypocrysye. This is a sin that
shows good deeds with outforth / which ben not withinforth. Then they ben
Ypocrytes which counterfayte the wise man withoutforthe / and they be nothing
so withinforthe. For they do more in the entencyon to have the name of a go^
man than the truth and the holiness. And this is departed in to three parties.
For there is one Ypocrysy folysshe / one foul / and one subtle. They be foul
Ypocrytes that done the ordures and fylthes of sin secretly in hid places /
and counterfayte the good men tofore the people. Our lord calls them in the
gospel sepulcres painted and gylte. They ben folysshe Ypocrytes yt keep them
clean enough as toward their body and do much great penance and good works
/ pryncypally for the praysynge of the world / because they would be reputed
and holden for good and holy. Such people ben well fo folysshe. For of good
metal they make false money. They ben subtle Ypocrytes that will mou^te in
hye estate and takes away and steel the dygnytees and offices. They do all yt
a good man ought to do so subtylly / yt no man may know it unto the time that
it be achyeued and gotten / and all ready mounted and raised in to hye estate and
dygnytees / and then they show their vices / their fayntyses and ye
Ypocryses that were in them within their heart. That is to wete pride /
auaryce / and malice / and other evil works whereby may be clearly known their
wyckednes and their Ypocrysy. And yt the tree was never good / and yt all the
work and deed of such a person was fayntyse and Ypocrysye of yt he had
showed tofore.

The seventh brau^che of pride is fooll dread Ca. xxiii.
THe seventh branch of pride is fooll dread and fool shame that is wha^ one
leueth to do well for the world / to the^de that he be not reputed and holden
for an ypocryte and a. papelart / and fereth and doubts more the world than
god. This shame comes of evil pleasau^ce And therefore is she daughter of
pride. And ye seventh branch pryncypall makes a person oftyme too leave to
do well / for to playse wyckedly the world.

The.ii. heed of the beast of hell is envy Ca. xxiiii.


THe second heed of the beast of hell is envy. This is ye serpente yt
enuenymeth all. Envy is mother of the death And by the envy of the devil came
the death to the world. This is the sin the which most right and sone
makes a man to resemble to the devil his fader / for the devil hates
nothing more than the well of another. And loves nothing but the harm of
another. And by this sin the enuyous man may not se the well of another / no
more than the owl may se the clerenes of ye day or clerenes of the son. This
sin is departed in to three branches which be pryncypall. For this sy^ne
poysoneth first the heart of thenuyous person / and after ye mouth. And after
that the works. The heart of thenuyous is so poisoned and ouertorned that it
may not se ye good of another / but that it grieve his heart withinforth and
Judges evil that which he sees / or that he hereth he takes and demeth
always the werste. And all this he does to his own harm. The heart of an
enuyous person has so many venymous thoughts and falls demimynges and
Iugementes that they may not be no^bred After this when the enuyous person
does or hereth any evil of any other what someuer he be / is it of harm of
his body / as evil of his death or of his sekenes / or of evil fortune / or
of pouerte / or evil spyrytuell like as when he hereth yt some which have been
holden for good men ben blamed and defamed of some vices and defautes. Of these
things enjoys the enuyous person in his heart. After when thenuyous person
hereth the well of another Then comes to him a sorrow and an heaviness to his
heart that he may not be eased ne make any good chere ne fair semblaunt. Now
may thou se yt the venymous heart of thenuyous person synneth generally. In
malice in gladness and Joy of the harm of other / and in sorrow of the well of
another. Thus sy^neth the enuyous man by his mouth. For needs must such wine
come out of the tappe as there is within the vessel. And by cause that the
heart is all full of venym / it by houeth that such issue out of ye mouth.
Then by the mouth of thenuyous person issue three manners of venymous words
of whom Dauyd speaks in his psaulter / that the mouth of thenuyous person
is full of maledy^tyon. For of ye good and well of another he myssayeth
appayreth and lasseth as much as he may Of hurtynge. For all the harm and
deffaultes of another he secheth and sercheth / and shows forth to his power.
Of Trayson. For all that he sees or hereth he peruerteth to his power / and
tourneth it to evil and Judges it falselye After ye enuyous person has three
manners of venym in work like as he has in his mouth and in his heart For the
nature of the enuyous is to quen^^ and too destroy to his power all goodnesses
/ be they lytyl be they great / or myddle or perfyght. Then he is of ye
nature of a basylyke that may suffer no verdure nygh unto him / neither herb
ne busshe ne tree. Then after ye gospel the good or well has in him self
three estates. For it is first as in the heart after in the ere / and after it
is full of grayn. Then al thus there be sum that have good beginning to
come well forth / and to prouffyte well / and ben like as the herb. Them the
enuyous thinks to destroy if he may / the other ben also like theerys of corn
that flower well and prouffyte well to god and to the world. And them the fend
cries to destroy and to shame too his power The other been perfyte in great
estate and do much good to god and to ye world. For to beat down their good
loos and renoume and for to mynisshe their good deeds / the enuyous dresseth
all his engynes. For as much gretter as the goodness is. So much more sorrow he
has. This sin is so perylous that uneath may one that uses it come a right
to very repentance. For this sin is contrary to the holy ghost / which is
fountain of all goodnesses. And god says in the gospel. Who that synneth
against the holy ghoost he shall never have forgyuenes ne mercy in this world
ne in the other. For he synneth of his propre malice. And it ought holy for to
be understand that there is no sin how great it be / but that god forgyueth
and pardons in this world if a person repents with good heart. But uneath
it happeth that any repent of this sin. For such one warreth with his power
the grace of the holy ghost / in that / that he warreth the spyrytuell good of
another. In likewise as the Jews warred against our lord Ihesu christ for the
good that he did. And ye ought to know that there be.vi. sins specially
against the holy ghost. That is to wete (presumpcyon) ye which enlarges over
much to sin / and prayseth little the Justice of our lord / and over much
to trust in his mercy / and therefore much people sin in hope. The.ii. sin
against the holy ghost is (dyspayre) which beny^meth and takes away from
god his mercy. Like as presumpcyon takes from him his Justice. The.iii. is
(obstynacyon). This is hardenes of heart. When one is so enharded in his sin
and in his malice / that he may not be humbled ne meked ne bow and will not
repent him ne amend. The fourth sin against the holy ghost is (dyspyte of
penance). That is when a man purposes in his heart / that he shall never
repent him of his sin. The fyfth is to war against the grace of the holy
ghost in an other. The syxth is to war against the truth in ernest wetyngly
/ and in especyall the truth of the Christian faith. All these foresaid sins
ben against the bounte and goodness of the holy ghoost / and they ben so great
that uneath they come too very repentance. And therefore ben they uneath
forgyuen and pardoned.

The.iii. heed of the beast of hell is Ire or wrath Ca..xxv.


THe third heed of ye be is Ire. But thou owe to know that there is an
ire which is virtuous / that the good men have ayenste this sin / which
geten the virtues ayenste the vices. There is another Ire which is a much
great vice / that is felonnye of heart / out of whom yssueth many brau^che.
And in especyal four wars that the felons have.

Of the first war. of the sin of ire / which is such. Ca..xxvi
THe first war of the sin of ire / is to him self for when Ire surmounteth
the man / she tourmenteth the soul and the body so much that the man may not
sleep ne rest. Sometime ire takes away the etynge and drinking / and makes
one fall in a fever or in so great heaviness or malancolye / or despayr that
he takes the death This is a fire yt wastes all ye goods of the hows The
second war that ye felon has that is to god. For ire and felonnye surmounte
and fire sometime all the people / by aduersyte temporalle / or by maladye and
sickness / or by death of frendys. Or by any manner of meschaunce that his
will is not done that he grutcheth and murmureth against god our lord and
says maugre / and in despyte of god and of all his Saints. And swereth and
blasphemeth against god and his blyssed saints. The third war of Ire yt the
felon has that is unto them that been under him / that is to his wife and to
his meyne and breketh pottes and cups and like as he were out of his wit /
and so is he. The fourth war is withoutforth to his neighbor and by
dwellers about him and of this branch grow.vi. bows. For when Ire ryseth
between two men / there is then strife dyscorde / words / vylonyes / wrongs.
And after rancour which dwellyth in ye heart / after comes hate medlynge and
bataylle / after desire for tauenge him / after other while homycyde and
manslaughter. After comes often mortalle war emonge the friends / out of
which yssuen often evil in diverse manners / and many yt may not be amended For
when there is war between two hye great men it happeth often that many men be
slain which never had blamed ne trespaced / monasteryes and chyrches ben
broken up / and thrown down / and ben sometime burnt towns. destroyed and
brent. Abbayes and great pryoryes destroyed / men women and children dysheryted
and put to pouerte / robberyes / women married / and maidens defouled and
corrupt / and over many other euylles that been do for that cause. And all this
be they bound to render and to make amends / al they by whom so many
myscheues and harms have be done: And all they that have be in their help in
such wicked and evil works / and therefore they be in great peril of
dampnacyon / and far from their salvation. For they may not amend ne render
the domages that they have done / and they behoue to restore or to be forlore.

Of the sin of slouthe the which is said accyde. Ca. xxvii.


THe fourth heed of the beast of hell is slouthe / ye which is called of
clerks accydye. This sy^ne is grievous to do well. This sy^ne is an over ill
rote and casts out many evil branches. For this sin causes a man to come
unto evil amendment / and more evil beginning / and over evil ending.
The slow person has evil beginning by.vi. manners sins. The first vice is
fayntnes / that is when a man loves lytyl and fayntly our lord / whom he
owes to love ardauntly / and this happeth when he is flawe. latchous and
slowfull to do well. The second vice of slouthe is tendrenesse / that is the
bed wherein the devil rests him and says to ye man or woman. Thou have be
ever tenderly nourysshed thou art of over feeble complexyon Thou may not do
great penau^ces / you art over tender thou sholdest anon be deed / and for
this the caytyf suffers to be cherysshed / and to do all the eases and the
delight of his body. The third vice is idleness. This is a sin of whom
comes many euyls as the holy scripture says. For when the devil fyndeth a
man idle he puts him anon in his works / that is / he makes hy^ first to
think evil / to desire vylonyes rybaundryes / lecheryes to lose his time /
and to leave to do much good that he might do by which he might get heaven.
The fourth vice of s^outh is heaviness / wha^ a man is so heavy that he secheth
nothing ne loves so much as too lie down rest and sleep. Sometime how well
he be slow they ben waker and quycke enough to the needs of the world. But
they be all slepy to the needs and werkys of god / and for to do the werkys
that should be to their salvation / and these manner of slothful men had lever
to lose three masses than a sweet or a good nap of sleep. The fyfth vice of
slouthe is shrewdnes or cursednes that is when a man lies in sin and feleth
the temptacyons of the devil and of his flesh which assayleth him. (...) he
will not lift up his heed ne his heart to god by contrycyon. Ne cry to god
devoutly by confession. Ne stratche up his hands unto god by satysfaccyon. To
such slouthe resembles ye wicked man that had lever rote in foul stynkynge
prison / than take on him the labor to go up the stayre / or degrees to
escape and go his way.

Of pusyllanymyte / of delay / and werynes. Ca. xxviii.
THe.vi. vice of slouthe is pusyllanymyte. In this vice be they yt have fere
and dread of naught / and dare not begy^ne to do well / for they have dread
that god shall fail them. This is the fere and dread that some people have of
their dreme. They resemble him that dare not enter in to the pathe or way for
feere of the snayle yt shows his horns. And resemble also the child yt dare
not go in the way for gaglynge and hyssynge of the gees These ben the six
vices that takes away from a man good begy^nynge. And for.vi. other vices the
slow person may not have good amendment. These ben the.vi tatches or
condycyons of evil servants that so do yt no good wise man ought to receive
in to his service / yt is to wete when he is delaynge / necligent / forgetful /
slow / lachous / and faylynge to do well.

Of delaynge to do well Ca. xxix
THe first vice is delaynge. For when god puts in the heart of a man good
will or volenty for to do well. Then comes the old enmye the devil which
says to hy^. Thou shall recover well enough / thou art young and strong thou
shall live long enough. By this manner the devil destroubleth a man to do
well.

Of the vice and sin of neclygence. capi. xxx
AFter delayenge comes neclygence / for who so makes delayenge it is no
wondre though he do a thing neclygentlye. This is a vice of which all the
world is entatched if it be well taken head of. For there be not many that be
delygent to do that they ought to do anenste god and their neighbor.

Of the vice of forgetynge. capitulo. xxxi.
AFter neclygence comes oublyence or forgetyng for who is not retchynge and
neclygente he forgeteth often. by these two sins of neclygence and forgetynge
happeth often that some person can not well confess ne shryue himself. For
when a man is not remembrynge ne not retchynge and neclygent to confess him He
forgeteth his sins whereof is great peril. for no person may have pardon
without very confession. And he may not have very confession that has not
repentance in his hole heart of al his sy^nes / knowledge of his mouth / and
obedyence in works. This amends and this satysfaccyon ought every man to do.
Ne there is none how good and wise he be / if he sees and consyderethe well
his defautes but that he fyndeth enough to say always in his confession. But
neclygence and forgetynge blyndeth the people that they see nothing in the
book of their confession and of their conscience. And after that comes fere
or dread the which does come always of defaulte of heart / and of evil
custom that byndeth so a man that uneath he puts him self to do well / and
sometime this comes by defaulte of dyscrecyon / and of folysshe feruoure by
which a man takes on him and tourmenteth so his body by fasting / by waking
/ by penau^ces / and by other works that he falls in to langoure and in
such maladye and sekenes / that he may not labor in the service of god / and
of this he falls in such fere / that he has no sauoure of devotion to do
well.

Of the vice of latchednes. Ca. xxxii


AFter comes lachednes that makes a man latchous / and appayreth fro day to
day so much that he is always recreaunt and defaylynge And this is the.vi. vice
of which the ill servants is entached when he faylleth tofore that he come
to the end of his term / and it is said comynly. Who that serves and serves
not to the end he loses his reward.

Of the evil points of accydye and of sloth. Ca. xxxiii.
THere ben.vi. points in ye sin of accyde and of slouthe yt brings a man
to his end. The first is inobedyence / when one will not do yt / yt is charged
hy^ in penance. Or if he be boden sometime to do a thing yt hy^ seems hard /
he excuses hy^ yt he may not do it. Or if he accepts it / he does little
or naught. The.ii. point is i^pacyence. For as he may nothing do by
Inobedye^ce. Right so may he nothing suffer by i^pacyence. So ye none dare
speak to hy^ of his prouffyte. The.iii. point is murmr / for when he is
spoken to of his proffyte he anon murmureth and weneth to be despised / and
tha^ he falls in to heaviness / yt all yt is said to hy^ / all yt is done to
hy^ / and all yt he sees all greueth hy^ / and thus he falls in langoure and
it noyeth hy^ to live / so yt he would dye. After these sorrowful points of
sloth gives ye devil ye mortal stroke and puts hy^ in dyspayre / whereby
he seeks death and sleeth himself. Or else he fares with hy^ self as all
dyspayred / he yt gives hy^ to all euyls / and dredeth not to do sy^ne

Of the sin of auaryce or couetyse. Ca. xxxiiii.
THe.v. heed of ye be is avarice yt otherwise is called couetyse / yt is
rote of al euylles like as saint poule says. This is ye maystres yt has so
great a scole yt all gone thither to study / as says ye holy scripture / For
all manner of people study in auaryce / prelate / clerk / lay man and
relygyous. Auaryce is a love of dysordynate hauoyr and riches. This
dysordynau^ce shows himself in.iii. manners generally. In gety^ge ardau^tly.
In retaynynge straynably and in dyspendy^ge scarcely. These ben ye.iii.
branches pry^cypall yt grow out of this rote. But especyally / yssueth out
of this rote of auaryce many bows which been much great deedly syn^e. The
first is usure. The second theft. The third raueyne. The.iiii. challenge. The
fyfthe sacrylege. The.vi. Symonye. The.vii. malygnytees. The: viii.
marchandyse. The.ix. in wicked crafts The.x. in evil and wicked plays / and
eueryche of these bows departs him in to many manners.

Of diverse manner and spyces of usure Ca..xxxv.
THe first bough of usure departs him in to.vii twigs. For there is one
manner of usurers lenynge openly which lene their monye for other money. And
above the catell they take and leueye their gain / or in money / or in horse /
or in whete or in wyn or in fruit of therthe / which they take in gain
without to rekene the fruytes in payement. And yet that werse is / they will
rekene two times in ye year or thryes for too areyse their vsures / and will
yet have bountees or rewards above for every term / and thus be they helped
above that they lene pryncypally. Such people ben usurers couched and
vylaynous. But there ben other manner usurers lenynge and curtoys which lene
their monye without making of any couenaunte. Nevertheless they entende to
have prouffyte and rewards therefore / in money or in catayll / or in gold or
in silver / or in yeftes or in presents / or in robes or in ton^es of wine or
in fat swyne or in seruyces. Or in labor of horses or of oxen or asses or of
carts or waynes. Or of prebendes for their children / or in other things /
and in all these and such things is usure / when it is lent for occasyon to
have sum prouffyte. This is the first manner of usure / that leneth his good
wyckedly and shrewdly.

The second. Ca. xxxvi
THe second manner of usure is in them that lent not the money in their own
person. But that which their faders or their moders / their wives / or their
husbondes / or their predecessors have gotten by usure they retain it / and
will not render it ne yield it a gain. The third manner of usure is in them
that daygne not ne will not lenne by their own hand / but they make their
servants and other people to lenne for the^ their money / tho ben the
masters usurers. Of these sins be not quyte the great and hye lords that
keep and sustain the Jews and lombardes of pyemou^t and other places / which
dystroye the contraye / and they take the rewards and great gifts and sometime
the raunsones or redempcyons / which ben the catayle and cheuyssaunce of the
poor people. The fourth manner is in them that lene other men's money / or
that borowe it with little cost. Such people ben dyscyples of usurers which
learn this foul and wicked stynkynge craft. The fyfthe manner is in
marchau^dyse / when any sells any manner thing what someuer be for more than
it is worth for ye abiding of the term than he would do for ready money and
that more is the untrue seller and wicked when he sees the people more at
great myschefe / then he shall sell his waare the more derer / ye twyes or
thtyes more than it is worth. Such manner people do over much harm. For /
for their long term they do destroy and appourysshe the knights and other
hye men the which follow the assembles / the wars and the tournoyes that
they deliver to them their lands and their herytages in gayge and wedde / and
so lyenge in gayge they deye and never quytte ne pay. The other synnen in
byenge the things as corn wyn or other things less ye half than it is worth
for the money that they pay tofore hand / and after they selle the same three
or four times more dear than the thing was sold and delyuerd to they^ fore.
Other merchants bye the things wha^ they be at no prys and good chepe / as
whete in harvest. wyn in the vynyerde or other marchandyse / for to selle ageyn
in the time when they shall be more dear. The other bye their whete in the
stalkys and erys and the wyn in the flourynge when they show fair forth / by
such couenaunte that they have their achate sauf and their mesure The.vi.
manner is of them that deliver their money to merchants in such wise that
they shall be fellows and part in the gain / and no thing in the loss. Or
that deliver their beestes to halues / so that they be as iron That is to say
that if they deye or perysshe he yt takes them to halues shall set and put
other beestys in their place / of so much and as great of valor and prys as
were-they that been deed or perysshed at his propre charge / and dyspence.
The.vii. manner is of them that put and set their next neighbors in their
work and labor / by cause that they have lent them gold or silver or corn
or has done to them any curtosye or frendshyp / and when they see them pour
and nedy / then^e make they with them bargaynes for their avail / and for the
money yt they deliver to the pour man / or for a lytyl corn that they selle
to him well dear and for more than it is worth in market. He will have of hy^
six penny worth work or labor for two pens. These ben ye bows that grow out
of the evil branch of usure.

Of theft. Ca. xxxvii
THe second branch of auaryce is theft / this is to take or retain other
men's thing wrongfully without knowelege or against the will of him that owes
it. And this sin may be done in four manners / after four manners of thieves
For there ben some thieves openly. Some covertly / some privily / and some
felawly The common and open thieves ben they that stele in such wise that there
is Justice done on them when they ben taken. And of them ben diverse manners / as
well on these as on the land. The covert thieves ben they that take away
secretly and covertly great things and small things by their barate /
treason / or by subtle wit and engynne. The preuy thieves ben they that take
awaey no thing from strangers / but of their neighbors / and known / and of
them ben both great and small as / the untrue receyuour / shryues / prouostes
/ exchetours / bayllyues / sergyauntes / and other such as takes the ame^des
/ and restrain the rentes to their lords / and acou^t much in costs and
dyspences and less receytes and re^tes. Thus done the great officers which
ben in the houses of the great lords and rich men that makes great coostes
and dyspences / and give largely the goods of their lords and masters
without their knowing and against their will. In this sin synneth the wife
the which causes by her sin that the child the which yt she knowerh right
well that she has had it of another man than of her propre husband /
enheryteth and has the heritage where as he has no right thereto. In this
sin also synneth the wife that takes away the goods of her husbonde / for
to dyspende and put it to evil usage. That other thief is the little thief
that takes away out of the hows the breed or wine and other things / or fro
their neighbor their capons or hennys / or ye fruit out of their gardyns or
other things Such ben they that reteyne ye things that they have founden and
known well to whom they belong / and therefore they should not reteyne them.
But they ought to do by the counceyll of holy church / or by the counceyl of
their confessor. The theuys ye ben fellows ben they that parts their theft
/ or by composycyon or by yefte or by achate or by other manner. Also they yt
consent to the theft / or counceylleth or that commands it to be done.
Also they that counceylle ye theuys or deffende them or sustain them in their
malice / or receive the^ in to their house or in to their land / or ye gadre
together the theft. Also the wicked Iustyses that suffer them for yeftes / or
by prayers or by any other evil reasons and will not ne dare not do Justice.

The third branch of the sin of Auaryce is rauyne as follows Ca..xxxviii.
THe third brau^che of auaryce is Rauyne which has many bows. The first is
an evil executour of testamentes. Such people rob them that been deed
which is over great an untruth The second is in wicked and evil lords /
be they knights or other lords or bourgeyses which ete and fle ye poor
people by tayllees / by aids Imposycyons amends or by other manner / which
seche and purchase that which may grieve their subgettis / and accomplysshe
their evil will / and they ought to keep and deffende them. In this sy^ne ben
ye great princes ye barons / which by their might taken away fro the poor
and other that they may subdue their castellys their rentes and their
baronnyes. And also other rich men that take away by strength fro their
propre neyghburs lands vygnes and other things. And taken on all sides so
that no thing may escape them The third ben robbours of evil hostryes or
Innes which rob the pilgrims and the merchants and other that pass and
walk by the country. The fourth is in them that will not pay yt they owe.
And that reteyne wrongfully and without cause the hyre or wages of their
servants or of them that do their work. The fyfthe is in these great
prelates that pylle their subgettes / and that raunson them by over great
procuracions / or by other exactions and extorcions that they do in many
manners. These ben the wulues that destroy the sheep yt they should keep. The
syxte theft is in bayllyes Shyreues bedellys sergeau^tes and other offycyers /
which do the great rauyne and extorcions upon the poor people and bye the
great herytages / and so much there is of other manner of rauyne which should
be ouerlonge to reherce here. But ye most great part is contained in the
thing above said.

Of the sin of challenge Ca..xxxix.
THe fourth of Auaryce is challenge / that is to run on another wrongfully. To
this sin aperteyneth all barate trycherye and falsnesse that happeth in
plees. In ye clargye has dame auaryce many scolers and in especyall seven
manner of people that study therein.

Of.vii. manners of the sin of challenge. Ca. xl.
THe first ben the false pledours that make the false partycyons and demaundes
/ and seche false Iuges / and the false witnesses / and the false advocates And
false letters for to trouble other / and travail the people wrongfully in the
spyrytuell court / or in the te^porall court. The second ben they that put
away and set at naught that is right. And seeks barates and delays for too
take away from other their chyuaunce. The third ben the false and untrue
witnesses. For they make the false and unright maryages and weddy^ges. They
take away the herytages. They do so much harm and domages that none may
amend it / and all this they do for their great couetyse. The fourth ben the
false advocates that sustain the evil causes all wetynge / and empesshe and
let the good people / for the hyre and the gifts that they take on both
sides. And they make often the good causes to be lost / and the quarelles of
good men and makes of right wrong / and of wrong right by their wyckednes
and couetyse like as they that been masters of the barate and of ye treachery.
The fyfth ben the false notaryes that make false letters and Instruments / and
falseth the seals / and makes false lybelles and many other vntrouthes.
The.vi. theft done the false and untrue Iuges which entende and ben more
favorable against reason more to one party / than to an other / for gifts for
promysses for propryetces or for love / or for hate / or for dread / or for
favor / if that they delay the causes and ye quarylles wrongfully and make
men to do great costs and dyspences / and taken great yeftes and sometime of
both parties / and sellen Justice / or they leave to do Justice / and done to
poor people so great domages and hurt that they may not ne can not amend ne
repair. The.vii. ben the evil accessours which given evil counceylle to
Iuges / and causen that the causes and quarellys be lost by the offices and
seruyces that they have. All these persons tofore said ben bounden and holden
to render and yield again all ye which they have thus had and taken evil of
other and also all the costs and domages that the other have had and suffered
for them.

The.v. branch of auaryce is sacrylege Ca..xli.
THe fyfth branch of Auaryce is sacrylege / wha^ one breketh or hurts or
treats vylaynously ye holy and blessed things or the persons of holy
church or else the holy places / which been appropred or longing to the
service of god / and this does the sin of couetyse in many manners. First
when one treats vylaynsly ye body of our lord / like as done the heretykes
the Sorciers or wytches / and the wicked priests for winning / in like wise
say I of the other sacraments Also wha^ one breketh takes away or treats
vylaynsly the sayntuaryes / the crosses / the chalyces / the cresme the
corporalles / yt hallowed vestymentes and other things mysteryes of the
church. Also when one brenneth and destroys chirches / or holy places / or
chirchyerdes or howses of relygyon / or when any draw out them ye be^ fled
for refuge or socour in to monasteryes or chyrcheyardes for their suerte or
warraunt. Also when ye one makes medles or battle in the church so that
blood be shed / or when the sin of lechery is done therein Also when hand
is laid in wrath and evil on priest or clerk or on any man or woman of
relygion. Also wha^ one bears away by evil reason out of holy place any
thing blyssed and hallowed / or unhallowed what someuer it be. Of this sin be
not quyte they that the gods of holy church the patrymonye of Ihesu christ
dyspendeth in evil usage. Ne they that reteyne it by auaryce / When they ought
to give it to the poor people in holy church or put it in good usage. Ne they
also that take a way or retain with wrong or with force / the things which
are longing to ye poor in holy church / or who that pays them evil / like
as the rentes / the offringes the dysmes and the other ryghtes and duties of
holy church. Of this same sin be not quyte they that break ye sunday and
other feestes commanded. For the holy days have their fraunchyses like as
have the holy places These ben the bows the which grow out of the brau^che
of sacrylege.

Of ye sin of symony. Ca. xlii
THe syxte branch of auaryce is Symony. Symony has taken the name of an
enchauntoure the which was named Simon / ye which would have boughte of saint
Peter the appostle the grace for to do miracles. And therefore he offered to him
great hauoyce and good. And therefore ben they called Symonyakes all they that
will selle or bye any things spyrytuell which is emonge all deedly sins one
of the grettest and this branch has many bows.

Of the first boughe of Symonye Ca..xliii.
THe first is in them that selle or bye the things hallowed / or blessed or
the body of our lord or other sacraments of holy church. The second is in
them that selle the word of god / and preche pryncypally for money. The
third is the sin of them / which by yeftes or by promysses / or by prayers
of friends do so much that sum be promoted to dygnyte of holy church /
like as ben bishops Abbotes Deene archedeken or or other which ben made by
electyon. The fourth is ye sin of them that for yeftes or for promysses for
prayers or by force of arms / or for seruyses dyshonest give the prebendes the
cures or other benefyces of holy church. The.v. is the sin of them which
by couenau^te made enter in to relygyon / and in them that in such manner
receive them. There ben many other dyuersy^nes in symonye / but it apparteyneth
more to clerks tha^ to lay men and this book was more made for the lay men
than for the clerkys which know and have the books / yet nevertheless it is
necessary and need to lay men that they keep them fro this sin in.iii.
causes. One is when they will aid and help their kynnesmen and their friends
too rise unto dygnytees of holy church. The other is when they give the
prebendes that been of their yefte / and the benefyces. The third is when they
set and put their children in to relygyon / in these three points if they
give or receive yeftes or prayers not leesfull or evil seruyse / they may
soon fall in too this sin of Symony. For like as says the law wryton.
There be three manner of gifts of symony. Gifts of the hand / like as gold /
or silver / or other Jewel / Gifts of the mouth / as ben prayers. Gifts of
service dyshonest. I call gifts dyshonest where the sin is done pryncypally
for things spyrytuall.

Of the sin of malygnyte which comes of auaryce. Ca. xliiii.
THe seventh branch of Auaryce is malygnyte. When a man is so wicked that he
fereth not to do a great sin / deedly and horrible / or to do great harm to
other for little conquest of prouffyte for him self This branch has many
bows. The first is wha^ any person for dread of pouerte or for couetyse of
winning he rynyeth and forsakes god or for to deny the christian faith / and
becomes heretyke or Jew / or sarasyn. To this sin appertains the sin of
them that for money does call the deuylles and make the enchauntements and
makes to look in the sword of crystal / or in the vngle or nail of the
finger / for to attain and fy^de the theft or other things lost. And of them
also that pourchase the charms by sorcerye or by other wicked craft what
soever it be when persons ben in marriage hate each other and may not dele ne
have company one with an other by marriage. Or persons that be not in marriage
hate each other by sin folyly. The second is the sin of cursynge / or by
evil saying / by treason or by detraccyon / when a mam for winning or for hyre
does thing / for which any person is put unto death / or by sword / or by
venym / or by any other manner. The.iii. sin is of them that for to win /
brenne howses / or tounes / castelles or chyrches / or dystroy the vynes or
corns / and do other diverse great domages. The.iiii. is the sin of them
that often pourchace the plees / debates / and the wars in cytees or in
castelles in chapytres / or among other hye and great men because that they
wene too get and win more in war than in the peace. The fyfthe is the sin
of bayllyes and such officers that accuse and challenge the poor people and
make the^ to be raunsoned and tourmented for a little gain that they have
thereof. To this sin appertains the sin of false Iuges / of false men of
law / and advocates / and of false questes and witnesses of which we have
spoken tofore / and in many other manners is the sin of malygnyte. But it were
ouerlonge for too write it here. And better may each man read and consider his
sins and many other in his conscience than in the skin of a sheep or in
paper.

Of marchaundyse. Ca. xlv
THe.viii. branch of auaryce is marchandyse / wherein men sin in many manners
/ for tempo goods / and specially in seven manners. The first manner is to sell
as dear as he may. The second is to lie / swear / and forswere the more for
to selle his marchau^dyse. The third is the deceyte and fraud yt is done in
the weight and in the mesure / and this may be done in three manners. The first
is when a person has diverse weyghtes and diverse mesures / and byeth by a more
greter weight / and le^ger mesure and sells by a less. The second is when
one has a true weight and a true mesure and wayeth or meteth untruly and
falsely as ye tauerner which fylleth his mesure with scum and foam / the.iii.
manner is when they that selle by weight / pourchace and do so much by deceyte
and fraud / that the ylke thing that is weyed seems to be more of weyghte
tha^ it is. The fourth manner for too sin in marchaundyse is to selle the
derrer for the term / hereof we have spoken tofore. The fyfthe is to selle
otherwise than yt mustre is and worse / like as these scryueners and wrytars
done that at the beginning show and write good letter / and after make werse
and shende all. The.vi. is in hydynge and concelynge the truth of the thing
that is sold / and so do these brokers and coorsers of horse. The seventh is to
make and pourchace that the ware or thing that is sold seem much better than
it is / like as done the merciers and drapers that chesen and make the places
derke where as they selle their clothe and ware. And in many other manners may
men sin in marchandyse but it should be ouerlonge to say here.

The nynthe branch of auaryce Ca..lxiii.
THe.ix branch of auaryce is in many mysteres or crafts. In this synneth
much people and in many manners like as done these commyn women / which for
little winning abandone and give them self al to sin. Also these hazardours /
bawdes kepars of forboden games and many other which for temporell prouffyte
abandone them too dyshoneste and unthrifty crafts / which may not be done
without sin as well of them that do it as they that sustain it. The.x.
branch of auaryce is in evil plays and games / as the dyse at cards tables
or what someuer games that men play at for money or for gain temporelle. Such
manner plays in especyall of dyse and tables ben deffended and for boden by the
decrees and law for many perils that comen thereof. The first is couetyse /
ye second over great usure as.xii. for.vi. and not at a month or three days /
The third sin to multeplye lesynges and vain words / and that werse is
great blasphemies of god and of his saints. The anger and wrath that oftymes
has be taken too correct and chastyse the other. For sometime their vysage
has be turned bacward and behind. Sometime so^me have lost their eyes. Sum
their speech. There was a knight that swear by the eyes of god / and anon the
eyes of his heed sprange out and fill upon the eschequer. There was also an
archer by cause he had all lost at play / in despyte he drew his bow and
shot up toward god on hye / and on the morn when he was set again at his
play / the arowe fill down upon the eschequyer all blody of blood and threste
out his eyes. The fourth is evil example yt they which play given to other
that behold the play. The fyfthe is to lose the time which ought too be
employed in good werkys and many other wise. One thing ought not to be
forgeten / that is that he that wynneth at such games may not / ne ought not
in any manner to reteyne his gain / but he ought to give it all for gods
sake / but if it were in such manner yt he played for another / or by deceyte
or by force like as does he that makes another to play with him by force. In
this manner he ought to render it to him that has lost. In like wise I say
of yt which is won at tournoys. These been ye branches of auaryce / there
be^ enough of other but they appertain more to clarkys than to lay men / and
this book is made more for ye lay men than for clerkys that know ye
scryptures One thing ought ye too know that the auarycious man has a devil
to whom he serves / which is called in the gospel ma^mona / and that devil
makes to his servant syx commandments The first is to keep well that he
has / the second that in no wise he mynysshe it. The third is yt he encreace
it always be it day or night / the fourth that he give no thing ne do
alms for gods sake / ne curtosye to any other. The fyfthe that he ne lene
ne give to the poor and nedy any thing / ne put not in peril and Ieoparde
that which he has in his possessyon. The.vi. yt he refrain him self and
restrain his meyne fro mete and drink for to spare his good

Of the sin of lecherye which is love dysordynatly.xlvii.


THe.vi. heed of the beast of hell is lecherye / the which is outragyous love
and dysordynate in flesshely delytes. Of this sin the devil deceyueth a man
in.vi. manners. Like as says saint Gregory First in folysshe and false
beholdynges. After in folysshe and leude talkynges and words. After in false
touchynges. After in false kyssynges. After comes the deed. For fro folysshe
beholdynge comynycaco^n comes and speech / and fro speech to touchy^ge / and
fro touching to kissing / and fro kissing to the deed. Thus subtylly
brings the devil that one to ye other. First this sin is divided in two
manners. For there is lechery of heart / and lecherye of body. Lecherye of heart
has four degrees. For the spyryte of fornycacyon which is the fire of
lechery enbraceth the heart / and makes first to come the thoughts / the
fygures and the Imagynacyon of sin in the heart / and in consentynges / after
the heart delyteth him in folysshe thoughts / and yet he delyteth how well
that yet he will not do the deed / and in his thought he abides / and this
delight is the second degree / which may be a deedly sin / so great may the
delight be. The third degree is the consenty^ge of the heart of reason and of
will / and these consentynges concluded ben deedly sin in caas yt the deed by
dedly sin after the consenting comes ye desyere / and great brennynge of
the flesh that they have to this sin / and do ne many sins in the day in
seeing the ladies and the damoyselles rychely and fresshely apparayled / which
often dysguyse and array them proudly for to make the foles and musardes to
muse and behold them and certes they sin much grievously / for by their
coueytyse / by their pride and by their cause peryssheth many souls / and
much people put to death and to sin. For thus as says the proverb / dame
dator is the arblast to the tour. For she has not a membre in her body but it
is a grynne of the devil. As salamon says / whereof must be given acomptes at
the day of Judgment of the souls which by thoccasyon and cause of them be
dampened. That is to understand when they by occasyon and cause other to sin
by their entysynge and labor. Lecherye of ye body is departed in to the
lecherye of the eyes of ye eerys of the mouth / of the hands / and of all the
five wits of the body / and in especyall of ye vylaynnous deed and work. To
this sin apperteyneth all ye things of the flesh / that moeuen and desire
to do this sin. As done these oultrages and the excess of mete and drink /
of sweet beds and soft / of delycyous robes and in all manner of excess of
body without necessyte.

Of diverse estates of ye sin of lecherye. Ca. xlviii.
THe sin of lecherye has many estates and is departed in many branches
after the estate of the persons that done it. And it goes mountynge fro
degree to degree / and fro evil in to werse. The first is of syngle man and
syngle woman that holden no bond of vow / ne of marriage / ne of order ne of
relygyon / ne of other thing. This is the first sin of lechery. The second
sin is of common wymmen / and this is more foul and more abhomynable. For by
cause such wymmen ben sometime married and have left their husbondes / or
sometime ben of relygyon / and refuse no man ne brother ne cosyn ne kynne ne
other. The third sin is of ye man syngle with a wydowe / or the reuers. That
is a wydower with a syngle woman. The fourth too defoule a vyrgyn. The fyfth is
with a wedded woman. This is ye sin of aduoutrye which is much grievous. For
there is brekynnge of feyth yt the one ought to keep to another After there is
sacrylege when ye sacrament of marriage is broken / and hereof happeth sometime
dysherytaunce and falls marriage. This sin doubleth him sometime when it is of a
wedded man to a woman married to another man. The.vi. sin is when a man uses
his wife in thing deffended and dysordeyned ageyn nature and order of marriage.
A man may sle hy^ self with his own sword So a man may sy^ne deedly with his
own wife. For this cause god smote Onam the neuew of Jacob with an evil death /
and the devil which was named asmodeus strangled the seven husbondes of ye
holy damoysell Sara which after was wife to young thobye. For all ye
sacraments of holy church ought to be treated clenly and holyly / and to
hold and keep them in great reverence The.vii. sin of lecherye is too have
flesshly company with his godsyb / or goddoughter / ne with the children of
them / for such persons may not assemble without sin / ne also by
marriage. The.viii. is of man with his kynneswoman / and this sin encreaceth /
and dyscreaseth after that the kynne is nyghe or far. The: ix. is of a man
with the kynne of his wife / or the reuerse / the wife with ye kynne of her
husbonde / this sin is much peryllous. For when the man has had company
with such a woman / he may not after have his marriage of the cosyns of his
wife. And if he take her the marriage is none after the law / and if he take a
wife after her cosyn / he loses the right that he has too his own wife / in so
much that he may not ne ought not to dwell with her / if she require it not
tofore. The.x. of a woman to a clerk. This sin aryseth and aualeth much
after thorder and after the dygnytees ordered. The.xi. is of a man of yt world
/ with a woman of relygyon / or the reuerse / a woman of the world with a man
of relygyon / and this sin increases and dyscreaseth after thestate of the
persons that done it. The.xii. is of the prelates / which ought to be form
and ensample of clennes / of chastyte and of holy life to all the world. The
last is most foul and so abhomynable that it ought not be named. This sin
is against nature / which the devil entyseth and shows a man in many manners
which ben not to be named for the matter / which is ouermoche abhomynable. But
in confession it ought to be said / if it be he or she to whom it has happed.
For of so much as the sin is more great and more horrible / of so much
avails the more the confession. For the great shame that a man has to to
say his sin / is a great part of the penance / after holy scripture. This
sin dyspleaseth so much unto god / that he did do rain fire brennynge and
stynkynge sulphre upon Sodom and Gomor / and did do synke for this sin five
cytees down to hell. The devil him self that purchased this sin / has shame
and abhorred it when it is done.

Of the sin of glotonye. Ca. xlix.


THe seventh heed of the beast of hell is ye sin of ye mouth / otherwise
called glotonnye which has two offices / of which that one apperteyneth to
the taste / as to ete and drink and that other is in speaking. Therefore this
vice and this sin is divided in two parties pryncypally / that is to wit in
the sin of glotonye / which is in etynge and drinking / and in the sin of
the shrewde tongue / that is in foul and folysshe speaking. and first we shall
say of the sin of glotonye / which is a vice that much pleases the devil
/ and dyspleaseth to god. By this sin has the devil great power in man
whereof we read in the gospel that god gaf license to deuylles for to enter in
to swyn / and wha^ they were entered they drowned them in the sea. This
sygnefyeth that the glotons that led the life of hogs and of swyn the deuyls
have leave to enter in to them and to drown them in ye see of hell. And
makes them to ete so much that they breast / and drink so much that they be
drowned. when ye champyon has overthrown his fellow he holds hy^ by the
gorge / by cause he should not relyeue. Right so is it of him that the devil
holds by his sin in his mete the devil renneth to his gorge like as the
wolf does to the sheep for to stra^gle him / like as he did to Adam and Eve
in paradyce terrester. This is the fyssher of hell which takes the fysshes
with the grynnes by the throat. This vice dyspleaseth much. For the gloton
does to him great shame when he makes his god of a sack full of donge. This
is ye belly which he loves more than god and douteth and serves it. God
commands yt he should fast. The belly says nay / thou shall not / but you
shalt ete long and take it by layser. Also god commands to rise erly. His
god his belly says thou shall not. I am over full me list to sleep. The church
is none hare / she will not fle away / and it is not yet open. It shall well
abide and tarry for me. And when the gloton aryseth he begins his matyns and
his prayers and says. O god what shall we ete this day / shall we not find
that is any thing worth. After these matyns comes the lawdes and says. A
lord how well drank we yester even the good wine / and how good mete ete we.
Then after this be wepeth the gloton his sins and says. Alas says he I
wend well this night to have dyed / the wine yester even was over strong /
mine heed aketh. I shall not be eased till I have dronken. This god of the womb
of glotonye is over evil. For first he becomes a tauerner goer / and
frequenteth tauernes / after he plays at the dyse / and after he sells his
good away / after he becomes a rybaude / an holyer and letchour / and at the
last he hangs on the galowes. This is the salary and scotte that is often
paid for the sin of glotonye. This sin is departed after saint Gregory in
to.v. branches For there is sin in five manners in etynge and drynky^ge and
therefore some drink tofore time / or without reason or mesure / or over
ardauntly or over plentyuously or over curyously. Then the branch of this
sin is to eete tofore time. Over much to ete is a foul thing to a man yt
has aege and dyscrecyon when he may not abide a due hour for to ete and
drink. By great excess of glotony it happeth often that a man that is hole and
strong of bo drynketh and eteth without cause reasonable tofore time ordained
/ and that he comes to the meet as does a dombe be. And much sy^ne and
maladyes bodily happen often by ye customs / and thereof it comes that this
gloton says that he may not fast ne do penance. For he says he has an
evil heed and an evil heart also. And certainly he says truth / and for to
break the fasting days and vygylles commanded is right a great sy^ne For he
dampneth him self / and also will have company with him / and withdraws and
lets them to do well. And ledeth them unto hell. For he makes them to
break their fastes / and to do glotony / which they would keep if it were not
the evil company and felaushyp. For these glotons and these lechoures among
all other euylles that they do / done a sin that is proprely ye craft of the
devil / that is when they let and withdraw all them that they may fro well
doing / and mock and scorn all them that love to do well. These glotons say
that they may not fast / but they lain falsely. For little love of god causes
them to say so. For if they loved as much the very glory of heaven as they do
the vain glory of the world. For like as they fast for their worldy
occupacyon and temporal goods often unto the night as well might they fast
unto noone for the love of god if that they loved him. And if that they did
desired their salvation. But they be like unto the child that all day will
have breed in his hand. And truth it is ye like as one synneth by etynge and
drinking over erly Right so one synneth by over late souper. These people that
so much love to wake by night and wast the time in ydlenes / and go late to
bed / and arise late synneth in many manners. First in this that they waste
and lose the time and torn it / when they make of the night ye day and of
they day the night. God curses such people by the prophet. For men ought on
ye day to do good and occupye him in good and holy works. And in the night to
praise god / and to pray him devoutly / and to yield hy^ thanky^ges of his
gifts. But they that then lie in their beds when they should be up and risen
must needs sleep when they should pray to god and worship him / and here the
service of our lord / and thus lose all the time / and the day and the night.
Also in these great wakynges ben commysed many sins / as play at ye chesse at
tables and at ye dyse / and is there spoken many folysshe words and corrupt /
of which many sins follow and ensyewe. And also ye caytyues waste their
bodies their time / their soul / their wit / and their good. The.ii.
branch of glotony is to ete and drink outragyously and without mesure. These
that so done ben like unto a gulf that swaloweth all / in like wise as an
abysme. It is over great wisdom to keep mesure in etynge and drinking. Also
it is great health for much people dye often tofore their time by outragyous
etynge / and drinking / and by such excesses and such outrages comen and
sourdeth many maladyes and sekenesses. But he ye will know and take this
mesure / he ought to know yt there be many manners for to live in the world.
Some lives after the flesh and after the eases of the body. Some after their
Iolyte. Other after their Ypocrysye Other after physyke. Other after their
honest. Other after that their sin requires. Other after their spyryte /
and after the love of god. They that live after ye flesh as saint Poule says
sleeth their souls / for they make of their belly their god. They retain
neither reason ne mesure / and therefore they shall have in that other world
pain and tourment without mesure. They yt live after their Iolyte will hold
company with foles / such folk can not / may not / ne will not hold ne keep
measure ne reason. They that live after Ypocrysye ben they that been marters to
the devil. Such Ypocrytes have two mesures. For the ii deuylles that
tourmenteth thypocryte ben much contrary that one to that other / ye one says
ete enough that thou may be fair and fat The other says thou shalt not /
but thou shalt fast so that thou be pale and lene / to the end that the world
hold the for a good man. And that it may appear that thou do much
penance. Now it behooves that ye Ypocryte have two mesures / one little and
another great / of ye which they use the little mesure tofore the people / and
ye great mesure they use so that no man sees them / they retain not the true
mesure that been auarycyous. In such manner as the mouth will / which is lady
of the house / and commaundour. Then between the belly and ye mouth of the
gloton ben three dysputacyons. The belly says I would be full / the mouth says
I will not be full the belly says to hy^ I will that thou ete and take enough
and dyspende largely. The mouth says I shall not. I will that you restrain
the. And what shall the sorry caytyf do which is servant to his two evil
lords. Two mesures maken the peace. The mesure of the belly in an other man's
house good and large / and the mesure of his mouth in his own house soroufull
and ouerscars. They that lyuen after physyke kepen the mesure of ypocras /
which is little and streyte / and it happeth often that he ye lives by physyke
deyeth. They that lyuen after honest they keep and hold the mesure of rayson
/ and lyuen honorably in the world. For they eren in time and hour. And
taken in gree and at worth that which they have curioyslye clenly and gladlye.
They that live after that their sin requires keep such mesure as is charged
to them in penance. They that live after the spyryte ben they that for the
love of god rule and govern them self like as the holy ghost ensygneth and
techeth them to hold and keep mesure reason and order They have the lordshyp
and seygnorye over their body which is so dysciplyned and endoctryned by
penance and so well cha^^ysed that he demands none ou^trage and does that
which the spyryte commands and without contradyction. Now may thou see
by that which we have here said that the devil has many engynes for to take
ye people by their throtes and by their ^^tony. For first he shows to them
the wynes and ye (...) which ben fair and delyeyouses / like as he did to Eve
the apple / and if it be not worth he says to hy^ (...) and drink like as
did such one / thou must needs (...) company will thou that men mock and
scorn (...) will thou ben holden a popelarde. Or he says (...) you must nedys
keep ye health of thy body / who has (...) has no thing. Be not an homycyde
of thy self. Thou owe to thy body his sustenau^ce. Or he says to (...)
otherwise Behold and consydere ye good that you dooste / and what you may do.
Thou etest not for the delytes of the body / but for to serve god Thou ought
to keep thy strength to god like as dauyd the prophet says Of these reasons
abouesayd be sometime attained and deceived the most wise men. The third
brau^che of this vice is to run and take over gredely the mete / like as ye
dog does the carayne / and how much greter is the gredenes so much greter
is the sin. For like as it is not sin to have ye rychesses Justly gotten and
truly but not over much to love the^ / ne to use them evil / right so it is
not sy^ne to ete But yt it be not over gredely ne over disordynatly. All manner
metes ben good unto good people to them yt by reason / and by measure uses
them without any excess and without outrage / and always we ought too praise
god and render thankynges to god of his goodness and of his gifts / and by the
swetenes of ye meet we ought to think on the swetnes of god / and of that
celestyall / and sweet mete of glory pardurable which fylleth and
accomplyssheth the desire of ye heart. Therefore men read in houses of relygyon
at mete by cause yt when the body takes his refeccyon on yt one part / yt the
soul should take his spyrytuall mete and refeccyon on that other part.
The.iiii. branch of this sin of glotony is of them ye over nobly will ete
and drink / and which dyspende and waste that whereof an.C. poor men might be
well fed. Such people sy^ne dyuersly. First in great despences yt they make
After in yt / yt they use over great gredynes and delight than vain glory yt
they have. But this is not only thexces of ye throat / but it is for pride /
and for ye praysynge of ye world yt they seek so dear metes and multyply so
many meases whereof often times grow many sy^nes. The.v. brau^che of glotony is
the curyosyte of glotons / yt think on none other thing but for to delight
them in metes / they ben proprelye lycherous which seche not sauf only ye
delytes of their throat and mouth. In.iii. things namely lies ye sin of
such people. First in ye great charge that they have in pourchasynge and in
arayenge their metes. After in the glory and in the great playsyr that they
have in seeing and beholdynge them / and that they may recounte what dylygence
they put to that / that the metes ben well arrayed / and that eueryche have his
right and propre sauce / and how they may of one thing make diverse messes
dysguysed for the delycyousnesse of the mouth / and when the messys or the
metes comen in one after another / then be said the bourdes for entremesses
and thus goes the time / and the caytyss forgete them self and reason slepeth
and thinks no thing of the death / ne on ye sins that they do / their
stomach cries and says. Dame throat ye slay me. I am so full that I am like
to break. Then the lychorous tongue answers though you sholdest to breast I
shall not suffer this lycorous mete escape me / after the lycorousnes of meet
comes vaynglorye yt is to remember it. Then desire and wysshe they yt they
had as long a neck as a crane / and as great a belly as a cow that they might
yet devour and swalowe more mete. Now have thou herd the sins that comen of
glotonye and of lycourousnesse / and by cause that these sins sourden and
comen often in the tavern which is fou^tayne of sin. Therefore I will a
little touch the sins that been made and done in ye tavern The tavern is
the scole of ye devil where as his dyscyples study / and his propre chapel
where as his service is done / and that is the place where he shows and does
his miracles both day and night / such as appertey-come to show his virtues
and to make his miracles like as ye may se in many places / the blind for to
se / the lame and crooked to be redressed / to mad men their wit to dombe men
speech / and to deefe men their herynge. But the devil in the tavern does
all the contrary / for ye tavern is his chapel / as is aforesaid where men
does to him service / for when the man gooth to ye tavern he gooth all right /
and when he retorneth he has neither foot ne hand / by which he may himself
bear ne sustain. And when he gooth thither he speaks well / hereth and
understands / and when he retorneth he has lost all this / like as he that
has neither wit ne reason ne memory in him self. Such ben the miracles
that the devil makes in the tavern / and what lesson is said in ye tavern I
shall say to you. There is read / learned / herd and seen all fylthe and
ordure of sin / that is to wete / glotonye / lechery / swerynge / forswerynge
/ lyenge / myssaynge / renyenge god and his saynces / mysherkenynge / brawling
and many other sy^nes. Then sourdeth and comes stryues / homycydes / or
manslaughter / there is learned to steel / and to hang / the tavern is a
fosse and pytte of thieves / and also it is the fortress of the devil for to
war against god and his saints / and the tauerner that sustayneth such
people dyshordonate ben parteyners of all their sins that they do in their
tauernes / And certain if a person said as much shame to his own fader or
to his mother / or to his knave / as such manner people do to their fader of
heaven and to our lady and to the saints they should be much angrye / and
find and set other remedy than god does.

Of the sins of ye tongue. Ca. l.
WHo that will know and think of the sins of the tongue / him byhoueth to
think and acounte to think what ye tongue is and fro whens she comes and
what harm and evil she does. For it happeth that sometime ye word is sin
in him self / by cause it is evil and happeth by cause that it is sin / men
sin for as much yt she yssueth and comes of an evil heart. And also it
happeth that the word is great sin by cause it does evil / how well that
it be fair and well polysshed Now thou ought to know that the evil tongue
is the tree that god curses in ye gospel / by cause he found thereon no
thing but leeuys. By ye leeuys ben vnderstonden in holy scripture words. And
like as it should be a thing dyffycile and herd to nombre the leeuys of
trees. Right so it is Impossyble to compte and nombre the sins that grown of
the tongue. But we shall set and put ten chyef branches which grown out of
this tree. And these.x. branches may thus be named / ydlenes / auauntynge /
losange rye / detraction / lies or lesynges. Forswerynges / contencyons murmr
/ rebellyon and blasphemye.

Of the sin that been in idle words Ca..li.
THey that abando^ne them to idle words geten great dommage and great peril
/ which they apperceyue not And also they lose ye time which they may never
recouere. And lose also the good deeds that they should and might do unto their
own salute and health And lesen the joy of heaven / and ye tresour of their
heart and replenysshe it of vanyte and of sins: They discover the pot and
the flies enter therein. They call them idle words / but they ben not. For
they ben much costyous damageous and peryllous as they that avoid fro the
heart al goodness / and replenysshe it whith vanyte. For they shall render
reason and yield acompt of them too god straytly at the day of Judgment / like
as god says in ye gospel. This is not then a little thing ne little ydlenes
/ when it byhoueth to yield reason and accomptes at the day of dome unto a
little thought / and in so hye a court as is tofore god and all his saints. In
this idle words men synneth in six manners. There ben some vain words of
which some tongues be so full that so much speak a fore and after that they
be like ye clyket and ye clappe of a mylle which may never rest and also
sum words ben so curyous of them that gladly heren tidings told / that
they often set their heart to the desease of them that here them / so that the
recounters ben often holden for fools and liars. After comen the rehersayll and
the fair words / wherein is much vaynglorye / in them that can subtylly
show and say them for to make the herars to laughe / after been the truffes
bourdes and lies full of fylthe of ordure and of sin which been called idle
words / but they be not / for they be peryllous and greuable. After ben Iapes
/ the esbatemens and plays not lefull / yt say sometime upon good men and upon
them that would feign do well / by cause that they might withdraw fro their
heart ye goodness that they have conceived and purpose to do. These be not idle
words / for thou art like an homycyde if you withdraw by they tongue a man or
a woman or a child fro doing well or fro doing a good deed. And god shall
conne the as good thank / as the king should do too the / if yt thou
haddeste slain or mordred his own sone or stolen away his treasoure.

Of the sin of auauntaunce. Ca. lii.
AFter comes the sin of auauntaynge which is much great / much foul /
falfe / and much vylanous / it is much great. For the that auaunteth himself
is much hateful to god for he takes away his glory and also his Joy. Also
as we have said tofore / this is a much false sy^ne / for his goods of which
he might get heaven he gives for a little wind / and so it is a much foul
sin. For all the world holds him for a fool / for a vylayne / and for nyce
/ and this branch has.v. leaves. There be v. manners of vau^tours. That one is
of time past. This is the sin of them that so gladly remember their works
and their prowesses / and that which they wene to have done well / or said
well. That other is of time present / that is the sin of them that no thing
do gladly ne pain them to do well / ne to say well when they ben not seen ne
herd. They in doing or in saying / or in singing auaunt them self and sell
for naught all that they have done. To this man appertains the sy^ne of them
that so auaunt and boost them of the good that they have / or of that which
thy wene to have of their noblesse or of their richesse. They ben like to the
Cuckowe / that can not sing but of him self. The third is of them that been
surquydrous and that think and say in themself. I shall avenge me hereof. I
shall make hills and valayes. The fourth is more subtle / that is of them yt
dare not praise themself for shame. But all that ever ye other does and say
they blame and despise like as no were worth / but that which they can do or
say The fyfthe is yet more subtle / that is of them yt will when that men
preyse them / and they dare not say it openly they make it all contrary and
make them self humble and say that they be no thing worth and sinners three
times wers tha^ they be / by cause they would be preysed and for that men
should hold them for well humble and meke. Alas says Saint Bernarde yt this
is a sorouful auauntynge. They make them self deuylles by cause they should be
reputed for au^gellys / and feign themself to be evil / to the end that men
should repute them for good. But certeynly a man should not more anger them
than to say ye say truth To this apperteyneth the sin that seeks the
advocates for to preyse them / and to cry their oublyes / by whose mouth they
speak more hardely.

Of evil saying of other. Ca. liii.
THe losangers ben nouryces of the devil that give souke to the children and
make them sleep in their sins by their fair singing. They enoynte the way
of hell with the honey of flaterye by cause that the sinners should go it the
more hardely. This sin is departed in to five parties that been like as five
leaves on this branch. The first is of these flaterers / ye when they see that
he or they / that they see dyspose them too say well or to do well / anon
they show and tell it to him / by cause that he should have thereof vain
glory / But his defautes they shall never say ne tell him. The second sin
is that the little good that the children do they double it. That is to say /
that them yt they praise and feed by slatery / they increase it and double it /
and adioust thereto so much yt it is more lesynge than troth and therefore ben
they called false wytnes in holy scripture. The third sin is when they make
a man or a woman to understand that he has in hy^ many good virtues and much
grace / where as he has none. And therefore holy scripture calls such
flaterers enchauntours for they enchaunte so much the man or woman / yt they
believe the^ better than them self and yt they believe better yt they here than
ye which they se / and that they say to them better that they know and feel
The.iiii. sin is when they sing always the placebo of flatery. That is to
say my lord or my lady ye say truth / my lord does well and tourneth all
thing by flaterye what someuer he does or says be it good or evil / and
therefore ben they called Ecko. That is the soune that redoundeth in hye
mountains and wodes and accords always to that which is cried and said / be
it true be it false. The fyfth ben the flaterers that defends excuses and
cover the vices and the sins of them that will flater and praise / and
therefore ben they called in writing tails / for they cover the ordures and
sins of the rich men for some te^porall good / and therefore ben they lykened
in scripture to the tail of a fox / for their flatery barate and treachery.

Of losangery and flatery.
THe losengyers and myssayers ben of one scole. These ben ye.ii. seraynes other
wise called mermaydens / of which we find in ye book of ye nature of bestes /
which is a monster of these which is called serayns / which has ye body of
a woman the taylle of a fysshe / and vngles or claws of an egle / and they
lynge so swetely that they make the maronners to sleep / and after they devour
them. These ben ye losengyers and flaterers which by their fair speech make
men to sleep in their sins. There ben sum serpents which have the name of
serayns / that run more swyftely tha^ a^^hors / and sometime they flee / and
their venym is so strong that tryacle may not avail against it. For sooner
comes the death tha^ the bytynge of ye serpentis sel^^ These ben the myssaryers
of whom Salamon says / that they byte in trayson like a serpent / with this
been slain three at ones. That is he that says it / he (...) it / and he of
whom is myssayd. This is the right cruel be that is called hate / which
fynyssheth destroys / and brings out of the earth the bodies of the deed men
and eteth them. These ben they that byte and ere the goodmen of relygyon yt
ben in the world. Such manner people ben more cruel than is hell which
deuoureth the wicked / but these people run upon ye good and beuoureth them.
Such manner people resemblen these ^e / which when she has pigs gladly will
byte a man clad with whyt clothes. They ben like the huppe which makes his
nest in the ordure of a man and there testeth him / and like the dorre or waspe
that flee ye floutes / and louen dunge and ordure and this branch has five
leaves. The first is when they contryue the lesynges and evil for to hurt
blame and defame other. The second is when they have herd the blame and harm
they say it forth and report it too the people and adiust an^re of them self
therein. The third is when they quench and set at naught all the good
deeds the which that a man has done / and make it to be holden for evil They
ete the man al hole / ye other ete it not all. But they byte him and bear away
a pyece. This is the fourth leef of this branch / which is proprely called
detraccyon. For he always withdraws and cutteth of a pyece of good that he
hereth spoken of other. For wha^ any good is spoken of any other tofore him /
always he contryueth some thing to say to his reproach / and gives thereto a
but / as thus / he is right a good man and I love him well / but there ben
such defautes in him / certaynely I am sorry therefore. This is the scorpyon
which blandissheth with his face and prycketh with his tail. The fyfth is
when he peruerteth and tourneth all to ye wers party / and the good in to
evil. And for that cause he is a false Judge and untrue also.

Of the sin to say lesynges. Ca. liiii.
LEsynge falseth a man / like as one falsed ye ky^ges seal / or the bulls of
the pope / and because that such men false the money and bears forth false
letters he shall be Iuged at ye day of day of dome as a false man. The liar is
among the good true men as the false penny among the good / and as the chafe
among the corn. The liar is like to the devil which is his fader / like as
god says in the gospel / for he is a liar / and the fader of lesynges / like
as he that forged the first lesynge. And yet he forgeth and techeth them forth
all day. The devil shows him in many manners and in many fourmes / and
transfygureth him self in many guyses for to deceive ye people. Right so does
the liar. Then is he like the plouer yt lives of the wind and of the air /
and has nothing in his entrayles but wind. And also to every color yt he
sees he changes his son. In this branch ben. three bows / for there is
one manner lesynge brennynge / another pleasant / and another noyenge / and in all three is sin. For like as says saint Austyn / how well he yt lies / and
with his lesynge does good and prouffyte to another / nevertheless he does his
own hurt and wrong / then these lies ardaunt ben sins. But the lies
pleasant ben more greter sin / like as ben the lies of losengyers / of
flaterers / of mynstrelles / of truffars which that sayen these bourdes
lesynge / and derysyons for to solace the folk and to make them laughe / and
it is no doubt for to take heed and to here them it is a sin / but the
lesynges greuynge and noyenge ben deedly sin / wha^ they be said ernestly
with a fore thought for to harm and hurt any other. To this branch
appertain all the falsetees / the fallaces the deceytes and gyles that been
done and said through out all the world for to deceive and hurt any other in
soul or in body in hauoyre in renoume or in fame.

Of the sin of forswerynge. Ca. lv.
IT is evil to lie. But it is much wers and greter sy^ne a man to sorswere
himself. It is a peryllous thing to forswere himself / and therefore our
lord defends it much / not for that because yt one may in no wise swear
without sin. For often to swear makes a man often to forswere him and often to
sin. For in seven manners may a man sin in making of oaths. First when one
swereth ardauntly / this is by despyte and gladly / like as it seems that he
delyteth or yt he were fro him self. Saint James defends not only too swear
when it is of need / but the will to swear. Also when one swereth for naught
It is for naught / when one swereth lightly without cause and without reason.
This is deffended in the second commandment of ye law / which god wrote in
the tables of stone with his blessed fyngre and delyuerde them to Moses ye
prophet for to preche them to ye people. After when one swereth accustomably /
like as many done yt ben evil taught and that can no thing say without
swerynge. For for to swear is none other thing but to call god to witness /
the cause ought to be much great reasonable and true / where as should be
called or dare call so great a lord as god is to witness / his glorious
mother and his saints. Also when one swereth folyly / and this comes and
happeth in many manners as where swereth by ire or suddenly / of which when he
is repreued he repents anon / or when one swereth for a thing which he may
not keep without sin. Such swerynges ought to be left / and of them do
penance of the folysshe oath. Or when one swereth certeynly of the thing of
which he was not certain how well it be true. Or when one swereth certainly
of that which he knows not / or that he may not accomplysshe. Or wha^ one
swereth by the creatures as sum say by the son that shyneth / or by the
fire that there brenneth. Or by my heed Or by ye soul of my fader. Or such
semblable things. God deffendeth all these oaths in ye gospel. For too that
which I ought to conferme. I ought not too take too witness but the sovereign
truth / that is all mighty god omnypotente the which yt knows all / and
nothing the pure creatures which be nothing but vanytees. For when men swear
ernestly by them they do dyshonoure to god. For thonoure of god ought always
to be kept in all things. But when men swear by the holy gospelles / men
swear by him of whom ye words ben that been there written. And when one swereth
by the holy relykes or by the saints of heaven / they swear by them and by god
that Inhabyteth in them. After when one swereth vylaynsly of god and of his
saints. In this ben the christian men werse than the sarasy^s that swereth in no
manner / ne suffers that any swear vylaynsly tofore them of Ihesu like as
christian men do. And who yt swereth in their law Mahomet their god he shall be
stoned. In this ben the christian men more cruel than the Jews that crucyfyed
Ihesu christ. For they brake none of his bones. But they that swear by hy^ rent
and make mo pyeces of him than is made of a be in ye bouchery. And there be
many false christian men that in like wise break in pyeces our blessed lady and
other saints in swerynge vylaynesly. And certainly it is marvel how christ
my suffer. After when one swereth falsely or bears falls wytnes to his wetynge
in any manner that he swereth covertly or openly / or by art color or sophy^
For the law written says. God that loves symplesse and truth in such a
thing / he receives the oath and understands the word / as they say that
entende it / and yt symply and without barate understand it. Much is the great
debonayrte of god / when such men swear ye / which they know for certaynte
that it is not truth. Or that they promise or grant a thing the which
they will not keep ne hold / that the devil strangle them not anon right. For
when they say as god keep me / or else as god will me help / he puts him
self out of ye grace of god and of his aid and help. Now ought they of very
right too lose wit and mind / and all that they hold of god. The last
branch of this sin is when one breketh the faith that he has promised and
greau^ted / by his faith or by his oath. For faith lied and oath broken is all
one.

Of ye sin and peril that is of chiding Ca..lvi.
Saint Austyn says that there is none so like to the devil as is ye chydar.
This craft without doubt pleseth much the devil / and dysplayseth much
unto god which loves above all other things pees and concord. This branch
departs him in to.vii. bows / of which the first is too strive. The second
to chyde. The third ledenger. The fourth to curse. The fyfthe too reproach or
to repreue. The syxte to menace or to threte. The seventh dyscorde and to reyse
hate. This is when the devil sees pees and love between two persons it much
desplayseth him / and for to make them dyscorde he does his power to make
them to strive / and when they begin to strive the devil begins to blow
the fire of anger. Then after the stryffe and anger comes the noise and
chiding Then as the fire is light and the smoke is up anon comes ye flamme
and lepeth out. Stryuynge is when ye one says to ye other. It is so / it is
not so / it was it was not so. Chiding is when they demene and say one to
that other great words After comes ye ledanges that is when they pynche and
shoue yt one to ye other and say great vylanyes and great felonyes. there ben
some so felons ye cuttynge than a rasoure / and more percynge than arowes or
alles. Such folk resemble the porpyn which is full of pryckes and sharp
poyntures / and is over fell and angry / and when he is wroth he launceth and
casts his pryckes like arowes out of bis body and throws on ye right side
and on the lift side. Also he resembles the felon mastyf that byteth or
barketh on all them that he sees go by the way. After this comes the curses
and maledyccyons / this is when that one curses yt other. And this is so great
a sin as the scripture says that who curses his neighbor / he is cursed
of god. And saint poule says that such folk may not have the realm of of
god. And Solomon says that their mouths ben like as the pot that boyleth
and casts out on all sides / and scaldeth them that been about it. After
comes the reproaches which ben yet more sin that is when a man reprocheth
another of his sins and his defautes / or of his folyes / his pouerte / his
poor kynne / or other defautes that he has in him / he wexeth angry and
synneth. After comes the menaces and thretenynges and then begin the
medlynges and wars. But above all the sy^nes ye we have here named / passes
the sin of them that by their wicked tongues areyse and moeue dyscordes
deuysyons and evil will among them yt ben friends together / and that
dystourbe and let the peace and accordes. God hates much such people as
witnesses ye scripture.

Of the sin of murmr. Ca. lvii.
AS we se that it happeth often time that they that dare not answer ne chyde /
begin to murmr and too grunte with his teeth Therefore after the sin of
chiding we set ye sin of murmr / how much this sy^ne is great and how
god takes vengeance and correction of it we shall show. For god oftymes has
taken vengeance on such / like as the holy scripture records. For / for
this the earth opened and swolowed in dathan and abyron / and they descended
all quycke in to hell. And for this sin god sent a fire from heaven yt
burnt chore and all his fellows / that is to wete.ii. hundred and.xl.
thousand of the grettest that were in the host of our lord in deserte. For
this sin lost the Jews the land of promyssyon which god had promised So
that of.vi. C. thousand that god had delivered and put out of seruage of the
king of Egypt pharao / and that had nourysshed them.xl. year in deserte with
the manna of heaven. Of all them there entryd in to ye holy land of promyssyon
but two persons only / which were named Caleph and Iosue / but all deyed
with sorrow in deserte. This sin has two branches. For sum murmr against
god / and sum against man. The sin of murmr against man is in many manners
like as servants ayenste their lords and masters / and chamberers and women
against their ladies and maystresses / children against fader and mother. The
poor against the rich. The vylaynes against the nobles. The lay people against
the clerks and against the prelates. And the cloysterers against thabbotees
pryours and the officers. And this murmr grows against these persons of
mobedyence / by cause that there is made to them over hard commandments /
or of dread / or of inpacience by cause all things be not done ryghtfully / or
of envy / or of felonnye / by cause yt one is auaunced more than another / and
many other evil rancours. Murmr against god has many occasyons that is he yt
lost grace and patience and would be more tha^ god. For such thing as god
has made in earth / if he has not made it after his will / anon he
grutcheth against god / and syngeth the deuyls pater noster. For like as ye holy
ghost enseygneth and techeth his chosen to sing in their heart ye sweet song
of heaven / that is deogracias / of all that he has made and given us / and of
all that he sends us. In like wise the wicked spyryte makes his dyscyples to
sing the song of hell. That is murmr that always shall dure in hell.
Certain such a man is a much fool and wood yt will that god should give to
him acomptes of all that he has made / if he send to him pouerte or maladye
or dear time / or if he take fro one and give to another / and all this be not
done at his deuyse / anon he takes against god and murmureth against him / and
can him maugre / and what marvel is it though god avenge him on such folk
when they would take fro him his seygnorye / his sapyence and his puyssaunce.

Of ye sin and peril that is in rebellyon Ca..lviii.
EVyll thing is it of murmr / but much more evil is it of rebellyon.
Rebellyon is a vice that comes fro ye heart / which is hard / froward and
diverse and always will that his will be done and his sentence holden / and he
that will that other humble and bow to hy^ / and he will not bow ne enclyne
to no man. This is an heart diverse of which salamon says yt he may not faylle
of an evil end / and like as murmr is against god and also it is against man.
Right soois such an heart rebel against god and man. This vice has.iiii.
branches / for such an heart is froward and rebel to believe counceyle / and
to accomplysshe and do the co^mau^dements of god and to suffer chastysynge /
and to receive doctrine. Of this vice thou haste herd in the chappytres of
pride.

Of the sin of blasphemy. Ca. lix.
BLasphemy is as says saint Austyn as much as it grows. etc. Seche all the
condycynes in the chapter of pride tofore written in the rubrysshe of
arrogaunce in ye end. Now we have showed.x. manners of sin of the tongue / of
which the first is idle words / and the last is blasphemy. And this is that
Solomon says / that the begy^nynge of the evil tongue is folly / and the end
shall be over evil / here fynysshe then the deedly sins and all the
branches that dyscende of them. And know ye for truth yt who should well
study in this book / he might well prouffyte and learn to know all manner of
sins / to confess himself well / for none may confess his sins well / if
he know them not. Now thou ought to know that he that redeth in this book
ought to think and take heed dylygently if he be culpable of any of these
sins aforesaid. And if he find hy^ culpable of any he ought to repent him /
and anon to confess him dylygently / and to keep him to his power fro other
sins in which he is not culpaple / and also he ought to praise and thank
god humbly / and to pray him devoutly yt he will keep him by his sweet grace.

How this life is but death as it appears. Ca. lx.
(...). Furore consumor. Heu infame. Animam a^^isimus. Spes no bis ^^lla

Grievously dies he that has not learned too deye / learn then to dye if
thou shall conne live / for no man shall can live / that has not learned to dye
/ and he is by right called a caytyf that can not live ne that knows not to
dye / if thou will live freely and surely learn to deye wyselye / if thou say
how shall it be learned. I shall now tell to the. Thou ought to know that
this life nys but death. For death is a departing / this knows every man. And
therefore it is said of a man when he deyeth yt he departs / and when he is
deed he is departed. This lyfnys no thing but a departing / ye truly a much
short departing. For all the life of a man if he lived a thousand year / it
is not only a moment to the regard of yt other life / which always dureth. In
tourment or in Joy pardurable. This witnesses to us the kings / the dukes /
the earls / the princes / and the emperoures which had sometime the glory of
this world. Now weep they in hell / cry and howl / cratche and says alas /
what avails us our power / honor / noblesse / Joy / beautees and all
rychesses. Soon is all this departed and failed as a shadow or smoke. and
much faster fled from us than birds fleing / or quarelles out of a cross
bow. Thus departs away our life. Now we were / and anon we ben deed / and
all our life was not a little moment Now be we in pardurable torments. Our Joy
in weeping. Our carolles and feestes in sorrow. Roobes / hoodes / feestes /
dygnytees / games / rychesses / and all welthes ben failed us. Such ben the
songs of hell like as holy write recounteth. For to show to us that this life
is nothing but a departing / and this death is nothing but a departing /
and to live is nothing but to depart. Then the living in this world is
no thing but for to deye / and this is true as the pater noster. For when
thou beganest for to live / anon thou begannest / for to deye / and for too
approach unto the death / and all thy young aege and thyn old aege and all thy
time the which is passed / the death has conquered and retained Thou say
that thou have.xl. year. which is not truth the death has them. And never
shall he yield them to the again. Therefore the wit of the world is but all
folly. And certain the clerkys seeing / seen no thing at all / day and
night they done one thing / and the more they do ye less they know / always
they deyen and can not deye / for night and day thou deyest as I have said to
the. Yet in another manner I shall teache the this clergy / to the end that thou
know well to live and well to dye. Now take heed and understand ye death is no
thing but the deceuerynge of body and soul / this knows well every man and
understands. Now techeth us Cathon the wise man / learn says he to deye. To
depart and deceuere often thy soul and thy spyryte fro they body / like as did
many of the great phylosophres that so much hated this life and despised the
world and so much desired to deye yt they slew them lelf by their own
agreement but it auaylled thym no thing. For they had not ye grace ne the
faith of our lord Ihesu Christ. But the holy men which love god and dread him
/ of three dethes have they passed the tweyne. For they ben deed as touching
sins / and deed as touching yt world. Now abide they the last death that is
the third / and that is ye deceuerau^ce of soul and body. Between them and
heaven is but a little wall / for they pass it by thought and by desire. And
though ye body is in this world on this side / the heart and the spyryte is
on that other side in that other world / there where their conversation is in
heaven / like as says saint poule. Their solace their Joy / their consolacion
is by thought on the ferther side in heaven / where their conversation is like
as says saint Poule. And therefore they hate their life which is but death and
desire ye bodily death. For this damoysell bears Joy that is ye death yt
crowns al ye saints and set them in Joy infynyte. Death is to a good man
end of all his euyls / and gate and enter of all goods. Death is the river
that departs death and life. Death is on this side life / and on ye other
side also. But the wise men of this world which ben on this side of the river
of this world seen so clear And on that other side they se nothing. And
therefore ben they called in scripture fools and blind. For this death they
call departing. And the death that is comune to good they call the end. And
therefore they hate so much the death. For they know not what it is / ne on
yt other side of the river they have not conuersed / ne know nothing what
gooth therout. Then if thou will know what is good and what is evil / issue
out of thy self / issue out of the world / learn to dye. Dysseuer thy soul
fro thy body by thought. Send thyn heart in to ye other world. That is in
heaven / in hell / and in purgatory There shalt thou se what is good and what
is evil. In hell thou shalt se mo sorrows and diverse tourmentes than any man
may or can deuyse / or any heart think / In purgatory also thou shalt se moo
tourmentes than any may endure. In heaven thou shall se more Joy and glory than
any may desire. In hell shall be showed and ensygned to the how god vengeth
deedly sin. Purgatory shall show and ensygne the how god purges deedly
sy^ne. In heaven you shall se clearly virtues good works how hyely they ben
governed and rewarded. And in the se three things understand how and all that
/ yt the behooves to know to live well and deye well.

How men live dyenge in this world. Ca. lxi.
Remember friends great and small.
For to be ready when death does call.



NOw behold and take heed a little / and ennoye ne grieve ye not at these three
things. Therefore to know and will to hate sin Forgete thy body one time in
the day and go to hell living / to the end that you go not thither at thy death.
Thus done often the good men and ye wise. There you shalt se all that the heart
hates / cold / hete / honger / thyrst / and diverse tourmentes / as wepynges
syghes / and waylynges / that the heart may not think ne ^onge deuyse / and
always shall endure without end / and therefore is this pain by right called
perdurable / which is always death in living / and life in dyenge / when you
shalt se then that this one deedly sin must needs be so dear bought /
thou had lever be flayne al quycke tofore thou sholdest consent for to do
one only sin. After go to purgatory / there shall thou see the pains of
souls / which have had very repentance of their sins in this world but
they were not parfytely purged. Now make they the remenau^te of their penance
unto they be clear and net / like as they were at the time and hour when
they were baptized / but this penance is much horrible and hard / for all ye
pain that women ever suffered in trauayllynge and delyuerynge of their thyldren
/ and also saint bartylmewe suffryd to beflayne all quycke saint stephen to be
stoned with stones / saint laurente and saint vyncent to be burnt and roasted
upon brennynge cooles All these martyrdoms and torments ne ben not but as a
bayne in cold water after the witness of scripture to the regard of
torments of purgatory where as the sowles brenne until they be purged of all
their sins / like as gold and silver be purged and fined in the fire / till
no more be found to be purged. For this fire of purgatory is of such nature
/ that all that they find in the soul is it of deed of word and of thought
that has turned to any sin little or great / all is there burnt and purged.
And also there ben punysshed and purged al ye sins venyal / which we call
little sins which we often do. Like as foul thoughts / idle words. Iapes
trufes lies and all other vanytees so long till the soul have no more to be
purged of / and that she be so clean so pure so net and so worthy yt she be
sayntefyed for to enter in to heaven / where as none may enter but if he be
right fine right clean and right clear. This fire dreden all they that to their
power keep them fro deedly sy^ne / and ye keep holyly their body theyrmouth
their eerys their eyes / and all their five naturell wits fro all sins. And
also lyuenas they should every day dye and come tofore the Judgment. And by
cause that none may live all without sin / like as says Salamon. For seven
times in the day falls ye right wysman. And therefore by holy confession / by
teerys by orysons by almesses other good deeds ought every man to be relyeued /
and put a way fro sin and a mende his life. And to Judge him self of his
sy^nes to the end that he a bide more suerly the last Judgment. Also to learn
to know evil / and to fle it and all sin great and little. And that he be
then in ye great dread of god which is the beginning of all good and of
good life.

How we ought to live holyly and learn to do well. ca lxii
NOw it suffyseth not to leave al sins and all euylles. But that it be learned
too do good / and if we learn to get the virtues / by the which we may cast
and put a way the vices and all sy^nes with out which virtues no man may live
well ne ryghtfully Then if thou will learn to live well after virtue learn also
to dye as I have a fore said to the / deseuer thy spyryte fro thy body by
thought and by desyere. And go out of this world deynge / and go into the
land of lyuy^ge where none shall dye ne wexe old yt is in heaven. There is
learned to live well / and al wisdom and all curtesye For there may enter no
vylayne. There is the glorious company of god and of ye glorious virgyne his
mother saint marye of Angels and of saints. There surhabounde all goods
beautees Rychesses honors strength lyghtnes science fraunchyse virtues wit
glory and joy perdurable. There is no point of ypocresye ne of trycherye /
ne of losengerye / ne of dyscorde / ne of envy ne hungre ne thryst ne hete ne
cold ne evil ne sorrow ne dread of enemies. But always feestes and ryall
espousaylles song and joy without end. This joy is so great / that who
that shall have tasted one only drop of the most lest joy that is there /
he should be fyred and so entalented in the love of god that all the joy of
this world should be unto him stenche and torments and rychesses dunge / and
honors but fylthe and vyletees. And the desire for too come thither shall make
him an hundred thousand time more ardauntly to hate sin / and to love virtues
and to do well. For love is more strong than dread / and then is the life fair
and honest / when a person flees all euyls and sins. And enforces him to
do all the good yt he may / not only for fere to be dampened but for the desire
of ye glory perdurable and for the love of god And for ye great clennesse that
virtues have and good life / and them whom the love of god ledeth / much
hastelyer sooner and more ardauntly comen thereto / and less costeth / than they
that serve god for dread. The hare renneth and so does ye greyhounde That one
for dread that other by desire. That one flees ye other chaceth. The holy man
renneth to god like a greyhounde For he has always his eyes and his desire too
heaven where he sees ye pray yt he chaceth / and for yt he forgeteth ye gods
of this world / like as the gentle hounde wha^ he sees his pray. This is the
way and the life to the five good and true lovers of god / to gentle hertes
that so much loves virtues and hates sy^nes / that if they were certain /
that they ne should ne might know the sy^nes / ne that god should not avenge
them / yet they would not deygne to do ne to consent to sin / but al their
thought and pain of their heart is to keep them clean from all sins. And to
apparayle them that be worthy to se and have pardurably the glory of heaven /
where as heart velanous entached with sin shall never enter / ne fool ne
felonous ne proud man.

Of.iii. manner of spyrytuell goods. Ca. lxiii.
NOw have I well showed to yt how one shol learn to dye and led and use good
and holy life / and for to get virtues so that a man know well and euedently
clennes / and what is sins / what is alms and what is virtue. Also that
one know well and certaynely / and to Judge what is evil / and what is good /
and what is sin / and to can deuyse the very good and the great good fro the
little For a thing not known is neither hated ne desired / and therefore
ought thou to know that ye scryptures says that there ben some small
things that be called the little good / and some the myddle good. And some ye
great good / and some very good yt is ryghtful to al ye world is sometime
deceived. For they give ye great gods for ye little / or the great for the
myddle. For this world is as a fair / where as be many folysshe merchants /
and fools / yt bye glass for sapphires / and brass for gold / and bladders
for lanternes. But he is a good marchaunte that of every thing knows well
clearly the truth and ye propre virtue / like as the holy ghoost enseygneth
us / and another maystre techeth us too know ye great things fro the small
the precyouse fro the vile / the sweet from the bitter.

Of the goods of fortune Ca..lxiiii.
THey call the small goods ye goods of fortune which dame fortune has
about her whele / and always takes away and gives / and torneth that which
is above to fall under. These ben ye precyouse stones that the fools have
bought for rubyes for saphyrs and for emerawdes. These ben also as Ieweles and
young children which god gives to us for to solace us with / and for to draw
our love to him By cause that he knows well that we been tender and feeble and
that we may not hold the sharp ways of penance / of anguysshe and of
martyrdom / like as done the good knights of god which conquer the royame
of heaven by strength and take it by their prowess and their good virtues.
Then that is not the great good ne well ryghtful. For if that were the great
good and very Then were foles the blessed children of god Ihesu Christ which
chosen pouerte shame and sharpness for to give and to show to us ensaumple.
And refused the joys ye honors and ye rychessys of this world / if these
goods transytorye worldly and temporal ben very good / then be not all the
very goods in heaven. Then is not god parfytelye good and happy by cause he
will not use such goods / Then god is not good ne natural by cause he
gives not these worldly goods to his friends / but he gives them more
largely to his enemies / if these were very good / then were foles all the
saints / all the good clerkys and ye wise phylosophres that fled fro such
worldly goods and despised them as dunge / if these be very good / then
fails ye holy scripture that calls them lies and vanytees / nets and
grynnes of the devil / and this is as true as the pater noster. For these ben
the engynes of the devil / by which he deceyueth the souls in a thousand
manners / and byndeth them and takes and holds them But ye wise marchaunte
that is the wise man / whom ye holy ghoost enlumyneth by very knowleche /
that oueral knows and can decerne what every thing is worth / he sees right
well and understands that all the world is not a good morsel for too fylle
the heart of one man / and that there is therein much evil and little good.
And therefore he beholds ye euylles and perils that been therein / and knows
well that it is truth that is comunelye said / who that gives not that
which he loves / he takes not which he desires Such folk given the
world for to have heaven / and forsakes ouerall rychesses for joy / fylthe
and ordure for gold / and leave all for gods sake / rychesses delyces and
honors / and bycome poor in this world for to win good and for to get
the richesse of heaven. This is the most fairest life and most sure that may be
in this world There ben other that see that in many manners may one do his
prouffyt and his sauacyon with goods temporal and yt he may have without
ouermoche to love them. For god commands not a man to leave al. They reteyne
them / but little they preyse them. They use them but little they love them /
like as did Abraham Job and Dauyd / and many other which eschewed and fled
the peryls And they do spyrytuell prouffyte with temporal goods / and will by
heaven with their almesses and other good deeds. They can bye out their sins
and help their neighbors. They can the more love god / dread and doubt him
for the perils yt they be in / and the more humble them self when they se
and consider their sins and their defautes / when in sharp and strayte ways
of penance they dare not go / when so little for gods sake they will suffer
and give / which so much suffered to save them / and would.xxxii. year in this
world be poor for to enryche them in heaven. They save them self well but it
is hard to do. For it is a more light thing to leave all the gods at ones /
than to retain them and not to love them.

Of the gods of fortune which follow here. Ca. lxv.
THe mean or myddle of goods ben ye goods of nature and of doctrine. Of
nature like as beauty of body / prowess / force / or strength / vygour /
lyghtnes / debonayrte / clear wit and clear engyne for to find / good
memory for to retain well / and good voice for to sing well. All these
goods aforesaid nature brings them in ye natyuyte or birth of a person.
Doctrine clargy and all other gods be gotten by study or by accustomau^ce /
like as ben good virtues / good manners / and other virtues. But these be not
yet very good ryghtfull. For they do not that which is perfytely good. For
many a phylosophre / and great clerks. Emperoures. Kings / and many other
princes and other great lords the which has had many of these goods ben
dampened in hell pytte. Also all these goods has our lord given to his
enemies as well as to his friends. To Sarasyns To Jews To false christian men
like as he has too good men. Also this is not very good that faylleth at need
/ and that may be lost maulgre him self. And thought theuys may not take them
and rob them. Yet ye death takes them always at the last. Also I say that
the veraye goods aydeth always and greuen never / but certeynlye such goods
and such graces forayne ben often damage and grieve them that have them / if they
use them not well accordy^ge to god. For some auaunt them and ben proud and
despise the other / when they to whom god has given such graces and such
goods as I have tofore said and named / if they use them not well and Justly
according to god / they shall be in gretter tormente in hell. And straytly
they must acompte and yield a reckoning at ye day of dome / of that they have
done / and how they have used and despended it. Notwithstondynge they have
gotten goods that god has lent to them for multeplyenge and encrees.

Here after is showed of the goods of grace Ca..lxvi.
NOw have I shortly showed the tytell good and the mean good. Now will I show
to the which is the very good ryghtfull and parfyte. This does he which
has the good with right and understanding For without ye which was never
no good with right This good is called the grace of god and virtue and
charytee. Grace by cause that she gyeueth life and health too the soul. For
without that / the soul is deed. For like as the body is deed without the
soul. So is the soul deed without the grace of god. It is called virtue by
cause it adourneth ye soul with good works and with good manners / it is called
charity because it Joins the soul to god / and also does all thing as it
were with god. For charity is nothing elys but a dear unity / That is the
perfeccyon and ye beneurte to which we ought to entende Much were deceived
the auncyente philosophers yt so curyously dysputeden and enquyreden who was
the sovereign good in this life / and never could they find ne know it / For
some set their stuyde and their wytin delytes of the body. The other in
rychessys the other in honest but the great philosopher saint Poule which
was rauysshed unto the third heaven / and passed all the other philosophers
techeth us by many reasons that the sovereign good in this life and that the
queen of virtues is for to love god and to have very charity in him self For
with out this good ne aualen all the other goods right naught. And who that has
this good of charity he has all other goods / and when all other goods
shall fail / this good shall not fail and above all the great goods that been
this charity is lady. And then the gretest good the which is under heaven. Is
charity And also after by cause that thou will and desyerest this good the
which by right is called virtue / and that thou desyerest to love it most /
and to seche it above all other goods And I will yet show unto the his valor
and it is acustomed for to deuyle three manner of goods in the world / that is
to wit goods honorable gods delectable and goods prouffytable There be no
mo goods ne very ne good ne fair but these three manners / and this see thou
openly of the world yt none desires ne loves any thing but that he wene yt
it be honorable or delectable or prouffytable. The proud secheth thing
honorable. The covetous man seeks things prouffytable. The delycious secheth
things delectable. And when they sechen this thing vaynlye. Every man ought
to know yt virtues have these three propretees. For virtue is much honorable
and delectable and prouffytable.

What virtues been goods honorable Ca..lxvii.
ALl virtues ben goods honorable / this may thou see in this manner. Six
things been in this world much desired by cause that they seem much
honorable / that is to wit beaulte wit prowess power fraunchyse and
noblesse. These ben.vi. fountaynes of vanyte. Of vain glory comes and
sourdeth a plant Beauty is a thing much loved. For it is a thing much
honorable / and nevertheless beauty that the eyes and the body se and love /
is a thing falls couerte and vain. It is false for he or she is no thing
fair. But our eyes ben vain and feeble that see no thing but the sky^ne
wtoutforth. Then who might see as clear as a be yt is called a lynx which
seth thorughe out a wall he should clearly see that a fair body nys but a
white sack full of stynkynge dunge / and like a dunghylle couerd with snow or
with grene grass. Also I say to yt ye this beaulte is much short and not
abiding. For it is sone faylled and anon passed as a fume or a smoke and as
the flour of ye field or of the medowe. Anon as the soul departs fro the
body / fair well all the beaulte is faylled and gone. Then the beauty that
the body has / the soul has given it too him. And therefore much fools ben
they that for the beauty of the body gloryfye themself. But the beauty of the
soul is the right beauty / which always encreaceth and never shall fail.
This is the very beauty by which ye soul pleases god and to the aungelles
that sees the heart. This beauty renders and gives to the soul graces
virtues and love of god. For she reformeth reparaylleth and renders her right
enprynte. That is the image of her maker / which is beauty without co^paryson /
and who best resembles in getynge the virtues / in pluckynge up and cast from
him all sins / and keep his commandments entyerly he is most fair. Then
the most fair thing that is under god / is the soul which has parfytly
his right four me and his right clerete / color of flower / clerenes of ye
son / figure of man / and pleasau^ce of precious stones. And all that the eye
of the body sees of beauty is fylthe and foul to the regard of ye soul /
and all yt may be thought of beaulte may not be compared to the soul.

Of very sapyence. Ca. lxviii
Clear wit and clergy is a thing much honorable / and much to be
praised. But and you will be wise a right and learn verey clergy / do so that
you have very good / that is grace and virtues. That is the very sapyence yt
enlumyneth ye heart of a man / like as the son enlumyneth all the world.
This wit passes and sourmounteth all the wit of the world / like as the
son passes the clerenes of ye moan / For the wit of ye world is but folly /
like as the scripture says / and chyldehode and wodenes Folly is in them that
so much loves the world and his beauty / and that can not know the day fro
the night. Ne Judge between great and little / and between precious and vile.
They wene the moon to be the son. For they wene that the honor of the
world be veraye glory / and a little apple to be a great mountain / for they
wene that the world be a great thing. But to ye regard of heaven it ne is but
pouerte. They wene that a glass be a saphyr. And they wene that their
strength and their power be much great / which is more feeble and more frail
than is glass. Also I say that this chyldehode of ye wit of ye world is in
them that so much make them wise for to keep and ease the body and to be in
delyces which lyuen as a child / that seche nothing else but to do their
propre will. In such people reason is deed and therefore they lyuen as beestys
/ for their wit is al turned and corrupt / like as is the taste and savor of
a seek man or of a woman great with child / which fyndeth more savor and
appetyte in a sour apple than in bread made of whete / and more sauoure in a
cool than in good metes. Also these people may not believe yt there is more Joy
and delight in loving god and to serve and to honor him / than in doing the
will of ye caroyne of their body. For they can not right fully Judge between
sweet and bitter. Also I say yt the wit of the world is wodenesse in them
that so much be subtle in finding malice for tengyne and deceive other / be
it by strength or by plee or by barate. And that ne think ne study sauf to
auaunce and enhaunce them self / and to grieve other. This wit as says saint
James is the wit of ye devil / which always payneth him self to do harm to
other. But the very wit yt the holy ghoost enseygneth and techeth to the
friends of our lord is in knowing without mysprysynge what every thing
worth / he shows that the world is vain in being foul in valor / in
loving it and sauourynge it The rychessys been vile and transytorye. And the
delytes ben bitter. After he gives feelynge that the love of god and virtues
is a thing very precious and sweet / very for she fylleth ye heart and
nouryssheth it. She is precious for one may bye god and all that he has. She
is sweet / for it is ye manna that all things makes sweet / labor sorrow
wepynges shames trybulacyons aduersytees martyrdomes and all pains. And all
that one may thy^ke to love / it makes it sauoure like sugre. This is the
wit and the sapye^ce whereof the scripture says. This is the sapyence out of
which grows purete and very conscience.

Of the prowess of the knights of Ihesu Christ. Ca. lxix.
AFter I say that virtues and charity gives very prowess. Then there is no
prowess by right but in the knights of god which the holy ghoost adoubeth
and armeth with virtues and charity. In prowess ben three parties. Hardynes /
strength / and steadfastness. There is none noble by right but if he have
these.iii. things / but if he be hardy / prudent / and entreprenaunt of great
things / and strong and puyssaunt for to pursue them and ferme and stable to
fynysshe them. But without wit and without pourueyaunce no thing avails
none of these three things. For like as says the book of the art of chyualry.
Error without battle may not be amended. For it is anon compared. Folysshe
entrepryse is where as lies little prouffyte / much dyspence and great pain
and peril. These ben thentrepryses of them that be called wise and hardy in
this world / that their bodies and their souls puts in sin / in peril /
and in pain for to get a little lose and praysynge which is much vain / and
little endures. But virtue does make a man of great heart / and of wise
entrepryse / when that she makes a man the which is nothing but earth so
hardy / that he dare entrepryse for to conquer the realm of heaven / and to
vaynquysshe all the deuylles of hell that been so strong This enterprise is
good wise and much prouffytable. For there is therein little peril / and
little pain but there is glory honor and prouffyte inestymable / and
perdurable without mesure / who has no virtue has no great heart / but he is
like him that is aferde of naught. Such ben they yt doubten the euylles the
aduersytees / perils / and trybulacyons of the world And that have dread to
lose that / which they may not long keep. They have no great heart yt give it
over for naught / like as done they that give their hertes for to love ye gods
of fortune / which in truth ben right naught / but fylthe charge and ordure
too the regard of the goods and glory perdurable Then such people ben
like a child / yt loves better an apple or a myrrour than a royame. But virtue
gives great heart by right. For virtue makes them too conquer heaven /
despise ye world / and to bear great deeds of penance. And to supporte and
gladly suffer all the euylles of the world and to endure them for gods
sake. And also for too withstonde and resyste all the assaults of ye devil.
Like as the wise and prudente Seneke says / wepynges myschaunces / sorows
trybulaco^ns / harms shames / perils / and all that which evil fortune may
menace and do / have no more power against virtue / than one drope of water
should do in ye see / virtue makes a man hardy as a lion / strong as an
holyfaunte / ferme and durablee as the son which always renneth and is never
weary. Then there is no prowess ne strength but in virtues.

Of very seygnorye which gives grace and virtues.lxx
THus is there none very seygnory / but in virtues. A great lord is he that
knows all the world. Such a lord gives too a man such virtues and grace.
For he sets a man in his right estate / in which he was first set in and
made. The man was made in such honor and in such seygnorye / that he was
lord over all creatures that were under heaven / to whom all things obeyed /
and to whom no thing might noye ne grieve / and this is the right estate to
the man and to his seygnorye / but he lost this seygnorye by sin. And might
not recover it again but by virtue. But virtue sets a man on high and
sets ye world under feet and makes him too converse in heaven / virtue
makes a man by good right gretter lord of ye world / than the king is of
his reame. For of ye goods of the world he has as much as his heart
desires / he has his usage and his sustenaunce / and as much as he may have
for suffysaunce / and more suffysantlye than the king has in his reame. For
all that the good has and the evil / al is his. Therefore of all he does his
prouffyte and preyseth god and thanketh and loves him the more and doubts
and serves. And in this he sees and knows that every creature is made for
to serve him. Also there is another seygnorye much great / without whom
there is none by right lord for he is emperor and lord of him self / that is
of his body and or his heart / which he Iustyceth them in good pees and does
his will. For his heart is so joined to the will of god / so that of all that
/ that god does he thanketh him / and it playseth him well. And this is the
seygnorye that virtue gives too him that has it. Of this speaks Seneke and
says as great honor gives god to the / when thou art lord and emperor of
thy self and more when a king / ha lord god how many kings emperors and
other great lords have been in the world and also barons / that have citees /
castellys / and royames that have not this seygnorye. For they be not lords of
their hertes. By cause that it tormenteth often / by wrath or by maletalente /
or by couetyse / or by desire that they may not accomplysshe.

Here is spoken of very fraunchyse Ca..xxi.
AFter this I say there is none that has very fraunchyse / if he have not
grace and verue. Then if thou will know what is very frau^chyse of a man and
of a woman by right. Thou ought to understand that a man has.iii. manner of
fraunchyses. One of nature / another of grace / and the third of glory. The
first is free will by which a man may chese and do freely good or evil. This
fraunchyse holds every man of god so freely that no man may do it wrong / ne
all the deuylles of hell may not enforce a man ayenste his will to do a sin
without his accord and consentemente. For if a man did evil against his will /
he should have thereof no sin / for as much as he in no wise might eschew it
/ like as says saint austyn. This fredom and frau^chyse has every man. But
this fredo^ is not in children / ne in wood men / ne in fools / by cause they
have not ye usage of reason by which they can chese the good from ye evil A
man puts away from him this fraunchyse in great party wha^ he synneth
deedly. For he sells himself unto the devil for the delight of his sin. And
yeldeth him self unto him and bycometh his servant by sin so that he may not
cast him self out / ne put him fro his will / for he has deserved the death of
hell / if the grace of god help him not. The second fraunchyse is such that
ye wise man has in this world / whom god has fraunchysed by grace and by
virtues from the service of the devil / and fro sin / that they be not
bond to gold ne to silver / ne to temporal gods of this world ne to their
bodies which is caroyn / ne to gods of fortune / which the death may soon
take away / but they have their hertes lift up and given to god / so that they
preyse no thing the goods of the world / ne the honors / ne the vanytes /
ne king / ne duke / ne meschaunce ne pouerte / ne shame / ne death. For they
ben now deed to the world / and have the heart so deceuered and taken away
fro the love of ye world / that they desire the death like as the werkman his
payment of his Journey or days labor / and the labourer his hyre / and also
like as they that been in the torment and in the fortune of ye see / desire to
come to port salve. And like as the prysonner desires good delyueraunce / and
as the pilgrim desires to come again in to his contreye. And if they be
parfytelye free in this world like as a creature may be / then fere they ne
doubt they no thing but god / and ben in great pees of heart. For they have
then their heart in god and ben in heaven by desire. And this fraunchyse comes
of grace and of virtue. But yet all this fraunchyse nys but seruytude unto the
regard of the third fraunchyse that they have that been in glory. They be
verayly free. For they be verayly delyuerd fro all perils and fro all
torments / fro fere of death and of death / fro the grynnes and empesshements of
the world fro myserye / fro pouerte / and fro all pain of heart and of body
without retornynge / of which thing there is none fre in this world / how
parfyte that he be.

Of very noblesse Ca..lxxii.
THey that shall have the second fraunchyse of which I have spoken shall come
to great noblesse. The very noblesse comes of gentle heart. Certain none
heart is gentle but if he love god. There is no noblesse but to serve and love
god and to keep him fro all sins and from the seruage of the devil. Ne there
is no vylanye but to anger god by sin. There is no man by right gentyl / ne
noble of the gentylnesse of his body. For as touching ye body we ben all
sons of one mother. That is of the earth and of sylthe of which we al have
taken flesh and blood. Of this part there is none gentle ne free. But our
sweet fader Ihesu Christ which is king of heaven that fourmed the body of the
earth and created ye soul to his image and semblaunce / and all in like wise
as it is of the carnal fader / yt is much glad and joyous when his sone
resembles him Right so is it of our fader Ihesu Christ. For by ye holy
scripture / and by his messagers he techeth us / that we should pain our self
to resemble him. And therefore he sent to us his blessed sone Ihesu Christ in to
therthe for to bring and give to us the very exemplayre / by which we may be
reformed to his image and semblaunce like as they that dwell in the hye cytee
of heaven. That been the aungellys and ye saints of heaven / where eueryche is
of so much more hye and more noble. As more proprely he bears this fair
image and therefore ye holy men in this world pain hem self to know god / and
to love him with all their heart / and purge them cleanse and keep them from
all sins. For of so much as the heart of a creature is more pure and more
clean without sin / of so much he sees more clearly and more euydently the
precious face of Ihesu christ / and of so much he loves more ardauntly / of
so much he resembles more proprelye. And by that he has the more gretter
glory. And this is the very noblesse that god has given us. And therefore
says right well Saint Johan the appostle and euangelyst / that then^e we shall
be ye sons of god / and we shall resemble him proprely / when we shall see
him euydently like as he is This shall be in his glory / when we shall be in
heaven. For no man sees so dyscouerd ne so clearly the beauty of god / like as
says saint poule. But then we shall see him face to face proprely and
clearly when we shall be in glory in his Joyous company The very noblesse of
a man then begins by grace and by virtues / and that is parfyght glory.
This noblesse makes the holy ghoost in the hertes that he purges and
enlumyneth in truth and in parfyte charity. These ben the grettest goods
that god has done to aungellys like as saint Denis says by which they
rese^ble their maker. Thus werketh ye holy ghoost by grace and by virtue in the
hertes of good men / by which they be reformed to thymage and too the
semblaunce of their maker Ihesu Christ as much as it may be in this mortal
life. For they reyse them self so in god / and enbrace them self so with the
love of god. And all their entendement / al their entencyon / their will /
their memory is all converted to god And this love and this enbracement and
desire which encreaceth Joins and vnyeth so ye heart to god / that they may
no thing will / but that / that god will For there is not between them and
god but one self will. And then he has the image and the semblaunce of god
as much as may be had in this world. And this is the most great noblesse and
the most hye gentylnes to which one may atteyne or mount. Ha good god how
far from this noblesse and fro this hyenes ben they that make them so noble
and so quaynte. Of this poor noblesse that they have of their mother the earth
which bears and nouryssheth the hogs as well as she does the Emperoures
and the kings. And they auaunt them of their gentylnes / because they wene
they be of more gentyl fylthe than the other. And of this kynred and parage
conne they right well recounte and tell. But that other side and that other
nobles they behold nothing at all / of which comes very noblesse and the
gentyl parage. They should behold and take heed to their very exemplayre Jesus
christ / which more loved and honored his mother / than did any other man.
And nevertheless when one said to Ihesu christ. Sir your mother and your cosyns
stondeth without to seche you / he answered to them and said. And who is my
mother / and who is my fader and cosyns / who some ever do the will of my fader
that is in heaven / he is my brother / he is my fader / my sister / and my mother.
For this is the noble side and the gentyl kynred by which comes and grows
to the heart very glory and of that other grows and spryngeth vain nobles
and pride.

How charity is the gretest of virtues. Ca. lxiii.
NOw I have suffysauntly showed to ye that there ben no goods honorable by
right but virtues and charity. This is the fair love of god. For there is none
other good prouffytable without this virtue of charity. This witnesses to us
saint Poule that says thus. If I have as much science so yt I knew all
clergy and all langages / and spoke as well as men or aungellys / and knew all the scryptures and the counseylles of god / and if I delivered my body to
martyrdom / and gaf all that I had to poor people / and if I did by miracles
that the mountains lepen from one place to another / if I had not ye virtue of
charity / all this should not auaylle me. Now behold then and take heed that
saint Poule whom we ought to believe / has here named the grettest things and
good that one may do / and ye most auaylle and prouffyten. That been penance
of the body / to suffer martyrdom to aid the poor people / to convert
sinners / and to have science of langages and thappostles says all these
things auayllen not wtoute charity / and if such and so great gods auayllen
not / how should less good avail. That same may thou know by reason. Think
on this proverb which is comunely said. As much is a man worth as his land
is of value. This is as true as the pater noster / who well understands /
how the man is of no value / or sum thing or more or less. And this is no
doubt but it be that he have love and charity of god / and who that has most
is most worth / and who that has less is less worth / and who that has
nougth is naught worth. For how well that a man has temporal gods / like as
is gold or silver or other rychesses / or of spyrituel goods or natural
goods / like as is art / subtle engyne / science / clergy / strength /
prowes or other goods How shall I say yt they prouffyte / for they ben ye
most part more cruelly dampened / because they use not aryght the goods that
god has lent to them for to multyplye and for to win than ben they that
nothing know. Also if he do bodyly works / as done the laborers / the
mynstrelles and other work men. Or if he do spyrytuall works as to fast /
wake / clothe the poor / were heir / if this be without charity all this
avails nothing For he shall never have thereof merit. But he that has
virtue and parfyte charity / of all that that god sends him in this world he
does his prouffyte. And with all conquereth grace and glory. Charity is good
and sure marchaundyse. For over all it wynneth and never leseth. She hyeth all
the good wares / and makes all hers and always she has her penny again. This
is the love of the heart which is the penny / with which she byeth all ye
gods of the world / and it remains always in the almerye / love of charity
has in all places his sales. Charity wynneth in all quarelles / and has
vyctory in all batayles. She does so much that it is as much worth to her to
give a penny / as to another an hundred pound. And also charity does so much
that it avails one as much to fast one day / as another all the lent / and
to say one pater noster / as another to say a psaulter. And this is for none
other reason / but by cause that as much is a man worth as his land is of
value / and so much ben worth his works / for so much as a man has very
love in god / so much he wynneth more every day. The love the which a man
has to god is the poyse and weight of saint Myghell. For none other thing may
not weye when one takes every day his wages / but the love and charity. And
therefore I say that there is none good profitable / proprely to speak by right
/ but fair love and charity.

Of two manners of delectable goods. Ca. lxxiiii.
IN like wise as god made man of body and soul. Right so has he given two
manners of delectable gods for to draw his heart to him / and in whom is all
the very delight. The some goods comes withoutforth / and by the.v. wits or
the body / by seeing / by herynge / by smelling / by tastynge and by
touching. These.v. wits ben also as five conduytes / by which the goods
delectable of the world enters in to the heart for to delight him and for to
lycke and draw to the very delyces which ben in god to serve / to love and
to honor him / for all the delight of this world that ye five wits have /
ben not but a drop of dew to the regard of the fountain that is Ihesu
christ. But of the great see of these goods / descends the drop of dew /
when one sees it a far resemble to a precious stone. But when one weneth to
take it it falls to ground and becomes naught. Thus is it of the delytes of
ye five wits bodily / when one thy^keth or fygureth or wyssheth / or when one
desires them / it appears much precious. But when a man has and holds
them / anon they be lost / and become truffes and dremes. Think on the delight
of ye last year / and of thy dreme to night / thou shalt se yt all is one /
anon they pass and anon they come again / and in no manner may they fulfill
the heart of a man. And if in a drop be as much swetenes / yt it is the
sweetness of all ye fou^tayne. Then is that a delectable good. And therefore
the wise and holy men in all that they saw in this world / and sauoured of
the delectable goods of the world preyseden god / and most desired the love
of him / and the more that they saw the drops sweet / the more they desired
to come to the fou^tayne celestyal. And therefore it is well known that the more
that one forgeteth the drop / the more he loves the fountain / and the
reuerse. The more that one loves the drop the more he hates the fountain
and forgeteth it. And the more that the sweetness of ye world pleases to a
creature which he so much desires / ye less has he of the sweetness of
god. Therefore the good men take the less of the sweetness of the world as
much as they may and will not use the flesshly delytes ne the deduytes that
comen by the five wits bodyly A good lord god how much ben they fools /
and more than beestes / that know well that the body of a man is the most
foul thing that may be / and that the soul of a man is the most noble
thing / the most precious and ye most noble creature that may be. Therefore
they should not wene that the goods that come of the body be more delectable
and sweet / than they of the spyryte / which ben very good / pure / and
perdurable / and may fulfill the heart and replenysshe it. Such gods gives
god to a man in this world / wha^ he gives to him pease of heart and vyctorye
against his sins and against thenemyes of hell. And gives to him glory of
conscience and apeasyble heart / when he replenyssheth ye heart with love and
spyrytuell Joy. Of such Joy ne of such delight / no semblaunce ne no
comparyson may be fou^den in ye joys of ye world ne ben not but drops to ye
regard of ye fou^tayne of sweetness that is Ihesu Christ. This is the
fountain of swetenes of which our lord speaks in the gospel / who that
shall drink of the water that I shall give him he shall become a living
fou^tayne. which shall make him lepe in to the life pardurable. This is the
fountain of Joy / of swetenes / and of charity / ye which may fylle and
replynysshe the heart. And none other thing what someuer it be / may not fill
it. Of this fountain has tasted Dauyd the prophet which says in his
psaulter. O lord god how much is the multitude of thy greece swetenes / which
thou kepest to thy servants and departest to thy friends. And certain who
had well tasted and sauoured this swetenes yt god has given to his friends /
he should despise all the delyces and all the Joys of this world / and should
chese and retain the spyrytuall Joy. And should do like as they that bulte
the meele and deceuereth the flower fro ye bren and grous / and as they that
make oil / that take the clear pure fat / and leave the gross matere. For
Joy of the heart that comes of god to love / to serve / and honor him
which is very Joy parfyte / like as says the proverb. That none has
parfyte Joy if it come not of love. And therefore this Joy is called oil in
holy scripture / like as our lord says by the prophet. I shall give says he
oil of Joy for weeping. This is Joy of heart pure and very for weeping of
penance. Of this oil ben enoynted they that god has made kings and lords
of the world and of them self. And then^e is a man parfyte christian when that
he is enoynted with holy cresme. For of crysme is said christ / and of Christ is
said christian / that is of Ihesu christ. And who that is enoynted of such
oyntemente / the which is of Joy and love of god / he lives in god / and god
in him. Like as the holy appostle says. And this is then the life of a
christian / yt is to speak right / the life of a man / this is a good life and
blyssednes that christian men ought to seche and desire for to get the life
perdurable / ye know much well that he is not in life / but in langoure / that
always lives in pain / in thought and in anguysshe. This is no thing but now
weep / and anon laughe. Now is at ease / now is he at mysease / now is he in
anger / now is he in pease / now in Joy / now in sorrow. Then who that will
led a good life / and live Justly without sin / seche he that he have the
very good / then he shall have life honorable / delectable and prouffytable.
And then he shall live as a man reasonable. That is to say holyly / ordynatly
/ wisely Ioyously and meryly. Meryly without anger / wisely without error /
and. Ioyously without sorrow / and this life has one by grace and by virtue /
and none otherwise.

Here after is spoken of virtues in especyal. Ca. lxxv.
NOw I have showed to the generally here tofore the dygnyte and ye valor of
the virtue of charity / and wherefore one ought to get it. For great prouffyt
comes for to have it / as Joy / honor / and glory perdurable. But by cause
men know not the thing so well in general as they do in special Therefore is
mine entencyon to speak of virtues in especyall / in such manner yt eueryche
that will study in this book may ordeyne his life by virtue and by good works.
For otherwise little should auaylle to know the good if he do it not. For like
as says saint James the appostle / who ye knows ye good and does it not / he
synneth and mysdoth / he is a fooll That knows the right way / and ernestly
go out of it The holy scripture says thus. The wise man or wise woman has a
fair gardyn full of verdure and fair trees / and of good fruytes / whereof god
says in the book of love to the holy soul. My sister / my friend thou art a
gardyn enclosed of two closures. That is of the grace of god and of aungelles.
This gardyn planted the great gardyner. That is god the fader when that he
admolysshed and made soft the heart of the creature humayne / and made it
sweet and treatable like wax chaufed And as good earth well arrayed and
cultyued / and worthy that good ympes should be therein planted. These ympes ben
the virtues which the holy ghost bydeweth with his grace. The blyssed sone of
god / which is the veraye son / by the virtue of his clerenes makes them to
grow on hye / and prouffyte. These three things be necessary to all things
that grow in earth / that is to wete / earth conuenable / humor nourysshable
/ and heet reasonable / without these three things spyrytually may not ye ympes
of virtues grow ne bring forth fruit. These three things makes the grace of
the holy ghoost in ye heart of the person / and makes to wexe grene / to
flourysshe and to fructyfye / and it makes him as a gardyn much delectable
full of good and precious trees. But in like wise as god planted in paradys
terrester plente of good trees and of fruit. And in the myddle he planted a
tree which was called the tree of life. By cause that his fruit had strength
and virtue to keep life to them that should ete of it without deyenge / and
without ever to have any maladye or sykenesses. Right so does he spyrytually
in the heart of a person. The great gardyner / ye which is god the fader. For
he planted the trees of virtues. And in the myddle he set the tree of life.
That is Ihesu christ / which says in the gospel / who that eteth my flesh
and drynketh my blood has life perdurable This tree enuerdureth and
embelyssheth by his virtue all ye which is in paradys. By ye virtue of this tree
grown and flourysshen and fructefyeth all ye other trees. In this tree is all
good / as much as there is. This tree is to be preysed and to be loved for
many things. For the rote / for the fruit / for the stock for the flower /
for the odor for the leef / and for his fair shadow. The rote of this tree
is the right great love and the oultrageous charity of god ye fader / of which
he loved us so much / that for to bye again his evil servant / he gaf his
right blessed sone and delyuerd him to death and to tormente. Of this rote
speaks ye prophet and says thus. That a rod shall issue of the rote of
Iesse. This word is as much to say as embracer of love. The stock of this
precious tree / is the precious flesh of Ihesu Christ. The heart of this tree
/ that was the holy soul in which was the precious marghe of the sapyence of
god. The bark of the tree was the fair conversation without forth. The
droppynges of this tree and the body / weren three precious things and of right
great virtue / which issued and dropped out of the preyous members of Ihesu
christ that were ye water / the teres ye sweet and the blood. The leuys of this
tree weren the precious and holy words of Ihesu Christ which heleden all
maladyes. The flowers were ye holy thoughts of Ihesu Christ which were fair
/ honest and berynge fruit. The fruit weren ye twelve apostles / which fled
all the world and nourysshed it with their holy doctrine / by their examples /
by their good werkys / and with their benefaytes. The branch of this tree in
one sens / ben all the chosen that ever were / and that been / and that ever
shall ben. For like as our savior Ihesu Christ said to his appostles. I am
said he the vygne / and ye ben ye branches In another sens / his branches
were his fair virtues / and his gloryouse exemples / which he showed by work
/ and taught them with his mouth. These were the parfyte virtues and full of
very beneuerte and blyssednesse / which Ihesu Christ showed to his pryue
friends to the xii. appostes / whom he led in to the mountain / and there
he satte as says the gospel / and his dyscyples were about him. And then
the debonayr. Ihesus opened his mouth and said Blessed be the poor of spyryte
/ for the reame of heaven is theyres. Blessed be the debonayr for they shall be
lords of the earth. Blessed be they that wepen. For they shall be comforted.
Blessed be they that have hongre and thurst for Justice / for they shall be full
fed. Blessed be ye merciful / for they shall find mercy Blessed be they yt
be clean of heart / for they shall see god Blessed be the peasyble / for they
shall be called the sons of god. These ben the seven branches of life of ye
blessed sone of god Ihesu Christ. In ye shadow of this tree ought the sin /
and good heart to shadow him / and ought to se and behold these fair
branches / which bear the fruit of life perdurable In these branches and in
these seven words is enclosed all hyenesse / all perfection of grace / of
virtue and of blessedness / as much as may be had in this world / and to have
and atteyne in that other. For these be seven rules of holy life which Ihesu
Christ taught to his chyldern. This is the very phylosophye that the maystre
of angellys enseygned unto his dyscyples. In these words is enclosed all the
sum of ye very perfeccyon of the new law of love and of swetenes. And it
is well said new.. For it may well wax old / like as did tholde law to the
Jews. And because that the soul was waxen old by sin / it is made youge
again and becomen new by these words aforesaid It is very new and dysguysed
fro the other laws / law is said because it is bounden. But the other byndeth
and this unbinds The other law charge / and this law dyschargeth. The
other laws menaceth and three teneth. This law promyseth. In other laws is
plee / in this new law is peace. In other laws is dread / in this new law
is love. The other laws have maledyccyon / and cursynge / this new law has
benedyccyon and blyssynge. Then is this new law all full of beneurte and
blyssednes. And therefore ben blyssed all they that keep it and accomplysshe it.
This says Salamon. For all they that keep it well wynneth the tree of life
pardurable. Then these.vii. words abouesayd which god said ben called
blyssynges. For they make a man to be blyssed as much as he may be in this
present life / and yet more blyssed in that other. Now have thou herd what the
tree of life is / which is in the myddle of paradyce ye which god planted in
ye holy soul. In the shadow of this tree grows and prouffyteth the fruit.
The tree of virtues which god the fader the which is the great gardyner
planted and set in this gardyn / and did bedewe it with the fountain of
grace / the which makes it for to wexe grene / grow and to prouffyte / and
holds it in virtue and in life. This foresaid fountain is departed in to
seven ryuers. These ben the seven gifts of the holy ghoost / the which
arouseth and bewat^eth all the gardyn. Now behold the right great curteysye of
our lord / ye which came in to this world for to seche and save that which
was lost / by cause that he knew well our pouerte and our feblenesse / by
which we may fall in to sin But by our self we may not releue us ne issue
out of sin ne get virtue / ne do none other good / but if it be by the grace
of god / or that it come of his yefte / and therefore he cesseth not to excyte
us that we pray and require him these yeftes. And promyseth much to us / that
if we require and demand him any thing that is good for us / and that it be
ryghtfull we shall have it. And yet ye debonayre Ihesus does unto us more of
his curtosye For he is our advocate that forms for us our request and our
petycyon. For we have not the wit if he formed it not to us. The petycion /
the request or oryson that ye sweet Ihesus informed and taught us with his
blyssed mouth / is much fair / much good / and but short by cause we should
reteyne it well. That is ye pater noster / wherein ben.vii. petycyons and
requestys / by ye which we require our good fader Ihesu Christ / that he give
us the.vii. yeftes of the holy ghoost / that he deliver us fro the.vii. deedly
sins / and that he take them away fro our hertes. And instead of the said
sins / that he by his grace will plant there and nourysshe ye.vii. virtues /
which bring us to the.vii. blessings of perfeccion and of holy life / by
which we may have the promysses that the debonayre Ihesu made and promised to
his chosen people in the seven words aforesaid. Then our entencyon is with the
aid and grace of ye holy ghoost to speak first of the seven petycions of the
holy ghoost which ben contained in the holy pater noster. After I purpose to
say of the yeftes of the holy ghoost. After of the seven virtues / against the
seven deedly sins. The.vii. petycyons and requests ben like as.vii. fair
maidens that never cease to draw the lyuy^ge waters out of seven ryuers for to
water and arouse these seven trees that bear the fruit of life pardurable.

Of seven petycyons and requests that be contained in the Pater noster. Ca.
lxxvi.
Our fader that art in heaven sanctified be thy name thy kingdom come to us /
thy will be done in earth as in heaven / our daily bread give us to day and
forgive us our dett as we forgive our detts. and led us not in to te^ptaco^n
but deliver us from evil. ame^


AS a little child is set to scole / at the begy^nynge he lerneth his (Pater
noster). Who ye will learn of this Clergy and know it / he must be little and
humble as is a child. For our good master Ihesu christ techeth his scolers
this clergy which is the most prouffytable / and most fair that is. What
man or woman that this dotryne well knows / understands and well retayneth
it. For such there be that wene well for to understand it / that no thing
know thereof / by ye bark or rynde without forth That is the lettre which is
good. But little is it worth to the regard of the marghe / of the godnes and
of the great substance which withinforth is so sweet. It is much short in
words and much long in substance light to say and subtle for to
understand. This prayer and oryson passes and surmounteth all other in three
things. That is to wit. In shortness. In dygnyte / and in prouffytablenesse
The dygnyte is in that / that the right blessed son of god made it / too god
the fader in short words. God the holy ghoost touching his demand / he
will that it be short in words / by cause yt none excuse him to learn it and
to conne it. And also by cause that none should be grieved to say it wyllyngly
and often. And for to show that god ye fader hereth us right soon / and
grants it gladly when we pray him with good heart / so that it be not of
long ryotte ne of words polysshed ne rymed. For sweet saint Gregory says
Verayly for to work is not to say fair and glosynge words with the mouth /
but too cast out wepynges and deep syghes from the heart. The valor and the
prouffyte of this oryson or prayer is so great / that it compryseth and
encloseth in words much short / all that which may be desired of heart /
and prayed and demanded of mouth. That is to be delyuerd of al euylles / and
replenysshed with all goods Thus begins the holy pater noster. Fader our
that art in heaven. Behold now how that our blyssed advocate / and our right
good and blyssed master and sovereign our rede^ptour and savior Ihesu christ
/ the which is the sapyence and wysdom of god ye fader omnypotent / and that
knows all the vsages and all the laws of his court / techeth us for to plete
well / and to speak wisely / subtylly / and shortly But certainly if the first
word that thou say. Fader our that art in heaven / if that it be well
understood and well pursued he shall give to the all thy request and all thy
demand. For saint Bernarde says that ye orayson that begins by the right
name of god the fader / gives to us hope to Impetre and get all our prayers
and requests. This sweet word (fader) which makes sweet all the remanaunt /
shows to the that / which you ought to believe and somoneth the to that /
which you ought to do. And these two things saves the man when he
believes well and aryght. And when he does after that he ought to do / when
thou call him (fader) thou know that he is lord of the house / that is
of heaven and of earth / and capytayne and beginning. And fountain of whom
all creatures and al gods comes This knowlegest thou in that / his puyssaunce
and might. After I say by cause that he is a fader / he is ordeyner gouerner /
and purueyer of his meyny / and specially of his children / that is of the men
of whom himself has created / made and fourmed to his semblaunce / and in
this thou knowlegest his sapyence / yet also sith that he is fader by nature
and by right / he loves that which he has made. Like as says the book of
sapyence. And he is debonayre and loves and nouryssheth his children / and
does their prouffyte better than they can deuyse. And he beteth and chastyseth
them when they mysdone or offend / for their prouffyte and welthe as a good
fader / And gladly he receives and takes them unto mercy and to pardon /
when they have trespaced or offended / and return to him by great repentance.
And by this we know his bou^te and his great debonayrte. Now I have showed to
ye then this word / when you say / Fader) his puyssaunce / his sapyence /
his bounte / and his debonayrte. On that other part he remembers thy self /
thy noblesse / thy beauty / and thy richesse. Of more great noblesse ne may
thou not be sone. Ne unto so great a king. Ne unto so mighty and puyssaunt an
Emperor as is god. For more greter riches may thou not have / than to be
heir of all that he has / More great beauty may thou not have than to
resemble him by right The which beauty is so great that it passes the beauty
of man and of aungelles. Then this word (fader) remembers the that thou
art his sone / because that thou paynest thy self to resemble him / as a good
sone ought to resemble his fader and to ensue thy good fader / in all good
virtues and in all good works. That is to say yt thou be wise / and noble /
vygorous / strong / and puyssaunt to do well / to keep the from all sins /
and strongely resyst against the temptacyons of the fend. And yt thou be wise /
and aduysed / large / curteyse / sweet / and debonayre / clean without velony /
and without sin / like as is thy fader our lord Ihesu christ. And that thou
hate sin and fylth and all evil / as does thy good fader Ihesu christ / so
that thou forsake him not. This word then (fader) remembers the all the
times that thou say it / that if thou be his good and true sone thou
ought to resemble him by nature / by commandment and by right. For thou
owe to him love / honor / reverence and dread / service / and obedience.
Now think than when thou say thy pater noster / that thou be unto hy^ a
good sone and true if thou will that he be unto the a good fader sweet and
debonayre / It is said to a knight think whose sone thou art / for to give to
him the greter courage / when he enters in to the tournoyenge / here see
thou how this first word when thou say fader / how sweet it is / and how it
admonesteth the / that thou be valyaunte and noble and techeth the what thou
sholdest be.

Wherefore thou say fader our / and not fader mine. Ca. lxxvii.
NOw demand I of ye wherefore that thou say fader our / and thou say
not fader mine. And unto whom thou accompaniest the / when thou say give to
us and not give to me. None ought to say fader our / but he that is his sone
by nature without hegynnynge and without ending. That is the blessed sone of
god Ihesu Christ. But we ben not his sons by nature / but in as much as we be
made to his image and to his semblaunce. So ben the sarasyns and the Jews / we
ben his sons by grace and by adopcyon. Adopcyon is a word of law For the
law of the Emperors when an hye man has no children / he may chese the sone
of a poor man if he will / and make of him his sone and his hair if he will by
adopcyon. This is by aduoerye. And by yt he shall be his herytyer and his heir
and have his heritage This grace has given to us the sone of god the fader
without our deserte / like as saint Poule says / when he made us come to
baptesme / where as we were poor and naked / and all sons of wrath and of
hell.

Then when we say fader our / and we say give to us / we accompany with us
all our bretherin by adopcyon / the which ben sons and children of our mother
ye holy church / the faith that they received in baptysme. Now we show then
by this word (ours) the larges and ye curteysye of god our fader / which
gives more gladly enough than little to many than to one / whereof saint
Gregory says / that the prayer that is common is much worth and prouffytable.
In like wise as the ca^del is better employed and is more prouffytable that
serves and lyghteth many men / than that which serves and lyghteth but one
man alone. This word (fader our) admonesteth us to yield thankynges with all
our hertes of this grace which god has done to us / by which we ben his
sons and his heirs / and that much ardauntly we ought to love our brother and
fader Ihesu christ which has accompanied us with him to this grace. This word
(our) admonesteth that we keep in our hertes the holy ghoost which is our
witness of this adopcyon. And like as it were a gage or wedde. This says the
appostle saint Poule. By whom we be sure / yt we shall have the heritage of
our fader our lord Ihesu christ / yt is the glory of our fader of heaven. This
word fader our techeth us and says that we ben al brethren / both great and
small / poor and rich / high and low / of one fader and of one mother. That
is of god and of holy church And that no man ought for to despise / ne myspryse
an an other / but to love him as his own brother / and that one ought to aid
and help an other / like as the members do of one self body. And also we
ought to pray the one for that other like as said the blyssed appostle sweet
saint James. And in this our prouffyte is much great / For when that thou
say thy prayers in common / thou have part in all ye comynalte of our mother
holy church. And for one Pater noster that thou say / thou wynnest more
than an hundred thousand. This word (our) techeth us to hate three things in
especyall. Pride. Hate / and Auaryce. Pride puts a man out of company /
wha^ he will be above al other people. Hate puts him out of company. For
when he hates and warreth one / he warreth all the other. Auaryce puts him
out of company. For he will not him self / ne that his things comyne with
other. And therefore such people have no part ne company in ye holy pater
noster. This word our / shows that god is ours / if it be not in our
deffaulte / if we will. The fader the sone and ye holy ghoost That is if we
keep his commandments like as the gospel says.

Why we say / qui es in celis Ca. lxxviii.
AS that I say / qui es in celis / yt is to say / which art in heaven. I say
two things / like as I shall say The king is at paris. I say two things /
that he is a king and that he is at paris. Right so wha^ I say that he is in
heaven. I say that he is / and that he is in heaven It is founden in holy
scripture in two books of the law that god appyered to Moses the prophet in
a mountain and said to him. Go thou in to Egipte and say to king Pharao on
my behalue that he deliver my people the children of Israhell from the seruage
wherein he holds them. Sir said Moses if it be demanded of me how ye be
named what shall I say. I am that I am / said god. Thus shall thou say to the
chylderen of Israhell. He yt is sends me to you. Now sayen the holy and good
clerkys / that among all ye hye names of our lords this name is ye first and
most propre. And that most aryght techeth us what god is. For all his other
names / either they speak of his bounte / or of his excellence / or of his
sapyence / or of his puyssaunce / or that he is such or such. That is the
right good / the right wise / the right fair / the right puyssaunt / and many
other words as ben said of him to his loenge and praysynge / and the which
say nothing of the being of god But we that been gross and rude to speak of
so hye a thing / speak of god / like as one speaks and deuyseth of a man of
whom he knows not the name. Thus as it is said / he is a king / he is a
duke / he is an earl / he is so great / he is so fair / he is so rich / he is
so large. And many of such propryetees and accydents. How and by what manner
one may know what he is / and what manner man But he says not his propre name
a right. But thus as we speak of god / we find many fair and sweet words.
The which shows unto us some thing of him / But there ne is no word so
propre / as this same word here following. (qui est.) which so proprely is
showed to us and so subtylly / in as much as our entendement may stratche and
compryse. For our blyssed lord Ihesu christ is he that is only. Like as Job
says / he is only. for to say right. For he is only pardurable without
beginning and without ending. But this may not be said of none other thing.
After he is very truth / and veryte. For he is way and truth. All manner
things that been created and that been creatures / ben vain and vanytees. As
the wise king Salamon says / And be as nothing unto the regard of him. And
to naught shall they come / fro whens they came if that he witholde and
sustain them not. And also preserve and keep them by his virtue / yet also
he is only establement and steadfastness. For he is always him self / and in
one self point without trouble without to change him / without to moeue hymn
any manner / this says saint James. All other things ben moeuable in sum
manner of their nature. Then is he proprely called / that is. For he is
verayly without vanyte / establysshement without beginning / without end /
without he was and without he shall be / for in him is no departing. Now
ought thou here understand that he is. And that there is no thing that may
better be known than this / that god is. And therefore I counceyll ye that thou
muse not tenquyre ferther. For thou may sone err and go out of the way /
late it suffyse to the that thou say. Fader our the which art in heaven.
Troth it is that he is oueral present in earth in heaven / in see / and in
hell like as he is in heaven. But it is said that he is in heaven by cause that
he is more seen there / more known / more byloued / and more honored After I
say that the debonayr Ihesus is in persons spyrytuell and dououte. That is in
the holy hertes / that been hye / cleansed / clean and purged from all sin as
is the heaven. For in such hertes is he seen / known / honored and loved. Now
have thou herd these.iiii. words Pater noster quies in celis The first word
somoneth the to honor god. The second to love god. The third to redoubte
god. For how well he be fader and our / always he is Just and not meuable.
The fourth word somoneth ye to engyne thy self to him and to encorage and
enforce the / for sith he is so hye and thou art so low / if thou be not
hardy and vygorous to vaynquysshe al sy^nes / to resyste al ye temptacons of ye
enemy / and to keep holy his commandments thou shalt not come in to ye
glory of heaven. The first word abouesayd shows to us the length of his
eternyte. The second ye largess of his charity. The third the depnesse of
his veryte and truth. And the fourth the hyenesse of his mageste / who
someuer shall have these four things attained without doubt he shall be blessed

How Sctificetur nomen tuu^ is expowned. Ca. lxxix.
NOw have thou herd the prologue of ye holy Pater noster which is like unto
an enter in to a town. A lord god who ye well could all this song / he should
find therein many sweet notes. For it is no doubt that in the prayer and song
spyrytuell which the sapyence of god made / he that taught the birds to sing
/ has many notes and words subtle and swear in his holy song and prayer of
the holy Pater noster / how well that it conteyneth little letter. In this
song and excellent oryson ben the seven petycyons and requests of ye holy
Pater noster which get and Impetre the seven gifts of the holy ghoost /
which put away and destroy the seven vices capytall of the heart those ben
the seven deedly sins. And they plant / and nourysshe the.vii. virtues / by
the which one may come to the seven blessings. Of these vii. petycions and
requests The three first make a man holy as much as he may be in this world.
The.iiii. after makes him parfytly Just. All the holiness of a man that is
made to thymage of the holy Trynyte after three things that been in ye soul /
yt is to wete / memory entendement and will is in three things. In this that
the soul be parfytely purged / and the will parfytely enlumyned / and the
understanding parfytely confermed in god / and with god in the memory. And the
more ye soul receives of god these three things / the more habundauntly and
more proprely she approaches more too his right great beauty natural. That is
to the semblau^ce of the fader / and of the sone / and of the holy ghost. That
is when god the fader confermeth unto him his memory. God the sone enlumyneth
to him his understanding. God the holy ghoost purges in him his will. These
three gifts we require in the three first petycyons of the holy pater noster /
when we say. Sanctificetur nomen we show to our good fader curteysly our
pryncypall desire / which we ought always to have. That is that his glorious
name be sanctyfyed / and that it be confermed in us. Then when we say.
Sanctificetur nomen tuu^. we show to our good fader Ihesu christ curteysly our
desire. That is to say. Sir this is our sovereign desire. This require we
above all things that thy blyssed name be sanctyfyed in us. That is thy good
renoume / thy knowledge / thy faith be confermed in us. In this first petycyon
we require the first and the pryncypall gift of ye holy ghoost. That is the
gift of sapyence which makes steadfast and confermeth the heart in god / and
Joins him so to him that he may not be dysioyned ne deceuered. Sapyence is
said of sauoure and for to savor / for when a man receives this gift / he
tastes and assauoureth and feleth the swetenes of god / like as is felt the
swetenes of good wine by the taste better than by sight But to this that thou
understand better what it is to say. Thy name be sanctyfyed. Thou ought for
to know that this word (Saint) is as much to say as pure / as gold / as
earth / as dyed in blood / as confermed. In these five manners is sanctyfyed ye
holy ghoost of sapyence in the heart of a man. First he cleanses and purges
like as the fire fyneth and purges ye gold and the silver / after he takes
it away fro the earth / that is fro all carnal affeccions / and makes all to
bycome lothely that which he was wont to love / like as ye water is hated to
him that is lykorous to ye good wine. After he haloweth him self all to the
service of god. For he leueth all charges / and puts him self all to think
on god and to love serve and honor him / like as the church and the
monasterye is hallowed to the service of god. So yt he ought none other thing
do but to serve and honor god. After he dies him self in blood. For he
puts him self in one so strong and ardant love and in so sweet love of
Ihesu Christ / and of devotion / that when he thinks on him and on his passion
/ he is as he were all drunk of yt precious blood that Ihesu Christ shed for
him in his holy passion like as is a soppe of hot bread / wha^ it is put in
wine. This is a new bapteme. For to dye and to baptyse is all one. After he
confermeth him in god so strongelye / that nothing may dysseuere ne desioyne
him. Now then / will thou to say this word / thy name be sanctyfyed in
us. That is to say give to us yefte of sapyence by which we may be so fined
as is the gold / and the silver in the fornays / and cleansed fro all ordures
of sin / by which we be dronken of his love and that al other loves be to us
bitter by which we be so given to the and unto thy service / that we never
retche of none other charge / too the end that we be not only wesshen fro all
sins / but dyed in grain / renewed and rebaptysed in the precious blood of
Ihesu Christ by devotion of fervent love to this that the blyssed name of our
good fader Ihesu christ be so confermed in us / that he be our good fader / and
we his sons / and his servants / as very obedyent unto to all his
commau^demementes / and in such manner / that nothing what someuer it be / may
come ne happen to dysioyne this fastnes ne this grace. Much is great the grace
of god wha^ the will of the creature humayne is so rooted in god and confermed
that it may not wagge ne moeue for no temptacyon. Much greter a thing it is /
when one is so affermed in the love of god and so dronken in his swetnes that
no solace / ne no comfort / ne no pleasaunce may not be had but in him / and
then is the heart parfytely co^fermed in god / when the memory is so fastened
and Joined to him / that it may not think on no thing but on him. And this
require we when we say. Sanctificetur nomen tuum. This is to say. Sir thy name
be sanctyfyed in us.

Here is the second petycyon and request of the holy pater noster. Ca. lxxx.
ADueniat regnu^ tuum. This is the second petycyon and request of ye holy
pater noster / where we pray and require / yt ye realm of heaven come to us /
and be wtin us. Our lord says in the gospel to his disciples The reame of is
in you understand well how this may be / when god gives to a person in his
heart the spyryte of understanding Thus as the son takes away ye darkness
of ye night. And does waste the clouds and the mystes in the morning. Right
so wastes this spyryte and does take away all the derknesses of the heart /
and shows him all his sins and defaultes great and small / like as the
rays of the son shows the motes and ye duste that is in the house. Also
this spyryte of understanding shows on that other part / not only that
which is within him / but that which is under him / hell / and that which
is above him / heaven / and that which is about him / all the fair creatures
/ which all preysen god and wytnessen how god is fair / good / wise /
puyssant sweet / and great. And who that sees most clear ye creatures / is
most desiring to see god / but let him consydere that he is not pure ne
worthy to see him. Then the good heart / true and devout chauffeth him /
and is angry with him self. Then he begy^neth to enter in to his heart and to
examyn him. And there he fyndeth so many sins / vices / pouertees / defautes
/ troublynges of heart and of thoughts and evil will / that he is angry with
him self by great contrycyon and dyspleasyr that he has of his sins. And
then he begins to cleanse his heart and purge him of al ordures of sin by
bitter repentance / and by devout confession / and after by sharp and
condygne penance. But when he has long led this life / and has cast out
al his sins by very confession. Then he fyndeth pease and rest and
consolacion. And fereth so much god to fall again to sin / that him
seems that all the world be to him hell to the regard of this clerenesse
and this pease that that he fyndeth in his heart. And this demand we of god
when we say. Adueniat regnum tuum / that is to say. Fair fader plese it to
the that the holy ghoost will enlumyne in us the heart / and cleanse and purge
it fro all sins. And that he vouchesauf to come and dwell as a king and a
lord / governor / and commaundour in hour hertes / so that all the heart be
his / and that he be king and lord and always that we mayse him. For it is
life pardurable to have the reame of god within us. Therefore says our lord in
the gospel / that ye realm of god is as a treasour hyd in a field / that is
in the heart of a good man / which is more great than all the world.

The.iii. petycyon and request of ye holy Pater nr^. Ca. lxxxi
FIat voluntas tua sicut in celo et in terra. This is ye.iii. pytycyon and
request / where we pray our lord yt his will be done in us / like as it is
done in heaven / that is in holy aungelles that been in heaven / which ben so
inlumyned and confermed in god / that they may will none other thing but that
which god will / we may not have this petycyon ne this perfeccyon but we have
the gift of cou^ceyle / which is ye third gift of the holy ghost / yt techeth
us to do his good will / and that he convert our caytyfe and frail will so
that in us grow no propre will / but that his will be only lady of the heart
holy / and do in us what someuer he will / like as his will is done in holy
aungelles of heaven which may not sin. And yt always does the will of god
without myspryse and gaynsaynge. Now have thou herd the three petycions and first
requests of the holy (pater noster / which ben the highest and most worthy. In
the first we demand the yeft of sapyence. In the second the gift of
understanding / and in the third the gift of counceyle / like as I have
tofore showed. These three things we do not require and demand / because we
should have them in this mortal life parfytely. But we show unto our good
fader Ihesu Christ our desires / that they be always in heaven where they ought
to be. To the end that these three requests and petycyons be done and
accomplyshest in us in the life pardurable / we demand them in this present
life. In ye other four petycyons that comes after we speak an other langage.
For we say to our good fader Ihesu christ. Give to us perdone us / keep us / and
deliver us. For if we have not of Ihesu christ these four petycyons and
requests in this present world / we ben but deed. For they be necessary unto
every person in this mortal life.

The.iiii petycyon and request. Ca. lxxxii.
DAnem nr^m cotidianu^ da nobis hodie. Well techeth us our good master Ihesu
christ / to speak humbly and wisely. For he techeth us to say. Fair fader give
to us this day our breed cotydyan or daily. What may the sone less demand
of his fader / than only breed for to pass forth the day / he demands
none outrage / ne wine / ne flesh / ne fysshe / but he demands breed and
no more not for a year / ne yet for a weke / but for to pass with the day
only. This seems that it is a little thing that we demand / but certainly
we require a much great thing / when we require of an abbot the breed of an
abbay / or require the fraternity / the company / the part / and the right in all the gods of thabbay. Right so it is of hy^ yt axeth of god this daily breed
/ he has fratnyte part company / and right in all the goods that been in
heaven. This is the blyssed breed of heaven / of that blyssed couente. The bread
of heaven. The bread of aungellys / the bread delectable / the bread of the life
perdurable. For it gives life understanding / never to deye / and preserves a
man / whereof god says in the gospel. I am the bread of life which descended
fro heaven / who that shall ete of this bread shall always live without deyenge.
This bread is right good mete. For it stauncheth all the hongres of the world
/ and fylleth a man and replenyssheth this does not other mete / this is the
breed and the mete that thou take at the sacrament of ye altar. And this
mete thou ought to take in great ardour and in great devotion of heart / and
in great desire. That is to understand that thou ought to believe feythfully
that this mete so much precious is the very body of Ihesu Christ / and the
soul / and ye godhede all together without error and without to demand or
ask any ferther. For god may more than man may understand. After a man ought
to understand and chewe this precious mete / like as the ox fedeth of the
grass and cheweth his cudde / and then he takes it in. That is to say that
one ought to remember deuoutlye and often by parties / the bountes and graces of
our lord / and all ye sorrows that Ihesu Christ suffered in earth for us.
Then the heart fyndeth the savor of this precious mete and causes a right
great ardour of the love of god in right great desire and will to do and to
suffer all that he may for him / and more than he may. And all this does the
virtue of this blessed bread celestyall of the sacrament of the mass which
is ye very precious body of Ihesu Christ. This is the bread that comfort and
enforces the heart to that / that he be well strong to suffer and to do great
things for the love of god. But this may not be but if he have the fourth
gift of the holy ghost / which is called the gift of strength / which armeth
and encourages the knight of god / and makes hy^ to run gladly to
martyrdom and to suffer Ioyously the tourme^tes Now may thou se / when we
demand this breed of aungelles. We demand the gift of strength. For like as
the bodily breed or materyall sustain the body and enforce it. Right so the
gift of strength makes the heart strong to suffer and to do great things for
god This breed celestyall of aungelles / we call (our) for he was made of our
paste he was sone of god the fader / and was sone and borne of the glorious
vyrgyn Mary. Blyssed be this glorious vyrgyn fro whom came this blyssed
flower. For that was ye debonayre Ihesus / yt was crucyfyed on the cross for
to redeem ye world fro pains of hell. And this did he for the great
brennynge love that he had unto us. This is the bysquyt of which he
garnysshed his ship of holy church for to pass the great se of this
peryllous world / he is ours / for he left to us at his departing and leave
taking at his last testament the sweet Ihesu christ / the right large / as the
most great and most rich treasoure that he might leave to us. For he gave him
self to us as the most fairest Jewel that he might give to us. And we ought
devoutly / clenly / and reverently keep him without sin / and of this breed
of au^gelles we ought every day to use for the love of hy^ / and in mind of
his holy passion / he is verily ours. For no manner thing may he taken away
from us against the will of ours / that is of himself / we do call our breed
cotydyan / the which is for to say of every day / that is for to understand
the cotydyan dystrybucyon the which he gives to his priests and relygious
people each day which done his seruyses and sing his masses and his hours /
that is to all good christian men and wymmen that every day by very love
deuoutely make remenbraunce of the dolorous passion of Ihesu Christ that he
suffered for us The groos of the prouende of this bread of aungellys we take in
harvest / that is in heaven when we shall see the sweet Ihesu Christ dyscouerd /
in his right great beaule like as he is. Therefore is it said cotydyan / that
every day is to us necessary. And every one ought to take the holy sacrament
of the altar like as done the preestys / which ben thereto ordained. Or
otherwise every good christian man or woman ought to take him by right faith.
This bread is right precious / right noble and right well arrayed. This is
meteryall in which ben all manner of delyces and all good savors like as says
the book of sapyence. This is none erthely mete that ought to be given to
raskayll / but to hertes gentle and noble which ben purged and cleansed fro
all ordure of sin by very repentance / by devout confession / and by
entyer satysfaccion and penance. Of the virtue of this bread of aungellys
says saint mathe we theuangelyst / and calls it bread sursubstancyall. That
is to say / that it passes and surmounteth all substance and all creatures
of praysynge and of virtue / of all dygnytees / and in all manners of valor.
Nor none may better name it ne descryue it ne more suffysau^tlye than to call
it / bread sursubstancyall. It is said that a mete is substa^cyous / wha^ there
is therein enough of substance and of nourysshynge. And for so much more as
it is nourysshynge / so much more it is said that it is substancyall. And by
cause that in this precious bread of Aungellys is more of nourysshynge of
virtue / and of good than ever may be thought and said is not said only that
it is substancyous between any understanding and supposing / but it is said
sursubstancious This bread require we at our good fader Ihesu Christ and we
pray him that he will give it to us in this day that is in this present mortal
life / to the end yt we may make a good Iourneye / and abide more gladly our
reward / yt is in the end of our life the glory pardurable of heaven.

Here follows the.v. petycyon and request of the holy pater noster. Ca.
lxxxiii.
DImitte nobis debita nr^a: sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nr^is. In this
request and petycyon we require and demand our good fader of heaven / that he
will pardone and forgive us our sy^nes and our trespaces / like as we forgive
them that have trespasced to us / or that trespace to us Then we say thus
Fair fader quyte to us our dettes like as we quyte our detters. Our dettes be
our sins which we have increased upon our souls. This is the best and most
dear wedde that we may fine / whereof the sinner for one deedly sin which is
soon passed as too the delight / or as touching the deed is bounden to so
great usure that he has no power to pay ne to fynysshe / that is the pain of
hell which is without end. After he owes unto god whom he has dyspleased
so great amends that he has no power for to pay it. For in all his life if
he lived an hundred year or more he might ne could not make suffysaun^ penance
For one deedly sin only / if god would use his right full Justice / it
should never be forgyuen to the And therefore it byhoueth that in bitter and
great repentance the wicked sinner return unto the mercy of the debonayr and
blessed lord Ihesu Christ. And that he cry him mercy and demand pardon and
foryeuenes.For by the right of the court of Justice / the sinner shall be Iuged
and condemned unto death perdurable. And therefore our good fader Ihesu Christ
which is soft and debonayr for to foryeue and pardone / large and curtoys for
to give / we pray him that he will pardone and foryeue to us our sins and
trespaces. But think and consider well how thou prayest. For thou say
pardone to us our sy^nes as we perdon other. God shall not foryeue ne pardone
to us / as he him self says in the gospel if we forgive not and pardone to
other that have trespaced to us. Then he that says his Pater noster if he
keep in his heart rancour and felonnye he prays more against him self than for
him self. For he prays to god that he forgive him not his sins / when he
says forgive me like as I forgive / and therefore all the times that thou shall
say thy Pater noster tofore god ye sees thyn heart. Thou ought to forgive
all evil talentes and cast out of thyn heart all Ire and al rancour Otherwise
thy prayer is more against the than with the / if it seem to ye an hard thing
and grievous to forgive and pardone to them that hate the / and that will the
evil or that have much trespaced to the / or myssayed. Think that god
pardoned his death to them that crucefyed him / for to give to the an exaumple
for to forgive / and more yet for to pray for them that have trespaced to ye
that god forgive them / and more yet for to do well and good to them / and to
help them if they have need. For as he says in the gospel / that it is not
a great thing ne great merit against god to do good to them / that do us
good / ne to love them that love us. For so done the paynyms and ye Sarasyns.
Jews and other sinners But we that been the children of god by faith and by
grace and ben named christian of our blessed Lord Ihesu Christ and ben heirs
with him of ye heritage of heaven ought for to forgive each other. And also
ought for to love our enemies. That is to say their persons and pray for
them and to do good to them if they have need. For so comau^deth god in the
gospel. Then we ought only hate the sins and to love their souls. Like
as the members of one body love and supporte each other if one membre hurt
that other by adventure / ye other aduengeth him not. And therefore we that been
all one body in Ihesu Christ like as thappostles says we out to love and
supporte each other / and not to hate ne to grieve / and who that does
otherwise he is an homycyde of him self / this says the scripture. Such there
be that can say their pater noster / that it were better for them and more
auayllable that they could say it a right. For who that pardons not / nor
forgyueth with heart / and with mouth / he moeueth his Judge ayenste him. And
in this prayer that we make to god / we require of him the yefte of science
which makes a man wise and also cunning. This spyryte shows unto him what
he is and in like wise from whens he comes / whether he goes / and what he
has done and what he has trespaced how much he has lent / and how much he
owes. and when he sees that he has not whereof to pay / then this spyryte
makes him to repent / to weep and also to ^yghe / and cry god mercy and say.
O good lord forgive and pardone to me my dettes / that be my sy^nes. For I am
much endetted to the / for the euylles and sins yt I have commysed and done
/ and for the good deeds that I have forgoten and left to do / which yt I
ought and might have done and for the gods and benefayres that thou have done
to me / and the great bountees which I have all day received and evil used
them / and have evil served the. And because lord that I much dread and
doubt to make my payment. I require the to pardone me that / which I owe unto
the. When this spyryte of science has thus enlumyned him that he knows his
defautes and sins. Then he casts out of his heart all hate and rancoure
and pardons all his evil will and anger if he have any. And if he have none
/ and is in will and in purpose to pardone and forgive with good heart if any
have trespaced to him. Than may he well say. Fair fader forgive us our
trespaces / like as we do to them that have trespaced us.

The.vi. petycyon and request of the pater nr^. Ca. lxxxiiii.
ET ne nos inducas in temptacionem. Burnt child fire dredeth / and he that
sometime is falin to sin / when his sin is pardoned him he is more doutous
and more a ferde / and has more dread of ye temptacyon of sin than he had
tofore / and therefore he prays unto all mighty god unto whom he has so
much trespaced / and also that he has forgyuen and pardoned him / that he
will keep him from falling in to it again / and says thus Et ne nos inducas
in temptationem. That is for to say Fair sweet fader / suffer not thou yt we
enter in to temptacyon / and that we consent not to any sy^ne. The devil is
the temptoure of sin / for it is his craft / of ye which he serves in the
house of god to preue the new knights of god. And if the temptacyon were not
good and prouffytable to good people. God the which does all thing for our
prouffyte / would never suffer that temptacyon should come. But as saint
Bernarde says when our temptoure smyteth us on the back. He forgeth unto us
our crowns of glory / like as he that smyteth on the back of a good knight /
forgeth to him his praysynge and his glory / The devil tempts a man
proprely to the end that he take him aweye and depart him holly from the love
of our lord Ihesu Christ Therefore prayed and prays to us saint Poule the
appostle / and unto his dyssyples / that they be founded and ferme as a toure /
and roted as a tree / in charity / and in the love of god so that no temptacyon
may moeue them ne make them for to staker ne quaure. And therefore in this
petycyon and request we require and demand ye aid and help of god in our
bataylle against the fend / that he will give to us the yefte of pity. That is a
grace that arouseth and bedeweth the heart / and makes him sweet and pyetous /
and makes him al to render and were grene / and to bear fruit enough of good
works without forth / and withinforth. And within to make steadfast and ferme
his roots in the land of living people / yt is like as ye good cyment of
which ben made these walls sarazynoys / which may not be broken ne defeated
with pykeys ne with hamer when we say then. Et ne nos in ducas in
temptacyonem. That is to say sweet fader make thou our hertes ferme and in
like wise stable / that they moeue not ne quauer for no temptacyon yt come to
them by the grace of the gift of pity / we pray not that we be in no wise
tempted. For that were a folysshe prayer and shameful / like as the sone of a
lord / or of another noble man / that should be adoubed a new knight / and he
should say to his fader. Fair fader I pray you that ye me deporte or forbere
and keep that I never se battle ne tournoy. We ought well will to be tempted /
for it is our great prouffyte in many manners. For we be the more humble and the
more doutous and the more wise in many cases / and the better proved and the
more hardy. For as Solomon says ye. Who yt has not be tempted / he may know
nothing a right / but like as one knows of ye battle of Troy by here
saying for he may not know him self ne his Infyrmyte / ne the strength of his
enemies / ne their subtylte / ne how god is true and ready at need to aid his
friend / ne how and many times he has kept us from many perils and sins
/ and by all these reasons he shall not conne love god aryght / ne thank hy^ of
his yeftes if he be not tempted / but pray we him that he keep to us our hertes
yt they enter not in to temptacyon / yt is to say that the heart consent not
thereto / and as touching our self we be so poor / that we may not an hour
of the day sustain thassautes and the diverse temptacyons of the fend without
ye help of our lord. And when he faylleth for to aid and help us we enter
in to temptacyon. And when he helps us we resyste and we fight and
vaynquysshe the fend our enemy when that we consent not to sin.

The.vii. petycyon of ye pater noster. Ca. lxxxv.
SEd libera nos a malo amen / saint austyn says that all the other temptacyons
ben to us either for to do well or for to leave to do well. But all the yeftes
and all the good that a man does / or that he can get / is for to put away
and destroy pride and all sins and euylles. And therefore when god has given
to a man this that he has required of god in the.vi. requests aforesaid.
Then certaynlye it is of very need that god deliver him from the puyssaunce
of ye fend / fro all his engynes and from all his temptacyons. And therefore
comes at the last this petycyon and request as the ryergarde which says
thus. Sed libera nos a malo a men / that is to say. Fair fader Ihesu Christ
deliver us fro all evil / fro all sins and fro all perils passed / present
/ and to come. And fro all thengynes of the fend our enemy / that we lose not
by pride the goods that thou have given to us. In this request we pray to
god that he give to us the yefte of holy dread. By the which we may be
delyueryd fro the fend and from his temptacyons / and fro all manner of evil
/ that is fro all perils and fro al sins in this world and in that other
amen So be it as we have said / so much is it to say this word amen. Now
have thou herd the seven petycyons and requestys / that god made with his
blessed mouth for to enseygne and teache us to learn all that which we may and
ought to pray and demand for the body and for the soul and for this world
and for that other. And all is contained and comprysed in the holy Pater noster
Now keep the well that thou say it aryght with heart and with mouth. For
great good shall come to the thereof / if thou so do.

Thus ends the seven petycyons of the holy Pater noster.

Of the.vii. gifts of the holy ghost. Ca. lxxxvi.


AFter the petycyons and requests that been contained in the holy pater noster.
Us behooves to speak in great reverence of so hy a matter as of the holy gifts
of the holy ghoost / like as he him self of his grace shall ensygne and teache
us. And we shall say first which ben ye gifts of the holy ghoost. After
wherefore they be called gifts / and wherefore they be called of the holy ghost.
After wherefore they be seven gifts of the holy ghoost ne moo ne less. Also we
shall say of the goods that the gifts of the holy ghost do. Custom it is /
reason and curteysy / that a hye man / rich / valiant / and noble / when he
will go to his spouse that he loves with all his heart / yt he beat to her of
his Iewelles. Ysaye the prophet saw in his spyryte the glorious espousaylles
that were made in the belly of the blyssed vyrgyn Mary / when ye blyssed sone of
god espoused her / and took in her our blood and our flesh / our humanite and
our nature. So recounteth to us the said prophet of the Iewelles and the fair
gifts yt he brought with him for to give to us his espouse and to her
parents. And says thus the said prophet much curteysly. Fro the rote of
Iesse shall issue a rod ye shall bear the flower of nazareth. That is to say
/ out of the great charity / and fro the great enbracynge or brennynge of the
love of god shall come to us a rod which shall b^re the flower of flowers.
For nazareth is as much for to say as flower. And Iesse is as much to say as
enbracy^ge or brennynge. And upon this flower shall rest the holy ghost the
spyryte of sapyence and of understanding / the spyryte of strength and of
counceyle / the spyryte of science and of pity / and the spyryte of the dread
of god. These ben the graces of which he was all full fro the hour that he
was conceived in the precious belly of his mother like as the great se is full of
water / and is well and fou^tayne of all the fresshe waters and salt / of
which he arouseth and watreth all the world. Right so was he as says saint
Johan theuangelyst so full of grace / of veryte or truth ye of his plant we
take all. These.vii. spyrytes and these seven gifts we take them and receive
in the holy baptesme But thus as the graces corporell which god gives to
children / in wit / in bounte / in strength / and in other graces / which
he gives at his playser to eueryche he shows him little / like as a child
grows and comes forth. Right so is it in spyrytuell graces / after that /
that eueryche prouffyteth and grows in good works / and gives all his heart
/ and all his thought to god / after yt / god gives to him more of his graces
/ and that shows the same gifts by works / sum in one / and other in /
other / at the playsyre of ye holy ghoost as says saint Poule ye appostle.
Then in our begy^nynge these graces and these virtues ben low / and rise on
heyght. That is fro the spyryte and yefte of dread unto the gifts of sapyence.
For holy dread is the beginning of sapye^ce. Like as Dauyd says and Salamon.
But in Ihesu Christ weren always all the graces and all the virtues plenerly
without any mesure. And therefore the prophet sets them in descendynge each
gifts after the order of his dygnyte / like as the petycyons and requests of
the holy Pater noster ben set forth after the order of their dygnyte / the
hyetofore / and the lower after.

Why they be called gifts / for three reasons. Ca..lxxxvii.
SVche manner graces have to name gifts / for.iii. things and for three
reasons. First for their dygnyte and for their valor / if a man at the court
of the king give a robe to a child / or to a poor man a dysshe of weight
This is no thing that ought to be called the gift of a king. Therefore
calls saint James thappostle all ye other temporal goods that god gives /
not a gift / but little gifts which ben moeuable and passy^ge. But these
graces abouesayd he called them gifts parfyte. For god gives them to no
creature / but that he gives hy^ him self. The second reason is because that
the other graces and the other gifts he leneth them to us for to use them in
this present life. But the seven gifts tofore said ben very gifts by right
without reprysynge and reprehendynge / for when all ye other gifts shall fail
/ these.vii. gifts shall always abide in their ferme estate. Then they be
so proprely ours that we may not lose them against our propre will / like
as we may lose the other. The third reason and the pryncypall is / yt the
self gifts be purely for love. And thou know well that a gift leseth the
name of gift when it is not given purely for love. For when the gyuer gives
any gift for his proffyte / yt is no gift / but it is marchaundyse when he
beholds bounte received or service / that is not a gift / but it is bounte
and curteysy / received to be rendered and yielded again. But when the gifts is
given freely and lyberally without entenco^n to have prouffyte and without dread
and without any doubt. Then it is by right called gift / hereof says the
phylosophre that a gift is a gift gyuynge / again / or without to awayte any
reward but only for to get love. In this manner god gives to us these gifts
purely for the love that he has to us / and for to get our hertes and all
our love unto him.

Why they be called ye gifts of ye holy ghost. Ca. lxxxviii.
NOw for what cause ben they called gifts of the holy ghost and / not the
gifts of the fader and of the son / for all their works and their gifts
ben comyne. To this purpos ben two reasons. That one like as the works of
puyssaunce and might ben appropred to god the fader / and the works of
sapyence to god the sone / right so ben ye works of grace and of bounte
appropred to ye holy ghoost. For bountes ben like as says saint Denis / to
spend and to give him self. For if a man give that which cost him naught /
that is not great bounte. But by cause that the holy ghoost by these seven
gifts expendeth and gives him self in our hertes. like as says saint Poule /
like as it were by seven stremes / and therefore ben they called proprely the
gifts of the holy ghoost For he is the fountain and they ben the stremes.
That other is by cause that the holy ghoost is proprely the love that is
between the fader and ye sone and by cause that love is the propre / the first
/ and the pryncypall gift / that a man may give / Then with right in this
gifts ben given all the other and with / out this gifts none other is not
called gifts truly ne ryghtfully. Therefore is the holy ghoost a gift / and
gyuer. For he gives him self and is given in eueryche of these.vii. gifts /
that he gives for to conferme our love unto his / so that it be fervent / fine
very and clean.

Why there be.vii. gifts and no mo ne less. Ca. lxxxix.
FOr ii things a man is saved for to fle ye evil / and to do good / for to
hate and to fle ye evil causes us ye gift of dread / ye other.vi. gifts
cause us to do good / ye gift of dread is the vssher at the great mass / that
is to say at the great menace of the sentence of god / and of ye pains of
hell / which is always ready and apparaylled against the sinners / this is the
watch of the castle that never slepeth. This is the weder of the gardyn that
wedeth and plucketh up all evil herbs. This is the treasorer that keeps the
heart and all the goods that be therein. These be the other six gifts that
make us to do all good deeds. Now ought thou to know that like the clerenes
of the son / which thou see with thyn eyes / gives clerenes to the world
/ and virtue and enuygoure and strength all the things that grow and come in
to the world. Right so does the holy gooost which enlumyneth in heaven and
also in earth all them that been in grace / men women and aungelles / and in
like wise as there be in heaven three estates of aungelles as saint Denis says
/ of whom one is most hye / that other mean or myddle / and the third more
low. The most hye ben like them that been of the kings counceyle. They be
always with god more nere to him than the other and se him and here him in his
secrets. The mean or myddle ben as barons and bayllyes that govern love and
keep all the reame and go and come / and learn of them of the counceyll that
which they command / and make it to done to other / the lowest ben like as
servants and officers which have their crafts / and does their offices and
messages as it is said to them. By this manner and ensamble there ben three
estates of the children of god in earth yt ye holy ghoost conduyteth as says
saint Poule. The one estate is of them yt be in the world and live after the
commandments of god and of holy church and after yt they here and believe of
their prelates. The other estate is of them that been parfyte / that all have
their heart out of the world and of this mortal life / and have their
conuersacyon in heaven and their body in earth and their heart with god. The
third ben in ye myddle estate which govern them self well and other / and
lyuen after the counceyll of the gospel / and not only after the
commandments. These three manner of people techeth the holy ghoost / and
ledeth and governs by these.vii. gifts / and departs to them his graces /
to eueryche after his benygne volente and will as says thappostle. The two
first of these.vi. gifts apperteyne to the^ that been of the first estate The
gifts of science techeth them / and the gifts of pity makes them to work.
The.ii. myddle apperteyne to them of the moyen estate The gifts of counceyll
governs them / and the gifts of strength accomplyssheth the works.
The.ii. last apperteyne to them of the most hye estate. The gifts of
understanding enlumyneth them / and the gifts of sapyence confermeth them and
Joins them with god. Another reason there is wherefore there ben.vii. gifts
/ for ye holy ghoost by his seven gifts wedeth / plucketh and takes away
the.vii. sins and vices fro ye hertes of persons / and planteth there and
nouryssheth vii. virtues contrary which make perfytely a man to be honored.
These ben the goods that the holy ghoost makes in the hertes where as he
descends by these seven gifts. But tofore that I descend unto ye virtues
which ben contrary to the seven deedly sins. I will shortly speak of seven
other virtues / of which three ben called dyuyne / and the other four ben
called the four cardynall virtues.

Of seven virtues of whom there ben three dyuyne / and four cardynall.
Ca..lxxxx.
THe three first virtues dyuyne. Saint Poule ye thappostle calls them. Faith /
hope / and charity. And they be called dyuyne by cause they be godly and
ordeyne the heart to god / faith like as saint Austyn says sets us under
god / and makes us to know him / and knowleche him a lord of whom we hold
all that which we have of good. Hope says he enhaunceth us to god / and
makes us strong and hardy and to enterprise for ye love of god that / which
passes the virtue and strength of man. Charity / says saint Austyn Joins
us to god. For charity is none other thing but chyere unity / that is / dear
one head / for she makes the heart and god all one as says saint Poule. Faith
byholdeth in god souerayn unity hope beholds in god souerayn hyenesse / and
charity souerayn bounte These.iii. virtues ben divided by.iii. degres of love /
for for.iii. things a man is loved. One is by cause that one has herd or
hereth great good of him. Or by cause yt he has received great good of him. Or
by cause he entendeth to have great good of him. These iii. manners of love ben
in these.iii. virtues. Love of faith hereth and werketh / love of hope feleth
the savor and requires it / love of charity takes and sees it / and tastes
and holds it.

Of the four cardynall virtues / by which a man ought to govern him. Ca.
lxxxxi.
OF the four cardynall virtues speken much the au^cie^t phylosophres: but ye
holy ghost gives the^ and ensygneth them better an hundred times as says
Salamon in the book of sapyence. The first of these four virtues is prudence
the second attempraunce / the third strength / and the fourth Justice.
These.iiii. virtues ben called cardynalles / by cause they ben the most
pry^cypall among the virtues of which the ancient philosophers speaks. For
by these.iiii. virtues a man governs him self in this world. Like as the
pope governs al holy church by his cardynalles. Prudence keeps a man that
he be not deceived by none engyne of the ennemy. Atte^praunce keeps a man that
he be not corrupt by none evil love. Strength keeps him that he be not
vaynquysshed ne overcome by wrath / or by dread / or by sorrow. This is yt
holds a man in good estate toward himself. Justice sets a man in right
estate anenste himself and other / for Justice renders to each man ye which
is his. These ben the.iiii. toures at.iiii. corners of the house of the good man
that makes it strong / sure and good Prudence garnyssheth it toward the eest
by purueyaunce for all perils. Attempraunce garnyssheth it toward the southe
against the evil heetes. Srengthe garnyssheth it toward the north for the
evil coldes. Justice garnyssheth it toward ye west against the evil raynes.

Yet again of the four cardynall virtues as here follows. Ca. lxxxxii.
THese.iiii. virtues have diverse offices / and ben much diverse in their works
/ like as says an au^cyent phylosophre named Plato in his book yt he made of
these.iiii. virtues / and deuydeth them much subtylly / and says that
prudence has.iii offices. For by this virtue all that which a man does says
/ and thinks is ordained all and led by line / rule / and reason and in all
his works he pourueyeth / that he use them after thordynaunce of god that all
sees and Iugeth. A great lord should he be as me seems that should have this
only / virtue / and by these three things should govern him.

Of the virtue of attemperaunce.lxxxxiii.
THe virtue of attemperau^ce has.iii. offices for ye heart that has this
virtue will not ne coueyteth not to do a thing of which he ought to repent.
In no things he breketh not the law dysmesurably / but putteh him self
always under the yoke of reason. And no things doubts of all the couetyses
of the world. That is to say / who has this virtue he keeps him that he be
not corrupt by ye three things yt foulen and shamen ye world

Of the virtue of strength. Ca..lxxxxiiii.
THe virtue of strength has also.iii offices / for a man yt has this virtue
in his heart he lift hy^ upon hye above the perils of this world and no
thing doubts he sauf vylonye and sin / he bears aduersyte and prosperyte
/ and suffers without to bow on ye right side ne on ye lift side. Much good
should be the knight of god that in these three things should be well proved
These.iii. virtues armen / ordeyne / and adourne a man as touching the three
parts of the heart which ben called / reason / love / and vygour. Prudence
keeps ye reason that it be not deceived. Attempraunce keeps ye love / yt it
be not corrupt. Strength keeps the vygoure or might that it be not overcome.

Of the virtue of Justice. Ca. lxxxxv.
IVstyce makes a man to live ordynatly among the other. For like as Plato
says the phylosophre. This is the virtue that makes that a man does unto
every man ye which he owes to do. For he renders reverence and honor unto
them that be above him. Frendshyp pease and concord to them that been like to
him / grace and pity to them that been under him. By these.iiii. virtues says
ye said phylosophre / that a man is the^ worthy that he be gouernoure of
himself / and after of other. In these.iiii. virtues studied the ancient
phylosophres which despised all the world for to acquyre and get virtue and
wisdom / and therefore were they called phylosophres / which is as much to
say as love of sapyence. O good god how should this confound us and make us
aferde that they that were paynyms and without law written and nothing knew of
the very grace ne of the gifts of the holy ghost / and nevertheless they styed
up in to the mountain of perfeccyon of living by force and by their propre
virtue / and dayned not to take heed of the world / ne to do evil / ne to
consent to sin / and we yt ben christian men yt have the very faith / and
know the commandments of god / and have ye grace of the holy ghost / if we
will and our sy^nes cause it not / yt we may more prouffyte for our health
anenst god in a day / tha^ they might in a year / we defoule us / and lie here
beneth as a swyne in a mire / and in ye ordure of this world / and sin in ye
fylthe and donge of delyces of this world. Therefore says saint Poule that ye
paynym that is without law shall Judge us at ye day of Judgment / that have
had here the law / and we neither hold ne keep it / and by cause they had not
ryt faith ne ye grace of ye holy ghoost ne no virtue ne quycke ne very faith /
they may not well know how these virtues be good and fair / for as much
dyfference as is between a brennynge cole / and a deed cole / and a living man
and a deed man. So much dyfference is there between virtue that is without
charity / and virtue that is with charity / which is the bounte / ye valor
and the life of other virtues / whereof saint Austyn says when he speaks of
these.iiii. virtues / he deuydeth them by.iiii. manner of loves and by.iiii.
things that very love does / and says that the virtue prudence is the love
of heart / which verily and wisely refuses all that which may grieve and
ennoye him / and cheseth all that which may aid to have that which he loves
/ that is god / ye virtue of attemperaunce is the love of heart by which he
gives him self entyerly and without corruptyon to that which he loves / yt
is god. The virtue of strength is the love of the heart / by which a man
serves only that which he loves / that is god / and for him sets a man
all other things under his foot / and despyseth them Then the virtue of
Justice sets a man in his right estate / that is above all things / and
under god / without these.iiii. virtues / there is none yt may mount in to the
mountain of perfectyon / for who that will mou^te so hye / him byhoueth / that
alther first he have prudence which makes a man to despise the world / and
that he have with it the virtue of strength / ye which gives to him great
heart strong and stable courage to enpryse to pursue great things / and on ye
other party that he have ye virtue of attempraunce / by cause that he be not
over charged ne evil carried / and that he have with him the virtue of Justice
that may led him by the right path / and by a good and Just way that he be
without sin / and that he show to him how by holy works he owes to
conquer the reame of heaven / like as god did to Jacob / as says the book of
sapyence / who that thus may have these.iiii. virtues he shall be well parfyte
and blyssed in this world and more in that other / for he shall be in peace of
heart and in Joy spyrytuell / and nothing shall fail him / but he shall
habounde in ye grace of god yt he shall have with him / in whom he shall delight.

Here after follows how a man may take away and put from him the seven deedly
sins and get ye virtues. Ca. lxxxxvi.
NOw let us come again to our matter / and pray we with all our heart to the
holy ghost / yt he will enspyre and ensygne our hertes / yt he be our advocate
/ and teache us to show how he by the seven gifts of the holy ghost he pluck
out and take away the seven deedly sy^nes fro our hertes / and that he therein
will vouchesauf to plant the seven virtues

Of the gift of holy dread ye which makes a man Just. Ca. lxxxxvii.
THe gifts of dread is the first of the gifts / for he casts out of the
heart all the sins like as we have said tofore. But proprely this gift of
dread plucketh out / takes away and destroys the rote of pride / and
planteth there in his place the plant of humylyte. Now behold and understand
well how the sinner that holds him and slepeth in his sin / is like to a
rybaulde that slepeth and is drunk / and has all lost at tavern / and is all
naked and so poor that he has no thing but he feleth no thing ne
complayneth not / but weneth yt he be a much great lord But when he has
slepte and comes again to him self / and that he is out of his drunkenness.
Then feleth he his harm and knows his folly. Now complayneth he his loss
and his damage. This is the first good that the holy ghoost does to a sinner
when he vysyteth him. For he gives to him again his wit and his mind / and
brings him again to know him self. So that he aduertyseth and sees what
goods he has lost / and in what pouerte and in what peril he has be for
his sin / like as did the sone of ye good man / which wasted and dyspended
his heritage in dyssolucyon and rybauldrye. In such confusyon and myserye he
became that him byhoued to keep the swyne and feed them / and to live of their
releef and mete / like as our Lord Ihesu Christ shows us by example in the
gospel. Yet also the sinner as says Salamon is like to him that slepeth in
the myddle of the sea / and is in great peril and tormente / and he feleth no
thing ne has no fere thereof: But when the holy ghoost awaketh him he felyth
and sees his peril / and begins to have dread of him self. Yet also the
sinner is like to him that is in prison feterydin yrons / and is in boltes and
has many kepars / like as saint Peter was in ye prysone of king Herod. And
the caytyf sinner thinks no thing on the prouoste / ne on the Justice / ne
on the galowes that tarry for him / but he slepeth and dremeth that he goes to
a wedding and to a feste. But the grace of the holy ghoost is like to the
angel that awoke saint Peter / and delyured him fro the hand of king
Herod. For ye grace of the holy ghoost awaketh the sinner and delyuerth him
from the hand and fro the puyssaunce of the devil of hell / yet also the
sinner is like to him that weneth to be strong and hole / and he has the
death under his teeth. For he has the humors evil and corrupt within the
body / then dies he within a month / that wend to have lived.xl. year.
Like as says Elyuans in the verses which speken of the death and sayen thus.
Go ye away ye whystelers and gapars / for such be couerde under their clothes
/ that wene to be hole and fat that shall not live unto march. But the holy
ghost is like unto a good physycyen that shows to him his maladye and
sickness / and moeueth fro him his humors and gives unto him a bitter drink
which heleth hy^ a renders to him his life / right so troubles our lord the
sinner by bitter contrycyon when he helyth him fro his sins by the bitter
drink like as says ye prophet in his psaulter / and fereth him / and
brings him again to know him self / like as did Adam our first fader / when
he hid him emonge the trees of paradys terrestre. And then said god to him.
Adam where art thou. Three other demaundes made god by his angel to ye
chamberyer of holy Abraham which was named agar when she fled fro her lady.
The angel said Agar from whens come thou / whyder go thou / what do
thou. These three questyons or demau^des makes the holy ghoost unto the
miserable sinner / when he awaketh him out of his sins / where as he was
aslepe / and he reyseth him / and opens unto him the eyes and the sight of
his heart / and gives to him again his wit and his understanding / the
which was lost in ye slogardye of sin. Where art thou says he / that is
to say Behold thou poor and miserable caytyf in what sorrow / in what
myschyefe / and in what peril thou art in this present world. For thou art
semblable and like unto a man the which peryssheth in these slepynge fast in a
ship or other vessel / ne feleth / ne understands / ne also apperceyueth
his peril and danger the which he is in. That is to understand and say
caytyf behold again thy life fro now backewarde. For thou come fro the
tavern of the devil / where as thou haste wasted and mysspent thy life and
time in foul ordure and fylth of sin / and lost al thyn aege / and all the
goods che which god has given unto the. What do thou. That is to say /
consider how thou art faynte and frail weary and slow toward thy body and
toward thy soul. Thou wenest to be hole and strong / but peradventure you
have ye humors corrupt in thy body which shall led the to ye death. And in
thy soul thou have evil manners / that shall led the to the death of hell if
the grace of god keep ye not After whither go thou / that is for to say.
Caytyf thy^ke behold and understand that thou go to thy death wherein thou
shalt fall in to the hondes of Herod / that is the devil of hell and his
meyne. Thou go unto the Judgment and dome where thou shalt se the Justice
our lord god so cruel / so strayte / and so puyssaunt. Thou ghost in to
hell where thou shall find fire and styn king sulphre / and mo than a
thousand tourmentes yt The tree of sy^nes
the rote of pride

Envy.

Symony.

Blasphemynge

Ire.

Avarice

vayn glory

Sloth

Glotony.

Lechery.

never shall fynysshe to tourment the. Thus does the holy ghoost to the sinner
to open his eyes / and to behold above him / and under him / and tofore him
and behind him. These ben four strokes of death the which fereth ye sinner
and makes him to try^ble and too have dread. And these four beholdynges and
consyderacions proprely ben the four stremes of the virtue of humylyte that
the gift of dread planteth in ye heart of the sinner when god vysyteth him.

Here follows of the four roots of the sin of pride. Ca. lxxxxxviii.
THe four thoughts and consyderacyons the which ben tofore reherced pulls
out and takes away from the root out of the gardyn or herber of the heart
the four roots of pride / that is of the proud man the which weneth for to
know much thing / Or for to be of the valor of much thing / or that he
may do and compryse much thing / or to have much thing. These ben ye four
horns. That is for to understand the four cowardyses the which shamed the
country that our lord god showed unto the holy man Zacharye the prophet. But
the four things that he showed him proprely after that they came for to beet
down these tofore said four horns the which ben the four thoughts and
co^syderacyons toforesayd. For when a man from whens he comes / and when that
he understands and alsoo knows the pouerte / the vylete / and veraye
fraylte of his birth / how and in what manner he was conceived as in sin / of
so foul matter and fylthe made and fourmed. In so poor an house herboured and
lodged. In so great pouerte borne and brought forth. In what pains and
myseryes nourysshed and fostred. In what labors and trauayles he has lived.
And he has lost and spente his time folysshely about vain and transytorye
vanytees / he sees and consydereth the great nombre and multitude of his
sins and trespaces. And knows clearly the good deeds the which he has
left and not done by his slouthe and neclygence. Then the grace of the holy
ghoost makes him to feel / to Judge and for to know in his heart / that he is
of no value / ne no thing worth / after when he thinks where he is / and
sees this world which is nothing but an exyle / and a desert full of berys
and lyepardes / a forest full of theuys and engynes a see full of tempest and
perils / a fourneys brennynge and enbraced with fire and of all sins / a
field of bataylle and of anguysshe / where always byhoueth to live in war and
fight ayenste the deuylles which ben so subtle and so sage. Then the grace
of God makes him for to feel aryght and perceive that he felt nothing for to
govern him well touching his salvation yet again when the sinner thinks /
consyderethe and knows his sins and his defautes that he is full of sins
/ and void of all good deeds and works. Then the^ holy ghost makes him to
feel and to know his pouerte / and that he has no spyrytuell good in him After
when the synnar sees tofore him which way he goes / and he sees the death /
to whom no man may gaynsaye On that other part ye synnar sees ye Justice
and the vengeance of god so Just and so ryghtfull which is so much to be
doubted / by whose hands he must pass / he sees and knows the pains
horrible of hell from whom the synnar may not escape. Then god gives him
to know that the power of a man and of a woman is naught / and that they may
do no thing without the special grace of god. Then ye synnar begins to
have the spyryte and yeft of dread. In these thoughts and consyderacyons ben
the branches of ye rote of the tree of humylyte. This tree is planted beside
the fountain of the dread of god / of which it is always arowsed and watered
as well in winter as in somer. Now oughtes thou to know that these.vii.
virtues of which I purpose to speak of have each of them seven degrees / by
which it prouffyteth / aryseth / and grows in ye heart of a creature / and
his good werkys by which is shows outewarde. For virtue grows on hye /
like as does the palm / the cypres or the cedre / and after spredeth and
casts his branches on all sides.

Of ye virtue of humylyte. Ca..lxxxxix.
OF the virtue of humylyte speaks saint Ancelme / and says that it has.vii.
degrees by which it mounteth on hye before that it come to perfecion. Now
understand well how the first degree of humylyte knows his pouerte / his
sins / and his defautes. For like as says saint Bernarde humylyte is ye
virtue yt makes a man to mespryse and despise him self / and hold him for
vile wha^ he knows him self verayly This knowleche grows of the.iiii. rotes
tofore said. But there ben sum that know well their deffautes and their
sins / and their pouertees / but they feel them not. Therefore ye second
degree of humylyte / is to feel and to complain his sins / his defautes / his
sorrow / and his maladye he renneth gladly to the leche / that feleth him self
hurt of a wound / and in peril of death / and he renneth much sone to the
physycyen that is seek / and that has evil humors in his body for to have
health and guaryson / and is much glad and Joyous wha^ he may purge them and
cleanse them and therefore the third degree of humylyte is for to confess
deuoutelye and often his trespaces and to be wayle his sins gladly in great
contrycyon and repentance and to purge his heart fro all sins. But there ben
sum that know well their defautes and feel them and ben well sorrowful for
them but they will not for any thing / that no man should know them..
Therefore is the fourth degree of humylyte holden for vile and dyspytous / but
there ben yet some that well know feel and tell their defautes / and say well
and Judge. I am wicked and a sinner and such and such But if another said to
them. Certainly that is truth that thou say they should be dyspleased and
wexe strongely angry. Therefore is the fyfth degree of humylyte to here gladly
truth spoken of him self / and that one say to hy^ his defautes. And this is
ye saint Bernarde says that ye very humble would be holden for vile. and
would not be praised that he is humble. Therefore is the.vi. degree of humylyte
when a man suffers in pacyence yt he be foul treated and as a person
despised. Like as did the good king Dauyd ye which suffered swetely a
servant named Semey which threw at him stones / and said to him great
velonyes / and all that he knew of evil and harm. Yet there is a degree in
which there is some of this perfeccyon and of this virtue of humylyte. That is
will certainly and desire of heart without fayntyse to be reputed for vile /
and be holden simple and foully to be treated. That is a right pouerte of
spyryte and humylyte of heart. Much loved this pouerte in this present world
the rich king of heaven Ihesu christ. Much loved he it when he bought it so
dear / which would and vouched sauf to be borne in a stable horyble and
abhomynable with an ox and an ass / and would have.xxxii. year in pouerte.
The sweet Ihesu christ loved much humylyte / when he him self that never did
sin / he that never had defaute fought and came among the thieves That was
between the sons of Adam or formest fader and the sweet Ihesu ceyste cladde
him with clothes of a sinner and malefactoure / because he was foully treated
Then he said the night of his cene or souper to his appostles with great
desire I have desired this pasque. That is to say this death / this shame and
this departing. More hye may not this trees mount in humylyte. And who shall
be raised unto this degree of humylyte / without doubt he shall be well blessed
in this world and in that other. For he that says this is god / may not lie.
For he is the perfyte and sovereign veryte which says with his blessed mouth
in the gospel / blessed ben they that be poor of spyryte / and how that is he
techeth and shows to us when he says / learn of me and not of other to be
meke and humble of heart / as I am / and ye shall find rest to your souls.
This rest and this blessedness none know it but they that learn it. Then if
thou will know what it is / do pain with all thy heart so much to
vaynquysshe thy self / that thou be mounted in to the seventh degree of humylyte
Then may thou gadre of the fruit and ete of the tree of life / like as it
is said in thapocalyps.

Of the rote of the virtue of humylyte. Ca..C.
OF ye rote of humylyte grow.vii. branches. For this virtue shows him in
seven manners. First honourynge god / in praysynge other. In adourynge and
prayenge god. In loving pouerte. I gladly serving. In fleing praysynge / and
him self trusting al in god The very meke and humble honors God in three
manners. For he byleueth him symply / he prayseth him truly and he prays him
deuoutelye / he honors him first in that / that he byleueth him symply and
steadfastly of all that / which is said in holy scripture / like as a little
child believes his master / and of this reason has our faith merit. Then
who believes well / it does him great honor / like as he does great honor
to a man when he believes him upon his sy^ple word. And this is the beginning
of well doing / which is necessary to all them that will save them self / as
says saint Poule. That is to believe god on his simple word / that all is true
what someuer is said of him only / without to seek other reason or to require
other proof. Therefore ben the heretykes and proud men dampened. For they would
not believe god without good wedde. That is for to understand / if that they se
not quycke reason in all yt which god says / but to the quycke reason they
holden them / like as the usurer holds him on his pledge or wedde that will
trust no person by his simple word. And hereof ben comen all the evil
heresies and vnbeleues. For the proud aungelles that would compare their wit
to the sapyence of Ihesu Christ / dayned not to believe that god said / but if he
showed to them quycke reasons or good open miracle. But we that keep the very
faith believe an hundred fold better / this that he says that may not lie /
that is god / than we do the miracles ne reason / ne that which we se. God
says yt every person shall be Iuged after his works / god says that of
every idle word / us behooves to give accomptes at the day of Judgment. But
the meke and the humble yt this hereth and believes and dredeth and doubts
and doothe pain to keep his heart / and so his mouth / and all his works
shall not be Iuged. After the veraye humble does praise god truly for all the
goods and benefayts yt he has done to him / and that he does to him daily
and yt he yet shall do / after like as we have showed before in ye trayte of
pride. The humble person is like a poor man / which of a little alms has
great Joy / and thanketh with all his heart his benefactour. Then when ye
humble sees nothing in him / by which he is worthy to have good or bread or
other thing of which he uses he knows sees / understands / byleueth /
and doubts not of all that god sends / yeueth and leneth him / and because
that ye very humble draws nothing to hy^ self of the goods of his lord /
which passen by his hand / therefore is he a true servant as saint bernarde
says. After the very humble adoureth god and prays him deuoutely / that is
to say with very teerys which comen of the grace of god and of right feeling
of ye heart. For him seems that he is like a child that is all naked tofore
his maystre and that can not his lesson / or that he is like to the poor man
endetted / which is fallen in the hondes of his credytour / and has not
whereof he may fine ne pay his debte. Or that he be like a thief proved that
is taken with an hundred trespaces / and that has the cord about his neck /
or that he be like the lame man that lies at church door / which has no
shame to show his maladye and his soores to them that pass by / for cause
that each body should have pity on him. If ye will then learn to pray god /
pray and adoure him aryght / these.iiii. things aforsayd shall enseygne and
teache the that is to wete / the child / the man endetted / the thief / and the
lame man.

Of him that is very humble and meke. Ca. C.i.
THe custom is of a very meke and humble man to praise another and give hy^
loos / to hy^ before allow him with his mouth / and by works to bear him
honor he is like the little be that makes the honey / which escheweth
stynkes / and secheth flowers of the field and souketh the dew and the
substance of them / and makes honey for to garnysshe with his house. Thus does
ye very humble / which takes none head of the stenches / ye sins / and
defautes of other. But all the gods yt other do / he holds them loves and
prayseth and souketh ye swetenes of devotion of his heart with which his
conscience is replenysshed. The very humble sees none so ylle a thing / ne
so hard / ne so sinful / but yt he can draw matter to allow and praise god.
In his heart he preyseth other in three manners. For he believes more the wit of
an other man / than the wit of himself / he will yt the will of other men be
do sooner than his own. All the contrary does ye proud man like as we have
showed tofore. After also the very meke and humble man allows and prayseth
other men by word. The good deeds ye other have done he enhaunceth and
prayseth them / and the evil deeds he excuses and makes them less. The
veraye meke man tourneth to the mean thing in to good / and understands
them always to the best / and this is against the evil tatches of the myssayers
/ which enhaunce the evil deeds and mynysshe the good / and the mean
preuerteth and torn to the werst. The very meke and humble prayseth by work
/ and honors in deed euerych as he ought to do and as he may do without
mysdoynge. Thus does not the proud man / but all the contrary like as we have
said tofore in the treatise of the sin of pride.

Of him that is humble of heart. Ca. C.ii.
THe custom is of hy^ that has an humble heart that all his good deeds he has
behind him at his back / and all his evil / his sins and all his defautes
he has always in mind tofore his eyes / and the good deeds of other he has
always tofore his eyes / and the evil defautes and sy^nes of all other he
sets them behind him at his back as in oblyaunce or forgetinge. And hereof
happeth oftymes that the very meke and humble man the more he prayseth other
and honors / so much more he dysprayseth himself. The very humble and
meke person of heart is like the auarycyous and coueytous man that has always
his eyes on the goods that other have / and yt they do. And always him seems
that he has no spyrytuall good in him. For like as there is an evil proud
man / so is there very meke and humble. He that is very humble of heart is
like a little child which is sone of a king and heir of the realm / which
wepeth and cries / and knows nothing of his hyenes ne of his riches. He is
also like unto the simple sheep / in whom all is good and prouffytable / the
wolle / the fell / the flesh / the milk / and his donge / and the sheep
knows nothing of it / ne he thinks on it / and in this manner says the
great Patryarke Abraham of him self / yt he was nothing but ashes and
poudre. And holy Job yt was so great and rich in the world said in like
wise. And saint Andrew that said also of him self / what am I but ashes /
duste fylthe / rotynnes / a worm / wind / shadow / leaves that the wind
bears away / and dry stupple which is naught but for the fire. And like as
the veraye humble person of heart prayseth and honors other with his heart and
mouth and also in deed as we have said. Right so dyspyseth he hy^ self in
these.iii. manners. It seems to him like as saint Iherome says of him self /
when that I ete or drink or that I wake or sleep / always me thinks that the
fereful trompe of ye day of Judgment blows in mynerys saying / come to thy
Judgment / come to thy Judgment / and by cause that he will not be Iuged of his
sins / he seeseth not but every day purges himself / keeps and cleanses
him from all sins and Iugeth / condempneth / and repreueth al his works and
his words / he cries and nombreth / poyseth counterpoyseth and repreueth /
for he fyndeth more chafe than grain / that is to understand more of sins
than of good deeds. And by cause that he will not be Iuged at the death of
Justice / will he not leave but that little and great be examyned and said / and
also Iuged in the court of mercy that is in holy confession. In that court who
counts well aryght / is all quyte of his sins. But in the court of Justice
which shall be at ye day of Judgment / whom someuer he owes he must pay. Ne
never shall he mow be aquyted / and therefore he shall be perdurably dampened.
For he must render or pendre / that is hanged Alas caytyf what shall he pay
that has no thing / but the body which is charged and all full of deedly
sins who that well understood and felt these things / he should hold and
keep him fro all sins / and should withdraw him fro mockeryes and lesynges /
which they contryue against the very meke and humble persons which dread god
and love him / by cause they fere and dread him / they will keep them clean
without ordure of sin and confess them gladly and often / but little
auaylleth confession without repentance / and without penance / and with-good
Judgment / and that Justice be not done truly / and therefore all in like wise
as the veraye meke and humble person makes of himself very Judgment in
bitter contrycyon of heart / and in very confession of mouth / and
satysfaccyon and penance of veraye Justice / he Iugeth him self as a these
and puts him verily on the gybet of penance without fayntyse and without
ypocrysye.

How a man ought to hate pride. Ca. C.iii.
HE that hates pride / he loves pouerte / and sets his heart low and in
humylyte / and therefore all they that been veraye humble loves pouerte / and
ben poor of speryte. The very humble person loves pouerte for three reasons
/ that is to wete / for the perils that been in governance of rychesses / for
the goods that been in good and very pouerte / and for by cause that god
loves so much pouerte / as when he was here in this world he loved it / and
yet loves / and all them that love it / like as holy scripture witnesses it /
whereof Ihesu christ says by Dauyd in his psaulter / that god hereth ye prayers
/ and desires of poor men / and pourueyeth to them mete swetely in good
savor. For he is their refuge and their savior. Job says that god is the
fader of the poor / and has given to them power to Judge the other. And our
lord at the begy^nynge of his fair sermon says that blyssed be the poor /
and then he accursed the rich that have here their heaven. But the very heaven
celestyall he has given to the poor / so that they may give it and sell it /
and the world will not believe yt god say truth / ne yt pouerte be blyssed.
But god says thus in ye gospel / fair fader I pray the and thank the / that
ye have hyd these things fro the wise / and have manyfested and showed it to
the humble and meke. The humble and poor of spyryte seen god / here him well
and believe him well / and louen better an hundred fold their pouerte / than ye
covetous man loves his rychessys. In threthynges shows a man that he loves
pouerte / wha^ he loves and holds gladly the company of ye poor / and
loves them and holds them company / like as Ihesu Christ did as long as he
was in this world for naturally ye lambs flee fro the wulues and withdraw
fro them / and the children withdraw them and flee ye company of great people
/ and the humble and meke people withdraw them gladly fro ye proud people.
The life of a poor person is little and poor / for he requires not ne axeth
precious metes ne oultrageous vesture ne clothing / ne he secheth no bobaunce
/ ne no pride / in robes ne in riding / ne in householde / ne in meyne ne in
feeste ne in company. And it suffyseth to ye very poor that he have only
his sustenaunce. The very poor person suffers in pacyence hungre and
thryste / cold and hete / lothynges and vylonnyes and many bitter trybulacyons
for the love of Ihesu Christ and of his passion. And all these the evil poor
man does and suffers against his will The very humble and the very poor
suffers gladly all euyls and all aduersytes for the love of god / yet again
it is the custom of a poor man / that if he have no thing / and may get ne
win no thing / he is not ashamed to ask and demand / and the very humble
beggeth all day and requires ye prayers and the orysons of good people and of
the friends of god / and the very humble trusts more in their aid / than he
does in his own good deeds.

Of diverse estates of pride. Ca. C.iiii.
DRyde loves the hye place above. Humylyte loves the low place bynethe. This
is ye dyamonde of the noble nature that dayneth not to sytte in gold / but in
poor metal as in iron / in like wise as is the sheef of wheet beten / the
grayn is under and the chafe is above. But our lord shall sell his whete at
the day of dome al wynewed as says the gospel / and he shall cast the chafe
in to the fire of hell / and the grain in to ye garner of heaven / how much
more the gold is fine and pure / so much more is it heavy / and the more it
weyeth the sooner it gooth down to the botom / and the more that a man is meke
and humble / the more loves he the low place / like as did Ihesu christ and
his sweet mother which gave to us ensample to serve and to obey. Not only to
the gretest but to the leest. And how much more the service is vile and
dyspysable so much gladly does it the humble and meke. Therefore our lord
Ihesu christ taught his appostles to wasshe the fete by humylyte. Then
humylyte is proprely mother of obedience / and nouryssheth it / ensygneth and
keeps it yt it be not corrupt by vaynglory / by heaviness ne by murmr / ne by
propre wit / ne by propre will / ne by aduersyte / ne by any other manner / and
it is to wete yt there be.vii. adournementes of obedyence. The first ye one
obey anon prestly / gladly / sy^ply / purely / generally / vyly / and
vygorously. The humble is poor tofore his eyes and naked / and has not to do
for him self / and therefore he is always ready / as ye morones in ye see in
their ships ye anon as they here the voice of ye governor / they obey unto
him and run as they were enraged. The humble obeyth gladly / that the pains
/ the perils / and the death he receives to his power with great joy for the
love that he has to obedyence. Therefore said Dauyd the prophet in the
psaulter / that he loved better ye commandments that god made / than he did
gold ne silver / ne precious stones The humble obey al symply / as does the
horse / or the sheep / whom the shepeherde ledeth where as he will / and that
never says / wherefore go I more here than there. For one of ye most honest
daughters that humylyte has is holy symplesse. The humble is right true to god
/ like as is a right good wife to her husbonde / which will to no man obey
folyly / but to her husbonde only And therefore none obeys so Justly ne in so
good entencyon as does ye very humble / which hates not / but for to playse
the world / and desires no thing but to plese god. After ye very humble is
right vygorous / ryghe swyfte and open / when he bears the virtue of obedyence
and the love of god and does it to his prelate. But when his own will bears
him and ledeth Then he is heavy and slow to do well / like unto the sterre
named saturnus that renneth as much in one day with the fyrmament / when the
fyrmament ledeth her / as she does in.xxx. year in her propre course. Also ye
very meke and humble obeys generally ouerall and in all places / where he
byleueth that it playseth god / and in all things like as does the ass of the
mylle / that as gladly bears barley as whete / and led as gold / and whete to
a poor man as to a rich man. Also the very meke is made strong. For he
changes his strength with ye strength of god / like as says the prophet
Isaye. and therefore there is no thing but the very humble may well bear: For
god bears him and his deeds. Then he obeys vygorously and perseuerauntly.
For he is never no more weary than ye son is / yt god ledeth and conduyteth /
and the longer it lives the more grows her force and her vygour. Now may
thou see clearly how humylyte techeth the well and parfytely to serve and obey
god.

Of the techynge and doctrine of our lord. Ca. C v.


Our savior Ihesu christ the great master of humylyte and mekenes when he had
preched and fed his people / and heled the seek men and lame. Then he
fled away fro the people in to the mountain / for to be in oryson for to
ensygne and give us an example to flee the praysynge and lauding of the world
and therefore the true humble heart like as he payneth to do well wha^ he
obeys. Right so he payneth him to fle the praysynge of the world / and to
hyde him for to keep him fro ye wind of vaynglory. And to fyxe him in the
shadow of the roche / like as Ysaye the prophet says fro the tempest of evil
tongues. This roche is Ihesu Christ him self which is the refuge and the charity
to humble and meke. To this roche that is our savior Ihesu christ flees the
humble and debonayre heart charged with thorns / like as is the yrchyn / that
is to say of sharpness of penance. This is the douehous in to which flees
for refuge ye doves of our lord / that been ye meke humble and simple hertes
flee thither to refuge for the fowls of proy or rauayne / the which ben the
deuylles which always seche to dampne the souls when an humble heart has
done so much that he is entered in to this roche as the dove in to a dove house
/ that is when he remembers well the life of Ihesu christ / and his blyssed
passion / then he forgeteth all his sorrows / and prayseth little all yt the
world has and is worth / and may be of value a good heart that has assayed
this / desires no thing so much as to be forgoten to the world. The world
is to hy^ a great burden and charge / and much besynes / for as ye wise man
says. The good man is never more sure than when he is alone without company
and felaushyppe / ne more in works than when he is idle / for he is than
with.ii. of his best friends / that is with god and with his own self. There a
devout contemplatyfe heart treats of his great quarelles and complayntes by
the which all other works and operacyons seems to him truffes and naught /
and al vanytees. There he acompteth with god / and god with him by holy
thoughts and by fervent desires. Then he feleth the great swetnes of
consolations and comfort that god gives to them that dread him / and love him
/ like as. Dauyd the prophet says in ye psaulter. Then al langages and al
words ennoye and grieve him / if they be not of god / to god / or for god. Thus
begins the soul to love solytude and scylence. And then comes to him in
his heart an holy shamefestnes which is one of the fair daughters of humylyte /
for all in like wise as a damoysel that loves paramours with great shamefastnes
when she is apperceyued and she hereth that it is spoken of. In like wise the
humble person and devout when he hereth that one speaks of him / and of his
spyrytuel goods that god has done to him / and no thing less does he / than
the maid does which is ardantly surprysed of love / for what someuer the world
say to him / it is known. Nevertheless he secheth his corners and hydles like
as he that requires none other thing / but to be rauysshed in god like as was
saint Poule

Of the pryuyte that god has to an holy soul ca. C vi
OF this acquaintance and of this preuyte this holy soul begins to have of
god / between her and an holy pride. For when the holy soul is rauysshed unto
heaven / she beholds the earth fro far / like as says Ysaye the prophet /
and there sees it so little to the regard of the gretenes of heaven / so foul
to the regard of that great beauty / so troublous to the regard of that great
clerenesse / so wide to the regard of that great plente. Thene he dyspreyseth
and dyspyseth certainly all the rychesses of the world / beautees / honors /
and noblesses. Then^e it seems to him that it is but a play of children that
play in the way / and much travail them self and win nothing. It
seems that all is but wy^de and dremes as says Salamon. Then he begins
to deye to ye world / and live to god as says saint Poule. Then is the
soul so poor of spyryte that it has naught. For god has his spyryte taken
from him and rauysshed it and replenysshed with his gifts / as he did to
thappostles on whytsonday. Then the holy ghost gives to him so great an
heart / that the prosperyte ne aduersyte of the world he prayseth no thing at
all / and with this he gives to him so holy and so ferme a conscience / that
he awayteth hardely the death / and he has in god so great faith / and hope /
that there is nothy^ge but he dare entrepryse it for the love of god / for he
has that faith of which god speaks in the gospel / which is lykened to
mustarde sede / by which he may command to roches and mountains / and they
shall obey to him.

Of ye co^paryso^s of mustarde sede to ye love of god. C.vii
THe sede of mustarde is much little / but it is much strong and sharp. And
it is hot in the fourth degree as the physycyens says. by the heet is
understood love. The first degree of love as says Bernarde / is when a man
feleth nothing of love but of hy^self / and of his own proffyte The.ii. is
when he begy^neth to love god. The.iii. is when he loves best god / and loves
him proprely for his bounte. The fourth is when he is so esprysed with this
holy love / that he ne loves him self ne none other thing but god / or for
god / or with god. And unto this love brings him very humylyte. Now may
thou see clearly that the poor of spyryte ben blessed. For they be so humbled
and void of their spyryte / yt their spyryte is al mynuysshed / for god has
it al / and ye holy ghoost has replenysshed the house of his heart / and is
there lord / and enhaunceth them that been poor of spyryte. These ben the
very meke and humble / whom he makes to regne in heaven by holy hope and by
holy conscience / and therefore says our lord in the gospel / that the royame
of heaven is theyres. Not only by promise / but by fine certeynte / like as
they that begane sometime to receive the fruytes and the rentes how they should
be blessed in that other world. That may no man know unto the time that he be
there. For the heart of a mortal man may not think it / ne express with
mouth / ne also here it with his ecrys.

Of the gifts of holy dread and of pity. Ca..Cviii.
THe first gift of the holy ghoost makes the heart humble dredefull and to
doubt god and hate all sins / and therefore it is named the gifts of dread
The second gift of pity makes the heart sweet debonayre and pyteous. And
therefore is it named the gift of pity. And that is proprely a dew and a
traycle against the venym of felonnye / and in especyall ayenste ye venym of ye
sin of envy / of which we have spoken tofore. For this gift of pity takes
away and plucketh of ye heart ye rote of envy / and there heleth it
parfyghtely Then the heart that receives this gift / and feleth in him a
dew / which makes him to germyn a sweet rote / and right well attempred /
that is good love / out of which grows a fair tree berynge great fruit /
that is a fair virtue and good that is called in latin ma^suetudo. That is to
say swetenes and debonayrte of heart / which makes a man sweet / debonayr /
charytable / and amyable. For this virtue makes a man to love his neighbor
parfytely / and him self after god. This tree has vii. degrees by which he
mou^teth on heyght. These.vii. degrees shows to us saint Poule / there where
he admonesteth and prays that we do pain to that / yt we be all one in god.
The first reason is that we have al one heart / the hye and the low / the
poor and ye rich. That is that we have all one fader in heaven. That is god
which made us all comunely to his image and semblaunce And because that all we
have one creatoure and maker which made us all of one matter and of one form
/ and to one end / that is that we be all in him and with him. Like as he
says in the gospel. It is much great reason that we love each other / for the
beestes / and the birds loves his semblable. The second reason is that we be
all christian and baptized in the sacrament of baptym poor and rich. That is yt
we be all wasshen with ye precious blood of Ihesu christ. And we were redeemed
with one manner money / and as much cost that one as that other Much then
owe we to love each other and to honor. for god has much loved us and
praised us / and has made us of great dygnyte. The third reason is because we
have all one faith and ben bounden all to one law which all is accomplysshed
/ Like as saint Poule says in this word / Love thy neighbor as thy self.
Of this det is no man quyte for any thing yt he can do / this det owes each
man to other / and who that most renders most owes. The fourth reason is
that we have all one master and one lord that is god of whom he hold all
body and soul / and all that we have / he made us all and fourmed / and has
us all redeemed of a like price / he shall Judge us all / and reward largely to
all them yt shall have kept and holden his commandments / and that have
loved each other truly. The fyfthe reason is because that we be all felawes in
the host of our lord / And we be all his knights and souldyours / which we
all abide one reward / that is the glory perdurable / and love and company of
all saints. The.vi. reason is that we live all of one speryte spyrytually /
like as we live of one air corporally. By this spyryte we ben all sons of god
by adopcyon. That is by aduoery / and sons of holy church / brethren germayne
of fader and mother / a spyrytuell fraternity / which is better worth than a
carnal fraternity / like as the speryte is of more value than the body. The
seventh reason is because that we ben all members of one body / of which Ihesu
christ is ye head / and we ben the members ye which lives all of one meet.
That is of the precious flesh and blood of our savior Ihesu christ / the
which so much loves us / and us holds so dear and well be loved / that he
gives unto us his right precious blood for too drink / and his dygne and
precious flesh for to ete. Therefore remembers us so often saint Poule this
love which he shows unto us. For a more quicker reason ne more fayrer
example may he not show unto us of very amyte and frendshyp / if so be that
thou think well and steadfastly on these toforesayd reasons. Thou shalt
find.vii. degrees of amytye and frendshyppes the which comes of the gifts
of pity.

Of.vii. manners of spyrytuell love. Ca..Cix.
OF this stock and out of this rote grown vii branches. For this virtue
shows hy^ in seven manners like as love is known / which is emonge the
members of a body in vii. manners. First the one of the members keeps and
countregardeth the other / that it do to him none evil / ne that it faylle him
not / ne that it do him none harm ne damage to his power / and herin we
understand our Innocence which we ought to keep each anenst other. For this
commandment is wryton in ye heart of every person. That is that thou do to
another after god that / which thou would that he did to the and that thou
sholdest not do to another / otherwise tha^ thou would should not be done to
the. Ne ye thy right hand should smite the lift hand. Also that one membre
suffer swetely that other that it do to it no harm / ne no vengeance ne
wrath. But if that one membre have harm or hurt / that other members feel
it. And in this understand we parfyght debonayrte which has iii. degrees.
The first is that he revenge him not. The second that he reteyne not wrath ne
ire. The third that he ne feel no moeuynge of hate ne ire toward his
neighbor for any thing that he does. Also ye members obeyen al to their
souerayn. For they do al to their power that / which the heart comaundeth them
/ and ye eyes ensygnen them. In this understand we ye virtue of obedyence of
which we have spoken tofore / which ought for to be apparaylled and aourned
in love and in charity as like as says saint Peter the appostle. Also that one
membre helps that other / and serves that other without danger or peril /
without contradyccion and without auaryce. And herin we understand ye virtue /
the which is called charity / of which a man then^e helps and socoureth an
other gladly with the power ye god has given him / or he ensygneth or
counceyleth with the wit that he has. Or he gives and departs largely for
the love of god the goods and rychesses that he has. Then is said of him
that he is much charytable / and thus commands to us saint Peter / that the
graces yt almighty god has given unto us / that we admynyster them unto our
neighbors and prochanes. whereof Tullius ye phylosophre says / we ought to
feel all that which is in ye world and grows and increases / all is made
for to serve man. And the men be made ye one to aid and help the other. For
the one is engendered of the other. Let us then^e do that for which we be
borne and the which nature ensygneth and shows us / and seche we all the
comune prouffyte. For thus as says the holy appostle saint Poule / we ben all
members of one only body. All the members feleth and draw to them that
which is done to eueryche / be it good / or be it evil be it Joy / be it
anguysshe / when one smyteth the foot the mouth says ye grieve and hurt me.
By this we understand and know the virtue of veraye pity / the which we
ought to have comynly / which has two offices as says saint Poule. That is
to wete to Joy for the good that other do and have. And to sorrow for the
euyls that other feel and make. Also if a membre be seek or hurt / al ye other
help it to the end yt may be garysshed and holy: In this understand we ye
virtue of Justice and of correcyon / without the which the body of the holy
church may not endure. For ye roten members defoule the other that been hole /
who that will then chastyse his brother and his neighbor / and repreue and
punysshe his subgette / late him take heed at him self / when that a membre is
seek or hurt / the heart has great compassyon / and feleth great sorrow. And
that is for the great love that he has to it / he set hand to / much
swetely and often. And like as says Seneke / like as all the members of the
body aydeth and bear up each other. Right so ought every man for to supporte
his neyzboure / and to correct and pluck away the wounds of sins that been
in his heart. First there ought for to be laid thereto the oynementes and
thenplaystres of sweet admonycyons. Also if this be naught worth there must be
laid thereto the sharp poudres and poynaunte of hard reprehencyon. And if
that help not / then let come ye sword to dysseuere / or for to excommynye
him / or to bannysshe him out of the contreye or to withdraw fro him. Also the
members honor and keep that one that other / and do worship like as says
saint Poule / we owe to bear and do reverence one to another / and specially
they that have great need to be supported. These ben ye most folysshe and
most feeble. Them ought men most to supporte. Then the wise men and sage
beren and supporten always the fools and the feeble / like as the bones bears
the flesh / and as the pyler bears the house. This is against myssayers / that
so gladly cryen and sayen the deffaultes and the sins that they se in other.
Also yt one membre deffendeth yt other at need and put hy^ tofore to save yt
other / for at need is seen who is a friend / when that one foot slydeth / ye
other helps it anon. When that one would smite the heed / the hand puts
him tofore. In that understand we parfyte and pure amyte / whereof god says in
the gospel. Who may do greter amyte or frendshyp / than to set his life for
his friend. This frendshyp shows to us Ihesu christ the very friend / which
for us set his soul and his body to death shameful. And ye did he to give to
us example / like as says saint Peter / and also saint James / that god has
set his soul for us. And right so ought we to set our souls for our
brethren and for our neighbors / if we be aryght the members of the body of
Ihesu christ / which is our heed. Who that has this virtue aryght I shall say
appertly that he is well blyssed. This is the virtue that our good master
Ihesu christ ensygneth us when he faith in the gospel / blyssed be the
debonayre. For they shall possede the land of them that lives in glory
without end. Now understand well this blyssynge that the debonayre has in
this world. For the parfyte debonayr ben now in possessyon of the earth. That
is to understand in iii. manners First of the earth of living people That is
god him self / which is the heritage of them that live pardurably that is of
the saints and of good people in like wise as the earth is habytacyon of
beestes and of men. And because that god himself is the earth of living men /
he has the debonayres in his possessyon. For they do nothing but yt which
pleases god. Therefore it is right that they have god in their possessyon. Like
as Dauyd the prophet says in his psaulter. The debonayres says he shall have
the earth in possessyon and in heritage. And also they shall have delectacyons
in multitude of peace. And the holy man saint Austyn says ye no man shall have
god in his possessyon / but ye first he shall be in his. Also the debonayr have
in this world the land of their heart in possessyon For they be by right
lords of their heart. The felone is not lord of his heart / and the debonayre
has ye mystrye of his heart and of his evil manners. And Salamon says that he
is more valyaunte / that maystryeth well his heart than he that takes a
strong castle and cite. Also the debonayre ben lords of therthe / that is of
worldly goods. For if they lose them they shall never be troubled ne angry
therefore. But they that been angry when they lose worldly goods / be not lords
of them ne of their hertes. But ben servants thereto / and therefore it is
right and reason that they that have here the goods temporell and spyrytuell /
have in them self their possessyon of the heart. But now understand and
behold that this that God gives unto ye poor of spyryte is the heaven / and
to the debonayre the earth / where shall be the auarycyous men then and ye
felons / but in the torments of hell.

Of ye seven gifts of the holy ghoost / and first of the gift of science. Ca.
C.x.
THe first gift of the holy ghoost is the gift of science / which makes a
man humble and dredefull. The second makes him sweet and pyteous. The third
makes him clear sceynge / and conning / and therefore it is called the gift
of science. For it makes a man wise and conning in mesure in all things /
when this gift descends in to the heart of a person / he extyrpeth and
casts out the rote and ye sin of ire and of felonnye which troubles ye
heart / and makes a man like as he were fro him self so that he sees no
thing ne for him self ne for to conduyte other. But this gift enlumyneth the
heart on al parts so that he may not be deceived of any person / like as the
gift of pity makes the man Innocent / so that he will none deceive / whereof
saint Johan says in thappocalyps in spyryte / that the holy man that was all
full of this espyryte / was all full of eyes tofore and after. And an angel
showed to Zacharye the prophet a stone wherein were seven eyes These ben the
eyes that the good men have / for they see clear within their heart and all
about them. That is to say under and above / on the right side and on the
lift side. This gift of science is maystre of the works / and that is to say
of virtues of the soul. For he makes all Just to a point by line rule and
plombe / he takes first his bound and his point / and that is that the wise
man says. In all that thou begynnest / behold the end / and to what end
thou shall come / after he holds the line. For he goes by right way before
and by right entencyon. After he makes all by rule. For he makes it all
plain and by mesure. For he loves the comyne way of good people without to
find noueltees. After he preueth his sight and his works by plombe. For he
takes head that his body enclyne not toward the right side by prosperyte ne
to the lift side by aduersyte. This gift of sapyence is like to ye pryour of a
cloystre of ye soul / which keeps thordre / and makes it to be kept oueral
/ First in ye heart and after in other offices in this heart ben.ii. sides
and.ii. things / ye understanding and ye will / ye reason and affecion wha^
these two sides and these two things accords together / they make much sweet
melodye and much fair service. That is to wete when the will / will all yt
which the understanding ensygneth to god / and that affection feleth all that
which reason understands / if they understand well in these.ii. sides
which ben in ye soul / when and how they ought to accord. In one side
ben.iiii. locks / and in that other side.iiii. for reason has. four offices.
That is to enquire / to Judge / to remember and to show that which they
understand by word. This gift ensygneth the reason that which he ought to
learn and inquire / and in what order / and in what manner / and what end / and
this is a much great craft. For the mysprysynge in these things is much
peryllous / it behooves to understand the reason / and to learn that which is
necessary / prouffytable / and honest / and for to withdraw fro the
contrary. O god how a creature leseth his time / and dyspences for to learn
things that been of no value / but vaynglory and sin. But the holy ghoost by
this gift ensygneth lightly and makes a man to learn ordynatly that / which
is most necessary to the prouffyte of the soul. And that ledeth him most
right unto the love of god for the health and the prouffyte of his soul / and
to help his neighbor. Also it behooves the reason well to inquire the
truth of the things. And also how he ought for to believe. Well to believe is
when a man believes symply / and steadfastly all yt which god says and
commands without over much to inquire / and without to enserche the
counceyles of god and the profounndnesse of his Iugementes the heyght of his
magnyfycenciall magesty / and the reasons of his holy Sacraments / Well to
believe is when one believes not over hastily / ne over late / ne to eueryche /
ne to none / for that one and other is vice as says seneke. After good
enquiring comes well to Judge. For to Judge well it apperteyneth yt one afferme
no thing to ye time that he has inquired the truth of the thing / and that
he be well encerteyned / and that he entremete not to Judge that which
apperteyneth no thing to him / like as ben the secret things and hid /
thentencyons of hertes / the things that may not be turned on ye right side ne
on the lift side / that yet they be understand to the better part. Of which
ye spyryte by this gift makes the reason to Judge well / and to know the
right / and to determyne between good things and evil things between the
little things and the great things / for he must praise every thing after his
valor. Also this spyryte makes ye reason to remember. For he remembers a man
all that is needful to him / like as god says in ye gospel. The things that been passed he must remember and bring again to memory. The things that been
present he must understand and remember and ordeyne The things that been to
come he must purueye fore ordeyne and advise. These ben the seven parties of
the virtue of prudence / after that which the phylosophre says. Also he
makes the reason for to speak by mesure and be stylle gladly / and not to
speak till it be need. So that the word be tofore well aduysed and well
thought or it come to the tongue. And that the word be wayed and poysed as
good money and preued like as Salamon says. So that the word be according
unto god and without sin of good matter and of good form That is that it
have not ouermoche / ne over little. And that it be well employed. For good
money ne a good word ought not to be given for naught. Hereof says god in the
gospel that we should not cast the precious stones tofore hogs and swyne.
That is to understand ye precious words of our lord god before them / and to
such persons that set them self not to work for their health. But lives
in the ordure of their sins. Therefore holy scripture calls them hogs.
This gift aforesaid ordeyneth and accords that other party of ye heart That
is the will where it has.iiii. parties / love / dread / Joy / and sorrow.
That is that one love that / which he owes / so as he owes / as much as he
owes / and that he dread not also that which he owes / and that he have no
Joy ne delight / sauf in that he owes after god / and also how he owes / and
as much as he owes. And that he have no sorrow ne heaviness / but in that
which he owes / and also how he owes / and as much as he owes when
these.iiii. parties ben accorded / then it is said that a man is well
attempred when he is not over cold ne over hot / ne over dry / ne over
moist. And in semblable manner as to the body of a man comes over many maladyes
/ for the dysatempraunce of these four qualytees / or of these four humors.
Right so the heart of a man comes to him the vices and sins by the
dysatempraunce of these four manners. When these two sides of the heart ben
accorded and ordained / that is ye reason and the will. Then is a man
ordained within hy^ self. These ben the two sprynges of the rote of a much
fair virtue the which is called equity. Equity proprely is that the which is
done by good Judgment and true sentences / not over soft / ne over rude /
without bowynge and enclynynge unto that one party / nor unto that other /
when one gooth forth aryght as alyne / for equity is none other thing but
unity / that is egalte / all egall / who has this virtue is a true Judge and
wise. For he does no thing but it be inquired and examyned like as a good Judge
ought to do Then ye first degree of this virtue / is that a man be a good
Judge of him self for he ought to enter in to him self / and behold his
conscience / and well to examyne his thoughts and his wylles / whether they ben
good or evil / and to ordeyne all to the regard of reason / so that will and
reason be at one accord. For like as saint Bernarde says / virtue is none
other thing but thassente of reason and of will That is that will without
gaynsayenge / say and do / and also put in oeuure / that is to say in deed
and work that which reason says / shows / and enseygneth /

Of the second dgree of equity and of right wysnes Cxi.
THe second degree of this virtue is / that a man be a ryghtfull Judge / and
hold the right line of equity between him self and that which is under him
That is his body which he has in keeping which he ought here to nourysshe /
that it may serve / and be so dyscyplyned and chastysed that it will of all and
in all things obey unto ye soul / like as a good chamber yer obeys to her
maystresse / and a good dyscyple to his master without gaynsayenge. For ye
reason ought to be like as a true arbytrour between ye soul and the body /
which ought to keep ye right of either part. In such manner yt the spyryte be
a good lord / and the body be a good seruau^te and very subgette and
obeyssaunt to ye soul. Now is it need too hold in this party ouerall equity
and right mesure in drinking and etynge / in clothing and in arayenge / and
in all the things that the body commands. For it enclyneth more to
ouermoche than to over little. After him behooves the.v. wits of his body well
to conduyte and to govern / by reason and by equity / so that eueriche serve
in his office without sin and with out mysprysyon / like as with the eyes to
behold / the eres to here / the nose to smell / the mouth to taste and to
speak / the hands and all the body to touch. When these v. wits ben well
kept from sin / then is the castle sure and ferme. For these ben the
gates of the soul. These ben the wyndowes by which death enters often in to
the soul. This witnesses the prophet.

Of the.iii. degree of the virtue of equity. Ca. C.xii.
THe third degree of the virtue of equity is ye a man be a good Judge / and
that he hold equity / between him self / and that / yt is tofore hy^ That been
the temporal things / which often dystroyeth body and soul / as when a man
sets his love ouermoche on them / like as does ye auarycyous men. and all
they that above mesure love worldly things. For they have their hertes knytte
in the nets of ye devil / as Job says / yt is to plees and quarelles / and
forayne works / wherein they ocupye them so / yt in the life spyrytuall ne to
their salvation they can naught do / ne may not ne will not entende / so much
ben they blind and bounden in their sins / whereof it happeth yt which
Seneke the wise man says. That by this we sin and go out of the way / that
as touching the party of the bodyly life / every man thinks and is besy /
but for to ordeyne his life spyrytuell for to have glory pardurable no man
thinks ne studyeth. Now this is then much great necessyte / yt a man set not
over much his heart in forayne things / for who that so over much does /
he falls in the charges and in the couetyses of ye world which is the rote
of all vices.

Of the fourth and fyfth degree of ye virtue of equity. Ca. C.xiii.
THe fourth degree of the virtue of equity is yt a man se clearly on his right
side / that is yt he take heed and take example of ye good for to govern him /
that be like as at his right side. And of the good and wise men he take wit
and example. But in this side behooves to hold dyscressyon and equity. For all
the people may not goo by one way / ne all the good / ne all the wise / have
not al one self grace / like as the members of a body have not one self
office / and hereof ben many persons nouices deceived in their heart / like as
says the book of collacions of holy faders / which treats of the perfeccyon
of virtues / for when they se a man well perfyte much prouffyte in one estate
and in one grace. Anon they entende / desire / and will resemble him / and
when they se another / yt in an other estate does also much good / also they
cry and run after / and also to the third and the fourth and with none they
abide ne rest. They be also like as the young greyhounde / which is yet all
young / that renneth after every be that he sees tofore him / and does
noothynge but makes him weary and leseth his time. Here of tells ysopus a
tale or a fable / of a little hounde and of an ass / which ass saw the
hounde that as oftymes as his lord came home / he ran against him and lepe
upon his neck / and the lord played with him and made him great feste / and
the ass thought saying. More ought my lord to make to me feste which serve
him all day / than to his dog which serves of no thing It was not long
after that this ass saw his lord come to his house. And he ran against him
/ and cast his.ii. fore feet about his neck / and began strongly to lycke
and fawn him. The servants of the lord which saw this / ran with great
staves and beten right well the ass. And of that / of which ye ass had
supposed to have had grace / honor / and prouffyte / he had shame and damage.
By such fables ye wise men were wont tenseygne and teache them self by such
ensaumple. And by this ensaumple he shows / yt no man should desire such
graces as he may not attain ne come to / and the same techeth Salamon saying.
Sone cast not thyn eyes to rychesses. That is to the graces that thou may
not atteyne. Therefore he has great need of dyscrescyon that he see of whom he
takes ensaumple. Also it is necessyte that a man see clearly on his lift side
/ and that is the fyfthe degree. For one ought to behold the fools and the
shrewes which ben as on the lift side / for they be on ye werse side. To them
ought one to take heed / first by cause that a man should have pity and
compassyon. Also that one should not ensyewe their folly ne their predycyon /
so as the wise Salamon says. I passed said he by the vyneyarde of the
slothful fool / and saw that it was full of thorns and nettles / and by
this ensaumple I have learned wit and prouydence.

Also that one love most god by whom he is quyte of such sins and of such
perils. But him behooves on this side to keep dyscrecyon and equity. For when
I se a fool and a sinner. I ought to have pity and compassyon / and not to
make of him mockerye ne derysyon. I ought always to hate the sin / and love
the person / and much I ought to keep me that I will no grefe ne harm in my
heart to no person / ne to condemn him. Ne compare my self to an other that
is so evil. For he is this day evil that shall be to morrow good / and such
is this day good / yt to morrow shall be evil. Also I ought as much as I may
without mysdoynge unto other enploye my self / humble and condescende in
works and in words for to win him to god / and to withdraw him fro sin.
For like as says Seneke and saint Gregory. We may not better releue them yt
ben fallen / than by that which is aforefayd / and let us not will our self
how that it be enclyne toward them.

The.vi. degree of the virtue of equity. Ca. Ca. xiiii.
THe.vi. degree of the virtue of equity is yt.vi. eye that the wise man has.
That is that he se clearly behind the net and the engyns of the devil /
which ben to us as behind us. For the fend sees us / and we may not se him.
The fend our enemy that is ye devil / which is much strong / wise /
subtle and besy for to deceive us. For he cease never day ne night / but
always is in a wait for to deceive us by his false craft / and by his engynnes
that he uses in moo than a thousand manners. And like as says saint Austyn.
The deuylles see much subtylly the state of a man and his manner / and his
complexyon and to what sin / and to what vice he is most enclyned / by
nature or by custom / and to that part whereto a man enclyneth him self.
Thereto the devil assaylleth most strongely. The coleryke man to wrath and
ire. The sanguyn man to Iolyte and to lecherye. The fleumatyke to glotonnye and
to slouthe / and the malencolyke to envy and heaviness. And therefore every man
ought to deffende and keep him fro that part where he sees that his house is
most feeble. And against this vice and this sin ought one to fight and resyste
most / of which he is most assaylled. And how much more he shall resyste
strongely ayenste all sins So much more merit shall he have in paradyse or
in heaven / and understand well that the enemy of hell spares no person.
For he is hardy and aygre / as he yt assaylleth our lord Ihesu Christ in
temptynge him. Know thou says our lord to Job / in how many guyses the
fend desguyseth him / and in how many manners. Like as he should say. No man
knows but I only. For like as says saint Denis. All the aungelys ye good
and the evil / and all the spyrytes of men ben like as a myrrour spyrytuell.
Then like as a myrrour receives all ye fourmes and then pryntes that comen
tofore him. Rygh so does a spyryte of a man / be it in slepynge be it in
waking. Now then take a myrrour and set it against another. Anon all the forms
that been in that one / thou shall see in that other In such it is said that
the devil shows to a man such fygures and such fourmes as he will that god
suffers him And the soul receives maulgre him self sometime in thought and in
ymagynacyon / like ayenste my will / me byhoueth to look / se and receive in
the syghte of mine eye the form that comes before me. Now it is a right great
grace of god and a right great gift of the holy ghost to understand well all
the languages of the devil / and to know al his temptacyons / and all his
engynes. For like as says ye holy saint Bernarde. It is over subtle a thing
for to know and dyscusse between the thoughts that the heart co^ceyueth and
brings forth / and them yt the devil planteth. And the fend shows to a
man how the sins ben pleasant and delectable / lightly may a dyscrete man
and reasonable know this. But when the fend comes to tempte one in guyse of
an angel. and shows to him good for to draw him to evil. Then is ye
te^ptacyon most strong. And therefore says saint Johan that one ought not to
believe al spyrytes / but they ought to preue and well examyn them tofore that
one believe them / and to consider if they be of the part of god Right so does
they that have their confessoures good and holy men / wise and well approved in
their fayte. To which confessoures they that confess them / shows often
their thoughts which come unto their heart / both ye good and evil. For
like as Salamon says. Blyssed be they that all so doubt that they sin not
ne mysdone. And he says also in an other place. Do by good council all that
thou shalt do. And then thou shalt not repent the.

The seventh degree of the virtue of equity. Ca. C.xv.
THe.vii. degree of equity is the seventh eye / which he must have ye will
have this virtue. That is that he behold upward on hye. And that he have god
all way tofore him. Of such our lord says in the gospel / if thyn eye be
poor and simple. All thy body shall be clear and shynynge And if thyn eye be
derke and tenebrous. All thy body shall be derke obscure and tenebrouse. That
is to say if the entencyon of thyn heart is pure and simple. and goth forth
the right lygne after god by all the degrees that we have tofore named. All the
mess and substance of thy works and of thy virtues shall be fair and clear
and playsaunt to god. And if the entencyon be not good but froward and evil /
and reployeth bacwarde / all the work shall be derke and tenebrouse. For
without good and ryghtfull entencyon. Alms by comes sin / and virtues
vices. Thentencyon is simple when a man makes his works good right for goods
love / and it is obscure and derke / when a man does his works for to playse
the world or for vain glory. It is crooked and not right in two things /
that is when one holds one part to god / and that other of the world. For
thentencyon retorneth bacwarde / when a man secheth his own prouffyte in all
thing that he does. Now have thou herd the seven degrees of this virtue of
Equity by which this tree ryseth on heyghte

Here folowen the virtues against the seven deedly sins. Ca..Cxvi.
THe branches of this tree ben the seven virtues pryncypall / which answer
unto ye seven deedly sins / like as meekness or humylyte does ageynste
pride. Amytye or frendshyp against envy. Debonayrte and pacyence against ire
and felonnye. Prowess and dylygence against slouthe. Largess against auaryce.
Chastyte against lecherye / and Sobrenesse against glotonnye. These seven
virtues keep and conduyte much right the spyryte of science which ledeth and
conduyteth them by the way of equity as Salamon says. By the which way
dyscrescyon and reason which is the charytour and ye conduytour of virtues as
says saint Bernarde and the governor of the ship of the soul ledeth and
governs them that they go not out of the way ne on the right side ne on the
lift side. And thus prouffyten they grow and brings forth fruit
plentyuously. Then the virtue of equity / shows him by dyscrescyon in all
the works of other virtues / that without this virtue / the name of the virtue
bycometh vice. I say well that in another sense / these seven virtues
beforesayd ben the branches of equity / and all ye fruytes and the good works
that grown thereof apperteynen to this tree. Now understand well how ye great
maystre of virtues speaks to us of this virtue. For he says not in his rule /
blessed be they yt holden equity ouerall / and in all things have dyscrescyon
and mesure without mistaking For there is none but he mysdoeth in many manners.
And therefore our lord Ihesu Christ recomforteth us / wha^ he says not. Blessed
be they that sin not / and that mysdone not / but done all by equity and by
right lygne but he says much curteslye for to recomforte the synnars. Blessed
be they that weep / for they shall be comforted. That is to say. They ben and
shall be blessed that seen and / known / and understand well their sins and
their defautes in all the points of equity which we have here tofore named.
And thereof wepeth and be sorrowful they that find Inyquyte and wyckednes /
there where as they should hold and find equity. And therefore this world is
called the valeye of teeres / that none in the world may live without teeres
which has received the gift of science / whereof we haspoken tofore. But it
behooves as says Salamon / that who that most knows and most sees the
euylles and sorrows of the world / he has most sorrow at his heart teres and
wepynges. Thus began the world to grieve and anoye / and to whom this
transytore life most annoyeth and greueth / he most desires that other life
which is without end. Now ought thou to take here.vi. manner of teres
which an holy man had here in this world by the gift of scye^ce. The first
teres comes of that / which a man has often times angered god / by thought /
by word and by work. The second teres comes of that / which one beholds
the great tourmentes / horrible / and perdurable of hell which thou have
deserved by thy sins / of which each person ought for to have great dread.
The.iii. teres grow of the euylles / yt a man se the good suffer / of whom we
ought to have pity and co^passyon. The fourth teres comes for the sin that
the evil people do. The fyfth teres comes for this life which is peryllous /
and for that other life which is without end in glory pardurable / that we tarry
so long therfro The syxte teres comes of devotion and of great plente of
spyrytuall Joy of the presence of Ihesu christ / and of the feeling of the holy
ghost. These ben a right well blyssed that in this manner wepeth and wayleth
their sy^nes For they shall be well conforted as says the holy gospel like as
the nouryce comfort the child that wepeth and cries. For she dries the
eyes and kysseth him / and makes him to laughe by force. Right so shall our
lord do to them that wepen by bitter contrycyon for their sins like as I
have said. The debonayr Ihesus shall dry their eyes / that they shall never
weep more. Ne they shall never feel harm ne sorrow. But al way they shall be
with our lord god in pees / in laughing and in Joy pardurable.

Here after follows how that a man ought for to live in moyen astate.
Ca:.Cxvii.
NOw have we spoken of the gifts and of ye virtues that govern them yt live
in this world in the lowest of these three estates of which we have spoken
tofore. Now owe we by the aid of the holy ghoost to speak of the gifts and of
ye virtues / which most proprely apperteyne to them that despise the world /
and tenden to the mountain of perfeccyon. Of them says proprelye the holy
man Job. That the life of a man upon ye earth / is as a knyghthode / for the
life of a man in therthe is laboryous. Now behold and take heed of a young
bourges / and of a young knight. These.ii. manner men have much diverse
thoughts / and diverse ententes. The bourges entendeth to marchaundyse / for to
bye and selle / to win and to get good / and the end of his entente is all
for to be rich and noble and honored in his cite or town. The new knight
gooth al another way. For he desires and entendeth to do curtosyes and to
give largely. To learn chyualry and for to use arms. To suffer pain and
disease / and to show prowes to conquer loos and honor and to mount in to
hye estate. These two estates we se openly and appertly in these two manner of
people / of ye which some ben / yt will keep them from great sins / for
they will do penance and give alms / and hold and keep the commandments
of our lord Ihesu christ and of our mother holy church. And well should suffyse
them / if they might for so much save them at the last. There ben other unto
whom the world ennoyeth and greueth for the perils / sins / and the
pains of the which it is full. So that none may have pease of heart / ne
sure conscience. They se also again on the other side / that there is no
treasure which may be compared unto the love of god Nor no swetenes so great
/ as is the peace and tranquylyte of heart. Ne no glory mondayne and worldly /
that I may compare to the glory of a pure conscience. It seems unto them and
truth it is that who someuer might get these three things he should be more
than any Emperor. This is a great thing / but there ne ben but few persons
which undertake this empryse. But when god gives to a man this grace and this
gift / the which is called the spyryte of strength / he gives unto him a new
heart / a noble heart / and an herdy heart and couragyous. Noble for to despise
and set at naught all the which the world may take and give unto the. And of
this foresaid hardynesse speaks our lord Ihesu christ in the holy gospel /
when that he says. Blyssed ben they which have honger and thyrste for
Justice. Salamon says that he is Just the which dyspyseth his damage for his
soul or for his friend. And holy saint Bernarde says that he is not Just
that sees not that his heart feleth and understands / that he is bound in
his heart anenste god to love him above all things. They that verayly desire
with all their heart to render this debte to god / ben they of whom our lord
speaks in ye gospel when he says that blessed be they that have hungre and
thyrst for Justice. He says not blessed ben they that do ne Justice / but that
have hungre and thyrst to do Justice For this Justice may not be holden / nor
plainly rendered in this world. But in this world it shall be desired and in
that other paid. Therefore our lord says not they be blessed that shall
render and yield this Justice / but he says more curtoysly. As he yt well
knows our pouerte. Blessed be they that of this Justice have hungre and
thyrst. For Ihesu Christ requires not that we pay to him here his debte / but
it suffyseth to him if we have good will and desire to render and yield. And
how shall I say that they be Just / that render not that / which they owe /
ne have no will ne lust to pay. This desire when it is very in the heart /
him byhoueth that he show it by work. For like as Salamon says. No man may
bear fire in his lap but if that his gown brenne This demonstraunce may not
be without virtue and without prowess For by witness / ne by pletynge ne by
preef may not be that one be a good knight / but by many good feetes of arms /
and by much suffrynge and endurynge of trybulacyons and myschyef. And this is
the fourth virtue that the holy ghoost gives to a man to extyrpe and pluck
all out the fourth deedly sin That is the sin that is called in clergy
accydye / that is slouthe. This virtue aforesaid is of so great dygnyte that
emonge al other virtues / this virtue only bears by him self proprely the
name of virtue. For virtue and prowess is al one. God gives this virtue of
prowes to his servants / when he suffers and will make them knights like
as he did his appostles at penthecost or whytsontyde. Of whom we read that
they were so cowarde tofore that they had received this virtue of prowess /
that they durst not go out of their lodging / unto the time that they were
armed with this virtue / but after the had this virtue of prowes they suffered
gladly al martyrdomes and all manner tourmentes.

Of the dyuysyons of virtues after the phylosophres. Ca. C.xviii.
Plato.

Dyogenes.

Seneca



THe phylosophres that treat of these virtues depart this virtue of prowess
in.vi. parties / which ben like.vi. degrees / whereby this virtue mounteth and
prouffyteth / but our master which made the phylosophres and the phylosophye
/ that is Ihesu christ / he put to the.vii. point of prowess. The first
point of prowess is called (magnytude. The second is (affyaunce. The third
(suerty. The fourth (pacyence. The fyfthe (constaunce. The syxte (magnyfycence.
And the seventh which our master Ihesu christ adiousted / that is hunger and
thyrste of Justice. This virtue may not so proprely be named in english / as
thentendement or vnderstondy^ge of the world is said in latin.

The first of the virtue of magnanymyte. Ca. C.xix.
MAgnanymyte / is hyenes / gretenes / and nobles of courage by which a man is
hardy / as a man of great empryse. This virtue has two parties / yt is to
wete to despise great things / or naught to praise / and more greter things
to entrepryse and to chese. Of ye first party says saint Austyn. Prowess is
when courage dyspyseth all that which he has not in his power. That is all
that he may lose against his will. And Senek says in worldly things there is no
thing great / but the heart which dyspyseth great thing. Of the second
party says the phylosophre / that magnanymyte is reasonable enpryse of hye
things and ferd^ull / he yt has this virtue / he beholds ye world fro
far. as says Ysaye. And thus hy^ seems yt all ye world be a little thing
/ like as a sterre seems to us a little thing. Then all the world / and all
the charges / and ye great works and needs of the world semen to him as
naught / whereof Salamon says when he had well enserched the world / and had
desputed of all the states / of the fools and wise men He said his sentence in
this manner / vanyte of vanytes and all that I see is vanyte. That is to say
that all the world is vanyte / and all full of vanytes And a man him self for
whom the world is made / he peryssheth with all vanyte / for in him is all
manner of vanyte and of ordure. Like as Dauyd says in his Psaulter / vanyte by
mortalyte. For his life flees away as shadow / vanyte by curyosyte. For his
heart is as a dreme / vanyte by wyckydnesse: For sin makes him more to be
holden and reputed naught / than any thing that is in the world Now is then
the first party of this virtue that has made him to despise ye world. Like
as have sometime done in time passed / the phylosophres / ye paynems / the
sarasyns. And holy christian men. That other party is so that he do get the
way of perfeccyon / and to chese the life that is so openly sharp and
dredefull. This is the way that ledeth a man unto the montaygne of god that is
in thestate of perfeccyon. This is the way of the pryue counceyle of our lord
Ihesu Christ / which he showed in the montayne to his appostles this traytye
speaks. Thus way chese they / to whom it suffyseth not only to keep the
commandments of god / to which they be bounden by true debte like as they
do / that leave all that they have for gods sake / and abandonne them self to
dye for the love of him that deyed for them in the cross / yt was our sweet
savior and redemptour Ihesu Christ. Or for to goo unto the holy land or else
where / as they do that leave and despise al for the love of god / both hauoyre
/ friends / and them self / and make them servants of other and poor that
were rich and might be in the world / and put them self to suffer great
sharpenes / which had in the world great eases and great delytes / and all
these things done and have done with good heart that been in relygyon / or in
sharpness of penance if the heart be not there. For the habyte makes not ye
monk / ne the arms the knight / but ye good hertes and the pourueyaunce and
garneson of good works.

Of the virtue of affyaunce spu^ell. Ca. C.xx.
THe second degree of this virtue is affyaunce For who that has enprysed a
good way or any good works / him behooves yt he hold hy^ fermely in his
purpose. And that he acheue yt he has begone. This virtue is called fyaunce
Fyaunce is necessary against thassautes of the world / of the flesh / and of
ye devil of hell / which much strongely assayleth a man at ye beginning.
The flesh says to him I may not endure this life / my life has custom to
live such a life. The world renneth after for to withdraw him fro doing well
/ like as one renneth after a thief / wha^ he escapes fro prison. The devil
says to him. Caytyfe what wylt you do wherefore will you thus sle thy self / ye
may save the otherwise. These ben thassautes yt the new knights of god
suffer / and when they entende with god by good and ferme affyaunce / they retche
not. For he is ye true friend yt can / may / and will keep his friends / and
whom god will aid and help / none may noye ne grieve.

Of the virtue of surete. Ca..Cxxi.
THe third degree of prowess is surete. Surete as says the phylosophre is a
virtue by which a man redoubteth not ne dredeth the euylles ne ye perils
which ben tofore his eyes / and this is ye third good and well that the gift
of strength makes. For when the holy ghoost armeth his knight with his virtue
/ he gives to him first a noble heart for to enterprise great things / after
he gives to him a great ardoure and a desire to poursyewe it / and great
affyaunce to bring it to an end / after he makes him sure and hardy as a
lion so that he has no dread of peril ne of pain / ne of death / ne of
torments / but desires them like as does the new knight ye tournoye. Thus
dyden the holy marters like as it appears in their lives / emonge other we
read of saint agathe that had as great Joy when she went to the torments /
like as she should have gone to a wedding or a feste / and in like wise of ye
holy appostles and other holy marters without nombre

Of the fourth degree of ye virtue of prowess.Cxxii.
EVen as the holy ghoost makes his knight sure for to abide the torments and
ye sorrows that been to come. Right so makes he him strong and pacyent to
suffer them when they come / and this is the fourth degree which is called
pacyence. By this virtue a man ouercometh his enemies. The devil / the flesh
/ and the world / and all yt they may do and say. For these be ye sheldes of
gold to hy^ yt for the love of god suffers that they cover on all sides /
Like as Dauyd says in the psaulter / so that no stroke may hurt him. This
virtue has no man but if he have be tempted. For trybulacyon forgeth sapyence
as says saint Poule. Like as the fire makes the tyles hard / without this
virtue is none proved. Thus without pacyence none may come to perfeccyon /
without pacyence no man has vyctory. For who that leseth pacyence is
vaynquysshed. Of this we se example in all the crafts yt ben made with hand.
Many a stroke of the hamer suffers the cup of gold tofore or it be set on
the table of a king. And also a chalice or it be blyssed and set on ye auter.
Much suffers the tonnes and pypes and many great strokes tofore the wine be
put therein. Much is defouled with the fete of the fullers the fine scralet
clothe / tofore or the queen is cladde withal / and as many examples may
thou find as there ben crafts in London. By this virtue is a man strong as
iron / which all other metalles softeth and maystryeth / and he is made so
precious as gold / which the more it is in the fire / ye more it is pure and
clean / clear / and treatable / as the salamandre in the fire / and as the
fysshe that lives in ye water of trybulacyon in which he swy^meth and is
nourysshed.

Of the seventh degree of the virtue of prowess. Ca. C.xxiii.
THe.v. degree of the virtue of prowes is called ye virtue of constance / this
is a very virtue yt makes ye heart strong and stable as a toure founded on a
rooche / and as tree roted in good ground yt meueth not ne waggeth for no wind
yt may blow. That is to say / for none adventure ne temptacyon that may hap
or come / good ne evil without this virtue none comes to virtue ne to
vyctorye. For when ye knight of god has made or done sum prowesses Then
assaylleth him the devil by vaynglorye. And then is the bataylle in the
heart only to vaynquysshe / yt he fall not by vaynglorye / that all the
first temptacyon was not so strong / as is this vaynglorye. Of which Dauyd
says in his psaulter / that the devil beteth down the strong on the lift
side by aduersyte. And ye right strong on the right side by vaynglorye. This
virtue prayseth much Seneke the wise man which says. That there is no
virtue but that which gooth tofore proudly between that one fortune and that
other / and to the great despyte of that one and of that other

The.vi. degree of ye virtue of prowess. Ca..Cxxiiii.
THe.vi. degree of prowess is magnyfycence / this virtue expresses and
declares also the phylosophere saying Magnyfycence is an hye work and happy
achyeuynge our Lord Ihesu Christ the sovereign phylosophere calls this virtue
perseueraunce / by which the good knight of god endures the euylles unto the
end / in that hye way of perfecyon which he has emprysed. Of this virtue
says saint Poule that all the virtues run / but this virtue wynneth the
sword All they fight but this has the vyctory and the crown. Al werken. But
this virtue of perseuerau^ce bears away the reward and the merit. For our
lord Ihesu Christ says / who yt shall persevere unto ye end he shall be saved
and none other. The phylosophre could no ferther declare this virtue of
prowes. But ye dyscyples of our great maystre Ihesu Christ seen much more
ferther. For like as Salamon says when they have al remembered and performed.
Then them seem that all is to begin again. The virtues and the prowess of
phylosophres were all for to vaynquysshe the sins and vices / and for to get
the virtues. But the prowess of saints was not only to vaynquysshe sins
and vices and to get virtues / but with all this pryncypally for to keep
Iustyse and truth toward Ihesu Christ. He is not true ne Just / that
renders not that he owes to his power And certeynly it is a thing much
ryghtfull and reasonable that I give my life and my death for him that gaf his
life and death for me. And as much as he is of more value and is more worth
than I / so much I am more redeuable to him by right Iustyse. Like as says
saint Ancelme. This Iustyse I owe to desire but I may not here render it ne
pay it fully / as we have said tofore. And therefore is the seventh degree of
this virtue this which our lord Ihesu christ has put to. To the which the
phylosophre might never atteyne / when he said blessed be they that have hungre
and thyrst of Justice. They then be blessed that be mounted in to these seven
degrees of prowess / and have hungre and thyrste and great desire to their
power to mount unto the seventh degree.

Of ye spyrytuell battle against sin. Ca..Cxxv.
IN this tree like as in ye other we find.vii. branches for in.vii. manners ye
virtue and ye prowess of ye good knight of god shows him. For by.vii. manners
of bataylle there comes.vii. manners of vyctory / and by.vii vyctoryes / he
co^quereth seven manner of crowns of glory. These ben the rewards and ye seven
merytes of which speaks saint Johan thappostle and euangelyst in
thappocalyps. For as says saint Bernarde. Much is he a fool / and over
wenynge that without vyctory atteyneth to have the crown / and that without
battle weneth to have vyctory / whereof saint poule says. That he shall never
be crowned in glory that fyghteth not truly again sin and vices / which is
the champe of the battle in this world. The master of this field of bataylle
is Ihesu christ / which preueth his new knights like as it is written in the
book of kings. This master is the debonayre Ihesu christ / which is right
true as says saint Poule / and knows well ye power of every man / wherefore
he suffers not that any enemy or fend tempt us above our power / ne that no
adversary assail us so but that we may overcome him if he will by ye help of
god which increases our strength in the battle as says saint Poule / and
saint Johan also as we have said and devised.vii. vyctoryes / and.vii. crowns.
That is to say / vii. manner of rewards and of merytes the which god
promyseth unto them the which overcome the sins and the vices.

Of the first battle against all vices. Ca. C.xxvi.
THe first battle and fight that a christian man has is against deedly sin.
There is none overcome nor vaynquysshed in this foresaid bataylle but if he
will. For who that will not consent to sin he vaynquyssheth the battle /
which is light to do to a good heart vygorous / and much hard to him that is
slow and latchous and evil encoraged to do well and to the seruyse of god /
which is not strong by dread / ne hoot in prayer to god and in well doing as
/ saint Johan says For who that falls and is vaynquysshhed in this battle /
has much to do and is more hard for him to releue him and to defend him /
than he that is in hye spyrytuell estate. For he has no power to releue him /
but if it be by the grace of god For like as the fysshe enters by him self in
to the net / yet may he not issue ne goo out / but if he be cast or put out
/ right so a man falls by him self and by his will in to sin but he may
not issue ne go out without the grace of our lord and his aid and help / as
wha^ he gives to him repentance to do penance for his sins / and that is
the armor that saint Poule comaundeth to take in this bataylle. Now ought
thou to know / that when a man is armed for to vaynquysshe and overcome
hardely sin and parfyghtly him byhoueth that he have three things which ben
in very penance. The first is repentance of heart. The second confession of
mouth. The third is satysfaccyon and penance / that is the amends of sin
/ if one of these three faylle the confession is nothing worth.

Of very repentance of heart. Ca..Cxxvii.
Repentance requires great sorrow / and great by wayllynges of heart of yt
which he has angered and dyspleased god / and of so much as he has more
sy^ned and dyspleased god / so much more ought be ye sorrow / and the
repentance greter. Thus repented hy^ the good king Dauyd when he said in his
psaulter. I have labored and trauaylled in my bewailing / and have wasshen in
the nyghtes my bed / and my couche with my weeping teres. He that has
dyspleased god by deedly sin / ought to weep and wayle in ye depnes of his
heart / and with great syghynge cry god mercy / like as the thief / the
murderer / and the traitor that had deserved to be hanged on the gybet of
hell. The sinner is the thief to god. For he has stolen and mysused the goods
of his lord which ben but lent to him for to win with. Tho ben the gods of
nature / of grace / and of fortune / of which he must render and give acompte
and reckoning much straytely / how he has folyly dyspended them and has put
them to evil use. Also he is a murderer of ye daughter of a king / that is of
his own soul / ye which was daughter of the king of glory by grace / whom
he has slain and put to death by deedly sin. Also he is a traytre. For the
castle of the heart and of his body which god has given him to keep / he
has yielded to ye devil which is his mortal ennemy / well ought he to
demean great sorrow that is in such peril / and ought often for to wasshe his
bed / that is his conscience. The teeres chase and drive away ye devil out
of his heart / like as scaldynge water dryueth a dog out of ye kechyn. After
ye repentance ought to come confession / yt is the good chamberyer which
makes cletnehe house: and casts out al ye ordures with the brom of the tongue /
whereof Dauyd says in the psaulter. Now understand well how a man ought to
confess him.

Here after is contained how that a man ought to confess him. Ca..Cxxviii.
Unto that / that confession auaylleth to the sauacyon of the soul byhouen
six condycions. The first is that it be made wisely and this is in two things
/ the first that he take good head / to whom he ought to confess hy^ and
after whereof he ought to be confessed / saint Austyn says / that it which one
should do for to eschew and flee the death of the body / ought one do for to
eschew the death and the dampnacyon of the soul. The seek man for teschewe
and to flee the death / and for to have health secheth gladly the best
physycian and ye most wise that he may find. Thus says says Austyn / who so
wisely will confess him and find grace anenst god / he ought to seche such a
confessor / which can and may bind and unbind / and also counceylle. That
is that the confessor can well know sin / and counceylle ye synnar and that
he have power to assoylle him / and to give him penance after the sin. For
according to his sin he ought to have penance. Also who so will confess
hy^ wisely he ought dylygently remember his sins tofore or he confess him
and enserche all his heart and his conscience / how he has dysplesed god and
his blyssed mother and all his company of saints and ought to remember all his
life in great dread. Like as did the good king Ezechyas which said thus. I
shall remember all my years in the great bytternes of my soul and my heart. The
sinner ought to enter in to the house of his heart / and not to pass through
like a mynstrell which a bydeth not gladly in his house. For he has no werse
home than his own. But in his heart a man ought to dwell and consider all his
sy^nes and defautes. Whereof he ought to yield accomptes and reason truly to
god and to his confessoure / and ought to remember to ordain well his acompte /
like as he yt is adiourned tofore his lord for to render acomptes of all his
receytes and paymentes. And also well to take heed tofore the writing of his
conscience / that he fail not to account all his life. For if he fail of his
acompte / god shall not fail of his. When a man has dylygently remembered his
sins / and beholden how and in how many manners he has dyspleased god / and
how oftentimes / and how gretely he has sinned. And how long he has abyden
in sin. Then^e he ought to confess him anon and hastily. And this is the
second condycyon yt ought to be in confession. The king Dauyd rose at
mydnyght for to confess him. Like as he says in the psaulter / and abode
never unto a month / ne to the end of a year. And the wise man says thus in
an other place. Ne tarry thou not to convert to god / ne withdraw the not ne
seek no delays fro day to day. For in tarye^ge is much peril for many
reasons First for the condycyon of sin. For sin is a fire bre^nynge /
which may not be quenched but by lacrymable co^fessyon. And much were he a
fool yt saw his house bre^nynge / and would not hastily ren to fetch water to
quench the fire. Also it is a great malady and sekenes to dwell in sin and
the very medicine is confession / and certain little prayseth he his health /
that feleth him self seek to the death / and desires not to be guarysshed and
heled. Also the death which is nyghe and all about for to espy the sinner /
ought to moeue and excyte him hustely to confession. For he knows not the day
/ the hour / ne the point or mynute when the death shall come. the which
surpryseth often the sinner / there where he takes no head. And certainly who
that knew what day he should deye he should make him ready in the best and
hastyest wise that he might. Also if a sinner saw well ye peril wherein he is.
For he is in ye hold and prison of sin and in the throat of the lion of hell
and of the dragon yt will devour him / he should hastily go to confession / and
that as soon as he might. Also a sinner ought for to se what he has lost by
his sin / the goods pardurable and the goods spyrytuell. His time and him
self which he might al recover by devout confession. Much then were he a
fool if he hasted not to recover that which he had lost. Also the mercy of
god that abides for ye sy^ner and knocks at his door as says thappocalyps.
For he that ought to haste him to be confessed. For of as much as god abides
so long the sy^ner / of so much is his Justice more hard and more cruel /
when he sees hy^ slow and neclygent. For like as the archer gives his bow
more bente / and tharbelaster to the cross bow so much more smitteth it the
harder and stronger. And certainly god has his bow bent and ready to lose as
says the psaulter for to sle the sinners if they will not convert them and if
they take not good head. Also the sinner that over long taryeth to confess
hy^ forgeteth often his sins. So that it happeth that uneath that he is well
and truly confessed. For he forgeteth many sins which he shall never
remember / and so of them shall he never repent / ne never be confessed / of
which it is to him great peril. Also when a synnar is tofore his confessor
he ought to express and say his sins clearly / so yt his confessor see
euydently his heart / and all thentencyon of him yt confesses him. For ye seek
man ought to descoure his malady unto ye physycyen / else ye physycyen might
not work. Ne the Surgyen ne might not hele the sore but if he saw the wound.
And therefore says ye wise man if thou will yt the Surgyan hele the / thou
must dyscoure to him thy wound or sore. Then ye truaunte and the lame techen
the to confess ye which shown their maladyes / and lay forth the foulest
tofore to have alms. Thus then ought the synnar to dyscouer his sins to
his confessor for to have mercy / and this is the third condycyon that ought
to be in confession. Also the synnar ought to confess him entyerly and / holy
this is the fourth condycyon. For he ought to say al his sins great and
little and all the cyrcumstaunces of ye sins. Then he ought first to
behold the deedly sins / of which I have spoken tofore / and to confess
hy^ holy of eueryche of them / after that he feleth him culpable / without to
hyde any one thing and without saying more / and without excusing him / and
without to accuse any other. Rygh so confessed him Dauyd that says in the
Psaulter. I shall confess me and shall say all mysy^nes against me / and not
against other / like as ypocrytes which put always the fairest outward / and
tell their good deeds and hyde their evil deeds. And accusen other of that /
which they them self be more culpable and gylty of. For they can espy se and
apperceyue well a little festue or a little mote in the eyes of other / and
behold not a great beme or block yt is in their own eyes / yt is to say the
great sins that been in them. Such was the pharyse of whom the gospel says
that he remembered his good deeds / and despised the publycan that humbly smote
his breest in the temple / and cried god mercy and said. Lord god have pity
and mercy on me poor sinner. Thus ought the sinner Judge himself fofore god /
and not aledge his sin but to agreue / poyse / and recounte clearly withoue
lyenge. Also confession ought to be hole and not departed to diverse
co^fessoures. For it ought to be said al to one confessoure / and not one part
to one / and an other part to an other / god loves not such departy^ge. Also
a man ought not to say only the sins / but all the cyrcumstaunces which
agreueth much the sins For the sins ben paraduenture more great in one
person than in an other / as in a relygyous man more than in a seculer. In a
prelate than in a simple man. Also this is a more great sin in one place than
in an other / as in a monastery or in an other holy place more than in an other
unhallowed place / also in one time more than in another / as in lent or in
feestful days. Also when one synneth wytyngly and in ernest / he synneth more
than when one synneth ygnourauntly. Also one ought for to say ye condycyon of
the sin. For it is greter sin with a wedded woman than with a syngle / or in
a man or woman of relygyon / or in a person ordained a priest / or a deken /
after that the order and the estate is more great / so much is the sin more
great. Aso if that ye sin be against nature / and how long time that he has
abyden and dwelled in the said sins. Also he ought for to say if that he
have little or naught resysted and withstonde temptacyon / or if he have sought
temptacyon / or if he have be beten in temptacyon. Also he ought to say ye
cause and the entencyon that moved him to do ye sin / and all the other
occasyons of ye sin. Also a man ought for to think and consydere by all his
members how he has sinned. First he ought to go to his heart / and say all
his sins what someuer they be carnal or spyrytuell. Spyrytuell as against
the faith or of vain glory / or of envy / of auaryce / of rancour / or of
other manners / of whom there be many. The sins carnal or bodily /
apperteynen to the delytes of ye flesh of the body or if he have not kept him
well in all thoughts / yt therein has been consenting / or long abiding. Or
delight / which sometime is as much as the consenting and of all these
thoughts he ought to confess. Also one ought to take heed if he have sinned
by ye members of his body / for a man synneth in them in many manners. First in
ye head / when one sets over great cure and great cestes to dress it / as
done these ladies and wymmen which so curyously array their head with precious
adournementes for pure vanyte and for to playse and draw men to sin. In
which they sin often grievously / and specially they yt make the^ hye horns
of their here / or of other thing / which resemblen common wymmen. There be
vanytees enough about ye heed / in washing / in kembynge in dyenge and in
poorynge in a myrrour / of which things god is often dysplesed / of this
vanyte and folly ye men be not all quyte / for they arraye their here like
women / and force it to be yelowe / and if they be black / they by craft make
the^ blou^de and abourne / and late the^ grow long more like to a woman tha^
to a man / which is a sign of great evil and much pride / and of all this and
such things a man ought for to confess him / and of all other vanytees and
keep him that he do them no more. Also a man ought to remember and well
consider to the five wits of his body / wherein he has often sinned in many
manners. By the eyes in folyly seeing and beholdynge. Or by the eres in herynge
gladly the myssayers / losengers / liars / and other folyes. Or by the mouth
in folly speaking / in ouermoche drinking and etynge. Or by the nose in
ouermoche delytynge himself in sweet odoures or wicked odoures. Or by folyly
touching in him self / or in his wife / or in other that is wors / be it man
or woman. Also a person ought too confess him of the outragyous array of his
robes and of his garments in hosynge and shoynge / and of all other defautes /
of which he has mind / and thus the confession is good and hole / when one
says all his sins great and little / and this is the fourth condycyon that
ought for to be in confession. The fyfth condycyon is that one ought for to
confess him humbly. For the sinner speaks to god which sees all his heart.
Then the confessor is but the ere of god and that which he hereth / ne
knows not as a man / but as god. And the sinner ought to tell his sins with
great dread / and ought to open his heart and pour it abroad yt it flow over
/ like as one shedeth out a full pot of water when the water is poured out
there abides no color as does of milk ne odoure / as of wine ne sauoure /
ne no smell ne taste as of honey / thus should nothing be retained of ye sin
/ sith it has be said in confession. Ne the color. That is an evil manner
that is had in speky^ge / or in beholdynge / or in following evil company / or
in other thing that has color of sin. Also one out to leave the sauoure
and taste of sin / he retayneth ye savor of sin / that thinks on the
sins that he has done. And delyteth him in the remembrance of them and
pleseth him. But he ought for to think upon them in great dread / yt he fall
never no more in them. And also he ought to remember them in great sorrow. And
he ought to co^founde hy^ in him self / and to have great shame tofore god of
his sins. And ought have ferme purpoos that he should never return to his
sins though he should be desmembred. Also he ought to leave and fle the
odor. There ben sum yt leave well their sins but yet they here gladly spoken
of them / but who yt well repents him / will not gladly here speak of them /
but he ought to have great abhomynacyyon of them. The vi. condycyon is that one
ought often to confess him for many reasons: First for to get more gretter
grace and more merit against god / like as ye lynnen cloth which is often
wasshen / is ye more white. Also for ye venyal sins yt one falls in often /
he ought to wasshe him. Alsoo for to chase and drive away the devil fro him /
and for to be out of his thraldom and of his net. The bird withdraws him
and departs gladly fro ye place as his neste is broken and deffeated / and
fro thens that his eggs ben taken away. Also for to learn for to confess hy^
well. For ye usage makes a master / like as it appyereth in these crafts.
Also by cause that one knows not if he have be well sorry and well repentance
/ therefore he ought to have recours unto his confessor / and to confess him
of all things suffysauntlye. Also for to humble him self / for to get ye more
grace and more merit ageynste god / wherefore one demanded of a monk wherefore
he confessed him so often / and he answered / by cause said he yt I have always
fere yt I be not well confessed. and also I remember me often of sum things
that I have not said in confession by forgetynge / and also by cause that after
my confession I find my self always the more humble and meke. Now have thou
herd how one ought too confess him. Now ought thou to know that five
things specially empesshe and lets very co^fessyon. The first is shame yt
one dare not say ne tell his sin for shame / and this makes the devil /
that puts shame tofore for to close his mouth like as a thief does / which
that casts unto the hounde a little glewe by cause he should not bark ne
baye. For the little glewe is of such nature that it makes an hounde dombe and
to be still when it is put in his throat / but the synnar ought to think that
the shame that he has to tell his sin is a great part of his penance and
of thamende. Also the synnar ought gladly to suffer and drink a little shame
for to escape ye great shame / yt all synnars shall have at ye day of Judgment
when all the world shall see their sins. The.ii. thing is evil dread to do
great penance / ye which ye devil puts in ye ere of ye synnar saying thou
may not do this sharp penance / and thou may not leave thy customs /
such people resemble ye shoughe horse which is aferde of ye shadow yt he
sees. And certaynlye this penance yt we do here in this world is but a
shadow to ye regard of ye pains of hell or of purgatory. The third thing
is ye wicked love yt the synnar has enlaced yt he loves so much his delight
yt he will not leave it / and thinks yt for no thing he will confess him /
but slepeth in his sin like a swyne in the dunge. The.iiii thing is hope of
long life / whereof ye devil says to him / ye art a young man / you shall live
long / you shall well recoure a confessor / but he takes no head ne sees not
the death that awayteth him / and shall take him sooner than he weneth / for god
which promyseth pardon unto hy^ that repents / promyseth not to morn as
saint Gregory says. Then the devil plays often with the sinner / like as
the catte does with the mouse when he has taken hy^. For when he has long
played he strangleth and sleeth him. The.v. thing is dyspayre / in which ye
devil puts the sinner / but he ought to remember yt god forgyueth to them
that repent lightly and more gladly he gives pardon than we demand him.
After the confession comes the satysfaccyon. That is thame^des and the
penance that one ought to make and pray for his sin / after tharbytrement /
and will of the confessoure / which ought to Judge the amends of the
trespaces. In fastings. In almesses / or in prayers / or in other good things
/ after that the sin requires it / and the seek man ought gladly to obey to
the physycyen to have health. And the good sone ought gladly to do the will of
his goostly fader for the salvation of his soul. Now haste you herd three
things that holds together ye haubarkes of penance / with which ben armed the
new knights of god for to vaynquysshe the battle against sin. And who that
shall vaynquysshe this bataylle shall not retche of the second death. Like as
saint Johan says in thappocalyps / but he shall have very rest / that is the
glory perdurable The first death of the soul is to love sin / which is
vaynquysshed by penance / by which one escapes the second death / yt is the
death of hell / when one may not deye. This is ye first branch of the tree of
prowes in them yt vaynquysshe sy^ne. After this battle comes another. For
when a man repents hy^ of his sy^ne / then comes a new wrastelynge to his
heart / what what life he may led. And there be many of them that in this
battle be recreaunte. For like as god says in ye gospel. Now they believe.
Now they believe not. Now they will / now they will not. Now they purpose. Now
is all naught. For they be not ferme ne stable / ne perseueraunte. But when a
man Joins him to god / and affermeth his heart and his good purpoos to him /
then is this battle good and gotten / and then god makes him ferme and stable
as is a pyler in the church / as says saint Johan. This is the second
vyctorye and the reward that answers to him / after this wrastlynge comes
the iii. wrastlynge that a man has to his flesh / which much complayneth
when it begins to feel ye hardenesse and sharpness of penance / and it
reenforceth to come ageyn to her old customs / the flesh is an evil wife /
whereof Salamon says / who most does the will of the flesh / the wers it is
/ and more is to him contrary. And who yt suffers his flesh to overcome him
he enters and puts him self in great seruytude. For there is none so foul
a thing as to be overcome of the flesh / who yt vaynquyssheth this battle /
god promytteth to him a new crown white of chastyte and of Innocence / and
bry^geth him to rest yt is the glory perdurable like as he says in
thapocalypse / after this battle comes this world and dame fortune with her
whele / which assayleth a man on ye right side and on ye lift side / which
ben ii. strong bataylles / where as much people ben vaynquysshed / and mo on
ye right side than on the lift like as Dauyd says in his psaulter / for more
strong is ye temptacyon yt comes of the right side / than it yt comes on ye
lift / as Dauyd says in his psaulter. For more strong is the temptacyon yt
comes of honor of rychesses and of delytes which the devil offreth and
sets before / than that which comes in aduersyte / like as pouertees and
the maladies and the sekenesses yt god sends / and he yt vaynqussheth and
that dyspyseth with heart ye prosperytees of this world. God promytteth to him
honor and hyenes in glory / for he shall make him sytte with him in his trone
as says thappocalyps. To him that shall vaynquysshe yt other battle which is
on the lift side in thaduersytees of this world / god promyseth glory which
no man may take fro hy^. The.vi. battle which is much strong is against the
wicked that been in the world / which ben the members of Anthecrist / which
warreth against the good men by their might / like as did of old time the
tyrauntes against the marters and good christian me^ For uneath shall none dare
reclame him christian for the strength of Antecryst and of his members. This is
ye be that saint Johan saw yt warred the saints of which we have tofore
spoken. The members of this be shows them in wicked princes and evil
prelates / which by their great couetyse defoule / fley / and eete their
subgettes / so that the good men that been under them have enough to suffer
and many dyseases and great myscheues. But they that take all in good pacye^ce
without murmr as did Job / and trust all in god they vaynquysshe this
battle / and to him yt shall overcome it / god promyseth to him yt he shall
give to him power over his enmyes / like as saint Johan says in thapocalyps.
After all these batayles comes ye last yt is most strong / for ye devil yt
is malycyous and subtle / when he sees yt a man is mounted upon the mountain
of perfeccion / and has over comen all batayles aforesaid. Then assaylleth
him ye fend by vaynglory / and by presu^pcyon / for then it seems to him that
he is a much good man / and great friend of god by this that he has all
suffered for him by which he falls sometime from hye to low as did lucyfer /
and therefore it is great necessyte yt a man be wise / and yt he keep him from
the sin of vaynglorye / which makes the reregarde. For in the taylle lies
often ye venym / and thencombraunce / and sometime the ship yt is nyghe to the
port peryssheth / which went surely in ye hye see. Then him byhoueth that
he tarry and address his saylle That is all his entencyon and all his. heart at
the port of health. That is to Ihesu Christ by the wind of fervent love and of
great desire of god / this is ye hungre of Justice of which we have spoken
tofore / which comes of the gift of strength and of the virtue of prowess.
As ye good Knight which is noble and hardy / yt has a good heart and that
has been in many presses / which has great talente and great hungre to show
his strength in tournoyes or in bataylles for to get to him pryse and renome.
And certeynly who that has great love to god and great hungre and desire of
his health he ouercometh lyghtlye this last bataylle / he will not ne desires
not in this life / but that which is unto the honor and to the glory of God.
And to the health of his soul / and who that vaynquyssheth this bataylle shall
win the reward of which saint Johan speaks in thappocalypse there where
our lord says / that to him that shall vaynquysshe he shall give to him to
ete of ye tree of life / which is in ye myddle of paradyse. That is Ihesu Christ
hy^self that gives life perdurable of which all the saints lyuen in ye glory
of heaven / and all ben fulfilled and ben in rest. And this is the blessing of
which ye debonayre Ihesu christ promyseth in ye gospel to his good knights
when he said / blyssed be they that have honger and thyrst of Justice / that is
for to serve god and to love him. For they shall be fulfilled of ye fruit of
the tree of life. That is the end and the perfeccion of this virtue yt which
is called prowess / to the which ledeth and brings ye gift of strength.

Of the virtue of the gift of cou^ceyle / and of the good and merit that is
therein Ca. C.xxix.
Like as the holy ghoost gives strength / and vygoure to empryse great
things. Right so gyhe counceyle by which a person comes to a good end / of
that which he empryseth. This is a great grace yt the holy ghoost gives yt is
called the gift of council / whereby a man has great aduysement and great
delyberacyon and advise in all yt / yt he enpryseth / and in that / yt he be
not over hasty in his empryses for like as says the phylosophre. Great things
be made and done not only by the strength ne by arms / but by good council /
and an other phylosophre named Socrates says yt of an hasty council men
repent them after. And therefore says Salamon / do nothing without good counsel
/ and after the deed you shall not repent the. This grace shows him in a man
in three manners. First in sechy^ge gladly good council / thus Thoby counceyled
his sone. Fair sone said he ask council always of a wise man / and Salamon
says yt there where as is no good governor ye people fails anon and is
anon dystroyed / but it is sauf where there be good cou^ceyles / and the wise
Tullyus says yt little is worth ye arms without forth / if there be not keep
ye well says the scryptue fro evil counceyllours / and cou^seylle the not
with fools. For they love no thing but yt which pleseth them / and not yt
which pleases god. Also the scripture counceylleth yt one should ask and
seche counceyl of the old and ancient men / and not of the young men which
ben not proved in the works For in the ancient men that have seen and proved
many things / is good wysome and good counceyll. By cause yt Roboas the sone
of Salamon left the counceyll of the old and ancient men yt were wise / and
took the counceyl of young men / he lost the most party of his royame. Also
who yt has this gift late him examyne and consider the counceylles yt be
given to him and think with great aduysement if he be well counceylled and
truly / and not lightly to believe to the counceyl of one ne of tway / ne / how
well that they be of his pryue friends. Therefore Seneke says yt a wise man
exmyneth his counceylles / and byleueth them not lightly. For he yt byleueth
lightly / he fyndeth yt he is often deceived. Also who yt has this gift / he
obeys to good counceyll when he fyndeth it. For for naught asks he
counceyll / yt has no will to do thereafter / whereof says Salamon. It seems
to a fool that he be in the right way / but the wise man hereth gladly good
counceyl / yt is to say / that ye wise man obeys to the good counceyles /
which ye foles despise. The most prouffytable counceyll yt a man may have /
is the cou^ceyll yt our good master Ihesu christ which is the fontayne of
alsapyence of whom comes all good cou^ceyl / yt is in ye holy gospel wha^ he
says / if thou will be parfyte / go and selle al yt thou have and give it to
ye poor people / and come follow me / and thou shall have great tresour in
heaven / and behold and think who gives such counceyl. For he is as I say
the fountain of sapyence. The very god yt came in to therthe for to
counseylle yt / and for tenseygne ye, ye right way for to go / to paradys. That
is the path of pouerte of ye spyryte / by which ye holy ghoost ledeth them
whom he enlumyneth with ye gift of cou^ceyll. Truth it is yt in another
manner a man may be sauyd. As by ye way of the commandments of our lord to
hold and keep them. One may be saved in marriage or in wedowhode / or in
rychesses of ye world when they be well used. But the holy ghoost by ye gift
of counceyl ledeth and conduyteth more right and more surely by the way of
very pouerte of ye spyryte / by which one despyseth and put under foot all
the couetyse of ye world for the love of god / this gift takes away fro ye
heart ye sin of auaryce and of couetyse / and so planteth the fair tree of
mercy / which is to have sorrow and compassyon of other men's harm / and of
other men's suffraunce.

Of the degres of the virtue of mercy. Ca..Cxxx.
THis tree of mercy has seven degrees like unto the other / by which it
grows and prouffyteth These ben seven things which moeue much and draw a
man unto mercy / and to have compassyon of others harm. The first thing that
moeueth a man to mercy is nature. For as ye book says which speaks of the
nature of beestes. No bird eteth another bird of his own nature. Ne a be
alsoo eteth not another be of his own nature. Also the same book says that
a mare nouryssheth the fool of another mare / wha^ she is deed. Also it has
often be seen and preuyd yt a wulfe has nourysshed ye whelps of another wulfe
/ and has defended them fro other beestes / well than ought a man to have pity
and compassyon on an other / of his evil and harm / which is semblable to
his nature. For we be all made of one matter and one form and one image. The
second thing that ought to draw a man to mercy and to compassyon of an other
man's harm is grace. For we be all members of one body / that is of holy
church by grace / and one membre helps an other naturally / and has pity
and co^passyon. Also we be brought and redeemed with one price that is with the
precious blood of Ihesu christ / that henge on the cross for to redeem us fro
death perdurable / when our savior Ihesu christ was then so pyteous and
merciful toward us. well ought we then have pity and compassyon one of
another / and to aid and socoure yt one that other. Also we be all bredren of
fader and mother by faith and by grace. For we ben all sons of god and of holy
church / and the one brother ought to help yt other when he sees it is need /
for at need is seen who is a friend. The iii. thing yt ought to moeue a man to
mercy is ye commandment of ye holy scryptue yt counceyleth and commands
the works of mercy above all other things. Whereof Salamon says Se well to
says he yt thy head be not without oil / for by thoyle / yt nouryssheth yt fire
and the lamp is vnderstonden mercy that ought always to be in our tonnes. For
in likewise as thoyle surmounteth in ye lamp above all other lycoures. Right
so mercy surmounteth ye other virtues. And also as ye oil nouryssheth and
keeps the fire in the lamp / and when thoyle fails ye fire quenches Right
so mercy keeps ye fire of ye love of god in ye heart / and when mercy fails
/ the love of god fails. As says saint Johan / who yt shall se says he his
brother and his neighbor hauy^ge disease and necessyte in need / and closes
the door of his heart / yt is to say that he has no pity ne compassyon / and
helps him not if he may / how says he / shall the love and charity of god be
in him / like as he should say. That may not be. For the oylle of mercy is
faylled in ye lamp of his heart. Also ye good thobye taught his sone and said
thus / fair sone be thou merciful / as much as thou may / if thou have
plente of goods give gladly and largely / if thou have little yet of ye same
give gladly to ye poor. And our lord says in the gospel. Go said he and
selle al yt thou have and give it to the poor. This is the virtue yt the holy
scripture prayseth most generally. And it is ye virtue that most playseth god
as the scripture says. Hereof says god by ye prophet. I will says he mercy
and not sacryfyse And saint Austyn says that there is no thing that so much
makes a man amyable unto god as does pity / and to have mercy on other. Much
people do seruyse and sacrefyse to god in fastings / or in plygremages / or in
sharp penance of the body / but to do alms / they ben scarce caytyf and
strayte. Also much people of great estate to whom god has given largely of
his temporel gooddes do sacrifyse and seruyse not to god / but to ye world /
or to ye devil in yt / that they dyspende folyly their goods in vanytees and
in oultrages / and in honors of ye world. But for to give for gods sake to
ye poor they ben hard as ademont. Also like as mercy pleseth to god / right
so despleaseth it to ye devil / for it is ye armure and ye virtue by which he
is most soonest vaynquysshed / as is said in a gloss upon ye plaulter / he may
not suffer the good odor of such an oyneme^t / no more tha^ ye crapaulde may
feel ye smelling or odor of ye vygne / this odor might not Judas smelle ne
feel wha^ ye holy Maudelyne enoynted the heed of Ihesu christ with the precious
oynteme^t For it seemed to Judas that it was a thing lost / and had lever the
money that it cost in his purse by couetyse. Of such people that be thus
covetous and auarycyous is lord and master a devil yt is called Closepurs /
whom a holy hermyte saw / that he had the office to close and shyt the purses
of covetous men / that they should not be opened to do alms. The fourth
thing that ought to move a man to mercy is the great largess of our lord /
which gives largely to every man after that they be / as says saint James /
and makes his sone to shine upon ye good and evil / like as it is said in the
gospel. Sith yt ye debonayre Ihesus is so large to us / that he gives to us
and has given / all that we have that is good / we ought to be large and
curtoyse that one anenst yt other. For so commands to us god in the gospel
when he says. Be ye merciful / like as your fader of heaven is merciful. He
ought to resemble his fader / and ought to ensue him wha^ he is good and wise.
Or otherwise he forsakes him / and therefore says the wise man in scripture.
Be ye merciful and pyteous to the poor / and to the orphans / like as you were
their fader or their mother / be you as their husbonde and thus you shall be
called the sone of god. The fyfth thing yt ought to moeue a man to mercy is
the honor of god. For as Salamon says / he honors our lord yt does well
to the poor. For that which is done to ye pore is done unto god like as him
self witnesses in ye gospel. That yt ye have done to one of the leest of my
seruau^uauntes / ye have done unto me. This says our savior and redemptour
Ihesu christ. The poor ben the little meyney of our lord / who so honors
the^ by ye works of mercy he honors god. For who honors ye meyne he
honors the lord / and who that does vylonye to the famylye and servants /
does vylanye to the lord. Hereof have we a fair and a good ensaumple of the
holy saint Martyn. To whom god apperyd in the night after yt he had departed
and given his mantell to the poor man / and he was couerd with the said mantel
/ and god said to his aungellys Martyn has clad me with this vestement. The
syxthe thing yt ought much to moeue a man to mercy / is the dread of the
Judgment. For as says saint James Judgment without mercy shall be do to him yt
does not ye works of mercy. For like as god says in the gospel / when ye
day of Judgment shall come / the sentence shall be given against them that have
not to their power done and accomplysshed the works of mercy. For god shall
leye a deef eere to them yt now leye a deef eere to the poor / like as it
appyereth in the exaumple yt he recounteth of the rich man that would give
none alms to Lazare / and by cause he refused to give to him alms / god
refused to him a drope of water when he was in the fire of hell. In like wise
did he to the folysshe vyrgyns yt had none oylle in their lamps God closed to
them the yate at the wedding and said to them I know you not / and so they
abode without and came not in right so shall it be do at ye day of Judgment to
the auarycyous and to ye covetous men which have not the conduytes of mercy
which ledeth the souls to heaven / and makes to them a right way to come
tofore god as holy scripture says. Like as way is made and the yate opened to
him yt brings a present Certeynlye acursed shall he be by right to whom
pity and mercy shall torn their back at ye day of Judgment / wha^ god shall
give sentence so ferme / stable / and dredefull For it shall be so
establysshed by Justice and confermed / that it shall never be repeled. And
then shall god do as souerayn pope bishop and king / cast out his great
excomynycacyon. For he is king and bishop as says the scripture / for he
took nature humayn in the lynage of kings and of bysshoppes This
excomynycacyon shall be cast upon them yt shall be on the lift side. None of
them shall be except. They shall be wicked people whom god shall curse for
their sins and for their falsehede. Thus shall he say to them. Go ye wicked
and cursed in to the fire of hell perdurably / which is ordained to thoryble
deuyls / and to them that have done their will. Alas this sentence how well
that it is short / certeynlye it shall be over anguysshous and over hard when
Ihesu christ shall chase them out of his company. Such hard a departing ought
much to be doubted. The seventh thing that ought much to moeue a person to
mercy / is ye fruit and the good yt grows of this tree / which appyereth in
many manners First in that which mercy geteth pardon to synnars. Of which
mercy has the lettres of pardon and of Indulgence. For god says in the gospel
Blessed be the mercyful / for they shall have mercy. After in the same letter
says he / if we pardone not that one ye other / god shall not pardone us. Also
mercy is ye good merchants purs / which wynneth ouerall / and never leseth.
For as says saint Poule / mercy auaylleth to all things. A precious stone
should be much worth that should be good for all things. That is mercy
which wynneth the goods temporal / the goods spyrytuell / and the gods
perdurable of glory / of ye gods temporell says Salamon / honor god of thy
rychessys and of thy gods te^porel give to ye poor / and god shall replenyssh
thy garners of wheet / and the cellers of wine. But understand well this word
/ yt he says of thy rychesses and of thy gods / and not the goods of other /
as does some that will do almesses of yt which they have taken fro other by
force / by rauyne / by usure / or by other evil cause / and makes often of
other men's leder large thonges. But of thyn own propre good which you hold
truly honor god. For that other thou art bounden to yield and render
again. Also he says that thou give to the poor and not to ye rich / and god
shall yield to the an.C. double therefore like as he says in the gospel. Mercy
is a sede that fructefyeth better in ye lene land than it does in fat. How
that mercy multyplyeth the goods temporell we have many fair ensamples / of
which I will remember some here. It is said of saint Germayne of Ancerre / yt
when he came from Rome / as he went out of Melane he demanded his deken if he
had any money / he answered yt he had but three pens. For saint Germayne had
given all to poor people. Then commanded saint Germayne to his deken yt he
should give tho.iii. pens to the poor people / for god had well whereof to feed
them that day. The deken with great pain and grutchynge gave two pens / and
retained the.iii. penny / and as they went on ye way the servant of a rich man
brought to saint Germayne fro his lord.CC. shelynges. Then called saint
Germayne his deken / and said to him yt he had stolen fro ye pore a penny. For
if he had given the.iii. d. to the poor / the knight had sent him.CCC.
shelynges. After it was said in the way to saint Germayne / that to saint John^
thamener came a gentylman which was robbed of thieves so that he had nothing /
and told to saint Johan thamener his case / he had great pity and compassyon
on him / and he commanded his dyspencer that he should give him.xv. pound /
of gold / his dyspencer for couetyse gaf him but.v. Anon a noble lady sent
unto the said saint Johan five.C. pound / of gold. Then he called his
dyspencer and demanded him how much he had given to yt man. He ansuerd and
said yt he given him xv. pound. The holy man said nay / and yt he had given
hy^ but.v. pound / and when he knew the troth by him that had received it /
he said to his dyspenser / yt if he had given that.xv. pound. Our lord had
sent to him by the good woman.M. and.vC. pound / and when he demanded of ye
good lady whom he called to him / how much she had given and left to him in
her testament / she answered that she had ordained a thousand and five hundred
pound for to send him. And when she saw the.M. pound raced and put out of
the writing she thought yt god would yt she should send to hy^ no more but.v.
hundred pound Also saint Gregoyre reherceth of saint Bonyface / yt fro that
time that he was a child he was so pyetous / that he gaf his sherte and his
gown unto the poor / how be it yt his mother beat him often therefore Now it
happed that the child saw many poor people that suffered much dysase / he
espied yt his mother was not at home / he ran to the garners / and all that
his mother had assembled for the year he gaf to the poor people. And when his
mother came and knew what he had done / she was as out of her wit. Then the
child prayed our lord and the garners were full of whete. Also there as a
poor man as it is said that had but one cow / which hard say of his curate
in his sermon that god said in the gospel / that a man should have an hundred
fold double for all that he should give for gods sake. The good man by the
counceyll of his wife gave his cow unto his curate in hope to have an hundred
kyen for his cow / and when he had long tarried / and that promise abode
long after / he wend that his curate had deceived him / and thought that he
should sle him / and arose on a night for to sle him / and when he was in the
way he found a great mass of gold / and then he thought that god had
rendered and yielded his promise and returned in peace. Also of an other poor
man because that he had herd that god would so give an hundred for one / he
gave his cow unto his curate which was rich. The priest took gladly this
cow and sent her to his pasture where as his other kyen were. And at the even
the poor man's cow came again home and brought an.C. kyen longing to the
priest with her / when the poor man saw yt / he thought that god had kept
his promysse according to the gospel. And the said kyen were Iuged tofore the
bishop to the poor man against the priest. These ensamples to fore said
shows well / that mercy is good marchaundyse for it increases well the
goods temporal. Also mercy empetreth and geteth of god the goods spyrytuell
and perdurable. Whereof saint Poule says that it avails to all thing For she
gives life and grace in this present life / and the life of glory without
end in that other. And therefore says Dauyd in his psaulter / yt god loves
mercy and truth. For she gives grace in this world / and glory in that
other. Also mercy and alms keeps a man fro all perils and delyuereth hy^
fro spyrytuell death yt is of hell. For many deed men have been raised unto
life by the works of mercy / the which have been done / whereof there ben
many ensaumples in writing of the lives of saints / the which is of the death
pardurable of hell. Therefore said Thobye to his sone. Be thou said he pyteous
and merciful as much as thou may. For alms delyuerth and keeps fro all
sin and fro the death of hell / and defends the soul that it goo not in to
the derknesse of hell. Now have thou herd the branches and the degrees of
mercy / by which she grows and prouffyteth. Now the byhoueth to see the
branches of this tree / by which she mounteth / and by which it descends.

Here after folowen ye branches of ye virtue of mercy and of alms. Ca.
C.xxxi.
THis tree has mo branches than the other toforesayd / for it extends more
than ye other whereof there ben branches on right side and on the lift side. On
the right side ben ye works of mercy which touch the soul. They ben the
spyrytuell works of mercy / on the lift side ben the bodyly works of mercy
which apperteyne to the body / on the right side be: vii. branches. The first
is to give good counceyll to them yt have need / and only for ye love of god
purely / not for to coueyte other thing temporel therefore / as done these
advocates and men of law yt taken with both hands / and of yt one party and
of that other. And given often times many evil cou^seylles for to have money /
or for gifts / or for dread / or for favor of rich men / but they have god
tofore their eyes / and counceyle the sinners for to leave their sins and save
them. Or they that been out of sin / for to keep them to the end that they
fall not thereto again. Like as confessoures ought for to do / and the
prelates / and ye good men in what someuer estate they be / they done the first
work of mercy spyrytuell / and this is the first branch of the right side.
The second branch is to teache and ensygne them that a man has to gouetne.
As a prelate his subgettes whom he ought to feed with good doctrine and with good
ensample. In likewise ought the master do to his dyscyples in doctrine / in
science / and in good manners. Also the faders and the moders their children in
such wise that they keep them fro sin and vices / and yt they use them to do
well / and keep the^ fro lyenge / fro swery^ge / fro evil plays and games /
and fro ill company / and specially ye chyldre of great lords and of rich men
ought to be best informed in good manners. For ye children will always hold their
first form. And therefore they ought to be informed to do well. The third
branch is to reprehende and chastyse the fools and the wicked people of
their folyes / and this appertains specially to the prelates and to ye
princes which ought to chastyse their subgettes / when they knows that they be
wicked. For when they suffer the sins where they might amend them / and will
not so / they ben partyners. Ne no prince ne prelate ought not to suffer any
wyckednes in a man about him if he may know it. For if he have about hy^ evil
and wicked meyne and if he knows it or supposes / if he remedy it not. It is
a sign that he is no good man / for it is comyngly said / such lord such
meyne / and after the lord the meyne follow. And many and often times it
happens the lord or master is defamed and shamed by his evil meyne / and
therefore / ne for hauoyre / ne for favor / ne for famylyaryte of persons a
lord ought not to doubt to take away the sins that been about him For he
ought to doubt more god and to love him / than any man mortal. Me ought to
love the persons and hate the sins / and every prince prelate / and lord
ought to know that ygnouraunce in this part shall not excuse the^. For they be
bounden to know how their people govern them in their houses and in their
offices / and ought tenquyre by good men and true / and ye love god and dread
him. For they shall not be quyte at ye day of Judgment for to say that they
know not thereof. The fourth branch of mercy is for to comfort ye seek men
and them that be in trybulacion or in aduersyte or malady and to help them to
their power / and to comfort them by good words yt they fall not in dyspayre
or dyscomforte and that their heart fail them not. Thus commands saint
Poule ye says. Comfort them that be feeble of heart. And Salamon says that he
that is in disease of heart shall be glad and Joyous for to here a good
word. Also as he himself says / like as a person delyteth him and takes
pleasure in good odoures / in likewise deliteth the soul in great swetenes of
good council and in ye good words of a veraye friend. That is yt he loves
also well in aduersyte as in prosperyte. For at need it is seen who is a friend
/ and in aduersyte is the good and true friend proved / and thou ought to
know ye.iiii. things comfort much a man / that is in aduersyte / in
trybulacyon or in malady. The first thing is to think on the pains of hell
/ which ben so much hard / sharp / and horrible / that it ne is but a
shadow and an enoyntynge all that that may be suffered in this world as to the
regard of ye pains of hell / whereof the holy saint Austyn says unto our
lord. O good lord brenne me here / and hew me all in pyeces / rather than
thou dampne me perdurably. Also saint Austyn says that the tourmentes of saint
Barthylmewe which was flayne all quycke. Of saint lawrence and of saint
Vyncent which were burnt roasted and laid on gredyrons / and of saint Steven
which was stoned to death. Al these torments ne ben but a bayne to the regard
of ye pains of purgatory. And therefore the rod of chastysement of our lord
must be suffered for teschewe ye perdurable pain of hell. God shows great
semblau^ce of love to them / to whom he sends the aduersytees temporell /
for he says. I chastyse the^ yt I love / note this ensau^ple. The ox yt shall
be slain shall be well kept and made fat / but he yt shall be kept and live
/ is put to the yocke for to labor ye earth. A great sign of love shows ye
king and great honor does he to him / to whom he sends his cup to
drink of. The cup of our lord of which he drank ben ye trybulacyons
thaduersytees and ye myschyeues of this world. This is ye first sauce / with
which one ought to ete such mete yt is to think on the pains of hell. This
is a sauce of vynaygre / which takes away the savor of wine of the delyces
of this world. Like as ye vynaygre takes away ye savor of good wine. The
second thing yt much comfort in suffrynge pacyently trybulacion / is to
think on the reward of heaven yt one geteth for like as says saint Gregorye /
yt allegeth and asswageth much the pain and the trauaylle / when a person
has an hope to have great reward and great prouffyte. The third thing is to
think on ye passion of Ihesu christ / which suffered death for to redeem us fro
ye pains of hell / there is no thing yt so much allegeth ye pains and ye
trybulacions of this world / this is well sygnefyed to us in holy scripture /
there where as ye children of Israhel came to a water / yt was so bitter yt
they myt not drink. Then showed god to Moses a staff of tree / and said to
him yt he should put it in to the water that was so bitter. And when he had put
it therein / it was all sweet. The bitter water ben the trybulacyons of the
world. The staff of the tree that made it sweet / that is the cross on
which the debonayre Ihesu christ was hanged on for us. For who that remembers
well this sorrow that he suffered on the cross. There is no pain ne aduersyte
/ ne tribulacion temporal / but it it is sweet and light to suffer. The fourth
thing is to think on the spyrytuall gods that the trybulacyons does to them
that suffers them pacyently. For the trybulacyons proves the knight of god. A
knight knows not well his strength / unto the time that he has been in
battle and in prees. Whereof saint Poule says / that the pacyence proves a
man / and an aungel of heaven said to Thoby / by cause that thou were pleasant
to god. It behooves that temptacyon shall prove the. Also trybulacyon purges
the soul as ye fire purges the gold in the forneys / and as the flayle ye
corn when it beteth it. And as the hamer the iron / as says saint Gregory.
Also trybulacyons ben the medycynes of the maladyes of sin. For like as says
the holy scripture. The grievous malady makes a man sobre whom sy^ne has made
drunk oftymes. Whereof saint Gregory says. Let it not be hard to the that you
suffer disease on thy body when thou art guarysshed of ye malady of sin
within forth. Also by trybulacyons is won ye crown of glory / when one has
good pacyence. Where of saint James says / blyssed is that man that suffers
temptacions / that is aduersyte and trybulacyon / like as a good knight yt
suffers the strokes / for when he shall be well assayed and proved / he shall
have the croune of glory. These.iiii. remembrau^ces aforsayd comfort much
the^ that been in trybulacion. The.v. spyrytuell branch of mercy is to pardone
his maltalente and evil will to every body. For like as saint Gregory says /
who gives his pens or his alms to the poor and pardons not his evil
will / his alms is nothing worth. For god receives not the gift as long
as the felonnye is in the heart / for god weyeth / preyseth / and takes the
gift after his will. And therefore our lord says in ye gospel. If that we
forgive not each other / our fader of heaven shall not forgive us our sins.
Then he that will not pardonne and forgive says against him self / as often as
he says the pater noster / for he prays that god pardonne him / like as he
pardonneth his evil will to other. It is said of the emperor theodose / that he
held it for a great shame / if one did to him vylonye or Iniurye that prayed
him to forgive him / and when he was most angry / then he forgave most
sonnest. For he had liver draw to him people by debonayrte and by love /
then by dread. The.vi. branch of this virtue is to have in the heart pity
and compassyon of the synnars / and of them that be in trybulacyon or in
pouerte / or in aduersyte. For that one membre ought to bear ye maladye of that
other whereof saint Poule says / who that is seek / and I am seek with him. And
saint Gregory says / that so much is a man more parfayt / as he feleth more
in him self ye sorrow of another. The.vii. branch of mysyry cord is to pray
for the synnar / and for his enemies / and for all trespasses. For so
commands our lord Ihesu Christ in the gospel. Pray ye said he for them
that done to you evil / and so shall ye ben ye sons of your fader which is in
heaven / as who should say / otherwise ye ben not the sons of god / and then
ye have nothing in his heritage. Now is it then^e great alms and great
prouffyte for the soul to pray for the sinners / for Mekenes rote

Mercy and pity.

atre^pau^ce

Justice.

Compassyon.

Prudence.

Force.

Forgiveness

Faith.

Hope.

Charity.

his enmyes / and for all them which ben departed out of this present life.
These ben the seven branches of mercy of this tree on the right side.

Here after follows the seven branches of mercy upon the lift side. Ca.
C.xxxii.
Like as this tree of mercy has seven branches on the right side / so ben
there seven branches on the lift side. These ben the seven works of mercy
corporell / which holds the body / like as the other beholds the soul too
foresaid.

The first branch is to feed the hungry ye nedy and the myseased / and this
admonesteth us the holy scripture in many places. First Thobye which said to
his sone Ete thy bread with ye nedy and the poor yt deye for hungre and
Salamon says / if thyn enemy have hu^gre give him to ete / and if he have
thyrst give to him drink. Also our lord says in ye gospel / wha^ thou shalt
make a great dinner / call the poor people / ye blind / the lame and the
Impotent and thou shalt be blessed. For they may not yield it to the ageyn.
But god shall yield to ye in the resurreccyon generalle / and an hundred fold
double. This is ageynste rich men yt done great oultrages of mete / for
bobaunce / pride / and vaynglorye of the world and have no pity on the poor
people. But they ought to have great dread yt they fall not in meschyef / like
as it byfell to the rich gloton / of whom god says in the gospel / which
ete every day delycyously / and suffered ye poor Lazare deye for hungre at his
yate. But as to ye death of yt one and of yt other was a great change. For
Lazare was borne with au^gellys in to Abraham's bosom / and ye rich man
auarycyous and gloton had his sepulture in hell / where he desired to have one
drope of water for to refresshe his tongue. Alas if all the water of the sea
had run over his tongue / it should not have been coled in that fire
perdurable of hell which may not be quenched. Therefore it is good to feed the
poor peopell. For there by may one escape fro the pains of hell / and win the glory of heaven / like as says holy scripture / whereof our lord Ihesu
Christ shall say at the day of Judgment Come ye blessed of my fader in to the
royame of heaven which is ready to you. For when I had hungre And thyrste ye
gave to me to Eete and to drink. For that which yt ye did to the least of my
poor people / ye did it to me.

The second branch of mercy..Cxxxiii.
THe second branch of mercy is to clothe ye poor naked people. That is to
say that he that may should give to them clothing hosen and shoon. Thus
taught Thobye his sons when he said. Cover ye naked whith thy gown and Ysaye
the prophet says / when thou shall see the poor naked couere and hele him.
For such work saint Peter raised that good woman named Dorcas. For she
clothed the poor people as the scripture says. Hereof have thou a fair
example of saint Martyn as I have said tofore. The gown or vesture or what
someuer alms one gives to the poor / is a memoryall to them that pray for
him that has given it. And is represented to god of his aungellys.

The third branch of mercy. Ca..Cxxxiiii.
THe third branch of mercy is to lene to the poor people at their need /
and to forgive unto them the debt that they owe when they may not pay ne
render. For it is not only alms to give / but it is great alms to lene
without usure / and any prouffyte and without evil entencyon / but purely for
gods love. In like wise ought a man to pardone and quyte his debt / when the
dettour is poor and may not pay it / and this is that which god commands
in the old law / where he says / if one of thy bredren fall in pouerte thou
shalt not enhard thy heart / ne withdraw not thy hand fro hy^. But thou
shall open it to the poor / and shalt lene to him yt where of he has need.
And our lord says in the gospel / lene says he to him that has need / and
that requires the without hope of winning any temporal thing / and god
shall render to the an hundred fold double in glory This matter is against the
usurers that will always have more than they lene / in money or in seruyces / or
in other things. But god commands to lene to ye poor nedy purely for his
love / and he shall render to the an.C double / and to the poor man to whom
man to whom thou have lent / or that owes to the / or that may not pay to the
/ thou ought to forgive and pardon him. For so commands to the god in the
gospel / and says thus / if ye forgive not each other / god shall not forgive
you. and hereof shows god an ensample of an evil servant to whom his lord
had pardoned his debt / and because he would not pardone him that ought to him
/ the lord repeled the curteysy and bounte that he had done to him / and did
do dystrayne and held him till he had re^dred all that he ought. Right so
shall our lord do / if we forgive not each other.

The fourth branch of mercy. Capitulo. C.xxxv.
THe.iiii. branch of mercy is to vesyte / comfort / and to aid the seek
people / that is a work yt much pleseth to god / and more then trauaylle /
or fasting / or other bodily penance / whereof we find in vitas patrum / that
an hermyte demmaunded of one of ye ancient faders / the which was of most
grettest merit / of him that fasted.vi. days in ye weke and trauaylled and
labored with his hands / or of him that served the seek malades. The good
fader answered that he that fasted and trauaylled though he henge by ye
nosethrylles might not compare to him that served the seek people This work
auaylleth much to eschew sin / and is a great remedy against sin. And
therefore says Job vysyte thy semblable / that been ye seek men that been
semblable to ye in nature For they be men as thou art / and if thou so do /
god shall keep the fro sin for to do such a good work. And holy saint Jaws
says that it is a relygyon holy and clean tofore god to vysyte the orphans /
the seek and poor men / the wydowes and them that been in trybulacyon / whereof
is counted of a much great synnar which went ever the sea unto the isle of
roodes / and put him self in an hospytal for to awayte and serve ye seek people
/ and it haped on a time that he had great abhomynacyon of a seek man of whom
he wesshe ye feet. Anon all ageyn his heart he drank of that water his full
draught. And when he had dronken / he felt a right sweet and good smelling
odor / and this was a great token and sign that his sins were pardonned by
this good work. Also by this work is gotten great perfecyon of holy life /
whereof the wise man says in holy scripture / be thou not ennoyed to vysyte the
seek people For by that thou shall be confermed in ye love of god. Also thereby
is gotten great reward as is said in ye gospel whereof is told ye a lady named
Marye which was a much holy woman converted her husbonde so much / yt they
left all that they had / and went to the mesel house for to serve the seek
creatures / by which they came too great perfeccyon. After it was showed to
the same Mary / that her husbonde that had been her felawe in humylyte for to
serve the seek men and women / should be her felawe in the glory of heaven. Of
the same our lord gives us ensample in the gospel that he touched the seek
people and heled them. The servant ought not to have dysdayne ne shame to
vesyte the seek people ne to serve them / when the lord of heaven came in to
this world for to serve and vesyte them. Of whom he took the form and
semblaunce of his servant. This says saint Poule for to serve us that were
seek by sin.

The.v. braunce of mercy. Ca. C.xxxvi.
THe fyfth branch of mercy is to her borowe ye way fary^ge man / the poor
people / and the pilgrims that have no lodging. This is one of ye works of
mercy that pleases much god / as it appears by ensamples of holy scripture.
First Abraham received often times the aungelles of heaven in semblaunce of poor
pilgrims / and they promised to him that his wife Sara which was old and
barayne should conceive a sone. And Loath by cause that he received the poor
and seek men and kept hospytalyte / he received the aungelles the which kept
and delivered him from the peril of Sodom and gomor. And therefore says the
appostle saint Poule. Let us not leave hospytalyte / for thereby many good me^
have been much playsaunt to god and in his love and in his grace / for they
received aungellys instead of the poor. It is not meruaylle if such people
receive aungellys. For they receive our lord like as he says in the gospel
For who receives them receyuen him as he says / and that which is done to
ye poor is done to him / whereof saint Gregory recounteth of a good man which
was much pyteous and gladly received the poor people into his house / he
received on a day ye poor like as he had be acustomed / and when he had
supposed to have given water to a seek man yt was there / as soon as he turned
him / he yt was in lykenes of ye poor man vanysshed / and none knew where he
bycam / whereof he much meruaylled. And ye night after our lord aperyed to him
and said that he had on other days received him in his members / but on ye
day he received hy^ in his propre person Also hospytalyte is better and more
worth than abstynence or any other labor / whereof is found in vytis patrum yt
in egypt was an holy fader which received all them that passed forth by yt
had need / and gaf to them such as he had. It happed yt a man of much great
abstynence was herberowed in his lodynge / which would fast / and would not
ete at the prayer of the good man that had received him Then ye good man that
had lodged him said to him / late us goo fair brother under that tree there
without / and pray we to our lord Ihecu Christ that this tree enclyne and
bow down at the prayer of him that best pleases god / and when they had made
there prayers / ye tree enclyned down to him yt received ye poor people / and
not to him yt made ye great abstynences there ben many moo fair examples of
the hospytalyte but it should be over long a thing to reherce.

The.vi. branch of mercy. Ca. C.xxxvii
THe.vi. brau^che of mercy is to vysyte comfort and aid them yt be in prison
and in hold / and them to deliver if they may. To do this admonesteth us
thappostle Poule yt says. Remember ye them yt ben in prison / like as ye were
bound with them / that is to say yt ye vesyte / conforte and help them. Like as
ye would that ye were conforted / vesyted and helped if ye were bound in
prison as they be. Thus did Thobye yt went to them that were in prison and
comforted them with good words. And Salamo^ says in his proverbs. Deliver you
them says he ye men led to deye. In such wise delivered Danyell Susanna fro
death. And our lord delivered the woman that had be taken in aduoutry / which
should have be stoned to death after the law / not for because yt Justice
should not be done upon malefactors. But in such deed and fayt he taught the
Iuges what they should be / and how they ought to Judge other / whereof in this
ensample he ensygneth four things that every Judge ought for to have and keep
in Judgment. The first thing is great delyberaon / and great auysemente of
counceyle good and hole / Whereof Job says. The cause that I knew not. I
enserched it and required it dylygently / and this is to understand in that /
which our lord Ihesu christ when ye Jews had accused the woman / he wrote
in the earth with his finger / he that is without sin of you throw the first
stone. For to stone the woman. And by ye scripture made with the finger we
understand dyscrecyon and great delyberacyon. The second thing is good
entencyon that he bow not ne enclyne more on yt one party than on that other /
ne for prayer ne for gift / ne for favor / ne for love / ne for hate / and
this is to understand in that when Ihesu christ wrote he held him still in ye
place. The third thing is good life and to keep him well from sin. For he
that Iugeth other ought to be of good life / and of good conscience / and live
Justly. For if he be other / he ought to have great dread of ye Judgment of god
/ which says in the gospel / yt such Judgment as ye do to other / shall be
done to you. And saint Poule says thus of evil Iuges. In that thou Iugest
other you condempnest thy self / for thou do that for which you Iugest
other. Wherefore our lord said when he arose fro writing / he of you that is
without sin cast on her ye first stone / and wha^ they herd this sentence /
they departed and went away all ashamed / the one after an other without taking
leave / for they were greter sinners than the woman / whom they would have
stoned. The fourth thing is to have pity and compassyon / that the Judge ought
to have on him that he shall Judge / for he ought more to enclyne by humanyte
and mercy than to enhardy him by rygoure to do Justice. For Justice without
mercy is cruelte / and mercy without Justice is lewdness. And therefore that
one of these two virtues holds often company with that other in holy
scripture. But always says the scripture / that mercy surmounteth Justice. And
saint Johan with the golden mouth says / that at the day of Judgment / that
it shall be more of value to render reason of doing mercy than of the rygoure
and cruelte of Justice. And the holy man saint James says that Judgment
without mercy shall be done to him yt has do no mercy. And therefore our lord
after that he was relyeued he enclyned him toward therth / and after delyuerd
the woman / for the Judge ought to enclyne by pity and compassyon to him / whom
he ought to Judge / and have great dread / and also agyenst his will ought he to
Judge the other. For if he Judge wyckedly he shall be Iuged at the day of
Judgment. Now is it great alms to vysyte the prisoners / and them to read me
and deliver that may. And therefore our lord Ihesu Christ would descend in to
hell for to deliver the souls of saints that were there

The.vii. branch of mercy. Ca..Cxxxviii.
THe seventh brau^che of mercy is to burye ye deed bodies. Of this work is
much preysed in holy scrpture Thobye / which buried the deed bodies and left
his mete. And our lord praised Marye Magdalene for the oynemente that she
shed on his heed / whereof he said that she had done it in sygnefyaunce of
his sepulture Also Joseph demanded the body of our lord / and buried it much
dylygently. The other were ryt besy of their sepulture / and had great
bewayllynge and great devotion to the holiness / good / and holy life / of
their faders / and therefore they would be buried with them. Of whom Jacob said
to his sone Joseph: Burye me not in egypt / but with my faders / and therefore
it is good to be buried among good relygyous me^ for to have their prayers
nature ought to moeue a man to this good work / and virtuous operacyon. Whereof
it is read of the nature of beestes ye the dolphyns when they se a dolphyn
deed / they assemble them together / and bear him to the botom of the se / and
there bury him. If nature / and pity moeue and styre the Jews and sarasyns /
and other myscreauntes to do this / much more ought pity and compassyon to
move the christian men to do this / which by our faith see that the bodies be
raised and rewarded with the souls. And therefore who yt loves the soul of
his neighbor he ought to love the body / and do bury it when it is deed with
all humanyte and mercy yt he may. Now have thou herd the branches of the tree
of mercy. These ben works of mercy corporell and spyrytuell.

Here after is said how alms ought to be done. Ca..Cxxxix.
IT is so that there is much people yt lose their alms and their other
good deeds which they do / because they do them not as they ought to do.
Therefore I will show here shortly how alms ought to be done / and how it is
prouffytable and pleasant to god. First I will show shortly how a person
ought to do alms / and whereof he should do alms. For a man must do it of
his own good and not of an other man's / and of such good that is well and
truly gotten. God sets nothing of none evil gift. Alms which is made
of theft / or of taking away of other men's good / of rauyne / or of usure
/ or of other evil gotten good pleases nothing to god. Whereof ye holy
scripture says. Thou shalt not make sacrefyce ne oblacyon unto god of heaven
/ of oxen / nor of sheep / ne of thing wherein is any spotte of sin. For god
has great abhomynacio^ of such sacrefyse. The wise man says that who that
does sacrefyse to god of the catayll or gods of the poor man. He does like
to him that sleeth the sone tofore the eyes of his fader. And saint Austyn
says what gift is that / which the one takes gladly / and that other wepeth
And therefore ought every man take heed whereof he does his alms. Also he
ought to take heed of whom he does it whereof the scripture says / Beware to
whom thou shalt do good / do well to the good. That is to him that thou
wenest that he be good. And give no thing to the wicked for cause of their
wickedness. Like as they do which give to rybauldes and to menestrellys for
their wickedness / which is a great sin as say the saints / but who that
gives to them not for evil / but for pity and compassyon for their pouerte /
or of their wives / or of their children if they have any / or of their faders
or moders / or for any other good cause or reason / as for to withdraw the^
fro sin he does well Then the alms ought to be given unto the poor /
and more to them that be very poor of heart and of will which have left
for gods sake that which they had / much more thanne to other that be not
poor with their will / but sometime of pure necessyte. And sum there be
trewauntes and sloufull for to do any good / and might get their living if
they would. And sum there be that by fayntyse she we sum hurtes and be
faytours of them self that deceive the world. To such ought a man not to
give his alms / but it ought to be given to the poor orphans / to
shamefast people to to poor wydowes / to the dyseased and lame / and unto seek
poor people where as it is need / and when one may do it. And if a man is
bounden to give to strangers / he is much more bound without comparyson to
his fader and mother more than to any other. For nature ensygneth it / and god
commands it. It is read of the storkes / yt they nourysshe fader and mother
when they be old and may not purchase their meet. Then nature techeth that
one ought to do good to his fader and mother / and therefore it is well right and
reason that myschefe fall to all them that do evil to their faders as it oftyme
happeth. Also a person ought to take heed how he ought to do alms and the
manner of gyuynge. For.iii. condycions ought to be had in gyuy^ge alms. The
first is that a man ought to give gladly and with good heart. For god has more
regard to ye heart than to the hands. Whereof god in his sacryfyce as saint
Gregory says / be holds not only the thing yt is given / but with what
heart. Like as it appears well in the gospel of the poor woman that had
no more but two mytes which she offered in the temple. And our lord said / that
she had offered more than all the other which had offered great things / for
more pleases sometime to god a penny that a poor man gives gladly for gods
sake / than if a rich man had given an hundred mark in silver with
grutchynge. And therefore says ye wise man in the scripture. Make always good
chere he says in all thy gifts. And saint Poule says that god loves much
the gyuer that is glad and curteys. There ben some people right rich / and
be so rude and velaynous to the poor / that when they demand them alms
they answer to them so vylaynously and so churlysshely / that they do call
them truauntes / and vagabundes / and say unto them mo than an hundred
reproaches and vylonnyes. Such alms pleseth not god and therefore says the
wise man in holy scripture. Enclyne and bow thyn eere to the poor man without
heaviness and answer him swetelye. The second thing that apperteyneth to do
alms / is that it be done anon and hastelye whereof Salamon says say you
not to thy friend / goo and come ageyn to morn / and then I shall give to ye
/ when thou may give anon. And also god says / withdraw not long thy
gift fro the poor and fro them that be nedy. That is to say / make thou not
him abide / when thou may give forthwith. This is ageynste many rich men
which make poor men to cry after them / that have to do with them. And
so much delay them / that they must often pray and require them tofore that
they will any thing do. They selle over dear their bounte and curtosye / that
they do to them for like as seneque says / nothing is so dear bought as that
which is required and the proverb says that it is over dear bought that is
demanded Thus should every man hastily do for his soul / as long as he is
alive and hole / whereof the wise man says. Fair sone says he do well to thy
self if thou have whereof / and offer to god worthy offrynges as long as thou
lyuest. For the death shall not tarry but that she comes. And in another place
he says do well to thy friend tofore thy death / that is to thy soul / to
whom thou ought to do well tofore thy death / as to thy true friend / that
is to Ihesu Christ to whom thou ought to do well / tofore thy death in
alms for the love of him to the poor people. For that which is done to ye
poor people is done to Ihesu christ like as he says in the gospel. Then the
alms that is done in a man's life and in his hele / is much more auaylable
/ than that which is done after his death / like as the lantern that is borne
before a man conduyteth and ledeth him better and more surely / than that
which is borne byhynde his back / and therefore admonesteth us saint Poule /
that we do well as long as we have the time that god has lent us when a rich
man or lord is coming unto a cite or town / he sends his messagers tofore
and his herbours for to take his lodging / and for to make ready prouysyon
against his coming or else the lord and his people should be evil pourueyed
The good herbegeour and messager that takes the lodging and makes all thing
ready to rich men in the glory perdurable ben the alms and other good deeds
that they do in their lives which ben represented by ye aungelles tofore god.
The almesses that been done after the death / ben like as the slow servants
that comen late to the lodging / so that the lord is sometime evil pourueyed
and evil herberowed. The third condycyon that ought to be in alms / is
that one ought give gladly and largely / after that he may forbere at his ease
/ whereof the wise man says / give to god after that he has given to the. And
Thobye says also / after thy power be pyteous and merciful / if thou have
much give largely and gladly / and if thou have little depart of that little
with a good will / and every man ought to give after his estate / and after
that god has given him. It is read of a king / of whom a poor man axed a
penny and he answered / that so little a gift apperteyned not to hy^ yt was a
king / and of alysaunder it is read yt he gave a cite to one of his servant.
And the servant thought the gift over great and would have refused it. Then
alysaunder said to him I have no regard what is conuenyent to the for to take
/ but to me what I ought to give. The fourth condycyon is that the alms be
done in humylyte and in devotion / to the end that there be no vaynglorye
therein / ne to the poor people to whom the alms is given / be not despised
/ ne for alms done with other men's gods / ne to give for to sin / ne for
to have presumpcyon thereby to be saved. Some people there ben that when they do
alms they will that every body know it. But the scripture says that
alms should be done in the bosom of the poor. For as says saint
Gregory. It ne suffyseth only to a good man yt he se of whom he attends his
reward / and therefore says our lord in ye gospel / when thou shall give
thyn alms says he / let not thy lift hand know what thy right hand does
/ so that thyn alms be hid / for to eschew the loos and praysynge of the
world / and thy fader of heaven which sees in hid place shall reward and
yield it to the. That is to say when thou shalt do thyn alms / keep the
well that vaynglory which is vnderstonden by the lift hand be not meddled
therewith / but do thyn alms in true entencyon / that is vnderstonden by the
right hand. I say not but that one ought to do good works sometime openly
tofore the people for too give good ensaumple whereof god may be praised. For
right so says god in the gospel / that we should do good works tofore the
people / because that god should be gloryfyed and praised / and not for the
praysinge of the people as does the Ypocrytes. A good servant ought to be
ashamed to serve his lord tofore ye people / for to honor hy^. Whereof god
says / who yt shall have shame of me tofore ye people / shall have shame tofore
thau^gels / and I shall have shame to se hy^. This is good against them ye leave
to lie / by cause they would not be reputed ypocrytes. And therefore says saint
Gregory / yt who that does his werkys openly yt the entencyon be right to god
withinforth And yt do it to please god only. Also who yt will do alms he
ought not to despise ye poor to whom he does alms. Therefore says ye
prophet / ne despise not thy flesh. That ye poor man which is semblable to
ye / and of such nature of flesh and blood as thou art / and of such
fylthe. There be some people yt despise ye poor and deyne not to speak to them
/ and if they speak / they speak rudely and proudely. Thus did not Job yt said
/ that he never despised them yt passed by / for any thing yt they did / but
gaf to them clothing and mete. Also there were holy men as well kings and
other many great lords yt were not ashamed to serve the poor men / how well yt
some there be yt do alms to the poor / but they have them in desdayn and
in despyte / and if they were very humble / they should love better the
company of poor men that been good / which ben poor for the love of god /
and may edefye them well by ensaumple / and by word / than many of the rich
men that been about them / where as is in the^ but flaterye / couetyse / and
vanyte / and done them much harm by evil counceyll / and let them for to
do many good deeds. Also there ben sum people that do alms enough / but
nevertheless they leave not to do great sins / such almesses shall not save
them. For if they deye in that estate / their alms shall never keep them
fro dampnacyon. Then such manner people ben like to the^ that make their hows
on that one side / and depesshe and throw it down on that other side. And
therefore scripture says / if thou wylt plese to god / have first pity and
mercy on thyn own soul / for who that is evil and untrue to him self /
shall never be good to an other And therefore says saint Austyn / who that will
ordynately do alms / he ought tofore to love more his soul than another or
any other thing except god / none should say that he were pyteous ne
merciful that had not pity of his own soul poor and seek / how well yt he
had pity on others. Also I say not yt he is pyteous ne mercyful yt has no pity
on his own soul / when he knows yt it is seek to the death by deedly sy^ne.
Now have I showed to the enough of mercy / the degrees / ye branches / ye
fruit and the spyrytuell good that comes thereof in this world and in that
other. Of the fruit of this tree says Dauyd to us in the psaulter in this
wise. Blyssed is he yt entendeth to the nedy and to the poor. That is to say
yt he abide not so long till the poor demand him / but yt he give without
asking. Ne he has no heart to give yt gives not without asking / he does well
yt gives to ye pore but he does much better that gives without demaundy^ge.
And therefore says Dauyd ye prophet / blyssed is he yt entendeth to ye poor /
and wherefore is he blyssed / he says after in the said place / yt god shall
deliver him in ye evil day fro his enemies. That shall be at the day of dome
which shall be hard and evil to them that shall be dampened because they have
not fulfilled the works of mercy. Then shall the Judge say to them at that
day Goo ye cursed in to the fire of hell with the deuylles to be dampened / when
I had honger and thyrst ye gave to me neither meet ne drink. I have be seek
and ye vesyted not me. I was naked and ye clothed me not. And therefore they
shall be delivered to their enemies / that been the deuylles of hell / and they
that have been pyteous and that have intended to the poor people shall be
delyuerd that day and should be put in the possessyon of heaven. Like as our
lord says in the gospel. For he shall say unto them that have done and
accomplysshed the works of mercy Come ye blessed of my fader. Receive ye and
take ye the kingdom of heaven which that I have made ready for you sith the
beginning of the world: For that which ye have done to the poor / ye have
done to me. Great honor shall god do to them / when he shall thank them of
the works of mercy / and shall give to them the glory perdurable. And therefore
says he in the gospel. Blessed ben the merciful. For they shall have mercy /
by cause they have enlonged the life of the poor people by their alms / and
therefore they that have had pity of the members of Ihesu Christ / and have
sustained them in this world / and have comforted and aided them in their
aduersytees. It is well reason that he do to them mercy which delyuerth fro al
aduersytes and fro all myserye / and so shall he do when he shall give to them
the life perburable / whereto mercy shall led them and herberowe them.

Of the life actyf and of the life contemplatyf. Ca..Cxl.
THe holy scripture witnesses and enseygneth to us.ii. manners of well and
goods / by which a person comes to ye life perdurable / the first is called
the life actyf / by cause it is in labor of good works / and makes a man to
entende to ye proufyte of him self and of his neighbor The second is called
conte^platyf / by cause it is in rest of good works / and ne entendeth to no
thing but to love and to know god. Then is he idle of works without forth
/ and like as he were in a dreme / or heuely a sleep / but he is awaked
withinforthe for to think upon god / and for to love him. And for the love
that he hay to god / he put all other things in forgetynge / like as he were
all rauysshed and fyxed in god / and desires for to be dysceuered fro the
mortal body / for to be always with Ihesu christ. The first life / is the field
of good works where the knights of god assaye and preue them. The second
rest them with all mighty god in the chamber of clean conscience. The first
entendeth for to feed god with the meet of good works. The second entendeth
for to be fed and fulfilled of god by very comfort spyrytuell. Of the first
is sygnyfyed by Martha which was besy to feed our lord / as it is said in ye
gospel. The second is sygnyfyed by Mary magdaleyn which sat at the fete of
Ihesu christ / and herd his words. The first is a way and enter to the
second. For no person may come to the life contemplatyf / if he be not first
proved well in the life actyf. Like as says saint Gregory. The gifts and the
virtues whereof we have spoken tofore / appertains to ye first life / which
is called actyf. The two last gifts of which we shall speak / by the help
and aid of the holy ghost / that is to wete the gift of understanding and of
the gift of wisdom and sapyence appertains to the second life / which is
called contemplatyf. This life has two things like as we have tofore touched
/ that is to wete in ye right knowledge of god and in parfyte love. The gift of
understanding ledeth to perfeccyon of right knowledge. The gift of sapyence
ledeth to perfeccyon of love. We shall say first of ye gift of understanding
after that the holy ghost shall teache and ensygne us. This gift that is called
the gift of understanding ne is none other thing after the saints and the
doctors / but a light and a clerenes of grace ye which the holy ghost sends
in to the heart by understanding a man is lift up to know his maker and the
things spyrytuell which may not be seen bodily. And all ye th^ges that
apperteyneth to the health of the soul / and to natural reason to which ye
understanding of a man by him self may not come. This gift is called light
/ for it purges the understanding of a man fro the derkenes of Ignouraunce /
and fro the spots and fyfth of sin. For like as the bodily ^yght takes
away the derkenes / and makes the bodily things to be seen clearly Right so
this spu^^ll light purges ye vnderstondy^ge of a man / to that which he may
see clearly and know certeynly / as a man may know in this mortal life god his
maker / and ye spyrytuell creatures / like as ben the aungellys and the souls
and the things that apperteyne to the health of souls. That been the artycles
of the feyth of which we have spoken tofore This knowleche is not but in
conscience well purged / pure and clean. For like as sore eyes charged with
fylthe may not behold ye clear light. Right so the understanding of a man /
when it is of him self may not behold / ne know spyrytuell things / if it be
not well purged fro al tatches of error and of fylthe of sin / by very faith
which purges the hertes as the scripture says. But the gift of ye holy
ghoost of which we speak here perfourmeth this purgacyon at the heart so that
the holy soul which is purged and enlumyned with this light of understanding
may see and know god / and all that which is to him necessary / and
prouffytable to his sauacyon. And that is the blessing whereof god speaks in
ye gospel when he says blessed be they that be clean of heart / for they shall
see god in presence by faith / in light and informed by the gift of
understanding / and after the death they shall see him in heaven face to face
clearly without end as says saint Poule. This gift takes away all ordure
and fylthe fro the heart / and makes him clean parfytelye fro all ordures of
sin and specially for the spotte of ye sin of lecherye. For who that of
this sin is entatched is very blind. For he has lost the eyes of the
heart of reason and of understanding. So that he may not understand ne know
his maker / ne thing that is holsom ne health of his soul. But is like a
be that has neither wit ne reason in hy^ self / whereof Dauyd says in the
psaulter / that a man to whom god has done so great honor that he has
made him to his image and his semblaunce / by which he may know god and have
him / which he has not done to any other be / if he forgete his maker /
and the bounte that he has done to hy^ he is becomen semblable to folysshe
beestes which have none understanding. The sin that makes most a man to
be like a foul be / is the sin of Lechery / of which we have spoken
tofore in ye treaty of vices. The gift then of understanding which is
contrary unto this ordure / and dystroyeth fro the heart the sin of lechery /
and sets therein purete and cle^nes / out of which grows a right fair
tree. That is the virtue of chastyte by which they come to this blyssynge /
which god promytteth to the^ that keep clennes of heart when he says blyssed
be they that be clean of heart. For they shall se god Because that they shall
have the eyes of the heart well purged and well enlumyned of the gift of
understanding This tree grows and prouffyteth much like to ye other
byforesayd by seven degrees. These ben.vii. things yt which much avails to
live chastely.

The first degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca. C.xli.
THe first degree is clean conscience / that is ye root of this tree. For
without clean conscience chastyte may not please god. This clennes / chastyte and
purete requires yt the heart may be kept fro ill thoughts / so yt the heart
consent to no sy^ne. For who so co^senteth to sy^ne to evil thought and to
evil desire of his heart / he is not chaste / how well yt he keep him fro the
deed. For / for the consenting only delybered and purposed / he should be
dampened if he deyed in the same state. Three things auaylle much to keep
clennesse of heart The first is to here gladly the word of god and the sermons
whereof our lord says in the gospel to his dyscyples / ye be all clean said
he by ye words that I have said to you. For the word of god is like a fair
myrrour in which one may see the spots of the heart. The second thing is
very confession / which is ye fountain where one ought often to wasshe him of
all ordure of sin. The scripture says in the book of kings that Elysee the
prophet commanded to Naman which was a lepre / that he should wasshe
hy^.vii. times in the flome Jordan for to be clean and heled of his maladye /
and when he had wasshen him there / he was al hole and clean. The flome Jordan
is as much to say as the streme of Judgment / which sygnefeth confession /
where one ought to Judge him self with great sorrow of heart and with great
repentance of his sins so that a streme of teeres run by the conduyt of
his eyes / and thus the synnar shall be hole of the mezelrye of sin. And
therefore says saint Bernard / love confession if thou will have beauty. For
very confession and hole is the beauty of yt soul The.iii. thing is to have
remembrance of the passion of Ihesu Christ. For no temptacyon ne none evil
will may not duel in the heart that thinks and remembers often ye death and
the passion of Ihesu Christ. For this is the armure that the devil doubts
most / as that by which he is ouercomen and leseth his power. This is right
well sygnefyed to us in scripture / where as Moses raised up a serpent of
brass by the commandment of god upon a perch on hye that all the people
saw it. And all they that beheld it were heled of the bytinge and hurtynge of
the serpents The serpent of brass that henge on the perch / sygnyfyeth the
body of Ihesu Christ hanging on the cross. That was the serpent without venym
/ of which was made the tryacle of our salvation / for who someuer feleth him
smyten and enuenymed of pryckynge and sty^gynge with the venymous serpents of
hell / that been ye deuylles / let him behold by veraye faith on ye serpent of
brass. That is to say that he have in heart perfyte mind of the passion of
Ihesu christ / and anon he shall be heled and delivered of the temptacyons of
the ennemy that is the devil.

The.ii. degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca. C.xlii.
THe second degree of the virtue of chastyte / by ye which this tree grows
and prouffyteth / is for to keep his mouth fro vylanous words / which ben of
rybaudry and dyshonestes / or such as torneth to dishonor For by such words
and by such wind is often quyckened and enflamed the fire of lechery / whereof
ye scripture says Who speaks of a common woman is brennynge as fire. And saint
Poule says yt the shrewde words cortumpeth good manners / and therefore who yt
keep hy^ chastely / he behooves yt he keep him fro such words / and who yt
gladly speaks them / or gladly hereth them / he leseth god / and shows well
that he is not chaste. For there may none other thing issue out of a vessel
but such as is wtin it if the words be soul and vylaynous It is an open
sign that the ordure the fylthe and ye vy^onnye is in the heart. For of the
habundaunce of the heart the mouth speaks / this says our lord in the
gospel.

The third degree of ye virtue of chastyte. Ca..Cxliii.
THe third degree of the virtue of chastyte / is to keep well the five wits
of the body / the eyes fro folly beholdynge and eres fro herkenynge of folly
and vain words. The nose thrylles fro ouermoche delyty^ge in sweet savors
and wicked odours. The tongue fro evil speech and rybauldous langage. And ye
mouth fro ouerswete and delycyous metes and drynkes. These ben the.v. gates of
the cite of the heart / by which the devil enters often / these ben the
wyndowes of the house by which death enters often in to the heart / like as
says the prophet. Many great wise men have be taken and ouercomen by this /
that they kept not well the yates. And if thou will have example of this
matere / think yt no man was more strong than Samposon. Ne more holy than
Dauyd the prophet. Ne more wise tha^ Salamon. And nevertheless they fylle and
were all deceived by women. Certainly if they had well kept their yates of
their five wits corporell / the fend had not taken so great fortresses. For
as saint Gregorye says. The toure of the heart may not be taken if it be not
opened too the host of the devil / wherefore the ancient phylosophres fled
in to far places / in deserts / by cause they might not see / ne here / ne
feel things delectable / by which their strength and virtue should w^x feeble
/ ne by which they might lose their chastyte.

Other phylosophres there were yt by cause they should not be let to think
on their phylosophres put out their eyes by cause they should see no thing
that myt draw them fro contemplacyon. Then the bodyly wits ben like an horse
that renneth without bytte or bridle which makes his lord to overthrow or
fall. But the chaste heart holds him by the rain and by the bridle of
reason.

Of ye.iiii. degree of ye virtue of chastyte. Ca..Cxliiii.
THe fourth degree of ye virtue of chastyte / is sharpness of penance / too
subdue his flesh which is rebelle / and make it subget to the spyryte / like
as says saint Poule For he that will quench ye fire of lecherye he ought to
take away the rise fagotte / and al tho things that make it to brenne and
that nourysshe the fire. These ben the delyces and the eases of the body which
quyckene and lyghten the fire of lecherye and corrumpeth chastyte / whereof
saint Bernard says yt chastyte peryssheth in delyces. And therefore who that
will keep him fro brennynge / he ought to take away by abstynence / and by
sharpness of penance of his body all the occasyons that may quyckene the fire
of lecherye / whereof the scripture says that the children that were nourysshed
with gross metes would not use delycyouse metes / and were saved in ye
fournays of babylone / by which is vnderstonden the sin of lecherye / which
is quenched by abstynence and by sharpnes of penance. But the fat metes
delycyouses / and the strong wynes inflame and nourysshe this sin of lechery
in lyse wise as oylle and greece alyght and enflammeth the fire / and enforce it
to brenne.

Of the.v. degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca. C.xlv
THe fyfth degree of the virtue of chastyte / is to flee evil company and the
occasyons of sin. Much people have fallen to sin by evil company / which
otherwise had ne not fallen / like as the leuayne corrupts the paste and
draw it to sauoure. Right so the evil company corrupts the fame and renomee
of the person. An apple roten if it be among the sou^de and hole / corrupts
the good apples if it lie among them. A brennynge cole anon sets on fire
an heep of coals when it is laid among them. Whereof Dauyd says in the
psaulter / with the holy thou shalt be holy and with the shrewes you shalt be
perverted. Thus then if thou will keep chastyte and clennes / follow the
company of the good. For if thou love the company of evil and shrewes / thou
shall be evil as they be. For who that loves the company of a fool / it
behooves that he be like to him / as to that scripture says. Thus behooves it
to flee all the occasyons of sin. As to speak secretly with a woman / and in
suspecyous place one alone to one. For such things given occasyon to sin /
when there is place and time / whereof we read in the book of kings / that Amon
which was the sone of Dauyd / when he had his sister Thamar in his chamber he
corrupted and defouled her. The lady of Joseph when she found him alone she
would have made him to sin with her. But he fled as a wise man and left her
with his mantell. Therefore says the holy appostle saint Poule. Fle ye fro the
sin of fornycacyon / that is for to say / all the occasyons that may bring
or led a person unto the sin of lechery. For a man may not better overcome
ye sin of lecherye ne keep chastyte than by fleing ye companyes and the
occasyons of this sin. whereof ye angel said to loath yt he should issue and
depart fro ye cytee of Sodom / and from all ye marches. For it suffysed not
to leave ye evil company ne ye sin / but yt he should leave ye marches of
sin. It is said that so long gooth ye pete to water / yt at the last it
breketh. And ye gnat flees so long at ye flamme of ye candel / yt at last
it brenneth. In like wise may one seek thoccasyons of sin / yt he falls
therein. who so will then keep hy^ well fro such fire / that he brenne not / he
ought to wtdrawe him fro it

The syxthe degree of the virtue of chastyte. Ca..Cxlvi.
THe syxthe degree of the virtue of chastyte / is ye one be well occupied and
well set a work of good werkys and honest. For the devil which slepeth not
/ when he fyndeth a man idle and slow to do well / put him self to labor and
makes him fall lightly in to sin / whereof the scripture says / that
idleness / that is to say neclygence and slouthe for to do good / is
maystresse of many euylles / and that is enemy of the soul. And therefore
says Saint Poule. Ne give thou no place to the devil. That is to say ne be
thou not idle / that ye fend find not place to tempte the. For who that is
idle to do good works / he gives room and place to the devil for to tempte
him. Therefore says Saint Gregory do all way sum good works a and operacyon
that the devil find the not idle. For he is lightly taken of the fend / that
occupyeth not himself always in sum works. For he that is idle may not long
keep him fro fally^ge in to sin. Of this says the prophet / yt the cause of
the sin of Sodom the cite was plente of breed and wine / and ydlenes. That
is to understand that they ete and drank / and did nothy^ge. And therefore
they fell in to sin so horrible that it ought not to be named. Right so do
much people that lose their time / and employe it in vanytees and in outrages
of mete and drink and leude games / in Iolytees of leude songs / of dau^ces /
of plays not lefull / and other deduytes. And in such vanytees they waste
their time / and therefore they fall often in many horrible sins / and often in
to pyt of hell. For like as Job says. They led their lives in plays / in
deduytes and in delyces / and in an only point they descend in to the pytte
of hell / that is at the point of death / where as they take none head.

The.vii. degree of ye virtue of chastyte. Ca. C.xlvii
THe.vii. degree of the virtue of chastyte / is devout prayer and orison / that
much avails to overcome all sins / and specially the sin of lechery /
whereof saint Ambrose says / that prayer is a good shield against all the
brennynge darts of the devil of hell. And saint Ysodore says / that it is
the remedy against all temptacyon of sin / a man for to run to prayer as
soon as the fend tempts him unto sin. For the accustomaunce of devout
prayer and of oryson quenches all the assautes of sin. Devout prayer is
much mighty unto almighty god when it is under set and accompanied with
four things as of four pylers. The first thing is true faith / whereof our
lord says in the gospel. All yt ye ask and demand in your prayers / have
ye good faith and steadfast believe in god / and ye shall have that ye demand.
And saint James says / that one ought demand or ask in steadfast faith
without doubting. For who that doubts is like the foam of the sea which the
wind ledeth hither and thither. And therefore he that prays doubting Geteth
no thing of god. The second thing that ought to be in prayer is hope to have
that / which is demanded and required Hereof says Dauyd in the psaulter /
have good hope in god and he shall do that which / thou requyrest of him. And
also he says in another place. Lord have mercy on me / for my heart trusts
in ye. God gives to us great hope for to require him / and to have that /
which we demand of him when he says in the gospel. That who demands /
he takes it / and who so secheth / he fyndeth that is to understand who
demands wisely / and secheth delygently / and knock and shoue at the door
perseuerantly And when these three things ben in the prayer / wit. Dylygence
/ and perseueraunce god enhau^ceth it / if thou demand wisely. Many men pray
and demand which be not herd ne granted of god / by cause they ask evil
and not leefully / whereof saint James says to them that can not demand / ye
ask often says he of god / but ye get no thing by cause that ye can not ask
it.. Some ask more hye thing than apperteyneth to them as dydsaynt Johan and
saint James / which demanded of god that / that one should sytte on the right
side of our lord Ihesu Christ in his royame / and that other on the lift side.
They asked not wisely but it was with great presumpcyon. And therefore our lord
Ihesu christ answered to them hard and said to them / ye wot not what ye ask
/ then who that will pray to god / let hy^ keep him from presumpcyon / that
he suppose not great things in him / as did the pharesee / which auaunted
him in his prayer / and despised other But humbly ought a person to pray to
god in Iugynge / and accusynge him self tofore god / which sees every heart
/ and knows ye maladyes of sin / and the defautes / and also knows that
whereof we have need / and that which is profitable for us / better than we our
self / and take ensample of the poor truauntes which shows their soores
and maladyes for to moeue the people to pity toward them. Right so ought one
to do tofore god humbly to show his sins / and his defautes to remember
there for to get grace and pardon. There ben other that can demand but vile
and little things / as ben the goods temporal: And god will give to the a
greter thing he will not appease the with an apple or with a peer as a child
/ but he will that thou demand great things. which ben for the health of
thy soul / as his grace and his glory. For who that demands of god
rychesses / or honors / or death / or vengeance of his enemies / he
demands of god foul prayers and against him self / and therefore god
grants them not. Therefore says saint Austyn / understand not of god to be
a great thing / the goods that he gives as well to the wicked as to the good
/ and to his enemies as well as to his friends. And yet more gives god of
temporal gods to the wicked man than he does to ye good. God gives them to
ye wicked / to the end yt the good persons should learn to despise them as
saint Austyn says / when you prayest says saint Ambrose / ae great things yt
ben they yt endures withouten end / and not the things transytorye. But them
that endures without end. For such a prayer as to demand temporal goods /
he grants the^ not. And therefore our good master Ihesu christ techeth us for
to demand wisely. And forms unto us our demand / when he says in the
gospel if ye demand any thing of my fader in my name / he shall give it you
He demands in the name of Ihesu Christ that demau^deth that which
appertains to the health of his soul And what thing we ought to ask and
demand / he ensygneth and techeth us when he says in ye gospel. Seche ye
first the reame of god and his Justice / and all things temporal shall come
to your advantage. For as it is wont to be said / unto the most need one
ought always to run / we have need of two things of the gods spyrytuell and
temporell. But we have gretest need of the gods spyrytuell: And therefore we
ought first and pryncypally require them / and god shall give them and do to
us advantage of ye second good / yt ben the gods temporel we ought not to
make of the second gods the pry^cypall / as does the covetous men / which
seche not too have none other life but this present life / which fails and
escapes from them / will they or nyll they / but the reame of god is life
pardurable. That ought we require of god and desire by merit of good prayer.
And that is that god says. Seche ye first the realm of heaven / and his
Justice. That is to do good works / by which we may come in to that glorious
realm / the which never shall fail / who that secheth in this wise /
almighty god does unto him advantage of temporal gods. For he gives unto
his use suffysauntly. For no thing lacks to them the which does dread god
and love him. Like as says the holy scripture. But the auarycyous people of ye
world ye more they have ye more they lack and faylle. And Saint Iherome says
that to the covetous man faylleth that which he has and that which he has
not. Now think then when thou would pray god / for to demand wisely
dylygently. and perseuerauntly. And he shall give unto the all that shall be
nedeful to the prouffyte and health of thy soul The third thing that ought to
be in prayer / is devotion of heart. that is to lift up the heart to god
without thy^kyng no where else whereof our lord says when thou wylt pray to
god enter within thyn heart and close the door wpon the that is to for say put
out all thoughts seculer flesshely. foul. wicked. worldly. and vylaynous. And
thus pray thy fader of heaven in hyddles in thy heart / and that ye heart think
on none other thing. but on that which it ought to think. and saint ysodore
says that then we pray god truly. when we think nowher else. And Saint
Austyn says what auaylleth to moeue ye mouth and the lyppes / when the heart
says not a word. As great dyfference as is between the chafe and the corn.
and the brenne and the flower of whete so great dyfference is between the
prayer and devotion of ye heart. God is not a ghoote to be fed with leaves.
God cursyd ye tree whereon he fond no thing but leaves Right so ye prayer which
is all in leaves of words without devotion of heart / pleases no thing to
god but it dyspleaseth him and he torneth his eere. For he will not understand
such langage. who that prays god without devotion unto him / it seems that
he mocketh and scorneth our lord god like as he yt will mock and scorn with
a deef man and with a dombe man the which can not speak that meueth his
lyppes only as he spacke / and no thing says To such people god makes a
deef ere / but the prayer that comes fro the depnes of the heart / that hereth
our lord as he says in the gpspell. God is a spyryte / and therefore who will
pray god and have his request granted / him byhoueth that he pray in
spyryte and in truth. Dauyd the prophet enseygneth and techeth us in the
psaulter to prayer to god deuoutely when he says / lord mine oryson be
adressyd tofore the like to thensence. Thensence when it is upon the fire it
smells swetely. Right so does the prayer that comes fro the heart brennynge
in love of god smells much swetely tofore god / otherwise the prayer may not
be enhaunced tofore god if it come not fro the heart / like as a messager
which brings no letters / ne has no knowleche / enters not gladly tofore
the king. Oryson or prayer without devotion is as a messager without letters /
who such message sends to the court / he does evil his erandes who then
will pray god verily / he ought to cry to god fro the depthe of his heart /
as did Dauyd / which said in the plaulter / lord god here my voys. For I cry
to the fro the depnesse of my heart. The fervor of love is the cry fro the
depnesse of the heart / this says saint Austyn. Such a voys and such a cry
pleseth much to god / and not the noise of words polysshed / whereof. saint
Gregorye says that verily to pray to god / is in the teres and bewayllynges
of conpunccyon of heart. This cry chaseth away the thieves / that been ye
devil les which lie in awayte for to trouble and rob us. And therefore ought
we often to cry and pray unto god that he will keep and deffende us fro the
theuys of hell. Thus ought we strongely to cry unto god against the fire of
couetyse / or of lecherye / that he give to us the water of teres for to
quench such fire that it enflamme not our hertes. Also we ought to cry too
god against the evil thoughts that come often to the heart / that ye heart and
the soul perysshe not by consenting. Therefore cried Dauyd to god and said.
Lord save me / and keep me fro the peril of waters ye / which ben now
entered in to my heart / and ye dyscyples of our lord when they saw the
tempest of the sea upon them they cried saying lord save us for we ben in
great peril. And for these three things that I have here said one ought often
to cry to god that he save us fro these three perils / that is to wete fro
the thieves of hell / and fro the fire of couetyse / and fro the flodes of evil
thoughts and of temptacyon. Now ought thou to know / that in all times /
and in all places may a person pray to god. But he ought special and most
deuoutely ought he to pray in the church on the sondayes and in festes which
ben stablysshed for to pray to god to preyse and honor him / and therefore
then they seace and ought to cease al persons fro bodyly works and temporal
/ for ye better tentende to pray to god and honor him / and to spyrytuell
werkys. God commanded so straytly to keep the sabotte day in the old law
that he made a man to be stoned tofore the people by cause he had gadred a few
styckes on ye sabotte day what shall god do then of them that do ye great
sins on the sondayes and ye festes / and waste the time in vanyte and in
folyes / and yet werse done they on the sondayes / on ye festes and on solemn
days than they do on other days. Certeynly they shall be more punysshed and
dampened in that other world / than ye Jews that brake their sabot day. For
ye sunday is more holy tha^ ye sabot. So ben the pryncypall feestes which ben
establysshed in holy church for to serve god / and to honor and thank him
of his goodness and bountees that he has done to us / and does every day /
like as holy church remembers. In such a feast as is crystmas / that is of
his natyuyte / how he was borne of the vyrgyn Marye. At Ester how he arose from
death to life. At the ascencyon how he styed up in to heaven. At whytsontyde how
he sent the holy ghost upon thappostles. After there ben establysshed to keep
the feestes of saints for to praise and worship god and his saints / and to
remember the holy miracles that he did for to conferme our faith. And
therefore we ought to keep the feestes of saints / and to pray the^ devoutly to
aid and socoure us unto our lord / which has so much honored them in
heaven in glory and in earth / and therefore they sin grievously that keep not
their feestes. For they do against the commandment of god and of holy
church. But here some may say to me Fair sir a man may not all day pray to
god ne be at the monastery / ne in the church / what harm is it if I go play
and dysporte me / as long as I play I think none harm. To that I shall
answer. All the time that thou employest in folysshe plays and in vanytees /
and in work the which is not ordained in any manner unto god thou lesest it.
For thou ought to know that all the time that thou thynkest not on god /
thou ought for to account for lost / this says the scripture. That is
for to understand when thou thynkest on vanyte / and in thing that is not in
any manner ordained unto god. And certainly he leseth a great thing that leseth
his time. This says Seneke / for he leseth the goods that he might doin as
much as he so loses in worldly plays plays and in vanytees / and that is
not without sin for to despende the time in evil usage. For god requires
reckoning at ye day of Judgment / this says saint Ancelme / and therefore
ought one always well to employe his time as long as he lives in this world.
And the time is short as says ye scripture. Ne no man knows how long time
he has to live / ne no man knows when he shall deye / ne how he shall pass
out of this world who then will keep the holy days as he owes he ought to
keep him fro doing that desplayseth god and his saints / and well to employe
his time in god / in prayenge him / praysynge / and gyuynge him thanks of his
goods / and to here ye sermons and put them in eure and to entende to other
good werkys and needs that been according to god. Also when a man is in ye
church he ought to conteyne him much honestlye / and do reverence to god and
to his saints deuoutelye. For ye church is ordained for to pray god and his
saints / and not for to Iangle ne for to lawghe / ne for to Iape / ne for to
speak idle words ne for to talk too other of seculer things. For our Lord
says. My hows is the house of prayer. And therefore a man ought not to do none
other thing therein / than it for which it was establysshed / this says saint
Austyn / he that shall come tofore ye king in his chamber for to empetre / and
get any grace he ought well to keep him fro saying of any thing that should
dysplese the king. Much more ought he to be ware that comes in too the
church which is the chamber and ye house of god / what he says and does
tofore god and his aungelles / and that specially that should dysplease him.
Then god will not that a man should make of his house a market ne an halle.
For he him self chaced and droof out of his temple with good scourges them that
bought and sold therein Also he will not ye any plee should be made therein / ne
noise ne no seculer need / but he will that we should entende to pray god
deuoutely and praise And thank him of all his benefaytes. There ought a man to
call ageyn his heart to him self and put away all worldly werkys and all evil
thoughts / and think on his creator / and on the bountees that god has done
to him / and does every day / and to remember his sins and his deffaultes /
and to humble him self tofore god / and to require him of pardon and grace to
keep him from sin / and to have perseueraunce in good works unto the end.
Also in ye church ought the great lords and the great lays to forgete all
their glory / their richesse / their power / their dygnite / their hyenesse /
and their puyssaunce / and ought to think that they be tofore their Judge /
which shall straytely examyne them / and rekenne straytely of the goods that
he has done to them / of the dygnytees and estates that he has set them in
/ and how they have used them and he shall reward them after their deserte.
Therefore ought they much to humble them to god / and not to gloryfye them of
their hyenesse / ne of their fair array / ne of their rich robes They may
take example of king Dauyd / which forgate his dygnyte when he prayed tofore
god / and despised him self so much that he said to our lord Ihesu Christ. I
am said he a little worm and not a man. In this Dauyd knowleched his lytelnes
/ his pouerte / and his deffaultes / and made hy^ naught For like as a worm is
little and naught / and grows naked of ye earth / al in like wise is man of
hy^ self a vile thing / for when that he enters in to this world he brings
nothing / ne nothing shall bear away / al naked he entered / and so he shall
go hens / whereof saint Bernarde says / what is a man but foul sperme / a
sack full of donge / and meet to worms / he is much foul and made of foul
sede in his concepcyon / a foul sack full of donge in his life / and meet to
worms after his death. Also the great ladies that been so arrayed with gold
and silver / with precious stones / and robes ought in the church tofore god
well to take example of ye good queen Hester / which took of her precious
vestymentes and robes when she came for to pray god / and humbled herself / and
knowleged her pouerte and her defautes tofore god / and said to him / lord
thou know that I hate the sin of pride / and the glory of vestymentes and
of Iewelles which me behooves to set down fro my heed / in great
abhomynacion of them / that in such things trusts / delyteth / gloryfyeth /
and weere them for to show them and to please the fools. God has not to do
with such parementes in his church / but of a clean conscience and of an humble
heart. Saint Poule ensygneth and techeth right well how the women ought to
array them when they come to pray god / he says that they ought to have
honest habyte without any outrage / that is to understand after that it
appertains to the estate of a person. For that ye which is outrage in one
person / is not outrage in an other / some is conuenyent to a queen which is
not conuenyent to a burgeys wife / or another simple woman. Also thappostle
techeth that the women of what estate yt they be / that they should be simple
of beholdynge / and regard / and humble / that is to understand that they
should be simple / humble and shamefaste / and not afronted / ne openly show
her vysage / as done these comyu women / which gone with their neck stratched
out as an heart in the launde / and look a side or a trauers as an horse of
prys. Also he will that they be not curyous for to array their heed with gold
ne silver ne with precious stones. And yet he will also that they have in the
church their hedes couerd / so that no man be styred by them to evil / ne
sin not in beholdynge of them / but they ought to be arrayed as devout and
good women / which show the bounte of their heart by good werkys / and
therefore says saint Ambrose / who will be herd in prayer / he ought to take
away fro him al sign of pride / and ought to enclyne him to god with his
heart by very confession / and by penance in profounde humylyte / for to
moeue god to do him mercy. For as he says proud habyte geteth no thing of
god / but it gives cause to Judge evil of him ye weereth it. Now I have showed
to the three things that ought to be in prayer / faith / hope and devotion. But
to that / that prayer may be perfyghtly agreeable and playsaunte to god and
worthy to be enhaunced and herd / it behooves four things. That is that it
have.ii. wings which bear it tofore god. These two wings ben almesses and
fastings / or other penaunces / whereof the angel said to Thobye. Prayer is
good when it has in him self fasting and alms / without these two wings
the prayer may not flee to god. For as says saint Ambrose / good life makes
the prayer to flee to god. But sin lets it and with draws it ageyn /
whereof thou ought to wete that in two manners is prayer let / like as says
saint Ysodore. One is by cause a man keeps him not fro sin and fro doing
evil And for that a person will not forgive the evil will that he has to
another person For in like wise as the oyneme^tes will not hele ye wound / as
long as the iron is wythi^. Right so auaylleth not ne prouffyteth no thing
ye prayer to him that says it as he has evil will to another. And therefore
says the prophet / let us lift up our hertes and our hands to god. He
lyfteth up his heart and his hands to god that lyfteth up his prayers by good
works. And thappostle says that he that lyfteth up his pure hands to god in
prayer lyfteth up in pure and clean conscience without sin. For god
enhau^ceth not the prayer that comes of a conscience full of ordure and of
sin whereof he says by the prophet when ye shall multeplye your prayers. I
shall not here them / for your hands be all blody and full of sin who ben they
that have their hands blody but they that dystresse the pour people which ben
under them and take away fro them their good by force they have the hands full
of blood of the blood of pour people. for they take a way fro them their life /
and their sustenau^ce by couetyse and by their rauyne and do great oultrages
and ete^ the morsellys full of sin wherefore they shall pay the scotte in that
other world. For the scripture says that god requires the blood of the pour
people For they must give a rekenyng or sytte therefore and therefore who will be
enhau^ced and herd of god in his prayers late him not come tofore God the
sword drawn. Ne the hands blody ne with void hands. That is to say in will
to sin ne spotted of untruth ne void of good works For thus says our
lord in the gospel. Thou shall not come tofore me with void hands / he comes
with empty hands tofore god that comes to pray and require him without
making present of good works / for to him he shytteth and closes his yate
that requires him and brings no thing / hereof have we example in the
gospel / which says that the yate was shytte to the folysshe vyrgyns that
had none oil in their lamps / and god said to them I know you not. For god
knows none but them that have their lamps full of oylle that is to say them
that have the heart full of pity and of grace purged and clean of all sins
and show it by good works. Such people hereth god gladly and opens to them
his yate / and receives gladly their prayers. Now say I then that prayer
like as it rested on four pylers as it is said tofore / and is much playsaunt
to god. For it geteth lightly of god all that it has need be it in body or in
soul as says the scripture / whereof saint James says that much auaylleth
the besy prayere of a ryghtwyse man. For it auaylleth to hele al maladyes of
body and of soul / and says yet that prayer that comes of faith heleth the
seek person / if he be in sin it shall be perdonned. The holy scripture
says yt Moses the prophet vaynquysshed Amalech and his host / not by
bataylle / but by holy prayers. For as it is said of an holy man. Much more
auaylleth the prayer of a saint than the fighting of many thousand synnars.
The prayer of a good man perceth heaven. Then shall he overcome his enemies in
earth. A good old and devout woman geteth more soon a good request of god
in glory in prayenge him deuoutely / than a thousand knights may get of
land in long time by force of arms / and therefore it is good to pray and
require god with the orysons of good folk / and specially of couentes and of
relygyous people / which ben assembled for to serve god and for to pray night
and day deuoutely for all their benefactours. For the prayer is much worth
toward our lord. For like as says ye scripture. More avails and more may
do toward god the prayer of many good persons than any can express or say.
For as it is said of an holy man. It may not be but ye prayers of many good
persons together be herd of god and granted. The prays and requests of all
the hole covent together / is sooner passed and herd of thabbot / than the
request and prayer of one monk alone. In like wise hereth god more soon the
request of them that been assembled for to serve him. And therefore says god in
ye gospel / if twain of you accord together to ask and require me. All yt
they require my fader of heaven I shall do it. Now have I spoken of seven
degrees of the tree of ye virtue of chastyte / by which this virtue grows
and mounteth / and prouffyteth. Now behooves to say of the branches of this
tree which ben seven / after the.vii. estates of ye people ye ben in this
world.

Of the first estate of them yt ben entyer and chaste of body. Ca. C.xlviii.
THe first estate of the world is of them yt ben hole and chaste of body / and
have kept their maydenhede / but nevertheless they be not bounden to this / but
yt they may be married. In such estate ought a person to keep chastyte yt is
clennes and purete of heart and of body / wherefore ye children of rich men
ought to have good kepers and honest yt they ben delygent for tensygne them /
and keep them fro evil company and fro sin. For evil company fouleth often the
children / and ensygne them evil games / and shrewde words of rybaudry /
leude touchynges and dyshonest. by which they fall in to the sin of lechery
which is against nature. Whereof we have spoken tofore in the treaty of vices /
therefore it needs not to reherce it again / for such matter is abhomynable.
And therefore ye children ought to be chastysed and well drawn forth in good
manners / and hold and keep them nyghe yt they do no harm ne sin as long as
they be young / and to accustom them to keep thensygnementes. For also as
says Salamon / yt which a child is learned in his yongth / yt will he hold in
his old aege. And the phylosophre says yt it is no little thing to accustom
well or evil in his yongth / for that is al For it is said / that which is
learned in yongth is mayntened in aege. Such form as the sho takes at the
begy^nynge / the same holds it forth always in such estate. Then has
chastyte need of good keeping / for else it should be soon lost.

The.ii. estate is of them yt ben corrupt. Ca. C.xlix.
THe.ii. estate is of them yt ben corrupt of body and have lost their chastyte
/ and maydenheed / and yet were never married ne bounden with bond yt might let
them to mary. And netheles they be confessed and repentaunte of their sins.
In this estate ought one to keep chastyte For he yt is in such estate of
repentance ought to have stadfast purpose / yt never he shall fall again in
ye sin / but all his life to keep hy^ to his power / sauf yt he may mary him
if he will / he or she yt will keep him chaste in such estate / him behooves
yt he chastyse his body by sharpnes of penance. This is ye second branch of
this tree. so / and that is neither sin ne lecherye. The third case is wha^
a man requires his wife for such work / for to keep her fro sin. Also when
he sees that she is so shamefast that she never requires her husbonde of
such thing / and doubts that she should lightly fall in to sin if he
required her not who in such entencyon renders or requires such thing of
such debt / he sy^neth not / but he may deserve toward god merit. For pity
moeueth him to do it. In these three things is no point of sin in the works
of marriage / but in other caas there may be sin venyall or mortal. And
specially in three caas. The first is when this work is required only for his
delight and lecherye / and in this caas may one sin venyally and deedly /
venyally when the delight pass not the bonds and the terms of marriage That is
to say when the delight is so subgette to reason that he that in this work and
in such estate / would not do this thing but only to his wife. But when the
lecherye and the delight is so great in his wife that reason is deed and so
blind / that as much he would do to her if she were not his wife. In such a
caas the sin is mortal. For such delight passes the bounds of marriage /
whereof god is often dyspleased to such people / and gives sometime to the devil
great power to noye and grieve them like as we read in holy scripture / of Sara
daughter of Raguell which was wife to young Thobye / and had / had seven
husbondes tofore / and al were slain of the devil the first night that they
would have layen by her and have known her. Of whom the angel said to
Thobye that he should have her to his wife I shall say to the said he / in what
people the devil puts him in / and has power on them that putten god out
of their heart and of their thought that they ne entende to no thing but to
their delytes and for to acomplysshe their wicked desires like as does an horse
or a mule.

And god takes a way fro them sometime their lygnage and their fruit that they
may not have children by their sins. Yet may they sin mortally in another
manner that is to wete when that one treats that other against nature or
otherwise than nature of man requires ne law of marriage grants. Such
people synnen more grievously than ye other toforesayd but they that in their
marriage keep ye dread of our lord and kepen clenly and holyly their marriage.
Such people plesen god. The second caas that may be sin in marriage is wha^ a
man gooth to his wife in such time as he ought not that is when she is in the
maladye or sickness that comes unto wymmen oftyme. He that spares not his
wife when she is in such estate / for ye parylle of ye lygnage that she myt
then conceive should be mezel or lepre he synneth dedely. For as Saint Iherome
says. In that estate be conceived ye lame often time the crooked / and the
lepres. And that time ye woman ought for to tell it to her husbond / when she
is in that plyte / desyryng him to abide and suffer all so long as she is in
such point Aso they both ought for to spare and absteyne them fro the work
of marriage in holy times. That is to say as in the great solemn feestys / for
the better to entende to pray god and to serve and honor him. And in the
times of vygyles / of lent and of fastings commanded by holy church they
ougth to suffer and forbere such work / not for that it is sin to do such
thing in that time. For in a good and entyere enten^y on he may do it / but
sometime they ought to suffer of yt they may do / for to get the better of god
ye thing which they demand of him as says saint Austyn. Also in the time
the woman lies in gesyne / or nyghe the time of chyldynge a man ought to keep
him fro the work of marriage for shame / and also for the peril that might
come thereof. It is founden in the book that speaks of nature of beestys / that
the olyfaunt shall never abide with the female as long as she is conceived and
bears / and a man by reason ought to be better attempred than a be / and
therefore ought a man in such time withdraw him. But nevertheless I say not
that is sin to do the work of marriage in such time for good cause / and
true entencyon whereof god is Judge. The third caas is / that in which one may
most grievously sin in his marriage / that is in holy place. For in holy place
as is the church / which is ordained for to pray god and serve hy^ ought not
be do lecherye of marriage ne none other sin / for the reverence of the holy
place and he that has no regard in such holy place to do such work he
synneth for reason of the place. For such thing is sin in one place and in
one time / that is not in another. The.iiii. estate is of them that have be in
marriage / but the death has deceuerd them that one fro that other. And he or
she that is abyden ought to keep and live chastely as long as he or she is in
ye state of wydowhede. This is an estate ye which saint Poule preyseth much /
and says to the wydowes / that he or she is good that holds him in such
estate / and if it playse not the^ they may marye them. For better is to marye
than to brenne them / for if he bren^e so that he consent to sin he synneth
/ for he put his heart thereto by will and by dysyre to the fire of lechery and
better it were and more auaylle to him to marye / than to brenne him self in
the fire / that is to understand of them that been in the state of simple
wydohede and not them that been in thestate bounden by vow they may not marye
without deedly sin after their vow but nevertheless if the vow be simple and
that it be pryuely made without solempnyte / how be it that they sin deedly
that after their auowe marye them / nevertheless they may abide in their marriage
/ if there be none other lettynge And is bounden to do penance of the vow
broken / but when the vow is solemn / or by the hand of a prelate / or by
professyon of relygyon / or by holy order that he has recyued / as subdeken /
deken or priest. Then ye marriage is none / but they must deceuere and depart
that so ben assembled by marriage for they may not be laufully in such estate
/ to byholde the state of wydowhede / ought to moeue the example of the turtle
for like as says the book of nature of beestes. Never after the turtle has
lost his make she shall never accompanye her with another / but is solytarye
and flees ye company of other. Three things apperteyne much to them that been
in the state of wydowhede The first is to hyde her self and to be secretlye in
her house / and not to syewe suspecyous felawshyp / hereof have we a fair
example of Iudyth which was a wydowe / and was a much fair woman and young
of which it is said in the holy scripture / that she held her self in her
chamber cloos with her maidens / wherefore saint Poule repreueth the young women
wydowes that were idle and curyous for to goo and come and Iape and ouermoche
speak / but closely and secretly ought they to be in their lodging and
entende to do good works / like as saint Poul enseygneth the^. The.ii. thing
is to ente^de to pray god gladly and to yield him tha^kynges of his benefaytes
And to be in the church in great devotion in great repentance of their sins
and in teres weeping. As it is said in scripture by saint luke that the good
wydowe which was named. Anne departed not out of the temple but served god
night and day in prayer / in fasty^ges and in other penau^ces. The.iii. thing
is sharpness of metes. Saint poul says that a wydowe that ledeth her life in
delices is deed by sin for like as says saint bernard chastyte peryssheth in
delices / in like wise as he perissheth in ye water that is so much under in
depnesse that he leseth his breeth. No man may have his heed in the water that
is to say / his heart long in the delyces of this world but that he lose his
life. That is ye grace of ye holy god by which ye soul lives in god. In such
estate also apperteyneth humble habyte and not proud ne curyous After ye
example of Judith which left her rich robes and her rich parementis wha^
her lord and husbond was deed and took ye habyte of wydowhede simple and humble
which was more sign of weeping and of sorrow than of Joy ne of vayn glory
and by cause she loved the virtue of chastyte and that she would keep all her
life she clad her with heir and fasted eueryday except the festes / and yet was
she fair young / rich and wise. But the bounte of her heart and love of
chastyte maad her to do it / thus out he or she to live that will keep chastyte
in such estate / and this is the fourth branch of this tree

The fyfthe branch of the virtue of chastyte and of vyrgynyte Capitulo C.li.
THe fyfthe branch of chastyte and of vyrgynyte is the fyfthe estate which
is in the^ that keep and have always kept and yet always keep and purpose to
keep all their life their body hole without corrupcyon for the love of god This
estate is much to be praised for his dygnyte / for his beauty / and for his
bounte. For this estate has he that keeps him semblable to au^gellys of heaven
as sayen ye saints. But much more have the vyrgyns of glory and of merit
than the aungellys. For the aungellys lyuen without flesh / but the vyrgynes
have vyctorye over their flesh that is rethy propre body. And that is a great
meruaylle / that they keep so feeble a castle as is the body / against so
strong an aduersarye as is the devil / that secheth al thengynes that he may
to take ye castle for to rob the tresour of vyrgynyte. This is the tresour /
of which our lord speaks in the gospel when he says / that the royame of
heaven is like to tresour that hyd in a field. The tresour hid in the field is
vyrgynyte hyd in the body which is like a field / which ought by penance to
be eered / labored and sown by labor of good works. This tresour is
semblable to the royalme of heaven. For the life of vyrgynes is like the life of
heaven / that is the life of au^gellys whereof our lord says in ye gospel / yt
in ye resurreccyon general shall be no maryages as ben in this world / but they
shall be as au^gellys in heaven. Also I say yt this estate is for to be praised
for his beaulte. For it is the most fair estate yt is in earth except
vyrgynyte clenly kept whereof Salamon says in his book of sapyence in
meruayllynge hy^self. O says he how fair and chaste is generacyon with
clerenes and charity / he said well / chaste with clerenes. For then is fair
chastyte and vyrginyte / wha^ it is clear by good life and honest like as ye
clear son makes ye fair day. In like wise ye clerenes of grace and of good
life makes ye vyrgynyte fair and plesau^t to good whereof Saint Iherome says /
that much fair and clear is vyrgynyte tofore other virtues when it is without
spotte and without ordure of sin. for who that is hool and chaste of body and
is corrupt of heart and of thought he or she is like a sepulcre which is whyt
and fair withoutforth and within is full of careyn of deed bodies stynky^g and
roty^ vyrgynyte is like to a whyt robe wherein ye spots be more foul and more
apparau^t / than in a robe of another color. This robe out to be well kept
fro.iii. spots that is of fylthe / of blood and of fire / these.iii. spots
defoule more this whyt robe than other. The spotte of fylthe / is the couetyse
of the world / which ought not to be in the heart that will plese god and the
world his enemy / as says saint gregoire / and he shows that there is no
friend of god that will plese ye world which is enemy of god whereof saint
Ioha^ says / who that will be friend of the world shall be enemy to god and
saint poul says if I would plese the people of ye world I should not be the true
servant of Jesus christ It is a sign that he will not plese ye world that his
heart is al set to god and he that has over great array and curyous about his
body is not so for no perso^e secheth never beaulte ne couryosyte of roobes ne
of pareme^tes if he supposed not to be seen of ye people and who that secheth
most of such beauty leseth most ye beauty of his soul and of his conscience
wythinforth by which they should plese god whereof saint Bernard says to the^
that seche^ these fair and precious robes and ye fair pareme^tes for to please
ye world and to show the^ The daughters of babylone be^ of co^fusyon for
their glory shall torn to perdurable dampnacyon if they be not ware and keep
them well They clothe them says he with purple and of fair precious robes /
and under those fair robes is often the conscience poor and foul / naked of
good deeds and of virtues / and full of sins They shine withoutforth of
precious stones / of ouches of glode and silver / but they be foul before god
and abhomynable / and saint Bernard says that they that so array them in evil
entencyon / and done more than their estate requires / synnen grievously / but
all the glory of the daughter of the king of glory / as Dauyd ye prophet
says is withinforth / that is in holy conscience and in good virtues / where
as is no point of couetyse but for to playse to god / and in this wise the
spot of fylthe defoylleth not. Also a person ought to keep him fro the spotte
of blood That is of thoughts and of flesshly desires / whereof saint Jerome
says that such vygynyte is sacrefyce and offrynge to Ihesu christ / which is
not entatched in ye heart of any evil thought or consenting for like as him
self says No thing avails vyrgynyte of body where as is corrupcyon of heart
or of thought or of consenting. Also the fruit is not good how well that it be
fair withoutforth / when it is full of worms and of retynnesse withinforth.
Also he ought to keep him fro the spote that comes of the fire / the fire
brenneth and bruleth the white robe of chastyte and of vyrgynyte / yt is wha^
gladly they here or herkene foul words that may moeue them to sin For thus
as says saint Poule / and also other times we have said it tofore. The evil
words / corrupten the good manners. And therefore says Seneke / keep ye fro
evil words and dyshonest. For who that is so accustomed / he dredeth not ne
ferreth no shame / and falls the more lightly in to sin / and therefore who
that will clenly keep the white robe of vyrgynyte him behooves to keep him well
fro saying and herynge such words as thereby he might brenne. The catte
brenneth often her skin / and so does not the wild catte. Vyrgynyte among
all other virtues is compared and lykened to the flower de lys / which is a
much fair flower / and much white. Whereof our lord says in scripture by
the mouth of Salamon. My friend / that is the holy soul of a vyrgyn / is as
the lely among ye thorns. The special friend of our lord is the soul of
them that keep vyrgynyte of heart and of body. For that is a virtue by which
the soul geteth most specially the love and the famylyaryte of our lord /
whereof saint Johan theua^ge list was a clean vyrgyn / and was among all
thappostles most famylyer whith our lord and most pryue / as it appears in
the gospel / nevertheless he loved well the other / but he loved saint Johan
most for his virgynyte this flower de lys or lylye that keeps his beauty
among the thorns of temptacyons of the flesh / for the flesh that is our
body humayne is but a smoke / that has no charge as of him self but as
thorns and nettles / that is the evil menynges / which often prycketh ye soul
/ but the flower of vyrgynyte takes no head of the thorns / when it is well
rooted in the love of god which defends it fro thorns of temptacion / and
this flower ought to have.vi. leaves / and three graynes of gold tofore. The
first leef is the holenes of thy body / that is to say that the body de entyer
and hole without corrupcyon of lecherye. For if a vyrgyn were corrupt and all
against her will / she should not lose therefore the reward of vyrginyte.
Whereof saint Lucye vyrgyn and martyr said to ye tyrant if you corrupt me
against my will / my chastyte shall be doubled as touching the merit of ye
crown of glory. The second leef of vyrgynyte is clennesse of heart. For like as
saint Iherome says naught auaylleth to have vyrgynyte of the body / that has
will for to marye hy^ or her he speaks of them that has auowed chastyte. For
who that has auowed to keep vyrgynyte or chastyte / he ought to keep his heart
clean and chaste. The third leef of vyrgynyte is humylyte For vyrgynyte with
pride pleases not god. And therefore says saint bernard that it is a much
fair thing of humylyte with vyrgynyte. And that soul much pleases to god
that i^ humylyte gives preysyng of vyrgynyte and vyrgynyte embelyssheth
humilyte. I dare well say says he that without humylyte ye vyrgynyte of our
lady saint marye had never pleased our lord. The fourth leef of the lylye of
vyrgynyte is dread of god. For they that been very vyrgynes ben woned to be
tymerous ferful and shamefast / and that is no marvel. For they bear a much
precious tresour in a much feeble vessel Then our blessed lady the vyrgyn
marie was always hyd and had dread when the angel appyered to her But the
dread of god is the tresorer which keeps the tresour of vyrgynyte / which the
devil may not take a way for it keeps the yates of the castle / wherim the
tresour is enclosed. The yates of the castle of the heart where the tresour of
vyrgynyte is in ben the wits of ye body. These yates kepe^ the dread of god
that they be not opened to ye enemy of hell / by vayn curyosyte of sey^ge or
of heeryng / or of smellyng of spekyng or tastyng / or going in evil company.
For curiosyte of seeing or of herynge the vanytees of the world ben way and
cause of the sin of lecherye / whereof is said in the scripture that Dyna
daughter of Jacob when she went musyng by curyosyte to see ye women of the
contre / where anon she was rauysshed and corrupt of the sone of the lord of
the town / and therefore who will keep vyrgynyte / hy^ byhoueth much to
withdraw and keep his.v. wits bodyly fro al vayn curyosyte / and this ought
be done by holy dread / for a person owes always to dread to anger god. This
is the sense of the.v. vyrgynes of whom our lord says in the gospel / when
he said that the royame of heaven is like to.x. vyrgynes / of whom five were
wise / and the other five were fools. He calls here the royame of heaven holy
church / which is bynethe in this world / wherein ben always good and evil /
foles and wise / which ben members of holy church / by the faith that they
have received in baptesme. The five wise vyrgyns sygnefye them that keep and
govern well ye five wits of the body of which we have spoken. The five
vyrgynes foles sygnefye them that folysshly keep them The.v. leef is sharpenes
of the life of penance. For who will keep vyrgynyte / he must much chastyse
his flesh and subdue it by penance / and that the body do the will of the
soul by fasting / by waking in prayers / and other penance Sharpness of
life is like a strong hedge for to keep the gardyn of the heart / that the
evil beestes assaylle it not / that been the fendes of hell to the end that
they may not enter / which entende and study for to stele and take away the
tresour of vyrgynyte / and therefore ought this tresour to be well enclosed and
well kept that it be not lost. For who that leseth it may never recover it no
more than ye lamp yt is broken may not be made hole ageyn. The.vi. leef of
vyrgynyte is perseuerau^ce that is to have ferme purpoos to keep well that is
promised to god / whereof Saint Austyn says in the book of vyrgynyte and
adresseth his words to ye vyrgyns saying Follow ye the lamb says he / that
is Ihesu Christ / in keeping stronglye that which ye have auowed to god. Do
ardauntly as much ye may / that the well of vyrgynyte perysshe not in you. For
ye may not do that thing / by which vyrgynyte may be recouerd / if it were
lost / like as we have shewde by ensaumple of the lamp / and saint Bernarde
Says / estudye ye to the virtue of perseueraunce / for she only wynneth and
geteth ye crown of glory. The syxthe leef aforsayd enbelyssheth and makes
much fair the lylye of vyrgynyte / but it byhoueth to have withinforth three
graynes of gold / which sygnefyen.iii. manners to love god. For vyrgynyte
without love is like as a lamp without oil / wherefore the fools vyrgyns by
cause they filled not their lamps of this oylle / were shette out fro the
wedding / and the wise vyrgyns that filled their lamps of this oil entered in
to ye wedding with the spouse The three manners for to love god which ben
sygnefyed by the three graynes of the lylye / saint Austyn enseygneth them when
he says thus. Thou shall love god with all thyn entendement without error /
with all thy will without gaynsayenge and with all thy mind without
forgetynge. In such manner is thymage of god parfayte in a man after.iii.
dygnytees yt ben in the life. That is to wete / entendement memory / and will /
when these.iii. things ben well ordained to god / then ben the three graynes
of gold of the lyly / of the gold of charity which gives bounte / beauty /
and valor of all virtue. For without this gold no virtue is tofore god
neither fair ne precyouse. Otherwise says saint Bernard of the manner to love
god and says thus. O thou that art a christian man / learn how thou ought to
love god / learn to love him wisely / swetely and strongely / wisely that thou
be not deceived by nycete. Swetely that thou be not moeued by prosperyte.
Strongely that thou be not ouercomen by aduersyte In this manner is fair the
flour delys of vyrgynyte / when she is such as is said tofore / and this is
the second reason by which thestate of vyrgynyte ought much to be preysed
for her beauty. ye third reason wherefore thestate of vyrgynyte ought much to
be preysed is for her bounte and for the prouffyt that comes of it. For
vyrgynyte is a tresour of so great value that it may not be preysed / whereof
the scripture says that no thing is worthy to be compared to a chaste heart
/ of ye chastyte of vyrgynyte / for vyrgynyte above all other estates bears
the most grettest fruit and the most grettes proffyt. They that been in
marriage and keep it well as they ought to do have the.xxx. fold fruit. They
that been in wydowhede have the.xl. fold fruit. But they yt keep vyrgynyte have
the hundred fold fruit. For like as our lord says in the gospel that the
seed that falls in good land makes fruit.xxx. fold.xl. fold / and an
hundred fold. These.iii. nombres.xxx.lx. and an hundred apperteyne to.iii.
estates toforesayd. The no^bre of.xxx. which is of.x. three times which
maken.xxx. apperteyneth to thestate of marriage / where ought to be kept the.x.
commandments of the law in the faith of the holy trynyte. The nombre
of.lx. is more great and is of.x.vi. times. For.vi. times.x. maken.lx. and
apperteyneth to thestate of wydowhede. For in such estate ought to be kept ye
precepts / and the^ ought to be done ye.vii. works of mercy of which we have
spoken tofore / but ye no^bre of an hundred which is most great and most
perfyte for it represents a figure round / which is most parfyght and
most fair emonge the other fygures. For like as ye round figure / ye end
retorneth to his beginning and makes it round like a crown. Right so ye
nombre of an.C. joins ye end to ye begy^nyng. For.x. times.x. maken an
ho^dred. which sygnefyeth ye crown yt ye wise vyrgyns had / and how be it
that in yt state of marriage / and in the state of wydowhede may be won the
crown of glory. and have more merit anenst god than have many virgyns. For
many ben in heaven of the^ that have been in marriage and in wydowhede which be
more nygh to god and have more merit / than many of the vyrgyns. Never theles
ye virgyns have a specyal crown above ye crown of glory which is common to al
say^tes. by cause ye vyrgy^s have a specyal vyctorye of their bodies. For for
to follow the lamb. what someuer way that he gooth / that is Ihesu christ / to
whom they be espowses / they have left their carnal spowsayles / for to be
with him in the spowsaylles perdurable. There shall they been well arrayed and
nobly apparaylled of a specyal parement so gente so fair and so auenaunt that
no tongue may tell and therefore I will no more say but that which ye scripture
says that speaks of ye fair parementes that they have more especyal tha^ they
that been of other estates to foresaid and yet says ye scripture that they
sing new so^ges so melodyous and so fair that none other sing that been not
in their estate That new so^ge that they sy^ge sygnefyeth a new Joy and
especyal merit and preysy^g that they have by cause that they have well kept
their estate of vyrginyte And this is the.v. estate of chastyte and the fyfthe
branch of this tree.

The.vi. branch of ye virtue of vyrgynyte. Ca..Cli
THe.vi. estate that ought to keep the virtue of chastyte / is in the clerks
ordered for to serve in holy church / as ben subdekens / dekens / priests /
prelates / and relygyouse. All the people ben bounden to keep chastyte by many
reasons. First for the order which they have received / which requires to
live holyly / by cause that ye holy sacrament of the mass is so hye and so
holy / that all they that receive it be bounden to keep chastyte for they may
not marye after that they have promised too holy church For they be appropred
to serve god in his church / and at his altar / and treaten and touchen with
their hands the thing sayntyfyed as the vessels hallowed the chalyce and
corporas. And that which is gretter without comparyson the body of Ihesu christ
which ye priest sacreth and too them it byhoueth to give it to other. Now
then owen they to be much clean and live right holyly / for reason of the
hye lord to whom they serve / that is the saint of all saints and lord of
all lords / which hates all ordure of sin / whereof he him self says. Be
ye holy as I am holy / for such a lord such meyney / for the reason of the
place wherein they serve. This is the church which is dedycate too serve god.
It is founden that emonge the paynyms and the sarasyns / ye priests of their
law that seruen in the temple kepen chastyte / and ben divided and deceuerd
fro the other by cause they should not lose their chastyte. Much more ought to
be clean without romparyson and more chaste ye prestes of crystyante / that
seruen to god in his temple which is saint fyed dedycate / and approved to
serve god / yet ought they to be more holy and clean by cause they serve at ye
table of god of his cup and of his mete. The table of god is the auter. The
cup is ye chalyce / his bread and wyn is his propre body and his propre
blood. Much owen to be holy all they that such service done to god / whereof
saint Poule says that it byhoueth that a bishop and the other mynystres of
holy church be chaste and without sin. This virtue of chastyte was sygnefyed
in the old law there where god commanded to them that ought to ete the lamb
without spotte / which sygnefyed the body of our lord Ihesu christ they
should be gyrde on they raynes. The gyrdle of the mynystres of holy church
owen to be gyrde / that is with the virtue of chastyte which restrayneth and
quenches the delytes and the vices of the flesh wherefore god commanded to
Aaron which was priest and bishop of the law / that he and al his sons
should be cladde with synnen clothes of chastyte / and gyrde above with / white
gyrdylles of lynnen. Aaron and the children that serueden in the tabernacle
sygnefyen the mynystres of holy church / which owen to be cladde with lynnen
roobes of chastyte / which is sygnefyed by the white lynnen. For like as the
ly^nen towayl tofore it be well white it must be beten and often wasshen. In
like wise byhoueth it the flessh to be beten and corrected by penance / and
often wasshe his heart and his conscience by very confession and repentance to
the end that they might have the white cote of chastyte / but this cote ought to
have above ye white gyrdle. That is to say yt chastyte ought to be straytly
kept / and strayned by abstynence as much as reason may suffer which is ye
boucle of this gyrdle. Otherwise may it be said that ye lynnen cote sygnefieth
chastyte of heart. The gyrdle above sygnefyeth chastyte of body. which owes to
restrain ye desires and the will of the flesh for to keep the chastyte of
ye soul. This same is sygnefyed to us in the aube and in the gyrdle that the
mynystres of holy church use to clothe them when they will say mass. For they
owen to be chaste within their heart and without in the body. Much foul is the
spotte of sin. and specially of lecherye in ye mynystres of holy church. For
they ought to be ye eyes of holy church as says ye scripture. For like as ye
eyes aduysen the body and shown to him the way by which he ought to goo
Right so in likewise owen the prelates and all the other mynystres of holy
church to show ye way of health to other. Then also as the spotte of the
sin of lechery is more foul in them tha^ in other persons. Also as the
spotte that is in the eyes is more foul and grievous than in the other members
of the body. Right so is the spotte of the sin of lecherye more foul and
more peryllous in clerks / in prelates in relygyous and in all other people of
the church than in other folk. Also all the people of holy church ben or owen
to be myrrour and exaumple there wherein the lay people ought to look in for to
take good doctrine in good example but when the myrrour is rusty and foul men
may well se the spotte and thordure that is in the myrrour. But he that in such
a myrrour looks / sees not the spotte that is in him self ne what is in ye
myrrour which so is foul and troubled. But when the myrrour is well clear and
clean then may one well see him self therein and know his spots. Also when
the prelate is of good life and of good fame / than ought one to take example of
good life. Also Also the people of holy church ought too be pure and clean of
all fylthe of sin / and ought to be much holy / by cause they cleanse and
sayntefye and halowe other. For like as says Saint Gregorye. The hand that is
foul and fylthy may not well take away the fylthe fro other And ye scripture
says he that is foul may not cleanse another That is to understand as
touching his merit / for ye sacrament that is made and mynystred by the hand
of an evil mynystre is of no less value to him ne werse ne he is no less
mighty ne virtuous to halowe them that receive it / than if they should
receive it by the hand of a good mynystre For ye evil of the mynystre
appayreth not ye sacrament / ne his bounte neither / and also amend it not.
But always the evil of the mynystre may empayre other people by evil example /
and also he may by his bounte edefye them by example of good life / and
therefore they that sayntefye and cleanse other / in that they mynystre the
sacraments of holy church ought to be more holy and more clean than the
other. For if they be evil they shall be more punysshed than the other. This is
the syxthe estate in which ought to be kept the virtue of chastyte.

The seventh estate of ye virtue of chasttyte. Ca..Cliii.
THe seventh estate in which ought to be kept the virtue of chastyte of heart
and of body / is the estate of relygyon For they that been in that state have
promised to god and auowed yt they shall live chastely. Then they be holden and
bounden by such auowe yt they may never marye after that they ben professed.
And if they ma^rye after yt they be professyd the marriage shall be none. And
therefore ought they to set great pain and dylygence in keeping well their
chastyte / and for their estate / which is ye state of holiness and of
perfeccyon. For of so much as ye state is more holy of so much is the sin
of them more great and more foul. And also as the spotte is more great and
foul and more apparaunt in a white robe than in another cloth. And who falls
fro most hye hurts him most grievously / and for to vaynquysshe their
aduersarye that is the devil / which much payneth him to tempte / and to
make fall in to sin them of relygyon / and more he Ioyeth when he may
overcome one of relygyon / than many of other people. For like as the au^gellys
of heaven have great Joy of the synnar when he repents him and does penance
and confession of his sins. Right so emoyeth the devil when they may overcome
a good man and make him to fall in to sin And when he is in great estate and
parfyght so much has the fend more Joy when he may deceive him / like as
the fyssher has more great Joy to take the great fysshes that the small. We
read in the book of the lives of faders that an holy man recounted how he was
bycomen a monk / and said that he had be sone of a paynem sarazyn which was
priest of thydolles. And wha^ he was a child on a time when he entered into the
temple with his fader / he hid him / and there he saw a great devil that
satte in a chayer and many deuylles about him. And then came one of his
princes and adoured him Then he that Satte in the trone demanded him fro
whens he came / and he answerede and said unto is lord that he Came from the
earth / and that he had moeued and purchaced many wars and many euylles so
that much people were deed and much blood shed. The master devil demanded
of him in how long time he had done this / and he ansuerd in.xxx. days / and
the master said have thou be so long time out for to do so lyte. Then he
commanded anon that he should be beten and evil treated. After him came
another devil which adoured him as did the first and the master demanded
him fro whens he came / and he answered that he came fro the sea / where he had
made many great tempests by which many ships were broken / and much people
drowned. The master asked of hy^ in how long time he had done it / he ansuerd
in twenty days. Anon the maystre commanded that he should be beten as that
other was tofore / by cause he had no no more harm in so long time. After came
the third devil of whom the maystre asked fro whens he came and he said that
he came fro a cite / where as he had been and meued strife and debate and had
purchaced medlynges that much people were slain / and also he had slain the
husbonde of a wedding. The master devil asked him in how long time he had
done it / and he ansuerd in.x. days. Then he commanded that he also should
be beten. At last came another devil which adoured the maystre devil / ye
prince of ye deuylles demanded of hy^ fro whens come you / he ansuerd yt he
came fro an hermyte / where he had abyden.xl. year for to te^pte hy^ which was
a monk in ye sy^ne of lecherye / and he had so much labored yt nyt he had
ourcomen hy^ and had made him to fall in ye sy^ne of lecherye. Then the
maystre devil in braced and kyssed him / and set a crown on his heed / and
made him to sytte by him / and said yt he had done a great thing and a great
prowess. Now said the good man the monk that he had seen this and herd it
and thought that it was a great thing to be a monk and for this cause and
vysyon he was bycom christian and a monk In these words a foresaid may appyere
that the deuylles have great Joy when they may make a man of relygyon to
fall in to sin for after that a man is in relygyon he is like to him that is
entered into a field of batayl for to fight against the devil and all his
temptacyons / when our Lord would be tempted of the devil he went in to
deserte. For the deserte of relygyon is a field of temptacyon. Relygyon is
called deserte. For like as deserte is a place sharp and dry and far fro
people So ought to be the state of relygyo^ sharp and of holy and parfyght life
which is a strong help and a strong armure against the fendes of hell.
Sharpnes of penance is the remedy against lecherye. For who that will quench
the fire of lecherye in him self he out to take a way and withdraw fro him all the flesshly delytes eases / and soulaces of this world. For all relygyouse
people ought to take away and cut fro his flesh and fro al his body al
delytes and worldly eases by fastings / by wakynges by devout wepynges by
disciplynes and by other penau^ces. Else the fire of lecherye may not well be
quenched / who that will take a cite or a castle he ought as much as he may to
take a way and wythdrawe fro it all the vytaylles / al metes / and the water
for to enfamysshe the^. For after that the castle is infamyned and all vytaylle
is take fro it.

It may not long be holdem ne kept against his aduersarye. Right so the castle
of the belly / which is the fortress of the flesh / may not hold against the
spyryte when it is enfamyned by fastings / by abstynences and by other
penaunces. Also the estate of relygyon ought too be withdrawn fro the world
that they that been in such estate ne feel ne retche no thing of worldly
things / for they ought to be deed to the world. and live with god as says
saint Poule. For like as he that is deed bodyly has lost all his wits
bodyly / as seeing / speaking / tastynge herynge and smelling. Right so owen
the relygyouse to be deed as to the world that they feel nothing that
apperteyneth to sin / so that they may verily say ye word that saint Poule
thappostle says of him self. For world said he is crucyfyed to me / and I to
the world. Thappostle would say that like as the world held him for foul
and for abhomynable like as one were hanged. Right so had he the world for
foul and for abhomynable / as to him that is hanged or crucyfyed for his
trespace. In like wise does he that is in such estate does ^lee the world
and hate it. That is to say the couetyse and shrewdness of the world / that
he feel no thing by love ne by desire / so that his conuersacyon be in heaven
/ as saint Poule says of him self / and of them that been in the state of
perfeccyon Our conuersacyon is in heaven. For if the body is in earth the heart
is in heaven by love and by desire. A good relygyouse person ought to have no
propre in earth / but he ought to make his tresour in heaven / like as says our
lord in the gospel. If thou says he wylt be perfyght / go and selle all that
thou have and give it to poor. And thou shall have thy tresour in heaven which
never shall faylle. The tresoure of a relygyouse man is very wylfull pouerte.
For the very pouerte of the spyryte and of will is the money of which the
royalme of heaven is bought / whereof our lord Ihesu Christ says in the
gospel. Blessed be the poor of spyryte / for the realm of heaven is theyrs
Certain who that is poor of spyryte / that is of ye will of god / he secheth
not in this world only delyces / ne rychesses / ne honors / but put all in
forgetynge. In such wise ought to do good relygyous people / that will mou^te
up into the mountain of perfeccyon. Whereof the au^gelles said to Loath when he
was gone out of the cite of Sodom / rest ne tarry not thou nyghe the place
that you have left / but save thy self in the mountain. For he yt is gone out
of the conuersacyon of the world ought not to hold him nyghe the world by
his will ne by his desire. But ought to withdraw him as nyghe as he may. And
to entende to his health without lokynge backewarde or behind him. That is to say
/ that he set not again his heart to the world. The wife of Loath against ye
commandment of the angel beheld the cite fro whens she came out which
brenned / and therefore she was turned to an image of salt. The wife of Loath
sygnyfyeth them that after they have left the world / and be entered into
relygyon / return again backewarde by will and by desire / which have the
body in the cloister / but the heart in the world. They ben like thymage of
salt / which has but the lykenes and semblaunce of a man / and is hard and
cold as a stone. Right so ben such people cold of the love of god / and
hard without humor of pity and of devotion / and they retche nothing but of
the habyte of their relygyon / and nothing of the obseruau^ces and works. The
image the which was of salt sygnyfyeth in scripture wit and descrecyon. For
in like wise and semblably as salt gives savor unto the mete. Right so ought
every relygyous person to have wit and dyscrecyon in his deeds / and in his
words. This image then of salt ought to give wit and understanding and
example to them that been in relygyon / and after return to that which they
have left. And therefore says our lord in the gospel to his dyscyples.
Remember you of the wife of Loath. That is to say. Behold ye not that which
ye have left for the love of me / leest ye lose ye life of grace / like as the
wife of Loath lost the life of ye body because she looked to the place which
she had left / whereof our lord says in the gospel / who that puts his
hand to the ploughe and looks behy^de him / is not worthy to the kingdom of
heaven. For like as he that ledeth the ploughe sees always tofore hy^ to lead
straight and to conduyte right his plough. Right so ought he to do that
puts his hand to the ploughe of penance or of relygyon always he ought to
have ye eyes of his heart tofore. That is to say his understanding and his will
to that which is tofore him / and not behind. That is the goods perdurable
which ought to be tofore ye heart and not to the goods temporell / which
ought to be behind. Thus did saint Poule which said that he had forgoten
that which was behind him. That is ye world and all the couetyse of the
world which he praised at naught. And went always tofore him. For he had always
his entencyon and his desires to god. But many men of relygyon sets the
ploughe tofore the eyes. For many folk there ben and that is their damage / yt
more secheth and frequenteth the things bodily and worldly than the things
spyrytuell or goostly. They put that tofore which should be behind / that been
the goods temporal tofore the goods perdurable / and spyrytuell. Such
relygyous persons ben in much great peril of their da^pnacyon. For they have
naught but the habyte of their relygyon. By the example of Saint Poule / the
good relygyouse persons forgete the world / and leave it byhynde them / and
the goods perdurable they have tofore their eyes / and gone tofore always fro
virtue to virtue / till they come to the montayne of Joy perdurable / where
they shall see god clearly / and shall love him perfyghtly and shall adoure him
perdurably. This is the beneurte or ye gift of understanding / which ledeth
them that kepen clennesse of heart and of body / like as we have showed before.
And therefore says our lord Ihesu christ in the gospel / that blessed ben
they that been clean of heart. For they shall see god. This blessing begins
here / for they ben purged fro derknesses of error / as to the understanding
/ and fro the spots of sin / as to the will / and therefore they see god by
faith enlumyned of clerenes / which comes of the gift of understanding by
which a man knows his creator / and all that apperteyneth to the health of
his soul / without slydinge / without doubting / and without wauerynge in the
faith of Ihesu Christ where they be so Joined and fermly founded / that they
may not depart them for death ne for to suffer any tormente what someuer it
be. And therefore ben blessed they that be clean of heart in this mortal life.
For they have the eyes of the heart / the understanding and the will so clear
and so clean that they see god and believe him by faith ferme and certain like
as we have said tofore. whereof our Lord said to saint Thomas / by cause thou
have seen me / thou have byleued me. But they ben blessed that have not seen me
bodyly / and have byleued me certeynly / but this blessing shall be perfyght in
ye life perdurable / where he yt is clean of heart which here sees him by faith
/ yt is always derkly. There in his glory shall se him face to face all clearly
as says saint Poule. That is the blyssynge to aungelles and to saints which
se him in his precious vysage / to know one god in three persons / to behold
clearly in that myroure where all things shyneth / aungelles and all ye
saints looks therein / and meruayleth them / and takes there their glory /
and never may they be full for to look therein. For there is all beauty / all
bounte / all swetnes / and fou^tayne of life pardurable / and all that which
heart may will and desire. But yet I shall say a little. For like as says the
scripture. The eyes mortal may not behold ne ere here ne heart of man think
/ what that god has arrayed and made ready to his friends / that loves /
serves / and keep his commandments / and yt keep the^ from sin. Whereof
saint Ancelme says. Soul says he lift up thyn entendement there above / and
think as much as thou may what well / how great and how much delectable is
that good which conteyneth in himself the Joy and the delight of all gods.
And not such Joy and such delight as is founden in creatures / but as much
more Joy / as the creatoure and maker is more great and more worthy / and more
excellent / than his creatures. O says he thou faytour thou man that go so
folyly for to seche diverse goods / to thy soul and to thy body. Love thou and
seche one good / wherein ben all gods / and he shall suffysethe. For the good
that god has granted and given to his friends / that is him self ye which
is the sovereign good of whom comes and sourdeth all other goods / as stremes
/ ye which yssueth out of the quycke fountain. Certainly right blyssed shall
he be says saint Austyn / the which without vylonye shall se the vysage
dyscouered and the glory of god / and shall be transformed in to thymage of
glory where as he shall see god as he is / ye which sight is glory and crown
without end / and all the reward and merit of saints. This shall be al ye
good of man. This says master hughe of saint vyctor. The man that made all
and formed. For therefore would god by come man / which made in himself al men
blessed in body and in soul / by cause that the man saw him with the eyes
with his body in humanite. And that the soul saw him in his deyte so that he
found swetnes and delight in his creator and maker / within and without within
his deyte and with out in his humanyte. This shall be the Joy of every
creature his Joy his delight and life perdurable of his blessed vysyon. That is
the blessing / that they attend which keep clennes and chastyte of heart and
of body.

Of the yefte of sapyence. Ca..Cliiii.
THe last yeft the sovereign and the most hye is the yeft of sapience or of
wysedom which is a grace that the holy ghoost gives to the heart contemplatyf
/ by which he is esprysed of the love of god that he desyereth ne secheth none
other thing but to see god / to have him / to delight in him / to love him / to
honor and serve him / and dwell with him. This is the sum of perfeccyon /
and the end of contemplacyon. The gift of understanding of which we have
spoken tofore makes god to be known and the things spyrytuell as by sight
and simple byholdynges. But the gift of sapyence makes to feel and know god
by taste / then sapyence is none other thing but a sauery knowleche / which
is with sauoure and great delight of heart / for otherwise knows not he the wine
yt drynketh it in a fair voyre or glass / if he drink and taste it not and
savor it. Many phylosophres knewen god by scripture and by the creatures /
like as by a myrrour wherein they beheld by reason and by understanding his
might / his beauty / his wit and his bou^te / in that which they see the
creatures that he has made so great so fair and so well ordained. Then they
knew him / by simple byholdynge of understanding and natural reason But they
never felt him by taste of ryt love ne by devotion. Right so ben there many
christian persons / clerks and lay / which well know him by faith and by
scripture / but by cause they have their taste dysordynate by sin / they may
not feel him no more than the seek person may find taste or souour in good
mete. The gift of sapyence which the holy ghoost puts in a perfyght heart
/ purges and cleanses it fro all ordure of sin / and lyfteth up so the
spyryte of a man that he Joins him to god by ardaunt desire of love / so
that he is al with god / there he fyndeth him / there he nouryssheth him /
there he fatteth him / there he delyteth and rests hy^ / and there he
slepeth. There he forgeteth all his trauaylles / all his flesshely desires and
erthely / and him self / so that he remembers no thing but god whom he
loves above all things. This is the last degree of the laddre of perfeccyon
that Jacob saw in his sleep which touched heaven / by which au^gellys mounted
and descended / ye degrees of this laddre ben ye.vii. gifts of ye holy ghoost
/ of which we have spoken tofore / by these.vii. degrees mou^ten ye au^gellys
/ these ben they yt led ye life of au^gellys in earth by purete and clen^esse
of conscience / which have ye heart in heaven by very desire and holy
co^uersacion. When they prouffyte fro virtue to virtue / till they se god
clearly and love him parfytely. But when they be mounted to the last degree /
sometime / behooves it to them to desce^de by humylyte. For of as much as a
good man is more parfyte / of so much he is more humble / and less preyseth
him self. Then is a good man and a perfyte / ought for to be like a tree the
which is charged and laden with fruit. For the more that the tree is charged
and laden with fruit / the more he enclyneth and boweth to the earth. In a
another manner may be vnderstonden that the aungelys descenden for the good men
that led the life of aungelys in earth by their holy life wha^ they be mounted
in to the sovereign degree of contemplacion where the yeft of sapyence led them
so that they be joined to god that they forget all that which is under god for
the great swetensse that the heart feleth. Which is so rauysshed in god which
passes all other delytes. So that it byhoueth them often to descend froo this
swetenes and such rest and fro such delight that they feel of the comfort of
god which have give them to souke in such sweet contemplacion / where they yt
ben perfyte ought to entende. Another reason there is whereof it byhoueth too
descend froo the hye degree of contemplacion where the spyryte of sapience has
led hy^. For the corrupsyon of ye flesh of the body of the creature humayne
is so great that the spyryte may not in this mortal life long abide in so hye
estate of contemplacion ne feel that great sweetness / which passes all the
great delytes the which may be felt in this world / like as they know
which have proved it / whereof the countrepoys of the flesh is so heavy / that
it draws down the spyryte will it or nyll it. And therefore this great
sweetness that the heart contemplatyf feleth by the gift of sapyence in this
mortal life / ne is but as a little taste by which one may assauour and feel
how god is sweet and sauoury. But when he shall come to that great tavern /
where the tonne is / and shall be set a broche / that is in the life
pardurable / there where god of peace / of love / of Joy of solace / and of all
swetnes shall be abandoned to every person in such wise / that all shall be
filled / like as Dauyd says in his psaulter. For all the desires of the heart
shall be accomplysshed when god shall make dyscende upon his friends a flode of
peace / like as says the prophet / whereof they shall so much drink / that
they shall be all drunk. Of this dronkenesse speaks Dauyd in his psaulter and
says thus. Of the glory of paradyse shall all be dronken says ye prophet to
god / of the great plant that is in your house. And ye shall give them drink
of your swetenes and of your delyces. For with you is ye fountain of the life
pardurable / ye which fails not. That is god him self which is the
fountain of life yt may not deye / whereof sourdeth and descends upon all ye
saints that been and shall be in heaven a flode of Joy / of delight and of peace /
so great / that all they that drynketh thereof ben all dronken. That is the peace
and the blyssy^ge that shall be in the world that is to come. For which Joy
to win and to have / one ought to live sobrely in this world as says saint
Austyn. For none ne drynketh in this river / ne is not drunk of the plant of
Joy but if he keep sobrenes. This is the virtue that the gift of sapye^ce
planteth in the heart / against the outrage of glotony. For sapyence ensygneth
sobrenesse as Salamo^ says / which says in this wise. Sobrenes is a tree
much precious and good / for it keeps the health of the soul and of the body
as scripture says / and of the oultrage of glotonnye / of etynge / of
drinking comen many maladyes and of time the death. For of ouermoche etynge and
drinking deyen many folk and often the death takes them sodeynlye / like as
one takes the fysshe with an hoke / that is too say the morsel in the mouth.
This virtue of sobrenes ought one to keep above al things. For the goods that
it does to him that well keeps it. First sobrenes keeps to reason and to
understanding his fredome and fraunchyse / so that it puts and takes away
dronkenesse. For he that is dronken is so surprysed of wine / that he leseth
reason and understanding and is like as he were drowned in ale or wine. And
when he weneth to drink the wine / the wine drynketh him The second good that
sobrenes does / is that it delyuerth a man fro over foull seruytude / that is
fro the seruytude of the belly. For the glotons and they that been oultragous of
wine and metes maken of their belly their god as says Saint Poule. Certainly he
puts himself in great fylthe / and in foul seruytude / that serves so
foul a lord as is his belly / out of which may no thing issue but fylthe and
stynkynge ordure. But sobrenes keeps a man in his seygnorye. For the spyryte
ought to have seynorye upon the body. And the body ought to serve the soul /
like as the chambryere yt serves her maystresse / and sobrete keeps this
order. The third good that sobrenes does / is that he keep well the yate of
the castle against the oost of the devil / that is the mouth which is
maystre yate of ye castle of ye heart / which ye devil asseylleth and makes
war to us as much as he may But sobrenes deffendeth the yate and thentre /
yt is ye mouth. And wha^ ye yate of ye mouth is open / thoost of sy^nes entren
lightly. And for naught fyghteth he against other sins yt reteyneth not his
tongue / who has this virtue of sobrenes he has the lordshyp of his body /
like as man maystryeth the horse by ye bridle. Sobrenes has the first bataylle
in thoost of the virtues and keeps and deffendeth the other virtues /
wherewith ye devil tempted first Adam our first fader and Eve our first mother
that was toward the mouth that they should ete of ye fruit which god had
deffended / and the devil overcame them when they consentyd to the temptacyon.
For to keep sobrenes nature enseygneth us and ye holy scripture Nature techeth
us. Foremonge beestes a man has the least mouth after his dody. Also a man
has his members double / as two eyes / two eres / but he has but one mouth /
and therefore nature techeth us that one ought to ete and drink lytyl and
sobrely. For nature is sustained with little mete / and by ouermoche mete is
often beten down. The holy scripture enseygneth sobrenes in many manners by many
examples / like as they may see that connen understand scripture / and
byholden the lives of saints. Also every creature techeth to us sobrenes. For
in all nature god has set a right mesure which always holds the moyen
between ouermoche and over little / after that which reason enlumyneth and
enseygneth by the grace of god. For in these temporal goods / that which is
ouermoche to one / is little to another / yt which should be oultrage to a
poor man should be little oftymes to a rich man / but sobrenes and
atte^perau^ce setten oueral mesure. As well in spyrytuel goods as in fastings
in wakynges and in other works of virtues / which been done and made for the
Love of god And For the health of the Soul as much as. Reason will. The virtue
of attemperaunce is of sobrenes. This virtue keeps mesure reasonable / not
only in etynge and drinking but in all virtues / like as says Saint Bernard.
For this virtue sets all thoughts and al ye menynges of the heart / and all
the wits of the body under the lordshyp of right reason / as says Tullyus
the wise man / so that reason enlumyned by gift of sapyence / holds in pees
the lordshyp of the heart and of the body. And this is the end and thentencyon
of all virtues that the heart and the body be well ordained to god / so that
god only be lord and souerayn in such manner that all be in his obedyence.
And this makes sobre the love of god which puts him with all the heart to
the will of god whereof Saint Austyn says / that the virtue of attemperaunce and
of sobrenes is a love which keeps him in entyernesse without corrupcyon / and
withdraws us fro the love of the word / which troubles the heart and
puts it to disease / and takes fro hy^ right knowlech of god and of him
self / like as a person sees not clearly in water troubled. But the love of
god which is pure and clean / and is departed fro all erthely love and fro
carnal affection sets ye heart in pease. For it sets it in his propre
place. That is in god / there he rests / there he is in pees. Ne he has no
pees ne Joy ne rest but in god whereof our lord says in ye gospel / ye shall
be oppressed in this world / but in me ye shall find pees / and saint Austyn
said to god / lord mine heart may not be in pees / unto the time it rest in ye
/ such love comes not of an erthly heart / ne of ye maryce of this world but
it descends fro yt hye roche upon which it set and founded ye great cite
of heaven and of holy church / yt is Ihesu christ / which al is set and
founded fermly by true faith that been the holy hertes of good men. Fro this hye
roche descends that fountain of love in to the heart that is well purged and
taken away fro the love of the world This well is so clear that he knows
him self and his maker / like as one sees hy^ self in a fountain well clear
and clean / upon this fountain he rests and the heart ^ast by / after the
trauayll of good works. So as we read of our lord Ihesu christ / that when he
had so much gone that he was weary / he sat down and ^ested him upon the
well. This is the fountain upon which a good heart that will save him self /
rests him in the love of god. This fountain is so sweet that he that
drynketh thereof forgeteth all other swetenes and all other savor and therefore
it is so sweet and good to drink / for of so much as the fountain feleth
better the earth so much is it more holsom and better to drink. This is the
fountain of wit and of savor. For he that drynketh thereof he knows /
feleth and sauoureth the great swetenes that is in god / and that is ye
souerayn wit of man / to know well his maker / and to love him / dread him /
serve and honor him with all his heart. For without this phylosophye / al
other wit nys but folly. Such wit sets the holy ghoost in the heart /
when he gives the gift of sapyence / which fedeth and nourissheth ye heart
with spyrytuell Joy and makes it drunk with his holy love / yt is ye wit
which the holy ghoost sets in the heart yt is well purged and cleansed fro al
ordure of sin like as tofore is said. This spyrytuell wit yt comes of ye
parfyght love of god makes the heart sobre and attempred in all things by
mesure / so that the heart that is in such estate is in pees like as it may be
in this mortal life. For in this world none may live without tournoyes and
bataylle of temptacyon / which god sends for to preue his knights / and by
cause they can use ye arms of virtue. For other wise they might not be good
knights / if they were not preued how they can resyste to temptacyons. And men
be woned to make tournoyes in time of pease / but wha^ a good knight has
ouercome^ ye tournoye / he retorneth home to his house / and there he rests
hy^ at his ease. Right so does ye good heart when he has well foughten and
ouercomen the tournoye of temptacyons and well strongly resysted them. Then he
comes ageyn to him self and rests in god / which comfort him after his
trauayl which he has resysted against ye sins / so yt he forgeteth there al
his trauaylle / and thinks on no thing but on god in whom he fyndeth all yt
he desires. This is the fruit yt the tree of sobrenes bears which comes of
the gift of sapyence / like as I have showed tofore. Sobrenes nys none other
thing / but to keep right mesure in all things / and in.vii. manners ought a
person to keep mesure / which ben like to seven degrees by which grows and
prouffyteth the tree of sobrenesse.

Of ye first degree of sobrenes and of mesure. Ca..Clv.
THe first degree of sobrenes is that a man ought to set mesure in his
understanding. Specially in the points of the artycles of the faith / he
passes me sure which will seche reason natural / in that which is above
reason / and above the understanding of a man / as done the heretykes and
myscreau^tes which will mesure their faith after their understanding but they
ought to mesure rheyr understanding and reason / unto the mesure of the faith
/ as done good christian men. Therefore says saint poule / yt one should not be
wise more tha^ faith bears but by sobrenes after the mesure of the faith yt
god has given to us / and Salamon says to his sone / fair sone says he put
in thy wit measure / that is to say / be thou not of thyn own propre wit so
fyxed in thy presumpcyon / but that thou bow and enclyne the for to believe in
good council / and thou leave thyn own wit for to obey to him yt is more
wise than you art / and in especyall in the artycles of the faith a man ought
to leave his own wit and his understanding to bow and enclyne / and also
put him self in service of the faith / as says saint Poule / and not for to
enserche ne inquire natural reason there where is none / as does the
malancolyous men which ben like to him yt secheth muskles among frosshes / or
yt seeks here in ye egg / or under ye hyde.

The.ii. degree of sobrenes and of mesure. Ca. C.lvi.
THe second degree of sobrenes and of mesure / is ye one put mesure in
thappetyte / and in the desire of his will so that he let not the rain of ye
bridle over much at large yt he run not after the desire of his flesh / ne
to the couetise of the world whereof the wise man says in the scripture. Ne
ensyewe not says he thy couetyses ne the desires of thy body / ne of thy
flesh and beware / and keep the that thou accomplysshe not thy will. For if
you do to thyn heart his desires you shalt make Joy to the fendes of hell
like as he that does to his aduersarye a gaynst whom he must fight when he
yeldeth him vaynquysshed to him he yeldeth hy^ over comen of ye devil yt
consents to evil desires / and there fore says saint Peter the appostle. I
conioure you as strangers and pilgrims / that ye make abstynence of flesshely
desires / and keep you well / for they make their battle / and war against
the soul. He that is a pilgrim and a stranger is out of his land and
country. And is in the country where as be many thieves and robbers yt espyeth
the pilgrims and lies in a wait in ye ways wherefore he ought to keep him
well that he fall not in their hondes / and think how he may go surely. All
ye good men in this world ben strangers and pylgryms They be strangers / for
they be out of their country / that is heaven / which is ye heritage to good
men. They be pylgryms / for they thy^ke not but to perform their Iourneys /
till they come to their heritage / that is the cite of heaven / which the good
pilgrims seek as says saint Poule / which have not / ne entende not / ne
will not have any heritage in this world. Such pilgryms as will goo surely /
se that they put them self in good company / and in sure conduyte. The good
company which ledeth the right way and conduyteth surely is faith and love.
Faith shows the way to pilgrims. And love bears him so that the way greueth
him not or little / who that has such company has no care ne retcheth of
thieves which awayteth the ways. They ben the deuylles which takes and
robs all them that gooth not in such company. Tho ben they that will here
done the will of their body / and accomplysshe their desires / and bry^geth them
self in the net of the deuylles of hell. Faith and the love of our lord
Ihesu christ withdraws the heart fro evil thoughts and from evil desires
that they consent not thereto / like as one holds the hawke by the gesses / to
the end that he fle not at his will. And if he be not retayred by the gesses of
faith and love / he flees peryllously / so that he perysshe and falls often in
ye net of the fouler of hell / that is the devil which ne secheth ne
entendeth but for to take good men. Therefore the good men and wise ought to
restrain their will and their evil desires / by sobrenes and attemprau^ce /
whereof the wise Seneke says / if thou wylt get the virtue of sobrenes and of
attempraunce / thou must put fro the and take away thy desires / and set a
bridle before thy couetyses. For like as a man holds an horse by the bridle
that he go not at his will. Right so ought one to retain his heart / his
desires / and his will / by the bridle of sobrenesse and of attemperaunce / that
he abandone him not ne give himself all over to the vanyte and to ye couetyse
of the world.

The third degree of sobrenes and of the virtue of attemperaunce. Ca. C.lvii
THe third degree of the virtue of sobrenes / and of atte^prau^ce is to set
and keep mesure in words / whereof Salamon says / yt the wise and well
atte^pred mesureth his word. As saint Iherom says yt by ye points of words
is ye life porued. That is to say / after ye words may one know ye wit and
the folly of a man / like as an hog or a swyne is known by ye tongue / if he be
hole or mesell. And therefore says ye wise man in ye scripture / yt the words
of a wise man be peysed in a balaunce / that is to say / yt a wise man ought to
peyse his words in the balaunce of reason / and of dyscrescyon / yt he be not
reprehended. There ben some people that may not be still ne keep them fro
speaking / be it true or be it lesynge / which ben like to a water mylle
without skluys / that always tourneth after the course of ye water. For they have
as many words as water at mylle. But the wise men set the skluis of dyscrecyon
for to retain the water fro folysshe words that they pass not ye mylle of ye
tongue. And therefore says the wise man in the scripture. Retain thy words
in the skluys of discrecion. For like as says salamon. who suffers ye water
to have his course at will it is often cause of plee and of strife and of many
euyllys yt comen of an evil tongue / like as I have said tofore in in the
traytye of vices / where as I have spoken of the sin of the tongue. Therefore
says the wise man in scripture. Put says he thy words in ye balaunce / and
a good brydell and good keeper to thy mouth. And take heed that thou fall not
by thy tongue tofore thy enemies which lain in a wait for to espy the who
that peyseth not his words in the balaunce of discrescyon / and reteyneth not
his tongue by the brydel of reason / which owes to withdraw his tongue fro
folysshe words he falls lightly in to the hands of his enemies. They ben
the deuylles of hell which every day and night awayteth and espyeth us / when
thenemyes which warreth the castle find the gate open / they enter lightly.
Right so the deuylles which warreth the castle of the heart / when that they
find the gate open that is the mouth they do take lightly the castle. And
therefore says Dauyd in the plaulter. I have set good guard unto my mouth
against mine ennemy / that is against the devil The guard of my mouth is reason
and dyscrescyon / the which examyn the words tofore that they issue out of
the mouth. This is the balaunce of the wise word as I have said tofore. Now
ought the word to be peysed tofore that it be spoken. And it ought to be
known that truth holds the word right. Truth accords ye entencyon of
the heart / and the word of the mouth to gydre / so that the mouth say no
thing but truth / like as it is in the heart. This brau^che ought not to
hang on the right side ne on the lift. For neither for love pryue / ne for
prouffyte temporal / ne for hate of other / ought not to be left to say the
truth / there as it ought to be said and need is. Ne lesynge ne falsenesse
ought not to be said for no person.

Of ye.iiii. degree of sobrenes and of mesure. Ca..Clviii.
Like as a person ought to keep mesure in speaking. Right so ought he to keep
mesure in herynge and herkenynge. For as much may one sin in evil herynge /
as in evil speaking. Then he that gladly hereth to speak evil of a another /
is parteyner and fellow of the sin of him that says it. For none ought to
say gladly evil of another / specially to a great man / if he wene that it
pleseth to him that hereth it / whereof an holy man says / that there should be
none myssayer ne evil speker / if oone would here him. These great and hye
lords ought well to keep them and take heed what they here and what they
believe / for they find but few that tell them truth. And flateryes and
lesynge ben great chepe in their courts. The grettest derthe that is about
these great lordts is of veryte and of truth / and therefore ben they often
deceived. For they here gladly and by leven lightly that which pleases them.
Seneke says that there lacks no thing to great estates and unto great
lords but true spekars / and say^s of truth. For of liars they have great
plente. A man ought to have his eres open / for to here gladly ye good words /
which auayllen and prouffyten to ye health of the soul. And a man ought to
have his eres closed and stopped to lewd and folysshe words which may noye
and grieve / and may not help / whereof the wise man says in the scripture.
Stop thyn eres with thorns / and herkene not the evil tongue. The evil
tongue is the tongue of the serpent of hell which the evil sayers bear and
enuenymeth him that hereth them. Against such tongues one ought too stop his
eres with thorns of the dread of our lord / or of the thorns / of which our
lord was crowned in remenbrau^ce of his passion / they should not gladly here
ye evil sayers / ne the flaterers / ne lewd words ne dyshonest. In another
manner may this word be vnderstonden. Stop thyn eres with thorns. The thorns
that prycketh / sygnefyen hard words / by which one ought to repreue the
evil sayers / and show to them that they will not gladly here them. There is a
serpent which is called in latin aspis which is of such nature that he
stops one of his eres with the earth. And that other ere he stops with
his taylle to ye end that he here not thenchauntour. This serpent enseygneth
us a great wisdom / that we should not here thenchau^tour. That is the
flaterer / the liar / and evil sayers which enchaunte often ye rich men / how
that would stop one of his eerys with earth / and that other with his taylle
/ he should not retche to be enchaunted of the devil / ne of evil tongues. He
stops one of his eeres with earth / that thinks that he is of the earth /
and to the earth shall return. And thus a man remembers his Infyrmy^ (...)
^ylete wherefore he ought to humble himself and nothing praise. That other ere
he ought to stop with his tail (...) remembrance of death which he ought much
to fere and dread / who that thus could and would stop his eres ^e would not
gladly here ne remember / ne say / ne harken / words that should dysplease god
Thus shall he be well mesured in herynge in this fourth degree of sobrenes and
of attemperaunce.

The.v. degree of sobrenes and of mesure. Ca. C.lix
THe.v. degree of ye virtue of sobrenes / is to keep mesure in habyte in
vestymentes / and in precious robes where a man or woman passes often mesure /
and does great outrage. And because yt the making of them is over curyous /
or over proud / or over great and excessyf of dyspences it is great sy^ne
oftymes and causes many other to do sy^ne / and in such things one ought to
keep mesure. For if over precious and over curyous array were not sy^ne / our
lord would not have spoken so hardly in the gospel / against ye evil rich man
yt clad him so proudly with soft byse and precious purple. And truly he is much
a fool / and a child of wit yt of a gown / robe / or what someuer precious
clothyng it be / yt is proud thereof / for there is none of what so hye estate
he be / but yt he is cladde and arrayed of deed bestes and for to consider well
/ it is all but vanytee and fylth / and all becomes stynkynge ordure /
Certainly he or she should well be holden for a fool the which would be proud
for to bear the habyte or the vesture the which should not be but as a sign /
and a memoryall of the shame of his fader / and of his sin. This is ye usage
(...) / which was never found but for ye sin of ^^am our first fader / and
of Eve our first mother / for tog^^er their confusyon and ours / when we see a
byere (...) a deed corpse / which is couerd and apparaylled above. It is a
sign that there is within a deed body. Right so it happeth oftymes yt under
these fair rebes / the soul is deed by sin. Specially in them that gloryfye
them and ben proud If the pecocke be proud of his taylle / or the cock of
his creste / it is no meruaylle / for nature has given it to the^ and they do
after their nature. But a man or a woman that has wit and reason / which
knows well that nature has not given to him such a robe or gown he ought
not to be proud of ye arayement of his body / which is not but of deed
beestes / or of that which comes fro the earth / ne also of ye queyntyse or
parementes that be in his heed. Therefore says the wise man in the scripture.
Ne gloryfy yt not in fair robes. And saint Poule says that the women ought to
array them with sobrenes and mesure. That is to say by mesure without
outtrage / after that the state of the person requires / certeynly it is not
without oultrage wha^ a person has for his body so many gowns and robes
that many poor men might be sustained of the surplus and of it which is
ouermoche / yet if they were given at ye last for gods love / it should be
somewhat / but they be given to rybauldes which is so great sin. Therefore
ought to be kept in such things mesure and good ordenaunce / after that /
that the state of the person requires / as I have said tofore.

The fyfthe degree of the virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce. Ca. C.lx.
THe syxt degree of sobrenes and of attemperaunce is yt eueriche keep mesure in
good manner where of Senecke says / y^ thou art sobre or attemporate take
good head yt the moeuynges of thyn heart and of thy body be not foul ne
disauenaunte. For of ye dysordynau^ce of the heart comes the dysordynaunce of
the body / some be so chyldysshe and of so nyce manner that they make the^
self to be holden for a fool. It appertains to a man of of value which is
in great and hye estate / yt he be well ordained and well amesured in all his
deeds and all his sayenges and of fair and good countenance tofore all people
so that none take evil example of him / and that they be not holden for a fool
For as a philosopher says. A child of age: and a child of wit and of manners
ben al one and the scripture says that a child of an hundred year shall be
cursed. That is to say that he that is of great age / and lives as a child
shall be cursed. Whereof saint Poule says of him self when I was child I
did as a child but when I came to the age of a perfeyte man I left my
chyldehode. For who that holds a man of age for a child / he holds him for
a fool. And therefore says saint poul. Be not a child of wit / but in
malice be little as a child which has no malice. Now is it then a fair
thing honest and proufytable and honorable / and specially to great men of hy
state to keep mesure reasonable in countenance and in all his governance and
that he be well ordained over al tofore god and tofore the people. And this is
the.vi. degree of this tree.

The seventh degree of the virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce. Ca..Clxi.
THe.vii. degree of the virtue of attemperaunce and of sobrenes is to keep
mesure of ouermoche drinking and etynge / for thoultrage of etynge and
drinking does much harm to the body and to the soul / like as I have said
tofore. Therefore says our lord in the gospel / take good head that your
hertes be not grieved ne charged with glotonnye ne drunkenness. That is to say
that ye do no oultrage of etynge and drinking. Sobrenes keeps mesure in
etynge and drynky^ge that he do none oultrage. Of thoultrages that a person
does in etynge and drinking. I have spoken tofore where as is treated of vices
/ there as I spoke of the sin of glotonnye / to which this virtue of
sobrenes and of attemperaunce whereof I have here spoken is contrary specially
/ whereof I will now no more say. Now have thou herd whereby this tree of
sobrenes and attemperau^ce grows and prouffyteth / and if thou wylt know the
branches of this tree / byholde ye other virtues which be contained in this
book / and thou shalt find oueral this virtue. For as I have said tofore /
this virtue is such that it sets mesure in all things. The virtue of which
I have spoken tofore ben branches of this virtue / for it shows it self in
all the other / wherefore I will set none other branches but the virtues
toforesayd. This tree bears much fair fruit. That is pees of ye heart like
as I have tofore showed. For he yt has this virtue / he has his heart
dysseuered fro the love of the word and is Joined to God by charity / that is
the dear love of god which puts al other things in oblyuyon / which (...)
not ordained to god. And (...) such manner the heart re^^eth in god / where he
has all his comfort and his Joy that he thinks on none other delight. Such
comfort and delight sets the holy ghoost in the her that is parfyte in the
virtue of sobrenes and of attemperaunce / which comes of the gift of
sapyence / like as I have said tofore. Certainly who that might have such pees
of the heart / and feel that he rested in god which is the end and the
accomplysshement and the su^me of all good desires he should be well blessed in
this world and in that other. For then should he win that blessing that god
promyseth in the gospel to them that keep this pees entyerly without brekynge
when he says / blessed be the peasyble. For they shall be called the sons of
god. They be peasyble says saint Austyn that ordeyne and setten all the
moeuynges of the heart / under the seygnorye of right reason of the spyryte /
they ben called by right the sons of god / for they bear the semblaunce of
their fader / which god of pees and of love so says saint Poule. Then pees
and love of god is the thing that most pleases god and makes a man
reasonable to god / and the contrary to the devil which is enemy of god. Also
they ben called the sons of god. For they follow their fader more nyghe than
the other. For pees and love follow the^ more nyghe than any other virtue. Also
they say their hours to their fader Ihesu christ For god came not in to this
world but for to make peace between god and man / between man and angel /
between man and him self / for when he was borne the aungellys songen for the
pease that God had brought in to the earth. Gloria in excelsis deo and in
terra. etc. and and therefore yt ye peasyble people seche no thing / and
purchase but pees as much as they may / to ward^ god / their neighbor / and
themself / they be called spe^yally the sons of god / for they do ye works
of their fader. Therefore then because they be the sons of god / ben they
blyssed in this world by special grace / but this blyssynge shall be blyssed
when they shall be in peasyble possessyon of therytage of god their fader /
that is of the reame of heaven / where they shall be in sure peace / and in
perfyte peace / where all their desires shall be accomplysshed. There shall not
mow be evil / ne sorrow / ne aduersyte / ne defaulte / but haboundaunre of
all goods / and plente of Joy and glory without end. That shall be pees
honorable / pees delectable / pees perdurable / and pees which surmounteth
all wit as says saint Poule. And sith this peace passes all wit / and
sense it passes all words. For heart may not think ne tongue deuyse / near
here the pees and the glory that god kepethe to his friends. and therefore I
can not say that thing that may be suffysau^t to ye lawde and preysy^ge thereof
/ whereof now I will say no more But here I shall fynysshe and make an end of my
matere to the praysynge and lawde of our lord. To whom be given all honor /
which bring us in to his company / there / where as is life perdurable
without end.

AMEN
FINIS
THis book was co^pyled and made at ye request of king Phylyp of France in ye
year of thy^carnacio^ of our lord. M.CC.lxxix. and translated or reduced /
out of Frensshe into english / by me wyllya^ Caxton at request of a
merchant and mercer of London which Instau^tly required me to (...) for the
well of all the^ that shall read or here it / as for a special (...) to
know all vices and branches (...) them / and also an virtues by which well
vnderstonden and seen may dyrecte a parsone to everlasting bliss / which
book is called in frensshe / le lyure Royal that is to say the ^yall book /
or a book for a king. For the holy scripture calls every man a king /
which wisely and parfytly can govern and dyrecte hy^self after virtue / and
this book shows and enseygneth it se bubtylly / so shortly / so perceyuyngly
and so parfyghtly / that for the short comprehencyon of the noble clergy and
of ye right great substance / which is comprysed therein. It may and ought to
be called well by right and quycke reason above all other books in frensshe or
in english / the book ryall or the book for a king / and also by cause that
it was made and ordained at request of that right noble king Phelyp le bele
king of France / ought it to be called Ryall / as tofore is said / which
translacyon or reducynge out of frensshe in to english was achyeued /
fynysshed and accomplysshed the.xiii. day of Septembre in ye year of
thyncarnacyon of our lord. M.CCCCC. and.vii. The.xxii. year of the reygne of
king Henry the seventh.

Here ends the book called the ryoall. Enprynted at London in fletestrete at
the sign of ye son by Wynkyn de word.
printer's or publisher's device wynkyn de word



