When you see me, You know me.

Or the famous Chronicle History of king Henry the eight, with the birth and
virtuous life of Edward Prince of Wales.

As it was played by the high and mighty Prince of Wales his servants.

By SAMVELL ROVVLY, servant to the Prince.

LONDON, Imprinted for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold in Paul's
Church-yeard near Saint Austines gate. 1605.

When you see me, You know me.
Enter the Cardinal with the Ambassadors of France, in all state and
royalty, the Purse and Mace before him. Woolsie. GEntlemen give leave: you
great ambassadors,
From Francis the most christian king of France:
My Lord of Paris, and Lord Boneuet,
Welcome to England: since the king your maistes
Intreates our furtherance to advance his peace;
Giving us titles of high dignity,
As next elect to Romes Suprenacie.
Tell him we have so wrought with English Henry
(Who, as his right hand loves the Cardinal)
That vn-delaid, you shall have audience:
And this day will the king in person sit
To hear your message, and to answer it.

Boneuet. Your grace has done us double courtesy:
For so much does the king our master long,
To have an answer of this emba^^age.
As minutes are thought months till we return.

Paris. And that is the cause his highness moves your grace,
To quick dispatch betwixt the king and him:
And for a quittance of your forwardness,
And hopeful kindness to the crown of France,
Twelve reverent Bishops are sent post to Rome,
Both from his highness and the Emperor,
To move Campeus and the Cardinals,
For your election to the papal throne,
That Woolsies head may year the tripall Crown.

Wool. We thank his highness for remembering us.
And so salute my Lord the Emperor,
Both which (if Woolsie be made Pope of Rome)
Shall be made famous through all Christendom.
How now (...).

Enter Bonner. Bon. Sir William Cumpton from his highness comes,
To do a message to your excellence,

Wool. Delay him a while, and tell him we are busy,
Mean time my Lords you shall with draw your selves,
Our private conference must not be known,
Let all your gentlemen in their best array,
Attend you bravely to king Henry's coutt,
Where we in person presently will meet you:
And doubt not well prevail succ^sfully.

Bone. But has your grace yet moved his highness sister,
For kind acceptance of our Sovereigns love.

Wool. I have, and by the kings means finished it,
And yet it was a task, I tell ye Lords,
That might have be^e imposed to Hercules,
To win a Lady of her spirit and years.
To see her first love cround with silver hairs,
As old king Jews is, that bedrid lies,
Unfit for love, or worldly vanities.

Bon. But it is is countries peace the king respects,

Wol. We think no less, and we have fully wrought it,
The Emperors for^es that were levied,
To invade the frontyres of lo Burgondy,
Are staid in Brabant by the kings command,
The Admiral Hayward that was lately sent,
With threescore ^aile of ships and pinnaces,
To Batter down the towns in Normandy,
I^ by our care for him, called home again:
Then doubt not of a fair success^full end;
Since VVoolsie is esteemd your Soueraines friend.

Par. We thank your excellence, and take our leaves,

Wool. Have ye to court, lie meet ye presently.

Bone. God morrow to your grace.

Exeunt. VVol. God morrow Lords, go call Sir William Cumpt^n in,
We must have narrow eyes, and quick conceit,
To look into these dangero is stratagemes,
I will effect for France, as they for me:
If Woolsie to the Popes high state attain,
The league is kept, or else he^e breakt again,
Enter Bonner and Cumpton* Now good Sir William

Cum. The king my Lord intreates your reverent grace,
There may be had some private conference,
Betwixt his highness and your excellence,
Before he hear the French Ambassadors,
And wills you hasten your repair to him,

Wool. We will attend his highness presently,
Bonner, see all our train be set in readiness,
That in our state and pomp pontificiall,
We may pass on to grace king Henry's court,

Cump. I have a message from the Queen my Lord,
Who much commends, and humbly thanks your grace,
For your exceeding love, and zealous prayers,
By your directions through all England sent:
To invoke for her sound prosperous help,
By heavens fair hand in childbed passions.

Wool. We thank her highness that accepts our love,
In all Cathedral Churches through the land,
Are Masses, Derges, and Prosessions sung:
With prayers to heaven to bless her Majesty,
And send her joy, and quick delivery:
And so Sir William do my duty to her,
Queen Jane was ever kind and courteous,
And always of her subjects honored.

Cump. I take my leave my Lord.
Exit*
Wol. Adieu good knight we will follow presantly,
Now Woolsie work thy wits like gaddes of steel,
And make them pliable to all impressions,
That King and Queen and all may honor thee:
So toild not Caesar in the state of Room,
As Woolsie labors in the affairs of Kings:
As Hanniball with oil did melt the Alps:
To make a passage into Itali^:
So must we bear our high pitched Eminence
To dig for glory in the hearts of men.
Till we have got the papal diadem:
And to this end have I composd this plot,
And made a League between the French and v^
And match their Aged King in holy Marriage,
With Lady Mary Royal Henry's sister:
That he in peace complotting with the Emperor
May plea^ for us within the Courts of Rome:
Wherefore was Alexanders fame so great,
But that he conquered and deposed Kings,
And where does Woolsie fail to follow him,
That thus comman death Kings and Emperors,
Great Englands Lord have I so won with words:
That under culloure of ad^sing him,
I ouerrule both Counsel, Court, and King:
Let him command, but we will execute.
Making our glory to outshine his ^ame
Till we have purchased an eternal name.
Enter Boner. Now Boner, are those proclamations sent
As we directed to the Shriffes of London,
Of certain new devised Articles,
For ordering those brothelles called the Stews?

Bon. They are ready my Lord, and the Shrieue attends for them,

Wol. Dispatch him quickly, and haste after me;
We must attend the Kings high Majesty.

Sound Trumpets, Enter King Harry the Eight, Queen Jane big with Child, the
Cardinal, Charles Brandon Duke of Susfolke, Dudlit, Graye, Compton, the Lady
Marie, The Countess of Salisburie attending on the Queen. King. Charles
Brandon, Dudly, and my good Lord Gray,
Prepare your selves, and be in readines^e,
To entertain these French Ambassadors,
Meet them before our royal Palace Gate:
And so conduct them to our Majesty.
We mean this day to give them Audience.

Dud. Gray, We will my Lord.

Brand. Le tone attend without.
And bring us word when they are coming on:

King. How now Queen Jane (Mother of God) my love
Thou will never be able to sit half this time:
Ladies, I fear shele wake ye, yerbe long,
Me thinks she bears her burden veric heavily,
And yet good sister and my honored Lords,
If this fair hour exceed not her expect.
And pass the callender of her accounts,
She will hear this Embassage, Jane will thou nor

Q: Jane, Yes my dear Lord, I cannot leave your sight.
So long as life retains this Mantion?
In whose sweet looks bright soueraigntyes in Thronde,
That make all Nations love and honor thee,
Within thy frame sits Awful Malestie,
Wrethed in the curled ^urrowes of thy front:
Admird and feared even of thine enemies;
To be with thee, is my selici^e.
Not to behold the state of all the world,
Could win thy Queen, thy sick unwieldy Queen,
To leave her Chamber, in this mothers state.
But sight of thee unequal potent ate,

King. God a-mercie Jane, reach me thy princely hand.
Thou art now a right woman, goodly, chief of thy sex;
Me thinks thou art a Queen suparlatiue,
Mother, a God this is a woman's glory,
Like good September Vines laden with fruit.
How ill did they define the name of women,
Adding so soul a preposition:
To call it woe to man, it is woe from man.
If woe it be, and then who dus not know,
That weomen still from men receive their woe.
Yes, hey love men for it, but what is their gain,
Poor souls no more but travail for their pain;
Come, love thou art sad, call Will Summers in, to
Make her merry, where is the fool to day,

Dud. He was met my Liege they say at London
Early this morning with Doctor Skeleton,

King. Hes never from him, go let a grome be sent,
And fetch him home, my good Lord Cardinal:
Who are the chief of these Ambassadors?

Wool. Lord Boneue^ the French high Admiral,
And John de Mazo reverent Bishop of Paris.

King. Let their welcome be thy care good Woolsie.

Wool. It shall my Liege.

Enter Cumpton. King. Spare for no cost, Compton, what news?

Cump. Ambassadors my Liege.

King. Enough, go give them entertainment Lords,
Charles Brandon, hearst thou, give them courtesy
Enough, and state enough, go conduct them.

Brand. I go my Lord.

Enter Will summers booted and spurved, blowing a horn. King. How now William,
what? post, post, where have you been riding.


Will. Out of my way old Hary, I am all on the spur,
I can tell ye, I have tidings worth telling.

King. Why, where have thou bin:

Will. Marry I rise ^arly, and ride post to London, to know what news was here
at Court.


King. Was that your nearest way William?

Will. O I, the very foot pathe, but yet Irid the horse* way to here it, I
warrant there is nere a Cundhead keeperin London, but knows what is done in
all the Courts in Cristendome


Wolsie. And what is the best news there William?


Will. Good news for you my Lord Cardinal, for one of the old women
Waterbearers told me for certain, that last Friday all the belles in Rome Rang
backward, there was a thousand Derges sung, six hundred auemaries said, every
man washed his face in holy water, the peopel crossing and blessing themselves
to send them a new Pope, for the old is gone to purgatory.


VVolsie: Ha, ha, ha,


Will. Nay, my Lord you would laugh, if it were so indeed, for every body thinks if
the Pope were dead; you gape for a benefice, but this news my Lord is called too
good to be true.


King. But this news came a pace Will, that came from Rome to London since
Friday last,


Will. For, it was at Billings-gate by Satterday Morning, it was a full Moon, and
it came up in a spring tide.


Kin. Then you here of the Ambassadors that are come.


Wills. I, I, and that was the cause of my ryding to know what they came for, I
was told it all at a Barbars.


King. Ha, ha, what a fools this, Jane, and what do they say he comes for,
Will:


William: Marry they say he comes to crave thy aid against the great Turk that
vows to ouerrunne all France within this fortnight, he is in a terrible rage
belik, and they say, the reason is, his old god Mamet that was buried ith top
on's Church at Meca, his Tomb fell down, and kilde a Sow and seven Pigges,
whereupon they think all swines flesh is new sanctified, and now it is thought
the Jews will fall to eating of porke extremely after it.


king. This is strange indeed, but is this all.


Will. No there is other news that was told me, among the women at a back
house, and that is this, they say, the great Bell in glassenberie. Tor has told
twice, and that king Arthur, and his Knights of the round Table that were
buried in Armor, are alive again, crying Saint Gorge for England, and mean
shortly to conquer Rome, marry this is thought to be but a morrall,


king. The Ambassadors are coming, and hear William see that you be silent,
when you see them hear.


William: I Will be wise and say little I warrant thee, and therefore till I see
^m come, I Will go talk with the Queen; how do thou lane, sir. Harrie, she
looks very big upon me, but I care not, and she bring thee a young Prince,
Will summers may hap's be his fool, when you two are both dead and (...):


Kin: Go to William, how now Jane what groaning,
Gods me thou have an Angry soldiers frown:

William. I think to Harrie, thou have pressed her often:
I am sure this two years she has sern'd under thy sta^dard.

Q: lane, Good faith my Lord I must entreat your grace
That with your favor I may leave the presence:
I cannot stay to hear this Embassage,

king. Gods holy mother, Ladies leau her to her chamber,
Go bid the Midwiues, and the Nursses v. aight,
Make hole some fires and take her from the Air,
Now Jane God bring me but a chopping boy,
Be but the Mother to a Prince of Wales
Ad a ninth Henry to the English Crown,
And thou make full my hopes, fair Queen adieu:
And may heavens helping hand our joys renew:

Comp: God make your Majesty a happy Mother,

Dud: And help you in your weakelt passions,
With zealous prayer we all will invoke:
The powers divine for your delivery:

Q: lane, We thank you all, and in fair enterchange
We Will pray for you: now on my my humble knees,
I take my leave of your high Majesty,
God send your highness long and happy Reign,
And bless this king dome, and your subjects lives:
And to your gracious heart all joy restore,
I fear I shall never behold you more,

King, Do not think so fair Queen, go to thy bed,
Let not my love be so discomforted.

Will, No. no, I warrant thee Jane, make have and dispatch this
That thou may have another against next Christmas

King. Ladies attend her, Countess of Salisburie, sister Mary
Who first brings word that Harri^ has a Son
Shall be rewarded well:

Will, I, I Will be his suertie: but do you hear wenches, she that brings the
first tidings how soever it fall out lot her be sure to say the Child^ like the
father or else she shall have nothing.


Enter Lords and Ambassadors King. Welcome Lord Bonneuet, welcome Bishop
What from our brother brings this Embassage.

Bonneuet. Most fair co^mends great and renowned Hen.
We in the person of our Lord and King,
Here of your highness, do entreat a League
And to reede^i^ the former peace:
Held betwixt the Realms of England and of France,
Of late disordred for some petty wrongs:
And pray your Majesty to stay your powers;
Already levied in low Burgandie,
Which to maintain our oaths, shall be ingadge,
And to confirm it with more surety,
He craves your (...) consent unto his love,
And give the Lady A^arie for his Queen,
The second sister to your Royal self.
So may an heir springing from both your bloods.
Make both Realms happy by a lasting I eague,

King. We kindly do receive your Masters love,
And yet our grant stands strong unto his suit,
If that no following censure ^eeble it:
For we herein must take our Counsels aid.
But howsoever our answer shall be swift,
Mean time we grant you fair access to woe,
And win her (if you can) to be his Queen.
Our self will second you. Right welcome both,
Lord Cardinal, these Lords shall be your Guests,
But let our Treasure wast to welcome them:
Banquet them, how they will, what cheer, what sport,
Let them see Harry keeps a kingly Court:

VVolsie. I shall my Sovereign.
Ex. Wools: Ki With draw a while our selves will follow ye.
Now will are you not deceived in this Embassage,
You heard they came for aid against the Turk^.

Will. Well then, now I see there is loud lies told in London
But als on for their comming's to as much purpose as the other:

king: And why I pray,

Will. Why do thou think thy sister such a fool, to marry such an o^d d^es
veneris, he get her with Prince? I, when either I, or the Cardinal prove
Pope, and that will never be, I hope:


King. How know thou him to be old, thou never (...) him?


Will. No, nor he me, but I saw his picture with nerva tooth ^ the head out,
and all his beard as well favored as a white ^rost, but it is no matter, if he
have her, he will dye shortly, and then she may help to bu^y him,


Enter Ladies. 1 Lad. Run, Run, good Maddam, call the Ladies in.
Call for more Women's help, the Queen is sick.

2 Lad For Gods love go back again, and wa^me more clothes,
O let the wine be well burned I charge ye.

Will I, In any case, or I cannot drink it, do thou hear Harry, what a
coile they keep: I warrant, these women will drink thee up more wine, with
their gossipping, then was spent in all the Conduits at thy Coronation.


Enter Lady Mary and the Countes of Salisbury. King, I is no matter ^ill, How
now Ladies,

La: Mary, I beseech your grace command the fool forth of the pesence,


k. Away William you must be goue, here is women's matters in hand

Will^, Let them speak lo then, I Will not out of the room, sure,

Count, Come, come let us thrust him out, he will not stur^e else:

Will: Thrust me, nay and ye go to thrusting, i will thrust some of you down I
warrant ye:


King. Nay, go good William:

Will. I Will out of their company Harry, they will scratch worse then cats, if
they catch me, therefore I Will hence and leave them, God boy Ladies do you hear
Maddam Mary, you had need to be wary, my news is worth a white-cake, you must
play at tennis with old Saint Dennis, and your maiden-heade mustlye at the
stake.

Exit.
King Ha, ha, the fool tells you true (my gentle sister)
But to our business, how fares my Queen?
How fares my Jane, has she a son for me?
To raise again our kingdoms sovereignty

Lady Mary, That yet rests doubtful, O my princely Lord.
Your poor distressed Queen lies weak and sick,
And be it son or daughter, dear she buys it,
Even with her dearest life, for one must dye:
All Women's help is past. Then good my Liege,
Resolve it quickly, if the Queen shall live,
The Child must die, or if it life receives,
You must your hapeles Queen of life bereave,

Ki. You pierce me with your news, run, send for help.
Spend the revenues of my Crown for aid,
To save the life of my beloved Queen:
How hap't she is so ill attended on.
That we are put to this extremity,
To save the Mother or the child to dye.

Countess. I beseech your grace resolve immediately,

King. Immediately (say thou) O, it is no quick resolve
Can give good verdit in so sad a choice:
To loose my Queen, that is my some of bliss,
More virtuous than a thousand Kingdoms be;
And should I lose my Son (if Son it be)
That all my subjects to desire to see.
I loose the hope of this great Monarchy.
What shall I do?

Lady Marie. Remember the Queen my Lord:

King. I not forget her (Sister) O poor soul,
But I forget thy pain and misery,
Go, let the Child die; let the Mother live,
Heavens powerful hand may more children give:
Away, and comfort her with our reply,
Harry will have his Queen though thowsands die.
I know no issue of her princely womb:
Why then should I preferre't before her life.
Exit. La. Whose death ends all my hopeful loyes on earth.
God's will be done, for suer it is his will,
For secret reasons to himself best known:
Perhaps he did mould forth a Son for me,
And seeing (that sees all) in his creation,
To be some impotent and coward spirit,
Unlike the figure of his Royal Father:
Has thus decrede, least he should blurre out fame,
As Whylome did the sixth king of my name
Loose all his Father (the first Henry) won.
I Will thank the Heavens for taking such a Son.
Whose within there?

Enter Compton. My Lord. king. Go Compton, bid Lord Seimer come to me,
The honored Father of my woeful Queen
Now now what news?

L. Marie. We did deliver what your highness wild,
Which was no sooner by her grace receiud:
But with the sad report, she seemd as dead,
Which causd us stay, after reuouerie.
She sent us back tintreate your Majesty,
As ever you did take delight in her,
As you prefer the quiet of her soul,
That now is ready to forsake this life,
As you desire to have the life of one,
She does entreat your grace that she may dye,
Least both does perish in this agony:
For to behold the infant suffer death,
Were endless tortures, made to stop her breath,
Then to my Lord (quoth she) thus gently say,
The child is fair, the mother earth and clay,

King. Sad messenger of woe; oh my poor Queen,
Can thou so soon consent to leave this life,
So precious to our soul, so dear to all,
To yield the hopeful issue of thy loins,
To raise our second comfort, well, be it so:
Ill, be it so: stay, I revoke my word,
But that you say helps not, for she must dye:
Yet if ye can save both, i will give my crown:
Nay, all I have, and enter bonds for more,
Which with my conquering sword with fury bent,
I Will purchase in the farthest continent,
Use all your chiefest skill, make have away,
Whilst we for your success devoutly pray.

Enter Lord Seymer. Seym. All joy and happiness betide my Sovereign.

King. Joy be it good Lord Seymer noble father,
Or joy, or grief, thou have a part in it,
Thou commit to greet us in a doubtful hour,
Thy daughter and my Queen lies now in pain,
And if I loose, Seymer thou can not gain.

Sey. Yet comfort, good my Liege, this woman's woe,
Why? it is as certain to her as her death,
Both given her in her first creation:
It is a sower to sweet, given them at first,
By their first mother, then put sorrow hence:
Your grace, erc long shall see a gallant Prince,

King. Be thou a Prophet Seymer in thy words,
Thy love some comfort to our hopes affoords,
How now.

Enter two Ladies. Count. My gracious Lord, here I present to you,
A goodly son: see here your flesh, your bone,
Look here royal Lord, I warrant it is your own.

Seym. See here my Liege, by the rood a gallant Prince,
Ha little cakebread, foregod a chopping boy.

King. Even now I wept with sorrow, now with joy,
Take that for thy good news, how fares my Queen.

Enter Mary and one Lady. Count. O my good Lord, the woeful.

King. Tell no more of woe, speak, does she live?
What? weep ye all, nay, then my heart misgiues,
Resolve me sister, is the news worth hearing.

L. Mary. Nor worth the telling, royal Sovereign.

King. Now, by my crown, thou dimst my royalty,
And with thy cloudie looks eclipst my joys,
Thy silent eye bewrayes a ruthful sound,
Stopped in the organs of thy troubled spirit:
Say, is she dead.

La. Mary. Without offense she is.

Kin. Without offense, say thou, heaven take my soul,
What can be more offensive to my life:
Then sad remembrance of my fair Queens death,
Thou woeful man, that camst to comfort me:
How shall I ease thy hearts calamity?
That cannot help thy self, how one sad minute
Has raisd a fount of sorrows in his eyes,
And bleard his aged cheeks, yet Seymer see,
She has left part of her self, a son to me:
To thee a graund-child, unto the land a Prince,
The perfect substance of his royal mother,
In whom her memory shall ever live:
Phoenix Iana obit nato Phoenice,
Dolendum secula phoenices nulla tulisse duas.
One Phoenix dying, gives another life,
Thus must we flatter our extremest grief.
What day is this.

Cump. Saint Edwards even my Lord.

Kin. Prepare for christning, Edward shall be his name,

Enter the Cardinal, Ambassadors, Bonner and Gardner. Wool. My Lords of
France you have had small cheer with us,
But you must pardon us, the times are sad,
And focits not now for mirth and banqueting:
Therefore I pray make your swift return,
Commend me to your king, and kindly tell him,
The English Cardinal will remain his friend,
The Lady Mary shall be forthwith sent,
And overtake ye ere you reach to Dover:
And for the business that concearnes the league,
Urge it no more, but leave it to my care,

Bone. We thank your grace, my good Lord Cardinal,
And so with thankfulness we take our leaves.

Wool. Happily speed my honorable Lords,
My heart, I swear, still keeps you company,
Farewell to both, pray your king remember,
My suit betwixt him and the Emperor,
We shall be thankful, if they think on us.

Par. We will be earnest in your cause my Lord,
So of your grace we once more take our leaves.

Wool. Again farewell, Bonner conduct them forth,
Now Gardner, what think thou of these times.

Guard. Well, that the leagues confirmd, my gracious Lord,
Ill, that I fear the death of good Queen Jane,
Will caute new troubles in our state again.

Wool. Why think thou so?

Guard. I fear false Luther; doctrins spread so far,
I cast that his highness now unmarried,
Should match amongst that sect of Lutherans,
You saw how soon his majesty was won,
To scorn the Pope, and Romes religion,
When Queen Anne Bullen wore the diadem.

Wool. Gardner it is true, so was the rumor spread:
But Woolsie wrought such means she lost her head,
Tush fear not thou whilst Haries life does stand,
He shall be king, but we will rule the land.
Bonner come hither, you are our trusty friend:
See that the treasure we have gathered,
The Copes, the Vestments, and the Challices,
The smoke pence, and the tributary fees,
That English chimnies pay the Church of Rome:
Be barreld close within the inner seller,
Well send it over shortly to prepare,
Our swift advancement to Saint Peter's chair,
Be trusty, and be sure of honors speedily,
The king has promised at the next election,
Bonner shall have the Bishopric of London.

Bon. I humbly thank your grace.

Wool. And Gardner shall be Lord of Winchester:
Had we our hopes, what shall you not be then,
When we have got the Papal diadem.

Exeunt. Enter Brandon, Dudley, Gray, Seymer, Compton. Br. How now Sir William
Cumpton, where is the king.

Cum. His grace is walking in the gallery,
As sad and passionate as ere he was.

Dud. Twere good your grace went in to comfort him.

Bran. Not I Lord Dudley, by my George I swear,
Unless his Highness first had sent for me,
I will not put my head in such a hazard,
I know his anger, and his spleen too well.

Gray. It Is strange, this humor has his highness held,
Ever since the death of good Queen Jane,
That none dares venture to confer with him.

Enter Cardinal, Summers, and Patch. Dud. Here comes the Cardinal.

Bran I, and two fools after him, his Lordship is well attended still


Sem. Lets win this prelate to salute the king,
It may perhaps work his disgrace with him,

Wool. How now William, what? are you here to,

Will. I my Lord, all the fools follow you, I come to bid my cousin Patch
welcome to the court, and when I come to York house, hele do as much for me,
will ye not Patch?


Pat. Yes cousin, hey, da, tere, dedell, dey, day.

sing. Wool. What, are you singing sir.

Will. I Will make him cry as fast anon I hold a penny.

Dud. God morrow to your grace my good Lord Cardmall.

Wool. We thank your honor.

Enter king within. Call wiithin. King. What Cumpton, Carew.

Brand. Hark, the king calls.

King. Mother of God, how are we attended on: who waights without.


Brand. Go in Sir William, and if you find his grace
In any milder temper then he was last night,
Let us have word, and we will visit him.

Cump. I Will my Lord.
Exit.
Wool. What is the occasion, that the kings so moved.

Brand. His grace has taken such an inward grief,
With sad remembrance of the Queen that is dead:
That much his highness wrongs his state and person,
Besides in Ireland, do the Burkes rebel,
And stout Pearsie that disclod the plot,
Was by the Earl of Kildare late put to death.
And Martin Luther out of Germany.
Has writ a book against his Majesty,
For taking part with proud Pope Julius,
Which being spread by him through Christendom,
Has thus incenst his royal majesty.

Wool. Tush, I have news, my Lord, to salve that sore,
And make the king more feared through christendom,
Then ever was his famous ancestors:
Nor can base Luther with his heresies,
Backed by the proudest german potentate,
Heretically blurre king Henry's fame:
For honor that he did Pope Julius,
Who in high favor of his Majesty,
Has sent Campeus with a bull from Rome,
To add unto his title this high style:
That he and his fair posterity,
Proclaimd defenders of the faith shall be:
For which intent the holy Cardinals come,
As Legates from the Imperial court of Rome.

Gr. This news, my Lord, may something ease his mind,
Twere good your grace would go and visit him.

Wool. I will, and doubt not but to please him well.

Seym. So, I am glad he is in, and the king be no better pleased then he was at
our last parting, hele make him repent his sauciness.


Brand. How now old William, how chance you go not to the king, and comfort him.


Will. No birlady, my Lord, I was with him too lately already, his fist is too
heavy for a fool to stand under, I went to him last night, after you had left
him, seeing him chase so at Charles, here to make him merry; and he gave me
such a box on the ear, that stroke me clean through three chambers, down
four pair of stairs, fell ore five barrels, into the bottom of the seller,
and if I had not well lickard my self there, I had never lived after it.


Bran. Faith Will, i will give thee a velvet coat, and thou can but make him
merry.


Will. Will ye my Lord, and i will venture another box on the ear but i will do it.


Enter Cumpton. Cum. Clear the presence there, the king is coming,
Gods me, my Lords, what meant the Cardinal,
So unexpected thus to trouble him.

Gray. Is the king moved at it.

Enter the king and VVoolsie. Cumpt. Judge by his countenance, see he comes.

Bran. I Will not endure the storm.

Dud. Nor I.

Will. Run fool your master will be feld else.

King. Did we not charge that none should trouble us,
Presumptuous priest, proud prelate as thou art,
How comes it you are grown so saucie sir,
Thus to presume upon our patience,
And cross our royal thought disturbd and vexed,
By all your negligence in our estate,
Of us and of our countries happiness.

Wool. My gracious Lord.

King. Fawning beast stand back:
Or by my crown, i will foot thee to the earth,
Where Is Brandon, Surrey, Seymer, Gray,
Where is your counsel now, O now ye crooch,
And stand like pictures at our presence door,
Call in our guard, and bear them to the Tower,
Mother of God, i will have the traitors heads,
Go hale them to the block, up, up, stand up,
I Will make you know your duties to our state,
Am I a cipher, is my sight grown stale,
Am I not Hary, am I not Englands king, Ha.

Will. So la, now the watch words given, nay and he once cry ha, near a man
in the court dare for his head speak again, lie close cousin Patch.


Patch. I Will not come near him cousin, has almost killed me with his countenance.


King. We have been too familiar, now I see,
And you may dally with our majesty:
Where are my pages there.

Page. My Lord.

Enter pages. Kin. Trusse sir, none to put my garter on,
Give me some wine, here stuff a the the other side,
Proud Cardinal who followed our affairs in Italy,
That we that honored so Pope Julius,
By dedicating books at thy request,
Against that vpstart sect of Lutheraus,
Should by that heretic be banded thus,
But by my George, I swear, if Henry live,
I Will hunt base Luther through all Germany,
And pull those seven electors on their knees:
If they but back him against our dignities.
Bace slave tie soft, thou hurst my leg,
And now in Ireland the Burkes rebel,
And with his stubborn kernes makes hourly rodes,
To burn the borders of the English pale,
And which of all your counsels helps us now.

Enter Cumpton with wine. Cumpt. Here Is wine, my Lord.

Kin. Drink, and be dambd, I cry thee mercy Cumpton,
What the devil mentst thou to come behind me so,
I did mistake, i will make thee amends for it,
By holy Paul, I am so cro^t and vexed,
I knew not what I did, and here at home,
Such careful statsemen do attend us,
And looks so wisely to our common weal,
That we have ill May-dayes, and riots made:
For lawless rebels do disturb our state,
Twelve times this term, have we in person sat,
Both in the star chamber, and Chauncery courts,
To hear our subjects suits determined:
Yet it is your office Woolfie, but all of you
May make a packehorse of king Henry now:
Well, what would ye say.

Wool. Nothing that might displease your majesty,
I have a message from the Pope to you.

King. Then keep it still, we will not hear it yet,
Get all of you away, avoid our presence
We cannot yet command our patience,
Reach me a chair.

Brand. Now will, or never, make the king but smile,
And with thy mirthfull toys allay his spleen,
That we his counsel, may confer with him,
And by my Honor, i will reward thee well,
Too him good Will.

Will. Not too fast, I pray, least will Summers here be seen again, I know
his qualities as well as the best an ye: for ever when he is angry, and no body
dare speak to him, ye thrust me in by the head and shoulders, and then we
fall to buffits, but I know who has the worst ant: but go, my Lord, stand
aside, and stir not till I call ye, let my cousin Patch and I alone, and he
go to boxing, well fall both upon him, that's certain: but and the worst come,
be sure the Cardinals fool shall pay fort.


Bra. Use your best skill, good william, i will not be seen, Unless I see him
smile.


will. Where art thou cousin, alas poor fool, he is crept under the table, up
cousin, fear nothing, the storms past, I warrant thee.


Patch. Is the king gone, cousin?

will. No, no, (...) he sits, we are all friends now,
The Lords are gone to dinner, and thou and I must wait at the kings table.


Patch. Not I birlady, I would not wait upon such a Lord, for all the livings
in the land, I thought he would have killed my Lord Cardinal, he looked so
terribly.


will. Foe, he did but jest with him, but i will tell the cousin the rarest trick
to be revenged ast passes, and i will give thee this fine silk point and thou wilt
do it.


Patch. Obraue, obtaue, give me it cousin, and i will do what so ere it is.


will. I Will stand behind the post here, and thou shall go softly stealing behind
him, as he sits reading yonder, and when thou comst (...) to him, cryboh, and
well scarre him so, he shall not tell where to rest him.


Patch. But will he not be angry?


will. No, no, for then i will show my self, and after he sees who it is hele la^e
and be as merry as a magge pie, and thow't be a (...) man by it, for all the
house shall see him hug thee in his arms, ^ dandle thee up and down with
hand and foot an thou were a footebal,


Page. O fine come cosen, give me the pynt first, and i will rore so loud that i will
make him believe that the d^els come.


Will: So do and fear nothing, for an thou were the devil himself, hele
conjure thee I warrant thee, I would not have such a coniuring for twenty
crowns: but when he has made way, i will make him merry enough, I doubt it not, so
so now cossen look to your Coxecomb:


P^ag: Boe.

King: Mother of God what is that.

Page. Boe.

King: Out ass take that and tumble at my ^eete.
For thus I Will spurn thee up an down the house:

Pach: Help cossen help:

Will: No cossen now he is coniur^ng. I dare not come near him.

king. Who set this natural ^eere to trouble me.

En, Comp: Whose that stands laffing there, the fool, ha, ha, Where Is Compto^.
Mother a God I have found his dri^t, it is the cra^tiest old villain in
christendom, mark good Sir William, because the fool durst not come near
himself, seeing our anger, sent this silly Ass, that we might wreake our
royal spleen on him: whilst he sta^ds laffing to behold the left, bith
blessed La (Copto^) I Will not leave the fool, to gain a million, he contents me
so, come hither Will,


Will. I Will know whether ye have done knocking first, my cosen pach looks
pitifully, ye had best be friends with us I can tell you, we will scare ye out
of your skin else


King: Alas, poor pach hold (...) there is an Angel to buy you points.

Will. Law Cousin, did not I say he will make much on ye,

Pach: I cousin but has made such a singing in my head
I cannot see where I am.

Will. All the better cousin and your head fall a singing, your feet may fall a
dancing and so save charges to the piper:


King. Will Summers, prithee tell me why did thou send him first.

VVil. Because i will have him have the first fruits of thy fury. I know how the
matter stood with the next that disturbed thee, therefore I kept ith rereward,
that if the battle grew too hot, I might run presently,


King. But wherefore came ye.

Will. To make thee leave thy mellancholly and turn merry man again, thou
have made all the Court in such a pitiful case as passes, the Lords has
attended here this ^oure days, and none dares speak to thee, but thou art
ready to choppe of their heads sort: and now I seeing what a fretting fury
thou continuest in, and every one said twol'd kill thee if thou keepst it,
pulld eene up my heart, and vowed to loose my head, but i will make thee leave it,


Ling. Well William I am behoulding to ye.
Ye shall have a new Coat and a cap for this.

Will. Nay then, I shall have two new coats and cap pes, for Charles Brandon
promised me one before, to perform this enterprise:


King. He shall keep his word will, go call him in,
Call in the Lords tell them our spleen is calmbd:
Mother a God we must give way to warth.
That cha^es our Royal blood with anger thus:
And use some mirth I see to comfort us.
Draw near us Lords, Charles Brandon lift to me:
Will Summers here must have a Coat of you,
But Patch has earned it dearest whers the fool?

VVil. He Is enne creeping as nere the door as he can,
Heel feign begone I see, and he could get out,
Wo^ldest thou not cousin?

Pach: Yes cousin VVil. Ild feign be walking, I am afraid,
I am not as I should be:

VVil. Come, i will help thee out then, do thou hear my Lord Cardinal, your
fool is in a pitiful taking, he smells terriblie.


Wools: You are too cra^tie for him William,

King: So is he Woolsey credit me.

Will: I think so my Lord, as long as will live, the Cardinals fool must give
way to the kings fool:


K: Well sir bequiet, and my reverent Lords,
I thank you for your patient suffering,
We were disturbed in our thoughts we swear,
We now entreat you speak and we will hear,

Wools. Then may it please your sacred Majesty,

Camp. Legate to his holiness,
Attends with letters from the Court of Rome.

King: Let him draw near, we will give him Audience,

Dudley: and Gray Attend the Cardinal,
And bring

Campeu: to our presence here:

Dud. Gray, We go my Lord:

Enter Lords and Legates: king: Brandon and Seymer, place your selves by us,
To hear this message from his holiness,
You reverent princes pillars of the Church:
Legates, Apostolic, how fares the Pope,

Campeus, In health great King and from his sacred lips:
I bring a blessing Appostolicall.
To English Henry and his subjects all:
And more to mani^cst his love to thee,
The prop and pillar of the Churches peace:
And gratify thy love made plain to him,
In learned books against Luthers heresy,
He sends me thus to gr^et thy Malestie:
With style and titles of high dignitle,
Gommand the Heralds and the Trumpets forth:

Semer: Gentlemen dispatch and call them in:

Will: Lord bless us, what is here to do now,

Camp, Receive this Bull sent from his holiness.
For confirmation of his dignity
To thee, and to thy fair posterity.

Will: It Is well the Kings a widdower, and he had put forrh your Bull with his
horns forward, I Would have mard your message. I can tell ye.


K: Peace

will: Herralds attend him:

Camp: Trumpets prepare whilst we allowd prouounce
This sacred message from his Holiness,
And in his reverent name I hear proclayme
Henric the Eight by the grace of God,
King of England, France and I^eland*
And to this title, from the Pope we give:
Defender of the faith, in peace to live:

VVools, Sound Trumpets, and God save the King.

K: We thank his holiness for this princely ^auour,
Receiving it with thanks and reverence:
In which whilst we have life, his grace shall see,
Our sword de^ender of the faith shall be,
Go one of you salute the Mayor of London,
Bid him with Herralds and with Trumpets sound,
Proclaim our Titles through his government,
Go Gray, see it done, attend him fellows:

Gray. I go my Lord, Trumpets follow me,
Exit:
King, What more Lord Legate does his holiness will?

Camp: That Henry Joining with the Christian Kings
Of France and Spain, Denmark and Portugale
would send an Armic to assail the Turk,
That now inuades with War the I Will of Rhodes,
Or send twelve thousand pound to be disposd,
As his holiness thinks best for their rel eife.

Wills: I thought so, I knew twoold be a monnie ^matter, when als done, now
thart dese^der of the ^aith, the Pope will have thee defend ^ucrie thing
himself and all.


king, Take hence the fool.

vvil: I, when canye tell? do thou think any oath Lords will take the fool,
none here, I warrant, except the Cardinals.


king, What a knauish fools this, Lords you must bear with him come hither
Will, what saift thou to this new tytell given us by the Pope, speak, is it
not rare?


Will: I know not how rare it is, but I know how deer twill be, for I
perceive twill cost thee twelve thousand 'pounds, at least, besides the
Cardynals cost in comring.


king, All these nothing; the title of defender of the faith is worth ye,
twice as much, say, is it not.


Will: No by my troth, do hear old Harie; I am suer, the true faith is able
to defend it self without thee, and as for the Popes faith (good faith's) not
worth a ^arthing, and therefore giu^ him not a penny.


K, Go too (...) meddle not you with the Popes matters:


VV: Let him not meddle with thy matters then, for, and he meddle withthee, He
middle with him that's certain and so farewell, I Will go and meet my little
young Master Prince Edward, they say he comes to Court to night, I Will to
horseback, Prithee Harie send one to hold my sturrup: shall I tell the Prince
what the Pope has done.


King. I and thou will Will, he shall be defender of the faith too^ one day.

Will. No, and he and I can defend our selves we care not,
For we are sure the faith can.
(Exit.
King. Lord Legate, so we reverence Rome and you,
As nothing you demand, shall be den^ed:
The Turk will we expel from Ch^^tendome,
Sending stout soldiers to his holiness,
And mon^ to relecue diftressed R ho^des:
So if you please, pass in to banqueting,
Go Lords attend them, Brandon and Compton stay,
We have some business to confer upon.

Comp. We take our leave.
Exit.
King. Most hearty welcome to my reverent Lords.
So, now to our business, (...),
Hear ye no tidings from our sister Mary,
Since her arrival in the Reahme of France?

Bron. Thus much we heard my Lord, at Cales met her
The youthful Dolphin, and the Pecres of France:
And bravely brought her to the King at Towers,
Where he both married her, and crownde her Queen

King. It Is well, but Brandon and
Compion list to me,
I must employ your aid and secrecy,
This night we mean in some disguised shape;
To visit London, and to walk the round,
Pass through their watches, and observe the care
And special diligence to keep our peace.
They say night-walkers, hourly pass the streets,
Committing the^, and hated sacriliege:
And flightly pass unstaid, or unpunished,
Go Compton, go, and get me some disguise,
This night we will see our Cities government:
Brandon, do you attend at Baynards. Castio,
Compton shall go disguisde along with me,
Our swords and bucklers shall conduct us safe,
But if we catch a knock to quit our pain,
We Will put it up, and bye us home again.
Exit.
Enter the Constable and Watch, Prichall the Cobbler, being one b^^ing a
Lant-horne. Constable. Come neighbors, we have a straight command.
Our watches be scuerely looked into:
Much theft and murder was committed latelv,
There are two strangers, merchants of the Stillyard
Cruelly slain, found floating on the Temmes:
And greatly are Stews had in suspect,
As places fitting for no better use,
Therefore be careful and examine all,
Perhaps we may attach the murderer.

1 Watch. Nay I assure ye master Constable, those stew houses are places of
much slaughter and redemption and many cru^ll deeds of equity and wickedness
are committed there, for diverse good men loose both their money and their
computation by them, I abi^re ye; how say you neighbor Prichall?


Cob. Neighbor Capcase, I know you're a man of courrage, and for the merry
cobbler of Lune street, tho I sit as low as Saint Faithes, I can look as high
as Pa^les: I have in my days walkte to the stewas as well as my neighbors,
but if the mad wenches fall to burdering once, and cast men into the Thames, I
have done with them, there is no dealing, if they car^i^ fire in one hand, and
water ith the other.


Con. Well masters we are now plac'st about the King ^businesse.
And I know ye all sufficient in the knowledge of it,
I need not to rep^ate your charge again:
Good neighbors, use your greatest care I pray,
And if unruly persons trouble ye,
Call and i will come: so ^yrs goodnight.
Exit Constable.
1 Wat. Godyegodnight and twenty sir, I warrant ye, ye need not reconcile
to our charge, vor some on us has discharged the place this forty year I am
sure. Neighbors what think you best to be done?


Cob. Every man according to his calling neighbor, if the enomic come, here
Iyes my town of Garrison, I set on him as I set on a patch, if he tread on
this side, I underlay him on this side, or prick him through both sides, I
yerke him, and trick him, pare him and piece him, then hang him up beth heels
till Sunday.


1 Wat. How say ye, by my faith neighbor Prichall ye speak to the purpose,
for indeed neighbors, every sencible watchman is to seek the best
reformation to his own destruction.


2 Wat. But what think ye neighbors, if every man take a nap now, eth fore
hand eth night, and go to bed afterward.


Cob. That were not a miss neither, but and you will take but every man his pot
first, you will sleep like the man eth Moon in faith.


2 Do ye think neighbor, there is a man eth Moon?


1 Wat. I assure ye in a clear day, I have seente at midnight.


2 Wat. Of what occupation is he trow^


Cob. Some thinks he is a shepherd, because ons dog, some says he is a baker
going to heat his oven with a bauen ats back, but the plain truth is, I
think he was a cobbler, for ye know what the song says, I see a man eth
Moon, fie man, fie, I see a man eth Moon, clowting Saint Peter's shoone, and
so by this reason, he should be a cobbler.


1 Wat. By my fekins he says true, alas, alas, goodman Dor^o^se has even
given up the ghost already, us an honest quiet soul I warrant ye.


Cob. It behoues us all to be so how do ye neighbor Darmonse?


Dor. Godspeed ye, Godspeed ye, nay and ye go a godssleepie, name, I have
nothing to say to ye.


2 Law ye, his minds ons business, though he be nere so


Cob. Come lets all join with him and steal a nappe, every man masters to
his s^u^rall stall.


2 Agreed, Godnight good neighbors.


Cab. Nay, lets take no leave, i will but wink a while, and see you again. ^ward^


Enter King, and Compton, with bills on his back. King. Come sir William,
We may now stand upon our gaurd you see,
The watch has given vz leave to arm our selves,
They fear no danger, for they sleep secure:
Go carry those bills we took to Baynards Castle,
And bid Charles Brandon to disguise himself,
And meet me presently at Grace Church Corner,
We will attempt to pass through all the watches,
And so I take's will be an easy task,
Therefore make haste.

Comp. I will my Liege.

King. The watchword if I chance to send to ye,
Is the great Stagge of Baydon, so my name shall be.

Comp. Enough, we will think on it.
Exit.
Kin. So, now we will forward, soft yonder is light,
I and a watch, and all asleep burlady:
These are good peaceable subjects, here is none
Beckens to any, all may pass in peace: Ho sirrah.

Cob. Stand, who goes there?

King. good fellow. Stands a heinous word ethe Kings
High way you have been at Noddie, I see.

Cob. I, and the first card comes to my hand's a Knave.

King I am a Coatercard indeed.

Cob. Then thou must needs be a Knave, for art neither King nor Queen, ( I am
sure) But whether go thou?.


King. About a little business that I have in hand.

Cob. Then good night, prethy trouble me no longer.

King. Why this is easy enough, here is passage at pleasure,
What wertch so wicked, would not give fair words
After the foulest fact of V^llainie?
That may escape vaseene so easily,
Or what should let him that is so resolved
To murder, rapine, theft, or sacrilege:
I see the City are the sleepie heads,
To do it, and pass thus unexamined.
Fond heedlesse men, what boots it for a King,
To toil hithselfe in this lugh state affairs,
To summon Parhaments, and call together
The wise^^ heads of all his Provinces:
Making statutes for his subjects peace,
That thus neglecting them, their woes increase.
Well, we will further on, soft here comes one,
I Will stay and see, how he escapes the watch.

Enter Black Will. Black Will. So, how I am got within the City, I am as
safe as in a Sanctuarieat is a hard world, when Black Will, for a venture of
^iue pound, must commit ^uch petty robberies at Mile-ende, but the plain
truth is, the Stews from whence I had my quartaridgeas now grown too ^ote for
me: there is some suspection of a murder lately done upon two Merchants of the
Stilliard, which indeed as far as some five or six stabs comes too, I
confess I had a hand in. But mumbudget, all the Dogs in the town must not
bark at it. I must withdraw awhile till the heat ^ee ore, remove my lodging,
and live upon dark nights and (...) mornings. Now let me them see, the
strongest watch in London intercept my passage.


King. Such a Fellow would I feign meet withal:
Well overtaken sir.

Black Will. Sblood (...) before me sir:
What a D^ell art thou?

King. A man atleast.

Black. And art thou valiant?

King. I carry a sword and a bucklerye see.

Black. A sword and a buckler, and know not me, Not Black Will?

King. No trust me.

Black Will. Slave, then thou art neither Traveler, nor Purse-taker: for I
tell thee, Black will is known and feared though the seventeen (...) there is
not a sword and Buckler man in England nor Europe, but has had a taste of my
manhood. I am tole-free in all Cities, and the Subburbs about them: this is my
Sconce, my Castle, my Cittadell, and but King Harry, God bless his Majesty, I
fear not the proudest.


King. O ves, some of his guard.

Black VVil. Let his guard eats beef and be thankful, give me a man will
cover himself with his buckler, and not booge and the devil come.


King. Me thinks thou were better live at Court as I do, King Harry loves a
man, I can tell ye.


Black Will. Would thou and all the men he keeps were hangde, and ye love
not him then: but I will not change my revenues for all his guardes wages.


King. Have thou such store of ^ruing?

Black will. Art thou a good fellow?
May I speak freely, and wilt not tell the king ont?

King. Keep thine own counsel, and fear not,
For of my faith the King shall know no more for me, then thou telst him.


Will. And I tell him any thing let him hang me: but for thy self, I think
if a fat purse come ith way, thou would not refuse it. Therefore leave the
Court and sharke with me, I tell thee, I am chief commander of all the Stews,
there is not a whore shifts a smock but by my privilege, nor opens her shop
before I have my weekly tribute: And to assure thee my valor carries credit
with it, do but walk with me through the streets of London, and let me see
the proudest watch disturb us.


King. I shall be glad of your conduct sir.

Black. Follow me then, and i will tell thee more.

1 Watch. Stand, who goes there?

Blac. A good fellow: come close, regard them not.

2. Watch. How shall we know thee to be a good fellow?

Black Will. My names Black Will.

1. Watch. Oh, God give ye good night, good Master Black William.


2. Watch. God boy sir, God boy,
I am glad we are so well rid on him.

Will. Law sir, you see here is egresse enough,
Now follow me, and you shall see we will have regresse back again,

1. Watch. Hoe comes there?

Cob. Come before the Constable.
VVil What have ye forgot me so soon? it is I.

2. VVatch. O, it is M. Black William,
God bless ye sir, God bless ye.

Black. How likst thou now?

King. Faith excellent: but prithee tell me, do thou face the world with thy
manhood, that thus they fear thee, or art thou truly valiant?


Black Will. Sfoote, do thou doubt of my manhood? Nay then defend your
self, i will give you a try all presently, betake ye to your tools sir, i will
teach ye to stand upon Intergatories.


King. I am for ye, there is near a man the King keeps shall refuse ye: but tell
me, will thou keep the Kings Act for fighting.


Black. As ye please sir: yet because thou art his man, i will observe it, and
neither thrust nore strike beneath the knee.


King. I am pleased, have at you sir.

They fight. 1. Watch. Help neighbors, O take ye to your brown Bills, call
up the Constable, here is a piece of chance-meddle ready to be committed: set on
good man Sprichall.


Cob. I Will ferke them a both sides, lie close neighbor Dor^^use, keep the
kings peace, I charge ye, help M. Constable.


Enter the Constable. Con. Keep the peace, or strike them down.

Black. Sownes, I am hurt, hold I say.

2. VVatch. Let them not pass nieghbours, here is bloodshed drawn upon one of
the Kings Officers.


Con. Take away their weapons, and since you are so hot, I Will set you where you
shall be cool enough.


Black ^il. Sownes the Moons a wayning harlot, with the glimse of her light I
lost his point, and mistook my ward, had near brocht my blood else.


Con. pray sir what are you?

King. I am the Kings man sir, and of his Guard.

Con. More shame you should so much forget your self*
For as I takte, it is parcel of your oath,
As well to keep his peace, as guard his person:
And if a Constable be not present by,
You may as well as he, his place supply:
And seeing ye so neglect your oath and duty,
Go bare them to the Counter presently,
There shall ye answer for these misdemeanors.

2. Wat. Has broake my head sir, and furthermore it bleeds.

Con. Away with them both, they shall pay thee well ere they come forth, I
warrant thee.


Will. I beesech ye sir.

King. Never entreat man, we shall have bail I doubt it not, But master
Constable, I hope you will do me this favor, to let one of your watchmen go of
an arrant for me, if I pay him?


Con. With all my heart sir, here is one shall go.

King. Hold thee good fellow, here is an angel for thee, go thy way to
Baynards Castle, and ask for one Brandon, he serves the Duke of Suffolk, and
tell him his bedfellow, or the great stagge of Baydo^ this night is clapteth
Counter, and bid him come speak with me. Come Constable lets go, syrrha make
have.

Exit.
Cob. I warrant you sir, and this be all, i would have done it for half the money:
well, I must enquire for one Brandon, and tell him the great stag of B^yd^^ i^
eth Coun^er, burlady I doubt they be both cra^tie knaves, and this is some
watchword between them: beth mass I doubt he nere come well by his money,
he is so liberal, well i will forward.


E^ter Brandon, and Compton. Bron. Sir William, are you sure it was at
Graces-Church
His Majesty appointed we should meet him?
We have bin there and mist him, what think ye sir?

Comp. Good faith I know not.
His Highness is too vnterous bold, my Lord
I know he will forsake himself in this,
Opposing still against a world of odds.

Bran. Good faith it is true: but soft here comes one,
How now good fellow, whether go thou?

Cob. It lies in my authority sir,
To ask you that question.
For I am one of the kings watch, I can tell ye.

Co. Then perhaps thou can tell us some tidings:
Did thou not see a good lusty tall big set man, pass through your watch
to night?


Cob. Yes sir, there was such a man came to our watch to to night, but none
that past through, for he behaved himself so, that he was laid hold on
quickly, and now he is forth coming in the Counter.


Brandon. And whether art thou going?


Cob. Faith sir, has given me an Angel, to do an arrande for him at Baynards
Castle, to one Brandon, that serves the Duke of Suffolk: he says he is his
Bedfellow, and I must tell him, the great Stagge of Baydon, is eth Counter.


Bran. If thine errande be to Brandon, I can save thee a l^bour, for I am the
man thou look^^ for, we have been seeking him almost all this night: hold
thee there is an Angel for thy news, i will bail him I warrant thee.

Exit.
Cob. I thank you sir: but he is not so soon baylde, as you think for, there is
two of the Kings watch has their heads broke, and that must be answered for,
but alls won to me, let them shuffell as they will, the Angels has flowne
about to night, and two guls are light into my hands, and these i will keep, let
him get out as he can.

Exit.
Enter the King in Prison. King. Hoe Porter, whose without there?

Porter. What Is the matter now? will ye not go to bed to night?


King. No trust me, twill be morning presently,
And I have hope I shall be bailde ere then:
I prithee if thou can, entreat some of the prisoners to keep^ me company a
pair of hours, or so: and we will spend them: ethe rouse of healthes, and all
shall be my cost.

Say will thou pleasure me?

Port. If that will pleasure ye sir, ye shall not want for company, here is I now
that can tend it, they have hunger and ease enough at all times.


King. The^es a couple of Gentlemen in the next room, I prithee let them come
in, and there is an Harry Sovereign for thee.


Port. I thank you sir, I am as much beholding to you, as to King Harry for it.

Exit.
King. I, I assure thee thou art.
Well M. Constable, you have made the Counter
This night, the royal Court of Englands King:
And by my crown I swear, I would not for*
A thousand pound t'ware otherwise.
The Officers in Cities, now I see,
Are like an Orchard set with several Trees,
Where one must cherish one, rebuke the other:
And in this wretched Counters I perceive,
Money plays fast and loose, purchaces favor,
And without that, naught but misery.
A poor Gentleman has made complaint to me,,
I am undone (quoth he) and kept in prison,
For one of your fellows that serves the King,
Being bound for him, and he neglecting me.
Has brought me to this woe and misery.
Another Citizen there is, complains
Of one belonging to the Cardinal^,
That in his M^isters name has taken up
Commoditie^, valued at a thousand pound:
The payment being deferde has causde him break,
And so is quite undone. Thus kings and Lords I see,
Are often abusde by ^eruants treachery.
Enter (...) prisoners. But whist a while, here comes my fellow prisoners.

1. Prisoner. Where Is this bullie Grig, this lad of life, that will scowre the
counter with right renish to night? Oh Sir you are welcome.


King. I thank ye sir, nay we will be as great as our word, I assure ye. Here
Porter, there is money, fetch wine I prithee: Gentlemen you cannot be merry in this
melancholy place; but here is a Lad has his heart as light as his purse. Sir,
thou art some mad slave I think, a reguler companion: won that that uses to
walk a nights, or so. Art thou not?


1. Pri. Hark ethen ear, thart a good fellow.

King I am right borne I ass^re thee.

1. Pri. King Harry loves a man, and thou a woman:
Shall I teach thee some wi^?
And tell thee why I met thee here?
I went and set my limbe-twigs, and I think
I got some hundred pound,
B^ a crooked measure at Coo^e Park:
And now seeing there was watch laid,
And much search for suspicious persons:
I got won as honest as my self to arrest me,
By a contrary name, and lay me eth counter,
And here I know thayle nere seek me,
And so when the heats ore, I am at liberty,
And mean to spend my crowns lustily:
How likst thou this my Bullie?

King. An excellent policy.

1. Pri. But mum, no words: use it for your self, or so.

King. O sir, fear it not, be merry Gentlemen: Is not this wine come yet? Gods
me, forget our chief ge^st, where is my sword and buckler-man? where is Black
will? how now man, melancholy? let not a little wipe make us enemies, clap
hands, and be friends.


Will. My bloods up still.

King. When it is at highest twill fall again, come hands, hands.

Black Will. I Will shake hands with thee, because thou carriest a Sword and
Buckler, yet thart not right Cauelere, thou know not how to use them, thaste
a heavy arm.


King. I a good smart stroke.

VVil^. Thou cutst my head indeed, but it was no play, thou layest open enough, I
could have entered at my pleasure.


King. Nay I have stout guard I assure ye.


Will. Childish to a man of valor, when thou should have borne thy Buckler
here, thou let it fall to thy knee, thou gave me a wipe, but it was mere
chance: but had we not been parted, I had taught ye a little School play I
warrant ye.


Brandon speaks within. Brandon. What hoe, porter: who keeps the gates there?

Porter. Who knockes so fast?

Enter Brandon and Comp^on hastily. Count. Stand by sir^ah.

Porter. Keep back I say, whither will ye press amongst the prisoners?


Bran. Sirrah to the Court, and we must in.

Port. Why sir, the courts not kept eth Counter to day.

Bran. Yes when the king is there*
All happiness betide our Sovereign.

Will. Sownes king Harry.

1. Pri. Lord I beseech thee no.

All. We all ^ntreat your grace to pardon us.

King. Stand up good men: beshrew ye Brandon for disco^ouering us, we shall not
spend our time so well this month: but there is no remedy now, the worst is
this,

The court good fellows must be removed the sooner,
Ye all are cour^iers yet. Nay, nay, come forward,
Even now you know we were more familiar:
You see policies holds not always current,
I am found out, and so I think will you be:
Go Porter let him be removed to Newga^^
This place I see is too secure for him:
We Will send you further word for his bestowin.

1. Pri I beseech your Grace.

King There Is no grace in thee, nor ^one for thee:
Go, away with him.

Exit Porter and Pr^soner. Will. Sownes I shall to Tyb^rne presently.

King Gentlemen, you that have been wrongde by my servants and the Cardinals,
shall give me nearer notes of it,

Both what they are, and how much debt they owe ye:
Send your pe^^^ions to the Court to me.
And doubt not but you shall have remedy:
There Is forty Angels, drink to King Harries health,
And think withal, much wrong Kings men may do:
The which their masters nere consent unto.

2 Pris. God bless^ your Majesty with happy life;
That thus respect; your woeful subjects grief,

King. Where (...) Will, nay come nearer man,
I came nearer you, though ye mislikte my play.

Will. Beth Lord, your Majesty's the best sword and buckler man in Europe, ye
lie as close to your wards, carry your point as fair, that no Fencer comes
neer^ ye for gallant Fence-play.


King. Nay now ye ^latter me.

Will. Foregod ye broake my head most gallantly.

King. I But it was but by chance ye know, but now your heads broke, you look
for a plaster I am sure.


Will. And your grace will give me leave, I^e put it up and go my wai^s
presently.


King. Nay soft sir, the Keeper will deny ye that privilege, Come hither
syrrha, because ye shall know King Harrie loves a man, and I perceive there is
some metal in thee, there is (...) Angels for thee, marry it shall be to keep
ye in prison still, till we have further use for ye. If ye can break through
watches with eg^es and regres so valiantly, ye shall doote amongst your
countries enemies.


Will. The wars sweet King, it is my delight, my desire, my chair of state*
create me but a ^attord Corporal, and give me some prehemine^e over the vulgar
hot-shots, and I beat them not forward to as brave attempts, and march my self
I th Vantguard* as ere carried against a Castle wall, break my head in two
places more, and consume me with the mouth of a double c^luering, I^e live and
dye with thee sweet King.


King Twill be your best course sir, go take him in,
When we have need of men, we will send for him.

Will. God ble^se your majesty, i will go drink to your health.
Exit.
King. Begone: sir, keeper I thank you for our lodging,
Nay indeed I do, I know had ye known us, it had bin better,
Pray tell the Constable that brought us hither,
We thank him, and commend his faithful service,
Gentlemen lets hear from you, and so God morrow,
Keeper, there is for my fees, discharge the offices:
And give them charge that none discover us,
Till we are past the city: in this disguise we came.
We Will keep us still, and so depart again.
Once more God morrow, you may now report,
Your connter was one night king He^ries court.
Away and leave us, Brandon what further news?
(Exit.
Bran. The old king of France is dead my Liege,
And left your sister Mary a young widow.

King. God forbid man, what not so soon I hope,
She has not yet bin married forty days:
Is this news certain?

Bran. Most true my Lord.

King. Alas poor Mary, so soon a widow,
Before thy wedding robes be half worn out:
We must then prepare black funeral garments too,
Well, we will have her home, the league i^ broake:
And we will not trust her safety with the French.
Charles Brandon* you shall go to France for her,
See that your train be richly furnished,
And if the daring French, brave thee in attempts
Of honor, Barriers, Tilt, and and T^arnament:
So to retain her, bare thee like thy self,
An English man, dreadlesse of the prowdest:
And highly scorning lowly hardiness

(...) Bran. I shall my Sovereign, and in her honor,
I Will cast a challenge through all the court:
And dare the pro^dest Peer in France for her.

King. Commend me to the Lady Cat^erine Parry,
Give her this Ring, tell her on sunday next
She shall be Queen, and crownde at W^stminster:
And A^^e of Clea^e shall be sent home again:
Come syrs, we will leave the city, and the counter now,
The day begins to break, le^s hye to court.
And once a quar^er we desire such sport.
Exit.
Enter the Cardinal reading a letter, (...) is his Bishops R^^bes. VV^l. My
reverent Lord of Lond^^,
Ou^ trusty friend, the king of France is dead,
And in his death, our hopes are hindered:
The Emperor too, mislikes his praises,
But we shall cross him fort I doubt it not:
And tread upon his pomp imperial,
That thus has wrongde the English Cardinal.

Bon. Your graces letters by Campeans sent,
I doubt not but shall work your full content.

Wol. I that must be our safest way to work,
Money will make us men, when men stand out:
The Bastard Fredericks to attain the place,
Has made an offer to the Cardinals,
Of threescore thousand pound, which we will pay,
Three times thrice double, ere we lose the day.

Enter Will (...) and Patch. Patch. Come cosen Willian, I Will bring ye to my
Lord Cardinal presently.


Will. I thank ye cosen, and when you come to the court, I Will bring you to
the King again, ye know cosen, he gave ye an angel.


Patch. I but he gave me such a blow oath ear for it, as I care not for coming
Ins sight again while I live.


Wol. How now Patch, who have you got there? what Will S^mmers welcome good
William.


Will. I thank your grace, I hard say your Lordship had made two new Lords
here, and so the two old fools are come to wait on them.


B^n. We thank ye (...).

Patch Your Lordship will be well guarded, we follow ^e, The Kings fool, and
the Cardinals, and we are no small fools I ass^^e ye.


Will. No indeed, my cosen Patch here is something too square to be set on
your shoe, marry and you will wear him on your shoulder, the fool shall ride
ye.


VV^l. A shrewde fool Bonner, come hither William, I have a quarrel to you
since our last ryming.


Will. About your fair Leman at Charlt^n my Lord, I remember.

B^^. You speak plain William.

Will. Ye never knew fool a flatterer I warrant ye.

W^l. Well Will, I Will try your ryming wits once more,
What say you to this?
The bells hang high, and loud they cry, what do they speak?

Will. If you should dye, there is none would cry, though your neck should break.


W^l. You are something bitter William: But come on, once more I am for ye. A
rod in school, a whip for a fool, is always in season.


Will. A halter and a rope, for him that would be pope,
Against all right and reason.

W^l. He^s too hard for me still, I Will give him over, come tell me Wul, what is
the n^wes at Court?


Will. Marry my Lord, they say the King must be married this morning.


Wol. Married Will, to whom I prithee?

Will. Why to my Lady Catherin Parry, I was once by, when he was wooing on her,
and then I doubted they would go together shortly.


W^l. Holy Saint Peter sheeld his Majesty,
She is the hope of (...) heresy:
If she be Queen, the Protestants will swell,
And Cranmer, Tutor to the Prince of Wales,
Will boldly speak against Romes Religion*
But Bishops we will to Court immediately,
And plot the downfall of these Lutherans:
You two are Tutors to the Princes Mary,
Still ply her to the (...) obedience,
And make her hate the name of Protestant;
I do suspect that Latimer and (...)
Chief teachers of the fair (...),
Are not sound Catholics, nor friends to (...)
It it be so, we will soon remove them all*
T is better they should dye, then thousands fall.
Come follow us. Ma^it, VV^l, and Patch.

Exit (...). Will. Your Lords mad, till he be at the wedding, it was marvel the
King stole it so secretly and ner^ told him ont, but alls one, if he be
married, let him play with his Queen to night, and then to morrow heel call
for me, th^res no fool toth wilful still. What shall we do cosen?


Patch. I Will go get the key of the wine-seller, and thou and I Will keep a
passage there to night.


Will. We have but a little wit between us already cosen, and so we should
have none at all.


Patch. When our wits be gone, we will sleep eth sellor, and lie without our
wits for one night.


Will. Content, and then eth morning we will but wet them with an other cup more,
and thaile shave like a rasor all day after. Come close good cuzze, let no
body go with us, least they be drunk before us, for fools are innocents,
and must be accessarie to no man's overthrow.

Exit.
Sound Trumpets. Enter King, Queen Katherine, Cardinal, Semer, Dudly, Gr^y,
Enter C^^pton, crying H^b^yes. King. VVelcome Queen Katherine, seat thee by
our side,
Thy sight fair Queen, by us thus dignified,
Earls, flarro^, Knights, and Gentlemen,
Against ye all, we will be chief challenger,
To fight at Barriours, Tilt, and Turnament,
In honor of the fair Queen Katherine,

Queen. We thank your highness, and beseech your grace,

Forbear such hazard of your royal person,
Without such honors is your handmaid pleased,
Obediently to yield all love and duty,
That may beseem your sacred Majesty.

King. God a mercy, but where are our children?
Prince Edward, Mary, and Elizabeth,
The royal Issue of three famous Queens,
How haps we have not seen them here to day?

Dud. They all my Liege attend your majesty,
And your fair queen, so within the presence here.

King. It Is well, Dudh^ call Cranmer in,
He is chief Tutor to our Princely son,
For precepts that concern divinity.
Enter Cranmer. And here he comes, Cranmer, you must ply the Prince,
Let his wast hours be spent in getting learning:
And let those linguists for choice languages,
Be careful for him in their best endeavors,
Bid Doctor Tie, ply him to Music hard,
He Is apt to learn, therefore be diligent,
He may requite your love when we are gone.

Cran. Our care and duty shall be had my Lord.

King. We thank ye.
I tell thee Cranmer he is all our hopes,
That what our age shall leave unfinished,
In his fair reign shall be accomplished.
Go and attend him, how now Will Summers, what is the news with you?


Enter Will Summers. VVil. I come to bid thee and thy new Queen Godmorrow.
Look to him Kate least he cozen thee, provide civil Orenges enough, or heel
have a Lemmon shortly.


Queen. Godamercie Will, thout tell me then, will thou not?

Will. I and watch him too, or let him nere trust me: but do hear Harry,
because I Would have thee have the poores prayers, I have brought thee some
petitions, the F^yers and Priests pray too, but I think us as children say
grace, more for fashion then (...) heard, because they beg for Godsake,
therefore I prithee dispatch them.


King. Read them Semer.

Semer. The humble petition of the Lady Seaton, ^or her distressed son, that in
his own defense, unhappily has slain a man.


King. The Lady Seaton, Gods holy mother,
Her son has had our pardon ^wise already,
For two stout subjects that his hand has slain.

Will. And ^y had said so but thou Harry, I Would have told him a lyde, he nere
killed but one, thou kildst the tothe^: for and thou had hanged him for the
first, the two last had bin alive still.


King. The fool tells true, they wrong our Majesty
That seek our pardon for such cruelty:
A way with it.

Will. Give me i^ again, It shall nere be seen more I assure ye^ and I had
known tad come for that purpose, It should nere have bin brought for VV^l I
warrant ye.


Se. This other comes from two poor prisoners eth counter.

King. We know the inside then, come give them me,
Lord Cardinal, here is one is dedicated to you.
How! read it: whose there? Compto^ enquire for Rookesbie a
Groom of the wardrope, and bring him hither.

Comp. I will.

King. Cardinal, what find ye written there?

Wol. Mine own discredit, and the undoing of an honest citizen, by a false
servant.


Will. It Is not your fool my Lord I warrant ye.

Wol. No will?

Wub. I thought so, I knew it was one of your k^aues, for your fools are
harmless.


Queen Welsed Will thou love thy masters credit I know.

Will. I Kate, as well as any Cou^tier he keeps:
I had rather he should have the poore^ prayers, then the Popes.


Queen. Faith I am of thy mind Will, I think so too.

King. Take heed what ye say Kate, what a Lutheran?

Wol. It Is Heresy saire Queen, to think such thoughts.

Queen. And much vncharity to wrong the poor?

Will. Well, and when the Pope is at best, he is but Saint Peter's debutie,
but the poor, present Christ, and therefore should be something better
regarded.


King. Go too fool.

W^l. Syrrha, you will be whipped for this.

Will. Would the King wood whip thee and all the Popes whelps out of England
once, for between ye, ye have rackt and pulled it so, we shall be all poor
shortly, you have had four hundred threescore pound within this three year
for smoakepence, you have smoakte it in faith: do hear Harry, next time they
gather them, let them take the chimnies, and leave the coin behind them, we
have clay enough to make brick, though we want silver mines to make money.


King. Well William your tongue is priuiledgde.

VVol. But my good Liege, I fear there is shroder heads
Although kept close, has set this ^oole a work,
Thus to exstirpe against his holiness.

Will. Do not you think so my Lord, nor stomach no body about it: ye know
what the old Pro^erbe sai^s, therefore be patient great quarrellers small
credit winnes:

When fools set stools, and wise men break their shinnes: therefore think
not on it, for I Will sit down by thee Kate and say nothing, for here comes one
to be examined.


Enter Compt^n and Rookes^^^. King. O sir, you're welcome, Is your name (...)?

Rookes. your poor servant is so ealde my Lord.

King. Our servant we geffe ye by the clo^th ye wea^e, but for Your pouertic
it is doubtful, your credit is so good. Lets see what is the man's name, ha!
Hopki^^, do you know the man? (...)? No my Lord.


King. Had you never no dealings with such a man?

Rookes. No, if it like your Majesty.

King. No, if it like our Maies^ie, saucie varlet:
It likes not our Majesty, thou should say no:
It likes us not thou lie, for that we know.
You know him not, but he too well knows you,
And lies imprisoned slave, for what is thy due.

Rookes. Sure some envious man has misinformd.

King. Dare thou deny it still, out-facing knave,
Mother a God, i will hang thee presently.
Sir ye lie: and though ye wear the kings cloth,
Yet we dare tell ye so before the king:
Slave thou do know him.
He here complains he is undone by thee,
And the kings man has causde his misery.
Yet you will outface it still, deny, forswear, and lie fir, ha*

Will. Not a word more, if thou love thy life, vnles^e thou^ confess all, and
speak fair.


Rookes. I do befeech your Grace.

K. Out periurde knave, what do thou serve the King.
And darste thou thus abuse our Maiesti^:
And wrong my subjects by thy treachery?
Think thou false thief, thou shall be privileged
Because thart my man, to hurt my people:
Villain, those that guard me, shall regard mine honor:
Put off that coat of proof, that strong security:
Under which ye march like a halbertere,
Passing through purgatory, and none dare strike:
A Seriants mace must not presume to touch
Your sacred shoulders with the kings own wri^*
Gods dear Lady, does the cloth ye wear,
Such privilege and strong prevention bear.
Ha, is it Rookesby?

Rookes. My royal Lord.

Enter a Messenger i^ (...). King. Take that, and know your time to tell your
Message: Sir, I am busy.

Will. So, there is one served: I think you would take two more with all your
heart, so you were well rid on him.


Rookes. Your pardon good my Liege.

King. Ha, pardon thees I tell thee did it touch thy life in ou ^ht, more then
mine own di^pleasure, not the world should purchase it, vilde ^aus^e: had
thou neglected this thy dut e to our persons danger: Had thou thy self
against me ought attempted, I might be sooner won to pardon thee, then for a
subjects hate^ull injury.


Queen. Let me entreat your Grace to pardon him.

King. Away Kate speak not for him,
Out of my le^itie I let him live,
Discharge him from my cloth and countenance,
To the Counter to redeem his creditor,
Where he shall satisfy the ^most mi^e
Of any debt, default or hindrance:
I Will keep no man to blurre my credit so,
My cloth shall not pay what my servants owe.
Away with him.
Exit. Now my Lord Cardinal, speaks not your paper so?

Car. Yes my good Lord, your Grace has shown a pattern, to draw forth mine
by, I assure your Highness,

The punishment inflicted on your man,
Is meant for mine servants that bears such minds,
Their Masters thus but serves them in their kinds.

King. Where Is this fellow now that brings this news?

Will. He is gone with a fl^a in his ear: But has left his Message behind with
my Lord Dudley, here.


King. And what is the nowe^^.

Dudlye. Duke Brand^^ my Liege.

King. Oh, he is returnde from France:
And who comes with him?

Dudlye. His royal wife, my Lord.

King. Ha^ royal wife: whose that?

Dud. Your Highness sister, the late Q. of France.

K^^. Ou^ sister Q. his (...): who gave him her?

Gra. It Is sed they were married at Doner, my liege.

King. I were better he had nere seen the Town.
Dares any Subject mix his blood with ours, without our leaue^

Enter Brandon and Mary. Dudly. He comes himself my Liege, to answer it.

Bran. Health to my Sovereign.

Kin. And our brother king, your Message is before ye sir: off with his head.


Bran. I beseech your Grace give me leave.

King. Nay you have taken leave, away with him, bid the Captain of our Guard,
convey him to the Tower.


Bran. Hear me my Lord.
Audatious Brandon, think thou excuse shall serve.

Lady Mary. Right gracious Lord.

King. Go too, your prayers will scarce save your self,
Durst ye contract your self without our knowledge?
Hence with that hare-braine, Duke to the Tower I say,
And bear our careless sister to the Fleet:
I know sir, you broke a Lance for her,
And bravely did unhorse the Challengers:
Yet was there no such prize set on her head,
That you without our leave should marry her.

Queen. Oh my Lord, let me entreat for them.

King. Tut Kate, though thus I seem
A while to threaten them,
^meane not to disgrace my sister so:
A way with them. What say ye Lords,
Is he not worthy death for his misdeed?

Bon and Gar. Unless your Grace shall please to pardon him.

King. He deserves it then?

Bon and Gar. He does my Liege.

King. You are knaves and fools, and ye ^latter me:
Gods holy Mother, I Will not have him hu^t, for all your heads:
Dear Brandon, I embrace thee in mine arms:
Kind sister, I love you both so well.
I cannot dart another angry fro ^ne
To gain a kingdom: here take him Mar^e,
I hold the happier in this English choice,
Then to be Q. of France: Charles, love her well.
And tell on Brandon, what is the news in France.

Bran. The league is broke betwixt the Emperor
And the young king of France: Forces are mustring
On either part my Lord, for horse and foot.
Hot variance is expected speedily.
The Emperor is marching now to La^dersey,
There to invade the towns of Burgondie.

King. God and S. George, we will meet his Majesty,
And strike a league of Christian ami^ie.
Lord Cardinal, you shall to France with speed,
And in our name salute the Emperor,
We Will give direction for your Embassage.
The next fair wind, shall make us France to great,
Where Charles the Emperor, and king shall meet.

Exit O^nes. Enter Cranm^r, Doctor Tie: and young Brown, meets them with the
Princes cloak an^ ^as. Cran. How now young Brown, what have you there?

Brown. The Princes cloak and hat, my Lord.

Cran. Where is his Grace?

Brown. At Tennis, with the Marquess D^rset.

Cran. You and the M^rquesse, draw the Princes mind
To follow pleasure, and neglect his book:
For which the King blames us. But credit me,
You shall be soundly paid immediately.

Brow. I pray ye good my I. i will go call the Prince away.

Cra^. Nay, now ye shall not, whose within there ho? strai^e

Servant. My Lord.

Cran. Go bear this yongster to the Chapel,
And bid the M. of the Children whippe him well:
The Prince will not learn sir, and you shall smart for it.

Bro. O good my L. I Will make him ply his book to morrow.

Cran. That shall not serve your turn, away I say.
Exit. So sir, this policy was well deuisde: Since he was whipped thus for the
Princes faults,

His Grace has got more knowledge in a month,
Than he attained in a year before,
For still the fearful boy to save his breech,
Does hourly haunt him whereso ere he goes.

Tie. It Is true my Lord, and now the Prince perceiues it,
As ^oath to see him punished for his faults,
Plays it of purpose to redeem the boy,
But pray my Lord, lets stand aside awhile,
And note the greeting twixt the Prince and him,

Cra. See where the boy comes and the Kings Fool with him; Lets not be seen,
but list their conference.


Will. Nay boy, and ye cry you will spoil your eye sight, come, come trusse up
your hose, you must hold fast your wind, both before and behind, and blow
your nose.


Brown, For what Fool?

Will. Why for the mote in thine eye, is there not won in it, wherefore do
thou cry else?


Br. I prethy Will go call the Prince from the Tenniscourt.


Will. Do thou cry for that? nay then I smell a Ratte, the Prince has played
the Trewant to day, and his Tutors has drawn blood of thy buttocks fort: why
boy it is honorable to be whipped for a Prince.


Bro. I would he would either leave the Tenniscourt and ply his Book, or give
me leave to be no Courtier.


Will. I, for i will be sworn thy breech lies ith Hassard about it, but look
little Ned, yonder he comes.


Enter the Prince, and the young Marquess with their Rackets, diners
attending. Marq. Some Rubbers for the Prince.

Servant. Here my good Lord.

Prince. One take our Rackets, and reach my Cloak,
By my faith Marquis, you are too hard for me.

Ma. Your Grace will say so, though ye over ma^ch (...).

Pr. Why (...)?

Bro. (...) loyters, and will not ply your book, and your Tutors has whipped me
for it.


Pr. Alas poor Ned, I am sorry for it, I Will take the more pains, and entreat
my Tutors for thee: yet in troth, the lectors they read me last night out of
Virgill and O^id, I am perfect in: only I confess I am something behind in
my Greek Authors.


Will. And for that speech, they have declynde it upon his breech.


Prin. And for my logic, thou shall witness thy self I am perfect: for now
will I prove* that though thou we^^ whipped for me, yet this whipping was good
for thee.


Mar. I Will hardly belccue you my Lord, though Ramu^ himself should prove it:
well, probe.


Pr. Mark my Problem.
Bona virga facit bonum puerum:
Bonum est, te esse bonum puerum:
Ergo bona vorga, res bona est: And that is this, Ned.
A good rod makes a good boy: it is good that thou should be a good boy:
(ergo) therefore a good rodis good.


Will. Nay berladie, the better the rod is, it is the worse for him, that is
certain: but do 'st hear me, boy; since he can prove a r^dde to be so
good, let him take it himself next time.


Prin. In truth, I pit^ie thee* and inwardly I feel the stripes thou barest,
and for thy sa^e, Ned, i will pli^ my book the fastor; in the mean time, thou
shall not say, but the Prince of Wales will honorably reward thy seru^^c^come,
Brown, kneel down.


Will. What, will thou knight him, Ned?

Pr. I will; my father has knighted many a o^e, that never shed drop of
blood for him; but he has often for me.


Will. O brave! he looks like the myrrour of knighthood already.

Enter Cru^pt. Clear the presence, Gentlemen, the King is coming.


Pr. The King? gods me, reach (...) booke^s call my Tutors in: come ^rowne, I Will
confirm thy knighthood before the King.


Enter the King. Mar. Here be your Tutors, my Lord, and yonder the King comes.


Pri. Health to your* Majesty.

King. Godamercy Ned; I, at your book so hard, it is well, it is well; now
Bishop Cran^ar, and good doctor Tie, I was going to the gallory, and thought to
have had your Scholar with me, but seeing you are so busy, I Will not trouble him,
come on Will, come, go you along with me, what make you among the scholars
here?


Will. I come to learn my quy que quod to keep me from the rod: mar here is
one was whipped in pudding time for he has gotten a knighthood about it: look
old Harry, does he not look more furious then he was wont.


King. Who W^, young Brown, Gods Mary mother, his father is a gallant Knight,
as any these south parts of England holds.


Will. He cannot compare with his son tho, if he were right donsal delphebus,
or the very knight of the Sun himself, yet this knight shall unhorse him.


King. When was he made a knight Will.

Will. Marry i^he last action, I can assure you, there was hot service, and some
on vm came so near him, they had like to smelt ont: but when all was done, the
poor gentleman was pittifuly wounded in the back parts, as may appear by the
scarre, if his k^ightship would but vnt^usse there.


King. But who knighted him, William?

Will. That did Ned here: and he has earnd it too, for I am sure, this two year
he has bin lasht, for his learning.


King. Ha, how, come hither Ned, is this true?

Pr. It is, my Lord, and I hope your highness will confirm my deed.


King. Confirm it, Gods holy mother, what shrode boys are these? Cranmar and
Tie, do ye observe the Prince, now by my Crown young Ned thou have honored me.

I like thy kingly spirit that loves to s^e
Thy friends advanced to types of dignity.
Young Knight come hither, what the Prince has done
We here confirm, be still Sir Edward Brown:
But hear ye Ned, now you have made him Knight,
You must give him some living, or else it is nothing.

Will. I by my troth, he is now but a Knight under Forma papris, for a Knight
without living is no better than an ordinary Gallant.


King. Well, what will ye give him Ned?

Prince. When I have heard of something that may do him good, I will entreat
your Majesty for him, and ith mean time from mine own allowance I Will
maintain him.


King. It Is well said: but for your sake Son Edward, well provide for him;
Cranmar, see presently a Pattent drawn, wherein were will confirm to him from
our Exchequor a Thousand Marks a year.


Brown. I thank your Majesty.
And as I am true Knight, I Will fight and die for ye.

Will. Now if your Tutors come to whip ye, you may choose whether you will untruss
byth order of arms.


King. Well Ned, ^ee ye plye your learning, and lets have no more Knights made
in this Action, look to him Brown, if he loyter, his Tutors will have you up
for it.


Brown. I hope my Lord, they dare not whip me now.

King. Be^ladie Sir, that's doubtful.

Will. If they do, he shall make thee a Lord, and then they dare not.


King. Well Cranmar well leave ye, when your pupyll has done his task ye set
him now, let him come and visit us: on Gentlemen into the Gallerie.


Pr. Heaven keep your Majesty.
Gentlemen draw near.
Exit.
Tie. God morrow to your Grace.

Prince. God morrow Tutors at noone, it is God even, is it not?


Cran. We saw not your Grace to day.

Prince. O ye quippe me cunningly for my Trewantship* that I was not at my
Book to day, but I have thought o^ that ye read last n^ght, I assure ye.


Cran. We doubt it not fair Prince: Lords, Gentlemen give leave.


Will. All void the rowme, there is but Scholars and Fools.


Cr. I hope your excellence can answer me in that axiom of Phylosophie, I
propounde to ye.


Prince. I promise ye Tutor, it is a Problem to me, for the difference of your
Authors opinions, makes me differ in mine own: some say, Omne animalest, aut
homo, aut bestia, that cu^rie living creature is, or man, or beast.


Will. Then a woman's a beast, for she is no man.

Pr. Peace William you will be expul'st else: And again some Authors affirm,
that every beast is foure-footed.


Will. Then a Fools no beast, for he has but two.

Prince. Yet again Will.

Will. Mum Ned, no words, I Will be as still as a small bagpipe.


Cra. Omne Animal est, aut homo, aut bestia: And thus it is proved my Lord, Omne
Animal, est rationalis, vel irrationalis, homo est rationalis, Bestia
irrationalis,

Ergo omne Animal homo est, vel Bestis:
Among all the creatures in this Universe,
Or on the earth, or flying in the air,
Man only reason has, others only sense,
So what is only sensual, in not man, but beast:
For man both sense and reason has:
So every creature, having one of these, is sure or man, or best: and though
all beasts are not foure-footed.


Will. That's certain a louse has six.

Cran. I beseech your Grace.

Pr. A way William.

Will. Not a word more as I am William.

Cr. For many beasts have wings serving in stead of feet, and some have
horn's, of which we thus esteem, Animal cornutum non habet dentes supremas, No
horned beast has teeth above the roof.


Will. That's a lie, a Cuckold has.

Pr. Thrust the Fool out of the presence there.

W. Well, Cedant arma toge, The scholars shall have the fools place.

Exi^ Will.
Pr. Well Cranmar, you have made me able to prove a man no beast, if he prove
not himself so, well now leave this: And now resolve me for Diuinitic, Cranmar
I love ye, and I love your Learning, speak and well hear ye:

God give ye truth that you may give it me,
This Land ye know stands wavering in her Faith,
Betwixt the Papists and the Protestants,
You know we all must die, and this flesh
Part, with her part of immortality,
Tutor, I do believe both Heaven and Hell:
Do you know any third place for the souls abode
Cald'd Purgatory, as some would have me think,
For from my Sister Marie and her Tutors,
I have often received Letters to that purpose:
I love ye Cranmar, and shall believe what ere ye speak,
Therefore I charge ye tell the truth.

Cran. How thinks your Grace, is there a place of Purgatory or no?
P. Truly I think none, yet must I urge to you what is laid
To me, this world you know has been five Thousand years
Still increasing, still decreasing, still repleni^h't,
How long it will be, none know's but he that made it,
We al do call our selus Gods children, yet sure some are not,
But think ye Tutor that the compasle of that heaven and hell,
Is able to contain those souls so numberless,
That ever breathed since the first breath was given,
Wthout a Tertium, or a third place.
Who puts these doubts within your Graceshead
Are like their own belief, slite, and unregarded,
And is as easily answered and confuted:
Quod est inf^^itum, non habet finem,
Calum est opus Dei, opus Dei est infinitum:
E^go Calum, est infinitum.
That which is infinite has no end at all,
For that eterniti^, that everlasting essence,
That did concord heaven, earth, and hell to be
Is of himself all infinite, that heaven and hell are so,
His power, his works, and words do witness it,
For what is infinite, has in it selle no-end,
Then must the heavens which is his glorious seat,
Be incomprehensible containing him,
Then what should need a third place to contain,
A world of Infinites so vast and main.

Pr. I thank ye Cranmar, and do believe ye
What other proofs have been maintayn'd to me
Or shall be, you shall know and aid me in them:
Enough for this time, who is there? Doctor Tie
Our Musicks Lecturer^ pray draw nere: Indeed I take much

Tie. In Music may your Grace ever delight, (delight in ye Though not in me,
Music is fit for Kings,
And not for those knows not the chime of st^ings.

Pr. Truly I love it yet there are a sort
Seeming more pure than wise, that will upbraid at it,
Calling it idle, vain, and frivolous.

Tie. Your Grace has said, indeed they do upbraid
That term it so, and those that do are such
As in themselves no happic concords hold,
All Music jars with them, but sounds of good.
But would your Grace a while be patient,
In Musickes praise, thus will I better it.
Music is heavenly, for in Heaven is Music,
For there the Seraphins do sing continually,
And when the best was borne, that ever was man,
A Quir^ of Angels sang for joy of it,
What of Celestial was reueald to man,
Was much of Music, ^is said the beasts did worship
And sang before the Deity supernall,
The kingly Prophet sang before the Arc,
And with his Music charmd the heart of Saul,
And if the Poet sail us not my Lord,
The dulcet tongue of Mus^^ke made the stones
To move, irrational beast, and birds to dance
And last, the Trumpets Music shall awake the dead,
And cloth their naked bones in coats of flesh,
T'appeare in that high house of Parliament,
When those that gn^sh their Teeth at Music sound,
Shall make that place where Music nere was found.

Pr. Thou give it perfect life, skillful Doctor
I thank thee for the honored praise thou give it,
I pray thee lets hear it too.

Tie. It Is ready for your Grace, give breath to your loud tuned instruments.

Loud Musickc. Pr. It Is well, me thinks in this sound I prove a comepleat age,
As Music, so is man governed by stops,
Awed by dividing notes, sometimes aloft,
Sometime below, and when he has attained,
His high and loftic pitch, breathed his sharpest and most
Shrillest air, yet at length it is gone,
And falls down flat to his conclusion,
(Soft Music.) Another sweetness, and harmonious sound,
A mildel strain, another kind agreement,
Yet mong'st these many stringes, be one untuned
Or jarreth low, or hyer than his course
Not keeping steddie mean among'st the rest,
Corrupts them all, so does bad men the best.

Tie. Enough; let voices now delight his princely care.

A Song. Pr. Doctor, I thank you and commend your cunning.
I est have heard my Father merrily speak,
In your hye praise, and thus his Highness says,
England, one God, one truth, one Doctor has
For Musicks Art, and that is Doctor Tie,
Admir'rd for skill in Musickes harmony.

Tie. Your Grace does honor me with kind acceptance,
Yet one thing more, I doebeseech your Excellence
To daine, to Patronize this homely work,
Which I unto your Grace have dedicat^.

Pr. What is the Title?

Tie. The Acts of the holy Apostles turned into verse,
Which I have set in several (...) to sing,
Worthy Acts, and worthily in you remembered.
I Will peruse them, and satisfy your p^^nes,
And have them sung within my fathers Chapel.
I thank ye both. Now I Will crave leave a while
To be a little id^e: pray let our lingguistes,
French and Italians, to morrow morn be ready,
I must confer with them, or I shall le^se
My little practice. so God-den good ^utors.
Exit.
Cra^. Heal^h to your Highness, God increase your days:
The hope of England, and of learnings praise.

Enter Bonner and Gardener reading. Bon. What have ye here my Lord of
Winchester?

Guard. Heriticall and damned he^esies,
Precepts that Crammers wisdom taught the Prince,
The Pope and we are held as heritickes,
What think thou Bonner of this wouering age?

Bon. As Seamen do of storms, yet hope for fair wether,
Berlady Gardener we must look about,
The Protestants begin to gather head,
Luther has sown well, and Englands ground
Is fat and fertile to increase his seed,
Here Is lofue plants, what, bishops and Prelates,
I nobility temporal, but we shall temper all
At the return of our high Cardinal.

Gar. Bonner it is true, but in mean time we must
Prevent this ranckor that now swells so big,
That it must out or break, they have a dangerous head,
And much I fear.

Bon. What not the King I hope?

Guard. It Is doubtful he will bend, but sure
Queen Katherens a strong Lutheran hard ye not
How in presence of the King an^ Cardinal,
She did exsterp against his Holiness.

Bon. But had our English Cardinal once attaind,
The high possession of Saint Peter's Chair,
Heed bar some toungs than now have scope too much,
It Is he must do it Gardener, '(...) perilous thing,
Queen Katherin can do much with Englands King.

Guard. I Bonner, that's the sum of all,
There must be no Queen, or the Abbeys fall,

Bon. See where she comes with the Kings Sister,
And from the Princes lodging, lets salute her.

Guard. God morrow to your Majesty.

Quee. God morrow to my reue^ent Lords of London and of Winchester, saw ye the
King to day?


Bon. His Highness was not yet abroad this morning.
But here we will attend his excellence.

Quee. Come sister we will go see his Majesty.

La. Ma We will attend ye Maddam.

Quee. Gentlemen set forward, God morrow Lords.

Guard. Ill morrow must it be to you or us,
Conspirators against men religious,
Bonner, these Lutherans do conspi^e I see,
And scoff the Pope and his supremacy.

Bon. Lets strike in time then, and incense the King,
And suddenly their stares to ruin bring:
The Trumpets sounds, it seems the Queen is coming.
We Will watch and take advantage cunningly.

Enter the King, Queen, Lady Mary, Brandon, Semer* Gray, and Dudley. King.
Where Is Brandon?

Bran. My Leedge.

King. Come hither Kate.

Bran. Did your grace call?

Kin. I Will speak we anon, I Will speak we anon: Come Kate lets walk a little,
whose there? my Lords of London and of Winchester, welcome, welcome: by this
your master the Cardinal I troe, has parted with the Emperor, and set a
league between the French and him, Mother of God,

I would our self in person had been there,
But Wolseys diligence we need not fear,
Ha think ye he will not.

Guard. No doubt he will my Lord.

King. I Gardner twill be his best policy,
Their friendship must advance his dignity.
If ere he get the Papal governance.

Dud. And that will never be I hope.

Sem. Twere pity it should.

Gray. He Is proud enough already.

Kin. Haw, what is that ye talk there.

Bran. They say my Lord he is gone with such a train, As if he should be
elected presently.


King. Fore-god it is a gallant Priest, come hither Charlcs prithee let me lean
a thy shoulder, by Saint George, Kate ^ grow stiff me thinks.


Quee. Wilt please your Highness sit and rest your self?

King. No, no Kate, I Will walk still, Brandon shall stay mine arm, I me fat and
pursie, and twill get me a stomach: Sawst the Prince to day Kate?


Quee. I my good Lord.

King. God blenn him, and make him fortunate, I tell ye Lords, the hope that
England has, is now in him, fore-god I think old Harry must leave ye
shortly; well, Gods will be done, heerle be old shuffling then, ha will there
not; well, you say nothing, pray God there be not, I like not this difference
in religion I, Gods dear Lady, and I live but seven year longer, we will take
order thoroughly.


Bon. We hear that Luther out of Germanic
Has with a book unto your Majesty,
Wherein he much repents his former deeds,
Craving your Highness pardon, and withal,
Submits himself unto your Graces pleasure.

Kin. Bonner it is true, and we have answered it,
Blaming at first his haughty insolence,
And now his lightnesle and inconstancy,
That writ he knew not what so childisbly.

Guard. Much bloodshed there is now in Germany,
About this difference in religion,
With Lutherans, Arians, and Anabaptis^^
As half the Province of Heluetia,
Is with their tumults almost quite destroyde.

Quee. Me thinks twere well my royal Sovereign,
Your Grace, the Emperor, and the Christian kings,
Would call a Counsel and p^^use the books,
That Luther writ against the Catholics,
And superstitions of the Church of Rome:
And if they teach a truer way to heaven,
Agreeing with the Hebrew Testament,
Why should they not be red and followed?

Kin. Thou say well Kate, so they agree with the scriptures, I think it is
lawful to peruse and read them, speak Bishops?


Guard. Most unlawful my dear Sovereign,
Unless permitted by his Holiness.

Queen. How prove ye that my Lord?

Kin. Well sed Kate, to them again good wench, Lords give us leave awhile,
avoid the Presence there, we^l hear the Bishops and my Queen dispute.


Queen. I am a weak Scholar my Lord,
But on condition that your Highness, not these reverent Lords,
Will take no exceptions at my woman's wit,
I am content to hold them Argument:
And first with reverence to his Majesty.
Pray tell me, why would ye make the King believe.
His Highness and the people under him,
Are tide so st^ictly to obey the Pope?

Bon. Because fair Queen he is Gods Deputy.

Queen. So are all Kings; and God himself commands
The King to rule, and people to obey.
And both to love and honor him:
But you that are sworn servants unto Rome,
How are ye faithful s^biects to the King,
When first ye scrue the Pope then after him?

Guard. Madame these are that sects of Lutherans,
That makes your Highness so mistake the Scriptures,
Your slender arguments thus answered
Before the King, God (...).

Queen. It Is true, but pray ye answer this:
Suppose, the King by Proclamation,
Commanded you and (...),
To spurn against the Popes authority:
Ye know the Scripture binds ye to obey him,
But this I think, if that his Grace did so,
Your slight obedience all the world should know.

King. Gods-mother Kate, thoust touched them there,
What say ye to that Bonner?

Bon. Were it to any but her Majesty,
These questions were confuted easily.

Quee. Pray tell the King then, what Scripture have ye,
To teach religion in an unknown language?
Instruct the ignorant to kneel to Saints,
By bare-foote pilgrimage to visit shrines,
For money to release from Purgatory,
The vildest villain, thief, or murderer,
All this the people must believe you can,
Such is the dregs of Romes religion.

Guard. I, those are the speeches of those heretics,
Cranmer, Ridley, and blunt Lattimer,
That daily rail against his Hollynesse,
Filling the land with hateful herefies.

Quee. Nay be not angry, nor mistake them Lords,
What they have said or done, was mildly followed,
As by their Articles are evident.

King. Where are those Articles Kate?

Quee. I Will go and fetch them to your Majesty,
And pray your Highness view them graciously.
Exit Quee.
Kin. Go fetch them Kate: a sirta, we have women doctors,
Now I see, Mother a God, here is a fine world the whilste,
That twixt so many men's opinions,
The holy Scriptures must be banded thus.

Guard. God grant it breed no farther detriment,
Unto your crown and sacred dignite:
They that would alter thus Religion,
I fear they scarcely love your toyall person.

Kin. Ha* take heed what you say Gardener.

Guard. My love and duty to your Majesty,
Bids me be bold to speak my conscience,
Unless your sasetie and your life they hate,
Why should they daily thus disturb the state.
To smooth the face of false rebellion,
Proud traitors will pretend religion.
For under color of reformation
The vpstart followers of Wickcliffes doctrine,
In the fifth Henry's days arise in arms:
And had nor dilligent care prevented them,
Their powers had suddenly surprisd the King.
And good my Leege who knows their proud intent,
That thus rebel against your government.

Kin. Shrode proofs berlady and by saint Peter,
I swcare we will not trust their gentleness,
Speak Gardner and resolve us speedily,
Whose the ringleader of this Iusty crew?

Bon. Unless your highness please to pardon us,
We dare not speak nor urge your majesty.

Kin. We pardon what ye speak, resolve us speedely.

Guard. Then if your royal person will be safe,
Your life preserude and this fair Realm in peace.
And all these troubles smoothly pacifide,
The Queen dear Lord must be removed from you.

Kin. Haw, the Queen, bold Sir advise ye well,
Take heed ye do not wrong her loyalty.

Guard. See here my lee ge are proofs too manifest,
Her highness with a sect of Lutherans:
Have private meetings, secret conuentickells,
To wrest the grounds of all religion:
Seeking by tumults to subvert the state,
The which with out your majesty's consent,
Is treason capital against the Crown.

Bon. And seeing without the knowledge of your grace,
They dare attempt these dangerous stratagems,
It Is to befearde, which heaven we pray prevent,
They do conspire against your sacred life.

Guard. Why else, should all these private meetings be without the knowledge of
your majesty.


Kin. Mother a god these proofs are probabell,
And strong presumptions do (...) your words, within there, ho?


Enter Compton. My Lord. Kin. Sir William Compton see the doors made fast*
Dubble our guard let none come nere our person*
Sommon the counsel to confer with us,
Bid them attend us in the pri^ty chamber,

Comp. Here is a letter for your majesty,
From Martin Luther out of Germany.

Kin. Da^bd Scysmatick still will he trouble us with books and letters, leave
it and be gone*

Exit Count. The villain thinks to smooth his treachery,
By sawning speeches to our majesty,
But by my George Lord Bishops if I live,
I Will root his fauorits from Englands bounds
What writes his worship?

Guard. Now Bonner stir, the game is set a foot,
The king is now incenst, lets follow close
To have Queen Katherne shorter by a head,
These heresies will cease when she is dead.

Kin. Holy sain: Peter what a knane is this,
Ere while he writ submissiuely to us;
And now again repents his humbleness,
Bishops it seems being touched with our reply
He wrights thus boldly to our majesty,
Gardner look here he was deceived he says
When he thought to find John Baptist in the
Courts of princes, or resident with those that are
Clothed in purple, Mother a god, Is It not a dangerous knave.

Guard. False luther knaves he has great friends in England:
Else durst he not thus move your Majesty.

Kin. We Will cut his friends off, ere they grow too strong
And sweep these vypets from our state ere long,
No marvel though Queen Katherne plead for him,
That is I see the greatest Lutherin,
How is your counsels we proceed in these?

Bon. tware best your grace did send her to the Tower.
Before they further do consit with her.

Kin. Let it be so, go get a warrant drawn,
And with a strong guard bear her to the Tower.
Our hand shall sign your large commission,
Let Cranmer from the Prince be straight removed,
And come not near the Court on pain of death,
Mother a God, shall I be basseld thus,
By traitors, rebels and false he^^ickes:
Get Articles for her araignement ready,
If she of treasou be convict, I swear,
Her head goes off, were she my kingdoms air.

Sound. Exit. Enter the Prince, Cranm: Tie, and the young Lords. Prin. Cranmer.

Cran. My Lord.

Prin. Where is Franciscoe our Italian Tutor?

Cran. He does attend your Grace without my Lord.

Prin. Tell him anon we will confer with him,
We Will plie our learning Brown least you be beaten,
We will not have your Knighthood so disgrast.

Brow. I thank ye good my Lord,
And your Grace would but a little plie your learning,
I warrant ye I Will keep my Knighthood from breeching.

Prin. Faith Ned I will: how now what letter's that?

1. Ser. From your Graces sister the Lady Mary.

Prin. Come give it me, we guess at the contents.
Cranmer, my sister often has writ to me,
That you and Bishop Bonner might conserre,
About these points of new Religion,
Tell me Tutor will ye dispute with him.

Cran. Withal my heart my Lord, and wish the king,
Would daine to here our disputarion.

Prin. What have thou there?

2. Ser. A Letter from your royal sister, young Elizabeth.

Prin. Another Letter ere we open this,
Well we will view them both immediately,
I pray ye attend us in the next Chamber,
And Tutors if I call ye not before,
Give me some notice, if the king my Father
Be walked abroad, I must go visit him.

Tie. We will fair Prince.

Prin. What says my sister Mary? she is eldest,
And by due c^urse must first be answered,
The blessed (...) of thy red^em^r, with all the Angels and (...) to preserve
thee of Idolatry, to (...) for help. Alas good sister still in this opinion,
These are thy blinded Tutors, Bonner, Gardner,
That w^ong thy thoughts with foolish herisies,
He read no farther: to him will Edward pray
For (...), that can him self preserve me,
Without the help of Saint or cerimonie.
What writes (...) sweet sister thou have my heart.
And of Prince Edwards love have greatest part.
(...) with a Sisters love,
Be (...) in thy such, and let thy prayers
(...) to God only for it is he alone
(...) thee, and confound thine enemies,
(...) assurance of thy hopes in heaven,
(...) thee in all temptations,
(...) grace to sh^^ Idolatry,
(...) life to inherit thy election,
To God I commend thee, who still I pray preserve thee.
Thy loving Sister Elizabeth. Loving thou art, and of me best beloved.
Thy lines shall be my contemplations cures,
And in thy virtues will I meditate,
To Christ I Will only pray for me and thee:
Enter Cranmer. This I embrace, away Idolatry,
How now Cranmer, where is the King?

Cran. Conferring with his counsel gracious Prince,
There is some earnest business troubles him:
The Guardes are doubled, and commandment given,
That none be suffered to come near the presence,
God keep his Majesty from traitors hands.

Pri. Amen good Cranmer, what should disturb him thus?
Is Cardinal Wolsey yet returned from France?

Tie. I my good Lord, and this day comes to court.

Prin. Perhaps this hasty business of the King,
Is touching Wolsey and his Embassage.

Cran. Pray God it be no worse my Lord.

Ent Count. Tie. Here comes sir William Compton from his highness.

Comp. Health to your excellency.

Prin. What news sir William?

Comp. The King expects your Graces company,
And wills vout Highness come and speak with him,
And doctor Cranmer, from his Majesty,
I charge ye speedily to leave the Court,
And come not near the Prince on pain of death,
Without direction from the K^^g and Peers.

Cran. Sir I obey ye God so deal with me,
As I have wished unto his Majesty.

Prin. Cranmer banished the Court for what I pray?

Comp. I know not gracious Lord, pray pardon me,
It Is the Kings pleasure; and trust me I am sorry
It was my hap to bring this heavy message.

Cran. Nay good sir William, your message moves not me,
My service to his royal Majesty
Was always true and just, so help me heaven:
Only I pray your Grace to move the King,
That I may come to trial speedily,
And if in ought I have deserved death,
Let me not draw another minutes breath.
Exit Cranmer.
Count. Will ye go my Lord.

Prin. Not yet, we are not your prisoner, are we sir?

Count. No my dear Lord.

Prin. Then go before, and we will follow ye,
Your worship will forget your self I see,
Enter Tie. My tutor thrust from court so suddenly, this is strange.

Tie. The Queen my Lord is come to speak with you.

Enter Queen. Prin. Avoid the presence then, and conduct her in,
I Will speak with her, and after see the King,

Quee. Leave us alone I pray ye.

Prin. Your grace is welcome, how fares your Majesty.

Quee. Never so ill dear Prince, for now I fear,
Even as a wretched caitiffe killed with care,
I am accusde of treason, and the king
Is now in counsel to dispose of me,
I know his frown is death, and I shall dye.

Prin. Who are your accusers.

Quee. I know not.

Prin. How know ye then his Grace is so incenst.

Quee. One of my Gentlemen passing by the presence,
Took up this bill of accusations,
Wherein twe^ue Articles are drawn against me,
It seems my false ac^users lost it there,
Here they accuse me of conspiracy,
That I with Cranmer, Lutimer and Ridley,
Do seek to raise rebellion in the state,
Alter religion, and bring Luther in,
And to new government enforce the king,

Prin. Then that's the cause that Cranmer was removed,
But did your Highness ^re confer with them?
As they have here accusde ye to the king.

Quee. Never nor cuer had I one such thought,
As I have hope in him my soul has bought.

Prin. Then fear not gracious Maddam, I Will to the king,
And doubt not but I Will make your peace with him.

Quee. O plead for me, tell him my soul is clear,
Never did thought of treason harbor here,
As I intended to his sacred life,
So be it to my soul or joy or greese.

Prin. Stay here till I return, I Will move his majesty,
That you may answer your accusers presently.
Exit Prince.
Quee. O I shall never come to speak with him,
The Lion in his rage is not to stern,
As Royal Herry in his wrathful spleen,
And they that have accused me to his grace,
Will work such means I near shall see his face,
Wretched Queen Katherin, would thou had been
Kate Parre still, and not great Englands Queen,

Ent. Comp. Count. Health to your Majesty.

Quee. Wish me good Compton woe and misery,
This giddie flattering world I hate and ^coffe,
Ere long I know Queen Katherins head must off.
Came ye from the King?

Comp. I did fair Queen, and much sad tidings bring,
His grace in secret has reueild to me
What is intended to your Majesty,
Which I in love and duty to your highness,
Am come to tell ye and to counsel ye
The best I can in this ex^remine.
Then on my knees I dare entreat your grace,
Not to reuaile what I shall say to you,
For then I am assurde that dea^^s my due.

Quee. I will not on my faith, good Comptton speak,
That with thy sad repor^s my heart may break.

Comp. Thus then at your sayre feet my life I lay,
In hope to drive your hig^nes cares away:
You are accu^de of high conspiracy
And treason against his royal majesty.
So much they have insenst his excellency,
That he has granted fi^^e commssion
To attach your person and convey ye hence,
Close prisoner to the Tower, Articles are drawn,
And time appointed for arrainement there.
Good maddame be aduisd by this I know,
The officers are sent to arest your person:
Prevent their malice, have ye to the King.
I Will use such means that you shall speak with him,
There plead your Innocence, I know his grace
Will hear ye mildly therefore delay not,
If you be taken ere you see the king,
I fear ye never more shall speak to him.

Que. Oh Comptton twixt thy love and my sage fear,
I feel ten thousand sad vexations here,
Lead on I pray, I Will be aduisd by thee,
The King is angry and the Queen must dye.
Exit
Enter Boner and Gardner with the commission. Guard. Come Boner now strike sure
the yrons hott.
Urge all thou can, let nothing be forgot.
We have the Kings hand here to warrant us,
It Was well the Cardinal came and so luckely.
Who vrgd, the sta^e would quite be ruined,
If that religion thus were altered.
Which made his highness with a fiery spleen,
Direct out warrants to attache the Queen.

Bon. It Was excellent, that Ceder once orethrowne,
To crop the lower shrubs let us alone.

Guard. Those Articles of accusations,
We ^r^md against her being lost by you
Had like to overthrow our policy,
Had we not stou^ly vrgd his majesty.

Bon. Well well, what is now to be done.

Guard. A guard must be provided speedely,
To bear her prisoner unto London Tower,
And watch convenient place to arest her person.

Bon. Tush any place shall serve for who dare contradict
His highness hand, even from his side well hale her,
And bear her quic^ly, to her longest home,
Lest we and ours by her to ruin come.

Guard. About it then, let them untimely dye, that scorn the Pope and Romes
supremacy.


^xeunt. Enter the King and Prince, the Guarde before them. King. Guarde, watch
the doors and let none come nere us,
But such as are attendant on our person
Mother a God tis^ime to stir, I see,
When tra^^ors creeps so nere our majesty:
Must English (...) walk with armed Gards,
Now in his old age, must I fear my life,
By hateful t^eason of my Queen and wife.

Prin. I do beseech your royal majesty,
To here her speak ere ye condemue her thus.

King. Go too Ned, I charge ye speak not for her, shes a dangerous travtor how
now, who knocks so loud there.


Guard. It Is Card^all Wol^ye my Lord.

Kin. And it be the Devil tell him he comes not here.
Bid him attend us t^ll our be^er lea^ure:
Come hither Ned let me con^erre with you.
Did ever hear the disputation
Twixt Cranmer and the Queen about Religion.

Prin. Never my Lord, I think they never yet,
At any time had speech concerning it.

King. O thou art deceived Ned, It is too certain,
knock. Hoyday more knocking, knock yrons an his heels,
And bear him hence what ere he be disturb us, who is it?

Guard. S. William Compton my Leedge.

Kin. Is It he, well let him in, Gods holy mother, here is a stur indeed, Compton
ye knock too loud for entrance here.

You care not though the king be near so near, say ye sir haw.


Comp. I do beseech you pardon for my boldness.

King. Well what is your business.

Comp. The Queen my Lord entreats to speak with you,

Kin. Body a me, is she not rested yet.
Why do they not convey her to the Tower,
We gave commission to attach her presently.
Where is she?

Comp. At the door my Sovereign.

Kin. So nere our presence, keep her out I charge ye.
Bend all your Holbeards points against the door,
If she presume to enter strike her through,
Dare she presume again to look on us.

Pri. Upon my knees, I do beseech your highness
To hear her speak.

Kin. Up Ned, stand up I will not look on her,
Mother a god, stand close and guard it sure,
If she come in, i will hang ye all I swear.

Prin. I do beseech your Grace.

Kin. Sir boy no more i will here no more of her,
Proud slut, bold traitresse, and forgetful beast,
Yet dare she further move our patience.

Prin. I Will pawn my princely word, right royal father,
She shall not speak a word to anger ye.

Kin. Will you pawn your word for her mother a god
The Prince of Wales his word is warrant for a king,
And we will take it Ned, go call her in.
Enter Queen Sir William let the guard attend without,
Reach me a chair, all but the prince depart.
How now, what do you weep and kneel,
Dus your black soul the gylte of conscience feel,
Out, out, your a traitor.

Que. A traitor, O you all seeing powers,
Here witness to my Lord my loyalty
A traitor. O then you are too merciful,
If I have treason in me, why rip ye not
My ugly heart out with your weapons point,
O my good Lord, If it have traitors blood,
It will be black, deformd, and tenibrous,
If not, from it will spring a scarlet fountain,
And spit defiance in their periurde throats
That have accusde me to your majesty,
Making my state thus full of misery.

Kin. Can thou deny it.

Quee. Else should I wrongfully accuse my self,
Of my dear Lord I do beseech your highness
To satisfy your wronged Queen in this,
Upon what ground grows this suspicion,
Or who thus wrongfully accuses me.
Of cursed treason against your majesty.

Kin. Some probable effects my self can witness,
Others our faithful subjects, can testify:
Have you not often maintained arguments,
Even to our face against religion:
Which joined with other complots show it self,
As it is gathered by our loyal subjects,
For treason Cappitall against our person,
Gods holy mother you will ^emoue us quickly,
And turn me out, old Harry must away,
Now in mine age, lame and half bedridden,
Or else you will keep me fast enough in prison,
Haw, mistress, these are no hateful treasons these.

Queen. Heaven on my forehead write my worst intent,
And let your hate against my li^e be bent,
If ever thought of ill against your majesty,
Was harbord here refuse me gracious God,
To your face, my ledge, if to your face I speak it.
It mani^estes no complot, nor no treason,
Nor are they loyal that so iniure (...);
What I did speak, was as my woman's wit,
To hold out Argument could compass it,
My puny schollership is held too weak
To maintain proofs about religion,
Alas I did it but to wast the time,
K^ow^ug as then your grace was wea^e and sickly,
So to expel part of your pain and griese:
And for my good intent they seek my life,
O God, how am I wronged.

Kin. Ha, ^aist thou so, was it no otherwise.

Que. What should I say, that you might credit me,
If I am false, heaven strike me suddenly.

King. Body a me, what euer^asting knaves are these that wrong thee thus, alas
poor Kate, come stand up stand up, wipe thine eyes, wipe thine eyes, foregod
it was told me that thou were a traitor: I could hardly think it, but that it
was appl^de so hard to me, Godsmother Kate I ^eare my life I tell ye, King
Harry would be loath to die by treason now, that has bid so many bru^ts
vublemished, yet I confe^^e that now I grow stifte, my legs fail me first
but they stand furthiest from my heart, and that's still sound, I thank my God,
give me thy hand, come kiss me Kate, so now ^^e friends again, hurson knaves,
craf^y varlets, make thee a traitor to oulde Harries life, well, well, i will
meet with some on them, Sfou^e come sit on my knee Kate. Mother a god he that
says thou art false to me by Englands crown i will hang him presently.


Que. When I have thought of ill against your state,
Let me be made the vildest reprobate.

Kin. That's my good Kat^, but byth mary God, Queen Kather^e you must thank
prince Edward here.

For but for him thou had gone toth tower I swear,

Que. I shall be ever thankful to his highness.
And pray for him and for your majesty,

(...). Come K^te weell walk a while eth garden here, who keeps the dote
there?


Count: My Lord.

King. Sir William Compton, here take my ring,
Bid Doctor Cranmer haste to Count again,
Give him that token of king Henry's love,
Discharge our guards, we fear no tray^ors hand.
Our State, beloved of all does firmly stand:
Go Compton.

Comp: I go my Lord.

King Bid Wo^sey haste him to our royal presence,
Great Charles the mighty Roman Emperor,
Our Nephew, and the hope of Christendom
Is landed in our fair Dominion,
To see his Uncle and the English Court;
We Will entertain him with imperial port:
Come hither Ned.

Enter Bonner and Gardner with the guard. G^^: Felows, stay there, and when I
call, come forward,
The service you pursue, is for the kings
Therefore I charge you to perform it boldly,
We have his hand and seal to warrant it.

Guard: We Will fellow you with resolution sir,
The Church is on our side, what should we fear?

Guard: See yonder, she is talking with his Majesty,
Think you we may attempt to take her h^^re?

Bon: Why should we not, have we not firm commission
To attach her any where? be bold, and fear not:
Fellows come forward.

King How now, what is here to do?

Qu: The Bishops it seems my Lord would speak with you.


King With bills and holberds, well, tarry there Kate,
I Will go my self; Now wherefore come you?

Guard: As loyal subjects to your state and person,
We come to apprehend that traiterous wo^^an.

King. Y are a couple of (...)
Gods holy mother, she is more true and just,
Then any Prelate that Subornes the Pops:
Thus to vsu^pe upon our government?
Call you her traitor? you are lying beasts and false conspiratours.


Bon: Your Majesty has seen what proofs we had.

King Here you Bonner, you are a whoreson coxcomb, What proofs had ye, but
treasons of your own invent^ons?


Queen O my dear Lord, respect the reverend Bishops.

Bonner and Gardner loves your Majesty.

King Alas poor Kate, thou think full little what they come for;

Thou have small reason to commend their loves,
That falsely have accusde thy harmless life.

Queen O God, are these mine enemies?

Guard: We have your highness hand to warrant it.

King Lets see it then.

Guard: It Is here my Liege.

King So, now ye have both my hand to contradict what one hand did: and now
out word ^g^ine shall serve as warrant to bear you both as prisoners to the
Fleet, Where you shall answer this conspiracy.

You fellows that came to atta^h the Queens,
Lay hands on them, and bear them to the Fleet.

Queen^ O I beseech your highness on my knees,
Re^^t the doo^e of their imprisonment.

King Stand up good Kate, thou wrongst thy Majesty,
To plead for them that thus have iniurde thee

Queen I have forgotten it, and do still entreat
Then humble pardons at your gracious ^^et.

King Mother of God, what a foolish woman's this,
Well, for her sake we rovoke our doom,
But come not near us as you love your lives:
Away and leave us, you are knaves and miscreants,
Wherson Cai^ifes, come to attach my Queen!

Quee^^ Vex not my Lord it will distemper you.

Enter Barnden. King Mother a God, I Will temper some on them for it
How now Branden?

Bran: The Emperor my Lord.

King Get a train ready there, Charles Branden, co ^c
We Will me^te the Mon^rke of imperial Rome:
Go Ned, prepare your self to meet the Emperor,
We Will send you further notice of our pleasure.
Enter Cardinal and Will. Attend the Prince there: Welcome Lord Cardinal,
Has not our tedious journey into France,
Disturbed your Graces hea^th and reverent person?

Will: No, no, never fear hun Harry, he haz got
More by the journey, heel be Pope shortly.

King What, W^^liam, how chance I have not seen you to day? I thought you
would not have bin the hindmost man to salute me.


Will: No more I am not Harry, for yonder is Patch behind me, I could never get
him before me, since thou coniurst him in the great chamber, all the horse in the
town cannot hawle him into thy presence I warrant thee.


King Will he not come in?

Will: Not for the world, he stand^ watching at the door.
He Will not stir while the Cardinal come;
Then the fool will follow him every where.

Wool: I thank you William, I am beholding to you still.

Will: Namy Lord, I am more beholding unto you, I thank your fool for it, we
have ransakled your winesellers since you went into France: Do you blush my
Lord? na, that's nothing, you have wine there, is able to set a color in any
man's face I warrant it.


King: Why William, is the Cardinals wine so good?

Will: Better then thine I Will be sworn, I Will take but two handfulls of his wine,
and it shall fill four hoggesheads of thine (look here else)


Wool: Mordie^.

Will: Mor devil; is it not? for without co^^^ing, you could never do it: But I
pray you my Lord call upon Mor dieu no longer, but speak plain English, you
have deceived the king in French and Latin long enough a conscience.


King Is his wine turned into gold, Will?

Wool: The fool mistakes, my gracious Sovereign.

Will. I, I my Lord, never set your wit to the fools, Will Su^mers will be
secret now, and say nothing, if I would be a blabbe of my tongue, I could tell
the King how many barrells full of gold and silver there was six times filled
with plate and jewels, twenty great t^uncks with Crosses, Crosiers, Copes,
Miters, Maces, golden Crucifixes, besides the four hundredth and twelve
thousand pound that poor Chi^neys paid for Peeter pence. But this is nothing,
for when you are Pope, you may pardon your self for more ^n^very ^^en this
comes to.


King Go too fool, you wrong the Cardinal,
But grieve not Woolsey, Will^am will be bold:
I pray you set on to meet the Empe^our,
The Mayor and Cit^izens are gone before,
The Prince of Wales shall follow presently,
And with our George and collar of esta^e,
Present him with the order of the Ga^ter:
Great Maximilian his progenitour,
Upon his breast did wear the English Cross,
And vnd^rneath our Standerd marched in arms,
Receiving pay for all his warlike hos^e;
And Cha^les with knighthood shall be honored:
Begin Lord Cardinal, greet his Majesty,
And we our self will follow presently.

W^l: I go my Sovereign.

Will: Fair weather after ye:
Well, and ere he come to be Pope, I shall be plunged for this.

Queen William, you have angered the Cardinal I can tell you.


King It Is no matter Kate, I Will anger him worse are long,
Though for a while I smooth it to his face:
I did suspect what here the fool has found,
He keeps forsooth; a high Court Legantine,
Taxing our subjects, gathering sums of gold,
Which he belike has hid to make him Pope;
A Gods name let him, that shall be our own.
But to our business, come Queen Katherin,
You shall with us to meet the Emperor,
Let all your Ladies be in readiness:
Go, let our guard attend the Prince of Wales,
Upon our self, the Lords and Pentioners
Shall give attendance in their best array,
Sound. Let all estates be ready* come fair Kate,
The Emperor shall see our English state.

Sound Enter E^p^^our, Cardinal, Mayor, (...) Gentlemen. Wool: Your Majesty is
welcome into England,
Theking our Master, will rejoice to see
Great Charles the royal Emperors Majesty.

Empe: We thank your pains my good L. Cardinal,
And much our longing eyes desires to see
Our kingly vn^kle and his princely son,
And therefore, when you please I pray set on.

Wool: On gentlemen, and mee^e the Prince of Wales.
That comes forerunner to his royal father,
To entertain the Christian Emperor:
Mean while, your Majesty may here behold
This warlike kingdom fair Metropolis,
The City London, and the river Thames,
And note the situation of the place.

Empe: We do my Lord, and count it admirable:
But see Lord Admiral, the Prince is coming.

Sound. Enter the Prince with a Herald before him, bearing the Collar and
garter, the guard and Lords attending. Emp: Well met young coosen.

Prin: I kiss your highness hand.
And bid you welcome to my fathers lands
I shall not need infer comparisons,
Welcome beyond compare, for so your excellency
Has honored England, in containing you,
As with all princely pomp and state we can,
We Will entertain great Charles the Austrian:
And first, in sign of honor to your grace,
I here present this collar of estate,
This golden garter of the knighthoods order,
An honor to renown the Emperor:
Thus as my father has commanded me,
I entertain your royal Mai^stie.

Emp: True honored offspring of a famous King
Thou do amaze me, and do ^ake me wish
I were a second son to Englan^ Lord,
In interchange of my imperial seats
To live with thee (...) hope of Majesty,
So well our welcome we accept of thee,
And with such p^^ncely spirit pronounce the word,
Thy fathers state, can no more state afford.

Prince Yes my good Lord, in him there is Majesty,
In me there is love with tender infancy.

Sound tr^^. Wool: The trumpets found my Lord, the King is coming.


Prince Go all of you attend his royal person,
Whilst we observe the Emperors Majesty.

Sound. Enter the Heralds first, then the Trumpets next the guard, then
Mace-bearer and swords, then the Cardinal, then Branden, then the ^ing, after
him the Queen, Lady Mary, and Ladies atten^ing. King Hold, stand I say.

Bran: Stand gen^lemen.

Wool: Cease those trumpets there.

King Is the Emperor yet come in sight of us?

Wool: His Majesty is hard at hand my Lord.

King Then (...), shea^the Sword and bear our Maces down,

In honor of my Lord, the Emperor:
Forward ag^^ne.

Bran: On Gentlemen before, sound trumpets and set forward^.


Prince Behold my father, gracious Emperor.

Empe: We Will meet him Coosen:
Uncle of England, King of France and Ireland, defender of the ancient
Christian faith;

With greater joy I do embrace thy breast,
Then when the seven Electors crow^ed me,
Great Emperor of the Christian Mona^chy.

King Great Ch^^les, the first Emperor of Al^ayne, King of the Romans, Semper
Angustus, warlike king of Spain and Cicily, both Naples, Navar and Arrag^^,
king of Creete and great lerusalem, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Millaine,
Brabant, Burg^ndy, Tyrrell and Flanders, with this great title I embrace thy
breast,

And how thy sight does please, suppose the rest,
Sound trumpets, while my fair Queen Katre^e
Gives entertainment to the Emperor.
Sound. Welcome again to England princely Coosen,
We dwell here, but in an ou^ward continent,
Where winters ice-^ckles hangs on our beards,
Bordring upon the frozen Orcades,
Our mother-point, compast with the Artike sea,
Where raging Boreas styes from winters mouth,
Yet are our bloods as hot, as where the Sun does rise,
We have no golden mines to lead you to,
But hearts of proof, and what we speak, we will do.

Emp: We thank you Uncle and now must chide you;
If we be welcome to your Country,
Why is the ancient league now broke betwixt us?
Why have your Heralds in the French kings cause.
Breathed defiance against our dignity,
When face to face, we met at Lander sey?

King My Heroalds to desire your Majesty?
Your grace mistakes, we sent Ambassadors
To treat a peace between the French and you,
Not to defy you as an enemy.

Emp: Yet Uncle in king Henry's name he came,
And boldly to our face did give the same.

Card: Hell stop that fatal boding Emperors throat*
That sings against us this dismal Ravens note.

King Mother of God, if this be true, we see,
There are more kings in England now then we:
Where Is Cardinal Woolsey?
Heard you this news in France?

Wool: I did my Liege, and by my means it was done,
I Will not deny it; I had Commission
To join a league between the French and him*
Which he withstanding as an enemi^^.
I did defy him from your Majesty.

King Durst thou presume so, base-borne Cardinal,
Without our knowledge to abuse our name;
Presumptuous t^aitor, under what pretense
Did thou attempt to brave the Emperor?
Belike thou meantst to level at a crown*
But thy ambitious crown shall hu^le thee down.

Wool: With reverence to your Majesty, I did no more
Then I can answer to the holy sea.

king Vilaine, thou can not answer it to me,
Nor shadow thy insulting treachery:
How durst ye sir, in your embassage,
Unknown to us stamp in our royal coin
The base impression of your Cardinal hat.
As if you were copartner in the Crown?
Ego and Rexme^s: you and your king must be
In equal state, and pomp, and Majesty:
Out of my presence hateful impudency.

Wool: Remember my Liege, that I am Cardinal
And deputy unto his holiness.

King Be the devils Deputy, I care not I,
I Will not be baffeld by your treachery;
You Are false abusers of religion,
You can corrupt it and forbid the King,
Upon the penalty of the Popes black curse.
If he (...),
Not to suppress an old (...) Abbey*
Yet you at pleasure have subver^ed foute,
Seizing their lands, tunning up heaps of gold,
Secret convaiance of our royal Seal,
To raise Collections to in^^ch thy state,
For which sir, we command you leave the Court.
We he^re discharge you of your offices:
You that are Cat^^^as, or great Cardinal,
Haste ye with (...) unto your Bishopric,
There keep you till you hear further from us:
Away and speak not.

Wool: Yet will I prowdly pass as Cardinal,
Although this day define my heavy fall.
Exit.
Emp: I fear king Henry, and my royal Uncle,
The Cardinal will curse my progress hither.

King No matter (...), bes^rew his trech^rous heart.
Haz moov'd my blood to much impatience.
Enter Will Summers. Whe^es will summer^^ come on wise, William,
We must use your little w^t^, to thase this
Anger from our blood again:
What art (...) doing?

Will: I am looking round about the Emperor, me thinks ti^ a (...) for though
he have seen more fools then I, yet I never saw no more Emperors but him.


Emp: Is this Will (...)* I have heard of him in all the Princes Courts in
Christendom.


Will: Law (...) fool of me,
(...) tell ye. (...)
Will summers is known far and near ye see.

(...) (...) I am for ye, I have not rymed with ye a great while, and now I Will
challenge yes, and the Emperor shall be judge beetweene us.


Will: Content my Lord, I am for ye all, come but one (...)


King Say ye (...)
We Will put you to an (...) presently.

Queen To him Will.

Will: I warr^nt you Madam.

King Answer this sir,
The bud is spread the (...)

Will: A wench (...), was found in you^ bed, besides the Q^eene.


Queen Godamarcy for that Will
There Is two angels for th^e:
I (...) my Lord I am glad I know it.

King God mother Kate* will thou believe the fool? he lies, he ^ies, a sir
William, I perceive and't had been so, you would have shamed me before the
Emperor, ^et William have at you once more,

In yonder Tower* there is a flower, that has my heart.

Will: Within this hour, she pi^t full sower, and let a fart.

Emp: He, too h^rd for you my Lord, ^le try him one venye my self, what say
you to this William?

An Emperor is gre^te, high is his fea^e, who is his for?

Will The (...) that shall (...), his carkas for (...) whether he will o^ no.


Emp: Well answe^ed will, yet (...) A ^uddy lip, (...)


Will: (...)

Emp: (...)

Will: Who comes next then?

King The Queen (...), took to your self,
To hi^ Kate.

Queen Come on (...), answer to this,
What could I take, my head does ache, what (...) good?


Will: Heeres (...) will (...) and warn your blood.


Q^eene I am not repulst at first William, (...) sir, Women and their wills,
are dangerous ills, as (...) suppose.


Will: She that puddings fills, when (...) must keep^ (...) her nos^.


King Enough good William, you are too hard for all:
My Lord the Emperor, we delay too long,
Your promised welcome to the English Court,
The honorable order of the garter,
Your Majesty shall take immediately,
And sit instalde t^erewith in Winds^r Castle,
I tell ye there are lads girt with that order,
That will ungirt (...) prowdest Champion:
Set forwards there ^egard the Emperors state,
First in our Court we will banquet merrily,
Then mount on steedes, and girt in complete steel,
We Will tugge at Barriers, Tilt and turnament:
Then shall ye see the Yeomen of my guard
Wrestle, shoot, throw the sledge, or pitch the bar,
Or any other active exercise:
Those triumphs past, we will forthwith haste to Windsor,
S. Gorges knight shall be the Christian Emperor

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

