A WAY OF RECONCILIATION OF A GOOD AND learned man, TOUCHING THE Truth,
Nature, and Substance of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Sacrament.

Translated out of Latin into English by the Right Honorable Lady Elizabeth
Russell, Dowager to the Right Honorable the Lord John Russell, Baron, and
son and heir to Francis Earl of Bedford.

AT LONDON PRINTED BY R. B. ANNO 1605.

The Author to the Reader.
TO seek the atonement of men is to be commended, and it has a sure promise
of God: Blessed be the peacemakers. But I fear me, lest in greedily
following the same, it happen to me which chances to them that part fraies,
while they seek others safety, they bear the blows themselves. And I, while
I study to make enemies friends, perhaps shall have small thanks of them.
Which if it happen, the example of him shall comfort me, which said: If I should
please men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Farewell, and endeavor thy
self to please Christ.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable my most entierly beloved and only daughter, the Lady
ANNE HERBERT, wife to the Lord HENRY HERBERT, son and heir apparent to
EDWARD the most noble Earl of Worcester.
MOst virtuous and woorthilie beloved daughter, Even as from your first birth
and cradle J ever was most careful, above any worldly thing, to have you suck
the perfect milk of sincere Religion: So willing to end as I began, I have
left to you, as my last Legacy, this Book. A most precious Jewel to the
comfort of your Soul, being the work of a most good, learned, and worthy
man; Made above fifty years since in Germany, After by traueile a French
creature, Now naturalized by me into English like to his learned Author, to
whom from my part most Honor and service is due. Surely at the first I meant
not to have set it abroad in Print, but my self only to have some certainty
to lean unto, in a matter so full of controversy, and to yield a reason of my
opinion. But since by my lending the Copy of mine own hand to a friend, I am
bereft thereof by some; And fearing lest after my death it should be Printed
according to the humors of other, and wrong of the dead, who in his life
approved my Translation with his own allowance: Therefore dreading, I say,
wrong to him above any other respect, I have by Anticipation prevented the
worst. J meant this to you, good daughter, for a New-yeeres gift, but altered
by grief for your Brothers broken arm. Farewell my good sweet Nanne. God
bless thee with the continuance of the comfort of his holy Spirit, that it may
ever work in you, and persevere with you to the end, and in the end.

IN ANNAM FILIAM.
Vt veniens Annus tibi plurima commodet ANNA,
Voce pia Matter, supplice mente precor,
Vt valeas, pariterque tuo cum Coniuge, Proles,
Officijs iunctis, vita serena fluat.
ELIZABETHA RVSSELLA, Dowager.

A CERTAIN MAN wishes to all Christians the health and peace of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST.
THE question of the Supper of JESUS CHRIST, and Sacrament of Thanksgiving,
has brought forth to us, above other things, a cruel and pernicious
contention. For the other Authors of sects, Anabaptists, and Suencfeldians, be
neither learned nor of our family. But this is a civil and domestical evil,
a bloody and deadly wound hidden in our bowels. Surely it is a lamentable and
horrible matter, that the thing which was first instituted for the confirmation
of men's minds in love, and concord, and fellowship of the body of Christ, which
is the Church, is now wrested to variance, and confusion. And if there have
been any good in this broile, it has been in the silence and sorrow of good
and learned men: of whom as well the misliking shows that there is somewhat in
both parts that might be amended, and prayer and earnest desire may percase
somewhat obtain at Gods hand, that contention taken away, the agreement of
minds may again join in one. But this book which is made touching this
question, whose soever it be, sure it seems to be the work of a good,
learned and modest man, and one that has been long, much, and well exercised
in the Monuments of our Fathers and Elders. Neither does it move me, that he
would not be named; for because there is no bitter word in this disputation,
and he does reason of the matter learnedly, well, and truly, neither does
seem willing to crave thanks at men's hands, nor to have taken this Treaty in
hand, either for desire of praise or greedines of Honor, but to be moved
thereunto by the common sorrow and hurt, to make an entry to that thing, the
which many men greatly desiring the peace of Christ's Church, have wished with
earnest and continual prayers: namely, the remembrance of the Christian peace,
and the forgetting of deuilish debate.

Bucer, whom I with honor speak of and for remembrance sake, had found and
made a way to this concord, and there was great agreement of minds between him
and Luther: and he pacified the Churches of the Heluetians, and while he
lived there was peace and quietness: but when they were both dead, behold
again bitter books on both sides. And surely they be to be pardoned which
write unwillingly: but those which without cause have renewed this wound, (if
there be any such) these surely seem to me little to fear what men judge of
them, or to esteem the peace which Christ gave and left unto us. But I return
to this Book, which pleases me best above other in this kind of argument;
not, that I will altogether allow it to the Congregation, but because it
seems to come nearest to the taking away of this contention. For which cause
he that cannot invent a better, if he be not content with this, and cannot
defend his own, let him take heed that he do not that for man's sake, which
he ought to leave undone for Christ's cause: namely, that he nourish not
contention, which is the greatest enemy the Church can have. I see nothing
concluded in this disputation, that either is repugnant from the nature of our
Religion, or not honorably enough spoken of this so great and singular
mystery; both which things if both the parts had retained or followed, we
should have had quietness long ere this. I blame neither part, I bear good
will to both, I love both. And if that were done in writing that is done, and
that of many, with good conscience in the leading of our life, and retaining
and esteeming the friends on both sides, men should both have written and
disputed of this question on both sides, with less offense and bitterness.
But now we write in such sort, as though we did defend the persons, and not
the cause, and apply the truth of the cause, not to the ordinance of Christ,
but to the interpretation of men. Jesus Christ restore to us his peace, which
he gave and left unto us when he departed hence, which we have lost by these
our contentions: Jesus Christ, I say, whose Victory, Triumph, Honor, Praise,
and Glory, be for ever and ever. Amen.

A way of Reconciliation touching the truth, nature and substance of the Body,
or of the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST in the Sacrament.
WHat good man does not sorrow, or what man zealous in Religion, does not
often bewail the pitiful and unlucky contention about the LORDS SVPPER,
which has now many years troubled the Churches of CHRIST which have embraced
the pure doctrine, whereby not only brotherly Love is broken, but also cities
and whole countries be thereby brought in danger? For whereas after the
expelling the darkness of Ignorance, and the happy restoring to the Church
the gift of tongues, a certain new Light was restored to the world, and the
Gospel had begun to take so great root, that thereby hope of very great fruit
was offered to ensue: By and by this sharp and vehement contention, bursting
in among the chief champions of the Word, has miserably troubled these very
good beginnings. For look what weapons they had valiantly used, in setting
forth the truth, and in overthrowing the enemies of the Gospel, the very
same, after this strife was risen, did they bend one against another. So that
the happy course of the Gospel that began to flourish is not only hindered,
but also by factions and discords, the matter is come to that pass, that
unless the mighty Right Hand of the Lord do resist, the truth does seem to
appaule and decay again, yea, and to return to the former confusion.

For if we will judge the matter truly, no force has so much withstand the
enlarging of the Gospel, no not the deceits and enchantments of the idol of
Rome, not the cruelty of Princes against the flock of CHRIST, not the
troublesome motions of breeders of Sects, as this only rash contention has
done hurt, which brings to the minds of godly men sorrow, to the enemies
cause to rejoice, and to the weak and unlearned, offense and falling. And
surely there is no doubt, but that our own wickedness has been the original
of this so great an evil, as it has been of many other: For we not regarding,
or rather contemning the light offered us, are justly thought unworthy of so
great a benefit. Which thing also is the cause, that albeit many learned and
good men understand what profit it should be for the Christian common wealth
speedily to pacify this quarrel, and to end the contentions, few
notwithstanding do earnestly traueile about this matter; And if any have
attempted it, it seems to fall out as unluckily taken in hand to the contrary
part. For my part, when I saw no end could be made of strife, nor any hope in
any one of better sequel, I thought best to commit the matter to GOD by
prayer, and with silence to look for help in season at his hands. Yet in this
mean space I thought it my part, not to neglect a matter of so great weight,
but after examination had of the chief points of this controversy, to bolt
out what was truth, and what not; and then to determine upon a sure grounded
opinion, both by authority of holy Scripture, and by the undoubted testimonies
of the Fathers, as well to satisfy my self, as to yield a reason thereof to
any that should perhaps demand it of me: that the mind should not waver
continually to and fro, tossed as it were with the contrary violence of winds.

While I take this work in hand, and diligently tread the steps of the old
Interpreters, me thinks I perceive (unless my opinion deceive me) that this
controversy is not so entangled, nor dark, as most men suppose, and that
these sharp co^tentions have come rather by men's fault, then by the nature of
the matter; and that the way of Reconciliation shall not be so hard with men,
desirous rather of the truth then of quarrelling.

Wherefore albeit I took in hand this work, whatsoever it be, privately to my
self, yet because among my friends certain good men and well given were so
desirous, I did not greatly pass to have it come to the ears and eyes of
other, that if there be herein any profit, it may also do them good. The cause
I have thought good so to divide, that briefly it may be brought to three
especial points: First will I show the truth of the body of CHRIST in the
Sacrament to be given to the faithful, and that these terms Nature and
Substance are not to be shunned, but that they of old time disputing of the
Sacrament used them: Then will I declare the difference between the Lords
proper body, and that which is in the Sacrament, and that the old Fathers were
of that opinion: And lastly I will set forth at large, what manner of Body that
is which is received in the mystery, and why it is called by that name, after
the opinion of the self same Fathers. Which things once expounded, a man may
easily judge of the whole controversy. First, it is manifest enough by the
declaration of the Evangelists Matthew, Matthew. 26. c. Matthew. 14. c. Luke 22. c.
Mark and Luke, that our Lord JESUS CHRIST, when he should depart out of this
world, and leaving the earth, should go up to the Father, did ordeine the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood in the presence of his disciples at Supper; and
so when he had taken the bread, he blessed, brake it and gave it to them,
saying, This is my body: After the like manner the Cup also, saying, This Cup is
the new Testament in my Blood, 1. Corinthians. 11.
Do this in remembrance of me. Paul also writes to the same effect to the
Corinthians, in his first Epistle the 11. chapter, rehearsing in a manner the
very same words, Et cap. 10.
and in the tenth chapter, The Cup (says he) of blessing which we bless, is
it not the partaking of the Blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it
not the partaking of the Body of Christ? By these words of the Evangelists, and
the Apostle, they of old time were of that opinion that CHRIST our Lord, which
is Truth it self, spoke these things truly, and did in deed perform those
things that he spoke, so that no place of doubt might any more be left,
concerning the truth of the matter.

Moreover those words which in the sixth chapter of John, John 6. c.
the Lord spoke, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, etc.
The bread which I will give you is my flesh. And unless you eat the flesh of
the Son of man, and drink his Blood, etc. The Fathers with great accord, as
well Grecians as Latins, do apply to the Sacrament of Thanksgiving; And that
they have interpreted those places so, both in John, and the rest of the
Evangelists and Paul to the Corinthians, the testimonies that follow taken out
of the authors themselves, Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
shall happily prove.

First, Justin Martyr in his second Apology writes thus, And this meat is
called with us, that is, Thanksgiving, etc. whereof none other may be partaker
but he, which both believes those things to be true which we say, and also
has been purified with the washing, which is given for the remission of
sins, and regeneration, and also so lives as CHRIST has appointed. For we
take not these things to be common and wonted bread, and accustomed drink, but
even as the word of God JESUS CHRIST our Savior was made man, and had both
flesh and blood for our salvation: Even so in like manner we have been taught,
that the meat which is hallowed by the prayers of the word that we received of
him, and by which our blood and flesh, by a change made are nourished, is both
the flesh and blood of the same CHRIST which was made man. For the Apostles in
their Commentaries, which be called the Gospels, have left in writing, that
CHRIST did so command them, and that he said, when he had taken bread and given
thanks, Do this in remembrance of me, This is my body. And that when he had
taken the cup and given thanks he said, This is my Blood. Partly the other
words of this testimonial do affirm the truth of his body: and chiefly
because by a similitude taken of the two natures in CHRIST, he declares that
there be also two natures in the Sacrament, namely of the outward sign, and of
the flesh and Blood of JESUS CHRIST.

Alike unto this is spoken in Irenaeus in his 4. book: For how say they again
that the flesh comes into corruption, and does not receive life which is
nourished of the body and Blood of the Lord? Therefore let them either change
their opinion, or else abstain to offer the things which are aforesaid: but
our opinion is agreeing to the Sacrament of thanksgiving, and this Sacrament
again confirms our opinion: For we offer those things that be his,
preaching agreeably the partaking and truth of Flesh and Spirit. For even as
the bread which is of the earth receiving the calling upon God, is now no more
common bread, but a Sacrament of thanksgiving, made of two things, earthly and
Heavenly: so also our bodies receiving the Sacrament of thanksgiving, be not
now corruptible, because they have the hope of resurrection. The same man in
his fifth book; and because we be his members, and are nourished by the
creature, and he gives us the creature, making his Son to arise, and raining
as he lists, the same Cup which is a creature, he confirmed to be his Body,
by which he increases our bodies. When therefore both the Cup mixed, and the
bread made, receives the word of God, it is made the Sacrament of the blood
and body of CHRIST, whereof both the substance of our flesh is increased, and
consists: how then does he deny, that the flesh is able to receive the gift
of God which is life Everlasting, seeing it is nourished with the blood and
body of CHRIST?

These words of Irenaeus albeit not very dark, yet will they be more plain if
we add certain things to them out of S. Augustine. August. tit. de consecrat.
did. 2.
He in his book of the Sentences of Prosperus, and is found De consecratione
distinct. 2. writes thus, This is it that we say, and that by all means we
labor to prove, that the Sacrifice of the Church is made two manner awayes,
that it consists of two things, Of the visible form of Sacraments, and the
invisible flesh and blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: of the Sacrament, and of
the substance of the Sacrament, that is the body of CHRIST. As the person of
CHRIST consists of God and man, since CHRIST himself is very God and very
man, because every thing contains in it self the nature and truth of those
things whereof it is made; But the sacrifice of the Church is made of two
things, of the Sacrament, and of the substance of the Sacrament, that is, the
body of CHRIST. There is therefore the Sacrament, and the substance of the
Sacrament the body of CHRIST. S. Augustine repeateth that comparison between
the person of CHRIST, and the Sacrament of thanksgiving, and therein he says
plainly, that the truth and nature of the body is contained. The same man De
consecrat. distinct. 2. Idem ibidem.
Whether is this mystical Sacrament of the Cup made in figure or in truth?
The truth says, My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink; Else
how can it be a great matter, The bread that I shall give, is my flesh for the
life of the world, unless it be very flesh? But because it is not godly that
CHRIST should be devoured with teeth, the Lords will was to have this bread and
wine in mystery to be by his power made his flesh and blood, in verity by the
consecration of the holy Ghost, and to be daily offered mystically for the
life of the world. That like as his true flesh is created of the Virgin by the
holy Ghost without the company of man, so by this same Spirit the same body
mystically, is consecrated of the substance of bread and wine. The body of
CHRIST is both truth and figure; Truth, in that the body and blood of CHRIST
by the power of the holy Ghost, is made by the strength thereof of the
substance of bread and wine: And the figure is that which outwardly is
perceived.

The same man in the same title: Idem ibidem.
They that eat and drink CHRIST, eat and drink life. To eat him is to be
refreshed; to drink him is to live. That which is visiblie taken in the
Sacrament, is eaten and drunk spiritually in very truth. Idem ibidem.
The same man in his book of the Sentences of Prosperus in the same title
says: But we in the form of bread and wine, which we see, do honor invisible
things, namely, flesh and blood. Neither do we alike take these two forms, as
we did take them before the consecration, seeing that we faithfully confess
that before the consecration, they be bread and wine which nature has framed,
but after the consecration, they be the flesh and blood of CHRIST which the
blessing has hallowed. He again upon the 54. Psalm, Until the world come to
an end the Lord is above, yet for all that the Lords truth is also here with
us: For it is fit that the body in the which he rose again, should be in one
place, but his truth is spread every where. He also in his Epistle to Irenaeus:
CHRIST is bread of the which he who so eats, lives for ever; whereof he
himself says thus, And the bread which I will give is my flesh for the life
of the world. And he expounds it how it is bread, not only according to the
word whereby all things live, but according to the flesh that he took for the
life of the world. For man's flesh which was dead through sin being knit to
pure flesh incorporat, made one with it, does live by his spirit even as one
body by his own spirit: But he that is not of the body of CHRIST, lives not
of the Spirit of CHRIST. Hitherto Augustine has plainly enough proved the
truth and nature of the body of CHRIST in this Sacrament.

Hilar. de tri. lib. 8.
Hilarie in his 8. book of the Trinity: I would know now of them that allege
unity of will between the Father and the Son, whether CHRIST nowadayes be in
us by truth of nature, or by agreement of will. For if the Word be verily made
flesh, and we receive the word, verily flesh in the Lords meat: how should a
man not suppose him to remain naturally in us, which being borne man, took to
himself an inseperable nature, now of our flesh, and has mixed the nature of
his own flesh with the nature of eternity under the Sacrament of his flesh to
be partaked among us? And a little after: Therefore whosoever will deny the
Father to be naturally in CHRIST, let him first deny either himself to be
naturally in CHRIST, or CHRIST to be in him, because the Father in CHRIST, and
CHRIST in us, do make us to be one thing in them. If CHRIST therefore did
verily take the flesh of our body, and if the same man which was borne of the
Virgin Mary be verily CHRIST; and we verily take under a mystery the flesh of
his body, and thereby shall become one, because the Father is in him, and he in
us: How is the unity of will alleged, seeing the natural property (by
means of the Sacrament,) is a Sacrament of perfect unity? Also a little
after; For those things which we speak of the natural truth of CHRIST in
us, unless we learn of him, we speak foolishly and wickedly. For he says,
My flesh is meat in deed, and my Blood is drink in deed: He that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, remains in me, and I in him. There is no place
left of doubting of the truth of Flesh and Blood: For now it is verily Flesh,
and verily Blood, both by the confession of our Lord himself, and also by our
Faith; and these things being received by eating and drinking, do work that
effect, that both we be in CHRIST, and CHRIST is in us. Is not this truth?
Let it happen unto them not to be true, which deny JESUS CHRIST to be very
God. And soon after: And so by a Mediator, the perfect Unity should be taught,
when as we abiding in him he should abide in the Father, and he abiding in
the Father should abide in us, and so should we clime to the unity of the
Father, when he is naturally according to his birth in him, we also should be
naturally in him, so long as he abides naturally in us. And that this natural
unity is in us, he has thus witnessed, He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, abides in me and I in him. And by and by he adds, This is truly
the cause of our life: for that we have CHRIST remaining in us carnal men
according to the flesh, whereas we shall live hereafter by him, after the same
sort as he lives by the Father. If we therefore live naturally by him after
the flesh, namely having taken upon us the nature of his flesh, how has he not
the Father after the spirit naturally in him, since he lives by the Father?
And he concludes: To this end be these things rehearsed by us, because the
heretics affirming falsely the unity of will only between the Father and the
Son, used for the example of our unity with the Lord, as though we were
united to the Son, and by the Son to the Father, only by obedience and will
of Religion, and no property of natural fellowship were granted to us by the
Sacrament of his flesh and blood: whereas in deed the mystery of the true and
natural unity should be taught, both for the honor of the Son of God that
is given us, and for the Son carnally abiding in us, and we knit corporally,
and unseparably in him.

Hilarious does manifestly teach the true and natural partaking of the flesh
of CHRIST in the Sacrament; And as plainly does Cyrillus witness the same in
the 10. Cyrillus lib. 10. cap. 13.
book chap. 13. when he says, Yet we deny not that we be joined
spiritually in CHRIST by a right faith, and sincere love: but that we have no
manner of joining with him according to the flesh, that truly we utterly deny.
And soon after; But does he happily think that the virtue of the mystical
blessing is unknown to us? which when it is wrought in us, does it not also
make CHRIST to dwell corporally in us, by the partaking of the flesh of CHRIST?
For why be the members of the faithful the members of CHRIST? Know ye not
(says he) that your members be the members of Christ? Shall I therefore make
the members of Christ the members of an harlot? Our Savior also says, He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, remains in me and I in him; whereby it
ought to be considered, that CHRIST is in us, not only by that accustomed
quality which is perceived by love, but also further by a natural partaking.
For even as if a man shall melt wax by the fire, and mingle it with other wax
which is likewise melted, so that one lump may seem to be made of both; So by
the communion of the body and blood of CHRIST he is in us, and we in him. For
this corruptible nature of the body could not otherwise be brought to
uncorruption and life, unless the body of natural life should be joined
thereto. The same man also in his 4. Idem in Io. lib. 4. cap. 14.
book upon John the 14. chapter does witness: For truly it behooves that
not only the soul should ascend into blessed life by the holy Ghost, but also
that this rude and earthly body should be brought again to immortality, by a
taste, feeling, and meat like unto it. The same man in his 11. book upon John
cap. 27. The Son, Idem in Io. lib. 11. cap. 27.
as man, is made one with us corporally by the mystical blessings, but
spiritually as God. And a little after; For we receiving corporally and
substantially, (as it has been said) the Son of God which is made one by
nature with the Father, be made pure and glorified, being partakers of the
nature that is from above. The same man in the same book upon the 26. chapter:
Idem eodem lib. cap. 26.
For to the end therefore ye might knit every one of us among our selves and
God, although we differ both in body and soul, yet has he found a mean
agreeable to the determination of his Father, and his own wisdom. For he
blessing with his own body (through the mystical communion) them that believe,
does make us one body, both with himself, and also among our selves. For who
will think those distant from this natural union, which be united in one
CHRIST by the union of one CHRIST'S body? For if all we eat one bread, we be
made all one body. And within few words after: But that this bodily uniting to
CHRIST is attained by the partaking of his flesh, Paul himself again does
witness, disputing of the mystery of godliness: the which (says he) has
not been known to the sons of men in other generations, as it has been
reueiled now to his holy Apostles and Prophets in the Spirit, that the Gentiles
be coheires and joined in body, and equal partakers of the promise in Christ.
The same man to Calosyrius: Idem ad Calosyrium.
For that we should not be afraid of the flesh and blood set upon the holy
Altars, God submitting himself to our frailty, puts a force of life into
those things that be offered, turning them into the truth of his own flesh,
that the body of life as it were a certain quickening seed, may be found in
us: whereupon he adds, Do this in a remembrance of me. Hitherto Cyrillus.

Cyprianus de coena Domini.
Cyprian of the Supper of the Lord; This bread not in outward appearance, but in
nature changed by the mighty power of the Word, is made flesh, which the Lord
did reach to his disciples. And in the same place; Who even to this day
creates, and sanctifies, and blesses, and divides, to those that take it
godly, this his most true and holy body. Hieron. in Matthew. de consecrat. did.
2.
Hierom upon Matthew, De consecrat. did. 2. He took bread, which is the
comforter of man, and passed to the true Sacrament of Passover. That as
Melchisedec for a figure thereof before had done when he offered bread and wine,
he should represent it in the truth of his body and blood. Chrysostom. in Io.
Hom. 45.


Chrysostom upon John, Hom. 45. But that not only by love, but even in very
deed we should be turned into that flesh, he works the same by the meat
which he has given us. For when he meant to bring his love upon us, he joined
himself to us by his body, and made himself one with us, that the body might
be knit with the head. The same man Homil. 61. Idem Hom. 61.
Therefore that we should be this not only by charity, but in very deed should
be mingled with that flesh, this is brought to pass by the meat which he
has given us. Chrysostom has also many other sayings to the same meaning.

Those things that S. Ambrose writes in his 6. Ambros. lib. 6. de sacra. cap.
1.
book the first chapter of the Sacraments, do agree with these: Even as our
Lord JESUS CHRIST is the true Son of God, not as men be by grace, but as a
Son of the substance of the Father; so is that which we take, the very flesh
of CHRIST, and they drink his very blood as he himself said. And a little
after; Then when his disciples could not away with the talk of CHRIST, but
hearing that he would give them his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink,
they went away: But Peter alone said, Thou have the words of eternal life, and
whither should I go from thee? Lest therefore any more should say this, as
though there should be a kind of lothsomnesse of blood, but that the grace of
redemption might remain, therefore receiuest thou the Sacrament in a
similitude, but thou obteinest the grace and virtue of the true nature. The
same man in his 4. book the 4. Idem lib. 4. cap. 4.
cap. Thou see therefore how effectual in operation the word of CHRIST is.
If then there be so great efficacy in the word of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that
that should begin to be, which was not; How much more is it of effect, to make
those things to be that were before, and to be changed into another thing? And
so that which was bread before the consecration, the same is become the body of
CHRIST after the consecration, because the word of CHRIST does change the
creature; And so of bread is made the body of CHRIST, and the wine mixed with
water in the cup, is made blood by the consecration of the heavenly word. But
perhaps thou will say, I see not the form of blood, But it has a likeness.
For even as thou have taken the likeness of his death, so also do thou drink
the similitude of his blood, that there should be no abhorring of blood, and
yet the price of our redemption wrought. Also before the words of CHRIST the
cup is full of wine and water: after the words of CHRIST have wrought, there is
the blood made which has redeemed the people. Therefore mark how the word of
CHRIST is able to make alteration in all things. Beside, CHRIST himself does
testify, that we do receive his body and blood, of whose fullness and
testimony we ought not to doubt. Likewise peradventure thou say, I see
another thing, How prouest thou that I do receive the body of CHRIST? This
remains yet for us to prove, that this is not it which nature has fashioned,
but it, that blessing has hallowed; and that there is greater force of the
blessing, then of nature: because nature it self is also changed by the
blessing. Also: But if the blessing of man was of such force that it could
turn nature; What do we say of the very heavenly consecration, whereas the
very words of the Lord our Savior do work? For this Sacrament which thou
receiuest, is wrought by the words of CHRIST. But if the word of Elias was of
such force that it could bring fire from heaven; Shall not the word of CHRIST
be of power to change the kinds of elements?

Eusebius Emyssenus de consecrat. did. 2.
Eusebius Emyssenus likewise, who was in years before Ambrose, does witness in
these words, the opinion which was then had of the Sacrament, and it is had De
consecrat. did. 2. Whereupon the heavenly authority confirms, That my flesh
is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink. Let therefore all doubt of
misbeliefe be laid aside, because he that is author of the gift is likewise
witness of the truth. For the invisible priest does turn with his word, by
a secret power, the visible creatures into the substance of his body and
blood, saying thus, Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, and the hallowing being
repeated, Take ye, drink ye, this is my blood. Therefore even as the height of
the heavens, the depth of waters, and largeness of earth had their being of
nothing, suddenly at the beck of the Lord that commanded: so with the like
power in the spiritual Sacraments when power commands, effect obeieth. How
great therefore and wonderful benefits the force of the heavenly blessing
does work. How it ought not to seem a new and impossible matter to thee,
that earthly and mortal things be turned into the substance of Christ, ask
thy self that art borne anew in Christ. He again in his oration of the body
of the Lord: Let not man dout but that the chief creatures at the beck of
power by the presence of Majesty, may be turned into the nature of the Lords
body. Leo and Syn. Romans de consec. did. 2.
Leo the bishop and the Synod of Rome as is there declared; In what darkness
of ignorance, in what body of slouthfulnes have they hitherto lain, that they
would neither learn by hearing, nor know by reading that which is so agreeable
in the congregation with the confession of all persons, that the truth of the
body and blood of Christ, among the Sacraments of the communion cannot be kept
in silence, no not of the tongues of Infants, because in that mystical
distribution of the spiritual food, this is given, and this is received, that
we receiving the strength of this heavenly meat, do become his flesh, which
was made our flesh.

Gregor. hom. Pasch. ibidem.
Gregory homilia paschali, and it is there rehearsed. For he is daily eaten
and drunk in truth, but yet he remains whole and one, and unspotted. And
it is therefore a great mystery, and to be reverenced with fear, because
there is one thing to the sight, and another to the understanding. Euthym. in
Matthew. cap. 64.
Euthymius upon Matthew cap. 64. Therefore even as the old Testament had
sacrifices and blood, so also has the New, namely the body and blood of the
Lord. For he said not, These be signs of my body, but he said, These be my
body and my blood Therefore we must not take heed to the nature of those
things that be set before us, but to the virtue of them. For even as above
nature he did deifie the flesh that was taken of the Virgin (if it be
lavvfull to use this phrase) so also does he unspeakably change these things
into his very lively body, and into his very precious blood, and into the
grace of them.

Theophil. in Matthew. cap. 26.
Theophilactus upon Matt. 26. In saying This is my body, he declares that the
bread which is sanctified upon the Altar, is the very body of the Lord, and
not a figure answering unto it; for he said not, This is a figure, but This is
my body. The bread is transformed by an unspeakable working into the body of
Christ; albeit it seems bread to us that be weak, and abhor to eat raw
flesh, especially the flesh of man. For that cause truly bread appears, but
it is flesh. The same man upon Mark cap. 14. Idem in Marc. cap. 14.
When he had blessed it, that is, when he had given thanks, he brake the
bread, which thing also we do, adding thereto prayers, This is my body: this I
say which you take. For the bread is not a figure and example only of the
Lords body, but it is turned into the very body of Christ. Damascenus does
also write almost the very same things lib. 4. cap. 14. Damas. de fide. Orth.
lib. 4. cap. 14.
The bread and wine is not a figure of the body and blood of Christ to the
right faith; for God forbid we should believe so: but it is the very deified
body of the Lord by his own saying, This is my body; not a figure of my
body, but my body, This is my blood, not a figure of my blood.

Many other places also may be brought forth here, taken out of the Fathers,
which agree with the rehearsed, by all the which we may easily perceive, what
was the opinion of them al, as much as apperteineth to this part of our
division, namely, that the Sacrament of Thanksgiving is not only a figure of
the Lords body, but also comprehends in it the truth, nature and substance
of the same. For it cannot be a doubt to any man that will read their writings,
that they oftentimes used these terms, Truly, Naturally, and Substantially,
and the coniugates of them. And although our faith depends not upon men, but
upon the word of God: yet since they defend their opinion with the authority
of the Scripture, it is very profitable for godly minds and desirous of the
truth, to consider how so many notable men both for godliness and learning,
have understood the words of the Scripture, and with great agreement left their
interpretations to their succession; neither shall he avoid the blame of
rashness (whosoever he be) that dare despise so great authority.

Now let us take in hand our second part. Whether they of ancient time have
thought that there is any difference between the body of our Lord, which is
distributed in the Sacrament, and that which was taken of the Virgin mother,
which ascended into heaven, and from thence shall come at his time to
Judgment. That is, whether the body of Christ be in the Sacrament of
Thanksgiving, according to the proper signification of a man's body, or
otherwise, differing somewhat from a proper body. When I speak of a proper
body, I mean a body properly understand, which shall suffice to have once
admonished. Then whether these terms, Truth, Nature, Substance ought to be
understand after the common sort in this matter, or after a more peculiar
manner, and more fit for the Sacraments.

Finally, whether there be any aequiuocation in these terms or no. For there
is not only heed to be taken with what words the fathers have spoken in old
time, but also what they meant when they so spoke. And that is not to be proved
by our own or other men's inventions, or light conjectures, but by the assured
testimonies of the Fathers themselves. But that we may have the easier entry
to this matter, we must perceive that the body of Christ is called not after
one manner wise in the Scriptures, but sundry ways. First, as that body as
was taken upon him, and borne of the Virgin, which also rose again, and
ascended into heaven, of the which this was spoken, Me truly shall ye not
have always. And this, I leave the world, and go to my Father And this, Feel
and behold, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have.
Secondarily, as the Church is called the body of Christ, according to this
saying, You are Christ's body. And this, And he gave him to be a head over all
things to the Church which is his body. Thirdly, as the Sacrament of the body
of Christ is called the body of Christ, whereof Christ himself said, This is my
body. And Paul, The bread which we break, is it not the partaking of the body
of Christ? And this, Making no difference of the Lords body. Which places be
understood of the Sacrament of his body, whereby it comes to pass, that the
body of Christ is called properly and improperly. Properly that body taken of
the Virgin; Improperly, the Sacrament and the Church. That the Church is not
properly the body of Christ, no man doubts. It remains that we prove
the same of the Sacrament. This is especially to be marked, as often as they of
old time treat of the Sacrament, they all apply to the Sacrament the words of
our Lord, which are spoken in the sixth chapter of John, My flesh is verily
meat, and my blood is verily drink. The bread which I will give is my flesh,
and unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. Which things shall be
proved by their own sayings before alleged, and also by those that shall
follovv. Neither are they to be allowed, that deny this chapter of John to be
referred to this Sacrament, seeing so great a troop of vvitnesses be against
them. But the opinion of them seemed more probable, who as they judge this
Evangelist to set forth the humanity of Christ less then the rest, and his
divinity more amply: so do declare that these things which are rehearsed by
the other Evangelists concerning the institution, and outvvard ceremony of
this Sacrament, are not at all mentioned of John; but that he opens and
expounds more plainly unto us the true and right understanding of them. And
it is plain that the minds of the Capernaites when the Lord said, My flesh
is verily meat; And unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. were
much offended and troubled, and therefore leaving him departed, for they
understood him too grossly, and after the common sort. But his Twelve Apostles
that tarried by him being admonished, and lift up to a more higher meaning, and
of more Majesty, heard of him, The words which I have spoken be spirit and
life. Upon this it comes to pass, that all the old vvriters do fly the
common judgment and usual understanding in those words, This is my body,
and which the Lord spoke of eating his flesh, and follovv a more divine way
of understanding them, and more agreeable to the Sacraments, as they themselves
affirm.

Chrysostom. in Matthew. cap. 26. Hom. 83.
Chrysostom upon Matthew 26. hom. 83. expounding the words of the Supper, Take
ye, eat ye, this is my body, etc. does ask this question, Why were they not
troubled when they heard this? And he answers, Because he had taught them
already many and great things concerning this point before: Wherefore also he
did not confirm that which they had often before perceived. And not long
after he adds, He himself did also drink of it, least at the hearing of
those words, they should say, What? do we then drink blood, and eat flesh?
and upon that might be troubled; For at the first also when he spoke of these
matters, many were offended only for the words. Lest therefore this should
then also have happened, he did this first himself, that he might bring them
to the partaking of these mysteries with a quiet mind. We be taught here by
Chrysostom, that the Apostles were not troubled when they heard the Lord say,
Take ye, eat ye, this is my body; Because they had been already taught before,
how that which was spoken ought to be understood, namely where others were
offended, as it is in John, and said, This is a hard saying, they abode and had
learned, It is the Spirit that gives life, the flesh profits nothing; The
words that I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life: that is to say, as the
same Chrysostom in the same place expounded it, they are spiritually to be
understood: which self thing the Lord himself confirms by his own deed,
when he did eat the same bread, and drink the wine with them, lest they
should think upon any base or common matter, but should be brought to the
partaking of the mysteries with quiet minds. It is no hard matter to perceive
by this that Chrysostom vvriteth in this place, that it is one way a body, that
Christ himself called his body when he said, Take ye, eat ye, this is my body,
the which he also receives himself together with his disciples; and another
way to be his proper body which was fed with the other. The one did eat, the
other was eaten, and after a diverse sort either of them is called his body.

To this purpose makes also that which Clemens Alexandrinus schoolmaster to
Origin, Clemens Alexand. lib. inscrip. Paedagogus.
teaches in his book, entitled Paedagogus, when he says, (...). The blood
of Christ is two manner of ways: the one fleshie whereby we are vvashed, the
other spiritual vvherevvith we have been anointed. Hierom. in Epi. ad Ephesians.
ca. 1.
Whom Hierom follovving upon the Epistle to the Ephesians the first chapter
says, The blood and flesh of Christ (says he) is understood two manner of
vvayes: that is, either that spiritual and heavenly, whereof he himself
spoke, My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink; And unless you
eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall not have everlasting life: Or else
the flesh and blood that was crucified, that was shed with the spear of the
soldier. There be two things that Hierom teaches in this place, That those
words in the 6. chap. of John, do appertain to the Sacrament, even as
Chrysostom does: and that the flesh that was crucified, does differ from that
which is in the Sacrament, which he calls Spiritual and Divine. The same
man upon Leuiticus, and is to be seen De consecrat. Idem. in Leuit. de
consecrat. did. 2.
did. 2. Of this sacrifice which is by miracle wrought for the remembrance
of Christ it is lavvfull to eat: but of that which Christ offered upon the
Altar of the Cross, it is of it self lavvful for no man to eat. A plain and
manifest distinction.

Augustine in lib. senten. Prosperi. August. in lib. Sent. Prosperi.
It is his flesh which covered with the form of bread, we receive in the
Sacrament, and his blood which under the form and taste of wine we drink, that
is to say, the flesh is the sacrament of flesh, and blood is the sacrament of
blood. By flesh and blood being both invisible, spiritual, intelligible, is
betokened the visible and sensible body of our Lord Jesus Christ, full of the
grace of all virtues and divine Majesty. Who sees not how plainly Augustine
puts a difference between the proper body of Christ which he terms visible
and sensible, and that flesh which we receive in the sacrament, which he
affirms to be invisible, spiritual, intelligible, and a sign of the other
body? Idem in Epist. ad Iren.
The same man in his Epistle to Irenaeus, You shall not eat this body which you
see, and drink that blood which they that shall crucify me shall shed. The
same truly, and not the same; The same invisibly, and not the same visibly.
He puts a difference when he says, Not this body: and again, The same,
and not the same. The manner of the difference is, the same inuisibly which he
terms before the invisible body, namely the Sacrament of the body: and not
the same visibly, or the visible body, which is referred to the proper body:
for this body wheresoever it be, is visible. The same man in his book Sent.
Prosperi: Idem in lib. Sent. Prosperi.
Christ was once offered in himself, yet is he daily offered in the
Sacrament, which is thus to be understood. That, in the outward showing forth
of his body, in the distinction of all his members, very God, and very man, did
but once hang upon the Cross, offering himself a lively sacrifice to the
Father. The body which is in the Sacrament, has neither outward showing forth
of the body, nor distinction of members, but his proper body never wants his
distinction of members.

Idem in Ps. 33.
The same man upon the 33. Psalm: And he was carried in his own hands. But my
brethren, who can understand how this might be done in a man? For who can be
carried in his own hands? A man may well be carried in other men's hands, in his
own hands no man is carried. How it may be understand in David himself,
according to the letter, we shall not find, but in Christ we shall find it.
For Christ was carried in his own hands when he commending his own body, said,
This is my body; for that body was carried in his hands, and afterward
expounding himself better he says, And he was carried in his own hands. How
was he carried in his own hands? Because when he meant to commend that body and
blood of his, he took into his hands, that which the faithful knew, and he
carried himself after a sort, when he said, This is my body. In saying that
body was carried in his hands, and he took into his hands that which the
faithful knew, and he bare himself after a sort; he does declare that this
saying is not to be understand simply of one self body, but that body that did
carry was one, namely his proper body, and that which was carried another, to
say, the Sacrament of his body.

The same man upon the 98. Psalm, Idem in Psalm. 98.
It seemed a hard saying to them, when he said, Unless a man do eat my flesh,
he shall never have everlasting life. They took it foolishly, imagined of it
fleshly, and thought that the Lord would have cut certain pieces out of his
body to give them, and they said, This is a hard saying. They themselves were
hard, not the saying: for if they had not been hard, but humble spirited, they
would have said within themselves; He speaks not this without a cause, there
is may hap a certain hid Sacrament in it; They would have tarried with him
meek spirited, not hardened, and have learned of him that which those that
remained did learn when they were gone. For when his Twelve disciples abode
with him after their departure, they seemed to bewail to him the death of
them, because they were offended at his words, and gone back. But he
instructed them and said unto them, It is the Spirit that quickens, for the
flesh profits nothing; The words that I have spoken to you, are Spirit and
life, Understand you that spiritually which I have spoken to you. You shall not
eat this body which you see, neither shall you drink the blood which they
shall shed that crucify me. I have commended to you a certain Sacrament. If
it be spiritually understood, it will give you life. Although of necessity it
must be ministered visiblie, yet must it be vnuisibly understood, where he
says, Not this body which you see, etc. And I have commended a certain
Sacrament unto you; he makes a plain distinction between the two bodies,
whereof one is properly his body, the other the Sacrament of his body.

Idem de doct. Christ. lib. 3.
The same man, De doctrina Christiana lib 3. Unless you eat the flesh of the
Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. He seems
to command a heinous and wicked thing; therefore it is a figure commanding that
we must communicate with the passion of the Lord, and sweetly and profitably
lay up in remembrance that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. If we
following the letter do understand it, as the words do properly sound, He
seems (says he) to command a heinous thing: therefore (he says) it is a
figurative speech, and ought not to be understood of the eating of his proper
body, but of the Sacrament of his body, which is after a spiritual sort the
body of Christ.

Idem ad Bonifac. Epist. 23.
The same man to Boniface in the 23. Epistle; For so we speak, as when Easter
draws nie, we say, To morrow, or the day after is the passion of Christ,
whereas indeed he suffered so many years before, and that passion has not at
all been made but once. For upon very Easter day we say, This day the Lord rose
again. whereas so many years are past since he rose again, Why is none so
foolish to reprove us, and say we lie in so saying? but because we call these
days according to the similitude of those in which these things were done, so
that it is called the same day, which is not the same, but by the course of
time is like that, and it is said to be done that day for the ministering of
the Sacrament, which was not done that day, but long before. Was not Christ
once offered in himself? and yet in the Sacrament not only at all the
solemnities of Easter, but every day he is offered to the people. And he lies
not, that being asked the question, does answer that he is offered: For if
the Sacraments should not have a certain likeness of those things whereof
they be Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at all. And of this likeness,
they take the names oftentimes also of the things themselves. Even as therefore
after a certain sort, the Sacrament of the body of Christ is the body of
Christ, and the sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ: so
also the sacrament of faith is faith. We see also in this place, that the
proper body of Christ which was once offered, is discerned from that sacrament
which is daily offered, and after a sort is the body.

The same S. Augustine, Idem de consecrat. did. 2.
as it is to be found De consecrat. did. 2. Whether is this mystical
sacrament of the cup under a figure, or under the truth? The truth says, My
flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink, else how shall it be a
great matter; The bread which I will give is my flesh for the life of the
world, unless it be very flesh in deed? But because it is not lawful to
devour Christ with teeth, the Lords will was that this bread and wine should
be made potentially in a mystery, his flesh and blood verily by the
consecration of the holy Ghost, and should be daily offered mystically for the
life of the world: That even as very flesh was made of the Virgin by the holy
Ghost, without the company of man; so also by the same through the substance of
bread and wine, the same body is mystically consecrated. The body of Christ is
both truth and a figure; Truth, while the body and blood of Christ, by the
power of the holy Ghost in power of the same, is made of the substance of bread
and wine: but the figure is that which is outwardly seen.

Here also Augustine does put a difference between the very flesh taken of the
Virgin, and the truth of the flesh that is made of the substance of bread and
wine: for this (says he) is daily created his very flesh, and offered in
mystery, which thing is not lawful to be spoken of the very proper body of
Christ. The same author in the same book, Until the end of the world the Lord
is above: but yet the truth of the Lord is for all that here with us. For it
is fit that the body wherein he rose again should be in one place, but the
truth thereof is spread every where. Does he not plainly teach, that the
body wherein he rose again is one, which necessarily must be contained in one
place, and that the truth of his body is another, which is so far spread
abroad, as the sacrament is rightly ministered?

Here is moreover to be noted, that the truth of the Lords body is spoken two
ways, and ought two manner ways to be understood; for one manner of truth of
his body is required in mystery, another simply and without mystery.

Those words also of Augustine in the same place, Idem ibidem.
De consecrat. did. 2. Vtrum sub figura, etc. do make for this purpose; That
because we do now take the similitude of his death in our Baptism, so also we
may take the similitude of his flesh and blood, so that the truth should not
be wanting in the sacrament, and yet be no laughing stock to the Infidels for
drinking the blood of a man slain. He affirms the likeness of flesh and
blood to be coupled with the truth in the sacrament: yet so as if one would
understand it properly to be the blood of a man slain, we drink it not: for
so might the infidels laugh us to scorn.

He again in the same title, Hoc est quod etc. Idem ibidem.
Even as therefore the heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ after his
sort, is called the body of Christ, whereas indeed it is the sacrament of
Christ's body, namely of that which was to be seen, handled, mortal, set upon
the Cross; and the sacrifice of the flesh which is made by the hands of the
Priest, is called the passion of Christ's death and crucifying, not in very
deed, but by the signification of the mystery: so the sacrament of faith which
is meant Baptism, is faith. Again he teaches plainly, that the body of
Christ which is to be seen and felt is one thing, and that another, which
after his sort is called the body of Christ, whereas indeed it is a sacrament
of that body of his which is to be seen and felt. Glossa ibidem.
Whereupon the Gloss upon the same place has thus, The heavenly bread (that
is to say) the heavenly sacrament which does truly represent the flesh of
Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly; and therefore it is
called after a peculiar manner, not in the truth of the matter, but by the
signification of the mystery. And a little before, Idem ibidem.
the same Gloss says in the same place; The heavenly sacrament which is upon
the Altar is improperly called the body of Christ, even as Baptism is
improperly called faith.

August. ad Dard.
To this agree those words that the same Augustine writes to Dardanus in this
wise: Keep faithfully the Christian profession, That he rose again from the
dead, He ascended into heaven, Sits on the Right Hand of the Father: Neither
shall he come from any other place then from thence to judge the quick and the
dead; And so shall he come, (the voice of the Angel being witness) as he was
seen to go into heaven, namely in the same form and substance of flesh: unto
the which flesh he has assuredly given immortality, and not taken away the
nature. After this form he is not to be thought that he is every where spread
abroad: For we must take heed that we affirm not so the divinity of his
manhood, that we take away the truth of his body.

Idem ibidem.
Afterward in the end of the same Epistle; Doubt not that Christ our Lord the
only begotten Son of God, equal to the Father, even that Son of man which
is less then the Father, is both altogether present every where as God, and
also in some certain place of heaven, for the measure of his true body. The
truth of Christ's body, which in another place he said is every where spread
abroad when he speaks of the sacrament of his body, here where he entreats
of his true body indeed properly understood, he denies that according to that
manner of body it is every where spread abroad, but that so the truth of his
body is clean taken away.

Augustine is not contrary to himself, but shows plainly enough that the
body, and the truth of the body is to be taken two ways. Peradventure I seem
to have rehearsed over many places out of Austin, but yet this one place do I
think not to be ouerpassed, which he has left in writing upon the Gospel of
John tract. 50. The poor have ye always with you, Idem in Joan. tract. 50.
but me shall you not have always. Let good men receive this also, and not be
troubled: for he spoke of the presence of his body. For according to his
Majesty, according to his providence, according to his unspeakable and
invisible grace, that is fulfilled which was said by him, Behold I am with you
every day, even to the end of the world. But according to the flesh, which the
Word took upon him, according to that that he was borne of the Virgin,
according to that, that he was taken of the Jews, that he was nailed to a
tree, that he was taken down from the Cross, that he was wrapped in linen
clothes, that he was laid in the grave, that he appeared in his resurrection,
ye shall not alvvayes have him with you. Why? Because according to the presence
of his body, he was conversant with his disciples forty days, and they
being in company with him, by seeing him and not follovving him, he ascended
into heaven, and is not here, for he is there, he sits on the Right Hand of
the Father: and here he is also, for the presence of his Majesty did not
depart. After another sort according to the presence of his Majesty, we have
Christ always. According to the presence of his flesh it was rightly said to
the disciples, but me shall you not have always: for the Church had him a few
days according to the presence of his flesh, and now keeps him by faith, and
sees him not with eyes. Thus much out of Augustine.

Where Augustine speaks of that which is properly called Christ's body, he
denies that it is simply present here, and does refuse such a presence of his
body: but when he speaks of the Sacrament, he does affirm that his body is
verily present, and a true presence of his body, yet not properly, but, as he
himself does instruct us, according to his Majesty, according to his
unspeakable and invisible grace, whereof we will speak more at large
hereafter. It is plain therefore, that the body of Christ in the sacrament is
to be understood one way, and that an other way which of necessity must be in
some place of heaven, for the fourmes sake of a true body, as he says. Now
let us go forward to other.

Gregor. Nazianz. oratione de Pasch.
Gregory Nazianzene in his Oration of the feast of Easter, says thus, But let
us be made partakers of the Passover, but yet still figuratively, albeit this
Passover be more manifest then the old. For truly the Passover of the Law (I
speak boldly) was a more dark figure of a figure: but within a while we
shall enjoy it more perfect and manifest, when the Son the Word it self,
shall drink it new with us in the kingdom of his Father, opening and teaching
us those things which he has now showed sparingly. Here Nazianzene called the
sacrament of Thanksgiving a more manifest Passover then the Passover of the
Law: yet still for all that a figure, namely of that which we shall enjoy more
perfect and manifest in the kingdom of his Father. This Passover therefore
which is performed in mystery, does differ from that which remains for
ever, wherewith we shall be satisfied in the world to come.

Gregor. in hom. Pasch.
The other Gregory in his Homily of the Passover: This wholesome sacrifice
does renew to us by a mystery the death of the only begotten Son: which
although he rising again from death dies no more, nor death shall have any
more dominion over him, yet he living immortally, and vncorruptibly in
himself, dies again in this mystery, and his body is also received every
where, and his flesh for the health of the people, his blood is not now shed
into the hands of the unfaithful, but is powered out in the mouth of the
faithful. By this therefore we may judge what manner of sacrament this is,
which for our absolution does always represent the Passion of the only
begotten Son. For what faithful man can doubt, that in the very hour of the
sacrifice, at the voice of the Priest, the heavens open, and the company of
Angels be present in the mystery of Jesus Christ? This Gregory makes a
difference between this sacrifice, and the other, and does also show that
this death, this passion, this body, which things be done in this mystery, do
represent and imitate those things which were done long ago. For if you follow
the letter, his body is not spread out every where, nor his flesh suffers, nor
dies any more, although these things be said to be done in mystery.

The same opinion had Eusebius Emissenus, Eusebius. Emis. de consecrat. did. 2.
whose words are rehearsed De consecrat. Did. 2. as follows. Forasmuch as
he would take away from the eyes the body taken of the Virgin, and would place
it above the stars; it was necessary that in the day of his Supper, the
sacrament of his body and blood should be consecrated unto us, to the end that
that might be worshipped continually by a mystery, which was once offered for
a ransom: that seeing a daily and vnceasing redemption did run for the
salvation of all men, there might be a continual oblation of redemption, and
that continual sacrifice might live in memory, and might ever be present in
grace, a true, perfect, and only sacrifice to be esteemed in faith, not to be
judged by form nor by outward sight, but by the inward affection. Whereupon
the heavenly authority confirms, that My flesh is verily meat; and my blood
is verily drink.

Let all doubt therefore of unfaithfulness depart, seeing he that is the author
of the gift, the same is witness of the truth: for the invisible Priest by his
word and secret power, turns the visible creature, into the substance of his
body and blood, saying, Take, eat, this is my body, and after the blessing
being repeated, Take and drink (says he) this is my blood. Therefore even as
at the beck of the Lord commanding it, suddenly, and of nothing the hie
heavens, the depth of the waters, and largeness of the earth was made: so by
the like power in spiritual sacraments, where power does command, effect does
obey. By plain words does Eusebius teach us, that the proper body which he
terms taken upon him, is not in the sacrament, but withdrawn from the earth,
placed above the stars: and therefore is ordained the sacrament of the body,
wherein is contained the substance of the body, yet in a mystery and by grace,
not that substance which he said before was taken away, which if it were
present, the sacrament were not needful; but a spiritual substance, and fit
for the sacraments, whereupon he also calls the sacraments spiritual. And
lest we should imagine it a more gross substance then is fit, he alleges
forthwith the example of regeneration, saying, How great benefit therefore, and
worthy to be praised, the force of the heavenly blessing does work, and how
it ought not to be a new and impossible matter to thee, that earthly and
mortal things be changed into the substance of Christ, ask thy self that art
newborn again in Christ. Lately far from life, a stranger from mercy, and
inwardly a dead man, from the way of health thou wast banished; and suddenly
professing the Laws of Christ, and by wholesome mysteries renewed, thou have
leapt into the body of the Church, not by sight, but by belief, and of the
child of perdition wast thought worthy by a secret pureness, to be the Son
of God by adoption, abiding still in the visible measure, and made inuisibly
greater then thy self, without increase of quantity. For although thou wast
the very selfsame man before, yet by augmentation of faith, thou art become
much otherwise: for in the outward man nothing is added, and all in the inward
man is clean changed, and so man was made the son of God, and Christ was
formed in the mind of man. Even as therefore without corporal feeling (the
former baseness set apart) thou have suddenly put on a new dignity; and as in
this point that God has healed those things that were amiss in thee, put away
thine infections, wiped away thy spots, thy eyes are not trusted vvithall, but
thy inward senses: so when thou go up to the holy Altar, to be fed with the
spiritual meat, behold in thy faith the holy body and blood of Christ, honor
it, marvel at it, touch it with thy mind, take it in the hand of thy heart,
and especially receive it, whole Christ, with the thirsty draught of the
inward man.

Eusebius declares by this similitude, what manner of change is made in the
sacrament, how earthly things be turned into the substance of Christ, and what
manner of substance that is: without doubt, like unto that change wherewith we
be altered in our Baptism, and such a substance as we put on in the bath of
Regeneration, when we be borne the children of God, and made a new creature,
and new men, when we pass into the body of the Church, where in our outward
part nothing is changed, but all inwardly, and for that cause calls he it
spiritual food, which we behold in faith, touch with mind, take with the hand
of our heart, and receive with the thirsty draught of the inward man.

Ambros. in Epist. ad Hebr. de consecrat. did. 2.
With this agrees that that Ambrose writes upon the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and is repeated De consecrat did. 2. In Christ was once a mighty sacrifice
offered for an everlasting Redemption: what do we then? do we not daily
offer him? yes, but in remembrance of his death: and it is but one sacrifice,
not many: for Christ was once offered, and this sacrifice is a pattern of
that. Ambrose says plainly, that that true sacrifice was once offered, but
this sacrifice is offered every day: and he declares in what sort it is one
sacrifice, and not one, when he says that this is a pattern of that. The same
man in his book of Mysteries says, Idem in lib. de Mist.
In that sacrament is Christ, because it is the body of Christ: it is not then
a corporal, but a spiritual food, vvhereupon the Apostle also says of the
figure of it, That our fathers did eat the same spiritual food, for the body
of God is a spiritual body, the body of Christ is the body of the divine
spirit. These things cannot be said of Christ's true and proper body, namely,
that it is a spirit: for a spirit has not flesh and blood, which that body
has, as the Lord himself did witness before his disciples, Feel ye, and
see you (says he) for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have.
Idem de Sacr. lib. 4.
Wherefore the same auctour De sacramentis lib. 4. says thus: Thou see
therefore how mighty in operation the word of Christ is. If then there be so
great force in the word of the Lord Jesus, that those things should begin to be
which were not: how much more is it of force, to make those things remain
which were, and yet to change them into another thing? The heaven was not, the
sea was not, the earth was not. But hearken to him that says, He spoke the
word and they were made, he commanded and they were created. Therefore that I
may answer thee, it was not the body of Christ before the consecration, but
after the consecration I tell thee it is now the body of Christ. He spoke the
word and it was made, he commanded and it was created Thou wast thy self, but
thou wast an old creature; after thou wast consecrated, thou did begin to
be a new creature. Will thou know how new a creature? Every one is (says he) a
new creature in Christ. Ambrose takes his argument a maiore, By the word of
God new things are made: then is it no marvel, if things which now be, and
remain, are changed into another thing by his word, which thing is done in
Sacraments. Examples of the first are Heaven, the Sea, the Earth: of the later,
man, which before he be regenerate is an old creature, but after regeneration,
by force of the word, albeit he be the very same he was before, namely a man
still, yet he receives an inward change, and of an old, is made a new
creature.

Like unto this he affirms the change in the sacrament to be, when as both
bread remains, and yet gets to it self a new substance (that is to say)
a new dignity. That same thing does he yet more fully expound in his sixth
book, writing thus: Idem de sacrament. lib. 6.
Peradventure thou may say, How is it very flesh? for I see a similitude, I
see not the truth of blood in deed. First of all, I told thee of the word of
Christ, that it works as of force, to change and alter the appointed kinds
of nature. Moreover, when the disciples of Christ could not away with his
talk, but hearing that he would give them his flesh to eat, and his blood
to drink, went their way; yet Peter alone said, Thou have the words of
eternal life, whither shall I go from thee? Least therefore any more should so
say, but the grace of Redemption should remain; Therefore thou take the
sacrament in a similitude, but thou do attain the grace and virtue of the
true nature. At the last he adds to make up the matter; And thou which
receiuest bread, art made partaker in that spiritual food, of the divine
substance.

We learn by the authority of this so great a man, that that which we take in
the sacrament, is a spiritual, not a corporal food; neither that that flesh is
to be taken after the manner of his proper flesh, as the Capernaits did, and
with offense went back, but together with the outvvard sign we obtain the
grace and virtue of the true nature, and receiving the bread are partakers of
his divine substance. And here also we see that Ambrose was of the same opinion
that Emissenus was, and far otherwise understands both the alteration which
is made in the sacraments, and also the very term of substance, then it is
either taken in proper speech, or as Philosophers do naturally speak.

Idem de offic. lib. 4. cap. 48.
To the same purpose serves also that which he writes in his book De officijs
lib. 4. cap. 48. Here is the shadovv, here is the image; there is the truth:
the shadow in the Law, the image in the Gospel: but the truth in heaven. In
time past the Lamb was offered, the calfe was offered; Now is Christ
offered: but he is offered as man, as taking his Passion, but he as a Priest
does offer himself here as in an image, but there in truth, where he makes
intercession for us, as an advocate with his Father. He puts a difference
in the one oblation from the other. And albeit both (after their manner) be done
in deed, yet this which is solemnized in the Church, is done in an Image, but
the truth it self remains as an Advocate for us with the Father.

And this place of Ambrose does seem to be like to that place of Origin upon
the 38. Origin in Psalm. 38.
Psalm, where he entreats of that saying of Paul, For the Law having a
shadow of those good things to come, has not the very Image of the things etc.
And thus he vvriteth: But if any man can pass from this shadovv, let him come
to the Image of the things, and see the coming of Christ made in the flesh;
Let him behold that hie Priest, both now offering sacrifices to the Father,
and that shall hereafter offer; And let him understand all these things to be
the Images of spiritual things, and that heavenly things be noted by corporal
Offices. It is therefore called an Image which is received for the present
time, and may be discerned by the nature of man. If thou can with thought
and mind pearce the heavens, and follovv JESUS who has pierced the heavens,
and is now present before the face of God for us, there shall thou find those
good things of which the Law had a shadovv, and Christ shevved the Image in
the flesh, which are prepared for the blessed, which neither eye has seen,
nor ear heard, nor ascended into the heart of man: which things when thou
shall see, thou shall understand that he that walks in them, and continues
in desire and earnest affection after them, such a one walks not now in an
Image, but in the very truth it self. Origin writes to the learned and
practiced, and therefore not easy to be understood of all men.
Notvvithstanding, he shows plainly that the sacrifices which be here
offered, be Images of that truth which pierced to heavens, and abiding before
the face of God is intercessor for us: And therefore that the Images of the
truth be one thing, and the very truth another. And that although these
Images have also their truth, yet this differs from that proper truth
which we shall there indeed attain to, when we follovving Christ, shall
pearce the heavens where he abides; the which after a sort we also enjoy
here, while in our devout meditations our minds being lift up to heaven, we
behold those secret good things. He also upon Matthew cap. 15. Idem in Mat.
cap. 15.
says: Neither is it the material bread, but the word that is spoken over it,
that profits to him that eats not vnvvorthily of the Lord. And these things
are spoken of the figurative and mystical body.

Many things beside may be said of the Word which was made flesh. Here Origin
does declare, that the true flesh, (that is to say) the true nature of man,
which Christ being the Word took unto him, to be one manner of flesh, and an
other thing to be his figurative and symbolical body, with which words he
calls the Sacrament. To this purpose serve the words that he writes Contra
Celsum lib. 8. Idem contra Celsum lib. 8.
We obeying the Maker of all things for his great benefits bestovved upon us,
when we have given Thanks, are fed with the loaves set before us, which by
intercession and prayers are made a certain more holy body. These words, A
certain more holy body, do not agree to the proper body of Christ, but they
agree to the sacrament of Thanksgiving, which after a certain manner is his
body. The same man upon Leuiticus Homil. 7. Idem in Leuit. Homil. 7.
expounds the same matter more plainly, saying: But you if ye be the
children of the Church, if you be endued with the mysteries of the Gospel, if
the Word made flesh dwells in you; acknowledge you these things which we
speak, that they be the Lords, lest peradventure he that is ignorant, be
ignorant still: Acknowledge that they be figures which be written in the holy
Volumes, and therefore examine them as spiritual, and not carnal men, and
understand those things which be spoken: For if you take those things as
carnal men, they hurt you, and do not nourish you. For there is also in the
Gospel a letter that kills: The killing letter is not only found in the old
Testament. There is also a letter in the new Testament that can kill him which
will not spiritually mark those things that be spoken. For if thou follow
this that has been spoken, according to the letter, Unless ye eat my flesh
and drink my blood, this letter slays. Seeing then the Authors every where
refer these words to the sacrament; and Origin commands so much to flee
the letter, as to say that it kills: Who sees not, that Christ's flesh is in
the sacrament one way to be understood, and another according to the letter,
and in proper speech?

Epiphanius in Anchor^to is of the same opinion, Epiphanius in Anchorato.
where he says: For we see that our Savior took into his hands, as the
Gospel contains, that he rose in the Supper, and took these things, and when
he had given Thanks, he said, This is mine, etc. And we see that it is not
equal, nor like, neither to the Image that is in flesh, nor to his invisible
Godhead, nor to the features of his members: for this is of a round fashion and
without sense, as much as to the power of it self appertains. And therefore
his will was to speak by grace, This is mine, etc. And every man believes his
saying: for he that believes not that he is true as he has said, he is
fallen from grace and health. But that which we have heard we believe that it
is his: for we know that our Lord is altogether sense, all endued with sense,
all God, all moving, all working, all light, all incomprehensible; but yet he,
that has given us this with grace. Epiphanius does in this place endeavor
himself to prove, that man being made after the Image of God, has in deed the
Image of God, not according to the proper nature of divinity, but after grace;
and uses the similitude taken of the Sacrament of Thanksgiving, the which
according to the proper nature of a body, he denies it to be the body of
Christ, since it has neither the form of a true body, and lacks feeling and
moving, and yet it is verily believed to be his body by grace.

Cyprian de Coena D mini.
Cyprian also in his sermon of the Supper of the Lord, does very godly and
plentifully reason to the same effect, out of the which I have thought
sufficient to touch these fevv places. For none of the Fathers have more
extolled the dignity of the Sacrament, and shutting out all carnal sense,
more plainly declared the true understanding of so great a mystery. An
vnconsuming meat (says he) the Master did set before his disciples: neither
were the people bidden to a sumptuous and cunningly dressed Banquet, but there
is given an immortal food differing from common meats, retaining the shape of
bodily substance, but proving by invisible vvorking, that the divine virtue is
present. Again, There did sometime arise a question (as it is read in the
Gospel of John) of the novelty of this word, and at the doctrine of this
Mystery were the hearers amazed, when the Lord said, Unless you eat of the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in
you: Because certain, for that they did not yet believe, nor could understand,
went back, for that it seemed to them an horrible and heinous thing to feed
upon man's flesh, thinking he had spoken this after that sort, as though they
should have been taught to have eaten his flesh sod, or roasted, and cut in
pieces: whereas the flesh of his person, if it should be divided into morsels,
could not have been sufficient for all mankind, which being once spent,
Religion should seem to perish, which should not have afterward a sacrifice
remaining any longer. But in such like thoughts flesh and blood profits
nothing, because as the Master himself has expounded, These words be Spirit
and life: neither does the carnal sense pearse the understanding of so great a
depth, unless Faith be added too. The Bread is food, the Blood is life, the
Flesh substance, the Body the Church. A body, because of the agreeing of
members in one; Bread, for the conformity of nourishment; Blood, for the
effect of life given; Flesh, for the property of the humanity taken. Also he
says, This common bread being changed into flesh and blood, does procure
life and increase to the bodies, and therefore by the accustomed effect of
things, the weakness of our faith is aided, and taught by a sensible
argument, that the effect of eternal life is in the visible Sacraments, and
that we be knit to Christ not so much by corporal, as by spiritual passage.
Also this bread which he reached to his disciples, being changed, not in
form but in nature, by the omnipotency of the Word is made flesh; and even as
in the person of Christ the humanity was seen and the divinity hid, so into
the visible Sacrament unspeakably does the divine substance power it self.
Also the Master truly of this Institution said, that Unless we should eat
and drink his blood, we should not have life in us: instructing us by a
spiritual lesson, and opening our understanding to so hidden a matter, that
we should know that our eating is an abiding in him, and our drink as it
were a certain incorporation, by submitting our service, and joining our
wills, and uniting our affections. Also he says, Among the guests of the
Lords table the natural man is not admitted; whatsoever flesh and blood does
appoint is shut out from this company, it sauoureth nothing, it profits
nothing, whatsoever the finenes of the sense of man does go about. Cyprian
has these and many other places to the same purpose. The very words of Cyprian
do sufficiently declare that which belongs to our purpose: How the Letter is
not to be followed in these things which be spoken of this mystery; how the
understanding of the Flesh is utterly to be shunned, and all things to be
referred to a spiritual sense: That there is the presence of the divine power
in this Bread, the effect of everlasting life, and that the divine substance is
powered thereinto; that the words are spirit and life, that a spiritual lesson
is given; that this Body, this Blood and Flesh, this substance of body, ought
not to be taken after a common sort, nor as man's reason does appoint, but to be
named, thought of, believed for certain excellent effects, powers and
properties joined thereto, which be even within the body and blood of Christ by
nature; namely, that it does both feed and revive our souls, and prepares
our bodies to resurrection and immortality.

Cyrill. in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 14.
The same opinion has also Cyrillus, who though he affirm in many places, the
truth and nature of the body of Christ to be in the Sacrament; yet he is in
opinion, that it is a spiritual and divine matter, and not to be understood
after the manner of men. For first he declares, that the same manner of eating
is set forth in the words of the Lords Supper, which the Lord himself
signified when he said, Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. For
so he writes in his 4. book upon the 14. Chap. of John: Where after he had
spoken somewhat of them that did say, How can this man give his flesh to be
eaten? he adds these words; Therefore they ought first to have set the
roots of faith in their mind, and then to seek for those things that are to
be sought for of man: but they, before they would believe, did seek
importunately. For this cause therefore, the Lord did not open, how it might
be, but exhorts to seek it by faith. So to his disciples that believed, he
gave the pieces of bread, saying, Take ye, and eat ye, this is my body. The
cup also in like manner he carried about, saying, Drink ye all of this: This is
the cup of my blood, which shall be shed for many for the remission of sins.
Thou see manifestly, that by no means he would declare the manner of the
mystery to them that sought it without faith: but to them that did believe,
and did not seek it, he plainly declared it. Likewise in cap. 21. Idem in
cap. 21
upon these words, This is a hardsaying, thus he says: And such as want
sharpness of wit, are wont to abhor knowledge, which should be sought with
great study, and much labor: but yet the spiritual man accustomed to the
Lords doctrine, as to great dainties, does continually sing, How sweet be thy
words unto my throat! yea above honey to my mouth. But the natural Jew does
think this spiritual mystery full of foolishness; and where by the Lords
words he is stirred to an higher understanding of things, yet he falls still
to his accustomed madness. Likewise in his cap. 22. expounding these words,
Does this offend you? Idem in cap. 22
etc. he writes on this sort. For ignorance, many which followed Christ, not
understanding his words, were troubled: for when they heard him say, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you, they thought Christ had
called them to the cruel manners of beasts, and stirred them to eat the raw
flesh of a man, and to drink blood, which be even horrible to hear. For they
had not yet known the manner of this mystery, and the godly ministration
thereof. Also in the 24. chapter. Idem cap. 24.
The words therefore that I have spoken to you be spirit, that is spiritual,
and of the spirit, and life, that is to say, they be of the lively and natural
life. Idem ad Calosyrium.
The same man's words are rehearsed to Calosyrius, which follow. For least we
should abhor flesh and blood set upon the holy Altars, God favoring our
frailty, powered into the things offered the power of life, turning them into
the truth of his own flesh, that a body of life, as it were a certain seed
that gives life, might be found in us.

By these and many other places in Cyrillus, we be lift up from the letter to
the spirit, from the sense of the natural man, to a more hie understanding of
a spiritual mystery. It must not be thought here, that we eat the raw flesh
of a man, or drink his blood, but that the words be spiritual, and
spiritually to be understood, that they be termed flesh and blood, but ought
to be understood of spirit and life, that is to say, of the virtue of the Lords
flesh that gives life: And therefore said he that the power of life was put
into the outward signs, Idem in Joan. lib. 11. cap. 26.
and called it by an apt signification the body of life. The same man upon John
lib. 11. cap. 26. does expound somewhat more plainly, how we be coupled
corporally both with Christ and with our selves, and that by the partaking of
the sacrament, although we be severed both in body and soul. It must be
considered, says he, whether to the unity of consent and will we may also
find a natural unity, by which we shall be lincked among our selves, and we
all unto God. For peradventure we are joined also with corporal union,
although we be severed one from another, that each one apart has his being and
distance of place. For although Peter and Paul be one by unity in Christ, yet
Peter is not Paul. Afterward within few words he thus concludes; The
original therefore, and the way whereby we be partakers of the holy Ghost,
and united to God, is the mystery of Christ, for we be all sanctified in him.
Therefore, that he might unite us one to another, and every one to God,
although we be severed both in body and soul, yet has he found a way
agreeable to the counsel of his Father, and to his own wisdom. For he
blessing those as believe, with his body, through the mystical communion does
make us both with himself, and also among our selves, one body. It is plain
that Cyrillus spoke not of the same kind of body, when he says, Although they
be severed in body and soul, yet they which believe, through the body of
Christ, and by the mystical communion be made one body with Christ, and
betvveene themselves. For even as the faithful, being joined in that
spiritual body, are one body, although their proper bodies remain severed:
Even so also we being joined with Christ in that spiritual body, are made one
body with him, although his own proper body be far distant from our
bodies. Let us add one place more taken out of this Father, Idem in lib. ad
Euop. Anat. 11
which is in his book Ad Euoptium Anath. 11. where he speaks thus of
Nestorius. Does not he pronounce this mystery to be (...), that is a
devouring of man's flesh, and violently drive the minds of the faithful,
without conscience, into false interpretations, and with man's inventions take
those things in hand, which are received by an only pure, and unsearchable
faith? Cyrillus does in this place object against Nestorius, That to maintain
this error, he did speak too grossly of the Sacrament, as though the faithful
do properly therein eat man's flesh, which by the Greek word he calls
(...): But such kind of thoughts he terms (...), that is to say, as Budaeus
does interpret it, counterfeite, not right, not sincere: For so much as here
is no place for such kind of worldly and common imaginations.

We ought to think the like of Theophylactus, who although in some place he
may seem to have follovved a more gross opinion, as upon Matthew the 26.
Chapter, whose words we have above rehearsed, wherein he seems to deny,
that the bread of the Sacrament of thanksgiving, is a figure of the Lords
body, but the very body indeed; yet when he says, It is no figure, he means
that it is not only a figure, as in another place, where upon Mark and John
it is read: for else he should have repugned against all the old Writers (and
that is not likely) who throughout, term this Sacrament a figure, an image, a
sign and pattern. Besides, in that he said it was the body in very deed, his
meaning was not to have it taken after a worldly and common sort, as it shall
manifestly appear by those things that follow: for he writing upon these words
in the sixth Chapter of John, Theophylac. in Joan. cap. 6.
The Jews therefore did strive among themselves, saying, How can this man give
us his flesh to eat? says thus: It behooves us therefore, after that we
hear, unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, ye shall have no life,
in taking the heavenly mysteries to keep steadfast and vnwauering faith, and
not to be inquisitiue how. For the natural man, that is, he that follovveth
man's carnal and natural thoughts, is not apt to conceive such matters as be
above nature and spiritual, and even so he does not understand the spiritual
eating of the Lords flesh, whereof who so be not partakers, shall not be
partakers of everlasting life. And by and by he expounds thus these words,
He that eats my flesh, etc. In this place we learn the Sacrament of the
communion. For he that eats and drinks the Lords flesh and blood, abides
in the Lord himself, and the Lord in him: for there is a new mixture made, and
above reason, so that God is in us, and we in God. Here the Author teaches,
that faith must be had in the mysteries, and not to be inquisitiue how: and
therewithal he remoueth apart man's carnal or natural thoughts, and requires
only a spiritual meaning, and commends a more hie manner of eating. For he
adds not long after upon these words, This is a hard saying, who can hear
him? etc. But see their folly; For their duty had been, to have asked, and
learned those things whereof they were ignorant. But they drew back, and did
expound nothing spiritually, but all things as they outwardly appeared. For in
as much as they heard of flesh, they thought he would compel them to be (...),
that is, deuourers of flesh and blood. But because we understand it
spiritually, neither we be deuourers of flesh, and yet be we sanctified by
such meat. By and by also expounding this, It is spirit that quickens, thus
he writes: Because, as we have often said, they that carnally expounded such
things as Christ spoke, were offended: he says, When those things that I
speak are spiritually understood, that only brings profit: but the flesh,
that is to say, to expound them carnally, profits nothing, but is occasion of
offense. So therefore such as heard carnally those things that Christ spoke,
were offended. He adds therefore, The words which I speak are spirit, that
is to say, they be spiritual, and life, (having nothing that is carnal) and
bringing everlasting life. Let us add hereunto those things which he writes
upon Mark 14. cap. 1. For the bread is not only a figure, and a certain
pattern of the Lords body, but it is turned into the very body of Christ. For
the Lord says, The bread which I will give, is my flesh. And again, Unless
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, etc. And how, says he, is not the flesh
seen? O man, this is done for our infirmity. For since the bread and wine be
of those things which we be acquainted withal, we abhor them not: but if we
should see blood and flesh set before us, we could not abide it, but should
utterly abhor it. Therefore God of his mercy favoring our frailty,
retains still the form of bread and wine, but he alters the element into
the power of flesh and blood. By all these places it is most certain, that
Theophylactus followed the steps of the ancient fathers, set aside all carnal
imaginations in this Sacrament, and called us to such as be hie and spiritual,
that it is not only a figure of the Lords body, but rather is verily his body,
and yet they that be partakers are not (...), that is to say, flesh eaters: And
he adds the cause, for that we understand it not carnally but spiritually,
that is to say, that they remain the forms of bread and wine, but yet do
pass into the power of the Lords flesh and blood, and, as he termed it, be
transelemented, in which term there is no cause why we should feign to our
self any Popish Transubstantiation as they call it. Idem in Joan. cap. 6.
For writing upon the 6. Chapter of John, he uses the same term, saying thus:
Therefore even as I, says he, live for the Father, that is, as I am borne of
the Father, which is life: even so also, he that eats me, lives by the
means of me, while he is after a sort mixed with me, and is transelemented
into me that can quicken. By this term of transelementatio^ he meant to
signify nothing else, but the same change that is fit for the Sacraments:
whereof Ambrose, Emissenus and others make mention, as before we have repeated:
for otherwise we cannot be transelemented into Christ. And no marvel that
Theophylactus so termed it, since Chrysostom himself upon the sixth chap. of
John, homilia 45. uses these words: Chrysostom. in Joan. cap. 6. homil. 45.
But that we should not only by love, but also in very deed be turned into
that flesh, he has wrought it by the meat which he has given us. Behold,
Chrysostom says, we are turned into the flesh of Christ really, as I may so
term it: But yet who sees not that turning to be spiritual, not carnal? Even
so is bread turned in very deed, and transelemented into Christ's flesh, but
by a spiritual and no carnal turning, because the bread does get to it the
power of the flesh. And these things which have been thus cited out of
Theophylactus, albeit he be not so ancient an author, yet because he is
chiefly alleged of such as follow the carnal sense in the sacrament of
thanksgiving, though he does very manifestly expound himself, and teaches
nothing repugnant to holy Scriptures and writings of old Authors, I meant to
show the true opinion of so learned a man, and not to discredit his authority
as a late writer.

Damascenus is yet unspoken of, whom the adversaries use as it were a chief
champion: but in case they would not snatchingly pick out such sentences as
serve the humor of their affections, but mark well the through drift of his
writing; he helps not so much their cause as he does overthrow it. Albeit
(that I may frankely admonish the reader and utter mine opinion) he is but a
very slippery and an uncertain author in expounding of this mystery, and none,
I dare say, among the old writers, shall be found, that has reasoned of this
matter so obscurely and doubtfully. Truly I gather by him, that when he had
determined to write a breuiat of the true faith, he would neither leave this
sacrament unspoken of, nor yet wist how to entreat of it plainly enough: The
which of his own words the indifferent reader shall easily judge. Damas. De
fide Orthod. lib. 4. cap. 14.
He vvriteth De fide orthod. lib. 4. cap. 14. of Christ in this wise: It
behooued, not only that the first fruits of our nature should come into the
partaking of a better, but that all persons, as many as would, should both be
borne by a second nativity, and nourished with a new meat, meet for that
nativity, and so prevent the measure of perfection. And a little after: And
because he is a spiritual Adam, it behooved the nativity also to be
spiritual, and likewise the meat. For since we have a double and compound
nature, it is fit that the nativity be also double, and the food likewise
compound. The nativity therefore is given us by water and spirit, I mean by
holy Baptism: but the meat is our Lord himself Jesus Christ, which came
down from heaven. Then after alleging the words of the Lords Supper, and
proofs of what force the word is, he adds: Even as all things whatsoever
God had made, he has made them by the vvorking of the holy Ghost: so now also
the same force of the holy Ghost brings to pass those things that be above
nature, the which no thing can comprehend but only faith. And a little after:
But bread and wine be taken: For God knovveth man's weakness: For commonly
those things which it is not acquainted with, it shunneth with
loathsomeness. Therefore he humbled himself after his wonted manner, and
brings to pass by the accustomed things of nature, such things as be above
nature. And even as in Baptism, because it is the manner of men to be washed
with water, and anointed with oil, he coupled with oil and water the
grace of the holy Ghost, and made it to be the washing of regeneration: After
the same sort, because men are wont to eat bread and drink wine and water,
he coupled therevvithall his Divinity, and made them his body and blood, that
by matters usual and agreeable to nature, we may be carried to those things
which pass nature. Hitherto he seemed to agree with the rest; for such as the
second nativity is, such, says he, is the meat: He terms the nativity
spiritual, likewise also the meat: The nativity to be double, through water
and the holy Ghost, the meat also double: but how it is double he alleges
not forthwith, as he did in the nativity, but the meat, says he, is the very
bread of life which came down from heaven: yet after a few words he declares
how it is done, saying, As the water is coupled with the grace of the holy
Ghost, and is made the washing of regeneration: so is the divinity coupled
with the bread, and is made the body and blood of the Lord. And this he
affirms to be the working of the holy Ghost, and that the bread and wine be
taken for man's infirmity, and by matters usual to nature, those things be
wrought that pass nature, which only faith can comprehend. None of these
things be contrary to the opinion of the other Fathers: but those things that
follow be not so. It is verily his body, says he, that is knit with the
divinity, that body taken of the holy Virgin. This before him no man had said.
If his meaning be of the proper body, the authority of the Fathers that were
before him cries out against him, which plainly affirm that body to be taken
from the earth, carried above the stars, and not to be here: who also with
manifest difference do separate that body from the sacrament of the body,
unless peradventure we may so interpret it, as that saying of Augustine, The
same body, and not the same body: the same by grace and power, and not the same
according to the proper manner of a body: the which it may seem that this
Authors meaning was when he writ this. For by and by there follows: Not that
the body that was taken of the Virgin, should come down from heaven, but that
the very bread and wine is changed into the body and blood of the Lord. By
which words he himself testifies, that this body which is received in the
Sacrament, is to be understood one way, and that body which was taken, which
he denies to come down from heaven, another way. For if it abide in heaven
without coming down hither; and if bread be made of the very same body that
was taken; sure the bread must be in heaven, and the faithful shall here
receive neither the bread nor yet the body, which thing no man in his right
wits can affirm. But if we leave the body that was taken in his place in
heaven, as our faith does require, and say notwithstanding that the same is
present in the sacrament by grace and power, as the rest of the Fathers do
pronounce, and therefore this bread may be called and believed for the natural
property of a body that is coupled with it, to be the body of Christ, not
properly as that body that he took upon him, but after a spiritual sort, as
the sacrament of that body; the matter is not intricate, but plainly opened,
neither shall there be any need to frame crooked mazes that be clean
contrary to our faith, or to knit vain ropes of sand, or to shun the
similitudes that the former Fathers used, and to invent other similitudes
gross and strange from mysteries, as Damascenus does in this place. For even
as (says he) the bread in eating, and the wine and water in drinking, are
naturally turned into the body and blood of him that eats and drinks them,
and be made another body, then that they had before: so the Show bread, and
the wine and water by invocation and coming of the holy Ghost, be changed
above the law of nature, into the body and blood of Christ, and be not two but
one and the same. What other thing does he by this similitude, but open a way
to (...) and (...): that is, the eating of man's flesh, which thing Cyrillus,
Theophylactus and other Fathers do detest? How much better have Cyprian,
Ambrose, Epiphanius, Emissenus, and other said, which affirm a like change in
the sacrament of thanksgiving, as that which is made in Baptism? whereby it
comes to pass, that the signs do remain the same, and by grace they get to
themselves a new substance in like manner, as one self man being not yet
regenerate does belong to the old Adam, and after regeneration becomes a
new man, and a new creature, not by a fleshly mean, which agrees not to
sacraments, but after a spiritual sort.

But Damascenus forgetting himself, who had before affirmed this meat to be
spiritual, as the regeneration in Baptism; now teaches it to be carnal, if
this bread must pass into the body of Christ, as common bread does into the
bodies of those that eat it: whereby it happens, that he falls also into
another error: for he denies this bread and wine to be a figure. This bread
and wine (says he) is not a figure of the body and blood of Christ, God
forbid, but the very deified body of the Lord. And no marvel it is that he
denies this, if he be in opinion that this bread is so changed as common bread
is into the body of the feeder. But all they of old time throughout be
repugnant: and surely he iarreth with himself: for after those words cited
out of the sixth Chapter of John, Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, etc. And My flesh verily, etc. by and by he brings another similitude of
a coal, far diverse from the former. A coal (says he) is not simple wood,
but coupled with fire: so the bread of communion is not simple bread, but
coupled with the divinity. How diverse is the manner of these two similitudes?
before he said, that the Shewbread was turned into the body of Christ, beyond
nature, as the common bread is naturally changed into the body of him that
eats it, but that is not done while there remains bread: here he says,
that the bread of communion is not simple bread, but bread coupled with the
divinity. The bread therefore remains: to what is it coupled? to the
divinity. Where is then that gross transmutation? Again a little after: This
is that pure sacrifice without blood, which God has commanded by the Prophet
should be offered to himself, from the rising of the Sun, to the going
down of the same. If he speak of the body that he took upon him, how is
it without blood? if he speak of his spiritual body and blood, he says
truth. Again he says: This body is not consumed, it is not corrupted, nor
cast into the draught. If his meaning be of his spiritual and better substance
of the sacrament, we confess it: if of the outward sign, Origin far
better learned then Damascenus says, As touching to that material part that it
has, it goes into the belly, and is cast into the draught. Damascenus goes
yet further and says, The bread is the first fruits of the bread to come,
which is (...), but epiousios does signify either the bread to come, that is
of the world to come, or else that which is taken for the consecration of our
substance. But whether it be this way or that way, it is aptly called the body
of Christ. For the Lords flesh is a spirit giving life, because it was
conceived of a quickening spirit. For that which is borne of spirit, is spirit.
But this I speak not, to take away the nature of a body, but willing to show
his quickening and divinity. How changeable is this speech? sometime one and
the self bread is one and self body, another time it is the first fruits of
the bread to come: otherwhile flesh: at another time spirit: At last, about the
end he says, For albeit some named the bread and wine patterns of Christ's
body and blood, as that holy man Basil; yet after the sanctifying they called
it not so, but before the sacrifice was sanctified. But in that which is
commonly called the liturgy of Basil, it is plain otherwise, and the rest of
the Fathers do oftentimes the like. And Damascenus himself shuts up his
oration with this conclusion: And they be called the patterns of things to
come, not because they be not verily the body and blood of Christ, but because
now by them we be made partakers of the divinity of Christ, and then shall be
by understanding, by sight only. What shall we do with this man, who a little
before denied that they were called patterns after sanctification, and now he
himself does plainly call them patterns after sanctification? what manner
inconstancy is this? This is not a teaching of mysteries, but in saying
somewhile one thing, and another while another, it is to wrap all things in
blind darkness. Truly I think in my mind, that Damascenus knew not how to
determine this matter certainly, but did heap together hastily and confusedly
those things which he had read, and which were written wisely of the old
Fathers, and when he could not wind himself out, he floteth to and fro, and
as the Grecians term it, (...) that is to say, wafteth with his wings. For
that he was persuaded that there should be a carnal (as they term it)
transubstantiation, that is not likely, since that the very Greek Church unto
this present day has not admitted that opinion. And indeed no marvel, if in
this mystery he saw the less, or had no sound opinion, if those things be
true which be reported of him in his life, that after he was made a Monk he
fondly became a basketseller in the market place, that he fained foolish
miracles, that he was a superstitious worshipper of Images, and a most earnest
maintainer of the same.

The authority of them of old time ought to be of more credit with us, whose
judgment commended to us with learning and unfeigned godliness, is of much
more weight: who for the understanding of this so great a mystery, exclude all
sense of the flesh, and call us back to a spiritual manner of understanding.
Wherefore wisely and learnedly does Bertram, which was no long time after,
seem to have observed this distinction in the ancient Fathers, and agreeable
also to the scriptures, and to have set forth in a work of his, though not
long, yet clearly and truly, what ought to be thought of this controversy:
and if we gather thereout a few places fit for our purpose, it shall not be
amiss; for he is neither a very new Author, seeing he lived about seven
hundredth years past, and beside, he was no less famous for his life then for
his learning. With many arguments he proves this proposition, That the flesh
of Christ taken of the Virgin, and that which is taken in the sacrament,
differ one from another. For he writes in this manner, expounding these words
of Ambrose: That is the undoubtedly true flesh of Christ, that was crucified,
that was buried. Therefore it is verily a sacrament of that flesh. The Lord
Jesus himself cries, Bertramus de corp. and sang. Christi.
This is my body. How diligently, says Bertram, how wisely is this
distinction made? Of the flesh of Christ which was crucified, which was
buried, that is, by the which Christ was both crucified and buried, he says,
It is his very flesh indeed: but of that which is received in the sacrament, he
says, It is therefore verily the sacrament of that flesh: making a distinction
between the sacrament of his flesh, and the truth of his flesh, in that he
said, That in the truth of his flesh which he took of the Virgin, he was
both crucified and buried, and therefore said that the mystery that is now
ministered in the Church, is verily a sacrament of that flesh wherein he was
crucified: manifestly instructing the faithful, that that flesh in which
Christ was crucified and buried, is not a mystery, but the truth of nature.
But this flesh which now contains in a mystery the similitude of that other,
is not flesh in form, but in Sacrament: so that in form it is bread, in
sacrament the true body of Christ, as the Lord JESUS himself cries, This is
my body. Whose mind that we may the better understand, it is to be marked (the
which we did also note before) that as he means the body of Christ two manner
of ways, so does he allege also two manner of truethes of the same, namely the
one truth properly, which he terms the truth in form, and the truth of
nature, which he does attribute to the flesh that was crucified and buried; the
other a spiritual truth, which he terms the true body in the sacrament.

The same man repeating the saying of Ambrose, The food then is not corporal
but spiritual, says: Thou may not therefore bring the sense of the flesh:
for according to that, there is nothing here determined. It is indeed the body
of Christ, but not corporal, but spiritual: It is the blood of Christ, but
not corporal, but spiritual. There is nothing therefore to be understood
corporally, but spiritually. It is the body of Christ, but not corporally: and
it is the blood of Christ, but not corporally. Note when he says, Not
corporally, he means not properly corporally, (for by the spiritual eating
also in the sacrament we are corporally annexed with Christ, as Cyrillus and
Hilarious do witness,) but mystically, not properly. The same man says of the
same Ambrose a little after: He has taught us very plainly, how we ought to
understand the mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ. For after he had said
that our Fathers did eat spiritual food, and drink spiritual drink, when as
for all that there is no man that doubts, but the Manna which they did eat,
and the water which they did drink, were corporal; he applies it to the
mystery which now is ministered in the Church, defining after what sort it is
the body of Christ. For in that he says, The body of God is a spiritual body,
Christ undoubtedly is God, and that body which he took of the Virgin Mary,
which suffered, which was buried, which rose again, was undoubtedly a true
body, the same that continued visible, and able to be felt: but that body which
is called the mystery of God, is not corporal but spiritual. But if it be
spiritual, then is it not visible, nor able to be felt: and therefore S.
Ambrose adds, saying, The body of Christ is the body of a divine Spirit. But
a divine spirit is nothing that is corporal, nothing that is corruptible,
nothing able to be felt. But this body which is solemnized in the Church, as
touching the visible form, is both corruptible and to be felt. Soon after
also he concludes upon the words of Ambrose, in this wise: By the authority
of this great learned man, we be well taught, that there is a great difference
between the body wherein Christ suffered, and the blood which he shed hanging
upon the Cross out of his side, and this body which in the mystery of
Christ's passion is daily solemnized of the faithful, and that blood also
which is received in the mouth of the faithful, is a mystery of that blood
wherewith the whole world was redeemed. He confirms that also by the
authority of Hierom, and after rehearsal of this place, The blood and flesh
of Christ is understood two manner of ways; either that spiritual, etc. thus
he concludes: With no small difference has this doctor made a distinction of
the body and blood of Christ. For in that he says, that the flesh or blood
which are daily received of the faithful are spiritual, and yet that the
flesh that was crucified, and the blood which was shed with the soldiers
spear, are not said to be spiritual nor divine; he does manifestly signify,
that they differ as much one from another, as do spiritual things and
corporal, visible and invisible, divine and humane, and that those things
which differ from themselves, are not all one. But the spiritual flesh which
is received in the mouth of the faithful, and the spiritual blood which is
daily given to the faithful to drink, do differ from the flesh that was
crucified, and from the blood that was shed with the soldiers spear, as the
authority of this man does witness. Therefore they be not all one: For that
flesh which was crucified, was made of the flesh of the Virgin, framed together
of bones and sinevves, and severed with the features of the members of a man,
quickened with the spirit, of a reasonable soul, endued with reason into a life
proper to it self, and motions agreeable to the same. But on the other side,
the spiritual flesh which feeds spiritually the people that do believe,
after the form that it bears outwardly, is made of the grains of corn, by
the hands of the workman, framed together of no sinews and bones, severed
with no variety of members, quickened with no reasonable substance, nor can
exercise any proper motions. For whatsoever gives the substance of life, it is
of a spiritual force, and of an invisible working, and of a divine power.
Again, of the words of Augustine he concludes in this manner: By authority
of this doctor entreating of the Lords words of the sacrament of his body and
blood we be manifestly taught, that those words of the Lord be to be
understood spiritually, and not carnally, as he himself says, The words
which I speak to you, be spirit and life, Namely the words of eating his
flesh and drinking his blood: for he spoke it upon that occasion, whereat his
disciples were offended. Therefore that they should not be offended, the
heavenly Master calls them back from the flesh to the Spirit, and from a
corporal sight to invisible understanding. We see therefore the food of the
Lords body, and the drink of his blood, are after a sort his very body, and
his very blood, namely in that they be Spirit and life. He adds again after
the matter proved: Therefore we see, that there is a great difference between
the mystery of the body and blood of Christ which is now received of the
faithful in the Congregation, and that body which was borne of the Virgin
Mary, which suffered, which was buried, which rose again, which ascended into
heaven, which sits at the right hand of the Father. For this that is
ministered in the way, is to be taken spiritually: For Faith believes that
which it sees not, and spiritually feeds the soul, and does rejoice the
heart, and gives everlasting life, and incorruption, while that is not minded
which feeds the body, which is crushed with teeth, which is broken in pieces,
but that which by faith is spiritually received. But that body wherein Christ
suffered and rose again, is his own proper body taken of the Virgin Mary's
body, able to be felt and seen, even after his resurrection, as he himself
said to his disciples, Behold my hands and my feet: for I am even he, handle
me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

Bertram writes many things to this purpose: but let it suffice that we have
touched thus much. Which man's exposition, and manner of disputing upon the
Sacrament, is (in mine opinion) diligently to be wayed and embraced, for two
respects: First, because he sticks to the authority and testimony not
only of those fathers of whom he has repeated a few, but also many more, I
might say of all the most ancient: Secondarily, because that where the credit
of the man was so much that he was provoked to write by a most famous Prince,
and his writing published abroad, and in sight of all men, he was praised of
many, reprehended of none, or noted of any one spot of erroneous doctrine,
whereby it came to pass that before these new gross and natural
transubstantiation makers sprung up, the doctrine of Bertram touching the
Sacrament, was allowed by the judgment of every man that was best learned:
Albeit this term of transubstantiation being indeed new and not necessary,
yet perhaps might have some place, as the word Trans-elementation, if they had
not brought in another change of the substances then a sacramental, and that
which the ancient fathers did understand, which is brought to pass the former
substance remaining still. But they not satisfied with the novelty of the
term, have invented a monstrous interpretation. For they appoint the very
proper body of Christ to be in the Sacrament, and pluck from it the true
properties of a man's body, whereas it should seem that Aquinas himself was
not ignorant of the distinction above mentioned. Aquin. 3. part. Sum. q. 76.
art. 3.
For he writes 3. part. Sum. q. 76. art 3. on this manner: Christ is whole
under each piece of the forms of Bread and Wine, not only when the host is
broken, but also when it remains whole: neither is there distance of parts
one from another, as the eye from the eye, or the eye from the ear, or the
head from the feet, as there is in other bodies organicall: for such manner of
distance is in the true body of Christ, but not as it is in this Sacrament. He
affirms the true body of Christ to be one, which is organicall, and has
difference of members, which also he denies to be in the Sacrament; and that
to be another, which is in the Sacrament, and wants variety of members:
which thing if he meant of the spiritual body as the old writers did speak,
he judged right; but if he meant to signify any mass of flesh without form,
it is a great absurdity, and contrary to the opinion of all the old writers.

Lombardus.
Lombardus also Author of the sentences, concerning the very and proper flesh
of Christ lib 3. Sentent. Did. 3. says thus: Christ's flesh that was taken, is
neither heavenly, nor of the air, nor of any other nature then of such as all
men's flesh is. Since therefore the manner and nature of the flesh of Christ is
common with the flesh of other men, as Lombardus says, and such flesh as
Aquinas affirms comes not into the Sacrament; it follows by their
testimony, that these two kinds of flesh differ much. And that this may the
better appear, and be laid up in memory, I thought it not without profit to
add, of such things as we have spoken of before, a certain distinction which
the Greeks call (...) by comparison.

1 The proper body of Christ, has the natural form of a man's body: The
mystical body has not.

2 The proper body has a head, breast, members severed: The mystical has not.

3 The proper body has bones, veins, and sinews: The mystical has not.

4 That may be seen and touched: This can neither be seen nor touched.

5 That is endued with the true senses of a body: This is without sense, as
Epiphanius says.

6 That is organicall: This is not.

7 That is no figure: This is a figure of his proper body.

8 That is not in mystery: This is in mystery.

9 That, of his own nature, is humane and bodily: This is heavenly, divine,
and spiritual.

10 The matter of that is not subject to corruption: The material part of this
is bread, and is corrupted.

11 No man may eat that by it self: This, both a man may and ought to eat.

12 That is contained in one place: This, wheresoever the Sacrament is
ministered, is present; but not as in a place.

13 That is not a Sacrament of another body: This is a Sacrament of another
body.

14 That being taken of the virgin Mary's body, was once create: This is not
taken of the Virgin, but daily by the mystical benediction is create
potentiallie, by the testimony of Augustine and Cyprian.

15 That is a natural body: This is above nature.

16 Finally, that is simply: This is after a sort.

17 That properly and perfectly: This is a body improperly.

Hitherto we have spoken of the difference which the ancient Fathers have
godly and diligently observed, between Christ's proper body, and the Sacrament
of the same body. In the which although many things have been spoken, which
do not only declare that there is a difference (which in this place we meant
to do) but also do admonish us vvithall, what manner of body that is in the
sacrament: Yet because we have not hitherto so fully expressed this point, as
the weightines of the matter requires, We have thought good from
hence-forvvard to entreat of this part more fully; Namely, in what sort this
Sacrament is the Lords body, and wherefore our Lord himself at the first, as
the Evangelists make mention, afterward Paul the Apostle, lastly all they of
old time, following the authority of them, have left in writing that it is so
called, and is so indeed; not that this manner which is a spiritual and hid
thing, can be found out by man's reason, or that we go about to search out
curiously such things as be forbidden and denied, but that all man's inventions
set apart, we may follow those things that have been left us by the authority
of Scriptures, and ancient Fathers that agree with them, and that manner which
the Lord himself would we should know, and the Church instructed by him and
his Apostles, has received, not to depart from that. This is to be holden
fast which we proved before, that not only the Lords words, which be spoken
in the 6. Chapter of John, Unless ye eat the flesh etc. And My flesh is
verily meat, and the rest that follows in the same place, but also these
words of the Lords supper, Take ye, eat ye, this is my body, and This is my
blood, are to be understood spiritually, not carnally, and that one manner of
eating is meant in both places. When I say, Not carnally, I mean, Not
according to the letter, nor as the words do properly sound: for this is to
understand carnally, as Chrysostom witnesses upon John, of these words, The
flesh profits nothing. What is it, Chrysostom. in Joan. Hom. 46.
says he, to understand carnally? To understand the things simply as they be
spoken, and nothing else. For those things that be seen, are not so to be
judged, but all mysteries are to be considered with inward eyes, that is to
say, spiritually. Let not this rule of Chrysostom go out of our minds. But
these two, Carnally, and Spiritually, are contrary; when the one is forbidden,
the other is commanded, and contrariwise. And that carnal sense has no place
in this mystery, not only Chrysostom is the Author, as we recited even now,
and Cyprian, where he says, Neither does carnal sense pearse the
understanding of so great a depth, and Theophylactus writing thus, But because
we understand it spiritually, we be neither deuourers of flesh, and yet be
sanctified by that meat. But to be short, I may in manner say, that all the
ancient Fathers with one voice do forbid us to understand the words of the
Lords Supper carnally, and command a spiritual meaning: The which by many
testimonies repeated in this piece of work, every man may readily perceive.
Neither is this sufficient, if we avoid one manner of understanding carnally,
and fall into another. For he that does understand the eating of Christ's flesh
after the letter, and as it were a proper kind of speech, he is a carnal
Capernaite, whether he suppose it to be done properly one way or another. That
is plain by these words of Augustine upon the 98. Psalm: Augustine in Psalm.
98.
It seemed a hard matter to them that he said, Unless a man eat, etc. They
took it fondly, and imagined of it carnally, and thought that the Lord would
have cut out pieces of his body, and have given to them. And a little after:
That which I have spoken, understand ye spiritually. You shall not eat this
body which you see, I have commended to you a certain sacrament, if it be
spiritually understood, it will give you life. Here Augustine calls carnal
understanding foolishness, and appoints spiritual understanding as
necessary. And his meaning is not that this is only a carnal sense, if a man
should imagine of the cut pieces of the Lords body, albeit he rehearses but
this one carnal way of understanding, but also of all other the like. For it
is a likely matter, that even all the Capernaites did understand it carnally,
and yet not all after one way. Cyprian.
For one manner is rehearsed of Cyprian writing thus: It seemed to them a
horrible and wicked matter to feed of the flesh of man, imagining that this had
been so spoken, as though they should have been taught to eat his flesh either
sodden, or roasted, or cut in gobbets. Cyrillus.
And Cyrillus does impute to them another kind of carnal understanding: for
he says, For after they had heard, Verily verily I say to you, unless ye eat
the flesh, etc. they thought Christ had called them to the cruel manner of wild
beasts, and that they were provoked to an appetite to eat the raw flesh of
man, and drink blood, which things be horrible even to be heard. Wherefore
if we believe that the flesh of Christ properly so called is there present,
whether we think it raw, roast, or sodden, either whole or cut in gobbets, open
or covert, the sense is utterly carnal, and the words be carnally understood.
For it is not therefore to be thought a spiritual sense, because they say the
flesh of Christ is present inuisibly: For if their meaning be of the proper
flesh, we cannot say that we eat him not therefore carnally, because we see
him not. The blind see not those things which they eat, and men many times in
pottage and brothes eat eggs and flesh, which neither they see, nor
otherwhile feel in taste. But none of all these is a spiritual sense, or does
contain a more hie meaning, but as the words simply do signify, eat eggs
and flesh, which Chrysostom terms carnal understanding.

Since therefore, all carnal meaning of the words set apart, a spiritual must
be had and retained therein; we ought godly to seek, and reverently to search
out, what manner of understanding that is, that has been set forth and
commended unto us; the which we also will endeavor our selves to do, not
departing from the footsteps of the very same Fathers. Even as there be two
parts, whereof the sacrament does consist, that is, the outward sign, and
inward virtue: so is that spiritual sense which is here required, taken of
both these parts. The carnal understanding does follow the letter, as
Nicodemus when he had heard, Unless a man be borne again of water and the
spirit, etc. he asks this question: How can a man be borne again? Can he
return again into his mothers womb? The spiritual man departs from the
letter, and so are we borne again in Baptism. And the washing is of two
sorts: Outward and inward; carnal and spiritual: the one according to the
letter, and is made by water; the other does shun the letter, and is
performed in spirit. Either of them is said to be truly done, but after a
diverse manner. The first manner of speaking is proper, the other figurative; and
the figure has otherwhile relation to the outward similitude, otherwhile to
the virtue inwardly hid. It is figuratively spoken, All flesh is grass. For
the withering grass has a certain similitude of a man that soon perishes.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. This is taken of the proper strength of
leaven, which spreads the taste thereof thorowout the whole lump; very like
whereunto is the infection of ill doctrine. Now in this sacrament the Fathers
of old time have noted two things, for either of the which it may well be
called and accounted the body of Christ, but especially when it comprehends
them both. For both because the Bread is a figure of the true body, it is
justly called his body, and much more because it has the lively force of the
same joined thereto, but in especial, because it comprehends both. And that
the figure of any thing has by good reason the name of the same, and is called
the thing it self, indeed Esaias shows where he says, The people be verily
hay, and He verily has borne our iniquities. By a similitude is the people
called hay, and the Lord upon the Cross had in him a similitude of a sinful
man, although he himself was without sin: after which manner also Christ is
said to be the true Vine. I am the true Vine, says he: and other places which
a man shall often find in the Scriptures. John Baptist spoke the truth when
he said, Behold the Lamb of God. The Lord himself said the truth when he
said of Nathaniel, Behold an Israelite in deed in whom is no deceit. That word
Verily, or Indeed, is not to be referred to the outward, but to the inward
circumcision: for the people of God also which is gathered of the Gentiles is
now more truly called Israel, then the Jews themselves, according to the
saying of Paul, We be the Circumcision which worship God in spirit. And this,
He is not a Jew which in outward appearance is a Jew, but he is a Jew which is
a Jew in secret. Yet be we not for all that properly Jews, but we are called
so by a figure, and all these figurative speeches for the outward similitude of
the things. Wherefore it ought to seem neither a new thing, nor yet a
marvel, if the Lords bread be said to be verily the body, where it is a
figure of the body. August. ad Bonif. epist. 23.


Hereupon Augustine to Boniface in his 23. Epistle says: For thus we speak
oftentimes: As when Easter is at hand, we say, The Lords passion shall be to
morrow, or the next day, where he suffered so many years ago, and that
passion has never been done but once. Likewise upon the very Easter day we
say, To day the Lord rose again, when since he rose again so many years are
past. Why is none so foolish to reprove us, and say we lie in so saying, But
because we use to call these days according to the similitude of them in
which these things were done? So that it is called the same day which is not
the same, but by course of time is like unto it, and it is said to be done that
day for the ministering of the Sacrament, which was not done that day but long
ago. Was not Christ once offered in himself? yet in the Sacrament, not only
in all the solemnities of Easter, but every day he is offered to the people.
Again he lies not, that being asked the question, does answer that he is
offered: for if the Sacraments should not have a certain likeness of those
things whereof they be Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at all: and of
this likeness also many times they take the names of the things themselves. Even
as therefore after a certain manner, the Sacrament of the body of Christ is
the body of Christ, and the Sacrament of the blood of Christ is the blood of
Christ: so also the Sacrament of faith is faith. By this place of Augustine, and
many other both of his and other fathers, we see that the figures and
similitudes of things be often called by the name of the things themselves,
and that this is one cause, though not the only, why this sacrament is called
verily Christ's body.

To this agree those things that we commonly find amongst old writers, who
term this Sacrament otherwhile a figure, as Tertull. cont. Mart. lib. 4.
Tertull.
This is my body, says he, that is to say, a figure of my body. And
Nazianzene, Nazianzene.
which said the old Passover was a figure of a figure. Augustine.
And Augustine, The body, says he, of Christ is the truth, and a figure.
Sometime a sign, as Augustine contra Adimant cap. 12. The Lord put no doubt to
say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. Chrysostom.
And Chrysostom upon the 26. of Matthew Homilia 83. For if Christ be not dead,
whose figure and sign is this sacrifice? Finally, of some it is called a
figure, and a badge, as of Origin and Chrysostom; of some other, an example,
pattern, and image, as of Ambrose, Basil, and Origin: wherefore not without
cause, it has also the name of that thing, whose figure, badge, and pattern
it is. Wherefore it is the more to be marvelled what comes into their minds,
that cannot abide to have it called a figure, nor do acknowledge any figure in
the words of the Supper, but do reprochfully call them that do acknowledge
it, figure framers: whereas it is plain for all that, that all old writers did
so call it, and that by those words of the Lords supper, the Lord did
consecrate the Sacrament of his body: this being manifest also, that after the
letter and proper manner of speech, the body of Christ signifies one thing,
and the Sacrament of his body another. And if it shall not be a figure, it
shall neither be a sign nor a sacrament, And so such as be ready to call other
men sacramentaries, they themselves do take away the sacraments altogether.
Therefore let no man doubt but this sacrament is both a figure, and therefore
does also take the name of that thing whereof it is a figure.

We said there was another thing which the ancient Fathers acknowledging in
this sacrament, would have it verily to be the Lords body, and that is the
virtue of the body it self that is of force, and gives life, which virtue by
grace and mystical blessing is joined with the Bread and Wine, and is called
by sundry names, where the matter it self is all one. Of Augustine an
intelligible, invisible and spiritual body: Of Hierom, divine and spiritual
flesh: Of Irenaeus, a heavenly thing: Of Ambrose a spiritual food, and body
of a divine spirit: Of other, some such like thing. And this also does make
much the more, that the sacrament is most worthy to have the name of the true
body and blood, seeing not only outwardly it shows forth a figure and image
of it, but also inwardly it draws with it a hid and secret natural property
of the same body, that is to say, a virtue that gives life: so that it cannot
now be thought a vain figure, or the sign of a thing clean absent, but the
very body of the Lord, divine indeed and spiritual, but present in grace,
full of virtue, mighty in operation. And it happens often, that the names of
the things themselves be given to their virtue and strength. We say leaven is
in the whole lump, whereas a small quantity of leaven cannot spread so far
abroad, but the strength and sharpenes of the leaven. We say that the fire does
warm us, when the heat of the fire does it, we being a good way off from the
fire. Likewise that the Sun is present, does lighten, burns, nourishes,
when indeed the heat of the Sun does it, and the Sun himself cannot go
out of his sphere. So is a King said to be in all his realm, because of the
power of his dominon. Neither does the scripture want these examples: for we
often meet with them. We will at this time be content with one of them, but
very manifest. Christ spoke of John, saying, He is Helias, because he was
indewed with the virtue or power of Helias, the angel unto Zachary witnessing
the same and saying, He shall go before him in the spirit and power of
Helias. Likewise therefore as John was Helias, because he had the spirit and
power of Helias; So the Lords bread is the body of Christ, because it has his
grace and lively power joined therewithal.

But that this is not a fained or a lately sprung opinion, but was received,
and allowed of the ancient writers, we will confirm it by their open
testimonies, partly reciting some of the forenamed places, and partly adding
other. Augustine upon John tract. 27. If therefore ye shall see the Son of
man where he was before: What means this? by this he answers that which
had troubled them: by this he opens the cause why they were offended: by this
plainly, if they would understand. For they thought that he would have given
among them his body: but he said that he would ascend into heaven even whole.
When ye shall see the son of man ascend where he was before, surely even
then shall ye see, that he gives not his body in such sort as ye imagine;
surely even then shall ye understand that his grace is not consumed by biting,
nor perishes by eating. The same man out of the sermon of the words of the
Lord, and it is rehearsed de consecrat. Did. 2. The faithful do know how
they do eat the flesh of Christ: Every man takes his part, whereupon the parts
be called the grace it self: by parts he is eaten, and he remains all
whole: by parts he is eaten in the sacrament, and remains all whole in thy
heart. The same man upon John, tract. 50. Thou have Christ both at this
present, and in time to come; presently by sign, presently by the sacrament of
Baptism, presently by the meat and drink of the Altar. Thou have Christ
presently, but thou shall have him always: for when thou shall go from hence,
thou shall come to him that said to the thief, This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise. And soon after: The poor shall ye always have with you, but me
shall ye not always have. Let good men receive this also, and not be
troubled: for he spoke of the presence of his body. For according to his
majesty, according to his providence, according to his unspeakable and
invisible grace, that is fulfilled which he has spoken, Behold I am with you
daily, even unto the end of the world. But according to the flesh which the
Word took upon him, according to that that he was borne of the Virgin,
according to that that he was taken of the Jews, that he was fastened to the
tree, that he was taken down from the Cross, that he was wrapped in linen
clothes, that he was laid in the grave, that he appeared in his resurrection,
ye shall not have him always with you. Why? Because according to the presence
of his body he was conversant with his Disciples forty days, and they being
in his company, and seeing him, and not following him, he ascended into heaven,
and is not here: for he is there, he sits on the right hand of the Father.
These be Augustins words. Whereas he said before that Christ is present with us
by faith, and by the sacraments; afterward he said that he is present with us
by Majesty, by unspeakable and invisible grace, and so that is fulfilled by
him which he spoke, Behold I am with you to etc. But according to the proper
presence of the flesh, that he is not here, which proper nature of the flesh
also he has dilated plentifully by a Periphrasis, to exclude altogether such a
manner of presence, and to establish his presence in the sacraments by grace
and power. Augustine teaches us by the Lords words, that his true and proper
body is ascended into heaven even whole, but the grace of that body we receive
by the sacraments, which is neither consumed by biting, nor perished by eating.

Idem in Psalm. 65.
To this agrees that the same Author writes upon the 65. Psalm. The murderers
drank the same blood by grace, Idem in Joan. tract. 26.
which they shed through madness. The same man upon the Gospel of John tract 26.
Give ear to the Apostle: I would not (says he) have you ignorant, brethren,
that our Fathers were all under a cloud, and all did eat one manner spiritual
food: Spiritual truly all one, but corporal, another: for they did eat
Manna, we another thing, but the same spiritual meat that we do. And they
all drank the same spiritual drink: yet they one thing, we another in outward
appearance, which notwithstanding did signify all one in spiritual power. He
calls the sacrament spiritual food, for the spiritual power joined
therewith, which power also was in the sacraments of the old testament, albeit
our outward signs and theirs were diverse. The spiritual power was all one in
both: That of a body to be borne at his time; This of a body already borne,
suffered and raised again. So Manna was to them the body of Christ, as the
sacrament of thanksgiving is now to us. For this spiritual power, Augustine
also called it, as we said before, a spiritual, invisible, and intelligible
body, whereby is signified the visible body of the Lord, and able to be felt.
Hereunto also belongs that saying of the same Author: The body of Christ is
both truth, and a figure: Truth, while the body and blood of Christ, by the
power of the holy Ghost, in power of the same is made of the substance of bread
and wine: but a figure is that which is outwardly seen. The meaning of these
words be, that the substance of bread and wine be made the body of Christ, for
the power of his body given to them by the holy Ghost. The same man in Psalm
77. Idem in Psalm. 77.
Their meat and drink therefore in mystery was all one with ours; yet in
signification, not in outward appearance: for the self same Christ was figured
to them in the rock, but to us he was made manifest in flesh. But he says,
That God was not well pleased with them all. In that he says, not with all,
there were some then there in whom God was pleased. And albeit the sacraments
were common to all, yet his grace, which is the power of the sacraments, was
not common to all. This place of Augustine if it be well weighed, does much
help to understand how Christ is present in the sacraments. For he joins
together these two, Signification and Grace, which he affirms to be the
strength of the sacrament.

To these agree those things which Ambrose writes lib. 6. de Sacramentis:
Afterward, Ambros. de Sacra. lib. 6.
when the Disciples of Christ could not away with his talk, but hearing that
he would give them his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, went their way;
yet Peter alone said, Thou have the words of eternal life, whither shall I go
from thee? Least therefore any more should so say, as though there should be a
kind of loathsomenes of blood, but that the grace of redemption might remain,
thou therefore take the sacrament in a similitude, but thou do obtain the
grace and virtue of his true nature. Ambrose does plainly teach, how it is
true flesh. For he has noted both: The figure, where he says, thou take
it in a similitude; and the inward strength, because undoubtedly it gives the
grace and virtue of the true nature. Which place being diligently marked, the
residue which be found of his, may easily be expounded. The same man in his
book De ijs qui initiantur mysterijs: Idem de ijs qui initiantur mysterijs.
Christ is in that sacrament, because it is the body of Christ. Therefore it
is not a corporal, but a spiritual food: whereupon the Apostle speaks of
the figure of it, that our fathers have eaten spiritual meat, and have drunk
spiritual drink; For the body of God is a spiritual body. The body of Christ
is the body of a divine spirit. By these words of Ambrose we be admonished,
what manner of body this is, and why it is so called, because it has the
spiritual virtue of the true body. For these terms, Not a corporal but a
spiritual food, and The body of the heavenly spirit, be most aptly applied to
the grace and virtue of his true body. Which thing also Eusebius Emissenus
confirms de consecrat. Did. 2. Eusebius Emissenus.
Seeing he meant to take from our eyes the body taken of the virgin, and would
place it above the stars; it was necessary, that in the day of his supper the
sacrament of his body and blood should be consecrated unto us, to the end that
that might be worshipped continually in mystery, which was once offered for a
ransom for us; that seeing a daily and vnceasing redemption did run for the
salvation of all men, it might be a continual oblation of redemption, and that
continual sacrifice might live in memory, and might ever be present in grace,
a true, perfect, and only sacrifice, to be esteemed in faith, not to be judged
by form nor outward sight, but by the inward affection. It is manifest by the
words of Emissenus, that the body that was taken of the Virgin was taken from
us, and was placed above the stars, and therefore that the sacrament of the
same was necessarily ordained, that that true, perfect, and only sacrifice
which was once offered upon the Cross, might live continually in memory, and
might alvvay be present in grace, that we should not cease to remember
continually the benefit of our perpetual redemption, neither have any cause
why we should require the presence of his flesh, seeing we feel the
presence of the same by grace to be of no less efficacy, which is to be
esteemed by faith, not to be judged in form, or outward appearance, but n the
inward affection. Idem ibidem.
And that which he writes immediately after in the same place: For the
invisible priest does turn with his word, by a secret power, the visible
creatures into the substance of his body and blood, saying thus: Take ye, eat
ye, this is my body etc. And least we should imagine it a more gross
substance, or that called again which he said before was taken away, he
alleges foorthvvith the example of Regeneration, saying, How great benefit
therefore the force of the heavenly blessing does work, and how it ought not
to be a new and impossible matter to thee, that earthly and mortal things be
changed into the substance of Christ, ask thy self, that art newborn
again in Christ. Lately thou wast far from life, a stranger from mercy, and
being inwardly dead, banished from the way of health: and suddenly professing
the Laws of Christ, and by wholsome mysteries renewed, did pass into the
body of the Church, not by sight, but by belief, and of the child of
perdition wast thought worthy by a secret pureness to be made son of God by
adoption, abiding still in thy visible measure, and inuisibly made greater then
thy self, without increase of quantity. For although thou wast the very
selfsame man before, yet by augmentation of Faith thou art become far
another; in the outvvard man nothing is added, and all is changed in the
inward man, and so man was made the Son of Christ, and Christ was formed in
the mind of man. Even as therefore the former baseness set apart, thou have
suddenly put on a new dignity; and as in that God has healed those things
that were amiss in thee, put away thy imperfections, wiped away thy spots,
thy eyes are not trusted withal, but thy senses: so when thou go up to the
reverend Altar to be fed with the spiritual meat, behold in thy faith the
holy Body and Blood of thy God, honor it, marvel at it, touch it with thy
mind, take it in the hand of thy heart, and especially receive it whole, with
the thirsty draught of the inward man.

Eusebius Emissenus declares by this similitude, what manner of change is made
in the sacrament; how earthly things, namely bread and wine, be turned into the
substance of Christ, and what manner of substance that is: surely like unto that
change wherewith we be changed in Baptism, and such a substance as we put on
in the washing of regeneration, when we pass into the body of the Church,
where nothing is changed in our outward part, but all in our inward man, which
is called a new man and a new creature: and for that cause does Emissenus
term this substance, A secret pureness, and new dignity. In like manner also
he calls the bread of the Lord, which has gotten a new substance, that is
to say, a secret power and new dignity, Spiritual food, which we behold with
faith, touch in mind, take in the hands of our heart, and receive with the
thirsty draught of our inward man. If it be well and diligently weighed, how
Emissenus, Ambrose, and the other fathers have used the terms of Nature and
Substance, it may easily be understood how vainly they trouble themselves,
which appoint a carnal eating of the flesh, and do not apply the words to
the matter entreated of. For that which we see done in other disciplines, that
the words do change their significations, according to the matter that every
kind of learning treats of, as Genus, Species, Figura, and other such like,
do signify one thing with the Grammarians, another with the Logitians, and
another thing with other writers; the same also ought we to observe in
divinity, when they entreat of the Sacraments. The fathers make mention of
Nature and Substance, not (...) but (...), that is, not as natural
Philosophers speak, but men disputing of divine matters, do apply the term of
Nature and Substance, to grace, virtue, and efficacy, forasmuch as the nature
of the Sacrament so requires.

The like manner of speaking does Chrysostom use when he says: But that not
only by love, Chrysostom.
but even in very deed, we should be turned into that flesh, that is wrought by
the meat which he has given us. We be turned in very deed into the flesh of
Christ: but that conversion is spiritual, not carnal. And thus much by the
way of the signification of the words. Epiphan. in Ancho.
Epiphanius in Anchorato: For we see that our Savior took into his hands, as
the Gospel contains, that he rose in the Supper and took this, and when he
had given thanks, he said, This is mine etc. And we see that it is not equal,
nor like, neither to the image that is in the flesh, nor to his invisible
Godhead, nor to the features of his members. For this is of a round shape, and
without sense, as far as pertains to power; and therefore his will was to
speak by grace, This is mine etc. and every man believes his word: for he
that does not believe that he is true as he said, he is fallen from grace and
health. But we believe that we have heard, that it is his: for we know that
the Lord is all sense, all endued with sense, all God, all moving, all working,
al light, all incomprehensible, but yet as one which has given us this with
grace. We admonished you before, that Epiphanius does in this place go about
to prove, that man being made after the Image of God, has verily the Image of
God, not according to the proper nature of divinity, but after grace, and
uses the similitude taken of the sacrament of Thanksgiving, the which,
according to the proper manner of a body, he denies to be the body of Christ,
since it has neither the form of a true body, neither can feel, or move, and
yet is believed by grace to be verily his body.

Idem lib. 3. cont. Haer. To. 2.
He is of the same opinion Lib. 3. against Haeresies To. 2. where he speaks
thus of the sacraments: Christ went down into the waters, rather giving then
receiving, rather offering then needing, giving them light, making them mighty
for a figure of those things that were to be wrought in them; whereby they that
believe on him in truth, and have the faith of truth, might learn that he
was verily made man, and was verily Baptized, and that so by his ascension they
also might come and receive the virtue of his coming down, and might be made
lightsome by his giving light, that the saying of the Prophet may here be
fulfilled, in the change of power that was given for salvation, the virtue I
mean of the bread that was received from Jerusalem, and of the strength of the
water: so that here the virtue of the bread and strength of the water may be
made of force in Christ, that the bread should not be the strength in us, but
the virtue of that bread. And the meat surely is bread, but the virtue in it is
it that quickneth; And not that water alone should cleanse us, but that in the
strength of water, by faith and efficacy, and hope, and perfection of
mysteries, and calling upon the sanctification, might be wrought for us the
perfection of salvation. This place does make the other somewhat more plain.
There he said, that the bread of the sacrament of Thanksgiving is the body by
grace: here he attributes virtue to the bread, as strength to the water in
Baptism, often repeating this term Virtue, and confirming that this virtue
and strength does sanctify. The meat (says he) is bread, but the virtue in it
does quicken: and he declares that this virtue of the bread does sanctify,
and strength of the water is made by grace, not naming it with one word, but
describing it more fully with many words, saying, That these things be done by
faith, and hope, and the perfection of the mysteries, Idem in Anacephaleosi.
and calling upon of the sanctification for the perfection of salvation. The
same Author rehearses almost the same words in Anacephaleosis. Cyprian. de
Coena Dom.


The same was also Cyprians opinion. There is given (says he) an immortal
food differing from common meats, retaining the shape of bodily substance, but
proving by invisible working, that the presence of a divine power is there.
Thou hear the presence of a divine power, thou hear an invisible working
(that is to say) the grace of God. Again, By the wonted effect of things the
weakness of our faith being aided, is taught by a sensible argument, that the
effect of eternal life is in the visible sacraments. And again, Even as in the
person of Christ humanity was seen, and divinity hid: so into the visible
sacraments, unspeakably does the divine substance power it self. Again,
These words be spirit and life, neither does the carnal sense pearce the
understanding of so great a depth, unless faith be added. The bread is food,
the blood is life, the flesh substance, the body the Church. A body, for the
agreeing of members in one; bread, for the conformity of nourishment; blood,
for the working of quickening; flesh, for the property of the humanity taken.
In this place Cyprian witnesses, that this sacrament is called flesh and
blood, for the working of the quickening, and for the property of the humanity
which Christ took (that is) the proper virtue thereof, namely spirit and life.
And foorthvvith he adds; Christ does othervvhile call this sacrament his
body, otherwhile flesh and blood, othervvhile bread, with the corporal nature
whereof, according to these visible things, he has communicate the portion of
everlasting life. And again, The sacraments, as much as in them is, cannot be
without their proper virtue, neither by any means does the divine Majesty
absent it self from the mysteries. These terms which Cyprian commonly uses,
The divine power, The working of quickening, The effect of eternal life, The
portion of life, The divine substance, The divine Majesty, what other thing
do they set out to us, then that which Augustine said, that according to his
Majesty, according to his unspeakable and invisible grace, Christ is with us
even unto the end of the world, especially since that he shuts out the
carnal sense, and requires a spiritual, as we have in another place more
fully expounded?

Neither thought Cyrillus any otherwise, writing in this sort to Calosyrius:
Cyril. ad Calos.
For that we should not abhor flesh and blood being set upon the holy Altars,
God favoring our frailty, puts a force of life into those things that be
offered, turning them into the truth of his proper flesh, that a body of life,
as it were a certain quickening seed, may be found in us. That truth of body
which Cyprian calls The working of quickening, The effect of eternal life,
The portion of life, the same does Cyrillus term the force of life, a body of
life, a quickening seed, meaning the spiritual power and grace, as he
expounds himself upon John lib 4 ca. 17. Idem in Joan. lib. 4. cap. 17.
saying thus: Even as a little leaven (as Paul says) does sour the whole
lump, so a little blessing of God does draw the whole man into himself, and
does fill him with his grace, and in this sort does Christ abide in us, and we
in Christ. By this means he rejects (...) that is to say, the eating of man's
flesh, and withdraws the minds of the faithful from untrue meanings and
worldly thoughts, and affirms to Euoptius, Idem ad Euopt.
that this mystery is received in an only pure and exquisite faith, as we
have mentioned before. For it is necessary that such an eating be spiritual
and made by grace.

Athanasius was of this opinion. Athanas. de Pecca. in Spiri. Sanct.
In his book of the sin against the holy Ghost he writes in this sort: For
this cause made he mention of the Ascension of the Son of man into Heaven,
that he might withdraw them from a corporal imagination, and that they might
afterward learn, that the heavenly meat that comes from above, and the
spiritual food which he gives, is called the flesh of Christ. For, the words
that I have spoken to you (says he) be Spirit and life. Which is as much as if
he should say, The body which is showed and slain, shall be given for the food
of the world, that it may be spiritually distributed in every one, and be made
a preservation for all to the resurrection of eternal life. For this cause
(says Athanasius) mention was made of the Ascension of the Son of man, that
he might call us away from corporal imagining of his presence, and might
afterward learn that the grace, or spiritual power which he terms the
heavenly meat coming from above, and spiritual food, and affirms that it is
spiritually distributed, is called the flesh of Christ.

To these agrees Chrysostom upon Matthew cap. 26. Chrysostom. in Matthew. cap.
26. Homil. 83.
Hom. 83. Will ye not see (says he) with what a cheerfulness of mind
Infants do snatch the breast, with what appressing do they fasten their lips
to the nipples? Let us with no less desire come also to this Table, and
spiritual nipple of this cup, yea rather with a greater coveting let us (like
sucking babes) suck the grace of the Spirit: Idem ibidem.
Let us have one grief and heaviness of heart, if we be deprived of this
spiritual food. The same man in the same Homily says, That it is an
insensible thing which is given us in this sacrament, but by things sensible,
even as in Baptism. These be the words: Since therefore he says, This is my
body, let us have no doubt, but believe, and behold it with our understanding.
For no sensible thing is delivered us from Christ, but by sensible things, and
yet all things which he delivered be insensible. So also in Baptism, by water
which is a sensible thing, that gift is granted: but that which is wrought in
it, (namely regeneration and renewing) is a certain intelligible thing. For if
thou had been without a body, he would have given thee the gifts barely
without body: but because thy soul is joined to a body, in sensible, things to
be understood are given thee. O how many do now a days say, I would I might
see his form and shape, I would I might see his garments, also his shoes I
would I might see. Thou do therefore see him, touch him, eat him; thou
desire but to see his garments, but he gives thee himself, not only that
thou may see him, but may touch him and have him in thee. Chrysostom does
here command us to believe Christ, when he says, This is my body, but to
behold it with the eyes of understanding: For he says, that neither any
sensible or bodily thing is given in the sacraments, but by those things that
be sensible, the very gifts to be understood, and incorporall are given us; and
that not only in Baptism, but also in the Supper of the Lord. But if Christ
do give us himself in his Supper, and yet no bodily thing is given, (for he
says that the gifts be incorporall) It is manifest that Chrysostom does agree
with the rest of the Fathers, that Christ is present in the use of the
sacrament by grace and virtue of his body. And although this Author do use in
some places devout Hyperbolicall speeches disputing of this sacrament, which
thing he has also done here, when he affirms that Christ is set before us,
not only to be seen, but also to be touched: yet an indifferent reader may
easily perceive by this place and some other, Theodoritus Dial. 1.
what was his right opinion of this matter. The very same thing does
Theodoritus plainly teach in his first Dialogue, in this wise;

Ortho. Our Savior himself changed the names, and gave the name of the
figure to his body, and the name of his body to the figure.

Sodal. Thou say true: but I would learn the cause of this change of names.

Ortho. The cause is plain to them that be instructed in the heavenly
mysteries: for his will was, that they which partake the heavenly mysteries,
should give no heed to the nature of the things which be seen, but by the
change of names they should believe the alteration that is made by grace: for
he which before had called his natural body meat and bread, and again calls
himself a Vine, the same has honored the figures which be seen, with the
title of his body and blood, not altering the nature, but joining grace to the
nature. Nothing can be spoken more plainly then Theodoritus does here
expound, how bread is the body of Christ, that is to say, because the nature
of bread remains, and yet by grace is made his body, in that grace is joined
to the nature of the bread. The same man Dial. 2. Idem Dial. 2.
For neither do the mystical signs, after the sanctification, depart from
their proper nature, for they tarry in their former substance, shape and form,
and may be seen and touched even as before: but they be understood to be the
things that they be made, and so believed and worshipped, as though they were
the same which they be believed. He said before, that the nature of the signs
did remain, but that there was a change made by grace; that the nature was not
changed, but that grace was joined. Here does he plainly say, that the
substance, fashion and form of the outward figures be the same after
sanctification, that they were: but yet they be made other things to our
understanding and faith, that is to say, by grace as he taught us before,
singing al one song with Chrysostom, That no sensible or corporate thing is
here given, but that they be things intelligible, and incorporate, which be
given by grace and with virtue.

Euthymius in Matthew. cap. 64.
Hereunto appertain the words of Euthymius upon Matthew chap. 64. Therefore
even as the old Testament had sacrifices and blood, so has the new also,
namely the body and blood of the Lord: for he said not, These be signs of
my body, but, These be my body and my blood. Therefore we must not take heed to
the nature of those things which be set before us, but to the virtue of them.
For even as above nature, he deified the flesh that was taken of the Virgin,
if it be lawful to use this phrase; so also does he unspeakably change these
things into his very lively body, and into his very precious blood, and into
the grace of them. In that he says, We may not regard the nature of those
things that be set before us, he teaches that the nature of the bread
remains: and in that he adds, But to the virtue of them, he shows that
by virtue they be the body of Christ, and not by any carnal means. Finally
he adds by interpretation, And into the grace of them, that he might exclude
carnal imaginations. Leo and Synod. To. de con. did. 2.
Leo and the Synod of Rome de consecrat. Did. 2. do not differ from these:
for thus be the words: Because in that mystical distribution of spiritual
food, this is given, and this is received, that we receiving the virtue of
this heavenly meat, may become his flesh which was made our flesh. You have
almost the very words which Emissenus and Chrysostom used, as we rehearsed
before, The distribution of the heavenly food, the virtue of the heavenly meat
received, and that so we become his flesh. What other thing is this, then that
we be joined with his flesh by grace and virtue? For how can we otherwise be
channed into his flesh?

To this tends also the saying of Hilary there brought in among other:
Hilarious.
For the visible quantity is not to be esteemed in this mystery, but the
virtue of the spiritual sacrament. Moreover Theophylactus, which is counted as
it were a certain follower and interpreter of Chrysostom, does affirm this
most plainly, as we have above more fully set forth: out of the which I will
repeat a few things here; the rest, Reader, thou may thy self take out of
him. For both he takes utterly away carnal imaginations, and affirms that
the words of this mystery are spiritually to be understood, as those which
have no things carnal, but bring everlasting life: and he shows the manner
and way how to understand them writing in this wise. And how (says he) is not
flesh seen? O man, Thoph. in Mar. cap. 14.
this is done for our infirmity: for insomuch as the bread and wine be of
those things which we be acquainted withal, we abhor them not: but if we
should see blood and flesh set before us, we could not abide it, but should
abhor it. Therefore God of his mercy favoring our frailty, retains still
the form of bread and wine, but he changes the creatures into the power of
flesh and blood. The same man in Joan. cap 6. upon these words, Idem in Joan.
cap. 6.
This is a hard saying, who can away withal? etc. See their folly: for their
duty had been to have asked and learned those things whereof they were
ignorant: but they started back, and did construe nothing spiritually, but all
things as they outwardly appeared: For when they heard of flesh, they thought
he would compel them to be deuourers of flesh and blood. But because we
understand it spiritually, neither we be deuourers of flesh, and yet we be
sanctified by such meat. The opinion of Theophylactus is certain, that the
faithful be not in the sacrament (...), that is, deuourers of flesh, as I may
so term it, as the letter properly sounds: but that spiritual sense is
required, that is, the form of bread and wine being retained, the virtue of
his flesh and blood is received of the faithful, as it is manifest by his own
words both here and those before rehearsed. Bertram.
Wherefore Bertram following the opinion of the old Fathers, has thus written:
For according to the substance of the creatures, they be the same also after,
that they were before the consecration. They were before bread and wine, in
which form being now consecrated they seem to remain. Therefore is there a
thing changed inwardly by the mighty power of the holy Ghost, which faith
beholds, and feeds the soul, and ministers substance of eternal life.
Likewise: But now, because faith does behold that whole, whatsoever that whole
is, and the eye of the flesh perceives nothing, ye shall understand that those
things which be seen, be the body and blood Christ, not in form but in
strength. The same Bertram when he had rehearsed this saying of Isidore: Which
things for that cause be called sacraments, because under the cover of
corporal things, the divine power does work more secret salvation, whereupon
they be called sacraments also, of their secret and holy virtues, and in Greek
it is called (...) because it has a secret and hid dispensation. And after he
adds of his own this saying: What be we taught thereby, but that the body and
blood of the Lord be for that cause called Mysteries, because they have a
secret and hid dispensation, that is, they be one thing which they outwardly
betoken, and another which inwardly they inuisibly work? Of this also they be
called sacraments, because under the cover of corporal things, the divine
power does more secretly minister the salvation of those that receive them
faithfully. By all these things which have hitherto been spoken it has been
made manifest, that the body and blood of Christ which in the Church be
received by the mouth of the faithful, be figures, according to their visible
form; but according to their invisible substance, that is, the power of the
heavenly Word, they verily be the body and blood of Christ. Whereupon,
according to the visible creature they feed the body, but according to the
virtue of their better substance, they both feed and sanctify the minds of the
faithful. These be Bertrams words.

Hitherto have we declared, what has been the opinion of the old true divines
of the Supper of the Lord, as well Grecians as Latins, even unto Bertrams time,
who in the year after Christ's birth 840. was a famous man both in life and
learning, noted by no man of Heresy, nor found fault with as having ill
written, but greatly praised by the judgment of learned and good men.
Wherefore that John, called Abbas Trithemius, Abbas Trithem.
doubted not to reckon him in the roll of divine and famous writers, and to
praise him by this his testimony that follows: Bertram an Elder and Monk very
expert in holy Scripture, and notably well learned in humanity, quick of wit,
eloquent of speech, no less famous in life then learning, writ many notable
little treatises, whereof a few have come to my knowledge. He writ one book of
Predestination, a commendable work: To Charles the king, brother to Lotharius
the Emperor, of the body and blood of the Lord, another book. These things
have I the more willingly rehearsed, to this intent, to reprove that railing
boldness of tongue that some man has used, who in a book newly set forth of
this controversy, when he had nothing wherewith he could answer Bertram,
thought it sufficient to despise this so famous a man, and to note him with the
name of an heretic. Bertram, says he, or what other soever was author of that
work set forth in his name, was a crafty and an impudent Heretic. O shameless
face and meet to be bridled! Barnard also which lived 300. year after Bertram,
does reject all carnal understanding in the words of the Lords Supper, and
acknowledges only a spiritual; whose words, taken out of his Sermon in the
day of the Lords Supper, I have here added: A sacrament is called a holy sign,
or holy secret. Many things certainly be done only for themselves: some other
also for other things betokened: and they be called signs, and be so. As for
example of usual matters, a ring is given absolutely for a ring, and there is
no signification: It is given to set a man in possession of any estate of
inheritance, and it is a token: so that now he that receives it, may say, the
ring is of small value, but it is the inheritance that I seek. After this sort
therefore our Lord drawing near his Passion, was careful to set his disciples
in possession of his grace, that his invisible grace might be given by some
visible sign. To this intent he ordained the sacraments. Idem de S. Mart.
To this end is the partaking of the sacrament of Thanksgiving. The same man
of S. Martin: Without fail even unto this day is the same flesh given us, but
spiritually, not carnally: neither have we to find fault that there is denied
to this our time, the appearing which was showed to the Fathers of the old
Testament, or that presence of his flesh which was declared to the Apostles:
For certainly, neither of both can be proved to be wanting to those that
consider it faithfully. For the true substance of his flesh is also now present
with us no doubt, but in a sacrament, and there be revelations, but yet in
spirit and power: so that no part of grace can be proved to be wanting in the
time of grace that now is. In conclusion, neither the eye has seen, nor the
ear has heard, neither have they ascended into the heart of man, which God
has prepared for them that love him. Notwithstanding, he has reueiled them
unto us by his Spirit. Neither marvel thou, that he gave carnal apparances
unto them which looked for his carnal coming: for it is necessary that we
have the grace so much more of force, and the revelation of more dignity, as
those things undoubtedly be more excellent that we look for. It cannot be hid
by these things that we have spoken, what was Bernards opinion of the presence
of the flesh in the Lords Supper. First, following the old writers, he
appoints two parts of the sacrament: the outward sign, and the inward
matter, which he defines to be invisible grace. Again, the flesh is given to
us, but spiritually, not carnally. Finally, that the very substance of his
flesh is present, but yet as it is fit for the time of grace, in grace, spirit
and power. As for that other Sermon of the Supper of the Lord, since it is not
reckoned among Bernards own works, albeit it be not contrary to these things
that we have now spoken, (if so be the author be thought to agree with
himself) yet since it is counted another man's work, and to have a false
title, it ought not to take place in a controversy of so great a matter.
Therefore in this third part of this work I meant to show, and I think I have
so done, how Christ our Lord ought to be believed to be present in the
administration of his holy Supper, according to common and agreeable
interpretations of the ancient Fathers. First I taught, that a spiritual
understanding of eating the flesh of Christ was required by them, and all
carnal imagination abolished. Then, that it was no spiritual manner of
understanding, if a man follow the letter, and proper signification of the
words, such as they fained which brought in Transubstantiation, or do appoint
a gross presence of flesh with the bread, but that all such imaginations be
carnal and humane, and not spiritual. Lastly, what those Fathers deemed
spiritual understanding, namely that the body of Christ in the sacrament of
Thanksgiving, is given to the faithful by grace and effectual power, in a
certain holy sign.

But here a doubt rises. If we believe that the grace and virtue of his true
body be joined with the bread and wine, we shall seem to attribute too much
to the Elements, and thereof should come a double evil: for so it shall come to
pass, that the worshipping of the sacrament will follow, and the peril of
idolatry; and evil men when they receive the sacrament should also eat his
body, and be partakers of his grace. But that cannot be. He that eats me
(says Christ) he shall live for me, and he that eats this bread shall live
for ever: which cannot be understood of ill men. As concerning the worshipping
of the sacrament, I answer, that the ancient fathers received the sacrament of
thanksgiving with reverence and great honor, and yet for all that, were safe
from idolatry; which thing might also happen to us, if the ancient discipline
were revoked, August. in Psalm. 98.
and the manner of Catechism restored. For Augustine does evidently teach in
Psalm. 98. when he says, That the ancient fathers worshipped when they did
receive. He gave you his very flesh to be eaten for salvation: but none eats
that flesh unless he have first worshipped. And we do not only not offend in
worshipping, but we offend in not worshipping. The same man in Sent. Prosperi:
Idem in Sent. Prosp.
But we in the form of bread and wine which we see, do honor invisible
things, namely flesh and blood. Likewise Eusebius Emissenus: Eusebius. Emiss.
When thou go up to the holy Altar to be fed with the spiritual food,
behold in thy faith the holy body and blood of thy God, honor it, esteem it
greatly. And Chrysostom 1 Cor. 10. Homilia 24: Chrysostom. 1. Cor. 10. Hom. 24.
For I will show thee that on earth, which is worthy of greatest honor. For
even as in Kings palaces, not the walls, not the goulden roof, but the body
of a King sitting in his throne, is the excellentest of al: so is also in
heaven, the body of the king, which is now set before thee to be seen in
earth: I show thee neither Angels, nor Archangels, nor the hie heavens, but the
Lord of all them. Ambrose upon the 1. Cor. 11. Ambros. 1. Cor. 11.
The sacrament of thanksgiving is a spiritual medicine, which being tasted
with reverence does purify a devout mind. And by and by he teaches, that we
must come with a devout mind, and with fear to the holy Communion, that the
mind may know, that it owes a reverence to him whose body it comes to
receive. Theodorit also dial. 2. Theodoritus Dial. 2.
For neither do the mystical signs after the sanctification depart from their
proper nature; for they remain in their former substance, shape and fashion,
and may be both seen and touched even as before: but the things which they be
made, be understood, and believed, and worshipped, as if they were the self
things which they be believed.

By this and other places, it is easy to perceive, with what honor, and with
what reverence the ancient fathers came to the holy Communion. Neither is it
any marvel, since they believed that they received in that bread, the true
nature, and virtue of our Lords true body, and were far off from idolatry,
being instructed and diligently taught, not to worship the outward sign, but
the inward virtue. Which thing Augustine declares by these words, August. de
doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9.
De doctrina Christiana lib. 3. cap. 9. For he serves under a sign, which
works or reuerenceth any thing that signifies, not knowing what it
signifies: but he that either works or reuerenceth a profitable sign
ordained of God, whose force and signification he understands, does not honor
this that is seen and passes away, but rather that whereunto all such things
be referred. And soon after: But in this time, after that by the resurrection
of our Lord Jesus Christ the most manifest judgment of our liberty appeared,
we have not been laden with the weighty operation of those signs which we now
understand: but the Lord himself, and the doctrine of the Apostles has
delivered unto us a few in steed of many, and those very easy to be done,
and most pure to be kept; namely the sacrament of Baptism, and the celebration
of the body and blood of our Lord, which every man when he receives, being
instructed, he knows whereto they be applied, so that he does reverence them
not with a carnal servitude, but rather with a spiritual liberty. Here we see
with what learning the Christian men in time past were seasoned, before they
should come to the use of the sacraments; and how, albeit they honored or
worshipped as well in Baptism as in the celebration of the Supper, yet that was
done without peril or offense. Peril, as here it is evident, when as they had
no respect to that which is seen and does decay, but to the virtue and
signification thereof: Offense, because they had a conscience in time past, I
will not say to receive the sacraments before Infidels, and such as were
ignorant of the mysteries, but not so much as to talk of so secret matters
before them. Of the which thing there be many testimonies: but we will for this
time be content with this one, taken out of the 2. Dial. of Theodoritus. For
Orthodoxus, Dial. 2. Theod.
being asked how he before the consecration called that which was offered by
the Priest, answered, We must not speak frankely: for it is likely that there
be some here present which be not instructed in the mysteries of Christ. Eran.
Answer me therefore softly. By this place it is evident, how warily, and
soberly they in time past spoke of the mysteries. And this is worth the labor
to note, That the ancient writers, when they spoke of the sacraments, did use
diverse terms of honoring, reuerencing, or worshipping: By the which
notwithstanding either they meant to signify some other honor and reverence
meet for holy matters, then that which is commanded of God when he says, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. So that
worshipping may be defined to be of two sorts: the one, wherewith we worship
God himself: The other, wherewith we worship the prescribed signs and divine
mysteries, according to that saying, Worship ye his footstool: which thing
most men understand to be spoken of the arc of covenant: other interpret it to
be of the humanity of Christ. Or admit that there is one manner of worshipping
in both places, we might say, that the flesh of Christ is to be worshipped,
though it be a creature, for the divinity joined therewith; that the arc of
covenant was to be worshipped, for the presence of the divine majesty, which
God himself promised should be there present. After the which sort also we may
worship the sacrament of Thanksgiving for the unspeakable and invisible
grace of Christ joined therewith, as Augustine says, not honoring that which
is seen and passes away, but that which is believed and understood. This also
is worthy to be marked, that the worship in old time, was not done by the idle
lookers on, but by them which did receive the mysteries, and were made
partakers of their grace. For he that worshippeth and receives, to him it is
the body of Christ; not to him that worshippeth and receives not. For to this
intent was that meat ordained, that we worshipping should eat, and not that
we should worship it when others eat. Thus much be said concerning the
worshipping. But in that it is denied that evil men can eat the body of
Christ, which thing should necessarily be done, if the spiritual virtue and
grace be joined with the bread; it may be answered, That there is a distinction
to be used. For if we have regard to the very nature of the sacrament, the
divine power can by no means be absent from the sign, in that it is a
sacrament, and serves to that use: but if we regard the manners and
inclination of the receiver, it is not life and grace to him, which otherwise
of the own nature is both, because the wickedness of evil men cannot be
partaker of so great a goodness, and suffers it not to bring forth fruit,
but contrariwise to them is it death and damnation. For even as diverse kinds of
meats be of their own nature wholesome, but if they be put into diseased
bodies, they increase the evil, and oftentimes shorten their time, not through
their nature, but through the fault of the receiver: so also comes it to
pass in the sacrament, whose proper virtue is alvvayes present till it has
performed the office thereof, although an evil man when he receives it, cannot
be partaker of so great goodness, nor perceive any fruit thereof.

Cyprian de Coena Domini confirms the very same. Cyprian. de Coena Dom.
The sacraments truly, says he, as much as in them is, cannot be without
their proper virtue, neither by any means does the divine Majesty absent it
self from the mysteries. But albeit the sacraments permit themselves to be
received or touched of unworthy persons; yet for all that they cannot be
partakers of the Spirit, whose infidelity or unworthiness does resist to so
great an holiness. And therefore these gifts to some be a savor of life to
life, and to some a savor of death unto death: For it is altogether right,
that the despisers of grace be deprived of so great a benefit, that the purity
of so great grace should have no dwelling in the unworthy. Augustine against the
letters of Petiliane lib. 2. August. cont. literas Petill. lib. 2. cap. 47.
ca. 47. Therefore remember that the manners of ill men do nothing hurt the
sacraments of God, to make that either they be not sacraments at all, or be
less holy: but the hurt is to the ill men themselves, that they should have
them for a testimony of damnation, and not for a help to salvation. The same
man in his fifth book of Baptism Contra Donatistas cap. 8. Idem de Bapt. lib.
5.
For even as Judas to whom the Lord gave a sop, made place for the devil in
himself, not by receiving that which was evil, but by ill receiving it; So
every man that receives unworthily the sacrament of the Lord, makes it not
evil because he is evil, or that he receive nothing, because he receives it
not to his salvation. For it was the body of the Lord, and the blood of the
Lord also to them, to whom the Apostle said, He that eats unworthily, Idem
contra Crescen. lib. 1. cap. 25.
eats and drinks his own judgment. The same man contra Crescen. lib. 1.
cap. 25. Albeit the Lord himself say, Unless a man eat my flesh, and drink
my blood, he shall have no life in him, does not the same Apostle teach, that
this becomes destruction to them that use it ill? For he says, He that
eats the bread, and drinks of the cup of the Lord unworthily, is guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord. Behold, how divine and holy mysteries do hurt
those that use them ill. Why not Baptism in like manner? By these and many
other places it is evident, that the sacrament of Thanksgiving, as much as
pertains to the nature of the sacrament, is verily the body and blood of
Christ, and is verily a divine and holy thing, albeit it be received of the
unworthy: where notwithstanding they be not made partakers of the grace, and
holiness thereof, but they draw thereout death and damnation. For neither does
so great a goodness remain in them, or enter into them, to the intent to
remain, but to condemn them. Neither does the touching of the Lords body any
more profit them, then it did the Jews that crucified Christ, to touch his
body that was hallowed, and always endued with his grace. Wherefore let this
be certain, that the sacraments, as long as they be sacraments, do retain
their virtue, neither can they be separated from it. For they always consist
of their parts, heavenly and earthly, visible and invisible, inward and
outvvard, whether good men or evil, worthy or unworthy receive them. And also
that change of signs and passage of elements into the inward substance, which
we often find in the old writers, can by no means stand, if we separate the
virtue from the sign, or would have the one received apart from the other. But
this is so to be understood, as long as the sign serves to that use, and is
applied to that end for the which it was ordained, according to Gods word. For
if we apply it to other uses, and abuse it contrary to Christ's institution;
either it is no sacrament at all, or else it cease from being a sacrament.
Therefore they commit no light offense, which do not direct the signs of bread
and wine to that end which Christ ordained them for, but do consecrat them for
a pomp, far off from Gods word, and yet notwithstanding do thrust them to
the simple people in stead of sacraments. For although they be ministered
orderly, and according to their lavvfull use; yet when that use and doing of
their proper office does cease, they retain no longer neither the name, nor
virtue of sacraments, which thing the old custom of the church does prove.
For when the Communion was ended, men did eat their common supper, and spent
together in the Church those things that remained of the sacraments, as Hierom
does witness upon the 1. Cor. cap. 11. Hlerom in 1. Cor. cap. 11.
And partly those things that remained unspent, were streightway cast in the
fire, Hesych. in Leui. lib. 2. cap. 8.
as Hesychius teaches In Leuit. lib. 2. cap. 8. whereof neither was lawful to
be done, unless they had ceased to be sacraments. Wherefore, neither is that
doubt of them that receive it vnvvorthily, of any force to subvert this opinion
which we have set forth, but that nevertheless remains safe, and unhurt, and
worthily to be embraced of men desirous of truth and concord. First, because
the dignity and due honor of the sacraments is not hurt, but remains whole
and unblemished, whilst we confess both the truth of his body, and the
nature and substance of the same, to be received of the faithful together with
outward signs, which thing the ancient Fathers do testify to be done. Again
if we receive that distinction which the same Fathers diligently observed,
betvveene that proper assumpt body of the Lord, or that he took upon him, and
this figurative body, or sacrament of his body, there is no offense committed
against the rule of our faith, which by no means is to be wronged, since that
we attribute to either body their due. For we say, that his proper and assumpt
body is in a place, and limited within the space of a place, for the manner of
his true body, as Augustine says: As the true manner of humane nature
requires, and the true believing fathers against Marcion, Eutyches, and other
heretics do stoutly affirm; Which thing they that deny, and appoint that body
to be every where, do by that means deny the true nature of his body, and
fall into the errors and heresies of them. And yet there is no let, but the
truth of his mystical body, because it is a spiritual and divine matter, is
as largely spread and present, as the celebration of the sacrament is spread,
according to the opinion of the same true believing Fathers. Furthermore, no
absurdities follow this doctrine, as very many do ensue both that gross
Transubstantiation, and also that carnal coupling with the bread; namely, that
mise, beasts, desperate men do gnaw, chew, or swallow that precious body of
the Lord which was taken of the Virgin, whereas it is lawful for no man to
eat of that body, no not for a godly man, as Hierom witnesses. Beside, this is
no doubtful doctrine, nor hard to be perceived, but open, and very clear, as
far as the nature of the mysteries do permit. And albeit this controversy
does otherwise seem to many, intricate, and like a maze; this exposition is
easy, no darkness in it, no words of the Scriptures, nor testimony of the
Fathers be against it, but all they do agree and friendly accord. Add
hereunto, that this manner of handling this matter, is old, and constantly
delivered to us from the ancient Fathers, not new sprung, nor at this time
first invented, as the matter it self declares; and therefore it makes them
more friendly to obtain the peace and tranquillity of the Church, since that
all men may understand that it is no new opinion, made out of our own heads,
but the ancient opinion of the true believing Fathers called to memory again:
especially since it is of such sort as can justly offend no part, but move and
exhort all men to be content. There be some that take in ill part, that the
sacrament of Thanksgiving is called a sign or figure, as though it were a
bare sign or vain figure. Here they hear that it is not only a sign, but
the thing it self, not only a figure, but also the truth. Not being
contented herewith, they urge the Fathers, they require the nature of his body
in the sacrament. Here also they do hear, that the presence of his nature is
taught, and that there is a natural participation. Yet they go further, and
command us to confess a substance of his body. They see also that the
substance is by us affirmed to be present, and that our communion with Christ
naturally and (if I may so say) substantially, is here set out: but yet that
these terms ought to be understood, not as Philosophers, but as Divines use
to speak. Neither would we strive so much about that term of
Transubstantiation, albeit it be barbarous and nothing necessary, if so be they
would interpret it to be such a change of substance as the ancient Fathers
acknowledged, that is to say, a sacramental alteration; such also as is made
in a creature that is regenerat by Baptism, which is made a new man, and a new
creature; and such also as is made when we be turned into the flesh of Christ,
which examples the ancient Fathers used. We do not so much eschew the terms
themselves, although there is also respect to be had of them; but we require
the signification of them, which the Fathers themselves taught and earnestly
demand; And only that (...) that is to say, the devouring of flesh, which by
no means they allow, but condemn as foolish and wicked, we reject, as far
off from the Scriptures, and far from the interpretation of the Fathers, and
finally directly striving with the true faith: and we judge, that a spiritual
meaning is necessary in the eating of this flesh, follovving therein Christ
himself the Author, and the consent of the best allowed interpreters that we
have. Surely it is a marvelous matter to see, how in other controversies we
be Aristotle men, and oftentimes take hold of distinctions more curious then
necessary: and in this disputation of Sacraments we admit no difference, we
allow no equivocation, although both the nature of the thing requires it, and
the authority of the old writers do as it were point us to it with a finger;
and seeing that neither the Scriptures, nor the holy Fathers do speak of the
divine mysteries after a natural sort, but after an high and divine manner, as
becomes men that treat of divine matters, and inspired with God, comparing
spiritual things with spiritual things. Again, if there be any man that
thinks that there is here too much attributed to the elements, it is not so:
but their due reverence is given to the outward signs for the holy use of
them. But the inward power which comes by the force of the word of God, is
only that which the mind of the faithful does respect, which sanctifies the
body and the mind of him that uses it. But if there be any that require a
miracle, (for some of the Fathers called the sacrament of Thanksgiving, a
notable miracle) surely it is no less to be marueiled at, that the bread and
wine being earthly creatures, and ordained to feed the body only, do possess
that force in them, and so mighty an efficacy by the virtue of the mystical
benediction, that they cleanse, nourish, sanctify, and prepare to immortality
both minds and bodies, so that they make us members of Christ, and one body
with him. Yea this miracle has more weight, more dignity, greater profit, and
more agreeable to the manner of the mysteries, then any gross
Transubstantiation, or natural and humane flesh-eating can comprehend.
Wherefore, the seeds of contention and discord be now taken away, and there
remains no cause why, but the Churches of Christ, especially those that
profess the desire of the Gospel, may agree in one with quiet minds and
coupled affections, which now disagree among themselves with bitter hatred.

These things, my brethren, I have thought meet to gather together touching
this controversy full of thorns, as it seemed to many: surely at the first
not with this intent to set it abroad in print, but to have some certainty
whereto I may lean, in a matter so full of controversy, and yield a reason of
my opinion. But now, that me thinks I have taken some fruit of this work,
vvhateuer it be, I am not unwilling if it may bring any profit to others also.
This I know in my own conscience, that I have sought for no other thing in
this Treaty, but godly and modestly to profit my self and others.

I beseech the GOD and Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST to remove from the
minds of Pastors, Doctors and Ministers of the Church, the greatest
confusion of the Church, (...), that is, desire to strive and rule, and dispose
their minds to peace and brotherly concord in Christ, that they may not abuse
this notable bond of love, delivered and commended by the Lord himself to his
Church, wresting it to the nourishing of contentions and factions: And
vouchsafe to inspire with his Spirit the hearts of Princes and Magistrates,
that they may above all things regard what does most become the rule committed
to their charge, and advance Gods glory, and not respect what may grow to
their coffers by this troublesome time, with the cruel vexation of their
Subjects, and common calamity of their Commonweals.


