This that is written in this lytyl book ought the prest^es to learn and teache
to their parysshe^s: And also it is necessary for simple prestes that
understood not the scriptures. And it is made for simple people and put in to
englissh which treates was made by great counseyl and deliberacion. and is
approuued. as it is said in the table. and by cause that for to here examples.
styreth and moves the people that been simple. more to devotion. than that great
auctorite of science / as it appears by the right renerend fader and doctor
Bid priest / which says in thystoryes of england that a bishop of Scotland
a subtyl and a great clerk was sent by the clerks of Scotland in to england for
to preche the word of god. but by cause he used in his sermons subtle
auctorytees such as simple people had ne took therein no savor. he returned
without doing of any great good ne proffyt. wherefore they sent another of
less scye^^^ the which was more plain and used comynly in his sermons
examples. and parables by which he prouffyted much more unto the erudicion of
the simple people. than did that other. Then maystre Jaques de vytry an holy man
and clerk which was a Cardynal in prechyng comynly through the wyame of
france. vsyd in his sermons examples the which moved in such wise all the
wyame of france that it is not in mind of any man that to fore him was ne
sith that styred and moeued the people to devotion as he did / For as it is
read according to such examples. that sei^t Austyn doctor of the church was
more moeued to couuerte him self to the christian feyth. by the xamples that were
recounted to him: by symplicien. vyctoryn: and by the xamples of the
merueyllouse life and conuersacio^ of saint Anthonye thermyte / than he was by
the prayers and be wayllynges of his mother. ne by the sermons of saint Ambrose
ne also than he was for the great maladyes that he suffered as his legende
makes mention we. read in the holy scripture that our lord Jhesu Christ preched
to his discyples oftymes by examples and parables. wherefore we have entencion
to say and write sum good examples in this matere for the better to styre
and moeue the simple people to devotion. like as did they above said: And by
cause this book should be the better read herd and understood. hit is made
short to be the more clearly vndresto^d to the end that there may be found therein
health for our souls.

This present book in f^^nshe is of right gr^te prouffyt and edificacion and is
examined and aproued at paris by diverse maystres in divinity / and the right
renerent fader in god Guy de roye by the myseracion dyuine Archebysshop of
Sense has done it to be w^^^on for the health of his soul. and of the souls
of all his people. And in specyal it is made for simple lay men for whom it
is specially ordained: And the said reverend fader comandeth by great end
seruent devotion that in every parysshe of the cite and dyocyse of sense this
wokeh had. And that the curates and chappelayns of the said paryss^es read to
the people two or iij chapytres if any will here it: And to the end that the
curates and chappelayns ben the more devout to ^^de: and the people foresaid to
here. the said reverend fader. to health of their souls and in hop that they
pray god for him has given and granted to all them that shall be in thestate
of grace that shall read this book to other xx days of pardon. and also to all
that shall here it read: and by them self red it. and that pray for that
reverend fader. ^. days for each time perpetuelly / And if it happen that any
make doubt of any thyn^ contained in this book and vndrestande it not well. by
cause it has be shortly made and grossly for simple people. by the said
reverend fader or his successors. or by their counceyllours shall be given
vndrestandyng and declaracion suffisaunt to them that would have it And it is
compiled of such things as folowen herafter in this table

Of the xij artycles of the feyth the first chapitre Of sorceryes and
deuynacyons Capitulo ij Of loving god and of chante Capitulo iij For confort in
all tribulacyons Capitulo iiij Of diverse and obscure Jugemens of god
Capitulo. v Of the passion of our lord Capitulo vj Of the virtue of the holy
cross Capitulo vij Of three pacyences in trybnlacion Capitulo viij Of loving
his neighbor Capitulo ix Of loving his enemies Capitulo x Of the works of
mercy corporal Capitulo xj How alms ought to be don and whereof Capitulo xij
Of the ^ comandementes of the law capitulo xiij Of the goods that god
promised to the children of israel Capitulo xiiij Of the soul Capitulo xv Of
the v werks of nature Capitulo xvj Of the harms that sins done to us
Capitulo: xvij Of the sin of pride Capitulo xviij Of venial sin Capitulo
xix Of dedely sins Capitulo xx Of pride Capitulo xxj Of Sentences of
excomynycacion Capitulo xxij Of the branches of pride Capitulo xxiij Of the
yefte of dread against pride Capitulo xxiiij Of humilyte Capitulo xxv Of shame
Capitulo xxvj Of dyscrecyon Capitulo xxvij Of the sin of envy Capitulo.
xxviij Of the sins against tholy ghoost Capitulo xxix Of the yefte of pity
against envy Capitulo xxx Of the sin of ire Capitulo xxxj Of the yefte of
science against ire Capitulo xxxij Of the sin of slouthe Capitulo xxxi^ Of
owyson or prayer / Capitulo xxxiiij Of them that talk in the church when they
ought to pray. Capitulo xxxv Of dysposyng evil his time. Capitulo xxxvj Of
making a wwes. Capitulo xxxvij Of them that have science. and used evil.
Capitulo xxxviij Of the pater noster ^aud who made it Capitulo xxxix Of the.
vij / peticions of the pater noster. Capitulo. xl Of the aue ma^a Capitulo xlj
Of the life of Theophile. Capitulo. xlij How angellis and seyntes have by our
lady joy Capi. xliij Of the holy name of ihesu christ: Capitulo xliiij Of the
yefte of strength against slouthe Capitulo xlv Of the sin of Auaryce Capitulo
xlvj Of Sacrylege / Capitulo. xlvij Of Symonye Capitulo xlviij Of dy^^es
Capitulo xlix Of evil plays of dyse and tables Capitulo l Of the yefte of
counseyll against auaryce. Capitulo^ lj Of the sin of gloutonnye. Capitulo lij
Of fastings and of them that ought to fast Capitulo liij Of the yefte of
sapience and sobrenes against glotonnye Ca liiij Of the sin of lecherye /
Capitulo lv Of the yefte of understanding against lecherye. Capitulo. lvj Of the
goods that been done in dedely sin Capitulo lvij Of the. vij. sacrementis of
the holy church. Capitulo. lviij Of confirmacyon Capitulo lix Of the sacrament
of the Auter Capitulo lx Of the goods that a man has for to here mass Capit
lxj Of the science and good example of prestes. Capitulo lxiij Of necligences
and remedies of the mass: Capitulo. lxiiij Of the houselyng gladly and often
capitulo. lxix Of the dygnite of prestes Capitulo lxij The gods that one has
to receive the sacrament worthily lxvi The harms that come to the contrare.
Capitulo: lxvij Of the last unction: Capitulo. lxviij Of the Ordres Capitulo
lxix Of the sacrement of marriage / Capitulo lxx which marriages ben of no
valewe Capitulo lxxj Of the state of wedowhed Capitulo lxxij Of contynence and
chaslyte Capitulo lxxiij Of the state of virginite Capitulo lxxiiij Of them
that been in relygyon Capitulo lxxv Of obeyssance in religyon Capitulo lxxvj To
whom one onght to be confessyd. Capitulo lxxvij. Of the reyne of the priest
that shows the co^f^ssion Ca lxxvjij Of the sacrement of penance Capitulo
lxxix Of confession and of his virtues Capitulo lxxx Of the science longyng to
prestes that co^fissio^ and how they ought to demand the synnar Capitulo
lxxxj How one ought to confisse him Capitulo lxxxij How one ought to make
amends to other. and to make satysfaction Capitulo lxxxiij Of the fire of
purgatory Capitulo. lxxxiiij Of the peynes of all* Capitulo. lxxxv How the
dampened souls complain in hell Capi. lxxxvj wherefore god made not man that
heshold never sinner lxxxvij Of the day of judgment Capitulo lxxxviij For to
convert the sinner to good life Capitulo lxxxix Of the joys of heaven Capitulo
lxxxx Of good admonycyon Capitulo lxxxxj Thexcusacion of him that made this
book capitulo: lxxxxij The complainte of him that made this book Ca lxxxxiij
Explicit the table
Of thartycles of the christian feyth Capitulo. primo


^^ery try^^^n men and woman ought tobi leave fermely the xij artycles of the
casten feith. for other wise he may not be saved sith he has wit and reason
and there ben xij artycles after the no^bre of the xij appostols which oughten
to be kept and holden of all them that will be saved and these xij articles
be contained in the credo. the which the xij apostoll' made: of whom each of
them made one article The first article is this I believe in god fader almighty
maker of heaven and of therthe. This article set in saint peter The ij article
is such I believe ^^^ly in our lord ihu c^^^ sone of god the fader. and h^^^
thou ought to bileue and understood that he is semblable to the fader in
all thiges that apperteyne to the ^rite / and is one self thing with the
fader. sauf that the person of the fader is other than the peas^n^ of the
sone. this article put in saint Johan the ^gelyst. The iij ar^ticle I believe
that he was conceived of the holy ghoost: and was born of the virgyne marye.
the which abode all way hole and entiere before and after this article p^t in
seint james brother of saint johan the^^^elist. The iiij article is this I
bileue that he has suffered death and passion under (...) ce pylate the which
was Juge in that time of iherusalem for the remains Wh^ he iugded to death and
crucyfied him wra^g fully and at the request of the felon jews did do put
him in the sepulcre. This article put in saint andrewe: The / v: article is
this I believe that he (...) in to (...) after his (...) that is to wete in to
the party where as the good souls were in very feyth and hope that they should
be saved by him For ^y cause of the sin of adam our first fader it byhoued
that all descended in to hell he went not in to that party where as were the
dampened souls perdurably. This article put in sei^t Phelip. The vj Article is
such: I believe that the third day for tacoomplysshe the scryptures he aroose
fro death to life. and appiered to his dyscyples. and pronounced his resurection
in many manners by forty days This Article put in saint thomas. The vij
article is such that the xl day after his resurrection. when he had eten with
his discyples to fore them he openly ascended in to heaven unto the right side
of god the fader. where he sytteth. This article put in saint ^ertyleme we: The
viij article is this I believe that he shall come at the day of dome for to judge
the living and the deed. the good and the evil. and shall render to euerych
after that he has deserved in this world / this article put in saint matthew
the euangelyst. The ix article is this I believe in the blessed holy ghoost this
article requires believe that the holy ghoost is the yefte of the love of the
fader and of the sone. of whom comes all the well of grace / which is one
self god and one thing with the fader and the sone / sauf that the person of
him is other than that of the fader and of the sone. this article put in saint
james brother of saint Symo^ and jude The: x. article is such I believe in holy
church catholical of the co^mynyon of saints. that is to say of the company
of all saints / and of all the good men that ever were. ben. and shall be
unto the end of the world. In this article ben vndrestanden the vij
sacrementis of holy church. that is to were baptesme / confyrmacion. the
sacrament of thaulter. of ordres. of marriage. of penance. and of the last
unction. This article put in saint Simon. The xj article is this I believe the
remyssyon of sins that god gives by the virtue of the blessed sacrementis of
holy church. this article put in saint Jude / Nor he that betrayed our lord
ihesu christ. but he that was brother of ^^nt Simon. The. xij artcle is this I
believe in the resurrection of body and soul general. that is the Joye of
heaven the which god gives to them that serve him by fryth. and by good
works. This article gyneth to vndrestonde his contrary. that is pain
perdurable that god appareylleth to them that be dampened. and the life
perdurable to them that be good. This article ought to be understand in such
manerr. that every person good or evil shall be at the day of judgment rey
sed fro death to life in his propre body in which he has lived in this world /
and eueuch shall receive his hyre and reward in body and in soul that which he
has deserved in this life: and the evil to be dampened in body and soul
perdurably In an evil hour shall he be born that for so lytil a while as he
shall have duellid in this world shall lose the life perdurable. This article put
in seint Mathie. Thou ought to believe fermely and live in this faith and
deye in all these xij artycles And if by simple nesse thou have byleued or
byleuest otherwise in any of the for said articles / thyn entente ought all
way to be of believe sted fastly like as holy church holds and byleueth

Of Sorceryes and deuinacions Ca ij
By cause that many of the simple people believe and have byleued and has had
faith in sorceries and in deuyna ryons we shall make to you thereof mencyon thou
ought to by leave steadfastly that god may all thing do. and that without
him may nothing be do by any how holy or good that he be. how then byleuest
thou and have affiance and trust in sorceues and deuinaco^ns: certes that
which they do and say. they do nothing ne kenowe but by their falls believe
and by reuelaco^n of deuyllis and if thou dema^de me wherefore suffers god it: I
a^suere the that he suffers it not but for to proeue the. and the devil also
does it for to da^pne the. The doctors of holy church sayen that all the
deuinours and they that believe in them ben excomynied and accursed of god and
of holy church. And as ydolatres and cursyd christian men. they attrybute to the
devil and to mankind thonour and the faith that they owe to god. There ben
sum that been sorcerers of herbs. of words. and other things / And also
there ben sum that make wrytynges and bryeuettes full of crosses and other
wrytynges. And sayen that all they that bear such breuettys on them may not
perysshe in fire: ne in water: ne in other peryllous place: And there ben also
so^me breuettis and wrytynges which they do bind upon certain persons for
to hele them of sum sekenesses and ma ladies: And for admonycyon. ne for
predycacyon. ne for excom^ynycacyon that may be do to them they will not leave
it: All they that make such things / or do make it. or bear it. or do it to
be born / And have trust and affyaunce therein. And they that selle it. give or
lene it synnen right grievously. But if they be simple people and so ignorant
of symplesse / that by Ignorance they be excused. the which thing excuse not
them if they be suffycyentely warned and taught. we say not that if any gadre
herbs medycynal in saying the credo or the pater noster that it be dedely
sin. But that they do other things and sorceryes. There ben sum that
believe that they have their destyne after the course of the sterres / The which
thing is false and evil error. For seint Gregorye says that no good christian
ought to believe that they have any other destynee: but that only god which
has given to them the life be plesed with. it if were troth says saint
Gregorye that the sterres were our destynee: we should be sub gettes to the
sterres: which is a falls error to believe. For the sterres be made for to
serve us. And not we for the sterres held the plant of the foot of his
brother Esau. For him behooved to issue first. And both were born at tones to
gydre out of of one womb in one hour nevertheless the life of that one was not
like to that other / For Jacob was welbyloued of god. an holy man and of good
life: But Esau was other. Then heretykes ansueren and sayen in this manner that
in the space that one should prycke a point the constellacion of the sterres cha
unge and torn. But seint gregorye says that the natyuyte of the child is so
great. that if it torn and change in the space of a point like as they say.
that the child has as many destynees upon him / as he has members on him: It
is read of See ^ take heed that fro hens forthon ye be physicyen of sowlis For
by the medecyne of your tongue our lord has delivered me of great error.
Believe then steadfastly in god of whom all good comes: and have no faith ne
trust in these evil deuynours and sorcirers. For if ye consydere well his
bounte and his grace ye shall doubt preyse and love him

Of loving god and Charity the iij chapitre
Faith without charity is deed as says holy scripture cha rite is as a doctor
named prosper says which speaks of the life con. templatyf. charity says he
is the end of all the co mandementis celestial. death of sin. full of
vyctories. the arms of holy thoughts. cause of good merits the reward of
them that be parfyght. without the which never creature plesith god ne never
shall playse him. charity is full of fruit to them that be penytent joyous in
them that perseueren in all good. vyctoryous in good-merites. werker in all
good christian men and in whi me every good creature lives / And the said
doctor says if we love well god in all our heart: there shall never be in us any
point of desyr for to sin. And saint Austyn says: do as mo che as thou wylt
so that charity be in the. charity is to love god of which scripture says.
thou shall love god with all they her te with all thy mind: and with all thy
strength. we ought to love god for him self by cause of his might. of his
sapience and of his bounte. and for cause of his benefytes: for us whi che were
nothing he has made and fourmed to his image and to his semblance and has
redeemed us fro the hands of the fend of hell and has made us his children
and heirs of his royame of heaven / if we love him. And verayly he is well
happy that remembers often the graces and benefeates of god with good heart /
For this remembrannce planteth in his heart. and ^oteth ^he love and charity of
god. And this charity of lo ue puts him and joins his heart to god and
effaceth and ta It is read that a good nonne demanded of a religyous man
whether was better charity or humylite. the religyous man an suerd to her and
said that charity is fair: and humilite more sure charity is the fontayne of
god and the rote of all virtues / and that is shewyde in every person by many
manners of which we shall speak of four only. First when the person loves
god and above all thing / And he be* well ware that he angre^ him not. And keep
his commandementis.

For comfort in all tribulacions Capitulo / iiij
SEcondly charity she weth. when the person for the love of god takes a worth
and in patience all angursshes peryllis and tribulaco^ns that comen to him. or
that been done to him. For comynly to them that he will save and draw to his
party. he sends or suffers to come tribulacions for to withdraw them fro
sin if they be synnars For many should duelle stylle in their sins / if
tribulacion or greuenes camen to them not for there be three things that purgen
sin. that is to wede / Effusyon of t^eres / digne and worthy prayer. and to
suffer tribulaco^n and malady we read in the lif of faders. that there was tour
of stome was deed saint gregorye wept in prayng our lord ihu^ christ for his
soul for the good judgment that he had done in his life: how well that he was a
paynem and anon god sent to him an a^gel which said to him / that by cause
of his prayer god had remised and sent again his soul in his bodi to the end
that he should be baptized. and after our sweet savior sen te to saint gregorye
that he should chese of ij things by cause he had prayed for the paynem. that is
to wit whether he would be ij. days in purgatory after his death. or that he
would have al le the days of his life diverse sekenesses and maladies. and yet
said he to him also that he should be we^l ware and keep him well. that he never
should pray for any that were dampened. seint gregorye loved better and had
lieuer to be seek all the days of his life. than to be ij days in purgatori
after his death / For the fire of this world ^ys but a bayne. to the regard of
the fire of purgatory. Ite^ for tenerece their glory in heaven / for to them
that shall be saved god our lord shall torn all the tribulaco^ns that they have
suffered in this world in to glory and joy in heaven. if they suffer them
pacie^tly. and by these said causes it appiereth that god shows great sign
of love and of salvation: and therefore Job which was the most pacient man of
the world and the most rich. the which lost all that he had: and tempested of
his x children And was in such wise charged of ordure of rotynnesse. and of
vermyne. that he lay on a donghyll / and he never said an evil word but
blyssyd all way our lord and rendrid to him and gaaf to him thankynges of all
that he suffryd. For the holy scripture says that all they that our lord
loves he corrects and suffers them to be beten and tormented. And that is a
sign that they ben in the remembrance of our lord. And that he loves them /
We read that saint ambwse would never abide ne rest in the house of a rich man
by cause that he said to him that all his besoygnes and things camen to him
at his plaisyr without tribulacion and soon after when he was departed out of
the house of the rich man. the rich man and all his richesses sonken down in
to therthe. Then said seint Ambrose well happy ben they that god vysyteth in
their life by sum tribulacion to the end that he punysshe them not ouersore and
hard at the^de / For it behooves as said saint poule that the creature enter in
to heuene by many grievous tribulacions. thou see well that the coupe of gold
suffers many a stroke of the hamer. to fore it be set at table of the king
siyght so it byhoueth the to suffer to fore that thou may come in to the
company of god Jhesu criste. For the doctors sayen that it byhoueth that
every man be also pure and clean fro all sin at the enter of heaven. as he
was at hour that he was baptized. Alas how byhoueth it us for to suffer
tofore that we be digne or worthy to enter there For the holy scripture says.
that we may not pass one day without to sin. And lytyl think we thewn but
we think well to have all our eases and plays. know ye that who that shall
have most pain and trybulacyo^ in this world. so much more shall he be happy
in heuene: if he suffer it pacyently for the love of our lord Jhesu criste. For
saint Jew me says that it is a thing impossyble. that a man may have in this
world and in that other glory and fely^yte. And therefore thappostles enjoyed
them of the tribulacions that the iewys did to them. And saint poul says we
appostles have hungre and thurs^e and ben naked. beten: blamed and cursed. And
we have no manner rest. But labors with our hands. and suffer reproaches and
tribulacions and ben chyden and mocked as shep that shall be slain / And
nevertheless we bliss them that curse and done evil to us / and pray for our
malfactours and evil doers / and suffren gladly all for the love of our lord
Jhesu crist / unto his apostles and his holy saints martres left our lord so
many tribulaco^ns that at last somewere stoned and other beheded. roasted.
and flayn and many suffered other hard torme^tis and martirdo^s. then ought
not we to meru^ylle ne be aba sshid of the harms pains. ne of the
tribulacions that we have: who that would take heed and understand these
things a fore said wiche is good and the evil. the health and the maladye the
pouerte and the richesse. the life and the death. he should well know that all
comes of god and of his suffrannce like as scripture says. And that by him
ben made and ordained all things except sin / Item he is pafyghtly good.
For he suffers nothing to be made ne to happen without cause. wherefore if a
man remenbryd him well he should all way love god and serve him And all
tribulacions suffer pacyently for the love of god

Of the diverse and derke Jugemens of god Capl'o v
WE read of an heremite which much meruaylled of the diverse and obscure
iugeme^ts of our lord ihu^ christ. and by temptacion of the fend he said in his
heart that his iugeme^tis were not just. For god suffered the good men to have
many tribulacions. and the enyl people many good thyrges: and god sent to him
an angel in form of a man which said to him in this manner / Come and goo
with m: for god has hoo^ste which lodged them well and made them Well at their
ease. And on the morn he delivered to them his servant for to show to them
the way by cause they should not goo out of the way. But when they were on a
bridge wherouer they should pass. the angel threw the servant fro the bridge
into the water and there was drowned: then thermyte was much abashed and
gretely enangred: And the fourth night they were lodged with a right valyant
and good host / a man of great honor and of right good life. which made to
them right great chere and made hem well at ease. and lodged them right well: but
he had a lytyl young child which cessed not of all the night to cry and to
braye in such wise that they might not sleep. Then than gel aroose and went
and slew the child. And when thermyte saw that: he had wend that thangel
had been a devil. and would have departed from him. fair friend said thangel to
there myte. our lord has sent me to the. for to show to the his derk
Jugementis to the end that thou know that he does nothing without good cause
/ I tell the that I took the cup fro the good host. by cause that he loved
it over curiousely. And many times he thought on it when he should have thought
on godd / and therefore I have take it away from him for his well and have given
it to this evil host which received us evil. to the^de that of that he has
done well / he has his reward in this world and shall nothing have in heaven.
And also I have through we^ in to the water the servant of that other host. For
he had entreprysed in his heart. that on the morn he would have slain his
master. And thus I have delyuerd our good host fro death. and his servant fro
the deed of homycyde which was by purpoos of evil by cause he should be the
less pugnisshed in this wrold. and our fourth host before that he had any
child did much alms and much good and all that he could get above his
living he gaaf to pour people for the love of god but sith that his sone was
born. He has withdraw his hondes fro the works of mercy. and has kept all
for his sone. And by the commandment of our lord I have taken away the matere
and the cause of his auaryce. And have sent the soul of the child in to
heaven which was innocent. And when thermyte had herd all this / he was
delivered of all the evil tamptacyons that he had. and glorified god and his
obscure iugementis which ben as a great sowolowe without bottom. like as
says the prophet Thou which haste herd the iugementis of god put them in
thyn heart: for to give to the example for to suffer well. and to endure all
tribulacions and all euyllys pacyently. For we have also example that more and
better auaylleth and ought to moeue us than thexa^ple which we have said and
that is of our lord Jhesu crist which fro his glory of heuene descended in to
the valeye of myserye that is in to this world after that he was born of the
virgyne marye unto the time that he was put on the tree of the cross he had
alleway pouerte. pain. reproaches. and tribulacyoos: And in the end suffered death
and right dolorouse passion as thou shall here now recyted with the help of
him. which give us grace a men /

Of the passion of our lord Capitulo vj


NOw late us behold by pity. how the sone of god would suffer for us. how well
that we may not write all. Nevertheless so^me thing we shall be hold to the end
that we may love him the better and for to moeue our lxries whim the^ better /
our lord when the hour of his passion approached he issued out with his
dyscyples to the monnt of olyuete in to a gardeyn. where he went oftymes for to
pray. And there he said to his dyscyples / that he was heavy and soroufull unto
the death / And he withdre we him a lytill fro his discyples. And put him self
to prayer / And to him that was very god and man / and knew all thing that was
to come to whom was presented and set to fore his eyes in a moment all that
which he should suffer. and incontinent after his humanyte. and after his
flessh. he had thereof so great an horror that he swette for anguyssh water and
blood which dropped down to therthe out of all his body. and there apered to
him an Aungel fro heaven which conforted him. O heart devout behold the king
of glory Which is joy: and solace to angellis of heaven. the which for to
give to the joy and life with out death: is soroufull and anguysshous unto the
death. he that has made the angellis is conforted of an angel / Merueylle the
nothing if he which is god had at his death dread and anguissshe as a man.
For he took in thnmanyte all the defaultes and maladeis that a man may have
except sin and ignorance he sinned never / and also knew all thing. Right
soon after came the traitor Judas that had sold him. with a great company
of evil people which camen in the night with lanternes in arms for to take
him. And the blyssed Jhesus fled not. but came to them: And how well that he
knew well what they demanded. yet he said to them. whom seche ye. they
ansuered to him. we seche Jhesus of nazareth. and he said to them / I am he.
for to withdraw them fro their wickedness And to the end that they should know
his puyssaunce. anon as he had said I am he. they fyl down bacward to therthe.
yet after this Jhesu christ said to them / whom seche ye. They ansuerd to him
Jhesus of nazareth: I have said that I am he / if ye seche me. late my
dyscyples goo. and do ye to them non harm. Here ought to be noted. how he
gaaf example to them that have subiettes under them how they ought to love:
keep / and deffende them. And by cause saint James the less resembled of
vysage to our lord. the false Judas was a ferde that they should have faylled to
have taken our lord. And therefore he salued our lord saying and calling him
Raby that is to say Master. and kyssed him on the mouth with his mouth
enuenimed Alas that there be many in these days that kyssen him and receyuen in
sign of devotion and of love. which ben false and traittres unto him for
their sin and evil ypocrysye. And anon as the evil and false Judas had
kyssyd on his sweet mouth he was taken on all sides and seized and they bond
his hondes as a thief. and brought him in to the house of the prince of prestes
of Jews. And passed forth all that night in dooynge despyte and Iniuryes to
the sweet lombe which said not one word. for any thing that they did to him
/ And then left him all his dyscyples: And fled from him sauf saint Johan
theuangelyste and saint petre: which followed a far as they that were most
trewest and that most loved him. when the sweet debonayre lombe Jhesus was in
their hondes / they covered his face: and gaaf him great buffettes and strokes
on his head. and said to him in despyte that he should read and prophecye who
had smeton him iu his gloryouse face and on his head Then after this the
felon Jews foul and stynkyng spytte vylaynsly in his fair vysage. And
brought false witnesses agenst him. And in all the maneres they might: they
did to him despyte and confusyon. O devout person consydere and behold.
that it is a great despyte to spytte in the face of a knight And yet more great
in the visage of an Earl or of a duke. but it should be over great despite to
spytte in the vysage of a king O lord god. O what confusyon was it to spytte
with the stynkynge mouths o^f ^n felon Jewe^s in the face of the king of
glory. And the sweet Jhesus suffered all benygnely. And his bounte received
all their fylthes and ordures in his sweet vysage without tornyng hither or
thither / like as he says by his prophet. I have not turned away my face fro
them that lothed me and byspytte me And certainly a creature may not dygnely ne
Worthily remember ne recounte this tonfusion: O right sweet Jhesus what
suffredest thou for us: for this suffysed not to the felon Jews. but on the
morn erly they led the as a thief. and presented the to pylate / like as a
man worthy to deye. and required and cried with hye cry for to put the right
sweet Jhesu to death and to be crucyfyed O lord god how well that the Juge was
evil and cruel. Nevertheless he said to them / that he fond in the no cause
of death and de^tes he said very truth. but thou would pay the sootte:
why^lx thou had not bore wed. O devout soul. if thou had seen that
time thy maker. thy brother / thy fader thy friend. the right sweet Jhesu christ
thy souerayn Juge and the king of glory. stondynge to fore the Juge without
reverence and wit hout honor. that like as a sheep to fore the sherar spacke
not aworde. but held him all stylle without ansuere. against many crimes and
falsenes that the felon Jews leyde on him wrongfully and purposed against him /
And requyreden that Barabas: which that for dmycyde and fo^t h^efte was put in
prison should by delivered And he which was pure and Innocent which never did
sin. should be put to death. There thou myghtest have herd how cruelly they
cried to the Juge. Take him take him. and crucyfye him. like as they had
abhomynacyon to see him / And as they might not behold him I too w that thou
sholdest not have kept the fro we pyng. And therefore escryeth saint Austyn
saying. O glory of Angellys. and obprobrye of men / that is to say he which
is glory of angellys. is bycomen rep^^ef and illusyon of men Then when
Pylate saw that he might not appease them he made the sweet Jhesus to be
despoylled and bound to a st^k or a pyller. and his tender vyrgynall flessh to
be cruelly (...)* and tormented so much that the precious blood ran down by
great habundaunce all a long his back and precious sides. which had not
deserved it. After pilate brought him and showed him all naked to the felon
Jews all his body full of wou^des and blood* And for to know if this had
suffysed to them. he said to them. loo see the man. like as (...) would have
moeued them to pity for to see him so vylainsly beten. For naturelly. a man
ought to have pity of a man so wounded and beten. but the ^als traitres and
evil Jews might nothing be appeased. till that he had Judged him to death ^
delivered him: O devout person opene the eyes of thyn heart and see the king
of Angellis which is Juge of the living and deed. and that all the world
shall Judge. which of a judge and a man mortal is Judged to death so
vylaynously. as to be crucyfyed. which then was the most hard death. the
most foul. and the most shamefullest that might be* For the thieves were put to
death by the same death. See how vylaynsly the felons Jews despoylleden the
sweet lamb Jhesus of his to be or garnementis / And clad him with a ^^be of
purpre. And set upon his hyde a crown of thorns sharp and pryckynge so that
his precious blood ran down over his fair vy sage. and in his right hond they
put a staf. in sign of a deptre royal. and knelid before him by great
derysion. and saying I sale we the king of Jews. And so saying spytte in his
face. And smote his precious hyde with staves that they held O lord god man
remember the that thou art he that berest semblaunce and image of the king
dyuyne: and nevertheless ^^plenesshyd of confusion. This is thy king and thy
god which is reproved and s^ytte as a meselle. and the most a solate of all
the Jews: by whoin thou art delivered for confusion perdurable. and has saved
the fro the wound of pride when the felon Jews were filled of such vylanyes
and of doing such despytes to this sweet lamb / which opened not his sweet
mouth against them. they cladde him again with his ^^be. And leyd upon his
sholdres the cross and ladde him to the mount of Caluarye for to be crucyfyed
with ij / thieves for to put him to more shame and confusion / There was the king
of angellys despoyllyd all naked to fore all the people couerd only with an
old sudarye about his raynes And sum sayen that it was a pyece of the
mantel of his sweet mother then being sorowefull which was present: which
cutted it of for to couere him. And it may well be byleued. For in such places
as the crucyfyeng of our lord is painted by the hand of a good maystre. that
the mantel of our lady and the cloth that is about the raynes of our lord
ought to be of one color. Then was the king of all the world thrown on
the cross cruelly. and so drawn and stratched in manner of an hyde: that a
man might lightly acounte and rekene all the bones of his body. According to
the holy scripture: There were his holy hondes* which by their attouchyng had
heled but late tofore the meseles. the blind / men / And other seek men persed
of great sharp nails. And the sweet feet which had so far god and
trauaylled for the health of all mankind. and after was enhau^ced on hye on
the cross now remember thou devout creature in thyn heart how wha^ the
blessed bodyof our savior ^hu^ crist was leyed on the cross how the felons
jews. nailed his right hand with a great nail so fast to the cross that no
drope of blod issued out. but about the wound the blod withinforth began to
swelle and we ^ed ble we and bloo al about the naylle. And that other arm with
all the body shranke and drew to that hond / And wha^ they should have naylled
the lift hand it was so shr^nken that it would not reche to the place where
they had ordained it to be naylled by a great dele / And then by force they
drew it with cords to the place and there naylled it to the cross so fast
that no blood might issue out / Then ye may well understand that all the
body and his legs shr^nken so much up that his fect might not come to the
place of the place asygned where they should be naylled / wherefore with great
vyolende and strength they drew down his legs and feet to the plade where
as they naylled them with great strength so soore and so fast that no drope
of blood yet issued out neither of hondes ne of feet / But thou shol^^st have
seen the hondes and feet so naylled / swollen and black of the blood which
might not issue. Now think denoute creature and feel in thyn heart if thou
myghtest suffer thanguysshe that our lord suffered for the when his precious
body was lift up and hanged on the cross. And the cross fylle down in the
sokette of the mortays: Thou ought well to believe that when his holy body
which was heavy and pesaunt began to hang and the cross fylle in to the
mortays: that it byhoued by force the wounds of his feet and his hondes to
bresten and opene. For the weight of the body drew down his arms. And the
naylles helden fast for they were great and strong in such wise that they
opened the wounds / and the blood came ^enninge down habundauntly. And yet more
in the said falling down of the cross with the body in to the mortays the
synewys and veins of his sweet blessed body all to breken. O thou sinnar man
or woman byholde and see in this myr^^nr of pacyence and learn to suffer. For
in all these grievous torments that the sweet Thu^ cust suffryd for the he
opened never his mouth. ne made no complaynte. ne excusacion. ne menasses: ne
cursings against the felons Jews and tormentours. but spredde upon his enemies
words of merueyllous blessings which never (...) had been herd. For he prayed
for them to his fader / and said in this manner. Fader pardoue them for they
know not what they do. And by the virtue of this holy words and prayer were
afterward many converted to our lord Jhesu Christ* and were redeemed and wasshen
of the precious blood that he had shed. And as saint Austyn says opene thyn
eyes of thyn heart / and behold the sweet Jhesu crist For from the plant of
the feet unto the highest of his heed was on him no place: but it was wounded
and couerd with blood. behold then the dysposicion of his body. he had his
arms spredde and stratched a broad for tenbrace the. he had his glorious head
bowed and inclined for to kiss the. he had his feet fast naylled for to abide
with the. and in all thy works and temptacions seek him there. For thou shall
find him there on the cross. when the hour of his dolorouse death approached
he beheld his sweet mother. which was in so great anguyssh and torment that no
heart may think it. For all thanguysshes Injuries: vylonnies. and the
despytes that he suffered in dyuerses parties of his body. the right sweet and
sorouful mother bare in her herd. by which she was more than a martyr. like as
saint Austyn says. For she suffered as much or more in her herb / as the
martyrs suffreden in their bodies And it grieved as much or more to the sweet
Jhesu Criste thanguis she of his sweet mother whom he saw to fore him. as did
the pain and harm that he suffered in his body: And beheld her benygnely and
said to her swetely. woman. loo there thy sone said he of saint Johan
theuangelyste which was present in heaviness / And in great sorrow of heart /
And after said to saint Johan. loo there thy mother Now think what anguisshe
then she felt in her heart. when she herd the sweet voys of her dear sone
which then was on deyenge. saying that she should receive instead of such
a sone his neuewe / and for the maker the creature. when the hour of none
approached. he demau^dyd drink and said I thirst. O sweet Jhesus. This said
saint bernard wherefore playnest the of thirst. and spekest nothing of thyn
other torments / of which thy body is so grievously tormented / Certes lord
this thruste is nothing but of our health wherefore thou have so great thurst
and so great desire that thou deydest for the talente thereof cruelly: After one
raught to him for to drink a sponge of galle meddelyd with vynaygre: And when
the blessed king of glory had been on the cross thespace of three hours. the
son withdrewe her light and clerenes. And the derkenes was upon the universal
earth and Jhu^s crist says wyhta low voys. It is fynysshed and after cried
with an hye voys: to the end that he might be herd a far by cause none should
excuse him: Fader I yield and render my spyrite in to thy hondes. Thennne they
that were comen to the sight. returned betyng their breasts for the tokenes
that they saw: And Centurio when he saw this. gaaf glory to god and said.
verayly this man was the sone of god. Byholde now devout person him which is
the light and clerenes of heaven Joye and glory of all the saints and is the
most fair of all the sons of men. See him hanged and deed on the cross as a
th^eflothed and blamed for our love. and if thou have any pity or swetenes weep
tendrely. be thou no more hard than the elements / And the things insensible
as the son which withdrewe his light and clerenes / And certain if thou be
very friend of him. that so derely has redeemed the. thou ought also to leave
all the clerenes of this world. the vain glory: and the folisshe Joye of
delyces / And to flee the Joyouse worldly companyes. And thou ought to
crucyfye thyn heart by penaunces with thy lord and thy friend Jhesu crist. The
stones cleften. the earth trembled. And monumentes opened. Thou ought also
cleue thy heart by contrycyon. and by compassion tremble all for dread. And
opene thy heart by teres of devotion For these three maneres of teeres*
oughteste thou to have. if thou be the friend of god. that is to we^^ of
contricion* and compassion / and of devotion. For the three causes of his death.

The first came of us when the sweet Jhesu crist deyde for us sinners. as says
thapostle. And aroos for our Justyficacion. And therefore we ought much to
waylle and weep bytterly teres of contrycion for our sins. which ben cause
of the death of Jhesu crist. and of our dampnacion if god had not had mercy on
us / The second cause of his death as touching his party was for the love that
he had to us. like as says saint John in thapocalyps. he has loved us said
he. and has wesshen our sins in his blood And by cause that he deyde for our
love. we ought without dessynge weep teres of devotion. After this by cause he
deyde of a death so shameful he being our brother after thumanyte. and our
fader after the dyuynite / we ought to weep teres of pity and of compassion. he
should be right disnaturel that should see his fader and his brother deye
wrongfully of a vylanous death. But if he had thereof compassion / And certes for
the consideracion of the pains. of the torme^tis. and of thanguysshes that our
sweet lord and true friend suffered for us we ought to despise all worldly
delices. And by the consideracion of the pouertees that he suffered all his life
for us. and how he deyed pour and naked. For he had not so much as he might
recline to his glorious head. we ought to have in great despyte all the
richesses of the world. After that the sweet Jhesus Crist was deed. the Jews
did to him great cruelte. For they did do perce his precious side. with a
spear. to the end that thou might more lightly enter unto his heart. Enter
then in to this preciouse side by great desir and by devout love. not by
ypocrisie. and in all thy tribulacions and aduersitees have thy recours there.
and have in mind that the wound is litil wherefore thou may not enter. if
thou be not litil by humylyte and pouerte of heart: for the proud and rich men
be over great and over much charged werfore they may not enter: after these
things the precious body was taken down fro the cross. And put in to the
sepulcre. and devoutly anointed with precious oynement And wrapped in a fair
sudarye and clean. Now take heed that thou have in thy memory this blessed
passion: And think often on all the things that the sweet Jhesu christ would
suffer for to moeue the to sweet teres. And to devout love and compassyon.
Also to very penance. and patience And when the sweet Jhesu Christ was deed. He
descended in to one of the parties of h^elle for to delyure his friends: And
the third day aroos fro death to life. And by forty days following he shewde
him to his dyscyples and friends in therte And after on the day of his
Ascencyon he styed up in to heuene: And on the day of pentecoste. which is
called wytsonday he sent the holy ghoost upon his dyscyples / And all this
did he for us. For he has given to us hope and we ought to believe that he
shall reyse us fro death to life. And he shall make us to stye up in to heaven with
him if we take on us the pain to rise fro death of sin to the life of grace.
And also that we* mount all way to heaven especyally by holy desires and
devout meditacyons and that our heart be set all in him. and ready to
receive the holy ghoost. And this we beseech him to grant to us by the
prayers of his sweet mother. and by the merytes of his holy passion. the which
be all way enroted in our hertes amen. Now have thou herd recyted soin what of
the pains and trybulacyons that the sweet Jhesu christ has suffered not for him
self. But for the / For as saint peter says he did never sin: Then
ought thou well to suffer pacyently all trybulacions and aduersitees that
may come to the. And thou ought to bileue stedfastli that thou suffrest
much less than thou have deserved. And certes thy grief shall be aswaged if
thou thus think well. And thou shall be well reconforted on the sweet ihu^
criste which so much has loved the that he has made the to drink of his
chalyce that is to say that he has made the suffer with him* p^ynes grye^^^
and tribulacions /

Of the virtue and dignite of the cross. Capitulo vij
THe blessed cross on which was crucyfyed our lord like as sonie say was of
iiij trees. that is to wete of pal me / of Cedre. of Cypres. and of Olyue / And
of each of them there was a piece. that is to wete. the siege or sokette under
the piece right up. the pyece that went th wart. and the table above in the
which Pilate wrote these iiij words / in grek. in he brew: and in latin / lo
these ben the iiij words. Thu^s. nazarenus rex iudeorum That is to say ihesus
of nazareth king of Jews / Origene says that the cross is of so great virtue
that who that faithfully have it in his remembrance: nener shall any lecherye
have domyuacyon in him ne no malice of sin may prevail in him. but as soon
as one has remembrance thereof all the company of sin and r^morse of sin
flees fro him.

Example of lechery
IT is said in the virtue of the rosse / that tofore that seint Cypryan was
Christian / he was a master in art magyke and in nygromancye. And he was a
noble man and rich and loved so much saint Justyne virgin that he might not
sleep ne restehe came to saint iustine and promised to hermany great yeftes to
the end that she should consent to be his wyffe Ciprian seeing that he mighthaue
not his intent and desire did do call a devil* and commanded him that he
should god to her for tenbrace her in the love of him. the deuille went thider
in the se^blaunce of her nourrisse for to entreat her to do the co^man^dem^t
of ciprian / but anon as she felt her self so enbraced she signed and blessed
her with the sign of the cross and anon the devil departed fro her. and
returned to Cypryen all ashawed and said to him that he might not have her.
and then Cypryan called another more foul and horrible devil and sent him to
her. but he did also lytyl as that other. This devil was in the lyknes of her
suster / Thirdly cyprian called an other devil and he went in lyknes of her
mother. and began strongly to weep to fore her. and said to her. O fair
daughter how cruelly shall thou be tormented if thou do not the will. and
desire of this noble man: and this devil was the master of all other / And
for the more to moeue her. he showed to her her breasts of which she said she
had given her to souke. Then the maid almost consented. but anon she
blyssyd with her the sign of the holy cross And the devil went away all
confused to Cypryen and was constrained to say the truth and said to him /
that by the virtue of the holy cross. the maid had vaynquysshed him when
Cypryan herd this he said. I renounce the and all thy works. And believe in
him of whom the holy cross has so much strength. Then the devil was
angry. and wend to have taken him for to tormente. But he sygned him with the
sign of the holy cross and so escaped fro him And went forthwyth and knelyd
down at the feet of Justyne the virgyne / and cried her mercy: And after he
did do baptyse him. and led after so holy a life. that by the crown of
martyrdoom he regneth with our lord perdurably: An And anon by the
commandment of the holy man. and by the virtue of the sign of the cross.
the devil went his way and left her: An Example. Item saint Gregorye
recounteth in the same book of the bishop of Fondes which was named Andrew
which suffered that a nonne duellyd in his cause he had do no more in so long
time. After came^ another and said I have been in an hermytage by thespace of
forty year. And I have done so much that I made a monk to fall in the sin
of lecherye. but it has been with great peine / And when the master of the
deuyllys herd this. he aroos out of his syege. and kyssyd him and set his
crown on his head and made him to sytte by him saying that he had done a great
thing and more than the other. After came another and said I have put in great
temptacion Andre we the bishop of fondes of a No^ne. and said that the day to
fore he had brought him so far that in blandysshyng her he had smeton here
upon the back behind. Then the maistre of the deuyllis prayed him that he
should accomplysshe that he had begone. to the end that by the sin of the same
bishop. he might have the crown of gretter vyctory e than all the other
deuyllis By the se. ij. examples may one see how the devil has great joy wha^
he may bring a person of the church in to sin. After the master of the
deuyllys commanded that they should see and know who was he that lay in the
temple. when the deuyllys sa we this jew Which was marked with the sign of
the cross: they fled away all cryeng. Acursed be he it is a vessel all
wide and foul. But he is marked with the sign of the cross. And so fled
they all and called him a vessel wide by cause he was not baptized: when it
was day the jew a^^^s and went to the bishop. and recounted to him all the
fayte And work whereof he was abashed. And anon made wide fro his hows the
Nonne: And all the wymen that were about And after baptized the Jewe. Now
thou have herd that the holy cross has great virtue upon christian men and
other / Saint lowys had a custom that when he passyd over a bridge he said
always. Surrexit dominus de sepulcro. qui pro nobis pependit in ligno And said
if the bridge be of stone I doubt not for to pass over. For the sepulcre of
our lord was of stone in which he was buried / And if the bryd ge be of tree
or wode I fere not to pass it. For the coosse on which our lord. Thesu crist
was crucyfyed* was of tree. And thus he passed all wey surely.

Of iij pacyences in tribulacyon Capytulo viij
OF all the tribulacyons and vylonnyes that thou suffrest ne will thou ne say
ne do thou any harm to other therefore how be it that thou have sorrow thereof
yet all way render and give thankynges to god* This first pacyence is good /
but if thou bliss god and give to him thankynges as did Job / that is the
second pacyence and is better than that other. And if thou have joy and be
glad of tribulacyon as it is said of thappostoles / that is the third pacyence
/ and that reprehencion or of correccion / or that they repr^ned and corrected
of their defanltes: or that any do or say thing that displeases them / anon
they show what they be in the heart by yr their proud and hard ansueres. The
clock of the monestawythout sownyng is much still as long as it is not
touched But asson^ as one draws the cord or ellis it be tonched any thing.
anon it cries so loud that it is herd over all the town / Right in like
wise done many / For when they be touched in word or in deed against their will.
anon they cry and make noise and be inpacy^nt. Example a relygious man
demanded of his abbot and said Fair fader tell me what I may do that I may
be saved / Thabbot ansuerd to him / yt thon may endure pacyently all that is
done to the in vylanyes and iniuryes without to ansuere any thing that is a
great virtue above all things.

Of loving his neighbor Capitulo ix
Thyrdely charity she weth him in loving his neighbor of which the gospel
says thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. that is to say thou shall
love and desire that he love god and serve him: and that he do good works by
which he may come to heaven: as thou would thy self Item that thou sholdest
love him so well. that thou have sorrow and pity of his sin / and of his harm
and that thou do so much for him. as thou would that he did for the by
reason. as for to help him and socoure him in his need. and to keep his good
name and fame. And to let his scathe and dommage / for ^accorde him to them
that he has discord and all other things that thou may do for him. like
as thou would he should do for the. And by thy neghbour is vndersten den all
manner of people nygh^ and far / Friends and also enemies: and all other
people

Of loving his enemies Capytulo C j x
Thou onghtest to love thyn enemies. and to will and desire. their amendment
and their salvation for the love of god. which thing he will and comandeth.
Item for the great well and prouffyt that they do. For if thou be pacyent.
they shall forge for the a crown in paradys. and sauacion for thy soul: but
they da^pne them self over hardly / Example. we read in the life of faders of an
holy hermy te which at his death kyssed right swetely the hondes of a thief and
said / These here ben the hondes that shall bear me to paradys / he has in him
for the harm that he has doo^n or said and has leyd to the. Example. Saint
gregory recounteth in his dyalogue. that by cause saint beuet was renomed of
holy as well for the love o^f the priest. as for his discyple which was glad
thereof. and made him to do great penance by cause he was glad of the death of
his enemy. The love that thou owe to have to thy neihbour is clearly showed
by the works of mercy of which there ben two manner / The spirituell and
corporell. These ben the spirituell. to counceylle well other for their
salvation. to show to other their defaultes and misdeeds for their amendment:
to conforte the sorouful. to supporte the ygnorauntes and teache them: and to
pray for them that been in sin to the end that god will amend them. to
bless them that curse the. to pardone wrath and evil will. and to pray for
thyn enemies that god will amend them. For hereof god gaaf us ensample on the
cross when he prayed for them that crucyfied him and put him to death.

Ot the works of mercy corporelle. xi
THe works of mercy bodyly ben these / to give mete and drink to the pour:
to clothe the naked. to herberowe the pour herberughles / to vysite the seek:
to supporte and aid the old aged people. to vysite and conforte the
prysonners: to burye the deed bodies / to sustain and deffende the pour
wydowes. and the pour orphelins / and all other pour people for man. and
abhorred them and might not see them: It happed on a day he was not at home.
and a lepre come to the yate of this noble lady And anon she demanded him if
he would ete or drink. he answered that he might not. but prayed her that she
would bring him in to her lords chamber. for to lie and rest him on his
bed. For he had thereof great desire. er he ete or drank / And she said to
him. thou know well how my lord has great abhominacyon of mesellis: if he
find the in his bed / it might be cause that both thou and I might be slain
For he shall anon return and com home. And the lepre began then ne to weep: The
lady might not endure to see him weep ne waylle. but anon she took him in her
arms and bare him in to the chamber and leyd him on her bed: and leyed a
soft pelowe under his head. and covered him with her be gowns. Anon after
the knight her husband came fro huntyng all weary and said to the lady his wife:
Dame open the door of my chamber / For I will goo lie and sleep. I am all hot
the lady which was sore a ferd. and doubted much the death of the lepre more
than of her self did not anon his commandment. wherefore the lord in great
anger brake up the door of the chamber And leyd him down on his bed. and when
he had rested a while: he came to the lady and said to her Dame ye have now well
made my bed. but I mernaylle how ye have so well arrayed it: and where ye have
gotten these good odours and sweet smelle whereof all the chamber is so sweet and
smells so well in truth that me^ seems that I am in heaven. The lady which
thought non other but the death entered in to the chamber and fond like as the
lord said to her. And she fond not the lepre / and she then by cause of the
miracle that she saw told unto the lord all that she had done. And when he
understood it. he was so constrained / that he which was to fore fires as a
lion was soft and dewnayre as a lombe / and by the merits of his wife. was in
such wise converted to our lord that for then forthon he led such a life
like as his wife did. This is that saint poul says: that the evil husbond
shall be saved by the good wife / that is to say he shall be converted to our
lord. The works of mercy get grace and devotion toward our lord. Saint
Jherome says. that he remembers not to have seen a person to deye of an
evil death. that gladly did the works of merry. The works of mercy done many
good things to them that done them. they taken a way the sins of him that is
truly confessyd and repentaunt. and in like wise as the water quenchyth the
fire. right so alms quenchyth the sin of a person. The works of mercy
plese so much to god that what thing thou do to the pour for the love of
him he holds it done as to him self / For at the day of Jugement he shall say
to the good that have so done them. Come on ye that blessed ben of god my fader
in the royaulme of heaven which is appareylled for you. I had hungre and
thurst. and ye gaaf to me both mete and drink I have be naked and ye cladde
me. I have been laboring on the way and ye have herberowed me. I have been seek
and in prison / and ye have vysyted me. what someuer ye have done to the least
of my pour people. ye have done it to me. And they that have not accomplysshid
the said works of mercy shall be sent to the fire of hell like as the gospel
says / and know thou that all only for to refresshe the pour man. to aid
or to conforte him. to herberow him. or to give to hym^ lytyl water to drink.
or to do any good after thy faculte for the love of god he shall yield to the
great guerdon and reward and all that thou do to them / or gladly would
have done if thou haddyst might. verily he shall hold it for done: and shall
reward it to the

How alms should be done and whereof. Capitulo xij
Much people lesen their alms and other good things that they do / by
cause they do it not as it should be done. For who that will do alms to
the end that it be prouffytable and playsant to god: he ought to byholde three
things. First whereof for he ought to do it of his owen. and not of other
men's / and of that he has of his propre and good getyng. For god sets
nothing of evil yefte. Salamon says that who that does alms or sacrifice
to god of the catayll or goods of the pour people. it does to him also great
desplaysyre. as he that should slay thy sone before thyn eyes. Also a man ought
to take heed to whom he does his alms. thou ought not to byholde the
synnar that is to say. thou shall not leave to give to them by cause of their
sins ne evil deeds / but for pity and compassyon of their pourete of their
wives. or of their children for to keep themfro sin / Example It is read of
a When they ax^ them alms / that an^n they an^u^^^ them by laynously and
call them trua^ts and say to them many reproaches to fore they give to them
any thing. Which is a great to^ fusion: That alms plesith not to god: Also
a man ought to give anon and not to say goo and com again when a man may do
it forthwyth / many rich men make the pour people to cry at their doo^es and
long stand / which have to do in other places. and so often pray / that over
dear they selle the bou^^e that they do / Seneqe says that there is nothing so
dear bought as that which is had by prayers. Alms which is made by a man's
life is more worth than that which is done after his death. like as the lantern
which is b^^n to fore lygh teth the conduit of the way better and more surely
that does that which is born behind his back. Also one ought to give after
his might and puissaunce. For the scripture says / if thou have much give
largely. and if thou have little give gladly / Example. A pour man demanded
of a king apeny And he ansuerd that so lytyl a yefte apperteyned not to a k^g
The king Alysaundre gaaf to one his servant a Cite. and he refused it by cause
it was so great a thing. Alysaunder an suered. I have no regard to that: that
apperteyneth the to take but I behold what thing apperteyneth me to give / if
thou have nothing to give. yet have thou good will For Saint Gregory says
that the hand was never wide of gyuynge: when the cheste of the heart is full
of good will / when thou shall do alms: do not for preysyng of the world:
For then ne thou shall lose it. Aand despise not the pour. as sum do that
daygne not to see nor speak to them. but if yt be rudely and desdaygn^usly. For
they be of such matere as thou art. And thou as they be* Sum there be that
do much almesses but for all that they leave not to sin. and such almesses
save them not. For if they deye in such estate. never shall their almesses keep
them too dampnacyon. And therefore says the scripture. if thou wylt playse god.
have first pity of thy soul / And saint Austyn says who that will to al mess
/ ought to begin at him self the first: that is to wete. to set him self
out of dedely sin. Sum may demand as done the relygyous which have not
whereof to do almesses. For they have nothing propre to them self. The
relygyous of the cloystre sayen truth. For they may nothing give without
license of his souerayn / the which ought not to refuse the license to give if
it be demanded of them / And they have whereof to gy^e. but they speak not of
one point which is in their rule / For also they ought not to take any yeftes
without license They that have offices may better and ought to give that which
remains of their prebendes* For therefore were they delivered to them of good
folk and not for to despende them in evil vsages. as ^many do whereof they
shall render compte at day of dome: For saint Ambrose says that the chyche
has gold and silver / to the end that it be given to the pour for the love of
our board Jhesu criste. and not to the end that it be evil spent and dystrybuted
/ I say verily ^^at for to do alms none may excuse him pour ne rich ne
Relygyous ne other For if he have nothing to give. yet if he have good will it
suffiseth: And who has not where of to do bodily almesses. late him do
almesses spyrytuelles That is to say: pray for the sins / and evil
persons with good heart and devoutly. and feed them by devout owy son and
good admonicyou with good example. And of good techynges of that he well
knows: For an holy man says that it is a greter thing to feed the soul
which shall all way endure than the body which shall deye* Example. Sayut
Johan thamener that was patriarch of alisaunder recounteth that in his time the
pour folk satte on a day man named Peter which would nothing give to them. of
whom they much spoke of One of them said to the other. what will ye give to me
if I may do so much* that I have alms of him / The couenauntes were made.
And the pour went forth to fore his house and demanded alms of him. The
master came and met his servant which bare two loves of breed for to give
to dogs or to hogs: he took one of them by cause he could not find stones
redyly and by great ^ndignacyon three we at the pour man. And he anon took the
loof and went to his felawes: and said to them that he had gotten it by great
frendshyp. / It happed that two days after Peter was seek / And him thought in
his slepyng / that he was tofore god at dome and judgment. And that his good
deeds and evil deeds were poysed and weyed in a balau^ce which he had done The
aungellis which were on that other part were all angry / by cause they found
no good deeds that he had done for to put in to that other part of the
balaunce / We have nothing said an angel for to put in to the balance but a
lytyl loof* such as he gives to his hogs which he gaaf in great despyte to
a pour man. it is not ij days yet agoon. wha^ it was set in the balaunce it
seems to him that it was egal to the euyllis. Then said the angel to him goo
hens / and do sum other good that thou be not dampened. he a woke and told
his vision to the holy patriarch: and said to him in this manner: Sire a lytyl
loof of bred has thus delivered me too the hands of the deuyllis: Shall I not
be better delivered if I give all for the love of god It happed on a day that
he was clad with a fair robe / and he saw a pour man all naked which
demanded of him a goun for the love of god. And anon he despoylled him self.
And gaaf to him that goune. And the ponre man went and sold it when Peter
knew it he was much sorry and began to weep / And might not etene drink but
said to him self Alas I am not worthy that this pour man should have my gown.
to the end that he should remember me. when he was a sleep he saw our lord Jhesu
christ cladde in his gown and said to him / Peter wherefore wepest thou. when
he had said the cause. our lord said to him know thou this robe. ye sir said
he in slepyng / I have every day cladde me with all said our lord sith that
thou have given it me. and I thank the: For I had great cold. and thou have
cladde me. then he awoke and praised much thestate of the pour people saying
that he should s^o do that he should be as pour as they. he gaaf all that he
had for the love of god. exepte / x. li. which he retained / and said to his
secretary. led me to the holy cite and there selle me to sum christian man for
to be his servant. and give the money that thou shall receive for me for goddis
sake to pour folk and loo take here* x: li for thy labor Then the seruannt
led his maystre in to the cite cladde with right foul clothyng: and sold him
to an argenter for xxx pens and after gaaf them for the love of god. Peter
served his master right truly-and did all the labor of the house. in such
wise that the other servants had envy at him. and desprised him and often
beat him. Our lord often appeared to him and shewde to him his clothes that he
had given to pour folk for the love of him and reconforted him. The Emperor of
constantynoble was much sorouful by cause he had lost such a man as peter
was. hit happed that his neighbors came in to Jherusalem in pylgrimage. and
were lodged in his masters house. and when they satte at diner. they saw
peter that seemed them and was in pour estat. and that on said* to that other.
see how this servant ress^bleth well sire peter the chau^ger: vereli said that
other it is he. I shall arise and take him / and shall led him hom / when peter
herd this he fled and went his way. the portier of the house was deef and
dombe. and by signs opened the gate. peter said to him open the gate to me.
and anon he recouerd his heering and spekyng. and ansuerd him and opened to him
the gate And peter went out and fled. and the portier came in to the house They
of the house were much abashed they saw him speak: and here: And told to them
that he that made dene the kychen is goon and fled a way, but certainly he is
byloued of god For when he bade me to open the gate / Anon issued out of his
mouth a flame / the which touched my tongue and mine eeres / And forth with I
recovered speech and hering: And anon all they went out and ra^ne after him.
but they could not find him. Then all they of the house dyden penance by
cause they had so vylaynsly entreated him. By this example may thou see: how
it is good to do alms. The holy scripture says that like as water
quenchyth fire. so alms quen chyth sin of him that is confessed and
repentaunt

Of the x comaudemens of the law. Capitulo xiij
FOurthly charity she weth her in obseruyng and keeping the ten comaundementis
of the law the which god gaaf to moises of whom saint johan says. The
charity of god is to keep his comaundementes. Also says the holy euangelyste
if thou wylt come to the life perdurable that is the Joye of heaven keep the
comau^dementes of god The first commandment of god is this. Thou shall not
bylene ne serve neput^^thy hope ne seyth but in me and thou shall have none
other god but me he or she that does the contrary synneth dedely and does ay
enst the first commandment. Such ben they as adoure and worshype ydolles:
and make their god of creatures. And not of the creator and maker / like as
they do that ouermoch love their tresour. be it gold or silver or any other
erthely thing and set all their heart and their hope therein. that they forget
of times god which has all given it to them The second commandment is this
Thou shall not take the name of god in vayn that is to say thou shall not
swear for naught and not without good cause. this same co^ma^dement defe^deth
god our lord in the gospel saying that thou shall not swear by heaven ne by
earth ne by other creature But for good cause a man may swear without sin. as
in judgment when truth is demanded / or out of Jugement in other good cause.
and other wise ought noman to swear. For who that swereth without reason the
name of our lord he periureth him self fassly wetyngely. and synneth dedely:
that is to say when one swereth knowing. aduysedly. and by deliberacion. who
that swereth truly to his wetyng and for naught nothing malicyously / but
lightly and without blasphemye he synneth venyally: and custom is perilous
and may well torn to dedely sin. But he that swereth horribly by our lord. by
malice and by anger synneth dedely and may not excuse him. An oath made against
the charity of god and against the soul of him that swereth ayenste another
ought not to be holden ne kept, and of such an oath one ought much to repent
and to confess the said sin to a man of the church that is wise and
understanding. The third commandment of god is this. Thou shall halowe and
keep the sunday and the festes commanded And thou shall not work ne do work
/ and thou shall keep the fro sin to thy power. if any thing. be in peril to
be destwied or lost not for to abide till on the morn. as a be to lie in a
dyche or such thyngis like. holy church suffers. that on the holy day be had
remedy And on the said day of feste a man ought to entende but on the works
of mercy and of our lord. And therefore a man ought to cesse and leave other
works contrary. especyally for to sin dedely. and of dau^cyng. but if it be
for so^me good cause / for many euyllis and sins comen thereof. as for to be
proud: and to coueyte fair robes and rich Jewellis. envy. lechery / slouthe
to do well engendren thereof. For it is time lost / and there be many disportes
of the world which ben contrary to the soul / saint austyn says that it
were better to labor therthe on the so^day than to dau^ce or play unlawful
games. and yet to so do is dedely sin. Example. It is read of a woman that
haunted the daunces / and much gladly daunced and song. and arrayed her self
merueyllously of rich and fair clothing and Jewellys. It happed that thenes
would fayn have robbed her of her robes and Joyaulx. But the devil keyte her
always. and said to the thieves: how be ye so hardy to will to rob her for ye
know well she is proprely ours. For she has made us to win moo wymen. than
have done all our other famyllye For she admonesteth and encorageth all
other to dance and to do many sins by her vestymentes. And in thus saying
the devil beat strongly the thenes. Example. Saint grego her spyryte. And her
soul went with the virgins in to Joye perdurable. Now have thou herd how the
danncyng desplaised to our lord: and plaised much to the devil. Thou may well
dannce when thou maryest any of thy children or of the neces of thy parents.
and the day of thy feste for gladness and for Joye. but in no wise do it not
for Jolinesse ne for sin: Example. The holy scripture says that the king
dauyd sone of the king dauyd made great werre against his fader. It happed on a
day that the bataylle should assemble for to fight And when they assembled
Absalon which fled upon a mule passed under a tree bare heded. And he had
much here on his head: which took the branch of a tree. and the mule ran
strongly* and he abode hangyng by his here on a branch of the tree And he
that ran after him slew^ him with a spear. And would not that any harm should
be done to the other of his party / by cause he poursiewed his fader. Another
Example. It is read that in normandye there was a man But when he supposed to
have take the best piece ^here came a great tode ^ took him by the over lyppe
in such wise that wha^ he would ete. he must with that one hand list up the
^^de. and with that other he put the mete in his mouth. he sent for a priest
for to confess him / and recounted to him all the fayt. The priest bad him
that he should goo to the archibysshop which was a wise man. and dyscret for to
give to him penance competent. to the end that he should give example to other /
Thar chebysshop said to him that he must goo to the pope: and that he should in
all places that he came show his maladye and tell the cause. he came to the
pope and told him all the tronthe which held it done for a miracle* and
assoylled him and bad him to cry mercy to his fader and mother. And fro than
forthon he should do to them the best that he wight. And thus then the tode
teparted fro him. and he amended him. Item they do^ against commandment that
bear no^ worship ne honor to their fader and mother ghostly: and to their
prelates. curates. and maystres of our lord. and they that selle or bye in the
church. or done other thing that ought to be done. For it is the hons ofgod in
the which ought no thing to be done but to seem god his mother and his
saints. Example. It is read that constantyn thou shall ^le no man but by good
J^styce. and that thou t^re non hate ne ran^our to any other. For the scripture
says he that hates his brother is an homycyde: Also that thou desire not the
death of an other for any evil cause. hate long kept. holden and roted in the
heart is dedely sin: But Jre and indygnacion that passes lightly without
parfyght will and consenti^g to grieve another is not dedely sin. Against this
commanndement synneth he that does or purchases shame or dommage to any other
wrongfully. or is in connseyll or helpyng to hurt and grieve another for to
aduenge him. They that in necessite socoure not the pour / after their power
shall be pugnisshed as homycydes. if by their defaulte they deye. And he that
does his flesshly sin. or any other evil work that a man may not engendre
ne woman conceive / ought to have penance as an homycyde / this says the law
Canon. The. vj commandment is this Thou shall do^ no fornycacyon. In this
commaundementis deffended all the sin of lechery and all flesshly company
of wymen. but if it be thy wedded wife. And a man ought to keep him well fro
going to C^myn wymmen. For it is right great sin by cause they spare none
fader ne brother. Cosyn ne kynnesman: Saint poule says that we be not only to
our self but to god that has redeemed us. Item he says that we be the temple
of the holy ghoost. ^f thou have abandonned thy body to the sin of lecherye.
thou have taken it away fro Jhesu criste* and have put it in tha^des of the
^ende of hell. and thou have made of the monastery of the holy ghoost. the
sygnagoge of the devil. And therefore admonesteth saint poul them that will not
absteyne them fro sin. that they marye them. For it is better for them to be
married: than to be brent / Example / It is said that in vitis patrum b^ried him
^hermyte stopped his nosethrylles for the st^nche of the body. And there came
rydyng a young man which was much lecherous which passed by them upon a fair
horse sadled with a sadle gylt. And this young man had on his heed a chapellet of
flowers. And anon the angel stopped his nose for the coming of the young man /
and nothing for the stenche of the deed corpse / And the hermyte demanded of
the angel why he abhorred more the young man than the deed body. The angel
an^^ered to him that the flessh of enery good and holy man shall be of right
good odor to fore god: but men feel it not by cause they be nourrisshed in
sin which is sweet to them and well smellyng* but the sin of a lecherous
man is much foul and horrible in the sight of god and of his angellys / The
vij commandment is this. Thou shall do^ no theft / This commandment defends
us to take ouy other thing what someuer it (...) and to reteyne it wihout
rayson. In this commandment is defended rapyne. usure / and. deceyte. as for
to d^^eyue another for to have his. and for to bye thing that is well known /
is evil taken: He that does against this commandment is bounden to render and
restore again all that he has evil gotten / if he wot to whom. and if he wot
not to whom he ought to do^ after the counsel of holy church. For otherwise
he should to the end that he should be buried in the chyrcheyerd / whauthe priest
saw that he might not endure for them he made his praer to our lord / and after
said to them. leie the deed bodi upon an ass. and late us see the will of god.
And to what place he shall bear it. be it in the church or in the chyrcheyerd I
shall bury hit Then when they had leyd the deed body on the ass / he went
neither to the church ne to the chyrcheyerd. but went and bare the body strayt
to the galowes where as the theuys hang. and there let it fall down and
after returned home at which place it was buried: The viij commandemau^t is
this. Thou shall bear no falls wytnes / In this commandment isdefended to the
that thou say nothing against truth for to hurt any other ne for to lie. For
in a good person ought nothing to be but truth: who that periureth him self
wetyngly he breketh the commandment and synneth dedely. Then who for to
deliver a man fro death forswereth him self he synneth dedely For to do any
good deed what someuer it be non ought to pariure him self. and in like wise
none ought to sin dedely. The is commandment is this* Thou shall not desire
ne coueyte auother man's wife That is to say* thou ought not to hane
aduiseme^t ne desire to have flessly company with anosher man's wife / For the
consent withont more should be dedely ynne after the sentence of the gospel
which says / who sees a woman and coueyteth her in his heart. he then
synneth him self. that is to say when the consentemeut is expressed and for
thought. For the will parfait: is reputed for the deed* and if this thought
come to the. and thou consentest not ne delytest the rin but it dysplaiseth the
that is not dedely sin. but thou may have thereby merit. by cause thou
ouercomest the devil which entiseth the. the difference of this commandment
fro the vj a foresaid is that the vj commandment defends the deed without
forth / and this defends the consentig withinforth. if the seem that thou do
any sin in slepyng if to fore thy sleping or after thou would for nothing
have done it / but it desplayseth the / and is not by thy fault happed / thou
synnest not. This commandment defends all desires and consentyng to have
flesshly company to another man's wife and other woman whateuer she be / but if
it be to thy wedded wife. It defends the evil signs without forth. which
may draw folk to sin as be evil words and dyshoneste. and also all foulle
gropynges and touchynges. Alas that this commandment is evil kept. whereof
comen many harms / In these days is not retched to require wedded wymmen /
and to styre and cause them to sin / whereof folowen many peryllis. for many
of them have children. which ben not their housbondes. And thus be he rytiers
of them that they be nothing of kynne ne sibbe to. and the right full heirs ben
desherited. and faders and moders be dampened cruelly. And of this sin the
christian men setten less thereby than do the paynems or sarasyns. Example. The
holy he left his mantel which she held fast and fled away fro her saying
/ I shall never do that vylonnye to my master. which has delivered to me for
to govern all that he has. reserved her would god that all the servants
were also true to their maystres as he was. and all wymen better to their
housbondes than she was. The. x. commandment is this. thou shall not coueyte
thing that longs to thyn neighbor* This coma^dement defends the all manner
will to have any others gaod wrongfulli: against this coma^demt done the rich
men wha^ they know that their pour neighbors have gardyns or lendes or other
things nyhe to them anon they will have it and they if will not deliver it to
them at their will / they menace them or hurt or diffame them and therefore it
is cominly said who that has a good neighbor has good morrow. in this
commandment is defended envy at other man's well or good or at his grace or
welfare. this is an evil couetise. and when the consent is acerteined and
concluded in his thought it is dedeli sin. but when the thought comes and no
consent given thereto it is venial sin.

Of the good that god grannted to the children of israel / C. xiiij
OF goods that god granted to the children of Israel if they kept well his
coma^demetis. and the euillis to them that kept them not well / by cause that
for the sin of our first fader Adam for any good that we did might none come
in heaven to fore the passion of our lord. but in behooved that all descended in
to hell good and evil how well that the good had not pain. but that they were
in derknesse. and abod the coming of our lord ihu^ crist. these ben the goods
that our lord promised to the children of israel if they kept well his
coma^deme^ts / and how well that by the grace of him we may now get heaven / if
it be not longyng ou us / thns he prometteth to us. if ye do and keep my
coma^dements said our lord I shall give to you rain in your need. your land and
yonr trees shall give to you fruit so habundantly / that when the new shall
come* ye shall cast away the old. Item I shall give to you such peace that non
shall mow grieve you. and if any enforce them against you. I shall give to you so
great strength. that five of you shall make an honderde of them to flee. and ye
shall ete. sleep and rest in surete: and non shall anger you: and no evil
bestes shall destroy your fruittes I shall not forgete yon. bnt I shall all way
be with you / and I shall be your god. and ye shall be my people: and if ye keep
not my coma^demautis says our lord. after that ye have labored your lands
and vygnes. there shall com strong people which shall destroy your fruits and
shall rob you. and shall defoule your wyns and shall slay yon and your
children. and after when ye shall have labored your lands and set your
vygnes / they shall give no fruit but shall be destroyed with tempeste and
wasted with thondre and lyghtnyng / alas we have oftymes proved for our self.
and lytyl we have amended us and corected us for our sins. verily all that we
have suffered and suffer yet it is not but for our sins / for the holy
scripture says that if we had none iniquitees we should suffer non aduersitees

Of the five wits of nature. Capitulo xv
GOd have given to the v wits of nature / and the me^bres of thy body for to
keep his comandeme^ts* andfor to serve him and to sane thy self. and has given
to the an heart for to think well and in special for to love his and to
remember his grares and the benefaittes that he has done to the like as it
has be said to the tofore of charity. nothing to think on sin. for fro the
heart come the vices and the sins. For to fore that thou make thou thynkest
on them and ben made in thy heart / like as says saint Gregory god has given
to the thyn eyes for to lead the and for to behold the in pity and for to see
the merueyllous works that he has made spirituel in heaven on the son and on
the move / and on the sterres which moeuen day and night without ^^ssyng and
without falling of one only point. and certes like as says saint poul / they
be well worthy to know god and his virtue. and to show his dignite and his
glory. Ceries who that never had seen them should much merueille for to see
them. and to think how fro this paynful life we should mount up above them. And
therefore he has made our visage toward. heaven. Thou ought not to byholde so
steadfastly the things which thou ought not to coueyte. as ben some time
these wymen which byholden so fixly the men / and the men the wymen / which
cause each other oftymes and give occasion. to sin For as the wise man says
fro seeing they fall to speech fro speech to touching. fro touch^g to kyssyng /
fro kyssyng to the deed. Example. by cause that byte and deffame other / for
the thondre and tempeste which ^o undeth and destwieth all that it
attaingneth. ne quarellis fleyng ne speres percyng. ne fire brennyng. ne
serpent enuenymed fleyng / do not so much harm and ^uyll unto the world. as
do the evil tongues / After god has given to the the hondes for to do
alms and good works / and he has given to the thy fret for to bear the to
the church and monastery: and in to all good places* and all thy* body for
to seem him and to save thy self: Example. we read that there were two religious
men which dnellyd togider: and that one said to that other / that he that
first deyed of them both should come again if it were to him possible. and say
to his felawe of his estate. and who it stood with him. It happed that one of
them deyed and appeared to his felawe. the which demanded of his estate and
how it was with him. And he ansuered to him right enyl. For he felt right evil
anguyssh at heart and said to him. I have been a religyous man good enough
at heart pure and clean of all things / But I have been of right evil will
For whych^ th^ge I have been over sore tormented and shall be in purgatory yet
xv days. his felawe ansuered to him and said that is a lityl thing or naught.
The deed man replied I had lever be in the world xviij ^ year. and to be even
day all flayn quycke three times that to be in the pain of purgatory xv days

Of the soul Ca. xv
There be many simple folk which say that they know not what thing is the
soul. And that say when the body is deed that they shall never feel good ne
evil which is an evil heresye to say it. and worse yet to believe yt And by
that they put them in many sins. By cause we have to fore spoken of the
five wits of nature. why the may nothing without the soul we will here speak
some what / For to give some techyng Many philosophers hau^ spoken in many
inan^rs / but we ought to believe the saying of saints and good catholyke and
holy maistres which sayen. that the soul is a substance spyrituell and
reasonable created of nothing for to quykene the humayn body for thou see
that when the soul is out of the body. it abides all still as a deed beeste
and the man when he engenders the child he engendered nothing the soul / but
god of his grace puts the soul therein as saien the maistres. and is a thing
perpetuel and entendyble well made to the image of god. it is capable or capa^
of virtues or of vices recovering pain or reward. free of liberte / ornate of
puissaunce and of affection it is no greter in a great body than it is in a
lytyl body / it has no figure ne color / The maistres saien: that it is great
by cause it is perdurable / it is rightwys and Just by cause it desires
bounte. It is fair and holy by cause it is partable of the deyte or godhede ne
it shall never deye / but ever it shall live / be it in glory or be it in peine
/ if the soul were mortal with the body. then were it no need to require the
saints ferrene nere. the which help us oftimes unto our lord by their
prayers. And all way we be certain and know verily that their bodies bendede
and is left of many but the bones then it appeireth that their souls live.
the book of sapience techeth us. that the souls of just men lyuen perdnrably.
and that their souls ben in the hand of god and the torment of malice shall not
touch them. that is the malice of the deuyllis. And of the evil souls says
the gospel. that at day of dome they shall seek the death. but they shall not
find it. Since then that thou see thy soul is such as may not deye keep
it then right clean. for the philosopher says that god has not delivered it
to the to the end that thou keep it dishonestly by sin / but to the end that it
grow in the virtue of good science and by good werkis. For as he says if it
be parfight to fore that it be departed fro thy body it shall be lift* up to
fore god to whom it has plesed. And if it be ^^parfight / it shall fall in to
the depthe of hell without hope of ever to plese god. God loves so much the
soul that he would suffer death and passion an the cross so shamefully for it.
as thou have herd to fore recounted / which he would not do for all the
creatures of the world. A wise man puts an example and says for to keep well
the love. if the king had adoughter that he loves well and hold her dear to
the end to make her queen of his wyalme / and he delivered her to keep to some of
his subiectys / And if he had evil kept her. I doubt not but that the king
would demand reason of his daughter / by cause he had kept her neclygently.
what shall then do the king of heaven of him to whom he has delivered his
daughter that is the soul made to his semblaunce whom he loves so well as thou
have herd to fore and entendith to make her queue in heaven if she have not be
evil kept: And therefore says the book of detronomie keep thy soul curiously
and dyligently / he shall be well happy that shall mow say to our lord Jhesu
cust at hour of his death / Lord god my maker I rende to the my soul: And
therefore god has delivered to the thy body as a castle for to keep it well.
And therefore says saint bernard / he keeps well his castle that keeps the
body fro sin. where in the soul is enclosed Now have thou herd what it is of
the soul. therefore keep well thyn: to the end that thou may yield good
rekenyng and acomptes at day of dome.

Of the euyllis that sins make us to do: Ca. xvij
TOfore erwe speak of sins we shall say of the euillis that sins done after
the saying of holy doctors: sin does to us much harm and causes many
euyllys tofore the death and after the death. Tofore the death sin hurts us.
Item it derketh our understanding that we may not know truth: It makes our
affeccion and our deuoco^n negligent that we may do no good. ite^ it
despoilleth us fro goods of grace Ite^ it deffoilled our soul. it binds us
to perpetuel pain: It makes our conscience bitter / It hardeth us in it / It
yeldeth us invisible. It sleeth the soul when it priueth us fro the love of
god which is life perdurable. Thou ought to know that venyal sin
disposes and gives the person todeth But the dedely sin gives the death:
Obstynacion deteyneth and holds the person in the death. And know thou
certainly that one of the sins grows of another First the proud person
will be before and above all other and is enuyous if any be like or semblable
to him: and so thereby he falls in envy. Then uyous by cause that lightly he
is angry on him to whom he is enuyous. he falls in the sin of wrath or
Jre. he that is angry when he may not venge him on whom he is angry. he falls
in slouthe. The slouthful by cause he will not ne may nothing do. he keeps
that he has and becomes auaritious. The auaritious man being rich by canse
he has well to ete and to drink / he falls in to glotonye The glouton when
he has well dronken and eten he falls lightly in to lechery / and thus may
thou see how the sins grown one of another. Item sin makes of the man
hell. For to the synnar is the fire of avarice / the stenche of lecherye.
derkenesse of Ignorance. Item it renders a man all wid. It deceyueth a man in
making him good chere. It shows a man to be a fool. For saint Austyn says
that it is great folly to live in such* astate. wherinhe dar not deye. sin
greueth a man to the death for at the death the man is right greuo* wha^ he
leseth his delites and the soulace of this world that he has led that is to
wite of drinking and eting with his friends. of his richesses of disportes and
plays. and also is priued of his propre body the which he shall never recouere
in such form: for when the soul of the sinnar shall recouere his body at
day of dome. it shall be much abashed. and would well have it again in the
astate. as it was wha^ the worms had half eten it in the sepulture / Item the
synnar shall be much abashed at his death when he shall see the deuillis after
the death the sinnar shall have great shame and confusion when the sins
shullen^e recounted to fore god and tofore all his saints of heaven. And our
lord shall reproach him by cause he had not done the works of mercy as they
have been tofore said / he shall be priued fro rest and fro light. ne the
church shall not pray for him / and he shall be cast in to hell. Item he shall
be departed fro god and all sai^tes of heaven and fro all good he shall fall fro
thestate to do works that been good for his health: Now see thou how sin
ennoyeth to him that keeps it in his life / and when he deyeth / and yet more
when he is deed / Therefore take heed if thou wylt have heaven

Of the sin of pride / Capitulo xviij
^Any there ben of simple people which know not what thing sin is. ne ^onne
not discern it. but they can well do it / wherefore I shall show to them some
thing by the help of god / without which may not be given any techyng ne
declaracion / And first of the sin of pride* which is the sin that we have
and take of our first fader Adam / the which he did by his disobeissaunce.
And this sin does to us much harm in diverse manners* as it appears by
certain names that it has after the doctors of holy chyche: First it is named
Infirmyte. For yt yeldeth a man Impotent and seek to resyste evil mouynges and
temptacions which may come to him Ite^ it is prompt and ready by cause of
continuel inclinacion that it has of appetyte to do enyll. Item it has name
corupcyon / when it brings a man to sin. Item vice: by cause it is
dymy^^cion or lassyng of goods of nature. Item langour wha^ it dureth in
nature corrupt. Item it is called law of the flesh by cause the law is
Inflyct and joined to the flesh Item law of the members for it moeueththem
to the work of evil concupiscence. Item nourrisshement. For like as ashes
nourrisshen the fire. right so by it is nourrisshed sin in the flesh after
the work nutrityf and generatyf. Item the prycke of the flessh / For it
moeueth the flesh at the first moeuyng of sin. and courage to the
consentyng: It is called concupyscence. that is to say vice in deed. as it
appears to them that be now able to sin. Item will to sin. as it
appears in the lytyl children. which yet have no power to sin. but they
have the will: Item in so much that it is compared to the first man. fro whom
it came first that was Adam / it is named original. which is as much to say
as deffaulte of Justice due. Thus sayen the doctors and maystres in theology

Of venial sins Capytulo / xix
THese beu the sins venyal: And first as says saint Austyn. Excess in
drynkyng and etyng. in over much spekyng: or over mo^he being still: mockyng
of pour people. to ete when other done abstynence. to come late to church by
over long slepyng. to know his wife without having hope to have a child. to
vysite over late the seek people and the prisonners. ne will accord them that been in debate and in dyscorde to despise his wife and his children / his
servant and his neyhbours / Excess in flatring. to give to the pour things
delycyouses and contagious to vndrestande say* or h^ere idle words in the
church / or else where: to swear for Japes without reason. to do that wherefore
one must swear to forswere him self for any necessyte. lightly and folyly to
curse an other / the harms and euillis that venial sins done be these. first
venial sin byndeth the person to peine / not determinatly ne precisely to
peine perdurable / but to pain purgatyf. and of present affeccion Item it
hardeth the soul. For saint Gregorye says the venial sin derketh the soul.
Item it lasseth the savor of charity / Item it lasseth the powers of the
soul. for it ableth not to do any good. Ite^ it tarieth to have grace for the
soul which might anon s^ihe up in to heaven after the death it behooves that
for the venial sine it be first purged in purgatory for it behooves y^ the
sonle be also clean at coming in to heaven as it was when the body was first,
baptized. Ite^ it dyminys^ heth the heavenly goods not them that we shall have
if we have no venyal sin For when we do the venyal sins we lose for to
do any good meritorye which we do not Item that many times the venyal sins
be cause of the dedely Thou ought to know that like at the remyssyon of
dedely sin. the byhoueth to leave the work of sin. and to have good will
to absteyne the fro than forthon: In like wise in this present world is not
pardonned the venyal sin / if thou leave not in deed and in will: For saint
Austyn says that no sin is venyal but it may be mortal that is to say wha^
a person has therein playsance and delectacyon. but there be many things by
which venial sins may be pardonned. First by the sacre mentes of holy
church in receyuyng and honoring them / Item by holy water* by the bishops
blyssyng. by smyting on his breast by saying of the pater noster / by almesses
and by fastings. And thou ought know that it byhoueth that thou have
contricion and repeutaunce For ellis they shall not be pardoned to the

Of dedely sins Capitulo xx
Saint Johan says in thapocalyps: that he saw issue out of the sea a much
horrible best / which had vij he des and.x. horns and upon the / x. horns
ten crowns Thorrible best signifies the devil which is the sea of the hell
The.vij. hedes signify the vij dedely sins / that is to wete. Pride / Envy.
Wrath. Avarice / slouthe. Gloutonye. and Lecherye. For these vij dedely sins
ben the h^ede and chief of all euyllis and of all other vices of sin. The x
horns signifien the brekyng of the ten comandementis of the law. And the x
crowns signifien the ten vyctoryes that the fend of hell has / when for the
defaulte of keeping well the ten comandementis of the law by the v wits to
forsaid the devil makes the pso ne to fall in to dedeli sin and therefore we
will speak thereof here

Of the sin of pride / Capitulo xxi
IT is pride to wene to be better worth / or to know more: or may more do
than other or to were proud for richesses or lygnage for beauty. for science:
or for any other thing to have moo w^es or other Jewellis than it apperteyneth
to his astate* or to have habytes desordinate / to say. or to too any thing
for to be preysed. to auaunte him self of his sins which is over great an
evil / to seche hye astate in office. for to be preysed without that he be
worthy / to despise and desday ne any other To auaunte him self of sum good
deed for to have preysyng of the world. For that is ypocrysye. to disobeye the.
x: comandements of our lord or of them that he ought to cursed / this is right
great sin / For he takes no part of the mass. And the preeste should sgnne
gretely: if he song mass knowing that a person solemp^ly acursed w^r^ present

Of the sentences of excomynycacion. Capituls xxij
Many of the simple people double nothing the sentences of cursyng. And sayen
that it lets not their pot to boyll on the fire / know they for certain
that they disobeye god. For seint poul says there is no power but it be
ordained of god / And who resists the powers of the church. resists the
ordeynaunces of god: God says to saint peter / when he delyuerd to him the ij
keys which ben the power of cursyng and of assoyllyng. that what someuer he
losed upon earth / should be losed in heaven and by the contrary. what he bond
in earth should be bounden in heaven Then saint peter holds the power and
thauc torite of excominicacyon and cursyng which he has of god. And the other
prelates holden it of saint peter. and all the Judges of holy church: Thou
ought to know that there be two parties of sentences much doubtable to all
persons. as well of the church as seculer. that is to wete sentence of the
law wreton. as to set hond on priest or clerk or a man of the church. and
after that the caas is great the sentence also is more great: The law canon
says that if thou take a clerk ^aly^yously by the hood or by the chyn saying
if thou were no clerk / I should beat the. thou art bounden in the senteuce of
law canon. There is another sentence that the Judge of the church gives like
as prelates osticyals and other deputes of the pope. There is also sentence
which is called interdict as sometime the prelates do which Interdite the
chyrchys and chercheyerdes for certain and just causes. There is another which
is called suspenaon as is done sometime on them of the church which do not
dyuyne offices ^or some causes. There is sentence to them that meddle with them
that been excomynyed / sauf in caas ^^^tryd by the law. Saint gregore puts
mauy caases to them that may meddle with the excomynyed. that is to wete the
wife. the children and the semantes. they that know not that they be acursed /
they that goo by the way / when the interdit is in a town. if they may not
other wise have their lyui^g but by them and they that for charity and not by
pride would do alms to them that be excomynyed / we forbede not says saint
Gregore. Saint Johan golden mouth says that none ought to despise the
sentences of the church / For it is no mortal man that curses and
excominieth. but it is god which has given power to man. and has made the
man worthy to have such honor. It is pride to here mass with them that
stonden acursed: and to meddle with them wetyngly / but in caas suffered by the
law as tofore said is. also to leave to do well for to speak and mock the
people. to be in dispayr for his sins / Example. after they were seen depart
out of the church and note well that seint benet had not excomynied them any
other wise but under condicyon saying. if ye amend not you I shall curse you.
Example. Item it is read that at twyes in cha^payn was a bishop which
excominied and cursed the baylly of the cite:

These ben the branches of pride Ca. xxiij
THe first is disloyaulte / that is untruth. The second is despite. the
third is presumpco^n. the iiij ambico^n. the v. is vainglorie. vj ypocrisie:
And the vij folish dread. to these sins acorden all the sins. that
apperteyne and that grow of pride. but to each of these branches longen many
small bows which should be over long thing to reherce all a long Example. It
is red that a great lady was rauysshed in spyrite and saw a great countess
deed which had been with her well a^ointed and saw the deuyllys which token
away the soul fro the body and led it in to hell. This countess in
complaining her self and in great by waylli^ges said alas caitif that I am I
ought well to sow we. for I have been in my life chaste ynow of my body. Abstiuent
ynowh of my mouth mercyful ynowh and pietous to the pour: and am not dampened
but only for the adurnement of my body vayn and poowd which I have ouermoche
loved and many times I have been chastised and rebuked but I would never leave ne
absteyne me thereof but I did great pain and labor for to plaise men And for
so lityl thing and so litil time. that so lytyl while endured I am dampened
perdurably /

Of the yefte of dread against pride. Capitulo xxiiij
THe first yefte of the holy ghoost is the yefte of dread: this yefte casts
out all the sins of the heart. but propreli it stops the rote of pride.
and it planteth the rote of humilite. the holy ghoost dema^deth of the sinnar
four peticions when he a waketh him and reiseth him fro sin. and opens the
eye^ of his heart. he yeldeth to him his wit and mind. and axeth him where
art thou / that is to say behold caityf in what sorrow and in what sine thou
art in this world. for thou art like unto him that slepeth in the sea in peril
in a ship: and feleth nothing ne knows his peril. after he demands fro
whens come thou that is to say behold caytif thy life unto this time. for
thou come fro the tavern of the devil in the which thou have wasted thy life
and lost thy time and all the goods that god has given the. after he
dema^deth what do thou. that is to say / thou art feeble toward thy body and
toward thy soul. thou wenest to be hole and strong / and by adventure thou
have at thy heart the humors of infeccion naturell which brings the to the
death of thy bodi And in thy soul thou have the humors of sin which shall
bring the to the death of hell. if the grace of god rescue not the. after he
dema^deth whither ghost thou. that is to say think and byholde thy gooyng.
for thou go to the death where thou shall fall in to the hondes of the
deuillis thou gooest to thy judgment where thou shall fide the justice so
cruel so rightful and so mighty that none may gainsaie ne withstond it / thou
go in to hell where thou shall find fire and thondre and many torments
which never shall leave the. ne cesse for to tormente the / this does the holy
ghoost to the synnar he openthe the eyes and maleth him to see and byholde to
fore and after these ben the iiij bodies of tho^der that fere the synnars ande
makyth them to tremble and to have dread and these regardes ben the regard of
humylite which the yefte of dread brings to the heart of the synnar when he
is vysited

Of humylite Capitulo xxv
Hvmilite is a virtue that mocheple aseth to god of the which says sei^t
berrnard I dar well say says he that without humilite the virgyne marie had
never pleased god She her self says in the magnificat that she made: that god
beheld more her humilite than her virginite: for without virgynite may well god
be pleased / but not without humilite. if thou remembrest well fro whens thou
come. and knew well the pouerte of thy birthe. how thou have be conceived
in sin and of how foul and vile matere thou have be made and fourmed / thou
sholdest have no cause to be proud* Saint bernard says understand man
understand and considere in the end what thou shall be after thy death. verily
says he there was a time in which thou were not. after thou were made of vile
matere / and in a foul place conceived. where for then art thou proud. for
thou art nothing but pouldre and ashes conceived in sin and in misery and
live in pain and deyest in great sorrow. certes says saint bernard a man is
nothing but a froth stynking in water full of dung and mete to worms after that
a man is made he be comes worms mete and ordnre and rotynnes: and so he
comes to nonght. Behold says seint bernard in the sepultures of Emperous. of
kings and of great barons that have been what thou shall find there bnt duste
and stinking filthe. they were made of such matere as thou art. and thou shall
be as they ben certes if thou consider well the things before said thou shall
be humble of heart and of deed and if thou have all way the eyes of thy heart
toward thy sins thy defaultes / and to thy pour frailte. thou shall set
nothing by thy self ne preise thy self nothing / then thou shall be great
tofor god. for very humilite comes fro the heart. seint gregore says that as
much does he that gadrith virtues without humilite as he that weneth to gadre
dust to fore the wind. and seit austin says that pride made of a^gellis
devils but. humilite made of men angellis. Example. it is read in vitis
patru^ that on a time thabbot marchaire walked in an halle. and the devil met
with him / and supposed to have smeton him with a sharp sith that he held in
his hond. but he coud not. and said to him. machaire thou do to me much
grief and harm. certes said he I fast and wake more than thou do / for I
never ete ne sleep. but only thy great humilite ouercometh me / now take heed
how much worth is humilite.

Of shamefastenes Capitulo xxvj
Of humilite comes shamefastnes which is a noble thig in a person that can
well keep it. seint bernard speaks of shamefastnes and says. O how fair a
thing is it and shynyng ge^me of good manners in the face of an adolescent that
is to sa ye of young people a ge^me is to say a precious stone. shamefastnes
says he is special glory to keep conscience and good reno^me siege and
province of virtue preising of nature. and sign of all honest / and says yet
I know nothing more curtois than shumefastnes: and the wise tulle says that
without shamefastnes may nothing be rightful ne honest: now be then
shamefast and be a shamed to be seen in town ne in common place without
necessite and be not stowte ne vacabu^de or sta^^ng. but simple and shame fast
after thexa^ple of the virgin marie which was troubled at the salutaco^n and
coming of the a^gel gabriel / and that came of virginal shamfastnes. and that
remembrance came to her of prudence and of discreco^n / and that one is nothing
worth without that other for there ben some that been shamfast of a bestial
sha^fastnes that can not keep contenance in them for the defaulte of wit and
of prudence. and there be some that make them wise and saien without shame that
which they know so precysely that they be noyo^ to eueriche and ben holden
for foles. but shamefastnes ought t^ be joined with prudence to the end that
they be shamefast wisely and wise shamefastly.

Of discreco^n Ca. xxvij
Dyscrecion is as who says an holy nourrice and the kepar of all virtue. and
it may not be gotten as it is said but by very humilyte It happeth often when a
person has do great pain and great dilygence to know humilite and to do
some good for his saluaco^n the devil the which is a^gry there with comes to
him for to make him lose all to his power by vainglorye. which he puts in
his heart and says to him. now art thou a good man or a good woman / for much
folk say good of the and holden the for good and humble and right debonayre.
but when. thou see the thus assailled thou ought anon to run to
discrecyon and there thou shall find iiij consideraco^ns which shall chase and
hunte away the devil fro thyn heart The first consideraco^n o^f thin owen
birth / the ij is thignorau^ce of thy pour estate. for as the doctor says.
there is none that knows: whether he is beloved of god or not. or in grace or
out of grace. the iij co^sideraco^n is the reme^brauce of death. the iiij is
thabydyng of the great judgment / when discreco^n without the which no virtue
is ought worth shall come to thy heart and bring to the these iiij
consideraco^ns. then thou may well think that the fend shall not mow
grieve the. for these be iiij great causes to hold thy heart in humilite. now
think then on thy propre birth and condycyn how king david did when he
said. I am said he a lityl worm and not a man / thus knowleched he his pouerte
and his vylete for like as the worms. be vile lytil and despised and grow all
of the therthe right so men and wymen ben vyl of them self and of her propre
frailte. for when a man enters in to this world he brings nothing with him
ne nothing he shall bear away. and all naked he shall goo. Example. It is read
that saladius. ^oo here is all that saladyn the great soulda^ shall bear with him
of all his richesses when he shall deye. seint bernard says that who should well
behold and take heed of that which yssueth out of the eyes / of th^^eres* of
the nosthrillis / of the mouth. of the heeris of the nailles or vngles / of
hondes of feet and of all other conduites of all the body and of all the flessh
he should find that there is non so vile ne so stinkyng as is that which
issues and comes out of the bodies of men and of wymen and as we be oueral
the body foul holy / and who that should think well how the death comes soon
and approaches pale and horrible cold and wan stinking and dredefu: and also on
them that he has loved well wha^ the eyes shall be broken and turned in the head
and when all the wits and all the me^bres of the body shall have lost their
offices and the arms and legs shall be stif cold and withdrawn and all the
body shall be as a tro^k deed and caroine which behooves anon to be born to the
earth to the end that the air be not thereof corrupt / for to be given to the
worms for to be eten. who that should well thynk heron should never have cause to
be proud

Of the sin of auari^e capitulo xxviij
It Is sin of envy when one has sorrow of the good life and of the well of
another to have joy of his sin or of his harm or do^mage for to detrac^e
and say evil of another be hind him to make discord bitwene them that be
friends. The sin of envy is much grievous and appropred to the devil with
the sin of pride. if thou do evil. and thou desyr^st that other do in like
wise. thou synnest by envy for thou will that the other be evil like to thy
self. they that have good begynni^g to do well and to prouffite in the love of
god. thenuious enforce them to quench and extinkte them if he may / the other
that prouffite well to god and to the world also thenuyous enforce them to hurt
and hindre them to his power they that been parfight and in great estate and
that do much good and good works to ward god and the world. thenuious
adressith his engines for to destroy and hurt their good loos and deeds for
how the good deed is mo ^e great the more (...) sorrow he has and therefore
says boece would god that in all places* tho enuyous had eyes tofore and
behind to the end that of the good well that they sa we other men have they
should he the more tormented. thenuyous has of custom if he here that one
says good of ouy p^one and be know or has herd any harm of him. for he is
right parfight and well just that has in him non impfecco^n. anon he ansuereth
by great envy that certainly he is a good man / but he has such a fault in
him this sin is so perilous that uneath may one come to good true
repentance. for it he is contrary to the holy ghoost which is fontaine of
all good and god says in the gospel that who sins aienst the holy ghoost
shall never have mercy in this world ne in that other for ^e sins of his
propre masice nevertheless thou ought hoolly to understand that there is no
sin so great but god may pardone and forgyne it in this world and in that
other who that repents him with good heart bnt uneath and with great peiue
that any repents of such sin which warreth to his power aie^st the holy
ghost and his benign grace by cause he warrith aie^st spirituel good like as
the jews warred aienst our lord for the good deeds and works that he did

Of the sins aienst the holy ghoost / C. xxix
Thou ougtest to know that the vi sins aienst the holy ghoost and that be
specially aienst his grace: the first is pre sumpco^n by which a man is bolder
to sin for hope of light and soon forgiveness and so makes the merci of god
ocasio^ more to offe^de him this is pr^su^pco^n which makes a man to misknowe
and mis use the grace of the holighost: the ij is despair or wa^hop which
takes a way the gretenes of goddis mercy like as does presu^pcion his justice
as thou have of cain wha^ god blamed him by cause he had slain his brother abel
he ansured mi wikednes is so great that I shall not mow have ^do^e ne
foryeuenes bnt saint bernard repreueth him and says thou best caim for if thou
had asked pradon And mercy of our lord he had given it to the and judas
offended more our lord of that he was so in despair than of that he betrayed
him to the death. Thei^^ is abstynacion that is hadrnes of heart when a man
wilfully and of purpose disposes him to fyxe in his malice. that he will not be
inclined by any auctorite or reason to be turned fro hysmys opynion as ege as
was which said to saint andrew I will patiently here the but what ever thou
say if thou will not here and obey me I shall crucyfie the / the iiij is
despite of penance. that is when a man has purpose in his heart / that he shall
never repent him of his sin: and so contynueth in deed to the end of his life
/ and this is most proprely sin in the holyghost. the v is for to war and
deffamethe grace of the holy ghoost in another like thou have herd to fore The
vj to war against truth wetyngly. and specially the truth of the christian
faith All these sins ben against the holy ghoost. and they be so great that
vennethe any comes to amendment. and therefore ben they with great pain
foryeuen and pardo^ned: Example. It is read in the life of faders that on a time
the abbot moses satte with his brethern / and euerich demanded of him of
their thoughts and he gat to each of them an ansuere. there was an ancient
abbot which was much envious which said to him: abbot moises thou art like a
common woman which a rayeth her for to draw men for to come and sin with
her. moses ansuered to him thou say truth god has showed it to the The
other said / moises thy body is all full of venim / moises ansuerd to him thou
say truth abbot. for thon see that which is without forth only / but and
if thou sa west that which is within me / thou sholdest yet say werse. After
this said one of his brethern to him. moises fair fader art not thou troubled
in thy self: of that which this old abbot says to the. he said to him no
veraily. for I am such within forth as Iam without forth and therefore I am not
angry ne troubled

Of the yefte of pity against envy. Capitulo xxx
THe second yeft of the holy ghoost is the yeft of pite that is proprely a dew
and a triacle against all felo^nye and specially ay^nst the sin of envy for
this yefte exsti^peth and pluketh out the rote of envy and heleth it
parfightly / then the heart that receives a dew of swetnes which makes it
to germe a rote sweet and well attempred that is the good love of the heart
whereof grows a fair tree and an hye bering right good fruit that is a virtue
good and fair which is called mansuetude or benygnyte that is swetnes of
heart which makes a man sweet and de^^nnai^. charitable loving / and amiable
for it makes a man parfightly to love his neighbor as him self as we have
said tofore

Of the sin of ire Capitulo xxxj
There is a good ire when one is angry against evil or ay enst defaulte of
another. and that is no sin / but there is another evil ire which makes
murmr aienst god. or to despite god. his mother and his saints. and that is
called blasphemy. if a man should say blasphemy or vylanie of the king or the
queen as is said of god or of our lady he should be grievously punisshed / an
holy man says Alas how great ire is it to swear and to forswere and seie
blasphemye of god / for which many deye of sodeyn death:. Example. saint
gregore wherreth sin he was delivered to the deuillis for by cause that his
fader did not correct him he was so acustomed: that at the death he set
nothing there by. and therefore god pugnisshed him. now behold then what god
shall do of them that b^n in great age that aduysedly and wetyngly blaspheme
so almighty god. wha^ he punisshed in such manner a child of v year of age.
Ite^ to swear by the blod of god: or by his belly. or by se^blable oaths it is
right great sin. also for ire and anger some despeyren and give them self to
the devil / Ite^ for ire and anger to do harm and hnrte to other in dysfaming
them which is werse than to rob him how well that the evil that one says be
truth. also he that leyeth hond on pressed or clerk he is ex^^mi^ed and acursed
by the law canon. and all that letten euilly the iu^sdiction of holy church
ben acursed by the law. Of ire grow homicides that is to say manslawhter.
clamours. indignaco^ns. ranconrs which abyden at heart meddled with hate /
great desire of vengeance / and mortal wars among friends whereof grown over
great harms and hurtes which may not be guarisshed ne amended. Example Saint
gregore reherseth in his dialogue that there was a non ne which was so angry
that in what place she was she moeued all way rancour plees and debates It
happed that she dey de and was buried in the church the night after. that she
was buried. the kepar of the church by grace of god saw that she was brought
before the hye altar and was departed in the body and one part was brent with
fire And that other abode hool / On the morn he recou^ted this to the freres
which comen to fore the hye altar where she had be brent* and fond the place
also brent as if the body had been visybly brent

Of the yefte of science against wrath and ire Ca. xxxij
THe third yefte of the holy ghoost makes a man clear seeing. and therefore it
is called the yefte of science* for it makes a man wise by mesure in all
things. this yeft wha^ it desce^ death to the heart it plucketh and casts out
the rote of the sin of ire and of felony which troubles the heart and
makes the man all fro him self in such wise that he sees nothing for to
conduite him self ne none other but this yefte enlumineth the heart of the man
on all parties so that he may not be deceived of non other. like as the yeft
of pity makes him innocent right so will he deceive non other saint Johan says
in thapocalyps that he saw in spirit that the holy men which were full of
this yefte were all full of virtues before and byhynde. this yefte is the
master of the hertes that is to say of the virtues of the soul for he has
ordained all things to point and by rule

Of the sin of slouthe Capitulo xxxiij
THe holy scripture says that tofore all works thou ought in the morning
when thou risest to yield thankings to god of his benefaites and to bliss the
with the sign of the cross. and to cry him mercy in very repentance of all
thy sins / and at the night when thou gooest to thy bed in like wise It is
slouthe for to be idle and to waste the time in vanite for all our time our lord
shall demand of us strait acomptes and rekeni^ge at day of judgment. and on
what good we have enployed our time. and therefore admonesteth vssaint iherome
that we do s^m good to the end that the denyl find us occupied and then he
shall flee fro us. for truly over many euillis comen by ydlenes Example him what
was in that book / the devil said these ben the sins that the people has
forgete: he demanded saying ben there any that I have forgeten in time passed.
The devil showed to him his book. and fond no sin that he had forgeten sanf
only that on a time he had seid ^o complyn Then seint Austin commanded him
that he should abide. and anon he entryd in to the church and said well and
deuoutely his complin and after come again to the devil / and bad him to show
him his book there as was wreton the default of his complin. the devil serched
and fond it all wid and scraped out there as was wreton the deffault of his
complin. then he said to saint augstin that he repented that he had showed him
his book. For by the virtue of thy prayers thou have put away thy sin. It is
slouthe not to pray to god / and not to do his deuoir for the d^ed bodies as
he is bound to do / ne to do: truly his daily work when he werketh for an
other man / and not to take heed to the prayers that be said for if thou take
non e^tencion to them. god takes none head to them not to withdraw another
fro evil doing to his power to flee and goo fro the prechyng and sermons. for
that is a sign that he is not on goods half. that gladly hereth not the word
of god for there he may here much good to do well. and correct and chastyse
him self fro many euillis / and all way he may learn. Example. we read of a
rich and noble clerk the which lived in this fair bed / that ye will
remember how the pour souls beleyed in the fire of purgatone. And there with
he departed: wha^ the clerk was leyed donn in his fair bed he might neither
sleep ne rest when he remembered the words that the prechour had said to him
On the morn when he was risen he gaf all that he had for the love of god and
entered in to relygyon: and after was an holy man / Now see thou how it is
good to here the word of god / It is slouthe when thou ghost not gladly ne with
a good will to church. For it is the first thing that thou ought to do
when thou art risen out of thy bed for to recomande the to god / and in good
truth thou and all thy works and besynesses shall fare the better if thou so
do. Example Eleazar and use it. thou shall be as rich as I am. And thus the
pour cord w^nn^r bycam much rich after when he frequented the church and
the sermons.

Of Prayer C xxxiiij
THou ought^st to know that in all places and in all works one may. and
ought to pray and serve good. but most specially in the church. for as the
scripture says The monasten or church is called the house of prayer. when
thou go to church for to pray to god. thou ought to put foo thyn
heart / all erthely afflyc^ions for to take the better head and entente to
pray unto god. Example it is read of a hou demandest. For saint austyn says
that god gives not (...) us anon that we our lord that he would hele her
daughter the first time he ansuerde not ande she perseurede all way
bysecrequyre. how w^^ it be thing reasonable Justise and pnissau^ce have recours
to thy great m^rcy which for the sinners would suffer thy self to deye and I
pray the that to me pour synnar thou wylt show and do thy grate how be it I
am not worthy. that thou behold me with the eyes of thy great mercy. At left
wnchesauf fro far to vysite and conforte me in all my necessytees and my
works / seint austin sa yth that or^so^ and prayer is to the man an holy
defense to his good angel solace. to the devil torment. and to god agreeable ser
uyce / and delight not the to make thy prayers to god ne to say words
polysshed as sum done: For saint The rome says that it is more auayllable to
say vij psalms in deuoco^n than all the psaulter in heaviness and ennoye. And
therefore made our lord the pater noster lytyl and short to the end that it should
be said with the better will and devoutly / Thou ought to know that two
things letten prayer as says saint Ysodere / that is or by cause that one
cesse not to do evil. or else that one pardone not ne forgive his evil will
or male talent For like as it is long or the wound be heled and may not avail
to the guarysshynge as long as the iron is within So in like wise prayer
auaylleth nothing to him ne proffyteth as long as he has evil at his heart /
Saint James says that much auailleth the besy prayer of a right wys man.
Example we read in the holy scripture in the third book Cy^^e^uly. o^n a time
at matin^s one had begone a psalm in a mean / And in that point and tune the
old men continued. And there was a young monk which was proud which lift up
his wis above the other. And how well that the ancient men / would have kept
still contrary to him. yet some of the yo^g monks sustained their note and
point in such wise that the old men were still / but anon issued out of the
mouth of the young monk like an hoot yr^n all read / and it transported to
them that had helped him This is aienst them that sing more by presumpcyon
than by devotion And therefore says saint austin all the time that I me
dely^ed more in the song than in the words and scrupture that I song. I
contesse that so oftymes I sinned grievously / Example. It is read of a posed
that it was for that he gloryfyed him self ouermoche in his song and this is
against them that glorifye them self over much in their song*

Of them that speak in the church when they should pray god / Capitulo xxxv
IT is slouthe when thou art in the church and ought to pray god and thou
troublest and let other. For the wise man says that anon as thou art in
the church. thou ought to remember wherefore thou art made a man thou
ought to read and sing if thou can or pray to god to thy power. many there
be that do nothing but ^angle and destrouble other and let te them and they
do many harms. Example / It is read tongue / for there issued out of her
mouth a great serpent wyht a great multitude of toothes which gnawed upon her
tongue

Of evil spending the time Capitulo xxxv
IT is slouthe as we have tofore said to occupy the time in folly. for it shall
never be recovered: Example A relygio^ person of clereuauly reherceth that an
holy man herd a wys which playned him merueillously And he demanded what him
eyeled. and he ansuerd to him that he was a soul dampened which complained his
da^pnacyon and said that the thing why the most tormented the dampened sowles*
is the time that they have lost and evil spended in this world. for they
might well have done so much good that they might have had the life ^e^durable
the which they have lost by their negligence of this sin ben not quyte the
hunters ne hawkers which wast the yr time in such vanitees. and despende the
goods that god has lent to them in dogs and hawks whereof they shall render
and yield strayt a comptes at the day of Jugement and many times they leave to
serve god whereof they shall in the end be right grievously punisshed. the holy
canon says that it is not found in holy spripture that any hunter was ever
saved ne saintifyed And says yet more that he that sees the hunter and
delyteth him therein that he shall see our lord in great anger. Example A doctor
which was called peter de clugny reherceth of an holy man which was in his
prayer on the good friday the which was rauysshed in spyrite unto ester day
and said that he had seen in purgatory a knight which had b^n in his life a
chaste man. a good alms man. and of good life. but he had loved over much the
disporte of hawkyng. and therefore he had like an hawk which tired and ete his
hondes and merue^lously was therewith tormented / Of this sin be not quyte
they that wast the time in ioustes and tournoys.. Example we read of a knight
uoute yno^gh toward our lord: a preehar came and said to him that out of these
games issued the. vij dedely sins / First that is the sin of pride. for it
is not do but for vain gloyre and for to have. preysyng of the world / Ite^
it is envy for all way that one has envy upon that other by cause he
iousteth better and is more habyle in arms tha^ that other: Ite^ it is sin
of ire and of wrath. for sometime that one hurts or sleeth that other by
wrath. Ite^ it is slouthe for it is time lost and is nothing but vanite. Ite^
it is avarice for oftymes they take and rau^son one that other and take f^o
them their horse and their harn^ is and make sometime ^heuyssaunce and great
extorco^ns to their subiettes for to make their games and es^atementes / Item
it is glotonnye for in such games be made great mangeries. banckettis / and
great dispenses not only of their own but of the yr subgettis. Ite^ it is
sin of lecherye for many times for t^ playse their loves and concubynes they
enforce them gretely and sometime as they say they bear thenseines and tokenes
of their folyssh ladies and loves / And for the euyllys that been done and ensie
we thereof holy church has ordained that they that deyen in such games of
what estate they be they shall not be buried in christian b^riels And if for
doubt or for love they be buried in christian buryels it should be more to their
dampnacyon than to their salvation when the knight herd this he know that it
was truth. And as he to fore had loved such games he hated them ever after
and despised them merueyllously

Of vows Capitulo xxxvij
IT is slouthe and dedely sin not to fulfill his vows within the term set
if they be reasonable. and may be goodly done They that make vows / ought to be
men of xiiij year of age / and wymen xij year of age and ought to have such
wit and understanding that comynly the said age requires. And if there be no
term / it ought to be done the most hastily that it may goodly be done / for
the tarieng dysplaiseth much. to god / as the holy scripture says I counssi^^
the thou make no vow over lightly for the peril that is in the not
accomplysshyng / and that thou say in making the a vow. that if thou wylt not
ne may not do it but by the counseyl of a good confessor thou may in the
stead of the vow do other thing such as he shall charge the with. Item if
thou made a vow that thou may not well accomplissh: thou may do it to be
changed by some man that has power. Item thou may reuoque the vows that thy
wife has made in thy company / and of thy children that ^^n in thy gouernauuce
when thou know it first / or ellis not / Thy children done well / if they
make the a vows in which thou have a vowed them / but if they do it not they
sin not if they were not consentyng in the age before said The relygyouses
ought not to make vows without license of their soueraynes. or of their
prelates or abbott^s

Of them that have connyng and use it evil Ca. xxxviij
IT is sin of slouthe when thou have science and connyng and thou use it
not well Thou ought to show it by work by predycacion and by enseynementes
and techyng. For if thou so do thou do right well And if thou do it not
thou berest lettres against thy self as did Urye which bare the lettres of his
death / and it shall be to thy dampnacyon. For the holy scripture says that the
servant that knows the will of his master or lord / if he do it not / he
shall be greuousely punysshed / the tell. And he ansuered to him and said fair
sone / that is because that thou thynkest not well on the rest that we entende
to have in heaven. and on the pains that we ought to fere and doubt if thou
thouhtest heron well and dilygently. and thy ^el le were full of worms. And thy
self in them unto thy neck thou sholdest well abide there without being a ferd.
It is Sloth and sin when thou have wit and understanding and can not thy
Pater noster the Aue maria. and the Credo with that that aperteyneth to thy
believe. And that ought to teache godfaders and godmoders to the children that
they hold at the font of batesme. ly^e as the pressed enioineth them at the
crystenyng if the fader and the mother do it not* or if they fayl le or deye to
fore the age they ought to know it

Of the pater noster Capitulo. xxxix
THe pater noster is the most worthy and the best prayer that is For it
contryneth vij petycyons in which werequyre and pray to god our fader that he
give to us the vij yef tes of the holy ghoost And that he delyuere us fro the
un dedely sins and that he give to us the un promesses which he promised to
his friends. For to speak bryefly it conteyneth and encloseth it all that the
heart may desire and demand of god And our lord ihesu christ made it short to
the end that it should be said with a good will and often. The vij petycyons of
the pater noster be when we say: Pater. we pray benyuolence. For we call him
pietous. when we say noster we take away pride. For we call him not
syngulerly our fader but of all when we say qui es in celis we bear to him
reverence For we say not only that he is lord of earth: ne of the things of
this world. but also of heaven /

Of the vij peticyons of the pater noster / Capitulo xl
THe first petycion of the pater noster is Sanctificetur no men tum wherefore
demand we the peticyon of our lord that his name be saintefied. is it not so
/ yes For all the scuptures witness it. but yet he might be sayntified in the
hertes of many moo. that is to wete in the hertes of paynems. why the believe
not on him to the end that they believe. serve. and honor him in their hertes.
and know and believe on him more fermely. than do the false christian men / and
to the end also that they have knowleche of his name by the law and that they
have the love of him by thoffice of love. and also that he be saynctified in
earth the better in the hertes of good people by the more great knowleche of
charity and by great swetenes of love. whereof. Sanctifycetur and cetera. The
second peticyon is Adueniat regnum tuum* what is that we demand wha^ we say.
that his royalme come. Is he not then king. has he not then his royame.
yes. but we demand that he come: and that he show him by grace to them that
he is not yet magnyfested and showed. that is to wete to them that be now born
/ and that been yet to be born / And therefore we say / O fader celestyal we
pray the that they which by nature of flesh be gendred / and which by
grace be generate in the holy font of batesme. And make them just. and by
the clerenes of thy justice / be thou shewde to all them which be sons of
thy royame. And like wise as thou regnest in the just and good persons / so
take thou away all wickedness and all iniquite of the enemies of hell and
will also regne in them which ben yet in sin. whereof. Adueniat reguum tuum
and cetera. The third petycion is. Fiat voluntas tua sicut in celo et in terra
/ we know certainly that they that be in heaven doubt nothing to do the will
of god / and by cause that a child of a day old may not be upon earth without
sin. Therefore we pray him. that like as the saints done his will in heaven.
and the good and just people done it in the earth to their power / hew well that
we may not do after their propre perfection. that it playse him to give us
grace that we may do his will after our lytyl faculte and not only his will
be done of good people but also of the wicked by remuneracion of sin. and by
operacyon and werkyng of good works / whereof / Fiat voluntas tua sicut in celo
et in terra / The fourth peticion is: Panem nostrum cotidiauum da nobis hodie /
Thou ought to know that god has made a man of double substance. that is to
wete of substance spirituel touching the soul and of substance corporel
touching the body and therefore he has need of two loves of bread / one for the
soul and that other for the body. the soul is fed with the bread of holy
scripture and the body of natural bread. The faders carnal owen the bread
natural and corporal to them And to their children by the grace of god which
maked it to come / For without him we mow not have it ne spyrituel also. The
faders spyrituell ben the prelates and the prestes which owen to give to us
the spyrituel bread that is the doctrine of the holy scripture like as god
comaundeth them in the gospel / But alas as says saint gregore The world is
all full of prestes: and nevertheless there be some that here gladly the word of
god But there be few that will say it Alas what shall many prestes say at the
day of dome which have take thordre of presthode. and nevertheless they be not
ashamed to live disordynatly. For which says the wise man that the evil
prestes make the ruin of the people by the evil examples that they give to
them: Thou shall not scarcely find them in the church for to teache and
enseyne the people / But forto receyne thoffryngis / And also thou shall find
them with the people dissolute and foulle of evil manners and thou shall not
know ne see any dyffaulte / of the habit of the seculer men to whom they
should teache and endoctryue And do not but they ben at plays and esbatemen
tes more dyssolute oftymes / than other ben / both in words and in deeds.
There swear they and forswere them. And speken evil: and wicked words both of
deed men / and also of living Their rentes and revenues they demauude
rygorously and oftymes to great hurt and domages of the pour people and say
to them great vylonnyes and take them sometime with both hondes / They he
cladde with the wulle of the sheep of our lord and eten the flessh and after
let and suffer them to deye for ho^gre for fault of feding them with the word
of our lord like as they be holden and bounden / Of which word many cannenot
ne know it not but goo to tauerues and dunke and ete more that needs: and
often fallen at debat and fight to gyder. They live lecherously and despende
their good evil and lewdly the goods of them that been departed out of this
world and fulle lytyl do they their deuoyr. And that werse is / many therbe so
dissolute that it is great pity of their evil life and evil examples which
they show to the world For they slay them whom they should quyckne for whom
they shall yield a compte full strayt at the day of judgment to our lord: like as
the prophet says. I shall demand says he of the pastors and herdmen of the
church the blood of the souls that by their deffaulte and neclygence ben
peasshed and dampened And therefore be they not displesed when truth is said
unto them. For saint bernard says that it is better to displease for to say
truth than to please by flaterie At lest says saint Gregore if they have
not science and connyng for to preche to the people And seche them let them
live so well and keep the way of Innocencye for to gyne good example / For the
good life of prestes is the science good lord we pray the that thou wylt feed
us with the dinyne inspyrasyon of thy holy spyride to the end that by the we
may have the bread of spyrituel life withinforth the which it please him to
dystribute to us by devotion Thus panem nostrum totidianum da nobis hodie. The
vpetico^n is dimitte no bis debita nostra licut et nos dimittimus debitoribus
nostris / Alas how this petico^n is gretely doubtous and perilous to much
people that say it / Certes it does to them more harm than good many there be
that by their tongue and evil wrath be so harded against them that have done to
them any displaisir that they would well have them slain of their propre hondes.
and also hurt in all their goods And neither for the love of god ne for
prayers required to them. ne for mercy that is desired of them will not take
any satysfacion ne make peace ne acoorde with them. Of such people says the
prophet that their prayer is turned in to sin as touching them self. And
how well that they ben such and so paruerse that they may not be more yet have
they not dread in the world but knele down on the yr knees to fore god and
tofore the altar and say this prayere O ye right curssyd sinners what is this
that ye do. ye prayr again your self ye will not pardone ne forgive to them
that have trespaced to you. and yet ye pray to god that he pardon ne your
trespaces like as ye pardonne theyres. ye moeue god against yon. and make him
more angry than ye appease him Certes what someuer pardonneth not any thing
that had be done or said to him god shall never pardone to him his sins for he
him self prayde for them that put him to death who me he might have confounded
and destroyed if he had would the holy scripture says that he that / hates an
other is an homicide or ma^slear and has no part in the kingdom of heaven Now
let him beware and take heed what he shall say that is in such estate / for
it is better to him to be still and say not than to demand pardon when he will
not forgive. Thus dimite nobis debita nostra. The vj peticion is / Et ne nos
inducas in temptacione^ Thou ought to understand hoolly that we ought not
to dema^de of god that we be not tempted. but we pray him that he will not
suffer us to be surmou^ted of the temptacyon. The te^ptacions proffiten much
to much people / for by the vyctories in withstonding them they shall have the
crown of glory like as says saint James. well happy is he that suffers
te^ptacion For when he shall be proved. he shall have the crown of perdurable
life. And yet says saint James right dear brethern esteem and take in you all
joy of the spirit and of grace wha^ ye shall be tempted with diverse
te^ptacions for by the patience that ye shall hane ye shall possess your souls
in perdurable glory Three things there be that te^pte us in this world that is
to wit the flessh / the world and the devil The flessh tempts us by
glotonnye and lecherye / the world tempts us by prosperity and by aduersite.
the devil enforces him to tempte us to sin and therefore we say Fader suffer
us not to be tempted more than we may suffer ne bear / but give to us strength
power and will for to suffer well the temptaco^ns to the end that we may have
victory. Thus. Etne nos iuducas in temtacione^.

The vij peticion is. sed libera nos a malo many euyllis there be to which
human creature is subgette and of which in no wise by him self he may not
keep him ne esche we them. which may be dystyngued in sex manneres. There is
one euylle of the body and an other of the soul Item one evil of the sin:
and an other of pain Item an evil of this present world And another of that
which is to come And of them that depend of these we demand of our lord
that he delivered us of when we say / Sed libera nos a malo. Lord deliver us
fro all euylle not only of the lytyl euillis but also of the great Thus Sed
libera nos a malo Conclusion of all these peticions before said is Amen that is
to say as verily as we dema^de in all the petico^ns to foresaid so good lord
be it. This prayer we ought to say often. for god made it and s^ewde it to us
how we should pray And certainli no prayer may compare to this / ne is more
prosytable to us some there be that glorify them self in saying many other
prayers and in redyng many psalm; in the psaulter. And when they say them
with the mouth of times their heart is set on worldy things: of whom our
lord says the people preyse me with t^^ mouth b^t the heart is far fro me:
we blame not ne gaynsaye ayeust such prayers: ^t to say deuocyens. but we
praise much if with the polixite of the prayer be the deuocyen of the heart.

Of the Aue maria / capitulo xlj
AUe maria is the fairest salutacyo^n and that best pleases to the virgyne
marie of any thing that is: and yet it to should plese her better who that will
say in the end ventris tui ihesus She is mother of mercy and of grace Queen of
heaven / lady of angellis our swetenes our hope. by whom after god all the world
is sustained. The just men by her have consolacyon. The sinners pardon: the
seek health. the angellis. the archangellis. the saints gladness. the
deuillis confusion. And the holy tunyte. glory: That the just people have by
her ^osola^yon it apperith by this example. Example. We read in the history of
saint

For he ete none other bread. Julyen was much angry and sent them again / and
after sent to him a trusse of heye saying thou have sent to us mete for bestes
unreasonable wherefore receive a like present like as thou as sent to us saint
Basylle sent him a word again we have sent to the such mete as we ete. and
thou have sent to us mete of a dombe be / Julyen anfuered to him when I
have put in my subiecyon all the royal me of perse / in despite of the I shall
destroy this cite The night after saint basylle was in the church of our lady
and saw a vysyon a great innltitude of angellis and in the mids a lady
which satte upon a trone. and said to the other. Call to me anon mercurye for
to goo slay iulien thappostata which blasphemeth me and my sone. This mercury
was a knight which for susteining of the faith of shu^ cust iulyau had put to
death and was buried in the same church of carnote anon this mercury by the
commandment of the virgin marie arose up and took his arms which were kept
in the church and went in to the bataill where iulien thappostata was and
anon as he saw iulien he smote the horse with his spores and came hardily to him
and smote him thurth the body and departed so that noman wist where he becam
and iulien deyeng filled his hand full of his own blod and cast it in to the
air saying thou galileen have vainquisshed me: he called our lord galileen by
cause he was conceived in galile: thus did iulien thapostata / and all the
people left him. then came they of perce and flewe him fro the heed to the
feet. and of his skin made a stole under the feet of the king of perse aienst
whom he went to make war when seint basylle had seen this vision he went to
the place where seint mercurye was buried and his arms. and opened the
sepulture and fond neither him ne his arms. and he demanded of the kepar of
the church who had taken away his arms. the which said that they had been
there at euensong time before / Saint basille went his way. and on the morn as soon as it was day he came again to the sepulture tofore said. and fond the
body of saint mercury his ariues and his spear which was all blody. and forth
with came anon a man fro the bataill which reco^ptedto him ye manner how iulien
had be slain of a knight which was not known what he was ne where he becam:
Now see thou how the vyrgyne marie delivered saint basile and the cite fro
the hondes of* Julien. Thus the just people have confort by her. And I said
also that the sinners have by her pardon and remyssion of their sins. as it
appears herafter by the life of Theophyle /

Of the life of Theophyle Capitulo xlij
PHylibert bishop of the cite of carnote recounteth that in the year of our
lord v C xxxvij in the wyasme of cecylle in a Cite was a man named theophyle
the which was vycary of the bishop and governed all the bysshope^^ch And he
governed it so well and wisely that when the bishop was deed all the people
chaas him and said that he was worthy to be bishop: but he would not be it. and
ansuerd that his of syce suffysed him / and so there was another made bishop
which deposed Theophyle of his office. whereof he was much angry in such wise
that he went to an evil Jewe for to have counseyll how he might have again his
office. The Jewe made him speak with the devil the which said to him if he
would renye god and his mother and renonce his crystendom. And thereof write to
him a lettre of his hond he should remyse him in his office: Theophile agreed
to all and made to him a lettre and sealid it with his seal and signed it with
his sign manuel. The devil made anon that theophille was on the morn in the
grace of the bishop and was set again in his office / After this Theophyle
advised him better and repented him much of that he had done. And wiste not
where to have recouere for he had renyed god and our lady by his lettre sealyd.
he aduysed him self that our lady was pi^ous and mother of mercy and entered in
to the church founden in the honor of her. and wias there by the space of. xl.
days in prayeng the glorious vrgyne marye that she would receive him to grace.
It happend that on a satreday night that he in wayllyng and weeping fylle aslepe
and the / gloriouse virgyne appierde to him and blamed him strongly of that he
had don and after she said to him that he should nothing doubt but that she
should get grace and pardon for him ot her sone. and anon she took fro the
devil mygntily the lettre that he hat delyurede to him: and she leyde it upon
his breast. to the end that he should know certainly that he was no le^ger
servant ne bounden to the devil of hell when he awoke and fond his lettre
noman ooude express the Joye that he had and on the morn: which was sunday.
he went son as he might to he church to fore the bishop and recou^tede to
fore all men all the feat and how it had happened to him whereof there were many
which had great hope to have merci of their sins by the gloriouse vyrgine
marie. The bishop commanded him to cast the lettre in to thefyre after that
the bishop with all the clergy / brought him to the aultre and there gaaf him
the body of our lord / and in receynynge him his face bycam as clear as the
son. and after he abode i^ the church loving god and the vyrgyne marye by
whom he had be delyuerd unto the / third day that he deyde holyly and well.
now have thou herd how the sinners hane byhir grace and pardon /

How angellis and saints have by our lady joy: Ca. xliij
WHo that should write all them that by the vyrgyne marye have be guarisshed
and heled of the malady of the soul and of the sekenes of the body him
behooves over great a book. whereof we leave by cause of shortenes. Also we have
said that the angels* archangels. and saints have by her Joye and gladness: For
by her many sinners ben called to penance. and the gospel says that the
angellis have more gretter joy of a synnar that repents him and does
penance than they have of iiij. s^o^e xix. rightful men that never sinned. The
holy saints when they see us come in to heaven have great ^^ye and gladness for
as much as we ben their friends and their brethren. and like as comynly men
rejoice of the well of his friend / The deuylles have by the virgyne marye
great confusion wha^ by her the sinners be delivered fro their hondes / like as
thou herdest of theophile. the blyssyd trynyte has glory touching to us. For
ihesu crist has bought us with his precious blood: Now late us so do in this
world that we may come in to her company. who someuer that salew^th often and
deuoutely our blessed lady with the said a^e maria. he shall find confort and
help in her. and she shall defend him fro the deuylles and in the end she shall
reward him without nombre / saint bernard says that he ought tarry for to
serve him whom he calls in his necessitees. and helps him nothing. like as
he would say that none who someuer he be shall require her devoutly. But that
she shall do him comfort and aid: Therefore says the holy scripture: how well
that god hereth not the sinners when they pray to him yet what someuer sinner
thou be leave not to serve her and to love her for if thon persevere and
continue. verily she shall get grace of her sone and pardon of thy synnesBut
beware and keep the well that thon sin not in that ent^nte would preche to them
the word of god. when they were assembled ye said to them ye be not all here.
for the lords chamber lain was not there And the lord comau^ded that anon he
should be ^ette and anon as he was ^omen and saw the relygyous man he began to
torn the eyes in his head as one enraged the relygyous man said to him I
conjure the in the name of god that thou say to us what thou art and what thou
sechest in this castle he ansuered to him / I am said he no man but I am a
devil. that have taken the form of a man and have duelled in this castle with
this knight the space of* xiij. year / and our maistre the great devil of hell
has sent me hither. to thentente that if this knight had forgeten to say on
day to our lady one aue maria: Incontinent I should have put him to death but
the day that he said it. I had no power over him when the knight herd this: he
was abashed. and knelyd down to the ^^et of the relygyous man and required of
him pardon / and fro than forthou he ladde a good life The relygyous man
coma^ded the devil that he should goo in to such a place / where he should never
noye ne grieve him that seemed* the virgyne marie Now have thou herd how this
knight for saying every day one / Aue maria. was delyuerd fro she devil and
brought again in good life. Example. it is read how a knight was much and have
so great hungre / how wenest thou then that the vyrgyne marie which is so
fair and so sweet take in grace and thank the fair salutacyons that thou
presentest to her enery day when thy body is so foul and vile of the ordnre of
lecherye and other sins of which thou art all full. for which cause thy
service plcseth not to her sone ne to her / and yet thou wylt that they receive
them. wasshe thy body by confession and ame^dyng of thy life so much that it be
pure and clean or ellis thou losest thy pain / And when this whas said they
departed. and the said knight lost his hungre and confessid him and amended his
life. and after served our lady by long time holyly to the honor of of her sone
our savior Jhesu criste / which lives and regneth and after deyde and was
saved. Then ought the Just and rightwys men have great hope for to serve our
lady wha^ that sinners ben by her saved.

Of the holy name of Jhesu criste Capitulo xliiij
IT is slonth when one names the name of ihesus in the church and enclyned
not his heed ne his knee for right so folo weth the ordinance of the law
Canon. and saint poul says that the name of Jhesus is above all other names
for the which enery knee of heaven of earth and of hell ought to bow. seint
bernard says that the name of ihesu is mete confortable mete which strengtyth
and makes a person to live hesayth that alleway when he is named / that we
ben conforted / yet says saint bernard* that this name ihesus is called a
fontaine* for of him issued three ryuers on the tree of the cross that is to
wit words of swetnes which signify confession / effusio^ of blod which
signifies affection water for to wasshe* which signyfieth compu^ction. Item
he says that the name of ihesus. is said medycine for no thing restrains so
much the anger of ire the swellyng of pride / ne heleth the wound ne
restranith so much the flux of lechery ne ate^perith the thurst of avarice /
ne takes away all stenche and ordure. as does the name of ihesu Ite^ seint
bernard says that it is called light and says fro whens is comen through all
the world so great light of faith. but of the name of ihesu. This is the name
says he. that saint poul bare tofore the kings / and tofore all people as a
light upon a can styke. Ite^ said sei^t bernard that this is a name of great
savor and of great swetenes and says if thou wylt write I will not read if it
speak not of ihesus* A doctor named richard of seint victor says that ihesus
is a name right delectable much confortyng the sinnar. and it is the name of
holy hope. I prey the says he that thou be to me ihs. for Ihs is as much to
say as savior Saint peter which was pope of rome says that ihus is the name
that gives clerenes and sight to the blind men heeringe to deef men gooyng to
the lame: speech to the dombe the life to the deed and all the power of the
devil it takes away and out of the bodies in which they put them. Item he
counseilleth the and exhorts that thou have this name in honor and reverence
and his blessed passion and to the end that god have the in keeping: that thou
say every morning and every euenyng in making the sign of the cross upon thy
breast* Ihs of nazareth sone of god which suffredest death and passion have
merry of me Or say in latin in this wise. Jhesu nazarene fili dei mise rere
mei. Example It is read of a man that so said and when

Of the yefte of strength against slouthe Ca: xlv
THe fourth yefte of the holy ghoost is the yefte of strength when god gives
it to a man he gives to him a new heart / hardy and noble for to despise all
wordly things and he may promise and give hardynes and for to suffer all the

Of the sin of avarice. Ca. xlvj
IT is avarice for to think over much on the goods of this world and to get
them ylle and again conscience it is usure for to lene for wynnyng as done some
usurers which lene money for cheuesaunce upon horse on whete / on wine or
fruytes of therthe / which they take in pledge or gage with ont to rekene the
said fruits in payement And yet that werse is they will rekene ij or in times
in the year for to have their entrees of their propre dettes. These ben cruel
and vygorous usurers. Other there ben that lene upon a bargayn mad entendyng for
to have some guerdon or reward in money or in cups of gold or of silver or in
robes / or in horse. or in wine / or in fatteswyn. or in prebendes for to give
to their children / or in other things: And all is usure when ouy man takes
by cause of priest or lenyng. All usurers and their heirs ben bounden to make
restitucyon all that they have vsured or attestre they onght to do their
deuoyr and power to restorr / or else to have great sorwe at their heart if
they may not make restitucion / ffor if they deye without doeyng itif it be
known / they seint martin went saying his hours and fond a p^eny the which
he retained and put it to his owen prouffit. when he came toward his death / the
devil came to the feet of his bed. and began to make grere frste and to cry
merueillously seit martin herd him and coniured him to say what he demanded
and sought there Then the devil ansuerd to him and said I tarry for thy soul
for it is mine seint martin demanded of him wherefore The devil said. thou
fondest on a time apeny of which thou neuere made restitucion / but have
retained it / when seint Martin herd this he prayed god to give him term for
to restore the penny and make satysfacyon. god suffered him to live a space of
time and to give the penny for gods sake. Then the devil fled away all
confused and enraged. Now see thou how the soul of seint Martyn was in
ieopardye for apeny Theft is evil avarice: It is theft to take or reteyne
other men's thing with wrong and without the will of him to whom it
bylongeth / And the law says that the sin may not be pardoned / all fulle
of leed boyllyng. to the end that he do penance of the sin that he has
done. and after that the soul return in to the body for to goo in to the
world and for to make r^stytucion to his brother of the penny that he had robbed
fro him. Then tha^gel that held the soul let it fall in to the pytte of
boyllyng leed* and there he felt so gre^e pain and sorrow that none erthely
thing may diuyse: It happend that the soul came again to the body and said to
his religyous brotheren / know ye for certain that I came fro the judgment of
god / the which Judged me in this manerr. And recounted to them all the
truth. and after said. I pray you that ye will deliuere to me apeni for to
restore to this brother of whom I took it fro and as soon as he had made
restytucion the soul departed fro his body and was saved in heaven / Example.
It it is red of

Of Sacrilege Capitulo xlvij
IT is ^^^^lege when the body of our lord is vilaynously treated as the
heretykes done and they that use sorceries and the evil priests for lucre and
wynnyng and in like wise of other sacraments of holy church. Also when one
^^^leth breketh or treats vylaynously the saynttuaries. the cross. the
chalyce. the cresme. the corporas. the vestimentes hallowed / and other holy
things when one leyeth in ^th and maletalent hand on any clerk or any
person of the ^che. Also when one takes any thing and beryth it euylle out of
holy place / be it hallowed or not hallowed. Item if one take away in place not
hallowed / any thing hallowed it is saculege / and in like wise of thing not
hallowed out of hallowed place Of this sin be not quyte they that dyspende
evil the goods and the patrymonye of Jhesu christ / Also they that reteyne by
their evil avarice that which they ought to gyne to the pour or to put in
good usage

Of Symonye. Ca xlviij
This sin is called Symonie by canse of an enchau^cour which was named
Simon. which on a time would have bonght of saint peter the appostle the grace
to do miracles. to the end that he might the better selle them. And therefore
ben they called Simonyaks. they that selle or bye the goods spirituell: and it
is emonge all the dedely sins the grettest. For spyritualte is gretter than
temporalite. They be symonyakes that for yeftes or for promesses or for prayers
or for carnalite do so much that they or other ben. helpers to dygnytees of
holy church. as ben bisshops. abbotes / or other dignitees which should be
made by election. Example It is read of an abbot Thabbot coniured him to tell
him what he was and he said that it was the soul of thyn uncle that late was
abbot and was in the fou^tayne merueilleusly tormented and brent / by cause of
the carnal affeccion and love that he had to the. by cause he had prayed the
monks that they should make the abbot after him. Thabbot ansuerd to him how may
it be. that ye suffer such brennyng in this fontaine which is so attemperat
The wys prayed him to take a canstyk of coper which stood behynd the altar.
and cast it in to the fontayne / And he should see how hoot it was. be went
and brought it and threw it in: and anon hit was molten as wax that is in the
fire / or butter in boyllyng water / wha^ thabbot had seen this anon he
renounced his abbotshyp unto the abbaye / and never after was the wys herd Item
it is symonye when for yeftes or for prayers or for service ben given the
prebendes / the cures and the other benefyces of holy church Example. It is
read in the wyllys to the bishop. Item they that by bargaryn made enter in to
relygion. and they that receive them in such manner. and demand of them diner
or souper / or any other thing as well for the church as for other thing ben
excomynied by the law canon. for much people ben tarried and withdrawn for to
enter in to religyon for such things as ben demanded of them. and they say
that it is the custom. And to thend that this defense be the better holden and
kept. Pope Urban the vj made a decre the wyche is called. Ne in vinea domini.
and pope gregore that came after coufermed the same like as to fore they be
acursed and that non may be assoilled. but if it be of our holy fader the pope
of rome There ben many other diverse manners of sins and of diverse caases of
Symonye / which apperteynen more to the clerks. Than to the lay people. And
this book is made more for the lay men than for the clerks. which have
books. But nevertheless it is need to the lay men. that they keep them fro
this sin in three caases / The first caas is when they will aid their friends
and kynnysmen to rise to dygnytees of holy church. The second caas is when
they give any prebendes or chapelles. The third caas when they put their
children in to doystres or relygyon In these three caases if they give or
receive any prouffyt or evil requests or se^y^es. They may soon fall in to
the sin of symonye which is an over great sin. For as says the law
wreton / There be three maneres of yeftes that make symonye. That is to wit
yeftes of the hondes: That is when is given any thing portable. yefte of the
mouth. As prayers of flaterye or evil reporte^ Yefte of semyce dyshonneste to.
that is when it is made by dishoneste or pryncypally for things perpetuel /

Of dymes. or tithes / Capitulo xliiij
IT is syn^^ of avarice of evil payeng of dy^^es or of t^^hes / Thou may
say. Sire I know not whereof I ought to pay dymes ne how I should pay them I
say unto the that thou owe tithes of thy corn of thy wine of thy medewes
fruittes / best. eggs / marchaundise. and of all the gain and wynnyng that
thou make in what manner it be / And the maistres sayen in the d^^it or law
that the usurers and y^ common wyme^ owen to tithe of their wynni^g but theyo
wen to give it for goods sake to the pour for the thyrche ought not to
receive it / to the end that the church approve not their sins ne their
error. Item they say yet that if alaye man have tithes which ben his propre
that he ought to pay tithe to the church / Then thou owe to pay the
tenthe part. for our lord says by the prophet thou shall pay the tenthe
part of as much as thou have. And the pharisee which was of the maystres of
the law came in to the temple as says the gospel and said that he paid the
tenthe of all that he had and note well that the holy scripture says not the
xij ne the ^x ne the xxx: but the droyt or law says the tenthe and the d^^it
canon says we coma^de and ordeyne straightly that the dysmes and oblaco^n^ of
usurers and of common wymen be paid to the church entyerly. to the end that it
be in the disposion of the bysshoppes and that they that reteyne them be
separate fro the comynalte of the church and excominyed and accursed These be
the goods that he has of god that well and truli yayeth his tithes: first he
has habondau^ce of fruit Item he has health of body Item he has remission of
his sins Item he has the royame of heaven. it is sin to reteyne the right
of holy church and to reteyne the duet^es of the^ that been deed it is avarice
/ for it is gretter sin than to rob them that been lyuyug / Example: it is
read of a knight why his owen proffyt. xxx. days after he appiered to his
neuewe and said to him know thou that my sins be not pardoned by cause thou
have not accomplysshyd my will I have been in purgatone: and now goo in to heaven
but know thou that thou shall dear abye that thou have done to me / the same
day the neuewe herd a great cry as it had be of lions and of wild bestes and
was taken and born away in the eyer and after he was sought xl days long /
but he was not found. It happed xiiij days after the battle of Charlemayn one
passed thurth the royame of uauare. And he was founden fallen fro a montayn and
was merueilloussely all to frusshyd Item it is avarice for to pay evil the
droytes and rightes that belongyng to the lords and. to hyde and keep secret
that which is due to them: the heirs which reteyne well wetyng things evil
gooten. they reteyne it to their dampnacyon. Example. We read that a fader for
the day journey. for to evil use thing lent or hired or put in keeping or for
to use it in other manner than it has be lent fore / or for to pay over late
his owen werkmen or meyne. Item for make ouermoche sow we for losses of goods
of this world For god which well might have kept if he had would has suffered
it. for to see if he will have pacyence. Theremye the prophet says that fro
the l^^^e unto the grettest all study in avarice. Salamon speaks and says, I
see says he a great evil in the world for many there be that have no children
ne brethren / ne sustrs but be allone and yet nevertheless they cesse not night
ne day to hepe and get tresour and hauoyr. and may have no rest. And it
happeth often that they that do nothing / but r^ste them and be ydell ben their
heirs and despende largely that of which that they dare not do / For the
scripture says that al so well lacks to the rich auaricious that which he
has. as that which he has not. Example. It is read in the miracles of our
lady that at rome was an archedeken which was named Peter the which was a
good man. but he was over much holdyng after the death of his brother. the
which was named Stephen. and by reuelacyon dyuine he saw him in purgatory
grievously tormented: by cause he had been so strait in keeping. Then he said to
his brother which had hope to be dely nered out of purgatory if the pope and
the cardinallis songen each amasse for him he should be delyuerd And so did
they and was delyuerd Some there be that of such goods as they have they dare
not use ne despende them for the well of their soul ne of their body but tarry
and abide that their children do for them after their death verily it is great
folly to the. if thou wene that thyn heirs do well for the of thy good when
thou wylt do no thing thy self / considere if thou have any wit that the
children Fair sone said he. I have had g^ete pain to bring the to honor I
pray the that thou say to me what good wylt thou do for me when I am deed.
The sone ansuerd to him I promise to you fader that I shall do make a chapelle
in which every day shall be songen a mass for your soul. Fair sone said the
fader that is a fair promise / After he said to the second Fair sone I have
done so much for the that thou art ^che and well married. what shall thou do for
me after my death / I promese to you fader said he I shall do found ij chapeles
in which shall be souge every day mass for you / and in middle of the ij
chapellis I shall make an alms house in which the pour shall be herberowed
which shall pray for you. Fair sone said the fader this is a right noble
promise / After this he said to his youngest sone / Fair sone and what shall
thou do for me wha^ I shall be deed. I promese you fader said he I shall do as
much for you as my two brethern. how may thou do so fair sone said the
fader thou art not married ne art not so rich as they ben. my fader said he. I
shall do it well. For of all that they have promised they shall do nothing And
therefore I say to you I shall do allone as much as they both to gydre: Fader
said he trust not on us but whylles that ye be master and owner. do for your
self. There be many that tarry till they be at the end of their death for to do
well for their souls. And then give by cause they may bear nothing with them
/ And note well that it shall be more auaillable in thy life to give a lytylle
penny for the love of god. than thou gave a montayne of gold at thy death. for
when the friends see that they make gr^te testamentes and great ordynaunces
they say to them leave all this and think to be hole. ye shall not deye yet if
it plaise god. And if ye dye / we shall do more for you than ye say. And when
they shall be deed. they shall do right lytyl or naught. Thus ben the fools
deceived And therefore says saint austyn Abide not unto the death for to amend
thy self ne for to do well for thy richesses which thou have so much loved
shall assaille ^he on an other part thou shall be so troubled that lytil or
naught shall thou remember on thy soul. Some there ben that have corn / wine
malt fruits or thing that may be eten. or sum old clothes or vesture
which had lever keep them till they ^^te or goo to naught. than give them to
the pour neyhbours or kynnesmen / or to the pour for gods sake. I will not
say / but they may be well kept by reason but it is avarice and great sin to
keep any thing till it be ^oten of lost so that none may be h^lpen thereby.

Of forboden plays as of dyse and quardes / Capitulo ^
IT is avarice to play evil games as be at dyse or ^ardes or at tables or
other forboden games what someuer they be where is played for money or other
temporel gain. such evil games as of dyse and of tables ben forboden by the
law and droites for many sins yssuen out of them. First to win and
despoille his felawe / It is over great usure to lene xj for xij not for viij
days ne a month but at one cast. or one day / Item to multiply lesynges and
evil words and that werse is to say great blasphemies to god and to his
blessed mother and to the saints of heaven whereof god is wroth so that oftimes
he has taken sudden vengeance. For sometime he has turned the vysage / the
former part to be behynd. Example: by force or that he made him to play
against his will for in these caases he onght to restore it him that has lost
it. Example / It

Of the yefte of counseil against avarice Ca lj
Like as the holy ghoost gives force and vygour ^en^reprise great things /
right so gives he counseyl by which one comes to a good bygynnyng and to a
good end of that he enterpriseth / It is a great grace when the holy ghoost
gives the yefte which is called the yefte of counseyl / by which a man may
have delyberacion in that which he enterpryseth to thend that he be not over
hasty in his entreprises. For like as ypo^^as says of hassty counseyl men
repent soon after and therefore salamon says do no thing wihout counseyl that
is to say counseyl delibered / and forseen* and thou shall not repentethe /
The most proufytable counseyl that a man may have is that which god gives in
the gospel when he says if thou will be parfyght goo and selle all that thon
have and give it to the pour and come follow me / and thou shall have great
tresour in henen. this is the right path of pouerte. for the holy ghoost ledeth
him that is enlumyned with the yefte of counseyl / nevertheless as touching the
richesses of the world a man may well be saved that uses them well as Abraham.
Jacob / Job. and David. and many other that were much rich in their life for
they were not subgette to their rychesses. but to god and the holy ghoost
ledeth the creature and conduyteth by the yefte of cou^seyl to his sauaco^n /
but yet he ledeth the more righter way and more holy by the path of very
pouerte by which the world is despised and all couetise for the love of god.
this yefte plucheth out of the heart the sin of ana^^ce and of couetise. and
planteth there a much fair tree that is the virtue of mercy which is to have
sorrow pity and compassyon of others harm and suffraunce

Of the sin of glotonnye Capitulo ^ij
IT is sin of glotonnye to ete and drink ouermoche glotonnously. and out of
hour and time ordained without hu^gre or without thurst* or for to ete somtym
for to drink the better and more than need requires ouermoch to sleep and
ouermoche to rest or over tendrely to nourissh his body and to seche other
eases without necessite. to ete and drink above other. and make him self
drunk. It is great sin dedely wha^ one is there in accustomed* for if there
had never ben dronkenesse. there had never ben seruytude ne bondage for by
dronkenesse came first seruytude. and bondage Example. We read in holy scripture
the first make him self drunk for him seemed therein should be comysed the le^t
^inne. and nygh to his hermytage was a myllar whom he loved much and was his
godsyb. the which desired the her myte to come dyne with him at his house. the
hermit thought that there he would acquyte him to the devil and went and dyned
with his godsyb they ete and drank so much that thermite and his godsyb were
all drunk: the hermit would have returned to his hermitage. but he went all
relyng hither and thither The millar said to his wife that she should led him
home wha^ they were well on the way. the wife satte down on the ground and
slepte: the hermyte which was drunk leyed him down and had company with her
flesshly The millar saw that fro his mylle. and took a glayue and went toward
thermite for to have slain him the hermit took the glayue fro him and slew
him: Now see thou how by dronknesse comen many euyllys he supposed to have
done but one sin but he comysed three great sins. he was drunk / he knew
carnally his godsyb and he slew her husb^nd which also was his godsyb It is
glotonnye to dyspende euylly or more than apparteineth to his astate They that
dyspende the goods that they have at vttrannce for to have renomme that they
ben large and valya^t people* they shall be grievously pugnysshid and shall render
strayt acomptes to god which had lent them for to put to good usage and

Of fastinges and of them that owen to fast Ca liij
It is glotonnye and dedely sin to break the fastes of lent of the quatre
temps or ymbryng days of vigyles and of other fastings commanded if they be*
not over old ne under the age of x^ year. or laborers that other wise may not
live wymen great with child and nounces in cas that the chydre^ should fare the
werse. pour beggars which otherwise may not live: seek men they that labor
by the way by necessyte they that make great works and may not rest ne leave.
All these persons ben excused of fasting: but it should be good for them /
that they should pray or do some good instead of fasti^g and if any which is
not excused of fasting felt him in place that he were seek by the leave of his
curate or of his good confessor which has power to change his fast in to
other good work may charge him therwyth instead of fasting but if he may fast
/ he may not change it. and he ought to set such a perso^e to fasti^g days
comau^ded for to obey to holy church: for obedience is more worth than any
other thing for four great p^^nffites comen thereof as is said in the preface
of the mass in lent. Qui corporali ieiunio. for it makes to do penance for
sins that have be done: and it kepyth one the better fro sin / and the
heart is the more devout to our lord and god gives grace and virtue and great
reward and guerdon in the end / saint ihe^^me says that when thou fastest.
thou ought to give for the love of god that which thou sholdest ete. if
thou fastest not to the end that of thy fasting. thy soul should be fed / and
not for to spare. Example we them that sayen evil / to promise thing reasonable
and not to hold it to swear by the son by the moon by the fire by water by
the bread by the wine. or by semblable oaths and to say idle words which may
not prouffyte if thou wylt speak and say well think twyes on the thing
tofore thou say or speak it.

Of the yefte of sapieuce and sobrenes against gloto^nie ca. liiij
The most hye of the vij yeftes of the holy ghoost and the most souerayn is the
yefte / of sapyence and of sobrenes It is a grace that the holy ghoost gives
to an heart conte^ platyf. by cause it is so nyghe the love of god. that he
d^syreth not ne secheth any other thing but to see / have. and delight himself
and duelle with him This is the so^me of perfecto^n and the end of
contemplacyon and makes one to say. know. and feel him as by taste. There be
many christian both derkes and la ye men which ly^l know god by faith ne by
scupture by cause they have the taste disordynate by sin they may not well
sauoure him / nemore than a seek man fyndeth sanour in good mete the yefte of
sapyence purges and cleanses parfy^htly all fylthe and ordure of sin: and
lyfteth up the spyryte of a manin such wise that he joins him to god by the
glue of love so that he is all with god there he is pleasyd. There he is
nourrisshed in grace and in d^lyte. This is the life perdurable for the which
to have ought one to live sobrely in this world. As says saint austyn Sobwnes
is the virtue which is the yefte of sapyence in the heart against the oultrage
of glotonnye / for Salamon says that sapyence enseyneth sobrenes / Sobrenes is
a tree much precious for it keeps the health of the soul and of the body
like as says the holy scripture Of glotonnye and oultrage of dunkyng and etyng
over much. comen many maladyes / And oftymes death takes them when they have
the morsel in their mouth. like as on takes the fysshe with the hoke. This
yefte is behind in thordre of the vij yeftes of the holy ghoost / but it is
set here by ca^se it is (...) t^ ^lot^nnye which is the v^ of the (...)
(...) ^^ly sg^^es after the (...) of holy church

Of the sin of letherie Capitulo. lv
OF the sin of letherye we have said. to fore in the fysthe and tenthe
comandementis of the. law but* furthermore know ye that payntyng or poppyng
of vysages* wanton and enyl beholding and rega^des kyssynges enbracynges and
dishonest touchynges ben cause of this sin. and therefore who so will keep him
well / let him flee and ^s^he we these things / and all the companyes by
which he might fall in this sgnne for the wise man says that thing which
the eyes see not. the heart co^eyteth not. and if any thought or temptaco^ne
com on the anon put thy self in prayer and do^ abstinence for god says in the
gospel that these ben the things by which this sin is most vaynquysshed.
and if temptacyon come to the in thy bed. arise out thereof and put the in
prayer. and incontinent the fend shall leave to tempte the they that putchasse
by consentyng or helpen to the sin of lecherye sin dedely. these young men
and young wymen that array them fresshely and show them in thendent that they
should be seen and byholden / make of their bodies grynnes and ne^tes of the
devil for to take them / and b^nge them to this sin that so behold them /
in this sin be many branches which may lightly be known. but emonge all
other There is one which is called sin ayenste uature for it is done against
the ordinance of nature in this branche there be many other / the first is when
a man or woman allone of him self by his soul touching of his propre will
doooth it aduysely wakyng he falls in the ordure of this sin whereof simple
priests may not assoylle them / for by cause of the grauyte it is remy^ed to
the bishops or to their lyeutena n^tes and penytenders / All the other
branches ben so abhomynabl^ and so horrible that they ought not be named and
therefore I pass over to write them / stor they that be eutached of them ben
worthy to deye as says / saint poul* and they shall be dombe at day of dome
to fore god like as dombe bestes ben / if they. a merde them not by confession
and by penance such / as perteyneth to the sin / also lytyl children do
their power after their lytyl wit to be that one with that other / and
sometime all openly they ought to be confessed.. how well that the child lose
not the virgymte but if it be of snche age that it know well

Of the yefte of understanding ay^nst lecherye / Ca / lvj
THe yefte of understanding. is non other thing after the doctors but a light
and a dernes of grace which the holy ghoost sends to the heart of the
person by which the under stondyug of a man is left up to know his maker.
and the spirituel things This yefte is called light / For it purges the
understanding of a man of the error of deckenes of ygnorau^ce: and of tatches
of sins. to the end that the sonle enlumined with the light of understanding
may see and know god: and all that / that is of necessite and necessary to his
saluaco^n. this is the blessidnes of which god speaks in the gospel when he
says. They ben well blessed that be clean of heart. for they shall see god in
the vysage. in this world by faith enlumined and enforced by the yefte of
understanding and after the beth they shall see him in heaven all clerly face to
face like as says saint poul / This yefte takes away all ordure fro the
heart. and makes clean perfyghtly fro all tatches of lecherye for who that is
entatched of this sin / he is verily blind and has lost the ^yen of the
heart. reason and understanding: and so he may not understand to know his maker
ne thing touching his salvation / but is like a dombe best which has.
neither wit ne reason in him self whereof dauyd says in the psaulter that a
man to whom god has done so great honor as to have made him. like to his
image and semblaunce which he not made any other best and so forgeteth his
maker and does to him self so great shame that he is bycome semblable to dombe
bestes which have no understanding The sin which most makes a man to
semble a foul best and vile is the sin of lechery then the yefte of
understanding which is contrary specially against this fylthe: plucketh and
puts out of the heart the sin of lechery. and setdeth there a much fair
tree that is the virtue of Chast^te by the which one may come to this
blessydnes / which god promyteth to* them that keep cle^nesse of heart when he
said. blessed be they for they shall see god by cause they have well purged and
enlumyned the eyes of their heart with the yefte of the understanding /

Of the good deeds whyhe be done in dedely sin Cap. lvij
Thou ought to know that prayer ne non other good deed that is done in
dedely sin is nothing worth ne prouffyth to him that do^th it as touching to
have heaven for if he deye in such estate he shall be dampued but nevertheless
for all that In what estate someuera man be he ought not to leave to do well.
thou ought to know that prayers and the other good deeds that been done in
dedely sin auayllen to iij thiges. the first is that bysuche good works god
callyth the more sooner a sinnar to the state of grace. this is a great thing
and a great godenes. The ij is wha^ that the sinner deyeth in such estate / he
shall be dampened. but for the good d^des that he had done in this estate he shall
have the less pain in hell / and therefore says a wise man. if I know
certainly that I should be dampened wherfro god keep us all* yet for all that I
would not leave to do well. but verily I should enforce me to do better and
better. The child is that for such good deeds. the goods temporal / and the
worldly works that been for to do in the would should preue the better / and ben
the more in auayll.

Of the seven sacraments of holy church Capitulo lviij
THe first is of bapteme oftimes by ygnoraunce or neclygence ben the sacraments
of holy church mesprised and evil done therefore we shall say some what for the
simple people Baptesme is the first sacrament and every person in need may
baptize and custene and is of as great auayll. as if the pressed had baptized so
that these words that follow be said / I baptyse the in the name of the fader
and of the sone and of the holy ghoost and the person that shall say these
words must cast the water upon the child and non other and he must say the
words in castyng the water and if in peull of childyng the head of the child
appear and if a person baptyse that it is verily cristened For in the head of
the child ben the v wits of nature and if any other membre appear and not the
head / And it be cristened we hope that our lord acomplisshyth the baptesme and
performs that which humayne person may not do. and if the child be born
and have life the priest ought to baptyse it saying if thou art not baptized I
baptyse the in the name of the fader and of the sone and of the holy ghoost /
Thou ought to know that with wine with veriuse. rose water olyue water. or
with any other lycour it may not be baptized but it byhoueth that it be natural
water

Of confirmacion Capitulo llx
THe second ^acratnent is confirmacion the which some men call cresmyng.
Every person that has understanding ought to receive this sacrament For by
this sacrament beu put in the soul of him that receives it worthyly the seven
yeftes of the holy ghoost by which he is armed against thassaultes of the fend
of hell all they that have not received this sacrament and have understanding
ben in peull to be oueroo men of the fend of hell by dedely sin. This
sacrament ought we not receive but one time if any know not if he had received
it or not. he might well receyne it For the thing is not understand to be do
again. when that he knows not whether it be done or not

Of the sacrament of the altar Capitulo. lx
THe third sacrament is the sacrament of the altar / our lord which for the
love of us is bioomen man and suffered death and passion right anguysshous in the
trre of the cross for us. yet for more ardently to show this brennyng love
and that we should have him in perpetuell mind and specially his blessed
passion. he has establysshed a superlatyf sacrament of love that is of his
precious body and of his precious blood. In which him self is all contained
and to which he gives him self to us unto the end of the world like as he
pr^mysed to his apostles. god said that he shall he well blessed that shall write
all the alyan^ees amorouses in his heart. And often record and remember them in
this blessed sacrament* which is the life of angels and of seintes / by whom
we have spyrituelly and be by the grace in ihesu crist and he in us and whom if
we receive him wordily we shall have the life perdurable in heaven with him. the
which conteyneth in him many merueilles and many signs of love and
stablyssheth for many causes / which were over long to recounte. But for to
speak short in him taken part all they that been in heaven as touching to glory
and honor. all they of the world that been in grace as to glory. to their
salvation and all they of purgatory to the alegeme^t of pain and for these
causes and many other makes the pressed iij parts of the body of our lord in
the sacrament of the altar. the first is for them of heaven / the ij for them
of the world / and the in for them of purgatory: the maystres of dyuinite
sayen that for every mass that is worthly said or songen. many souls ben
deliuerd ont of the pains of purgatory and goon strait to heaven. Every pressed
ought to dispose him self to sing every day for the merits of the mass be
great and great prouffit comes thereof. and that they see that they take it not
in vayn for if they so do they shall be grievously punysshyd and tormented /
they that take it in vain be like to the servant that took the besau^t of his
lord and put it not forth to prouffyt. wherefore he was cast out in to derke
tenebres like as the gospel says. our lord comaundeth the prestes that they
should make this blesshyd sacrament and commanded them in saying hoc facyte in
meam co^ memeracionem. That is to say that as often as ye make this holy
sacrament that ye do it in the remembrance of me. About all prestes shall he
be well happy and blessed. that shall mow say like as saint and rewe said.
Every day said he I offer and sacrifyce to god the fader. the lamb without
spotte. that is the precious body of ihesu crist / Example. It is read of
diverse

Of the goods that one has for to / here / gladely mass. and to see the
body of our lord lx
Saint austyn says in the book of the / cite of god / that the day that thou
have seen the body of our lord / thou shall have that shall be nedeful to thy
living thy vain words and thy vayn oaths shall be pardonned to the the light
of thyn eyes shall be kept thou shall not deye of sodeyn death and if thou deye
that day it shall be acompted to the for thy howsell and as long as thou art at
the mass thou shall not wexe old / and in going to church and in coming
thens every paas that thou make shall be acompted / and of god rewarded. and
the holy scripture says that alms emptyth not the purse ne heering the
mass lasseth not the iourne Example. it is read that many pilgrims went began
to lawhe and anoue saint Gregore wythdre we his hond and leyed the body of our
lord upon the altar and after demanded of her wherefore she lawhed She ansuerd
to him and said by cause that I have made this propre bread with min owen
houdes. and thou say that it is the propre body of our lord ihesu criste:
Anon saint gregore for the evil error of this woman kneled down and made his
prayer. And after aroos and fond the body of our lord Jhesu criste turned in
to the four me of a finger of flesh / and when this woman saw this miracle:
she and all the people byleued steadfastly that it was the very body of our
lord. and saint Gregore made his prayer again. And the flesh came again in to
form of bread and after houselled the woman. But I merueylle me much of a
great abusion which is done in the church. for when the pressed goth to the
altar for to say the mass. a man ought to be the better confessyd and
repentaunt. and in the grettest reverence that he may. and ought to have great
dread that he ne do ne have do thing that may desplayse god. wherefore he
ought to be much contrite and devout as he that gooth in the presence of god
and of his angellis / For as soon as the priest has said the words of the
holy sacrament god is there present with great multitude of angellis. how well
that we see them not. for they be saints and espirituel. and we ben mortal and
sinners therefore we may not see them. and much people full of vices and of
sins set not thereby. but go nyghe and about the altar. and stond so nyghe
the altar that they trouble oftimes the priest for the dissolucions that they
do in spekyng in lawhing and many of her manners and not only the lay men and
wymen / but also the clerks by whom the other ought to be governed and taken
ensample of. for they ought to be the mirror of the comyu people and
nevertheless they that have the governance of the church ought to reprehe^de
and chastise them for default of science or for negligence or flaterie that
they ne do such things as to approach so nighe thaulter the men and
servants that been about a king how well that he be a synnar and mortal as we
be / shall not suffer any person tapproche nyghe to the king without his
congie or license / Example / We read in holy scripture that Moses the
prophet ^awe / but there is entyerly the propre body of our lord ihesu cast
contained in the holy sacrement of thauter as it is tofore said ^emembre the of
the things to fore said when thou shall be in the church And keep the far
fro thauter fro the gospel says that the publycan which was in the temple
far fro the saintu arye was more enhaunced and herd of god by his humylyte.
than was the pha^see which was more nyghe by his auauntyng and by his pride

Of the dygnyte of prestes / Capitulo lxij
THe prestes ben the mynystres of ihesu criste and ben faders ghostly of all
christian people. They be the light of the world the which for thoffice that is
comysed to them and for the holiness that they ought to have in them ben called
the angellis of our lord. to the voys of whom the heuenes opene / And Jhesu
triste descends bytweue their hondes with great company of Angellis which
enuyronne all the parts of thaulter. And as touching to absoyllyng or to give
absolucyon they do that the angels may not do / They ought to keep and
hold them / holyly and chastely and to be garnysshed of all goods and all
virtues. For the scripture says that if they so do god promyseth to them
double honor The priest that lyneth in dedely sin specialy in sin of
lechery. keep him well that he be not his own judgment when he receyneth the
body of our lord as says saint poul. he is culpable of the body of our lord
ihesu christ that is to say. as if he had slain him / Saint Jherome called him
judas the traitre which betrayed our lord in kyssyng him And saint Ambrose
says who that sets nygh to the sone of the vyrgyne marye the ydole of venym
and saying the words of the holy sacrement he spytteth in the mouth of the
sauy^^^ of all world. Saint Austyn says that the sins of an^uyl pressed
empessheth not the sacrament. but he dampneth him right parfondly and
resembles and is like the torche of wax which does good and gives light to
other and he w^steth him self and know ye that the prayers and orysons in the
mass auaylle and be much worth. But god enhaunceth and receives much sooner
and better the prayers of a good priest than he does of an evil priest.
Example. It is read of a simple lyte of pylgryms or of hoostes as of great
lords. o^ for seek men he may say two messes And late the pressed be ware that
he say not the second mass for no money / for the law says that it should
be symonye if he so did. And when he shall say two masses on a day at the
first mass he shall take no wyn after vsyng in the end of the mass. For if he
so did he should not be fasting at the second mass. and therefore late him take
good head.

Of the science and good example that the prestes ought to show Capitulo. lxiij
THey that have taken holy ordres or benefices ought to have science
suffycyent and right competente for to enseygne and i^troduce the people: for
that is the thing that our lord most command th unto them For at the day of
dome they shall yield strayt Acou^tes of all the souls that been comytted to
them unto our lord. how they have enseygned taught and introduced them All
they of holy church ought to do pain for to live chastely. for they be
bounden thereto. and if they so do / And done good works* all other may the
better take example of them. Example. It is read of a thief that was in a
wood / which he should anon^ have it. and conmanded the monk that when the
thief had drunk and eten at his playsir / that to fore him: he should ete no
thing but bread and water when the thief had seen this many times. he had
supposed that this monk had to^mysed much evil by cause he did great
penance and demanded of him on a time saying. Friar what have thou do. that
every day do this great penance and demanded of him saying have thou slain
any man The monk ausuerde to him. A sire what say ye I never augred man ne
slew none I have been in this house sith my chyldehode After the thief said to
him have thou do any fornycacioun or aduoultre The young monk blessed him and
said to him. O sire when is that ye say god save and keep me / For I never
touched woman by sin. The thief said then w^h^rfor do thou then so
great penance / by cause said the monk that I may get the love of god and I
fast wake pray and do other good to the^de that I may be in the grace of
god and be saved* when the thief herd this he was much contrite / and said in
him self o good god that / I am much unhappy. for I have done so many
dysnatural euyllis so many homycides* and theftes and enforced so many wymen
and did never well not so much as for to fast one day. and this monk which
is innocent does so much penance / he anon did do call thabbot and fylle
down to his feet. and prayed him that he would receive him to be one of his
monks. Thabbot received him and after he did much penance in such wise
that he passed all them of thabbaye. Now see thou how the example of this
young monk converted the thief Certainly the that prestres given evil ensample
to other they shall be g^euously pugnysshed and tormented for if they live in
dedely sin they ben horyble and stynkyng to fore god / and his saints and
dampne them self vylaynsly saint ambrose says that the ^^baie^g and barkyng of
dogs the mowyng of oxen the grontyug of swyne and the cryeng of asses /
pleseth god better. than the song of such priests that be so much lecherous
/ And saint gregore says that for their sins. god is often wroth toward the
world. Eyample. The holy scripture says in the second

Of the neclygences of the mass and of the remedies I pass over for it
apperteyneth to prestes and not to lay men. C. lxiiij


Of houslyng and comynyeng often Capitulo. lxv
When a person which has wit discrecion and ag^ suffisaunt he ought to be
houseled: And specially he ought to be confessed at Estre. or he synneth dedely
and is not worthy to enter in to the church* and when he is deed he ought to
be cast out in to the feldes as a domb best but if it so be that he absteyne
him fro houselyng by the lyce^ce of his confessor for raysonable cause: but
not fro confessyo^. The man ought to be houseled at age of xiiij year / and
the woman at age of xij year / Saint Austyn counseilleth and preyseth the
deuoutes persons to be houseled every sunday. and the holy canon says that at
the lest in the solemn festes / and for to this ought the prestes to warn
and admoneste th^yr parysshens so to be houseled and to make them ready by
confession to fore the said festes. For no man can say ne express the grace.
the virtue / the guerdon / and ^^ward that one shall have to confess him and be
comyned worthily / The wymen great with child they that goo in just werre or
in other perillys of death they that goon on pylgrimage. all these oughten to
be confessyd and houseled. and they ought not to be prayed ne required so to
do. as sum do. for it is no good sign / We may have no better physycyen
than the body of our lord ihesu crist. They that shall be married oughten to be
confessed. if the seek man cast upward and wmyteth at the mouth he ought not
to be houseled. and if after his houselyng have any wmyte and any thing appear
of the sacrament / the priest ought to take it and lay it in the sacrarie with
other relyques and the remenaunt in the pyscyne.

Of the goods that a person receives when he is worthyly houseled. Capitulo
lxvj
THey that be comyned and receive our lord worthyly have thereby many goods
first they have remembrance of god and have his love / Item they have
magnifycence of heart for many times they that have but lytyl contricyon they
ben the more contrite. Item they ben incorporate in ihesir crist for god says
to saint austyn thou shall not change me in to the: but thou shall be changed
in to me. Jte^ they have the spyrituel refrction and encreacyng of devotion.
Item they ben there by the less enclyned to the sin of lechery. for like as
water quenchyth the fire / so does the body of our lord received worthyly
quench the concupyscence of the flessh. Jte^ he receives strength of god /
for it is a loof that fortyfyeth the person. Saint bernard says learn ye
christian men how ye ought to love ihesu crist which has given to us his flessh
and blod to ete and drink his soul also for our redempcyon. the water out of
his side for to wasshe us f^^ sin. Jte^ therein is great faith. for in this
sacrament our faith is enhaunced above nature and above the understanding right
exellently Jte^ we be fed in this sacrament with the mete of all the
angellis. Jte^ we have by this sacrament the wyalme of heaven / Item we have
thereby spyrytuel delectacyon. and have light of understanding. Saint bernard
says that this holy sacrament is medycyne to syke men. the ionrney to pylgrims
it conforteth the febles it delyteth them that be strong. it guar^s sheth and
heleth the langour and sekenes. and co^serueth and keeps the health / by this
sacrament he is the more debonaire to correction. the more pacyent to labor.
more dysposed to love god and his neighbor / more wise against cautelles / more
ready to o^^ye and more devout to yield thankynges to god

Of the evil that one has to receive god vnworthyli. c / lxvij
IN like wise as many good things come to them that receive worthyly the body
of our lord. right so^ come many euyllys to them that receive him unworthily /
first he that receives him unworthily is more ready to sin / he apparrylleth
his dampnacyon. he sklaundreth his neighbor. his courage is blind. he is the
more subget to temptacio^ he mocketh god he abredged his temporal life / and
despoilleth him fro the goods of grace. The fourth sacrament is the sacrament
of penance. of which we shall speak in the end of this ^^ke

Of the last unction Capituls lxviij
The fifthe sacrament is the last vnctio^ which some me^ call the last olye^g.
This sacrament auailleth much to forgi^i^ sins / and often it aledgeth the
maladye for it was establysshed for the health of the soul. and for the health
of the body / This sacrament may be received diverse times. when the s^ke man
^eleth him self in peril of death. and he ought to (...) demanded in his good
point if he will receive it. and if it happed that he refused it and says it is
no need: he is in peul of dampnacyon / if he deye without receyuyng it / For
none ought to refuse it. which is in peril of death

Of Ordres Capitulo / lxix
THe vj sacrament is of the ordres. and we shall first speak of the clerks. of
the other ordres we shall pass over except a lytyl that we shall say for the
simple clerks / the holy canon says that the clerks ought to bear crown
suffysaunte. The crown which has no bygynnyng ne end signyfieth that the
clerks oughten to sechen god with all their heart / for they ben of his party
and of his strength. and therefore say they when they be blessed and made
benet and take their first crown Dn^s pars hereditatis and ^e. The clerks
oughten to were simple robes and mayntine them symply. and to flee all the
varietees of the world and plays and of the dyse. and also the tauernes but if
it be by necessyte or by the way for the tavern is the fontayne of all
euylles There is learned ordure glotonnye. lechery. swering / forsweung /
lyeng. myssayeng of other / renyeng of god. mysrekenyng / deceyuyng in evil
plays / and over many sins ben done there / There grown noyses. medlynges.
homycydes / lecheries. there learn they to stele and take other^ thing. The
tavern is a pytte of thieves and fortress of the devil for they war against
god and his saints and they that maynteyne them ben parteners of all the
euyllys that been there done. and certainly if one said as much evil or shame to
hy^ fader or mother to his servant or child / as is done in the ta^erne to the
fader of heaven to our lady and to other saints they should be much angry / and
should find other remedy than they too The clerks oughten to keep these vj
things at table (...) han they ete. There first thing is thas they onght to
say no harm ne evil of other and specially of them that be not present /
The second thing is that they ought not to skorn ne mock them that be present
The third thing is that they ought not to speak of the vanytees of the world.
The iiij is that they ought to do read to fore them the holy scripture and well
to herkene it to the end that the soul be as well f^dde as the body. The v is
that they ete sobrely. the vj is that at bygynnyng and the end they ought all
way say graces and give tha^kynges to god the clerk^s ought not to hold wymen
in their houses but if they be their wynes or right nygh of their lignage. For
though there be no sin. yet there is suspecion of the people and they be no
more holy than / david. ne more wise tha^ salamo^ ne more strong tha^ sampson
the which all were deceived. and late not them excuse them for to say they be
old and without suspecion. For when the fire is lyghted. it spares nothing but
wast^th all that it fyndeth. Example. wassh^g of the dysshes: which they
dronken for the right great thurst that they hadden / Thabbot said to them
that. for the ^rdure of thurst they had dronken that foul water. also by the
ordure of the flessh might they do their wills with that old woman. And by
this mean the woman was put out of thabbaye. The clerks oughten to show
goodness and rypenes of heart by good words and by good works. And oughten to
serve. honor. and pray god: and his mother / and all the saints of heaven.
They oughten to live right chastely or cllis marye them. For clerks shall not
besette by. and shullen be mocked / but if they be better than other. The
clerks that have benefyces how well they have not taken none holy orders / And
also dekens and prestes thawh they have no benefyces they ben bounden to say
their hours canon: calls. and if they do not they sin dedely / And thaugh
so were that they be excomynyed or in dedely sin / yet be they bounden to
say them compedently. atreat nnd devoutly / as they that speken to god. For
saint Jherome says that better is worth to say the vij psalms deuouly and
with good heart. than all the psaulter in ennoye and without devotion / Some
there ben that when they say their hours. they think on vanytees and of their
works or lawhe and mock other. and talk and entrelarde. their hours with
such vanytees. And entende not to that thing that they say. Example. It is
read that saint seue^ne they say their hours they haste them in such wise.
that for their hasty saying they make many defaultes. and therein they be much
neclygent Of whom the prophet says that he is wicked that does the work of
god negligently. example. It is read in the lives of fadres that an heremyte
on a time recountred. and met the devil which bare a great sack / and he
dema^nded of the devil what was in the sack The devil said to him / These b^n
the words and sillables and lettres forgoten and evil said in the service of
god and therefore ye that say the hours see well to that ye have no part in
the deuylles sack before said

Of the sacrament of marriage Capitulo lxx
THe vij sacrament is the sacrament of marriage God establysshed this sacrament
in paradis terreure to fore all the other sacramentis / and to fore that man
ever sinned / Marriage signefieth the love of ihesu crist and of his holy
church. and god has so much honored it. that he would be borne under the
shadow of marriage and he was at weddyng with archydyclyn. were as he
changed water in to win / And he wyll^ that the husbond love and keep his wife
/ And the wife her husbond with all her power. as her propre body. For they ben
but one flessh. and they ought to have but one will. and therefore god made not
the woman of the head of Adam to the end she should not be his maystresse. Also
he made her not of the feet of Adam. by cause he should not have her in
subjection and in despyte. but he made her of the side of Adam to the end that
he should keep her as his felawe. They ought to love each other: and forbere in
all good and keep their faith each to other. and they ought not to believe
lightly evil reports each of other ne also words The woman ought to obey to
her husbond in all that is reason: And the husbond ought to hold his wife
honestely after his estate without pride / if god send to them children they
to enseyne and teache them th^yr crea^nce and believe / and well to chastyse them
fro angring god and dysplesig him as for sweryng and renyeng god and for to
curse and fro all other euyllis also to keep them deligently and so to bring
them vertuousli in the young woman. which tormented her much strongly but by
the prayers of an holy man that was there / he was put out fro her and after
she was heled. for the reverence of marriage which god has so much honored.
they oughtwel to keep them fro vsyng it dishonestly ayenste thordynau^ce of
nature. for therein they shall sin dedely. A man may slay him self with his
own swerd or knyf. The husbond or the wife that brekyth the marriage for what
cause someuer it be. synneth so grievously that in the old law they were put
to death / And he or she that keeps well his marriage may make dysseueryng or
departing* against that party that so breketh but it shall be coma^ded that fro
than forthon they live chastely and he or she that after shall sin with other
shall be constrained to take again his or her company. if the wife of her propre
will or by judgment of holy church be departed fro her husbond by cause she
has broken her marriage / if she assembled not again with her husbond she may
not demand her do wayre. he or she that sees his felawe repentau^t of his
sin if he take her* or she him in his or in her company he or she does
great alms / and god shall acompte it to him in great penance of his sins
for of a sinner repentaunt ought one to have mercy and pity

What marriages be of no value Capitulo lxxj
When marriages shall be made it ought to be known if it be the will of that one
as well as of that other. and that there be none empescheme^t of lignage ne
gossybrede. ne kynred ne that any trouthplyght has be made. ne flesshly
company / or if there has made any solemn awwe of cotynence / as in the
hand of the bishop. of abbot or abbess. or of his curate upon the altar to
fore good wytnessys or if he has received holy order as subdeken. deken.
priest / * Or professyon in order or if he has had flesshly company with any
woman of her lignage whom he w^ld marye. For in all these cases the marriage
is of n^^ valewe / And they that thus shall be assembled if they know the
lettyng they sin dedely. and their children shall be ba^^ardis / and they may
not have company carnal to gydre with out dedely sin and they that know
the lettyng and say not. synnen dedely. And ben parteners of the ^^yl that may
come thereof. In all these caases none may do grace ne dispense / but the pope
only. For sentence given of another. ne letter auaillen nothing. And for this
peril the priest ought to cry and ask the banes solempnly / and to receive
all opposaunts. And such as know only lettyng openly or secretly. and if non
say the contrary ne oppose. if the priest thike that there be any Impedyme^t /
he ought to inquire delygently. and if there any he ought to sygnyfye it to
their ordynarye Juge: There be many maryages that ^e^^ the^ evil by cause they
be not made a^ they ought to be made. The sum taken a wife for her beaulte.
The other for accomplysshe their carnalyte or flesshly lust. other for their
rychesses. And other for their lygnage: Example we ^^de but for to accomplisshe
their flesshly delight / as dombe bestes which have none wndersto^dyng. But
when ye shall be espo^sed ye shall hold you three days and three nyghtes fro
having to do carnally that one with that other / and ye shall be in prayers and
in o^^yso^s with our lord and the fourth night ye shall assemble to gyder not
for flesshly delectacion but in the dread of god and in hope to have lygnage.
many have so done and have absteined them fro their wives iij the first days
and nyghtes which after have lived to gyder in good love and in great
progenye. Between them that crystene children at the font and ben godfaders
and godmoders is no gossybrede by the law ne is no impediment of marriage and
hold for certain that the law says that if thou and thy gossyb he or she
have had children to fore ye were gossybs they may all take that one that
other by marriage. but the child for whom ye be godfader non of others children
may take by marriage /

Of the state of wedowhed Capitulo lxxij
Saint Poul preyseth much the state of wedowhed why the says to the wedowes.
that it is good that they keep them in such estate. or ellis that they marye
them. For it is better to marye than to brenne / he or she brenneth that
consents to sin. For to keep the state of wedowhed ought to be had example
of the turtle / For as sayen the maystres Naturiens in the book of nature of
bestis. after that the turtle has lost his make he shall never after accompanye
him or* her to another but is all way solytarye and flees the company of
other Three things apperteynen right well to them that been in the state of
wedowhed The first is for to enclose her self pryu^ly in her hows And not to
follow suspecyous n^ evil company. And hereof gives us example Judith which
was a wedowe and a much fair woman. and the holy scripture says that she
held her enclosed in her chamber with her maidens: wherefore saint poul
repreueth much strongly the yo^g wymen wedowes that been idle. and ready to goo
and to come and ben ouermoche spekyng and iangeleresses: and he says that they
should be in their howses and entende to do good works / Some there be when
their husbondes ben deed which were black gowns. but there is nothing there.
but the color of sorrow and of morning. For they be made as well and all so
gente and queyntly as thaugh they were of skarlet. The second is that they
should entende to pray and to serve god and to be gladly in the church in
devotion and in teeres like as the gospel says that a woman a wedowe named
Anne did which departed not out of the temple. but served god night and day
in prayers and in wayllynges. The third thing is sharpness of life For as
says saint poul / the woman wedowe that lives in delyces is deed by sin And
saint bernard says that chastyte perissheth often in delyces. Also it
apperteyneth that the yo^g wymen ben humble and nothing proud after the example
of Judith. which left her fair robes and her richesses and her parements when
her husbond was deed. and took thabyte of wedowhed simple and humble / which
is a more sign of weeping than of Joye or of vain glory. and by cause that
she loved chastyte* and would keep it all her life. she wered the heir. And
fasted every day sauf the festes / * And yet she was fair. wise and young. but
of bounte of heart and also love of chasstyte caused her to do it and therefore
who that will keep chastity late her live in such estate as did this valiant
lady judith

Of continence Capitulo lxxiij
HOw well that marriage be a sacrament. and that god has made it. and much
honored it: And much pleasyth him if it be well kept. Nevertheless the state of
contyne^ce of them that will live chastely. And keep them fro maryeng for the
love of god is more playsant to god. and is more honorable and more
proffytable / Item yt is A* victore that* one makes of his flesh / by cause
he has over come yt / For which victory god shall crown him much hyely in
heaven / Ite^ it is a manner of martyrdom especyally in his yongthe / Item they
that live chastely ben proprely the monastery of the holy ghoost / For these
causes / and for the better to please god counceylleth Saint poul to young people
and to them that beu to marye / that they keep them in such estate / or ellis
that they marie them for peril to fall in the. sin* of lecherye / But he
says that much happy shall they be* if they may hold them in the state of
contynence /

OF / the state of virgynyte Capitulo lxxijij
UIrgynyte. is so right hye estate and so. worthy / that it can not be
onermoche preysed / For it is the life of Angellis celestyall and it is read of
many diverse saints which have refused great dignytes and have suffered great
and hard torme^te^ and martyrdoms for theeyr virgynyte to keep / O the right
hye and noble tresour that he or sheleseth that plainly would have done the
sin of lecherye / but if he do so no more / and repents him* of his eull
will with good heart And confessyth him thereof / his / or her virgynyte
retourneth to him or to her again But and if he or she accomplyssh the sin of
the flesh / he or she shall never be virgyne. if one enforce a virgyne against
her will the merit of virgynyte lasseth not* But it encreaceth* whereof is
wreton in the life of saint lucye* the which said to the evil tirannt that
would have enforced and rauysshed her if thou make me to be enforced and
defouled against my will The crown of my virgynite shall be doubled wherefore thou
ought to be well aduysed and resyste it strough /

Of them that be in religyon Capitulo lxxv
Relygyon is called deserte / for like as the deserte is a place sharp /
allone. and far fro people. in like wise ought to be the state of religyon
sharp. and that by straytnes of lif Item the state of relygyon ought to be
far fro the world. that he that is in such estate feel nothing / but ought
to be deed to the world. and living toward god as says saint poul. For like as
he is that is deeed bodily. that is to wete. the herynge the seeing. the
smellyng. the spekyng / and the tastyng / right so ought to be the relygyous so
deed toward the world that he f^le nothing that appertryneth to sin. to
the end that he may say like as saint poul says of him self The world is
crucyfied in me. and I to the world. A relygyous ought to have nothing in the
world propre to him self. he ought to make his tresour in heaven as our lord
says. if thou wylt be parfight goo and selle all that thou haste. and give to
the pour people / and so shall thou have thy tresour in heaven. An holy saint
says in vytis patrum that pouerte is the way by which heaven is gotten.
Example. We read in the holy scripture that our lord said ^^ate or for to
despende it in evil vsages They will have games and esbatementes of hounds and
of hawks / and give to their hounds that. which they ought to give to the
pour for the love of god. to the end that they pray for the pour sonles
which have left to them the goods. and given to them the rentes. by which
they keep and mayntene great estate* and do lytyl their deuoyr to that they
ought to do they love better two knaves to lead their hounds* than two
chapelains for to do the dyuyne service and office. at lest if they will
not do: late them do it to be done for to dyscharge their souls they be
horsed like unto knights for if thou recou^tre and mete a knight and a
relygyous man. thou shall not conne dyscerne. which is the knight. And which
is the relygyous now in these days: Saint bernard says that on this day the
robe of a monk. and the robe of a kuyght ben all of one cloth. and also is
the goun of a monk as well furred and purlfid better at hond than is the robe
of a knight* how well that the rule says / that a monk should be clad not of
the derrest and best cloth* but of the most vile. And says Gregore says that
the servant of our lord ought not to seche vesture ne clothyng for to playse
the world. but only. to keep him fro the cold. Example habyte shows without
forth that is to say a very religyous and true servant of god of whom thou
breast the leuerey. for by the leuerey ben the meyne of a lord known. if thou
be such as thyn habyt shows. I doubt not / but that thou hold thy self
and reputest the for deed to the world. For thou have left the glory of the
world* And how well that thou have playsyrs. tases and delyces of the world to
thy dampuacyon. Nevertheless thou art not so abandouned to the world in deed /
how well that thou be in thy heart like as thou were of the world / And also
thou lesest god and the world. And shall have in this world and in that other
torment / Proprete in the person of relygyon is a right horrible sin / and
has be many times grievously punysshed in time passed. The holy scripture says
that the Apostles and dyscyples of our lord after his passion lyueden in such
wise that there was not one that said this is mine but they dystribued to euerich
after that he had need. Example. it not to his brethern of the relygyon. The
monks cain in to his chamber. And serched oueral and fonden the three floryns
the which they showed to saint Gregore. which then was much angry / by
cause that he that lived in comynalte with them had made tresour for him self
only and that at his death he had not she wde it to his brethern. Saint Gregory
for to puruere for remedy to the health of this monk* and to the end that he
had contrycyon and repentance of his sins* and for to give ensample to other
he comauuded that none of his brethern. should be at his death. and that he should
not have confort ne consolacyon of them And if he demannded of his brother
seculer which kept him. why his brethern vysyted not him that he should
ansuere him. by cause thou have made tresour. and haste not delivered it to the
covent they have abhomynaco^n of the Saint Gregore did it by cause he should
have contricyon of his sin to fore he d^yde. and saint gregorye said to his
felawes / when he shall be deed burye him not in the cyme ^orye of the brethern.
but make a pytt in th donghyl and cast him there in and cast the three floryns
upon him saye^g thy money be with the in perdycion* and after couere him with
earth. when the other brethern saw this. they doubted much to reteyne any
thing that was contrary to their soul. and all that they had. And also that
which was lawful for them to reteyne they brought all in common / therty days
after that the monk was deed saint Gregorye said to oue of his brethern / It
is a great whil that the soul of our brother has be in purgatory. goo forth
/ and fro hens forth: to therty days say every day a mass for him. And see
well that thou faylle not* And he faylled not* And the therty day after that /
the deed monk appeared to his brother seculer that lived And he demanded him
how it stood with him. The deed monk ansuered to him. I have been oner evil at
case unto this day. But now I am well* For this day I have received the goods
and masses that have be said for me / Saint Bernard says that wh^ a mouke
entendeth to have rychesses of the world. He gives over evil ensample to the
seculers. And says that he takes again that. which he has left. And
resembles the hound that retorneth again to his wmyte. And saint Iherome says
that a monk which has evil entencyon to proprete is not worth an halfpeny.
In law canon is not supposed that an Abbotte may not dispense that his monk
may have ne reteyne propre. For the renoncyacyon of proprete is annexed to the
rule of monks. like as is the dowe of chastyte. In such wise that the pope
may not dyspence with a monk being a monk. But the pope may well make of a
monk no monk. For he may make him a bishop / And by that he shall be no more
subget to the rule of monks / A relygyous ought to be pour in deed and in
will verily / For so he has avowed. Saint Iherome says. that he is not
pour. but is rich ynowh. that lacks no bread / Example. We read in the life
of lightly come in no detke place to sepeke to her. For in all these things
if there be no sin. yet there is suspecyounof them that see it or know it.
and so there is blame / and when thou shall speak to a woman / hold the in
such manner / and also hounestli as thou Would do if he rhusboud were there
present or ellis thy prelate. to the end that if any came upon you. that thou
have no cause to be a shamed / And also saint bernard counseylleth the that
thou have no famylya^yte to any woman what someuer she be. r^lygyouse ne other.
For many times comen thereof great pe^llis and evil temptacyons. And I say to
the if thou have good peace of heart and with god* flee all famylyaryte of
wymmen. And love them all like well. especyally the good and devout. and
occupye the not with them. for like as we have said tofore thou art not more
holy than was Dauyd. more wise than was Solomon. ne more strong than was
sampsom / the which were much deceived by wymen / Item I counseylle the says
saint bernard: that thou ^erke ne ne here gladly a woman speak / For when thou
herest her spe. ke. she enflameth the / It is a much sure thing that thou see
her not For when thou see her she enuenymeth the. but it is much more sure
when thou thouchest her not. For when she thon che. h the. she fowleth the /
Example. it is. read: of an hermyte

Of thobeyssaunce in relygyon. Capitulo lxxvj
THe relygyous people owen to be obedyent to their prelat^ For they have auowed
obeyssaunce unto the death. saint poul says that our lord Ihesu criste was
obeyssau^t unto god his fader unto the death that he suffered on the cross for
us: saint Bernard says that the very obeyssaunt obeysseth anon and abides not
till on the morn. saint Gregore says that thou ou ghtest not to dysobeye thyn
evil prelate when he coma^deth the to do well. ne thou ought not obey thy
good prelate when he comandeth the to do evil. Example. We read of an abbot
saint bernard for to drink clear water when we retche not to drink wine: but
if it be clear. and if it be not pure and fyn and in diverse manners. there shall
be great noise* And many there be that change their cup ij or iij times in a
mele. and say I will have that and I will have this. and this is not good and in
many places at great vestes. they shall say that they ought to have wine spyced
and made with good pouldres. and wherefore is this / but for to drink the more.
and the more delycyously* and when he shall have much dronken and that the wyn
shall mou^te in to his brain. what shall they do. when they be risen fro the
table. they will not read ne study but will sleep or play* as soon as we be
monks says saint bernard we have an evil stomak / or we be seek. and ben so
delycate* that none may serve us to our plesir / and many there be that when
they were in the world they lived much pourely and with great pain: and
lyuede^ sobrely. and held for great largess that* which they hold at great
vilete in their religyon / They be glotons gormantes / and lykorous and none
can serve them at their playsir / and ben more proud in words and deeds. more
worse for to serve than ben they that come fro great houses and many richesses
and what shall I say. of our habyte says saint bernard which was wont* to be
of humylite and now with great pain may be found in our province any cloth
that we will were or bear for if there come a great lord of the world in to our
hows he should be well content to be clothed with such cloth as we have Alas
religyon is much wasted* none will show by works / ne. by enseyguements / and
where as the relygiouses were wont to be saints and holy they be almost all
dissolute / Their is none estate in the world of which but the relygiouses
will entremete / they will be marchanns werof so^me by come meshauns. they will
be gossybbes they will be hunters. they will be fysshers of fysshe and not of the
souls. and more playseth them thesbatement and song of birds of the field
than does the song of the church For many / there be that when they be in the
church. they ben anon hoors ^ eurumed and may not sing and that they say or
do* they do negligently and slowly without affection without devotion and
without renerence / and all way they be idle in the church or a sleep. but to
thiges of the world they be all way ready and wakyng* and they hold them so
disordyueth and foulli in the church that it is a great abusion / Saint
bernart says that when thou shall be in the church* keep and hold the
reuerentli as he that is in the presence of god. if thou hane no devotion yet
do it / for to show example to other I meruaylle says saiut bernart how the
prelates suffer so many desolucions to be done as be done m these days m
religyon / but if it be by cause that one will not repreue a another gladly of
that he is entatched / For they that should be our myrrour and ou^ exemplayre by
therr works ben blind and leden the blind Example It is read of but that it
behooves to do great pain tofore thou shall be in such deuoco^n ne also well
set again in thy conscience. as thou were when thou departedest

To whom one ought to be confessed / Cao. lxxvij
TOfore we speak of confession we shall say to whom one ought to be confessed.
No pressed may assoylle but if he be thy propre pressed. Thy propre priest is
called in six manners first the pastor of the church as the prelate or c^^^te
secondly he that is co^inysed by the prelate or curate. or vycarye / Thirdely
they that have preuylege of the pope. Fourthly they that have license of the
curate* but he ought to amytte non / but discrete psones. honest. and known /
fyfthly in necessyte for in necessyte every pressed may a^soille in peril of death
and the pilgrims be assoylled in pylgrimage of them that confess them. syxthly
for the defaulte of thy pressed when he is an ydeote. or when he shows the
confession or wha^ he prays the wyme^ that they confess them to him of evil
love / In all these cases if thou find a pressed that has auctorite to
assoille / thou may confess the to him so that he be known dyscrete of
order. and of person / if thou be of religion none may assoille the without
lice^^e of him that has the cure or charge of the. but if it be in necessite
that thon may not have thy pastor or his d^byte or if thou were so contumax
and so perverse that thou wylt not confess the to thy pastor or to him whom
he has commysed / Then for peril that thou deye not without confession or
without counseyl some dyscrete and approved confessor or pressed may assoil le
the Item it is of necessite that the good priest hyde the confession by cause
of the sacrament of confession I am also that one confess him the more
hardyly. And know ye that the priest ought not to hyde only the confession.
but also all the things which may be perceived of the synnar or of the
sin* and though the synnar give license to thy confessor to say any sin
of him that he hereth in confession yet the co^fes sour ought not in any wise
to open it. but if he know it other wise than by confession / and yet it is
not right sure or expedient to open then and yt may without great
inconuenyents other wise be eschewed / if thou dema^de if the pressed know any
thing that thou say to him in confession before or after that thou confessest
the. he is not bound to hyde it. but if it playse him. as touching to this.
that he knows it as a man. some say to a priest some thing in secret. And
they say to him I tell it to you in confession. and keep not in thus saying
the manner ne thordy nau^ce of confession. and therefore if he show this / he
shows not the confession. but he does ouermoche evil to show the cou^seyl
of another / if a pressed have herd any thing in confession and it happeth that
he is called to witness tofore a judge personelly that he shall say if he know
any thing of that thing if he knew it otherwise than by confession he may say
it without peril. but if he know it not but by confession he may swear surely
that he knows nothing thereof / for he knows it not as a man. but as a
vycarye of god /

Of the pain of a pressed that shows the confession. Cao. lxxviij
Saint gregore says in the holy canon. late the pressed take good head of what
thing be said to him in confessyo^ that he tell it not to neighbor ne to
other that duelle far ne by sign ne tokene ue shlaundre / ne to any other
person any thing. and if he do. that he be deposed fro his benefyce. and all
the days of his life be he in infamye through the world Item the pope Innocent
says in the new constitucyon / late the pressed keep him well above all things
that of thing said to him in confeyon he say ne tell it not ne by sign ne
other wise and also in no manner he accuse him that is co^fessyd to him And if
he have need of better counseyl than his owen. let him demand without any
namyng the sinner by his name / For who someuer in Jugement of penance shall
she we in any wise the sin that has be said to him in confession. not all
only of thoffyce of presthode we will that he be deposed. but also with that we
will that he be put in sharp prison / For to suffer grievous penannce

Of the sacrament of penance Capitulo. lxxix
As to the sacrament of penance which is the iiij sacrament of holy church.
but it is set here the last for to accord to the other Tofore that the
sinners be reconsyled to god three things be requysyte that is to wete.
confession / contrico^n. and satysfaccion Confession and his virtue shall be
declared here following. Contricyon is to have sorrow at heart and great
repentance of all his sins. and to have steadfast pnrpos fro than forthon to
keep and absteyne him fro all dedely sins / For who that has entencyon to
return to dedely sin. his confession avaylleth him nothing. and if he be
houseled in such estate he synneth dedely. And if he deye in such estate he
shall be dampened perdurably

Of confession and of his virtue. Capitulo: lxxx
Confession is the second part of penance. when one is confessyd and
repentaunt of all his sins / and has sted fast purpos to absteyne him self
fro all dedely sins and for to amend him. Then confession is of so great
virtue. that it is as a second baptesme / and as a fontayne in which ben
wasshen and forgyuen all sins what someuer they be / and this confession as
says saint bernard destwyeth all sins and restablyssheth all virtues. The
augellys reioye them. and it confounds the deuylles. ir reconnceileth the
soul to god. it closes hell and it opens heaven. Well blessed is he that
of ^e is laued and wasshen in this fontayne. For if he keep him in purete and
cleunesse of conscience. and in the love of god. he is the more strong to do
good works / and to keep him fro the send of hell and may the better endure
against the euyllis that may come.

Of the scyences that prestes should have that here confession and how they
should demand the sins Capitulo. lxxxi
THe priest that takes the charge for to confess: ought to have science for
to inge well and to know the sinner and his sin / and for to give penance
after the quantyte of the sin. if the sinner does the penauuce such as the
pressed enjoy neth him: he shall be delyured fro da^pnacyou. but if by favor. or
by doubt. or by deffaulte of science the pressed gives less penance than he
ought. he shall bear the pain. Also the sinner ought to do good dylygence to
have a good physycyen for to hele his soul of the maladye of sin. like as he
should do to se she a good physycyen for to have the health of his body like as
he ought to hane the more penance. The priest ought benygnly to receive the
sinner. and ought to have pity and compassion of him and ought swetely to
demand of him of common sins and also of the obscures. to the end that they
should not have occasyon of sin / that is to wete of the vij dedely sins. of
the v / wits of nafe. of the vij works of merci of the. x coma^deme^ts of
the law. Item if he can the pater noster. the a^e maria and* the credo in
deu^. and if he can it not he ought to say to him that he learn it then he
ought to demand him of what estate he is be he man or woman or in dignyte or
in none / or noble or bourgeis or clerk or religyous And if he be of religyon
he ought to de ma^de of him if he have lyce^ce of his pastor for to confess.
him to another than of his order. For otherwise he ought not to resseyue him
But if it be in caas as we have to fore said in the chapter to whom one ought
to confess him if it be a woman she ought to sytte on the side of him: that is
to wete on his lift fide / and he ought not to behold her ne the vysage and
ought to say to her swetely that she say her sins well and hardyly without
to have dread ne shame for she speaks to god / and not to a man / and he onght
to say to her that god is pyetous and mercyful / For they that shall do most
penance in this world / shall be most loved and exalted of god: As it apperith
in david saint peter. saint poul-and in marie magdalene-and he ought to say
that the shame that one says his sins is great part of his penance And see
well that to a young woman he gyne no penance to god on pilgremage For therein
is much peril / ne also to a woman married. he gyne no penance by which her
husbond may apperceyue that she has trespased a^ enft him: if the sinner be
enharded. and that he will not well confess him / the pressed ouht to say to him
the peryllis that there is theryn and say if thou wylt / thou shall be
saued-And if thou wylt thou shall be dampened: It is better to have a lityl
shame of me / than to have shame and confusion tofore god and all his saints
at the day of Jugement with dampnacyon perpetuell. Example we read of a noble
nonne of good life propred to clerks. and if he have crown / tonsure. or
habyte couenable / And if he keep well chastyte and contynence. If he be
advocate. if he sing mass / if he play at tables or at dyse. For in all
these things synnen often the clerks. if he be relygyous he ought to demand
of him the xij abusyons of the cloister. that is to wete. prelate neglygent.
dyscyple inobedyent yo^g the slowthful. aged obstynat in his sins. a monk
following the court of lords / A monk that is an aduocat. habyte precious.
metes delycyous. Rumor in the cloystre. plees and strives in the chapter /
dyssolucyon in the church And in his heart vnreuerent in things that
apperteynen to the altar. and to hold him self irreverently at the altar.
After he ought to demand him of the three wwes of relygyon and of the rule.
That is to wete obedyence / pouerte / and chastete / for in all these things
the relygyouse persons mystake and trespace often / Item he ought to ask the
princes if they keep well Justyce / and ought to demand the knights of
rauayne / the merchants of falls marchaundises And if they do marchaundise in
the solemn festes and sondayes. or in the chyrches For god cast and three we
out them that did there in marchandyse / and said to them that the house of god
is the house of prayer / and they made of it a cave or a spelunke of thenes by
cause they bonght and sold there in / Item they ought to demand them that have
offyees of lords if they do any extorcion to the pour people. Ite^ to ask
crafty men of deceyte and for swering. Ite^ burgeses and cytezeyns of usure.
the laborers and semauntes of works of theft and specially abbot of an abbay
and when I have need of a somne of money he leneth it to me / And with great
pain can I get any thig and I am no player ne gormaunt. and my wife spares
all that she may / but I can not wete where it becomes. whereof I am much
soroufull. The priest said to him wenest thou to be rich of the goods of the
church wherein thou have no thing And parauenture thabbot which has
delivered them to the has robbed them of his monks / and suffered his houses
to fall down or has evil governed his possessions. Goo and pay him again as
hastily as thou may. and borowe of sum other temporal man / and at end
of the year / come again to me / and tell to me of thyn estate. The merchant
byleued his confessor and paid thabbot. and borrowed of other men of the world
and at end of the year he returned to his confessor. the which demanded
him of his estate and he ansuerd to him Sire said he. by the grace of god and
your good counsel I have more prouffyted in this year / than I did in x year
before. Goo then said the confessor and govern the wisely of thyn owen. and
nothing of the goods of the church / for therein thou shall nothing prouffyte
/ After the confession the confessor ought to give penance. by that which is
contrary to the sins / that is to wit humylite and prayer against pride.
fasting and afflyction against lecherye. Abstynence against glotonnye / alms
against auaryce / and so of all other by the contrary of the sins. and he
ought to warn and admonest the sinner to leave the sin of deed and of will
and that he put him self to do well and to penauuce. For of the good deeds
that he shall do in this world. he shall have merit in that other / but of
the peynes that he shall suffer in that other. he shall have to merit For he
suffers them not by his will: but by constraynt. if the sin be derke he
ought to give derke penance / Saint Cypryan speaks of penance and says O
penance I shall say says he yt I know of the / thou vnbyndest all thiges
bounden. and thou byndest all things vnbounden. thou mode rest all
aduersytees. thou guarysshest all sekenesses. And all things foul. thou
make fair and clear / Them that been desperate by their sin and feeble /
thou reenfordest and make strong. The priest onght to moeue the synnar to
contricyon and say to him that which the doctor says. For he might have
such contrycyon / that not only the culpe or sin shall be forgyuen But all
that he should suffer in purgatory for his sins should be pardonned: and he
should goo strayt to heaven after his death. as it apperith by the good thief that
was crucyfyed with our lord For by cause he had very contrycyon at his death.
god said to him / Thou shall be this day with me in paradys. At the end of the
absolucyon the confessor ought to say to the penytent coufessed that which
our lord said to them that he assoylled. goo forth and sin no more / to the end
that no gretter harm hap to the. The confessor ought to take good head that
for any thing that the synuar says to him in confession he despise ne rebuke
him not. but conforte him the best wise that he may and promise to him pardon
and grace of our lord if he be verily confessyd and repentau^t of his sins
for there be some so rude and so evil traytable to them that confess them that
they put them oftymes in peril of da^pnacyon: Example. It is read in the life
of faders. that a young monk to the world for to be married / for such an old
monk to who me I have said and confessed my temptacyon of the flesh. has
said to me that I am not worthy to have the name of a monk. by cause I may not
resyste unto the temptacyo^s of the flesh The good abbot conforted him
swetely. and said to him. be nothing abashed my fair sone. if thou that art
young be tempted of the flesh / For I that am old am tempted all day. I pray
the return to the monastery till to morn. The good abbot went anon to that
old monk that had so dysconforted the young monk. And when he approached him he
prayed our lord that the temptacyon of the young monk might come upon the old
monk that had so blamed him to the end that he might know by him self in his
old age the pain and sorrow that the young monk suffered in his yongthe. and
when he had made his prayer / he saw the devil castyng thembraceme^tes of the
flesh on the old monk / and fond him in a rage rennyng here and there. and
would return to the world like to the young monk: when thabbot saw him so
demene him self / he knew well that he was totme^ted and said to him: whyther
will thou goo. that art old and wasted. he was all ashamed and saw well that
thabbot knew his temptacyon. and could not ansuere for shame by cause of his
age The Abbot said to him return in to thy tell / and consydere the pain
that the young monk suffers / when thou which art so evil disposed for the
temptacyon thut thou suffrest in thyn old age but the espace of one day only.
And therefore has our lord suffered and preued in the the pain of the young
monk whom thou have not ^^n forted ne have had no compassyon of his yongthe.
but have put him in the way of desperacyon / This example techeth and
enseygneth us that the synnar ought to be traytted swetely / and nothing to be
dysconforted

How one ought to confess him self / ^Ca lxx^ij
IF thou wylt well confess thy self. thou ought first well think in thy*
conscience as he that will yield. and render a rekenyng to god Thou ought to
say all thy sins that thou can remember / that thou have done and would
gladly have done / and all thy thoughts which tornen to sin / And beware
that thou reteygne nothing ne the color ne the savor of thy sins / how well
thou confessest them and repen ty^^* for he that reteyneth the color of his
sins. thaugh he has confessyd them and repented / nevertheless he reteyneth
the evil manners that he had to fore. as in spekyng* in beholding in following
ylle compaynyes / and thoccasions by which one might fall in sin* he
reteyneth the savor of sin that well confessyd him and is repentaunt. but
gladly he hereth to speak the^^f. and often thinks on his sins and has a
delight in his evil thought and playseth him well. how well he will not do them.
Above all thing beware that thou leave not to say to thy wetynge sum dedely
sin of which thou reme^brest for to say to another priest / or for shame.
for thy confession is nothing worth then. and if thou be houseled in such
estate thou synnest dedely. and if thou sholdest so deye thou sholdest be
dampened perpetuelly. for one ought to say all his sins of which he
remembers to one priest* and not to say one part to one and another part to
an other. for such confession is nothing worth But when thou art well
confessyd to thy power* if thou be aduysed after any sin. of which thou were
not remembryd when thou were confessyd to fore. if thou then confess that to
an other it shall auaylle the. And thy confession is not departed / And excuse
not thy self in confessyng the as some do And say not also that thy sin is
gretter than it is / for then ne thou sholdestlye. Many confess them in great
and sayen. I confess me of the sin of pride. of envy of leche^e* and also
in other without to declare their sins. That confession suffyseth not. but it
behooves to thy power thou say and declare well all thy sins pureli in the
manner like as thou have done them and as often as thou have sinned if thou can
remember: It suffiseth not to say I have taken other memys things / but it by
houeth that thou say what and how much / and in what place For it is a greter
sin to take thing sacred than other. and to take out of an holy place than
out of an other* It suffyseth not oneli to say I have sinned in the sin of
lechery / but it must be said thestate of the person. that is to were if it
be a woman married or wedowe or of religyon: thy mother. or thy suster or thy
gossph or goddoughter or simple wymen. or if thou have ^^fouled a virgyne / For
after the estate of the psone the sin is more great or less* if thou have
with a common woman For that is a great sin and great peril* For they spare
neither fader ne so ne Cosyn ne other. and thou must say how often thou have
sinned if thou can remember* and in what place / if it be in church church
yerd or in holy place / For it is gretter sin. in holy place than in other.
And thou ought to say on what day. if it be a f^ste full day or day.
conmanded to fast / For after the day the sin is great or less or if thou
have sinned with any man or dred to god / as subdeken / deken* priest or of
religyon but keep the well that thou name not the person by his name with whom
that* have sinned For that should be great peril and thou ought to say if
thou enforcest they self to sin: or if thou would have sinned* or for to
do thy sin thou have made an other person thy messagyer* or if thou have
sinned with other which had no will to synue with the. For thy sin should
then double. And thou sholdest be holden to admoneste him or her to come to
repentance. Item if by thy sin is comen evil ensample. or if for cause of
thy counseyll consentyng or ay de any other have synued. For eueri time thou
shall be of god grievously pugnysshed. Item thou ought to say if thou have
long abyden in thy sin / and all other things that have ^^nsed the to
sin the more / thou ought to say and declare. to thy power. For like as a
good physycyen may not given a good medecyne. if he know not well the maladye
right so the pressed may not give the good counceyl / if the sinner declare not
well the manner of his sin. if thou declare not well thy sins the pressed ought
to make the to declare them well / and of other sins in which he thinks
that thou myghtest have fallen / or that thou would have done. be ought to
advise and dema^de dyscretly without tofore the. and of sins not co^mysed he
ought to demand the couuertly and fro far and he ought to she we t^^ manner
of thy sins / and to give to the good counceyll and suffy sauut remedy / and
in the end of thy confession / if thou repent the with good h^r^e. and thou
have ^nt^nco^n to absteyne the fro dedely sin. and to amend the. and when he
assoilleth the of thy sins it is right good that he say* goo forth and sin
no more / lest werse hap to the* for so said our lord to him that he
assoilled as the gospel says / when thou wylt com to co^fessyon. thou ought
to thynk on all the places where thou have be sithe thou hadest understanding.
and say in thy self in such a thing. and in such a place such: for this is a
thing by which one shall remember the better the sin c^ time passed / for by
cause that many tarry to confess them / they forgete many of their sins. but
the devil forgeteth them not. Example: we thou shall fide the by wrapped in
many sins of which thou aduysest not thy self. and therefore advise the and
confess the the best wise thou maiste. for when thou art best aduysed I
cou^seill the to be confessyd pure and clean and thou shall find thy self the
better byloued of god / and say in the end of thy confession. that god has
delivered the oftymes fro many great perils by confession and penance / but by
vnkendenes I have again oftimes a^gred him by diverse sins of which I am not
well remembered of which and of all them that I have said and confessid I
repe^te me and purpose and think to absteyne with all my power from now
forthon and amend me. and require absolucion of god. and of

How one ought to make ame^des to other and make satisfaction Capitulo lxxxiij
THe third part of penance is satisfaction which ought to be done by this
manner: if thou have mystaken thy self against any other amend it as soon as thou
may. if thou have deffamed another. repele it and gaynsaye that deffame to
thy power and cry him mercy. if he know it. and make to him amends. if thou
have hurt and don damage to any other without good cause. thou ought to
re^dre to him his scathe and hurt as soon as thou may. for if thou may and
do not. thou art all way in synneand may not be assoilled and if he be deed
yield it to his heirs / or do by the cou^seil of a good confessor and know
vereli if thou may not find him ne his heirs and thou give it for goods
sake or put it in the tronke in the church of thyn own auctorite thou art
not so quyte. For thou ought not to do alms of other men's good but if
it be thing of lytil valewe. if thou see that thou may not restore to them
that thon art holden. or thou have not whereof or thou can not find them thou
ought to have great sorrow in thy heart and good will to restore as soon as
thou may. and if thou see that thou shall never have to restore. then say
some prayers. or do some good and some penau^ces for them that thou art holden as
much as shall suffyse. and so shall thou make restytucyon after thy power. and
if thou find them and if they know that thou art so bounden to them. then
cry them mercy. and pray them for the love of our lord that they will pardone
and forgive the / Item it is satisfaccyon to do and a complysshe that which
the priest enioyneth the in penance the which thing thou ought to do
as soon as thou may to thy power. or ellis thou sholdest sin much
greuoussly. and know thou. that thou may not change it. but if thou may
not do it late it be changed by the pressed that charged and gaaf it to the or
by another that has power. and if thou forgete it thou ought to be
confessyd thereof and take new penance. The priest ought not to give the in
penance. to do some masses ne to offer at pardons if thou may do penance
with thy body For who that has done the sin he ought to bear the penance /
But with that it is good to do alms / and to offer at pardons they that
may. if thou be seek and in peril of death. and thou be very repentaunt / every
priest may assoylle the of all thy sins. what someuer they be. and also of
all sentences of exco^mynycaco^^s. if thou require it for if thou must deye.
and were in the sentence and be knew it and houseled the in that estate. he
should sin over grievously / and therefore he ought first to assoille the. for so
says the law of Canon / But and if thou become hole again. thou ought to
goo to him. that put the excomycacyon on the as hastily as thou may for to
do that reason requires / or ellis thou sholdest fall again in the sentence
as thou were tofore / Item if thou have no pressed for to confess the and thou
be very repentaunt of all thy sins. and would gladly confess the and be
houseled if thou had a pressed / if thon deydest in such estate it suffyseth
to our lord and art out of dampnacyon perdurable

Of the fire of purgatory Capitulo lxxxiiij
Thou ought much to enforce the to do iu this world penance for thy
sin. and to have great repentannce and sorrow at thy heart / and ought to
do good works. and suffer pacyently the euyllys and tubulaco^us of this world
like as to for is said. for that which is not full done in this world. must be
done in the fire of purgatory. the which is so ardaunt and brennyng that all
the pains and torments of this world be but a dew or a bayne to the regard of
that fire. O good lord how hard and without pite ben the friends of them that
be there when they help them not to delyuere them to their power / the which
friends require so pye^ously by the wys of holy chirch and sayen. Miseremini
mei / miseremini mei / that is to say have ye pity of me. have ye pity on me
my friends. for I am in the hand of the rightful Justyce / There be some evil
dysposed / people that say. that masses / oblaco^ns. ne suffrages that been
done for them that be deed: prouffyten nothing to them. and that they of the
church have fou^den this for to have money of the good people / Example. It is
red in the book of friar petre of Clugny that a bishop suspended a pressed of
his office. because he sange all way mass for the deed / It happed on a day
of a great ^este the bishop went to matynes. and passed thurth the
chyrcheyerd / him seemed that all the deed bodies that there we^ buried aroos
out of their sepultures euerich in such estate as they had been in this world.
that is to wete the knights in their estate of arms. they of craft also in
their estate of crafty men. and sayden that one to that other. loo see here
comes the bishop which has taken away our pressed that sange for us and he
will not sing for us. verily if he will not amend him he should deye of an evil
death the bishop had great dread. and assoylled the pressed / and after he him
self sange for the deed. Saint gregore says that we may aid and help them
that been deed in iiij maneres. that is to wete by fastings. by prayers: by
almesses. and above all other things the mass auaylleth them most / in which
is offered and sacrifyed for them the precious body and blod of our lord thesu
criste the which may not well be preysed how much the mass proffyteth to them
that been deed we have said it to for and also in the chapter of relygyous when
we spoke of seint gregore which did do say xxx masses for the monk that
was deed. Example it is read that in a bataille was a man lord which was deed
by cause that his sone faught for the well of the church / The lord abode in
that country by* the space of xl days. his fader appeared to his sone in great
clerenes. and thanked him of that he had done / for by him he was delyuerd out
of the pains of purgatory Now see tho^ how y^ masses the good deeds. and
the indulgences prouffyten to them that be living and to them that been deed /
and to them that been in purga torye.

Of the pains of hell Capitulo lxxxv
THe dampened souls that been in hell ben dampened for the sins that they have
done perdurably in the company of the deuylles. which ^eu so horrible to
byholde / that saint austyn says that there is no man in this world. but that
he had lever to brenne all quyk / than to see the devil in his figure. the
deuylles cast down the dampened souls so horribly in to the great and deep
swalowes without mesure all full of water so cold of yse and snow that there is
no thing like to that coldness if a great montayne fylle therein it should
become yse and after also as they that have their hondes froren wha^ they put
them to the fire they do to hem much great pain. Also for to make them to
feel great pain they throw the dampened souls fro the deep abysmes in to a
great sta^gne or ponde deep without mesure all full of fire all brennyng so
hoot that the fire of this world nys but warm to the regard of that fire.
no more than a bayne or a fire paited on a wall is like to the fire of this
world if all the water of the sea fylle therein. it shall not be the less
heete therefore. Example / we read in vitis patrum that seint Machayre fond in a
way the head of a deed man. he coniured by the name of god that it should say
to him of whom it was And it said I am the head of a priest of the paynems. and
would never believe in the faith of ihesu crist. Saint macharye dema^manded of
him where art thou. I am in hell said he. what pain (...) thou / I ansuere
the that the fire upon ^^y head is as much as is fro hens to heaven / and as
much under. and as much on all sides of me. And under me ben the jews why
the never would believe in ^hesu crist / And under the jews ben the evil christian
men which have byleued in the faith of ihesu crist with their mouth / but they
have not done the works and when it said all this it fill all to pouldre /
Item they that be dampened have so great stenche. that no mortal man may suffer
it / they have great dread. horror / and derkenes palpable. they have great
ferpentes which lyuen in fire like as ^ysshes done in the water / dragons
horrible that devour them. thondre and tempests which fall on them. hamers
that all way smite on them as upon an andlvylde without ceassyng or leuyng.
devil his which with glayues and speres perce / he we. and detrenche them.
they have great worms and great ^oodes which on them gnawe and many other
pains endure the which no man mortal may ne can say / and of so much as
they have been great sinners. the more be they payned and tormented. But above
all other they be tormented most by cause they have lost by their deffaulte
the Joye of heaven: And also that they have none hope to have ever any rest of
euyllys that they suffer. Example

And blewe so much in his eerys that the fire sprange out of his mouth / and
his eyes. and out of all his other conduits Loo said they this is for the
songs and instruments that thou have gladly herd. After they put serpents
about his neck and his arms. And said to him loo this is for the embracynges
that thou have made to wymen. And thus the caytyf was tormented after that he
had sinned / in an unhappy hour is he borne that for so lityl a while as he
shall live in this world. shall have so great torments perdurably

How they that be dampened complain them in hell / cao.. lxxxvj
Alas the unhappy dampened for great pain. strain and g^^nte their teeth: and
cast out great wepynges complaints and great by waillynges and sayen like as
the book of sapie^ce gives out. alas what has auaylleth or prouffyted us. our
pride our vain glory. our richesse / our lecherye / our delight our ease. our
desire / and our evil will that we had in the world. Alas all these things be
passed as a shado we and we be here in hell per durably tormented. Our vain
joy and lawhyng is turned in to weeping. our delight and our ease is turned in
to sorrow and tormente / Alas it seems to us that our life of the world has
not dured but a lityl. like as it were the flight of a bird or the castyng of
a stone / Much were we blind and ygnorau^t that for so lytyl living we have
lost the joy of heaven. and gotten the torments of hell / Alas alas the
caytyfs dampened when they shall have been in hell by the space of an hundred
thousaud year. they shall be yet to bygynne again. For all way without end
lyui^g they shat deye. and in deyng they shall live. they shall never mow deye.
And after the day of dome the body shall be tormented with the soul and for one
pain that they suffer now they shall then have an hundred. for so says the
holy scripture

Why god made not man that he might not sin. cao. lxxxvij
Much people demanden wherefore god made not a man that he might not sin / for
if he sinned not / and were a good christian man. by the merit of the passion of
our lord ihesu criste and the holy baptesme he should be sauued / and should not
^^nne in to the pains foresaid. the doctors of holy church and the maistres
of dyuynyte put forth here many reasons The first is for to show the might and
puyssaunce of god which is all only vnmeuable / and all creatures ben
meuable. as it appyereth of thaungellys which god created and made them good
which for their evil and sin bycome deuylles Item for to show and declare
the sapye^ce and wysedom of god / which is such for he can chese the good fro
the evil. the which thing may not be but if he had made the creature that he
might change fro good in to evil Item for to magnyfeste the pity of god by
the which and by his passion he has saved man which was dampened by sin
Item for to show the justice of god by the which he will reward to the good
merit and mede: And to the evil pain for their sher^wdnes and sin. Item by
cause that man should not be of werse condycyon than the other creatures to whom
god has admynystred in such wise that he has suffered them to joy their
propre moeuyng and the will. And ^f man had not free lyterte to do good or
evil. which that playseth him. he should not be so free. as the other
creatures. Item for to have preysyng humayne / for it is a great preysyng to a
man that he may do well. when he has done evil. Item the good be enhaunced by
the evil. and when is seen in a company of people a good man. then is there
done to him gladly great honor and more than to another that is werse than he

Of the day of dome or of Jugement. Cao. lxxxviij*
The last day of judgment shall be in the valey of iosaphat. the which is
bytwen Jherusalem and the mount of olyuete For it is night the place where our
lord ihesu criste did the works of his passion for our redempcyon. There shall
come our lord ihesu crist with all his holy angellys and all the saints for
to Judge all the world. Then all manner of people shall arise again all hool
without lackyng of one here of his head and all living in body and in soul in
such age as our lord was wha^ he was crucyfied. that it to wete in the age of
xxxij year and three months. And youg and old children shall all com to the
dome and judgment / then our lord shall be much angry against the synnars
aforesaid: There shall be the cross on which he was put and crucyfyed / the
crowns of thorns. the pyler. the soorges. the naylles and the spear. which
the angellys shall hold / Then our lord shall show to the sinners his
wounds. the which shall appear in his hondes in his feet / and in his side /
And as saint Johan with the golden mouth says he shall say ye evil cursyd I
was made man for you. And have suffered the pains and tubulacyons that ye here
now see. And many other torments for you. and fynably death. and passion right
doulourous and payneful: And for you had appareylled with me and mine aungellys
and my saynctes Joye and glory without end. if ye would have served me truly
and loved and kept my comandementes but all these things and mine other
benfaittes ye have put in forgetyng and have not set it at your heart / but
all your entencyon and your heart. ye have set on worldly things. and have
accomplysshed your wills and desires. On that other part shall be the devil
which knows all the sins and vain glory: vain words and idle / and
has lost and wasted so much time without good cause where as he might have
done so much good that he should have company with god / the devil shall leye
against him as says saint Austyn wyhout to leave any thing / there shall be
brought forth says saint Jherome the obscure and derke sins. which have not
be shewede by confession ne amended by penance There shall they be opened and
manyfested to fore all. And he that has had sha me toshewe. it to one only
priest in that hour he shall receive shame and confusion to fore god. and all
the court of lxue^. and dampnacion perpetuell. Item the angellis and all the
saints with our lord shall be much angri. and shall strongly accuse them alas
alas the caytif sinners. how marrid / astonyed. angered. and a basshed shall they
be. for flee ne gaynsaye may they not do. then ne ourlord by just sentence
shall do cast them that shall be dampened bounden hondes and feet. in to hell.
and in to the pit of hell and in to the tormentis before said perdurably. and
he shall bring them that be good in body and in soul with him in to heuene.
The holy scripture and the holy canons warnen us strongly to think often in
this Jugement. And for to make us ready without taryeng. For to goo worthyly and
holily with god and his saints

For to convert the sinner to good life Capitulo. lxxxix
When thou art in dedely sin: thou art in all perils that thou have herd.
For by thy sin thou have lost the love of god / which has so much loved
the. and would bycome man and deye for the. Item thou art pryued fro all the
goods of holy church / For the^n thou take nooparte. Item thou were the
sone of god. and thou art now sone and servant to the deuyllys. to whom thou
have yelden thy self by thy sin Ite^ thou that ought to give eusample: and
cause to do well to other / gyuest to them ensample to do evil Item thou have
more great pain and e^nuye for to do thy sin tha^ another has to do well
and tolede good life. And verily of thy sin. that in so lytyl time is passed.
thou have nothyug but the sin. and dyffame of the remenaunt. Item thou that
were a cytezeyn. and he ryter of the cite of heaven. brother and felaw of the
glorious virgyne marye and of all the saints of heaven. thou art priued for
thy sin / and art made a brennyng b^onde in the fire of hell A caytyf sinner
do shame to the devil which thus has taken the / And convert thy self to
our lord without more abydyng: For by long taryeng ben many lost and dampened.
and say not I shall amend me time ynowh as other do / for thou know well.
we have not leyzer tabide till to morn and oftimes as soon deyeth the young as the
old. and we see comunely that there is none so fair a vysa gene face / But that
a lytyl feure or maladye in a short time bungeth it to death. and lytyl think
we on it / Now then think and confess the and do^ penance and led a good
life with all thy power. For if thou so do thou reioysest the angellys. and
recouuerst the love of god and the lif perdntable in the joy of heaven of the
which thou shall here speak here following

Of the joys of heaven Capitulo lxxxx
O glorious wyalme of heaven. where is had all joy. all glory all good. and
all blessydnes. and all thing that heart will desire without any defaulte.
the angellis and the saints in seeing god face to face in his beaulte. in his
mageste and in his glorious company have in him so great delight that they may
not therein be fulfilled. but they have all way Joye wytout end / honor and
glory so great that all the delyces of all the toys of this world ben but
sorrows and anguysshes to the regard of that glory. O soul says saint
austyn thou ought to flee this mortal life. and take that which is life
wytout death which is yongthe without age. light without derkenesse / Joye
without heaviness. pees without end and without disoorde. will without wrong.
royalme without chaungyng in which is the guerdon that they shall have that
have done well and it is so great that it may not be mesured. and so precious
that it may not be esteemed. yet says saint austyn / O life gyuyng life which
all way ought to be in remembrance. in the which is all furete: and
souerayn haboundaunce well assuerd. Joyouse blyssydnes. affluence of richesse /
Influence of delyces. and habondau^ce of all goods. saint thomas of alquyn
says that the joys of heaven be such and so great that all and the maystres
in geometry may not mesure them. All they of ar^memet^ke may not rekene them.
all gramariens all rethoricye^s / and the may stres of all scyences may not by
words say ne declare them / many wondres and meruaylles may be said but who
that would say what there is. it should conteyne over great scripture. and
therefore we leave and pass over to speak thereof by cause of shortness. for saint
poul says that eye never saw. near never herd mouth can not express. ne
heart think the great joy. that god has appareylled to them that love him /
late us auaunce us then says saint austyn for to go^ in to this great glory
with our parents and friends. the holy patriarchs and prophets / thappostls
and martires / the confessors and vyrgynes the married young and continent.
which now ben sure of their glory. but yet be they dilygent to serve our lord
/

Of good admonycyon and warnyng. Capitulo / lxxxx
The glory tofore said is apparailled of god to them that love him and keep
his comau^deme^ts / and to them that of that they have and done / preyse not
them self ne be not proud there of and after their faculte departen gladly to
the pour and nedy. and set not their heart pryncypally but in our lord. and
to them that the euyllys the pains. and the trybulacions that come to them or
is done to them. suffren pacye^tly for the love of god and for to have this
great eglorie / Our lord admonesteth us that we be allway ready. and keep us fro
sin. and that we put not our hertes pryucypally in this caytyf world. which
is nothing but a lytyl passing. full of weeping: of sorrows and of anguysshes /
which we shalleue / and take uone head of the hour with out to bear any thing
with us / sauf the good deeds and the evil that we have done. And our body
caytyf shall be couuerd with the earth as a foul stynkyng caroyne. and worms
shall ete and wrote therein. Our lord promyseth not to us to morn. to the^d yt
our herts and our principal entenco^n be in him and in his love For we ought to
love god / and to remember often a deuoutely how the sweet ihe sus vouchedsauf
to humble him self for us. and descend fro his glory of heaven in to the womb
of the glorious vyrgyne marie. and become a man and our brother / and suffered
death and passion for us and how he has made us of naught. and semblable to him
which might have made us if it had playsed him like unto toodes and other
worms if we know well all the grate that he has do to us / and thank and
give him lawde therefore that is the thing above all other / by which we may
most soon and most lightly have his love and his grace much playsed it to god
wha^ one knowlechith the graces and the benefaittes that he has done and when
he is remercyed. and thanked therefore / Example: we read that the great chau^tre
of paris. fond on a time in a field a

Thexcasacyon of him that made this book. Cao. / lxxxxij
This book was first made in the year of our lord. M. ccc. lxxxviij. by the
reuered fader in god. my lord Guy de roy Achybysshop of sens: But the year
after following. a religyo^ brother of thordre of clugny beheld and read over
this book right diligently and fond that it was right short after the matere
and he put thereto many examples and diverse auctorites. chapytres of doctors
and maystres auctorised how be it that it is much shortly said and made. for
the world is at this time so lytyl devout that it demau^deth but shortenes and
briefte / and in specyal in the service of our lord and in thyuges that
apperteynen sinner. nevertheless by the grace of y^ holy ghost he prophtcied the
death of our lord. and said to the Jews. ye know no thing I say to you / that
it behooves that one man deye for all the people to the end that all the folk
perisshe not. Thus have I said nothing of my self / but all that I have said.
I have said it by the grace of the holy ghost

The complaint of him that made this book / Ca* lxxxxiij
ALas all sorowyng I am as a mylnare which gr^ndeth the whete of which other
men live. and when he has grou^den he abides all wide. ne there abides
nothing with him ne retryneth for him self of his mele. but delivered it to the
people. Certainly thus is it of me. Alas pour sinner I have delyuerd and
grounden the corn and the spyrytuell vytayll. of which ye reders and herars
live and shall be fed spyrytuelly and much shall prouffyte to you. if it be
not your own defaulte. Alas I reteyne lytyl to my prouffyt / for dertes I
confess humbly tofore god and his glorious mother and all the seyntes / that I
am not such as I admonoste you that ye should be The words be there well / but
theffecte is not such ne like the words god knows that I am woo therefore
and it dysplayseth me. And I desire and coueyte much that I may make my works
acorde to my words. And to that end I abide in the world and labor How be
it that I do less than I ought to do for to come to perfection and to good
works like as my heart desires And of that other part. how well that I be
good. Yet have I desire that all other be good / And I would well that I were
the werst of all them that been in the world. but I would not enpayre ne be
werse than I am. for I have no need to lose any thing. but I would that all
other were better than I am. And that is that me trcomforteth / For to love and
desire the good of other. is the beginning to come co perfection / Ye that
read or here this book. take it not in despyte by cause it has be made
compyled and wreton of a synful man and that right lytil knows. for an evil
man fylleth well his wine. how well he makes it not. and a foul masson crooked
and lame makes well a fair house / how well that he makes not the stones ne the
other matere. certainly in like wise is it of me: I have do no thing / but
have drawn the words of this book of holy scriptures. and out of books of
traytyes of doctors and of maistres auctorised of whom the scriptures ben
holden. and have joined that one with that other there is herein nothing of mine
but the pain and labor that I have had iu tornyng over of many books. But I
complain nothing the labor that I have had for the love of god. and of them
that it shall prouffyte / and if there be any that can find any thing for to
amend. I submytte me and abandone this book to the correccion and amendment
of all them that may and can amend it. Our Lord ihesu custe says in the
gospel of the pharisces of the prestes / and maistres of the law in
admonestyng and prechyng to other / and says do ye that they say to you. bnt
do not that which they do. if a priest had a good and a fair house / and he
despesshed and destroyed it without cause. or if he had a fair vygne full of
fruit and would take it up by the rote without to gadre the fruit or grapes.
certainly few people full of wisdom would take example of him. and would not so
do by theyres / and therefore I say to you if we of the church say to you well
do ye there after / and if ye see us do evil. do ye it not. for at the day of
Jugement no excusacyons shall be received. But enery man shall bear his owen
deed / for he that shall have done well shall have Joye glory and life
perdurable with our lord and his sweet mother the gloryouse vyrgyne marye and
all the saints. and he that shall have done evil and repents him not shall
have pain. torment / and dampnacyon with them that be dampened in hell. and in
the end I pray you that ye will all pray god for me. and that as long as god
will give you space and power. that ye entende to good works and to do
penance. For ye know not how long the time shall endure. and be that will not
when he may. he shall not when he would. And god by his grace grant for to
gouuerne us in such wise and live in this short life that we may come to his
bliss for to live and regne there without end in secula seculorum Amen

Thus ends the doctrinal of sapyence the which is right vtile and
prouffytable to all christian men / which is translated out of Frenshe in to
english by wyllyam Caxton at westme stter fynysshed the. vij. day of may the
year of our lord / M / cccc lxxx ix

Caxton me fieri fecit

Caxton's device


