A SERMON Preached before the Kings Majesty at White- Hall upon the ninth of
February. 1605.

By the Reverend Father in God, Anthony Rudd, Doctor in Divinity, and Lord
Bishop of Saint David's.

LONDON. Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Clement Knight. 1606.

TO THE READER.
Having gotten the Coppie of this Sermon here following and read it over once
or twice, I thought it not unmeet to adventure to publish it for the common
good of others, which shall vouchsafe to pervse it. Febr. 26. 1605.

Thine in the Lord. T. S:

PSALM. 3.8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and thy blessing is upon thy
people.


THis Psalm was David's meditation, when he was forced to fly before his
unnatural Son Absalom, who took up arms to deprive him of the kingdom,
and mightily for a time prevailed against him.

Herein first he falls into an admiration, of the great number of his
enemies conspiringe his destruction, but falsely perswadinge themselves that
God had forsaken him: Verse. 1.2. Secondly, he expresses what confidence he put
in God, and what assurance he had by him against all the assaults and attempts
of his adversaries. verse. 3.4.5.6. Thirdly, he makes petition for help,
grounding his hope upon Gods former protection: Verse. 7, Fourthly, he
concludes the Psalm with this Epiphonema: Salvation belongs unto the Lord,
and thy blessing is upon thy people, Verse 8: In which words he ascribes
unto the Lord the power of saving them which be in peril, and that goodness
whereby he provides for the safety of his people, and heapeth upon them
innumerable benefits and blessings:

Now imagine with me, that David sitting aloft in his Chair of estate looks
down to his subjects saying, Salvation belongs unto the Lord: And then
casting up his eyes to Heaven, by an Apostrophe to God says thus. And thy
blessing is upon thy people. When Jonas had cried out of the belly of Hell,
and the Lord had heard his voice, Ionae, 2.2.6.9.
and brought his life from the pit, then he pronounced definitiuely that
Salvation is of the Lord. And when Solomon had considered advisedly of martial
affairs from the beginning to the ending thereof, Prou. 21.31.
he resolutely concluded, that the horse is prepared against the day of
battle, but Salvation is of the Lord.

By Salvation here, is understood temporal preservation from worldly troubles
and perils: of the which I expound that in the 36 Psalm. Psa, 36 6.
Thou Lord do save man and beast. And thereof Saint Paul means, when he
says to Timothy, that the living God, 1 Timothy, 4.10.
is the Savior of all men, specially of those that believe.

Seeing then that Salvation is of the Lord, vain is the hope of them, that
without, or against God, put their trust in any worldly means. When Pharaoh
pursued the Jsraelites, he reposed his undoubted hope of victory in his
Chariots, Horses, and great Host of valiant armed men: but when the Lord came
forth as a man of war against him, then he and all his were cast into the
Sea, the deepthes covered them, Exodus 14. and 15.3.4.5.
and they sanke to the bottom as a stone. Who will set up his rest upon huge
bigness and strength of body, after that the Anakims were destroyed under the
conduct of Joshua, Josh. 11.21.22. 1. Sam. 17.50.51 and. 2. Sam, ^1.15.40. To
the end.
and Goliath with the other sons of Haraphah fell by the hands David, and his
worthies? Leagues with foreign Princes are but a broken staff of reed
without the Lord, for that we read of the Edomites in Obadiah, Obad. verse 7.
that the men of their confederacy drove them to the borders. As for riches
and treasures, Proverbs. 11.4
Solomon has given this verdit of them, Proverb, 23.5.
that they avail not in the day of wrath: but even when men should stand in
greatest need of them, then they take them to their wings as an Eagle and
fly unto the Heavens. Food and victuals are necessary for the sustentation of
man's life: Ezech 4.16. Amos. 4 6.
but God in his anger can easily break the staff of bread, and give cleanness
of teeth in all our Cities. If fortifications would have served the turn, then
might the Cananites have been safe in their Cities, Deuteronomy 9.1.
which were great and walled up to Heaven. What can Counsel, policy and
wordly wisdom, effect of themselves, Job. 12 20.
seeing that Job has observed that God takes (at his pleasure) speech from
the Counselors, and judgment from the ancient. And this is one of Salomons
Maximaes, Prou. 21.30.
that there is no wisdom, neither understanding, nor Counsel against the
Lord. In the time of sickness, without the Lord nothing avails the
Physician, as in the cause of Asa; 2. Chron. 16.^^ 2. king. 1.1.2.
nor yet the God of Ekron, as in the case of Azariah. And that we may know that
noe mortal man, nor all the sons of men put together can save us without the
Lord, therefore we are advised by the Prophet Jsay to cease from the man
whose breath is in his Nostrelles: Isay. 2.22.
for wherein is he to be esteemed? Ionae. 2.8.
Jonas has uttered all this in few words, saying: They that wait upon
lyinge vanities (that is, which depend upon any thing save God alone)
forsake their own mercy) 1. they refuse their own felicity, and that
goodness which they should otherwise receive of GOD. Wherefore let every one
of us, Psalm. 73.2^.
take first into his heart, and then into his mouth the words of the Psalmist
saying to Almighty GOD. Whom have I in heaven but thee? And I have desired
none in earth with thee.

Thus hitherto it appears that Salvation belongs to the Lord only. And by
that which next ensues it shall be manifest that Gods help alone is
sufficient for us. For when the Lord in Jsayes times perceived all things to be
out of order, both in the Church and the Commonwealth, namely that judgment
was turned backward, Isay. 59.14 15.^6.
and justice stood far of, that truth was fallen in the street, and equity
could not enter, and that he which refrained from evil, made himself a
pray, and therewithal that noe man offered himself to rectify those abuses,
then Gods own arm did save it, and his righteousness it self did sustain it.
Isay. 63, 1.3 4 5
And when as the day of vengeance against the Edomites came into the heart of
the Lord, and the day of his redeemed was come, then he trod the wine press
alone, his own arm helped him, and his wrath it self sustained him. And when
as Isay said, Isay. 26.1.
Salvation shall God set up for walls and bulwarks: his meaning was to
signify that Gods protection and defense should be sufficient for us: Psalm.
3.6, 3.
whereupon it is that David in this present Psalm will not be afraid of ten
thousand of the people, that should beset him round about, because God is his
buckler and the lifter up of his head. And as it is testified in the 23.
Psalm, Psalm. 23 4.1.
though he should walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet would he
fear no evil, because the Lord is his shepherd, whose rod and staff do
comfort him. Also, by Salomons determination, Proverb. 18.^0
the name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous runs unto it, and is
exalted. Jerusalem (as it is in Zachary) Zech. 2.4.5.
may be inhabited without walls, if the Lord be unto her a wall of fire round
about her, and the glory in the mids of her. And if the Lord be with Judah,
in the siege against Jerusalem, then shall Jerusalem be a cup of poison to all
the people round about, Zech. 12.2, 3.
yea it shall be an heavy stone for all people. All that lift it up shall be
torn, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it. And
when as Saneherib invaded the land of Jury, with a most populous and puissant
army to make an absolute conquest of it, the substance, 2 Chronicles, 32.7 8.
of Hezekiah his military oration was this. Be strong and courageous: fear
not, neither be afraid, for the king of Ashur, neither for all the multitude
that is with him, for there be more with us, then is with him. With him is an
arm of flesh (that is the power of man,) but with us is the Lord our God for
to help us, and to fight our battles.

Howbeit, though Salvation be of the Lord, yet the ordinary means of
preservation appointed by God are not to be neglected: 2. Sam. 1.18.
Wherefore David was no sooner entered into his kingdom, but he gave
commandment that the children of Judah should be taught to shoot, least they
should have been ouermatched by their enemies the Philistines in that art of
warfare.

2. Sam. 15.31.
And when Absalom rebelled against him, he did not only pray earnestly, that
God would turn the Counsel of Ahitophel into foolishnes: but also he sent his
friend Hushai the Archite, into the army of Absalom, to be his discouerer from
thence of all principal and dangerous plots and designs, verse, 34.35, 36.37.
and that he might skilfully bring the Counsel of Ahitophel to naught, the
which he deemed more perilous unto him then all Absaloms forces. 2. king.
9.16 28 and 10.11.14
King Solomon also that he might not want the sinews of war, nor the
ornaments of peace used traffike with his Navy, by the way of the red Sea, to
fetch gold from Ophir in abundance, verse. 27.
whereby he was enabled to give silver in Jerusalem as stones. 1. king. 10.16 17
And his armory glistered with 200. targets, and 300. shieldes of beaten gold.
Also he prepared 1400. Chariots. 12000. 1. king. 10.26. and 2 chronicles. 9.25
horsemen, and 40000. horses for service, which were bestowed in the Chariot
cities, and with himself at Jerusalem. And I cannot but wonder at the
exceeding great warlike preparation, 2. Chron. 17.13, to the end.
which Iehosaphat made against all dangers the 2. of the Chronicles and the 17.
chapter. Such discovery of the Counsels and plots of foreign enemies, 2. king
6, 8. to the 14.
as Elisha made by divine inspiration unto Jehoram, must now be supplied by
intelligencers abroad. How could David have avoided the fury of Saul, if he
had not received from Jonathan, and Michol, i. Sam. 19.1, 2. and 20.
information of his cruel purposes, and escaped by flight? And indeed this
was the oversight of Gedalah the governor, and it cost him his life in the
end, Ier. 40 4.14 15, 16. and 41.12,
for that he would not believe the report of Johanan who told him that Jshmael
meant to murder him by the instigatio^ of Baalis the king of the Ammonites.
Let us enter into consideration how expedient it is and necessary to have, and
to cherish in a kingdom and commonwealth not only valourous men, but also
wise me^, Just men, such as be fervent in prayer and intercession for the
public good, and those that be forward to execute laws against malefactors.
As for valorous men, how should the Jsraelites have been delivered out of the
hands of the Midianites, had it not been for the sword of the Lord, and of
Gideon? They had still lain under the yoke of Cushan Rishathaim, Iud. 7, 20
King of Mesopotamia, unless Othniel had been raised up a savior unto them*
Iud. 3.8.9.
Ehud saved them out of the hands of the Moabites: verse. 15.
And Shamgar and Samson from the Philistines: verse. 31.
Barak likewise delivered them from Iabin, Iud. 14 and 15. and. 16
the King of Canaan: Iud. cap. 4.
and Jphtah from the Ammonites. And the Lord wrought a great Salvation for all
Jsrael, Iud. cap. 12.
when David slew Goliath the Philistine. 1. Sam. 19.5.
Concerning wise men, how necessary they be in every state, Solomon implies
when he says in Ecclesiastes, I have seen this wisdom under the sun,
Eccles. 9.13.14 15.16.18.
and it is great unto me: A little City, and few men in it, and a great King
came against it, and compassed it about, and builded fortes against it: and
there was found therein a poor and wise man, and he delivered the City by
his wisdom. So was the City of Abel preserved from the rage of Joab by the
wisdom of one woman, 2. Sam. 20.13. to the 23.
who persuaded the Citizens to deliver the head of the rebellious traitor
Sheba the son of Bichri. And touching Just men, I have learned of Eliphaz the
Temanite in the book of Job, Job 22.30.
that the innocent shall deliver the Island, and it shall be preserved by the
pureness of his hands: so that if but ten just men had been found in Sodom,
Genesis 18.32.
the City should have been spared for their sakes. Genesis 19, 22, 20 21.
Neither would the Angel destroy Sodom till Lot was departed thence into a
place of safety, the which at his request was kept from destruction: Act.
27.22.23.
And in a most stormy tempest upon the midland sea, God gave unto Paul the
lives of all that sailed with him. When King Joash said with tears in his
eyes to Elisha lying upon his death bed, 2 King. 13.14.
O my Father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen of the same,
he signified that the Kingdom had been more prospered by his prayers, then by
force of arms. And God in his just wrath had utterly consumed the Israelites
in the case of the golden Calfe, Psalm. 106.23.
had not Moses his chosen stood in the breach before him, to turn away his
anger.

Number. 16.41. to the end.
And they had at another time altogether perished for murmuring upon the
execution of rebellious Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and not Aaron made an
atonement for them. Miserable then and wretched was the state of the Jews,
Ier. 7.16.
when as Jeremie was commanded not to pray for them: and when as God himself
protested, that though Moses and Samuel stood before him, Ier, 15:1.
yet his affection could not be toward that people.

And as for round executing of Justice upon offenders, Eccles. 8.11.
the great necessity thereof appears hereby, because it is directly gathered
out of the words of the Preacher, that the only delay of Justice is the
animating of transgressors. Wherefore King David made a solemn promise that
he would betimes destroy all the wicked of the Land, Psalm. ^01.8.
that he might cut of all the workers of iniquity, from the city of the
lord. And for the same reason says Solomon in the Canticles: Take us the
Foxes, the little Foxes, which destroy the vines. Cant. 2.15.
Which course if we had taken many years ago with the Jesuits, secular
Priests, and other seminary men, we had not been so pestered with them, and
endangered by them, as now we are, and of late have been. Deuteronomy. 13.11. and
17.13.
Wherefore it is high time to put hand to this work, that all Jsrael may hear
and fear and do no more presumptuously. Thus then it is evident that there is
great use and need of the ordinary means of preservation, the want whereof
makes a very woeful estate. As when the Lord of hosts meant in the time of
Isay to expose the Jews to all inconveniences, both oppressions and miseries
at home, and also invasions abroad, then he threatened, that he would take from
Jerusale^, Isay. 3.1.2.3.
and from Judah the stay and the strength, even all the stay of bread and all
the stay of water, the strong man, and the man of war, the Judge and the
Prophet, the prudent, and the aged, the captain of fifty, and the honorable,
and the Counselor, and the cunning artificer, and thy eloquent man.

Now that Salvation is of the Lord we have had good experience of late by the
rare manner of the discovering of that damnable and devilish devise which
should have been acted, upon the fifth of November last. For the same God which
inspired Elisha that he could tell the King of Jsrael, 2. King. 6.12
even the very words which the king of Aram spoke in his privy chamber: And
who in the days of Amos, Amos. 3.7.
would do nothing, but he revealed his secrets unto his servants the Prophets:
And who appearing to Joseph in a dream said. Math. 2.13.
Arise and take the babe and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there
till I bring thee word, for Herod will seek the babe to destroy him. Ps.
91.3.5.6.
And who promises in the 91. Psalm to deliver the faithful, not only from
the noisome pestilence, but also from the snare of the hunter, not only from
the arrowe that flies by day, but also from the terror of the night, not
only from the plague that destroys at noonetide, but also from the
pestilence that walks in the darkness: even he the same God, put into the
head of our gracious Sovereign, to make an uncouth and strange construction of
an vnsubscribed letter, but yet such an one as whereby both he and his, and all
we were wondrously delivered from the greatest danger that ever would have
befallen us.

And that it may otherwise also appear that this our Salvation was of the
Lord, consider with what intent the letter aforesaid was written, namely to
save one friend from perishing among us, but this resolution being still holden
that we should have received the terrible intended blow. Howbeit, Almighty
God, who by his infinite power and wisdom brings light out of darkness,
and life out of death: Isay. 45.1.
and who made Cyprus his anointed holding and guiding his right hand to subdue
nations for the delivery of his people out of the captivity of Babylon,
whereas Cyrus at the first meant nothing less, but only thought there by to
satisfy his own ambition, vain glory, avarice, and cruelty: and who also
turned the treachery of Judas to the Salvation of mankind: Math. 26.
even he the same God of his unspeakable goodness made use of this vndated
letter intended for the good of one man only, to the preservation of us al
both Prince and people.

Moreover the greatness of our deliverance may appear by this, that the
conspiracy went forward, and our danger continued without perfect discovery,
till within few hours of the appointed time wherein the cruel massacre should
have been put in execution. So Pharaoh brought the Jsraelites into such
straytes, Exo. 14.21, 22.
he being with his army behind them, that if the Sea, which was before them,
had not given present way unto them, they had been al put to the sword, man,
woman, and child. Likewise Hezekiah was so distressed by Saneheribs army that
he confessed it to be a day of tribulation, Isay. 37.3.
rebuke and blasphemy: for the children were come to the birth, and there was
no strength to bring forth. In so much as Hezekia and his people must needs
have been destroyed unless the Lord had suddenly put an hook in Saneheribs
nostrils and a bridle in his lips, verse. 29.36.
and had caused his Angel to slay fourscore and five thousand of the enemies
army in the space of one night. Psa 11.6.3.
When David made this moan in the 116. Psalm, that the snares of death
compared him, and the griefs of the grave caught hold on him his meaning was
to signify in what great danger he had been in the wilderness of Maon, when
Saul and his army compassed him and his followers round about to take them, so
that they could not possibly have escaped the edge of the sword, 1. Sam. 23
26.27.
if there had not come by Gods providence an unlooked for messenger to Saul in
post, saying, Have thee and come, for the Philistines have invaded the land.
Undoubtedly Jehoshua was brought near to the point of his utter undoing seeing
it is said of him: Zech. 3.2. Psa. 68.20.
Is not this a firebrand taken out of the fire? Thus our God to whom belongs
the issues of death has infinite means to deliver his in the greatest and
most extreme dangers, that we may know that Salvation belongs unto the
Lord. Again that this our late preservation may be acknowledged to have come of
the Lord only, call to mind what our doings and deserts were at that time and
before: surely I fear greatly, least if the Lord had visited us, Zeph. 1.12.
as in the day of Zephaniah he searched Jerusalem with lights, he should
have found many frozen in their dregs, that is, by their prosperity hardened
in their wickedness, and saying in their hearts the Lord will neither do good
not evil. He should (I fear) have found many drawing iniquity with the
cords of vanity, and sin as it were with cart-ropes: putting far away the
evil day, Isay. 5.18.
approaching to the seat of iniquity. Wherefore in this respect we may say with
the Prophet Jeremie, Amos 6.3. Lam 3.22.
It is the Lords mercies that we were not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. And all this Salvation came unto us from the Lord for the Gospels
sake which we profess, least our enemies by their good success in this
attempt, should have taken occasion to have blasphemed the name of God, saying
where is now the God of the Protestants?

But indeed one motive of the conspiratours to increase their hope of good
success in this wicked enterprise, was this conceit, that they supposed that
God had given us over for our sins, as may appear by those words of the
vndated letter formerly named, God and man have concurred to punish the
wickedness of this time. This self same opinion encouraged David's adversaries
in this present Psalm, Psalm. 3 2.
as is collected by the words of the second verse, Many say to my soul, there
is no help for him in God. And likewise, in the 71. Psalm, David's enemies
spoke of him, and they that laid wait for his soul, took their Counsel
together, saying, God has forsaken him, pursue and take him, for there is none
to deliver him. This also was the cunning and machiauellian trick of
Saneherib, which he practiced to terrify Hezekiah with all, when he said: Am I
now come up without the lord to this land to destroy it? The Lord said unto me,
Isay 36.10.
go up against this land and destroy it. Thus the late complotters pretended
the name of GOD to deceive withal, as though God had ordained them to be the
rod of his wrath in punishing of us, and that the staff in their hand had
been his indignation against us. Isay. 10.5.
But let them answer this question of Esdras. Are the deeds of Babylon, better
then they of Zion? 2. Esdras 3.31.
We deserved destruction I confess, but not by the hands of them whose life
is noe better, and whose religion is far worse then ours. I may say of Rome,
now as Jsai sometime spoke of Jerusalem. How is the faithful City become an
Harlot? Isay. 1.21.22.
thy silver is become dross, thy wine is mixed with water. God had not sold us
into their hands, 1. King. 21.25.
because they had sold themselves to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord as did Ahab.

Psa. 73.1.
And seeing that their purpose was defeated by divine providence, and we were
delivered from the snare which they privily laid for us, therefore we may say
and sing, yet God is good unto Jsrael, even to the pure in heart. Verily if we
had been altogether destitute of Good men as they falsely imagined, we had
assuredly perished with fire-worke from below, as Sodom for want of ten just
men in it was destroyed with a rain of brimstone from above. But yet some Lot
(praised be God) remains in the City among us to keep us from burning, yet
some Paul sayleth in the ship with us to keep us from drowning, Genesis 19.14.
verse. 22. Act 27.24.25. Psalm. 106.23.
yet some Moses is found standinge in the breach to turn away Gods wrath from
us.

And there is yet some Aaron left to make an atonement for us. Yet, I say,
some Noes, Number. 16.46. to the 51. Ezech. 14.14.16.20. and Ier 15.1.
or Jobs, or Samuels, or Daniels have their being amongst us, whose prayers are
effectual for themselves and us likewise. And so we find salvation from the
Lord.

Good Lord what lenity went before on the behalf of the Kings Majesty and
the state, and what cruelty was like to have ensued on the parts of the
conspiratours? Hereby we see by experience the truth of that which we read in
the Prophet Isaie: Isay. 26 10.
let mercy be showed to the wicked yet he will not learn righteousness, in
the land of uprightness will he do wickedlie, and will not behold the
Majesty of the Lord. Though David played with his hand upon the harp before
Saul to mitigate the rage of the evil spirit that was upon him, 1. Sam.
19.9.10
yet Saul intended to smite David to the wall with the spear which he held in
his hand. 1. Sam. 24.4 to the 9 and 26.7.8.9.20.
Yea though David spared the life of Saul, when he had him twice in his hands
to stabbe him, or to dispose of him at his pleasure, yet for all that Saul
continually pursued him, as one would seek a flea or hunt a Partriche in the
mountains.

Thus the traitors would have recompensed the Kings lenity with extreme
cruelty; for if they had prospered in their most mischievous intendement, they
meant to have killed the da^me with the young: They purposed to meet us as a
bear robbed of her whelps: Deuteronomy. 22.6. Prou. 17.12. Hab. 1.8.
we should have found and felt them more fierce then the wolves in the
evening. As they of Damascus threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of
iron: and as they of Tyrus shut the whole captivity in Edom: Amos 2.3.9.11.13.
and as Edom pursued his brother with the sword, casting of all pity, and
his anger spoiled him evermore, and his wrath watched him always: and as the
children of Ammon ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might
enlarge their own border: even so for all the world would these tygerlike men
have dealt with us. Adonibezek cut of the thumbs of the hands and feet of his
captives, and made them to gather bread under his table: Iud. 1.7.
yet, he suffered them to live.

And Naash the Ammonite would make no covenant with them of Jabesh Gilead, 1.
Sam. 11.2.
except he might thrust out their right eyes, and so bring that shame upon
Jsrael: yet was he content that they should enjoy their lives. But if these
blood-thirstie men, (some whereof are already cut of by justice not having
lived out half their days) had come to the full period of their hearts
desire, should have been heard soundinge in our ears but kill and slay.
Proverb. 12.10.
Thus even the minds of the wicked are cruel; but still Salvation is of the
Lord.

These underminers of the state said happily of us one to another, let us
break their bonds and take their cords from us: Psalm. 2.3.
but he that dwells in the heaven did laugh: the Lord had them in dirision.
They said perhaps among themselves by imitation of the 83. Psalm. Come let us
cut them of from being a Nation, and let the name of the Caluinists be noe
more in remembrance. Let us take their habitations for our possession: Psa. 83
4 12.13, 16: 18.


But our God has made them like unto a wheel, and as the stuble before the
wind, he has filled their faces with shame, that they may know, that he
which is called Jehouah is alone, even the most high over all the earth. They
resemble Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, which said in the pride and
presumption of their heart. The bricks are fallen but we will build it with
hewn stones, Isay 9.9.10.11.12,
the wild fig trees are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars:
nevertheless, the Lord will raise up the adversaries of Rezin against him,
and join his enemies together: Aram before, and the Philistines behind, and
they shall devour Jsrael with open mouth. They had no doubt as high and proud a
conceit as possessed Benhadad, when he said, the gods do so to me, and more
also, 1 King 20.10 11.
if the dust of Samaria be enoughe for all the people that follow me for
every man an handful, but let not him that girdeth his harness boast
himself, as he that puts it of. For SALVATION belongs unto the Lord.

Now then for so much as no man doubts, and every man confesses, that our
late deliverance out of exceeding great danger proceeded from the Lord, let
us first of all be admonished to be thankful unto Almighty God, by the
example of David, who after that he had escaped the peril of the Court of
Achish, solemnly promised in the 34. Psalm, that he would always give
thanks unto the Lord, Psa. 34 1.
and that the praise of God should be continually in his mouth. And likewise by
the example of Jehosaphat, 2. Chron. 20.26
who after that famous victory against the united forces of Ammon, Moab, and
Mount Seir, assembled his soldiers, and other his subjects to bless the lord
in that place, which was afterward by that occasion called the valley of
blessing.

Secondly, let us receive admonition to be constant in the profession of the
Gospel, notwithstanding all threats, calumniations, and dangers intended by the
fraud or force of any enemies whatsoever, Psalm. 119.23.51.69 85.61.25.28.83.109
entire.
by the example of the Psalmist in the 119. Psalm, who, though Princes did
sit and speak against him, and the proud had him exceedingly in derision,
imagining a lie against him, and digging pits for him: yea though the bands of
the wicked robbed him, and laid snares for him, and waited to destroy him: so
that his soul cleaued to the dust, and melted for heaviness, and he was like
a bottell in the smoke, and his soul was continually in his hand: yet he
declined not from the law of God, nor forgot his precepts, nor swarued from his
testimonies and statutes.

Thirdly, let us be encouraged to hope for such help and succor in time of
need hereafter, Heb. 13.8.
for that Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also is for ever, not
only the founder but also the preserver of the Church. He was our arm in the
morning when the Gospel began to be restored in these parts, and he will no
doubt be our strength in the evening thereof upon earth. he will perform his
work toward us, Psa. 138.7, 8.
and not forsake the work of his hands. But this hope must be grounded upon a
prouiso that we practice in life as we profess in word. And therefore I say
to all that be here present as Azariah the son of Obed said to King Asa and
all Juda and Benjamin: Hear ye me, the Lord is with you, while you be with
him: 2 Chronicles. 15.1.
and if ye seek him, he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he
will forsake you. Be it far from us to run the race of disobedience and
obstinacy, till our wickedness be full as the Amorites was, Genesis 15.16.
when the Israelites came to invade them. Be it far from us, who have lately
received so great a Salvation from the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 36.16
to mock the messengers of God, and despise his words and misuse his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord should arise against us, and till there
were noe remedy but that GOD must needs punish our sins in his just and
heavy judgment.

Fourthly, let us be exhorted to future vigilancie against the privy practices
of the Romish faction at home and abroad. Remember that when Ahab had
overthrown Ben-hadad in one set battle, he was advertised by a Prophet to
be of good courage, 1. Kings. 20.22
but yet to take heed what he did, because the King of Aram when the year
was gone about would come up against him the second time. But surely the
Jesuits and their consorts will not give us so long a breathing time. For they
are like the raging Sea, Isay. 57.20.21.
that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. It would seem that they
are imitators of those evil and cruel men mentioned in the iii. Psalm, Psa.
111.22.
which imagine evil things in their heart, and make war continually. To us
they are strangers from the womb. Can the black Moore chang his skin, Psa.
58.3. Ier. ^3.23.
or the Leopard his spots? Then may these men also do good which are accustomed
to do evil.

Here I cannot omit the sentence in the 76. Psalm, where is setfoorth the
power of God, and care for the defense of his people of Jeruslem, in the
destruction of the Army of Sancherib: The words, being directed to Almighty
God, stand thus in the text: Psa. 76.10.
Surely the rage of man shall turn to thy praise: the remnant of the rage
shall thou restrain. Eue^ so in this late co^spiracy such has been the event
that the rage of the conspirators has turned to the praise of God, who in his
just judgment has caused them to fall into the pit which they made and dug
themselves: Psalm. 7.15.16.
procuring their mischief to return upon their own head, and their cruelty
to fall upon their own pate. Exodus, 9.i6.
GOD showed his power in Pharaoh, and declared his name throughout all the
world by his overthrow. Hab. 2.14.
Likewise in the destruction the of the Babylonians, the earth was filled with
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. Isay. 26.9.
And seeing that such judgments of God are in the earth, the inhabitants of
the world shall learn righteousness. Thus by this late discovery God is
magnified, and the eyes of many, (I trust) are opened to see, that the Jesuits
and the rest of the Romish brood are more dangerous guests to the state, then
formerly they had believed.

But yet the remnant of their rage must be restrained, under Gods providence,
by circumspection and foresight of the Church and commonwealth watchmen, by
diligent and trusty inquisition, and by impartial and vndelayed execution of
laws, which is the very life of the laws. And if all the premises be
observed, then they that labor to bring in and erect popery, shall be found
the builders of Babell to their own confusion: Genesis 11.
And they shall be subject to the curse which fell on Hiel the Bethelite about
the reedifying of Jericho, who laid the foundation thereof in Abiram, 1. King.
16.34.
his eldest son, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub. Then
I say, shall their case nothing differ from that of the offspring of Esau, of
whom God speaks thus in Malachy. Though Edom say we are impouerished, but
we will return and build the desolate places, yet says the Lord of Hosts,
they shall build but I will destroy it, Malach. 1.4.
and they shall call them the border of wickedness and the people with whom
the Lord is angry for ever. And it shall be said of them, and their works,
as Habacuk speaks: Behold, is it not of the Lord of Hosts, that the people
shall labor in the very fire? Hab. 2.13.
the people shall even weary themselves with very vanity. They and their
devises shall consume like a snayle that melts, and like the untimely fruit
of a woman that has not seen the sun. Psa. 58.8.9.
As raw flesh is taken out of the pot, before the water feel the fire of
thorns, so shall God destroy their enterprises before they can be effected:
yea they shall be as the grass on the house tops, Ps. 129.6.7.
which withers before it comes forth: whereof the mower fills not his
hand, neither the gleaner his lap. Psa. 7.14.
Then they may indeed travail with wickedness having conceived mischief, but
they shall bring forth a lie; they may purpose to hatch the cockatrice eggs,
but they shall only weaue the Spiders web. And hereof we have a strong and
steadfast hope, Isay. 59.5.
because that as well the destruction of the wicked, as the Salvation of the
Godly proceeds from the Lord, whose blessing is upon his people, according
to the latter part of this text. And thy blessing is upon thy people. Behold,
and consider the humility, modesty, and sincerity of David: For if danger be
imminent to the state, then he casts all the imputation thereof upon
himself saying, 2. Sam. 24.17.
I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly: but these sheep what have they done?
let thine hand I pray thee, be against me and against my fathers house. But on
the other side when as he is here delivered from extreme danger, behold he
ascribes his deliverance to Gods favor toward his people, saying to Almighty
God, with eyes and heart lifted up to heaven, And thy blessing is upon thy
people.

Also when David was falsely accused by Chush, Psalm. 7.6.7.
one of Saul's kinsmen, he called unto God for help, framing his prayer in this
wise. Arise O Lord in thy wrath, and lift up thy against the rage of mine
enemies, and awake for me according to the judgment that thou have appointed
So shall the congregation compass thee about: for their sakes return on high
(that is, declare thy power for thy Churches sake.)

Upon whom falls Gods blessing? verily upon Gods people.

Therefore we must first show our selves to be Gods people, and then we may
expect the increase and continuance of Gods blessing. For the accomplishing
whereof, Matthew. 3.16.
let our light so shine before men, that they may see our good works, 1. Pet.
2.9. Tit. 2.14.
and glorify our father which is in heaven, acknowledging us to be a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, zealous of
good works, showing forth the virtues of him, that has called us out of
darkness into his maruailous light. Psa. 21, 3.6.
And then we may have an assured hope, that God will prevent our King with
liberal blessings, and set him as blessings for ever, making him a perpetual
example of his favor to this presentage, and to all posterity. Then I say, we
may conceive good hope, that God will endue all of us with convenient blessings
both spiritual and temporal, so that we may live in the fear of GOD, and
die in his favor, to be partakers of the joys of Heaven prepared for us, by
the mediation of our Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the
holy ghost be all honor and glory, both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

