A Terrible Battle between the two consumers of the whole World: TIME, and
DEATH.

By Samuel Rowlands.

depiction of Time and Death

Printed at London for John Deane, and are to be sold at his shop (...)

To the wise and well accomplished Gent: M. George Gaywood, health and
happiness.
SIR, the great and good report which my beloved friend (the bearer hereof)
has given of you, has made me more then half in love with you, which makes
me think in some sort (as the rude and rusticke phrase is) to scratch
acquaintance of you. But sir believe it to be thus, for you shall find it so,
that this is not done of purpose to draw from you any bounty or reward to me,
for my Pen never was, nor never shall be, (God saying Amen,) Mercinarie: but to
let you know that the bringer hereof, who does acknowledge himself to be more
indebted to you then his poor estate or dejected life can make satisfaction
for) has some friends, that will in some measure give you thanks for the more
then fatherly kindness you have showed to him. This unspeakable love and
kindness of yours extended to him, has made me to dedicate this silly work
unto you, which by the general report of your worthiness, I think unworthy
your acceptance. But if it please you to call back again some of the love
which you have heretofore borne him, and withal to consider that this is sent
to you, but as a gratulation from me for him, then I make no doubt but you will
accept it for his sake, if not, yet still I will rest your friend and
Wel-willer, made so by my friends report.

S. R

A bloody Battle betwixt Time and Death.
Time. DRead potent Monster, mighty from thy birth,
Giant of strength, against al mortal power,
Gods great Earl Marshall over all the earth:
Taking account of each man's dying hour,
Landlord of Graves, and Toombs of Marble stones,
Lord Treasurer of rotten dead-mens bones.
Victorious consort, Slautering Caualier,
Mated with me, to combat all alive,
Know worthy Champion, I have met thee here,
Only to understand how matters thrive:
As our affairs alike in nature be,
So let us love, confer, and kind agree.
Great Regester of all things under Sun,
Gods speedy poast, that ever runs and flies,
Ender of all that ever was begun,
That have the Map of life before thine eyes:
And of all Creatures since the worlds creation,
Have seen the final dusty consumation.

Death. Let me entreat thee pardon me a while,
Because my business now is very great,
I must go travail many a thousand mile,
To look with care that Worms do lack no meat:
There Is many crawling feeders I maintain,
I may not let those Cannibals complain.
I must send murderers with speed to Hell,
That there with horror they may make abode,
I must show Atheysts where the Devils dwell,
To let them feel there is a powerful God:
I must invyte the Glutton and the Liar,
Unto a banquet made of flambes of fire.
I must bring PRIDE where Fashions are invented,
[You idle headed Women, quake and feare]
Your toyish fooleries will be prevented,
A shute of crawling Serpents you shall wear:
You that endeavor only to go brave,
What Hell affoords, you shall be sure to have.
I have the swagring Ruffian to dispatch,
That moth and canker of the common wealth,
The graceles Thief, that on the pray does watch,
The dronkard a carrowsing of his health:
And of all sinners such a damned rowt,
As full of work as Death can stir about.

Time. This lawful bus'nes I do well allow,
But in my absence how will thou proceed?
I must be present too as well as thou,
Before Time come thou can not do the deed^
My Sithe cuts down; upon thy dart they die,
Thou have an hour glass, and so have I.
Look my kind Death, here is some sand to run,
[What do I bid thee look that have no eies]
Let Us suffer their last minute to be don,
Some man repents the instant when he dies:
As one example I remember chief.
Of him that died a Saint, and lived a Thief.

Death Thou speak it true, that penitent indeed
Had never happy hour till his last,
But of like second sinner who can read?
From such a hellish life to heaven past,
But one, to keep pore sinners from despair,
And from presumption, one, and he most rare.
Thou know all flesh that is of woman borne,
Corruptly unto sin gives full consent.
Serving the Devil with the finest corn,
Their pleasure, youth, and strength, on him is spent:
And when the night of age brings painful groans,
Then in Gods dish they cast their rotten bones.
Who would not censure him a foolish man,
To loyter out the spring and summer tide?
And when another reapes, make seed time than
Expecting what the season had deni'de,
Yet such bad husbands hell affourds good-cheap
Will undertake to sow, when others reap.
Some make my picture a most common thing,
As if I were continual in their thought,
A Deaths h^d seal upon a great gold ring,
And round about Memento Mori wrought:
Which memory with gold cannot agree,
For he that hates the same best thinks on me.
I only am a welcome friend to such
As know by me they enter unto rest,
And that no second death their souls can touch,
The peace of conscience harbors in their breast,
And with the devil, flesh and world, still strive,
Until at Canaan they do ariue.
But Time for the other thou shall witness be,
How most unwilling those same wretches die,
Their ends thou daily do behold and see,
And can inform the world I do not lie,
With horror, grief, and anguish discontented,
In soul, and body, furiously tormented.

Time Surely they are, their states cannot be told,
We apprehend but outward things in sight,
Most fearful are those objects to behold,
That curse their birth and time they saw the light;
Sin has no salve but mercy, that they craue-not,
Repentance, finds grace, and that they haue-not.

Death I came to kill a Usurer of late,
And staying by his bed a while for thee,
His speech was all of mony-bags and plate,
But not a word of God: nor thought of me*
Quick, fetch a scriuener, let a bil be drawn,
Sirrah, your day is broke, i will keep your pawn.
Entreat me not: you should have kept time better,
Thou shall buy wit, a fool must feel the smart,
Get me a Seriant, to arest a debtor,
And with that word, my mace went through his heart,
Thus died the wretch, with Money, Bond, and Bill,
And if God have him, it was against his will.
When this bad fellows date was thus crossed out,
I do remember we came to a place
Where lay a Dives groaning of the gowte,
Crying Lord, Lord, methought he meant for grace:
Until I heard the burden of his song,
Was, Lord where may this Doctor stay so long.
Sir (quoth his wife) twere good have a Divine;
Thou art a fool (said he) I need him not,
I have a heart as perfect sound as thine,
What is there not a Doctor to be got?
A Doctor with all expedition wife,
My legs will make me weary of my life.

Time This misers answer I have noted friend,
In sickness men on Doctors most rely
Unto Apothicaries shops they send
Till physic gives them over, they must die:
And when they see there is no way but one,
Fetch a Divine, God shall be thought upon.

Death. It Is true indeed, but we will give pilland potion
To such as whole on outward means depend,
And come to god for want, more then devotion,
As forced unto it at their helples end,
For ere the doctor could a drink provide
I stabbed my dart, thus deep into his side.

Death From him thou know we to a lawyer went,

Time. It Is right, we found him arguing of cases,
This is (quoth he) the very laws intent,
With that the golden fees came in by braces*
Where Is your instructions, and his declaration?
I cannot answer thee, till next vacation.
Come thou in Term thy matter shall be heard,
Sir I remembered you the other day,
The bill you wot off, I have now preferred,
With that stepped I and said, friend Lawyer stay:
An execution against your life I have,
You must unto my Iaile, is called the Grave.
Leaving him to the Sexton and the bells,
We came unto a Merchant in this town
That mighty bags of money ouer-tels,
Wrapped very orderly in his night gown,
Sir (quoth he) is not the post come yet?
Make speed and sum me up this bill of debt.
There can no ships come yet, I Will raise my price,
Oh that the wind would hold but thus a while;
There comes into my head an odd device,
The very thought thereof does make me smile*
Some shall be sure to pay if this gear hold,
The plot is precious, and must yield me gold.
Thus he sat plotting till I spoild his brain,
With Oh I feel my self exceeding sick,
I gave his heart a gripe, it grond again,
By this, on price of wares he would not stick
But lay a gasping, while the bell did towle,
And there his body lies without a soul.
Next door to him, we found a London dame
Upon her bed, with finger aching laid,
And there most bitterly she did exclaim
Against the misdemeanors of her maid,
Base queen (quoth she) how do thou make me fret?
To see my ruff of that ilfauord set.
Your manners huswife you have quite forgot,
As sure as death i will make your joints to bow,
You whore, the poking iron is too hot,
Durst thou presume to vex thy mistress now,
If I were well thou queen I would not miss
To had my fists about thine ears ere this,
Let me not rise, for if I do; no more:
Few words are best, I think you will repent it,
I Will make you feel your sides this fortnight sore,
Except Death cross my purpose and prevent it:
With that I stepped between to part the Fray,
The Maid escaped blows, and Mistress brake her day.
A Muskie-Gentle, we did visit then,
A Silken Gallant, very curyous fine,
That kept a swaggring crew of Seruingmen,
Whose rapyer-hylts embrued with gold did shine,
And for he would from all contention cease,
He wisely bound his weapons to the Peace.
One that would send his challenge to his Foe,
And brave him out with paper in disgrace,
But to the field, he always scornd to go,
For he kept men, that would supply the place:
He would preserve his life, yet send his Glove,
His person must attend on Ladies love.
Well this same signeur with the tender skin,
That dedicateth all his days and hours
To dancing, drunkenness, and Venus sin,
Never respecting Time and Deaths stern powers
Was met by me thinking his life secure,
I killed the knave to keep my hand in ure.
Where went we then, do thou remember Time?

Time Yes very well, we visited a Poet,
That tyrd invention day and night with rhyme
And still on Venus service did bestow it:

Death It Is true indeed a Poet was the next,
With foolish idle love extremely vexed.

Time All that he did endeavor to devise,
Was only Venus praise, and Cupids power,
Within his head he had a mint of lies,
On truth he never spent, in's life an hour:
His fictions were to feed those in their pride,
Who take delight to hear themselves belide.
For slander, women to have virtues many,
Admird their beauties, when they lack good faces,
Say they have wit at will, not seeing any,
Tell them their empty minds are full of graces:
Why then they think you love them past compare,
And every toy they wear becoms them rare.
This Poet thus a sonneting we found,
Riming himself even almost out of breath,
Cupid (quoth he) thy cruel Dart does wound,
Oh grant me love, or else come gentle Death:

Death I heard him say, come gentle death in Jest;
And in good earnest granted his request.

Time Leave him a rotting, then we marched along
Unto a Godly reverent grave divine,
Whose faith on Christ was grounded firm and strong,
And all his hope to heaven did he incline;
At prayer devout, we found him on his knees,
And with these words he spoke, his heart agrees.
The wounds that JESUS suffered for my sin,
Are mouths that cry, O love him with thy heart,
The thorns that pierced through his flesh and skin,
Are tongues, (pronouncing) Love is his desert,
The torturing whips, that did to anguish move him,
Are Echoes sounding, Wretched Sinner love him.
With Peter's sins in greatness mine abound,
Who by his oaths and cursses Christ denied,
And with the woman in Adultry found,
The filthiness of sin in me does bide:
With Magdalens in multitudes they be,
Her seven Devils, have infected me.
The shame of sin upon my soul does fall,
That on the wretched Publican did light,
The cruelty of sin I have with Paul
To prosecute the holy and upright:
And with the Thief, that all his life did ill,
Unto my grave, my sins attend me still.
Oh come sweet Jesus, for thy servant coms,
I do believe, Lord help my unbelief:
My debt of sins amount to mighty sums,
Of Mercies treasure only thou art chief:
Though sins be red as scarlet, yet I know,
Thy precious blood can wash them white as snow,
To be dissolved, greatly I desire,
This world does pass, the things thereof are vain,
To be with Christ, I only do require,
And see the City where his Saints do reign,
He is my life, Death is a gain to me,
With that his soul ascends where Angels be.

Death A happy soul, one that had learned to die,
And rightly understood his earthly state,
Whose constant faith enfor'cd the Devil fly,
That still assaulteth men with deadly hate,
For thou know Time how that same hel-hound strives
About the hour that men yield up their lives.
For in man's sickness Satan does conceive,
It may be mortal, that disease may end-him,
And therefore no temptation he will leave,
That to eternal torment he may send-him:
It Is time (says he) to do my most endeavor,
If now I loose his soul, it is lost for ever.
First then heel tempt him to impatient mind,
To grudge and to repine, at Gods correction,
Whereto with pain and grief he seems inclined,
But finding grace preuenteth that infection,
He seeks to draw him to a pride of heart,
To think himself a man of great desert.
And one in whom perfection does abound,
That constantly adversities can bear,
For his good works deserving to be crowned,
And that of sin he need not stand in fear:
If this cannot his soul for hell prepare,
He labors then to drive him to despair.
Compares Gods judgments and his sins together,
And bids his conscience look upon the law,
Where damned souls remain, he must go thither,
No mercy such a sinner ever saw;
It stands not with Gods justice for to saue-him,
The Devils come, and only he must haue-him.
Thus plots that foe, and thus he often preuailes,
And does enlarge his kingdom wondrous thus;
Millions of sowles go hel-ward with these gales,
When men from memory do banish us:
"To count thee precious all men have great reason:
"To think on me, is never out of season.

Time. Death, it is true but that same monster sin,
That brood of hell, that Devils eldest child,
Which with the fall of Adam did begin,
And all his offspring odious has defiled:
That Viper of the soul does still appear,
To all those sinners entertain it here.
Sin, the despising of Gods Majesty,
And the contempt of his Eternal power,
The death of Virtue, Graces enemy,
Canker of true felicities fair flower,
The obscure darkness of man's understanding,
Rebel to all the laws of Gods commanding.
Sin, the director unto all mishap,
The fetters of the eternal vault of hell,
The tempters net he uses to entrap,
The price wherewith the Devils buy and sell,
The seed of Satan daily by him sown
In those hard hearts which are become his own.
Sin, everlasting poison, curelesse killing,
The imitation of the evil sprites,
Folly of men, to which the world runs willing,
Pleasing destruction, filled with loathed delights,
Souls pestilence, from dark infections Den,
The cause of all Gods plagues that light on men.
Has over man such rule and Empire got,
And generally on earth bears such a sway,
That there is not one does good and sins not,
The righteous falls seven times a day:
This is the cause the Lion roares about,
And heavens narrow way, is hard found out.

Death True time: Well, then we went with expedition
(Killing about some hundred by the way)
Unto the mansion of a rare physician,
That with my subjects bare a mighty sway,
Of sick, and lame, and gowty, cry sort,
Gave all of him a wonderful report.
Within his hand he held a vrinall,
Which after he had viewed a little space,
This party (quoth he) very shortly shall
Be perfect well, and in a healthy case:
There is no danger, do as I have wild,
Yet that same person I had newly killed.
To many he gave notes, what they should take,
Some pill, some potion, others must let blood,
And diverse compounds some with speed must make,
And on his life this physic would do good,
Quoth I, Physician cure thy self fond man,
Thou die this hour, prevent it if thou can.
About this time much work I had to do,
As woeful London did both feel and see,
A dreadful plague began six hundred two,
Which did continue out six hundred three,
The bloody business I had then in hand,
Became a terror unto all the land.
Deadly destruction was in every street,
A daily mourning and a daily dying,
Great use of Coffin, and of winding Sheet,
From empty houses many hundreds flying:
Each faculty, profession, and degree,
Took counsel with their legs to run from me.
But how they sped experience can declare,
How many left their lives upon the way,
Poor mortals in my hands are brittle ware,
Like Vapor, Buble, Flower, withered Hay;
Where can they run, but I am still behind-them?
Where can they live secure, but I will find-them?
The Citizens that out of plague time, ever
Are entertained with welcomes in all Towns,
To shun like Serpents, each man did endeavor,
Amongst the rusticke rude vi^ciuill Clownes,
The name of Londoner, that very breath,
Had power to terrify as much as death.
Let him be friend or kinsman, what he will,
Master, or servant, husband, or the wife:
You must keep out, says Iobson with his bill,
The plagu's about him neighbors on my life:
Here is no meat and drink for horse or man,
Starve if thou will, or get it where thou can.
God which detested cruelty seeing this,
Gave us commission over all the land,
That flesh and blood might know the plague was his,
And he had power to strike or hold his hand:
Then we his officers to work did go,
And make the Country taste of Cities woe.
How could they shun their own infection now?
That held the Londoners contagious foes,
What virtue can their wormwood smells allow,
To charm the plague, for coming near their nose
Angellica is but a rotten root,
Hearbe-grace in scorn, I trample underfoot.
Unicorns horn's not worth a marrow-bone,
Though men esteem so precious of the dust,
Bugell is even as good as Beazer stone,
If I but say, Sirrah away you must:
Prepare thy soul, repent the guilt of sin,
Coffin, and sheet, attend to take thee in*
I wonder what men think that daily see,
Their friends and kindered carried to the grave,
How they can count themselves secure to be,
That not an hours time, of lifetime have;
That find they are but tenants here at will,
Yet live, as they could live freeholders still.
Where Is old Methuselah that long lived man?
Whers's all the fathers saw so many days?
Their lives were but the length of David's span,
A vapor that most suddenly decaies:
They Are borne, grow strong, wax old, fall sick; and die,
So other do: and others them supply.
Where Is that strong man that did so many kill?
And admirable things by valor did,
That carried Asah gates to Hebron hill,
And rent a Lion like a tender Kyd:
Look in the grave where this great man does lie,
There Is no strength left, to kill a silly fly.
Where Is that most rare and comely shaped prince,
That would have pulled his Father from his throne?
Whose like no age has seen for feature since,
Nor any age before his age had known:
Not a lock left of all his goodly hair,
Hundreds ago, his scull was bald, and bare.
Where Is Hector gone, and Hercules become?
What news with Pompey and Achilles now?
Where marches Alexander with his drum,
To Caesar's scepter who does yield or bow:
Where are these great and mighty conquering ones,
Time, show an ounce of dust of all their bones.

Time Death preethy stay, let this discourse stand by,
And make me answer unto one request,
Some doubt and difference is twixt thee and I,
Which to resolve in my conceit were best,
And this it is; The world exclaimes on me,
For diverse actions that are done by thee.
If thou stab children in their mothers womb,
Or kill a king as soon as he is crowned,
Or make the bloody field the Soldiers tomb,
Or in the Seas cause thousands to be drowned,
Why presently what will the people say?
Their Time was come: thus Time bears blame away.

Death If this be all, let it not grieve thy heart,
To hear thy self abused now and then,
But i will revenge, I vow it with my dart,

Time I marry will thou, but I preethy when:

Death To soon by many days i will meet with some,
If thou but say, strike for their Time is come.

Time I that's another matter, now you speak:
By my glass all thy tragedies are acted,
The prison of man's soul thou can not break,
With walls of flesh and blood, and bones compacted;
Nor give the same enlargement to go free,
Before my hand, to thy commission be.
Thou know Time is Gods agent in affairs,
And has bin so, ever since the creation,
Thou know he seateth Monarchs in their chairs,
Admitting kings unto their corronation:
If long they reign, Time gives their years the length,
If short they rule, Time cutteth off their strength.
The ornaments of heaven, sun, and Moon,
With all the glittering bravery of stars,
Are taught by me, their morning, night, and noone,
I order them, which else disorder mars:
Their motions, reuolutions, and aspects,
Time with his just proportion, due directs.

Death Why what a bragging and a coile do keep?
Best take my dart, be Time, be Death and al,
I Will into graves, and there go lie and sleep,
And answer thou when Gods affairs do call:
Be Lord of Coffin, Pickaxe, Sheet, and spade,
And do my work, with those in ground are laid.
Thou art for kings, and thou do this and that,
And without thee, there is nothing to be done,
To crown, depose, and do I know not what,
Nay thou art busy with the Moon and Sun:
Thou have an ore in every bodies boat,
Upon my conscience thou begin'st to dote.
I have bin Death almost six thousand years,
Yer never heard thee vaunt so vain before,
Thou coun'st thy self my better it appears,
But if thou do, thy aim is wide a score;
I tell thee Time, thou do insence me now,
Knowing my self a better man then thou.
At least thy self knows I am full as good,
Being Gods steward, sins reward to pay,
He that denies it I will see his blood,
Be he the greatest Monarch lives this day;
If he were Caesar of the earths whole Globe,
I Will make him poorer then the Devil made Job.
The mony-bag whose Idols in his chest,
Whose Gods his gold, whose golds his prisoner,
Whose thoughts are ever haunted with unrest,
And loves that best, becomes his murderer:
I take him sudden from huge heaps of treasure,
The slave was scraping all his life times leisure.
Wounds, heart, and blood, that will not sell his swearing
To him would give him forty pound a year,
That vows a tale is dull and harsh in hearing,
Unless by oaths the matter be made clear:
Often when the tempter chiefly does prouoke-him,
His mouth being filled with bitter oaths, I choke him.
The swaggering Ruffian in his heady braules,
Whose hand is ever on his poniard hilt,
That bloody fraies his recreation calls,
Chiefly delighted with foul murders guilt:
Whose thoughts are only for the stab pretense,
I have a trick for him and all his fence.
The quaintly suited Courtier in attire,
Whose looks are fixed no lower then the sky,
Is crossed by me, in height of his desire,
And under ground I make his carrion lie:
He scorned the earth, and that I make his bed,
Wrapped in a rotten sheet, from foot to head.
And wheresoever, or what ere he be,
For countenance, for credit and condition,
Dignity, calling, office, or degree,
Pessant, or prince, patient, or else Physician:
Even from the Crown and scepter to the plow,
I make all look as I my self do now.
Perhaps thou think because thy beard is gray,
I owe officious reverence to thine age,
And must believe whatsoever thou say,
Applauding thee chief actor on earths stage:
I Will never do it, Time expect it not,
For at my hand there is nothing to be got.
But prithee tell me, what is he fears Time?
Not one upon my life that does expect thee,
For all the sinful brood of Adams slime,
Do every day, and every hour neglect thee:
To use time well, who is not slow and slack?
But with their evils, al men load thy back.
Pirates and thieves take Time to fit their turn,
Time must assist them ere they can prevail,
The fawning flatterer does Time subborne,
To give him leisure for his lying tale;
The lustful Letcher borrowes thee by night,
And makes Time pandor to his sins delight.
The scatter good, in Time consumes the wealth,
That might sustain both him and his successor,
The drunkard takes his Time to pledge a health
Till drink, to wit and fence be an oppressor;
Nay not an evil since the world begun,
But Time was accessory till it was done.

Time. Well preethy slander on, i will hear thee out,
And thy untruths, with truth I will confute,
Touching the wronging me, thou go about,
Thou art not able for thy life dispute:
Death, thou art a lying fellow in this case,
I scorn thee I, for using Time so base.

Death What (Father gray-beard, does your choler rise?
Can you so ill digest to hear your crimes?

Time Why goodman bone-face, with your vaulty eyes,
What is it to me if men abuse their Times?
Where learnd your dry and empty pate the skill,
That Time should answer for men's doings il.
Man is ordaind by the almighty maker,
To spend his Time of earthly pilgrims state
So holy, that he prove foul sins forsaker
And with fair virtue finish out his date:
I being the Time and limmit for that use,
My il employment, is the worlds abuse?
What simple reason has thy brain in store,
That do all sense so utterly forget?
Shall I be charged to answer sinners score,
That never past my word to pay their debt:
Prove that, and let all that is good detest me,
Thou Art a lean knave: Take witness and arest me.

Death By my darts point, (I swore not so this year,
I Will fight with thee, next time we meet in field,

Time Why if thou have a stomach try it here,
I fear thee not, my since is newly steeld:
And take this warning ere the fray begins,
Look to your legs, i will crack those rotten shins.
My shins you whoreson ugly prating slave,

Death Sirrah i will keep you at the point aloof,
For dotard know there is not a bone I have,
But it is composed of stuff, full cannon proof,
Lay on my legs an hour by thy glass,
Als one, to hew a pillar made of brass.

Time Peace bragging fool, I laugh thy vaunts to scorn,
Thy tongue inclines to much unto thy lying,
Fear children with thy force but newly borne,
And terrify the sick that lie a dying:
I know the hour when God did first begin thee,
Thy mold and making, and how much is in thee.
Thy office is to murder and to kill,
Stabbing of men, is solace to thy heart,
Thou go about and carriest with thee still,
A Spade, and Pickaxe, Hower-glasse, and Dart:
With one tool, thou do give a cowards wound
Unseen, and with the other turn men under ground.
Thou look like the inside of a tomb,
All rotten bones, with sinnews bound together,
Thy guts are gone, for they lack belly room,
And al thy flesh is lighter then a feather:
Thy head is like an empty dry oil jar,
Where nether teeth, nor nose, nor eyes there are.
From ear to ear thou have a mouth unshut,
With arms and hands like to a Gardners rake,
Thy ribs show like a leather Ierkin cut,
Thy voice resembles hissing of a snake:
Thy legs appear a pair of Crane-stilts right,
And al thy forms more ugly then a sprite.
Thy picture stands upon the Alehouse wall,
Not in the credit of an ancient story,
But when the old wives guests begin to braule,
She points, and bids them read Memento mori:
Look, look (says she) what fellow stands there,
As women do, when crying Babes they fear.
No memory of worth to thee belongs,
To call thee famous is condemned error,
And though sometime thou art baletted in songs,
Thy names imploide unto no use but terror,
Thy company both rich and poor defy,
Loathsome to ear, most ugly to the eye.

Death Time, I perceive thou art disposed to rail,
So am not I, my head is not so vain,
Thy terms are very base, most scuruy stale,
And thou art a testie old fool, for thy pain:
What needst thou use this speeches unto me,
A man so hansome thou will never be.
Best shapen form, by natures powerfulness,
And sweetest face on which loves eyes do fawn,
The chiefest stature, praised for comeliness,
Are but my picture when the Curtains drawn:
Remove the veil of flesh and blood away,
It Is Death's true picture all the world will say.
But what art thou, a foul misshapen monster,
Behind all bald, a lock elle long before,
With cloven feet, whereby a man may conster,
Caron from hell has brought thee late a shore,
Which if he did, thy swiftnes does declare,
Thou ranst away and never paid his fare.
Actaeons feet, (I would thou hads his horns)
Winged like an Owl, a Cat has lent thee eyes*
A fugitive that never back returns,
One that will run with Titans horse in skies:
Never to be entreated, stopped, or staid,
For whom repose and rest was never made.
And do thou think i will pocket up disgrace,
Of such a paltry rusticke peasant boore,
Nay rather I defy thee to thy face,
Thou know me honest, though thou know me poor:
I care for no man, all that live fear me,
A fig for the whole world. A rush for thee.

Time Well art thou now revenged? preethy have done?
Thou striu'st to have the last word I dare swear it,

Death Why should I not as long as you begun,
Fie, fie, I am ashamed that any man should hear it:

Time For were it known, we two were at contention,
The world would laugh, and term it Mad discention.

Death Give me thy hand, embrace, let choler pass:
For my part I do bear thee no ill will,

Time Take heed (good Death) thy bones will crack my glass,

Death. I would be loath to do thee so much ill:
Lay down thy since, as I lay down my dart:
Shake hands, and so be friends before we part.

Time Where go thou now, Marry hark in thine ear:

Death I have a Lady presently to kill:
One that's at dice, and does no danger fear?
But have at al she says, come set me still:
She is at passage, passing sound and well*
And little thinks on the passing-bel.
And then I go to bail an honest man,
Lies in the Counter for a little debt,
Whom's creditor in most extremes he can
Does deal withal, now he is in the net;
He swears heel keep him there this dozen year,
Yet the knave lies, this night i will set him clear.
And then I go to see two fellows fight,
(With whom there is no reason to be had)
About a cup of wine they drank last night,
One swore it was good, and the other vowed it was bad;
I Will give one that, no Chirurgeon's like to heal,
And with the the other let the hangman deal.
And hundreds more, come Time with speed along,
About our business we have stood here now:
Till Priest, and Clarke, and Sexton have the wrong,
More dead work for their profit lets allow:
My dart is dry, there is no fresh blood thereon,
We suffer sick to ly too long and groan.
Hark a monstrous rich fellow a Citizen.


Time. We Will take him with us even in the way,
(Preethy be thou a quiet man a while)
Some hour, by my glass he has to stay,
Before the date be come of his exile;
And then in such a hole he shall be plac'st,
He is not like be seen again in have*
The villains rich, exceeding rich indeed,
And loves a bag of gold most dearly well,
His wife is of a proud and dainty breed,
And for imbrasing fashions does excel:
She married him for pure love to his wealth,
But has a friend for the other thing by stealth.
His children long, as misers children do,
To be a sharing, ery months a year,
They hope heel die, their minds consent thereto,
And then their gallant humors will appear,
The angels kept in darkness by his might,
Shalby their power approach and come to light.
Vintners make welcomes ready for they come,
Let them not want (I pray) Potato pies,
And Cheaters with false dice look out for some,
No little profit to your snares will rise:
But Bawds and whores have you a special care,
To fit them penni-worths with your pocky ware:
As the oppresser got it wicked in,
The prodigal will send it vainly out,
One wickedness requites another sin,
If vengeance have a plague to bring about:
For what is got by rapine and by wrong,
The Devil will be doer in it ere long.
Let them have Lord-ships, and be Lords of Towns,
Let them enjoy the world, at wit and will,
Let them bequ^ath five hundred mourning gowns,
And prosper al their days in doing il:
Give back their goods when life is almost spent,
As Judas when to hang himself he went.
What of all this, it warrants not from hell?
The wicked getting is not justified,
Because the rich disposes riches well,
Wrong gotten, and well given when he died:
For it is like him, steals from another store,
And of that coin gives alms unto the poor.
The usurer whom God forbids as plain,
Take any intrest, as the theife from stealing,
And yet will venture soul for money gain,
Opressing all that undergo his dealing,
Thinks it enough to make an honest will,
How ere he got his goods, that shall not skill.
Thus men delude, deeeiue, beguile, betray
Themselves, their sowles, their hope, their happiness:
Running the common beaten passage way,
That leads to hell, the haunt of al distress:
And like the foolish Virgins knock too late,
When there is no entrance in at heavens gate.
One builds a house, and titles that his own,
Gives it his name, to keep his name in sound,
When presently a grave with one square stone,
Will serve his bodies turn to ly in ground,
Ten thousand pounds his costly house requires,
A coffin of a crowne's al death desires.
Another falls to purchasing of land,
Heel have it out of Orchard, field, and wood,
And only with his humor it does stand,
To get much in his hand, and do no good:
This Mole that in the earth is moiling thus,
With six foot ground is satisfied by us.

Death No more, away, look here my glass is out,
Thou art to tedious Time in telling tales,
Our bloody business let us go about,
Thousands are now at point of death, breath fails:
To work, to work, and lay about thee man,
Let Us kill as fast, as for our lives we can.
Hark, listen Time, I pray give ear,
What bell is that a towling there?

FINIS.

