TO THE WORLDS BLIND IVDGEMENT, that wants a pair of Spectacles with a true
sight.
TRuth does avouch it, and experience says,
Time serves us with his worst of wicked days,
The world, even like a garment waxes old*
Self-love is hot, charity deadly cold.
The notes we have to know our good men by
(As corrupt Judgment deemes with errors eye)
Are wealth, and words, no matter how they live,
He Is a good man, that can good speeches give,
And talk of Virtue, and Religious zeal,
Although in deeds he like a Devil deal.
Another sort there are, the world calls best,
Only because they are of wealth possessed:
Their gold and silver gildeth them so well,
They are the best in Parish where they dwell:
And so was ^iues, out of question too,
Most richly magnified with much ado,
Until the end tryes truth, at dying day,
When all the worlds esteemed things decay,
Devils with Gluttons soul did merry make,
Angels, poor Lazarus to glory take.
Blind judging world, senseless in censure thou art,
With greatness, not with goodness taking part:
Tell me, where is he that for true Virtues sake,
The poor Just man, will his companion make?
Where Is he that is the greatest finde-fault known,
Reproues his brothers miss, and mends his own?
Where Is he that is to such a patience grown,
That he will put up wrong, and offer none?
What Is he that now-a-daies does good for ill,
And would do hurt to no man by his will?
Point out the man, breathing beneath the Sun,
That does, as to himself he would have done.
What Is he as willing will repay a Debt,
As he was ready trusted goods to get?
Who will not flatter Greatness now-a-daies,
In all the errors of their graceless ways?
Who will in losses on his God depend,
And take that patiently the Lord does send?
Who will be weary to be moneys slave,
And having wealth, confess, enough I have?
Who will not catch (if by his craft he can,)
The means, and living from another man?
What Is he that will his Covenant fulfill,
As firm by promise, as by Bond or Bill?
Where Is he will lend of superfluity,
Without the Usurers gratuitie?
Who is it that of faithful true intent,
Maintains the poor, defends the Innocent?
Sure if Diogenes did live again,
He might burn day, as once he did, in vain,
READER.
THis Crystal sight is not for all men's Eyes,
But only serves for the judicious wise,
Fools, they may gaze as long as ere they will,
And be as blind as any Beetle still:
A purblinde Momus fleeringly will look,
And spy no knave but's self in all the Book.
A Sicophant, that slaves himself to all,
Will his own Knaue-Companions honest call,
And wilful wink, because he will not see,
With diverse sorts of Buzzards else that be:
But these we leave to their defective sight,
With Bats and Owls that blinded are by light.
S. R.

A DRVNKARDS Duello.
A Worshipper of Bacchus, ripe in Grape,
From merry drunk, and toyish as an Ape,
Fell Lion drunkard, and in Claret heat,
His cup-companion did with combat threat,
To meet next morning in Saint Georges field,
Whereto the other did encounter yield,
And so they left the Tavern very late,
The Challenger reeled home with drunken pate,
And put himself in complete armor, like
The God of battle, Dagger, Sword, half Pike,
And beats upon his adversaries door,
Saying, I come like Beuis to the Bore,
Appear, base coward, rowse thee from thy den.
The other with the noise awakening then,
Comes down, and finds behind his door to stand,
A Paring shouell, which he took in hand,
And lends to brave Sir Lancelot of the Lake,
A blow that made his steeled coxcombe ache,
Who double wounded, fell as he were slain.
The other quiet went to bed again,
And his confounded enemy lets lie,
At last the stumbling watch with light come by,
Seeing an armed man all myery foul,
They gaze on him, like Woodcocks at an Owl,
Then get him up, and leaning on their Bills,
They samen him according to their skils,
As who, and what, and where, and which, and why?
And thus, and so, and then, and whence, and I,
Then holding of the Lantern to his face,
He thus delivers them his woeful case:
You brave brown Bill-men that behold the wight,
Whom dirt has spoiled of his armor bright,
Note well the admonition that I give,
In charity with all your neighbors live,
For I with malice on my friend did frown,
And Jove with thunderbolt has struck me down,
His very hand, none else has done the deed,
My wounds are inward, for I feel them bleed,
Disarme this heavy burden from my back,
Knock Vintners up, to save my life with Sack.
The Dis-honest borrower.
SIr, as you ever have (until this hour)
Bin my best friend by your assisting power,
And done more for me in true action tried,
Then all the friends I have, have done beside,
So let me once again on urgent cause
(Which all my credit into Question draws)
Obtain to borrow for a month ten pound,
And as I have tofore, I will rest bound
In all the duties of a grateful heart,
Till my Immortal substance hence depart.
The money lent, as fawning friend desired,
Month after month, and years at length expired;
The Creditor, weary of such delay,
Came to his Debtor, and entreats him pay.
Pay, Sir (quoth he?) what money do I owe?
What Bond or Bill to prove it, can you show?
This you demand is false, and I deny it,
First prove a Debt, and then come lawful by it.
My answer is, I owe you not a shilling,
My conscience is, I Will never pay penny willing.
Old Doting Lust.
Never persuade me, for I will have Besse,
If I were elder, and her years were less,
I have outliu'd the weary loathsome lives
Of three old (good for nothing) worne-out wives,
And now a young one I intend to try,
For comfort to mine age before I dye.
Persuade me not, I will be ruled by none,
Although to fourscore my gray head be grown:
I will have one that shall be young enough,
Preferring tender, before old and tough,
Neither pass I though foolish people say,
Yonder goes cold December, matched with May.
Look how his brows are swollen within his Hat,
For thus, my friends, I am resolved for that.
He that wears Horns, and neither knows, nor thinks it,
And he that takes a Fly unseen and drinks it,
Should never with conceit themselves abuse:
For what the eye never sees, the heart never rues:
Come good-luck, bad-luck, Cuckolds luck between,
My fourscore old will marry young sixteen.
A Fantastical Knave.
Sir, come hither, I must send you straight
To diverse places, about things of weight,
First to my Barber, at his Basin sign,
Bid him be here to morrow about nine:
Next to my Tailor, and will him be here
About eleven, and his Bill I Will clear:
My Shoemaker by twelve, haste bid him make
About the Russet Boots that I bespake:
Stay, hark, I had forgot, at any hand
First to my Laundresse for a yellow Band,
And point the Feather-maker not to fail,
To plume my head with his best Estridge tail.
Speak to the Sadler: no, let him alone,
He Will look for money, I can spare him none.
Step to the Cutler for my fighting blade,
And know if that my riding sword be made,
Bid him trim up my walking Rapier neat,
My dancing Rapiers pummell is too great*
Stay, stay, forbear, some other time we will borrow,
I must take Physic, and lie in to morrow,
The Doctor, I remember, will come hither,
And he will both purge me, and my purse together.
As wise as John of Gotehams Calfe: OR, This fellow brought his Hogs to a
fair Market.
HVmphrey would up to London vorty mile,
He vowed to travel over Bridge and Style,
To zee the Zitty, though his Father pray him,
And Mother weep, and Sisters cry to stay him.
There Is no persuading Humphrey bide at home,
He will to London spite of cock and's comb,
When parents see nothing prevail they can,
They point Tone Carter for his Seruingman,
And stock their Yongman with good store of crowns,
Who taking leave with all his fellow clownes,
Sets forward bravely like the Wandering Knight,
And could not take contentment day nor night,
Until the City skirts he ouertooke,
Where, as about for harbor he did look,
To drink a Health back, for their towns carouse,
They cast their Anchor at a bawdy house,
The Punkes perceiving they of prey were sped*
Entreated them to sup, and take a bed
Which Humphrey took most kind. Oh Tom (quoth he)
Here Is Gentlewomen of good breed, I see,
A man shall stay at home with Sisse and Ione
And all his life have no such kindness shown,
At every word w' are Gentlemen, hang gold,
We Will make it good, while fathers bags do hold:
When my purse shrinkes, why, to supply our store,
Thou shall ride down (brave Tom) and fetch up more.
Thus having lauish'd there, away they go:
But in short time the matter fell out so,
The country Gull, with Punks was so bepay'd,
That he must needs seek out for Surgeons aid,
A burning grief did overtake at last,
And he must sweat to think on what was past,
Take up his Chamber and a while lie in.
Oh Pockey grief to think where he had bin!
But Master Mendall did so hold him to it,
That in short time he got him up on foot,
When Humphrey crept no sooner out of door,
But he would rail, revenge upon his whore,
And to the place of foul confusion went:
His Punke came to him with fair complement
Demanding what he will give her? Give, quoth he?
Thou damned Whore have given the Pox to me.
Quoth she, Thou lie, and do abuse me base
I will disprove thy speeches to thy face:
I give the Pox? It Is false, I never gave any:
I sold the Pox, thou bought'st it with thy penny:
We made a bargain, I had thy French gold,
And thou my French disease, full bought and sold.
Oh 'bomination, Tom, let us home, I vow,
We brought our Hogs to a fair Market now.
No longer (Gentlemen) we will remain:
Go thou to Cart, and I Will to Plow again.
But Tom, sweet Tom, in any case be trusty,
Never tell Father I have bin so lusty,
Nor tell our country Wenches I beseech,
What I have brought from London in my breech:
For if thou do, I shall be quite undone,
As ever was any poor mothers son.
A Marriage Merchant.
Captain, in lieu of love I have a plot,
Whereby on both sides money may be got,
And thus, the Lady I did marry late,
Has a rich Daughter lives in Widows state,
To whom her Father gave a Legacy
Of fifteen hundred pound when he did dye,
This money to her must my Lady pay,
Being executrix: now what do you say?
If I between my Daught'r in law and you
Do make a match, will you release this due?
Her state is better then a thousand pound,
All this will come to you as money found.
You shall discharge me paying of this portion,
And I Will gain you a thousand, by my motion.
Quoth Captain Needy, Sir, with thanks agreed,
Pray help your self and me by this good deed,
This plot between us we will friendly smother,
And thus with one good turn, requite another.
Courteous complements between a Traveler and the Hangman.
A Giddy gallant, that beyond the seas
Sought fashions out, his idle pate to please,
In traveling did meet upon the way,
A fellow that was suited richly gay,
No less then Crimson Velvet did him grace,
All guarded and re-garded with gold Lace,
His Hat was feathered like a Ladies Fan,
Which made the Gallant think him some great man,
And vayl'd unto him with a meek salute,
In reverence of his gilded Velvet suit.
Sir (quoth his man) your Worship does not know
What you have done to wrong your credit so:
This is the Bewle in Dutch, in English plain
The rascal Hangman, whom all men disdain,
I saw him the other day on castle green
Hang four as proper men as ere were seen.
At this his Master in a raging vain,
Swore he would call his kindness back again,
And in great haste after the Hangman goes,
He and his man, so basting him with blows,
That never Hangman was in worser case
For a dry beaten, battered, fist-swolne face,
And then departing, said, Thou Rogue, take that,
For wearing clothes made me put off my Hat:
Rope-trader, keep thy self to Hemp and cord,
And wear not Suits to counterfeit a Lord.
Sir (quoth the Hangman) do not so disdain me:
Such swaggerers as you do thus maintain me:
For I upon my back their kindness bear,
And they, about their necks my favors wear.
The Devil, and the Usurer.
GOod husband, careful man, to thrive and live,
Embrace the gainful counsel that I give,
Keep not thy Coin a rusting on thy hand,
But put it out, it is thy house and land,
Make profit of thine own, be it to thy Brother,
And make thy hundreds one beget another,
Thou shall have me and all the Devils in hell
To take thy part, that thou do wondrous well,
Although some conscience Christian, some nice fool,
That will have only Scripture for his school,
Do tell thee that it is a damned thing,
To be a Usurer, and places bring
To prove the same. Why, man if that be all,
I can my self to alleging Scripture fall,
As once in Wilderness I did enlarge
It Is written, He shall give his Angels charge,
Thou shall not dash thy foot against a stone.
And so for thee. Tush, let the Devil alone.
For Usury this Scripture I have found,
Of him that hid his Talent in the ground,
And did not put it out to make a gain,
As did his fellows: here is a place serves plain,
He was condemned for to let it lie,
And no increase of profit come thereby.
Thou lend'st thy money unto one that takes it,
And very gainefull in the use he makes it.
He gives gratuitie to thee for lending:
You both get wealth, this course deserves commending.
And therefore in the Devils name go on,
It is thy money thou must live upon.
Name me one handycraft, show any trade,
Will sell his ware, at that same price he paid.
Let Usury be kept in practice than,
For it maintains many an honest man.
Innumerable multitudes of Jews,
And countlesse Christians, that the trade do use:
The sons of Mammon, mony-monger slaves,
With bribing Scriueners, and with broking Knaves,
That if it were not for the souls of such,
Lucifers Kingdom would diminish much,
That golden Legion are his constant friends,
To whom his graceless favors he commends.
And one thing more, my son, thou may be bold,
The Mony-monger, of all trades will hold:
When Merchant, Mercer, and the rest prove weak,
My hold-fast Usurer will never break.
Who ever sheare the Hogs, he will sheare the sheep,
And like a Lawyer, is for catch and keep.
They two (though with the Fox they are often cursed)
Yet still fare well, for neither of them burst.
Usurer.
I Do embrace this counsel with my heart,
Ten in the hundred, thou and I Will never part;
Bonds, Bills, and words, I Will trust none of you three.
Bring good security to deal with me.
Plate shall be welcome, with a Bill of sale,
Fast bind, fast find, sure work can never fail;
Or lend good sums, and have good land bound for it,
I Will not be caught nor laughed at, I abhor it:
Neither trust one, nor yet believe the other:
I Will credit pawn, before I Will credit brother.
A Roaring Boys Description.
AMongst the Monsters of this present Age,
That in the world like fiends incarnate rage,
Acting such villainies, and horrid crimes,
(Unknown to men, in our forefathers times)
The Devil has (amongst his fashions new)
Begotten children of the cursed crew,
In whose ungraciousness he greatly joys,
And these by name are called his Roaring Boys:
Villains that in all villainies abound,
Which in the lives of Reprobates are found;
Their days, and nights, are thus consumed away,
To live in sloth, and eat, and drink, and play:
God's name is never in their mouths, or hearts,
Unless by oaths, to tear him out in parts,
Blasphemously abusing his dread name,
And hating those that do reprove the same.
The choicest, loving, dearest friends they have,
Is Punke and Pander, thief and coozening Knave,
Sharke, Shifter, Cheater, Cutpurse, high way-stander,
With these, the broad wide way to hell they wander.
Your Roring-Boy is come of such a strain,
He is a Villain did in brimstone grain,
And will hold out while endless flames endures,
(Such hardened hearts, delight in sin procures)
If the to life, his picture you will have,
To know him, by description of a Knave,
Then thus his outside carries all the wealth,
Coos'nage can compass, by frauds secret stealth:
And what our neat fantasticks newest hatch,
That at the second hand he is sure to catch:
If it be Feather time, he wears a Feather,
A golden Hat-band, or a silver either,
A beastly bushy head of lousy hair,
A Horse-taile lock most nitty he does wear,
Waste like to some Dwarf, or coated Ape,
As if of Monsters mis-begotten shape
He were engendered, and rejecting Nature,
Were new cut out and stitched, the Tailors creature:
An elbow Cloak, because wide Hose and Garters
May be apparent in the lower quarters.
The pockey legs, that bear his carrion corse,
Are daily booted, though he back a horse
Twice in a twelve month, or forswear to ride
Until a Cart to Tyborne be his guide.
Yet still in Russettings he will appear,
Although with Shoemaker he never clear.
His Cabage Ruff of the outrageous sise,
Starched in color to beholders eyes:
A box of Infidels and Heathens drink,
Composed as hell, of fire, smoke and stink,
His whole estate is borrow, coozen, cheat,
This is a Roring-Boyes true Picture neat.
How kind goodwill, did love requite,
Between a Cuckold, and a Knight.

A Knight of Cupids Court (with Lust being led)
Got kindly with his neighbors Wife to bed,
And by Veneriall sport heated (I think)
Most impudently called the Maid for drink.
Which when it came, did prove exceeding small:
But thus Sir Tarquin made amends for all:
The frugall Cuckold for his humor salt,
Out of the Knight got forty seames of Malt.
Which had, he said, Sir, least I dye your debtor,
Pray' come and taste if now my Beer be better.
If you mislike, before that we do spend it,
I hope your Worship once again will mend it.
The boording of the Alehouse Ship, fought so,
Till Smug the Smith could neither stand nor go.

THere was a Smug, that dealt in Iron mettle,
That in a humor to close fight would settle,
And board a Bark laden with Beer and Ale,
Till brain forsook him, and his legs did fail:
For resolute one night, (this iron-trader
Entered the Hulke, supposing to unlade her.
But she so banged him with her Barley shot
His legs to bear his body, quite forgot)
And foundring in the durty kennell laid him,
Where many passed by, but none that stayed him:
When wallowing with his face, late hot and fiery,
He sings no other note, but Ala-mi-re,
Yet to his shankes that suffered him to tumble,
This angry speech the threatening Smith did grumble,
Since you will not bear me, legs, let who will mutter,
I for this night will lodge you in the gutter.
One good turn requires another.
MArget does know her Mistress is a whore,
For she her self has often kept the door:
Megg is a Thief, her Mistress can protest,
For she has seen her rob her Masters Chest.
But Maid (says Mistress) my abuses smother,
And one good turn (thou know) requires another.
One called a Lady whore, (which was the same,
Yet she (though bad) stood much upon good name,
Making a vow, unless he did submit,
His purse should very soundly pay for it.
He to save charges, in a cunning vain
Did thus recanting, call her whore again.
Madame, I come, submissiue unto you,
And do confess I called you whore, It Is true:
Which to recant, Sorry in troth am I,
Your Ladiship's no Whore, Madam, I lie.
Vice reproues Wickedness.
THere is no sinner in so vilde a kind,
But with some Vices he a fault will find.
The Prodigal, with Covetous man being met,
Said to him, Fie, base wretch, thou art in debt
Unto thy belly and thy back, for both
Do want the use of meat, and drink, and cloth:
And thou do only pinch, and pine, and spare,
To hord up money, keeping body bare,
To cramme thy bags, and fill thy gaping purse,
Fool, beast, base-minded, none so vile, none worse.
Quoth Covetousness, Thou spend-thrift of thy state,
Whom I detest with a most deadly hate,
Thy fleshly carrion all consumes, and spends,
(Besides thine own) what thou can catch of friends.
To eat and drink thy self in endless Debt,
And in the end thou will a lodging get
In Ludgate, or the Counter, there to lie,
Till loathsome life constrain thee wish to dye.
Then came a Drunkard, that could scarcely go,
And he upon a Broker did bestow
Outrageous raylings, cursing him to hell,
With all that ever he should buy and sell:
Unworthy wretch, to live in Commonwealth,
That dare not do as I do, drink a health
To all good fellows, that by Sea and Land
Will pledge carouse, as long as legs can stand.
Sir (quoth Broker) look you fetch your pawn,
I will unto no longer day be drawn:
You have had time enough to pay me in,
And now I Will plague thee for thy drunken sin.
Base Knave, I hate a Drunkard with my heart,
Though I* with Usury will never part.
It is the trade by which my liuing's got,
I Will use it still, honest, or honest not.
Drunkard, reele on, until the Stocks possess thee,
Broker (quoth Drunkard) Brandons Halter bless thee.
Instructions given to a Country Clown,
To take Tobacco, when he comes to Town.

A Cheater meeting with a simple Clown,
Would give him Wine, because he knew the town,
Where goodman Boore his countryman did dwell,
And all his neighbors he knew passing well:
Entering the Tavern, and the wine bespoke,
Quoth Cheater, Bring me here a Pipe of smoke
To purge my Rhume, by spetting to forsake it.
Gentleman (quoth the Clown) would I could take it*
Says he, I Will teach thee, (do observe me here)
To take Tobacco like a Caualeere.
Thus draw the vapor through your nose, and say,
Puff, it is gone, fuming the smoke away.
The Gull, that would be a Tobaconist:
Had cup, or pipe, continual in his fist,
Until with puff, it is gone, his senses shrunk,
And he was got by practice, Claret drunk.
The Cheater took his time, and did pretend
To go fast by, and call a special friend
To drink with them, and so conuayes the Cup,
And lets him sit, who takes his pipefull up,
And smokes it off, with puff it is gone. Oh brave,
The very whiffe, most dainty now I have.
At length the Drawer looked into the room,
And said, My friend, where is the Cup become?
He with his Pipe, the old tune plays upon,
Oh brave Tobacco, gallant, Puff, it is gone.
Gone, quoth the Vintner? by my faith and't be,
You are the man, is like to answer me.
Where is the friend was with you even now?
We Will have our Cup before you go, I vow.
He noses it, and holds the Pipe to the other,
And says, Hey, puff, it is gone most bravely, Brother.
Is It gone, quoth he? then friend, thus much I Will say,
You have the reckoning, and a Cup to pay:
Your puff it is gone, is like to cost your purse,
The reckning's something, but the Goblet's worse.
When all is discharged, that does as yet remain,
Then welcome puff, our Cup is come again.
Such Oast, such ghest, the Proverb says,
Ill Servants choose bad Masters ways.

A Master that delight in lies did take,
Did keep a man, would sooth up all he spoke,
Who being one time with Gentlemen of worth
At dinner set, this lie he vented forth:
It was my hap of late to make a shoot,
And strike a Dear quite through ear and foot.
This may seem strange, unto all you that hear it,
But ask my man, he saw it, and will swear it.
Quoth they, This is incredible: and we
Entreat some reason, how the same could be.
Why, quoth his Man, even as the Dear did lie,
My Master took his aim, and letting fly,
The Dear with hinder foot did scratch an ear,
And he shot through both at once, I Will swear.
Indeed (quoth they) thou do some reason show,
There Is possibility it may be so,
And laughing past it merrily away,
At last his man in secret thus did say,
Sir, I entreat, that if your Worship please,
To let your friends have any more of these,
That are so gross they lie upon your hand,
And I unto the proof of them must stand,
To give your Tales more scope into the weather,
For I could hardly bring this lie together:
The distance 'twixt the Foot and Ear was such,
That I had much ado to make them tuch.
Therefore in selling bargains to your buyers,
Take heed we be not (as we are) found liars.
Epigram.
A Scholar riding on the way alone,
Fearelesse of Coin, (for money he had none,)
Was set upon by two, that did command
With Thieves authority, Deliver, Stand,
For Stand (quoth he) my masters that I Will do,
But to other word, I cannot yield unto,
Which is Deliver: Pray you give me leave
Before I do Deliver, to Receive.
But yet I will deliver, and unfold
Advice, that shall be better worth then gold:
Deliver not your soul to Satan thus,
Remember Christ, that has redeemed us.
Deliver not your members slaves to sin,
That Newgate so do entertain you in.
Deliver not your selves unto the Bar,
To be condemned (as you know thieves arr.)
Deliver not your Necks unto the Halter,
But from false Knaves, to honest true men alter.
Scholar (quoth they) for this we are in debt,
We will leave theeuing, but we cannot yet.
We are sworn Brothers for a year in troth,
If the Rogue Hangman, do not break our oath.
Epigram.
MAdam, you ouercharge me with expense,
Which to my purse, I find a great offense,
This catching fashions at the first rebound,
I am afraid, will run your Knight a ground:
We are in Mercers books, and Tailors Bills,
And there remain (God knows) against their wills,
No helping trick, that I to mind can call,
But make new debts, to pay old scores withal.
Sir Barren Brain (quoth Madam, to her Knight)
What tell you me of charge? take I delight,
To have account how you do run in Debt?
My care is how to spend; care you to get.
I do protest, I will not forth of door,
Until our Coach have got two Horses more.
Ride but with two? why, what says vulgar speeches?
It Is very basely done, You wrong your Breeches.
And therefore, Sir, Hark private in your ear,
Give me content, or I Will do that, I swear.
Epigram.
WHat was the cause we two fell out last night?
Let Us know some reason for it ere we fight,
Though thou regard'st not thy flesh, nor I mine,
Yet let us not be insenc'd by drunken wine.
Speak, prithee speak, who gave the first distaste?
Were thou by me, or I by thee disgraced?
Marry (quoth the other) as I take it, thus:
There was a Health refused by one of us,
I know not which: but who did stab the chair
Even in contempt of her that last sat there?
Which of us first on Mistress Luce did rail?
Who put the salt into the bottle Ale?
And thrust the Candle in the quart of Sack?
Who called Tom Roring-Boy behind his back?
And broke Snels Pipes, in spite against the wall?
This I remember very perfect all*
But cannot tell which of us swagger'd so,
And therefore let this scuruy quarrel go.
Rapier, and Poniard, shall not have the day:
Rabbet, and Pullet, they shall end the fray.

