A Remembrance for the maintenance of the living of Ministers and preachers,
now notablye decuyed, exhibited unto the right reverend father in god Thomas
bishop of Elye, synguler patron of all good learning.

Anno dn^i. 1551.

Imprinted at London by Wyllyam Seres, dwelling at Peter College.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

TG

For the maintenance of ministers living.
OFfering this Breife declaration unto your lordship of the reasonable cause
whi alfermours or owners of Abbey lands being disolued ought and should be
co^tributours and helpers to the living of their person or vicar wtin whose
parish they be (as ye case hereof has hapened between me and one of those
fermers) Some would judge perchance that I were a man given to a certain
covetousness of living, and thyncke (I suppose) al were to little for prestes,
many would bolte out their grudge saienge: this fellow smells of papistrie,
and goes about to set up the kingedome of Prestes. But what soever any man
does conceive at the first hearing of ye title of my declaracion. This will I
protest before god and ye whole world, yt I speak nothig but moved with ye zeal
of the auau^cement of ye gospel and gods true lerninge, which of very necessity
must go to ye ground (if god of his wonderful goodness stay it not up) except
ye students and preachers thereof may be maynteyned with honest and
sufficyent living in the Service thereof. For by Livings all men are enkindled
to ye studies of good lerning. No man will run for naught, and if there be no
Reward when he comes to the marks end he thincketh his labor lost in
ronninge thither. Wherefore in that that your lordeshippes ernest and pure
zeal toward gods truth, and the painful Laborers therein (at my humble
suet made unto you, for ye redress of ye same matter, willed me to put you in
remembrance thereof at ye time of ye parliament: I thought it my bounde^ deuty
so to do and some thing to travail herein, in settinge forth ye matter more
plainly with my pen. Trusting thereby ye at your lord ships hands my suet
should have ye better success, and most especially for yt you have been
always a synguler fauorer and preferrer of learned men, that now you would be
a patron to their studies, and to the knowledge and leruinge that shall
spring after your days, and to help no less to preserve and continue good
lerning amongst us, then you have heretofore helped to bring it in. And
although there be Rewards suffycyente and plentyfull enough before god for
all men's pains and studyes in virtue if men would look thytherwarde and wait
there for Reward (as it becomes them to do) yet the nature of man is such,
that if he see the maintenance of his Living in study fail (as it were his
breath in his Raze to wax short) by and by he begins to fainte and sets
him self down idellie, resting otherwise then else he would do. Wherefore an
honest exhibycion of Living is a great prouocatyon and stay unto al
industryous labor and diligence. As long as a man has his due reward, his
pains is thought the less how many and great soever they be. The reward of
study failynge, and the living of ministres and preachers not nourysshed, is
thoccasion at this day unto many of shrinckynge from their estate and vocation
and applieng the^ selves to some other faculty to no little decaie of Christ
his faith and Religion. In so much ye where as ministres ought according to
Paul his lesson, Timot. iiii.
give them selves cheifelie and before al things to exhortacion and doctrine,
do clean contrary applieng the in selves to the world and forsakinge the
study of the word. The which thing to be true, we may perceive and se
partly by common experience many that have sometime labored in ye gospel (not
altogether vnfrutefullie) being not able to purchase great benefices as it is
now a days a common practice to do) nor to live otherwise of their stipendes
and cures, are driven to keep all houses, exercise the craft of Carpenters,
tailors, and other occupations, which thing comes to pass thorough ye fault
of uncharitable hearts much choked with covetousness, having nether zeal
toward the Gospel, nor the setters fourth thereof being not wylling to yield
to their minystres, which dayle and hourly have labored to bring the^ from
darcknes to light, that which is dew to them by Scripture, whereby they
might be able to bie books, apparel, with other means toward the
maintenance of their study, and Keep hospitality for the relief of the
poor, according to the will and commandment of god. i. Timo. iii
Like as a man goinge on warfare must needs live of the common coost, and so
being provided for does his deutie a great deal the better: Even so
ministres to thentent they may be able, and more willing to do their duties,
ought to have all things necessary and sufficient without care, grudge, or
suet for the same. The manners of me^ much is to be lamented in these days,
which declares greatelye their unworthiness of the gospel thorough the
dissimulacion and unthankful hearts which they show toward them that
have thouersyght of the^, in that a great number is readier contrary to the
doctrine of the holy Apostle, to take, to snatche, to catch, hebr. xiii.
and to spoil them of that little which they have, then to give that, which in
conscience, they are bounden to give. This vnthanckefulnes appears to them
which unfeignedly favors gods true lerninge, a great euel, seeing they
spoil Christ in that they deprive his ministres of their living. For as woo
shall be to the which so largely does feed the Balaanites ye ministres of Satan
that they should abound in all plenteousnes. Even so they feed Christ, Mat. x.
that nourishes his and the setters out of his doctrine, and shall receue
their full reward at his hand. What plentiful hands has been opened to ye
family and household of Baal? What gorgious houses what su^ptuous monasteries
has been builded for such a couente of Oules, and a herd of swyne, being
evermore obscurers of the light of the truth? What abu^dau^ce of riches did
they heap up what prince or what degree was he of, yt was not benefycyall to
them? But in this world, wherein the brightness of gods true light does most
manifestlye appear thorough gods prechers (by ye hand of our most gracious and
noble king Edward the sixte, deliueringe his people from Babilo^ that is fro
the heavy tradicions of ye bishop of Rome, to the exceeding consolation and
comfort of al people that faithfully coueteth the veryties furtherau^ce to the
great discomfort of them yt desires the hinderance of ye same. What scarsite
find they? what simple living do they possess? what small rewards have they
for their good labors? in min opinion truly the ernest setting out of this
doctrine is of such a price and value, ye Englyshmen had never greater cause
to thancke God and to pray for the gracious prosperity of their most worthy
King and his honorable and learned counsel, then for this matter, and also to
be ye more encoraged to declare themselves loving to the faithful overseers and
setters out of this doctrine, yea and that much more then they were to the idle
lubbers and domme dogs of that monstreous Religion in times paste.

Many at this day will feign to be very glad to hear the gospel, but when it
comes to pass, that either they may do a displesure to the setter out of it,
or by any pryuy means hindre him of that which is his very deutie, then they
show contrary to gods doctrine, with al ernestnes, their hypocrisye, which
they have long norished in their dissembling hearts both toward the word
and the preachers thereof. These. v.
No small guard also of such brethren there is that little pass either of god
or of good order, thinckyng themselves to be parfect masters, when in deed
they were never good scollers, which will say: why should they be chargeable
unto us? let them labor with their hands as Paul did. Wherein their error and
blindness does appear, in that they thyncke the office of preachinge the word,
were an idle thing and not labor: Al though sai^ct paul as we read, acts.
xx.
did get his living with his hands, and left that which was dew, with them
to whom he had preched, which thing he did by liberty and not by necessity:
Yet he lost not his right of axing his deutie, which lawfully he might have
had. ii. Cor. ii.
This Apostle as he witnesses Robbed other congregations, and took wages of
them, that he might preach the Gospel frelye to the Corinthians, ii. Cor. ii
and to do them service. Saint Augustine therefore in his book of works
says, If they be evangelists, if they be ministers, they must live of the
goods of the faithful.

Christ promised unto his Apostles the same, and commanded the^ to reserve of
the people things necessary. Temporalties ought to serve as instruments to
spirytual things, and so that benefyte to be given, to the preachers office
and aid of his living. The work man is worthy his wages, that is: if they
receiving of the temporal reward be spent in the administracion of spiritual
things and not laid up in coffres but bestowed in necessities and keeping
houses of hospitality not in purchasing of great possessions, or in
mainteining pomp, pride, delicate fear, fedinge of hounds, hawks, carding
and disinge, and such like euelles, for of such heat what is said in
scripture: Job. xxi.
They have led their days in vanity and wealth? but suddenly they go down to
hell.

These be they that executes their office not as Peter and Paul did, but as
Judas amongst the apostles, and as Simon Magus amongst the dysciples. These
(I say) are blind guides to the people, eue^ as smoke ye blinds men's eyes
in stead of a clear light. Therefore this sentence is worthy to ru^ne upon them.
That they be cast over ye board, be put out of their Romes, and other to be
placed. It is a sentence also most pithie to admonish them, where as the
apostle says: Timo. iiii.
take heed unto your selves, see yt you run in this world that you may
receive a full reward as the Philippia^s did, i. Cor. ix.
which ple^tifully distributed that manyfold grace given by paul his preching,
which walked in their vocation not in the pomp of the world, which
distributed, not studied to lay up and hyde. In like manner the covetousness that
in these days generally reigns (I know not whyther it be more worthy to be
lamented then spoken unto) the practices be shameful that they use for the
brynging in of money, their mouths are as wide as hell never being content but
groping for occupie^g not of fermes but of towns not of Towns but of hole
contreis, in the desire of encroching they be so roted that they cast in their
hertes how they may defraude every man of his living, or at the least of some
part thereof. And also with what spytefull rebukes, tauntings, and
sclau^dringes, those covetous men deface and put to silence the earnest setters
out of the doctrine of Christ it is wonderful, and to much shame to speak
of. They would make the ministres their servants, the preachers coloters and
berers with their wickedness, of who^ the prophets speaks. This is an obstinat
people dissembling Children, Esai. xxx.
that refuses to hear ye law of the Lord. For they say unto the seers: se
not, and to the^ that be clear of judgment, look not out right things for us,
but speak fair words unto us. The work of robery is in their hands, Esai.
lix.
in the way of craft and falsehode they go, but the way of the Lord they
will not know. But no marvel it is in deed that the world at this day is
thus bent toward the stewards and disposers of ye secrets of God for it has
been so sense the beginning. Take Abel for example, what small favor had Moses
and Aaron among the cruel Iues, Gene. iiii. Number. xvi.
when they brought the^ out of Egypt with many others mo, as Jacob, Joseph,
David, and Elias. Yea when the wise men showed king Herod, that the King of
the Jews was borne? he was sore vexed and al Jerusalem with him. Mat. ii.
It is no small vexation and disturbaunce yt rises at the true sound of gods
word amongst a nombre of covetous men and pharesies, But verily as when the
Kingdom of the papists religion flourished it brought forth riches, and then
riches as it were her daughter springing up so fast devoured the mother. Even
so (I fear me) we shall fall now into a worse extremity then that was,
thorough neade and necessitye, and be compelled to do as when a man's science
fails him. Act. iiii.v.
And therefore I can not a little allow the fathers of ye primitive church,
which sold al yt ever they had for the maintenance of Christ's gospel, nether
was there any amongst the^ that lacked. Yea and the^ also which founded
Colleges giving great yearly rentes for ye staiyng and upholding of learning
from time to time, with mani and diverse well affected me^ unto virtue and
knowledge which were wo^t to give exhibicio^ to scolers in universities, and
bring up pore men's sons in learning. And now what streams of tears may
seem sufficient unto us in speakinge of the wonderful decay thereof, which
will be the very bringing in again of ignorance, barbarousnes, and cruelty. And
where as the laws of this Realm binds Clerks of.C.li. liuinges to find
certain scollers in the universities, Yet they be so slothful them selves, and
have so little mind to that yt they do not study, yt it were as good no law
to be made and better, for then were it no offense to their conscience not to
do that they knew they were not bound to do. But what is further to be said,
see you not that even whereas the late king of most noble memory King Henry
the eight has builded colleges, and given great yerelye stipendes for the
maintenau^ce of pore men's children to learning, which were not able of them
selves so to set them forward. How shamefullye even straight ways this
thing is abused, emongeste men of knowledge, and of a high profession of gods
word, that every gentleman as he can best make his friend brings in his
Son thither, and keeps him there, with the living ordained for the pore man's
son, where he must be daintelye brought up, with as little applyeng of lerninge
as may be, saving for his breking a while to se the manner of the university,
and so prolo^g a time there almost in idleness. Where the pore scholar is
driven to his study, and would with all his heart refuse no pains to come to
knowledge (how hard so ever they were) if he had yt to put in his bealye and
lay on his back to keep him there, that the gentleman's son against all
reason and conscience in mine opinion kepethe from him, Yea and many of them
minding to depart from the university, a little before procures a like
chapman to labor for his rome. So that the world is so far run in
blindness at this day by covetousness in catchyng all and departing from nothing
that onelesse other prouysyon be found or this that is already made be better
looked unto, it will come to pass that the way which is thought to expel
papystrye long rooted amongeste the people, will be the redrest and most
strongest mean to bring it in again, in that the mayntenaunce of students
does want, whereby it is impossyble yt good learning should spring. What is
he that has traueled in study these many years yt at this present can receive
the reward of his study. That is, other a benefyce or like Living at a nombre
of hands, but it shall be other sold, or equally divided between the taker and
the giver, or else it passes over to simple sir John, which can scase read an
homely, and in deed looks for no further, if that he can bring ye well to
pass. And so the Benefyce being worth.xl.li. by year, he shall have.xx. nobles
being a person in name, and a very servant in deed. Yea, and some pretend
(if they might be suffered to bring it to pass) to unite their patronages
shortli to their inheritance. Would not this bring in a great pouertye think
you? Would not poverty seek again after old romysh merchandise thyncke you?
I fear it much. O case most lamentable, and men most unworthy such
patronages. With what face shall such look at the latter day before the
judgment seat of the great judge Christ Jesus? Or such of whom the
scripture says: Thenemie has put his hand to al things to him desierable,
Lamen. i.
for ye he has a certain people Lawles entering into his sanctuary, that
neither them selves keep the law of God, nor suffer the^ to come in that can
teach other.

Therefore God by his Prophet Osee says: Osias. iiii.
For that thou haste put away the knowledge of gods will, I will put the away,
yt thou shall use no priesthode to me, how wilt you answer God, O ignorant
priest, when thou shalt come to thy rekening, it is to be fered thou will
stand dombe for lack of answer, and for confusion of thine own conscience.
Thou I say, and thy master the patron placynge the not as a heard, but as an
hyrlynge, both you twain (I say,) shall fall into this most horrible
sentence. Mat. xxii.
Take them and bind them hand and foot. etc.

And what is to be thought here in of wicked inproperatio^s of benefices, which
have plucked from students lawefull livings, being ordained for the
Preachers of the Gospel. Many Godly men surely have preached and declared
openly herein their learning and gods truth to the utter condemnation of the
same, to whom I subscrybe with all my heart, wyshing of god most hartelye a
redress to be taken in the abolishmente of the same, or at the least it will
please the kings majesty his most excellent and gracious goodness, having
respect to the living of his prechers within his Realm, would not here after
grant or suffer any such licenses of improperacions to pass, and I would
wyshe that the bishops would not give their good will and consent thereunto for
obscience sake, yt at the least we might reserve unto the posterity of
stude^tes, and learned men yt shall follow us, no smaller or fewer rewards for
their study then we have found. What shall we say unto mam of the houses of
religion (as they called the^) which were exempted from paienge or
contrybuting any thing to the mayntenaunce of ministres and preachers, by
reason whereof, the owners and fermours at this day claim to pay nothing, and
yet to have the ministres as much bound to them as to the rest of the parish,
i. Tim. v.
I would have the owners of the^ note well saint Paul's saying herein: The
elders that rules well are worthy double honor. Most specially they which
labor in the word and techyng. And ye scripture says. Thou shall not mosell
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Deu. xxv. i. Tim, v.
Have they any Auctorytie to condemme this? Or gave they any liberty by this to
famish the Ox, or to scant the Ox of his meat? No forsooth. for thou shall not
(says the scripture) cast any Mosell upon his mouth. And what if those dull
and fat oxen which were estalled in their Abbayes, grated upon the people in
this (as in all things they laid importible burdens upon them) claymynge to
feed and live upon their goods. Were those think you the oxen that ye
scripture here speaks of? Or if they were, is there any succession or
inheritance into the office of those Oxen? No verelye, for in that saying of
the scripture, there is a further thing then appears, for it is not meant but
of the spiritual Ox, the preacher, the spiritual treader out of the corn of
the lyuyshe word of god unto his people. Such treaders Christ byddeth us
desire our Mat. x,
heavenly father to send into his harvest. But those Abbey Oxen were
scholemasters of ceremonies, ma^s traditions, supersticion, and finallye of all
ignorance. Wherefore if you be not like the^ whose lands now you do posses (as
if you were, you were unworthy of any thing) if you have not ye gift of
preachinge (as it is manifest you have not) which way then should you claim to
live upon that portion of living which parteyneth to the oxen that draw in
Gods ploughe? Mary you will peradventure give place to ye manifestnes of Gods
scripture in this behalf (as you must needs) and you will bring me in a
reason for your purpose on this wise. We have purchased these fredomes and
exemptions of payme^te of Tithes of the kings majesty, his most noble
progenitors, and we have them granted unto us in as ample wise as the
monasteryes ever had. Why should then our liberties thereof be taken from us?
Well, mark I pray you a great sort of you yt with hold these duties, were
not your monasteries parishes by the^ selves? And never chargeable to ^ vicars
or persons of any parish? it cannot be denied, the^ will I improve your reason
on this wise. The peculiaritie of your fredomes (is certain) was in respect of
your paryshes. Your parishes be extinct, ergo your fredome is extinct. Whi
should you then seeing your parishes be dyssolued associate your selves to the
floke of the herdma^, and contrary to saint Paul's lesson not suffer him to
eat of your milk?

Peradventure again you will stand in this, and say generally, Cor. ix.
That no man by the scripture of god is bound to pay any tithes of duty to
their Curates as things which they may not pretermit, but such as they are
able to spareter the mesure of their own conscience, and as they see them do
their duties. Pithely spoken, and as much I think as is used to be said for
you, wherein thus many matters you comprehe^d. The paymente of tithes whether
they be of necessity and by the law of god or no? Then whither your ability
ought to be looked upon in the paime^t thereof (As for your conscience I will not
speak of it, for it is no question whither you should pay any if they were
mesured by your conscience.) Last of al whither the not doing of the ministers
duties as you look for, be a suffycient cause for you to abbrydge them of their
tithes. To prove that the tithes be of necessite, and by ye law of God, ye
books of Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, Deutro, Malach, Ecclesiasticus, do teach
the plainly, the authority is good my voucher is true.

Yea mary you say, but the old law was but a figure, and the figures be
abolished and vanished away with the law.

You run very fast away, but stay a little, and harken what Christ says:
Think not that I come to destroy the law, or the Prophets. Mat. v.
No, I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. Then marcke that Christ is come
to fulfill, which is to approve, to allow, and to make good the sayings of
the law and the Prophets, and not to condemn them and take them clear away
as shadows. For although Christ's coming abolished and did drive away (being
him self the perfection and the end of the law) al figures and signs, under
which his most acceptable coming did appear. The residue of the law which
pertains to erudicion, example, and institucion necessary among us, he did
not condemn or take away, as appears Luke ii. in this same point, where he
rebukes ye Pharisees for great matters yt they left undone, Luke ii.
yet for their due payinge of tithes which they hyghlye esteemed of mynte, and
rewe, he rebuked them not, but rather allowed, he checked them for their
peruersitie, he reprehended not there diligence of tything. As to the ability
of payers of tithes whither it be, to be considered in ye paiyng thereof? If
there ability be sufficyente, they are concluded as you se, and must needs
pay. If they be poor and indygent, then are the tithes, although they be,
received by the ministres part also of there portion of living, and ought to
be distributed and larged out by the mynisters to the mayntenaunce and help
of ye poor widows and fatherless or what so ever they be, wherein ye
scripture does not only consent, but also ye auctoryte of many ancient
Doctors, for in deed ye goods of the church be the goods of ye poor. But now
a days ye greatest number of them be but simple distributers, for they scarce
can be trusted for meat and drink to put in there own bellies. Then whether
the not doing of the minister his duty as ye people look for be a sufficient
cause to abridge them of there duties or no? All though in deed I would have
no minister think that he has done his part sufficiently enough in that
behalf, but that he should traueile and spend his time continually
instructing, enformyng, and exercisinge his flock in the knowledge and
lerninge of gods holy Gospel. Yet if he have not such a gift and talente
of learning or vtteraunce given him as other have, whereby he may satisfye
the desyer of a great sort for as ye apostle says: The gifts of the holy
ghost be diverse, and every man has received according to the mesure of the
gift of God yet he ought not therefore to be dispysed, or to have his living
taken from him, spetially if he travel with all his diligence and with his
best power. To do more, then the gift which they have received does extend
unto, they are not bidden, for saint Peter bydeth them. i. Peter. v.
See that you feed so much as lies in you. And I would not have them in deed
do one jot less thoroughe Idelenes or entanglinge in other necessary matters
for there is a great wait hangs upon there heads, the blood of the sheep
shall be required at the shepherdes hands. The^ is it manifest that their
duties hang not upon your expectacio^, Eze. xxxiii.
but upon their own diligence.

And now to these Abbey owners again I say, if they will be of the
congregation, they must do as the congregation does. The congregation is
bound to minister unto their teachers and overseers, ergo they be bound to do
likewise. But although they could fetch them a good title from the law of man
(which they would feign find out) to discharge them selves of distributing to
ye prechers living, shall Christ and all the testimonies of his scripture
work nothing herein to inform there conscience? Christ says: The workma^
is worthy his wages, Math. x
how dareste thou then keep it from him? Saint Paul says: He that is taught
in the word ought to minister unto him that teaches him in all good things.
Who is then exempted? Who is discharged? or what is it thou should grudge to
give him? And further he says that in hope he ye ploweth should plow, and he
that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. And that it may be
plainly perceived what the apostle means by it, straight way he says: If we
have sown spiritual things unto you, is it a great matter if that we reap
your carnal things? Do not you know yt they which labor in holy
things, live of the same? Even so the Lord has ordained yt they which preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Manifest it is to every one that
unfeignedly searches the word of GOD, how of duty the people ought to bring
in unto gods preachers things sufficient. For though their office be high
and heavenly, yet God does not use communely to send his angels thence to
bring them meat and money. But his will is that they to whom the word and
sacraments are m nistred, whether they be owners of monasteries or farmers,
should plentifully and very wyllyngely reward them for their labor. And
therefore, he opens the wyndowes of heaven unto them, and pours out unto
them a blessing with plentuousnes of corn, fruit, Malach. iii.
and manifold increase.

And herein a godlier order ca^ not otherwise be devised for their honest
rewards, Exodus xxii. Leui. xxvii. Nu. xviii. Deu. xii. Malach. iii. Eccle. vii.
then almighty god ordained and appointed in Moses time, that the tenthe part
of all that came out of the ground should be given unto the Levites and
Priests, Eccle. vii. ^at. iii.
and that without fraud and of the best. They that will may read, none was
then exempted, and why should any now be exempted, but rather be bound more by
the law of GOD to give after the rule of charity.

The ministers of the church of God has a several office from al other, and
therefore God will that a several provision be made for them, or else it should
be a great hinderaunce to the preaching of the gospel, in that they should
of necessity be driven to get their living by some other faculty.

Provision was made by Gods appointment, for the priests of the old law and
shadows, and shall not the ministers of the Gospel be much more provided for,
as well of the goods of owners and fermours of dissolved Abbey lands as of
other, seeing they preach not shadows, but the truth it self: both to those
fermers and owners as to all other? The dygger, the Clayer, the Carpenter, the
Tyleman looks for his wages, and is sure to have it, much more he that
laboreth in the harvest of ye lord, ought to be sure of his wages, and to be
paid with a good will, so much as the soul is better the^ the body.

Saint Paul that elect vessel of GOD says: Cor. ix.
that those that preach the Gospel, should live thereby, yt is of there goods
to who^ it is preached. But for as much as the hearts and stomakes of me^ be
so soore corrupt and defiled with dissimulation and indignacion not only
against ye prechers, but also (as appears by their deeds) against the verites
furtheraunce, to have a positive law is very necessary. That where as the
word of God that spiritual sword can not provoke them to that thing which
is good, yet that the fear of the temporal sword might compel them to do
well. I mean the owners and farmers of Abbey grainges which be taught and
ministered unto with other, yet will help nothing unto the living of their
Curate with other.

For as it has been always the ordeynaunce of God to have spiritual pastors
to enstruct the people with his word: even so by the same ordinances, kings
and chyefe rulers are ordained to defend the same with the swerd.

And as abundaunce of riches and possessions can not help man, but rather
causes him to forget him self, Yea oftentimes oppresses him as too great a
waighte does a Ship. Eue^ so poverty and much beggerlynes brings a man
oftentimes into disdain, and makes him to be forgotten. And as the man's
person is disdained, so is his doctrine vilipended and set at naught.

The very beginning of al error and misorder in this world as the learned man)
says, is the depreuation of judgments when as things have not their due
rewards.

And surely like as that family and household can not stand and endure where as
envy and disdain one toward another raygneth,

Even so I fear me, if that the suppression of lyuynges of ministers and
preachers be winked at. Yea if they be not maynteined with the rule of his
doctrine that judges every thing with ryghtuousnes, not only the number
thereof shall decay, but the bishops them selves in not prouydynge and
speaking for them, shall also be a just punishment of God, have their
lyuynges so taken from them, that at the length they shall be cast into like
poverty.

The which if it should so come to pass, how little their word and
preaching should be regarded? How great confusion also otherwise should
ensue, every man within him self playnelye perceyueth, and daily more and
more may understand. To preach Christ's Gospel sincerely (to the bishops
their lyuynges was given,) and also not to forgette in their abundaunce, the
oppressed and neady, but to have a diligent eye unto them, especially which
are of the household of fayeth: if they be never so politykelye occupied, and
bear never so great a zeal to the commune wealth. Yet if they seek not
first therein, the kyngedome of GOD, Mat. vi.
and the maintenance of his holy word and service, all is but vain what
soever they do.

Let no man be seduced nor snared with the dignity and promotio^ of this world,
nor desire to follow ambicion, which thing when some men have coueted, they
have forsaken and forgotten their right vocation, applyinge them selves to
things not necessary. But let them rather follow quietness in studi of lerning,
a thing passinge al wordly tresures (if a man have sufficient to the
maintenance thereof,) and take no head what the most part does, or what is
most profitable for ye purse, but what is to be done riches and dignities if
they come not by virtue they are euel, if they come by virtue, then is virtue
better then they, and they not much to be regarded. Yet notwithstanding as a
man ca^ not be called a parfect and a whole man lackyng any parts or members
belonging to man, so is it no parfect common wealth (except it be maintened with
all estates degrees and sorts of people) expedient and necessary to the same.

Therefore like as a man is specially governed by reason, which defends and
looks unto all the members of the body, even so a Realm does floryshe
thorough a virtuous and a loving king to wards his subjects, by executing
true justice that the la^be may dwell by the wolf, the poor by ye rich. And
as al ye other parts of man as his head, fete and hands with the reast
stands need each of other and all to ye maintenau^ce of the bodi: So al
degrees of people are to the up holdinge and staying of the common welthe as
magistrates artificers with such other

Again, as the body can not well govern it self without the principal
part of the eye, but shall wander, not knowing whyther to go: So the people
being destitute of their eyes, which are the preachers of Gods word, shall
fall into all errors and blindness of the soul, and the^ let them none
otherwise think, but that al shall go against them, what so ever good thing
they take in hand. For he that knows not God aryghte, that loves him not,
that dreadeth and fears not his terrible threatenynges, him will he give up
to follow his own blindness, there is no doubt, Romans i.
as he has done unto them, in whom the prophecye of Esaias at this day is
verified. Of these he looked for equity, but se, Esaie. v.
there is wrong for righteousness. Lo it is but misery. etc And amongst us
where towns and villages were fruitfullie occupied with husbandrye, by wicked
oppression lo they be fallen down and turned into pastures, or else one or two
men holds the^ al and let their neighbors have none. Well let the^ be meri a
while. The darcknes of Hell shall fall upon such at the last, let the^ not
doubt. For it is impossible for a cursed extorcioner or a couetouse idolater
that trusts in the dead God of his riches and sacrifieth so unto him, to se
the light of heaven. Saint Paul charge you that are rich in this world,
that you be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
god (which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy them) that you do good
worckes, i. Tim. vi.
that you be ready to give, and glade to distribute, laiynge up in store for
your selves a good foundacio^ against the time to come, that you may obtain
eternal life. Take good head to your selves I say again, Mark well ye
Israelites so long as they were obedient to the laws of God, flourished with al
plentifulnes. But after they fell from ye true worshipping of God* little
regarding the instructions and teachynges given the^ of god by Moses and Aaron
their guides, they were banished from al their wealth and sore scourged of God,
and brought into captivity.

Wherefore let us diligently harke^ to ye commandments of God. Let us
ernestly regard the^ lest we taste of the mysfortunes that fell upon the
Israelites. Let us regard the prechers thereof, Ebrue. xiii.
and maynteine gods messengers amongst us that watch for our souls eue^ as
they that must give accomptes, yt they may do it with joy and not with grefe,
and they shall teach us to walk so yt we shall not slide. Let us cherish their
studies if they be necessary me^bres among us, let us provide yt the nu^bre
of them decay not, but pray that it may be multiplied. Al you yt be patrones of
learning in this realm, now set to your hands yt learning seek her not an
other region to dwell in, compelled with poverty. But embrace her amongst your
selves, interteine her, and retain her dyligently with all the provision you
can make, It is now time and that with speed: for covetousness, ambycyon, and
pride, stands in wait for their rewards, and thursteth at her very sore to
drive her away. In whose cause, I at this time all th nges (right honorable
lord) wayed and considered, and according to gods holy word sincerly and
purelie discussed, having not so much an eye to mine own co^modite as to ye
co^moditye and profit of many other, yea, and to the horrible inco^moditie of
al true christians (if remedy be not found in this behalf) do here humbly
beseech your Lordship, yt as you have been a singular patron of al good and
virtuous studies, a defender of the truth, a mayntener of poor men's causes,
that now you will prosecute and go forward to the land of God, and
beautifying of learned studyes to your power, in the redressinge and expulsyng
of all these enormities before rehearsed, now most manifestly rayninge in this
common wealth, for Gods sake, and his holy words sake.

Finis.
By your Lordships most bounden Thomas Ruddoke.

