RIGHT GODLY RVLE; How all faithful Christians ought to occupy and exercise
themselves in their daily prayers.

Luke. 22. Matthew 26. Christ teaches us in his Gospel (...) Watch and pray,
least ye f^^^ into temptation.

Imprinted at London by F. Kingston. 1602

GODLY PRAYERS.
For Monday. Morning Prayer.
O Most loving God and gracious father in Christ, we thank thee for that
sweet sleep and comfortable rest, that thou have given us this night: and
forasmuch as thou ha^t commanded us by thy (...) w^rd, that no man s^ be
idle, but always oc^pied in virtuous exercises, every man according to his
calling: we most humbly beseech thee, that thine eyes may attend us daily,
and defend us, and in sorrow succor, cherish, and comfort us. And so govern
(good Lord) all our counsels, studies, and labors, that we may spend this
day according to thy most blessed ^^ll, without hurting of our ^^^^hbour, yea
that (...) diligently and warily eschew and avoid all things that should
displease thee, set thee always before our eyes, and live in thy fear, and
ever work thou so in us, that we may be found continent, pure of living,
temperate, and acceptable before thy divine Majesty, unto the praise of thy
most holy and blessed name, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

For Tuesday. Morning Prayer.
SEeing that thou (oh heavenly Father) art that one and alone Almighty God,
which art in every place, and beholdest the counsels, devices and works,
yea the very thoughts of all men, and give to every one ^^cording to their
deeds: we humbly beseech thee for Christ Jesus his sake, to give us this
grace, that forasmuch as thou have graciously preserved us this night past,
we may not spend this day present, nor any other day of our lives, after our
own minds and pleasure, which is always evil and wicked, but more earnestly
look upon and diligently follow thy fatherly will, thy everlasting counsel,
thy faithful word and pleasure, which is always good, perfect and holy, and
perform ye same with chearefulnes, that thy divine name may always be sanctified
both now and evermore of us miserable sinners, thorough thy dearly beloved Son
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

For Wednesday. A Morning prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the bright Sun of ye world, ever rising, never
falling, which with thy wholesome look, preseruest, nourishest, and make
joyful all things that are in heaven and earth: shine favorably, I beseech
thee, into my spirit, that the night of sins, and mists of errors, being
driven away by thy inward light, I may walk this day, and all the days of my
life without stumbling or offense: comely as in ye day time, being pure from
the works of darkness. Grant this (O Lord) which live and raignest with God
the Father in unity of the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

For Thursday. Morning Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, to whom and before whom all things are manifest and
plain, which also suffer not a Sparrow to light on the ground without thy
providence: and which in times past, by thy holy Spirit did guide our
forefathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in thy paths and ways, and in a strange
country did appoint the same thy blessed Spirit and messenger to be their
guide: Grant me this day most wretched sinner (whom by thy word thou do
encourage to call upon thee in all time of need and necessities) that I may
have the same thy holy Spirit to direct my paths and ways this day, that I
may walk according to thy godly will and pleasure, to the profit of my
neighbor, and glory of thy name, which live and raignest world without end,
Amen.

For Friday. A Morning prayer.
O Merciful Lord God and heavenly Father, I render most high land, praise and
thanks unto thee, for yt thou have preserved me both this night and all the
time and days of my life hitherto under thy defense, and have suffered me to
live unto this present hour: I beseech thee heartily that thou will vouchsafe
to receive me this day, and the residue of my whole life from henceforth into
thy tuition, ruling and governing me with thy holy Spirit, that so all
manner of darkness, of misbeliefe, infidelity, carnal lusts, and affections,
may be utterly chosed and driven out of my heart, and that I may be justified
and saved both body and soul, through a right and steadfast faith, and so walk
in the light of thy most godly truth, to thy glory and praise, and to the
profit and furtherance of my neighbor, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior. Amen.

For Saturday. Morning Prayer.
O Heavenly Father, which like a diligent watchman, attendest always upon thy
faithful people, whether they wake or sleep, and mightily defendest the^, not
only from Satan yt old enemy of mankind, but also from al their adversaries;
so that through thy godly power they be preserved harmless: I humbly thank
thee, for that it has pleased thy goodness so to take care for me thy
unprofitable servant, this night past, that thou have both safely kept me from
all mine enemies, and also given me sweet sleep, unto the great comfort of
my body. I farther entirely beseech thee most merciful and sweet father, to
show the like kindness toward me this day in preserving my body and

For Sunday, or the Sabbath. Morning Prayer.
O Gracious Lord God, and heavenly Father, I humbly beseech thee in Christ so
to sanctify me thoroughout in body, soul, and spirit, that I may religiously
keep and sanctify this Sabbath unto thee, according to thy holy word, not
thinking therein mine own thoughts, nor speaking mine own words, nor doing
mine own works, but thinking, speaking and doing that which is agreeable to thy
blessed will: Give me grace, carefully to frequent the public assemblies of
thy Saints, and diligently to profit by all holy exercises there. Grant me a
religious heart to consent to the prayers of the Church, and an attentive
mind, to hear and understand the good things of truth and life, that shall be
delivered to me out of thy word. And assist me so further, yt when I shall
depart from thy people, I may call mine own heart to account in the things I
have heard, and may confer christianlie with others, for the strengthening of
our faith in our hearts, and for a glorious confession of the same with our
mouths, to ye everlasting praise of thy glorious name, and the eternal
salvation of our souls, through Jesus Christ thy dear son, and our only
mediator and advocate. So be it.

A general Morning prayer.
O Almighty God and our most merciful father in Jesus Christ, I confess and
acknowledge that I am a miserable and a wretched sinner, and have manifold
ways most grievously transgressed thy most godly and blessed commandments,
through wicked thoughts, ungodly lusts, sinful words and deeds, all my whole
life.

In sin was I conceived and borne, and there is no goodness in me, insomuch
that if thou should enter into thy narrow judgment with me, judging me
according unto the same, I were not able to suffer or abide it, but must needs
perish, and be damned for ever. So little help, comfort, or sucour is there
either in me, or in any other creature whatsoever. Only this is my comfort, O
heavenly father, ye thou did not spare thy only and dearly beloved Son,
but did give him up unto the most bitter and most vile and slanderous
death of the Cross for me, that so he might in his obedience pay the ransom
for my sins, satisfy thy judgment, still and pacify thy wrath, reco^cile
me unto thee again, and purchase me thy grace and favor, and euerla^sting
life.

Wherefore through the merits of his most bitter death and passion, and
through his innocent bloudshedding, I beseech thee, O heavenly Father, that
thou will vouchsafe to be gracious and merciful unto me, to forgive and
pardon me all my sins, to lighten my heart with thy holy Spirit, to renew,
confirm and strengthen me with a right and steadfast faith, and to inflame me
in love toward thee and my neighbor for thy sake, that I may henceforth with
a willing and a glad heart walk as it becomes me, in the obedience of thy
most godly and most blessed Commandments, and so glorify and praise thee
everlastingly, and also that I may with a free conscience, and a quiet spirit
in all manner of temptations, afflictions and necessities, and even in the very
pangs of death, boldly and faithfully say:

I believe in God the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne
of the virgin Mary. Suffered under Ponce Pilate. Was crucified, dead, and
buried. He descended into hell. The third day he rose again from the dead.
He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
almighty, from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe
in the holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The communion of Saints. The
forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life
everlasting. Amen.

But (O Lord) heavenly Father, to comfort my self in afflictions and
temptations, with ye assured feeling of these Articles of ye Christian faith it
is not in my power: for faith is thy gift. And therefore forasmuch as thou will
be prayed unto, and called upon for it, I come unto thee to pray and beseech
thee, both for that and for all my other necessities, bodily and spiritual,
even as thy dearly beloved son our Savior Christ Jesus himself has taught
us, and from the very bottom of my heart, I cry and say unto thee.

Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.

Thy kingdom come.

Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil.

For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

unto the lap of thy pity. For lo thou art my hope and trust, in whom I
only repose my self, having in thee full confidence and faith, so that now I
may say with a very faithful heart, trusting in thy mercy: I believe in thee,
O God the Father, in thee O God the Son, and in thee O God the holy Ghost,
three persons and one true, and also very God, besides whom I acknowledge none
other God in heaven above, nor in earth beneath: And yet I poor sinner cannot
but accuse my self unto thee (dear Father) that I have fore and grievously
offended thy almighty goodness and Majesty, in the committing of mine
exceeding grievous and manifold sins and wickedness. For I have not kept the
least of thy most godly and blessed commandments, like as thy righteousness
may require and indeed does dema^d ye same of me, I have not (I say) honored
thee like my God, dread thee like my Lord, loved thee like my father, nor
trusted in thee like my creator and my savior. Thy holy and dreadful name,
unto which al glory and honor belongs, have I used in vain. I have not
sanctified the Sabbath day with works which be acceptable to thee, nor
instructed my neighbor in virtue accordingly. I have not honored my parents,
nor bin obedient unto the^, through whom (as by an instrument) thou have
wrought my coming into this world.

The high powers and rulers, which receive authority of thee, I have not
willingly obeyed. I have not kept my heart pure and clean from malice and
manslaughter: yea, had not thy grace and mercy defended me the better, I
should have committed the very deed also. I likewise am not pure from theft,
nor from adultery, nor from false witness bearing, but have in my heart and
mind wished and desired my neighbors goods and things: I have followed the
great Prince of this World Satan, which has been a liar from the beginning,
in concupiscence of the flesh, in pride of living, in deceiptfulnes, in
lechery, in hatred, and also envy, in backbiting, in despair, and also
misbeleefe. And as I have abused my will and understanding, which are faculties
and powers of my soul: so my senses also, which thou have given me to use to
thy glory, and my neighbors good, and mine own lawful delight, I have
misused and misspent, in hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, and feeling also,
things that I should not, or else suffering the^ to be too violently carried to
things I might have used.

But in what manner soever that I have offended and sinned against thy eternal
Majesty, (for no man knows thoroughly his sins, as the Prophet witnesses)
whether it has been by day or else by night, yea even from my childhood unto
this day, were it in works, words, or thoughts, secretly, or openly, O my
merciful God, I am sorry for it, even from the very bottom of my heart, yea
my soul mourns for very sorrow, most merciful Father, that I am not a
thousand times more sorry than I am: howbeit, in token of great repentance,
though all hearts be known well enough unto thee, I do knock and strike my
breast, and say in bitterness of heart and soul, Lord GOD the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, have mercy. Spare me of thine infinite mercy (dear Lord)
now and all the days of my life, and let me be made partakers of thine
abundant grace, in such sort that I may change my sinful life, and put thou
out of me the old man, with al his concupisences and lusts: granting me
grace daily to die unto the world, and that the world may be crucified unto
me and I so daily go forward in newnes of life. Strengthen me O Lord, in a
true humble heart, in sound love, hope, and trust in thee: give my soul grace
to desire, in thee only to rejoice and repose my self, and that I may utterly
renounce and forsake the vain assistance of this world, so yt thou may find
me ready to meet thee in joy, and the right use of al thy gifts, with the
good servant in ye mid night of death which shall suddenly steal upon me like
a thief, ere I beware. Be thou to me at that time of need (O Lord) a tower of
strength, a place of refuge, and a God to defend me every manner of way, and
namely against yt face of the feend, who like a roaring lion will be then ready
to devour me, and against desperation, which then will be ready to grieve and
assault me.

Let the^ thy comfort cleave fast unto me, thy mercy keep me, and thy grace
guide me. Then especially recover again Lord God the Father, that which thy
puissant might has shapen. Fetch then again Lord GOD the Son, that which
thou have so wisely governed, and bought with thy precious blood. Take again
thou Lord God holy Ghost, that which thou have kept and preserved so lovingly
in this region of sin and vale of misery, three persons and one very GOD,
unto whom be praise and honor for ever and ever. Amen,

A Psalm wherein the sinner desires ot be heard of God.
How long (O Lord) shall my mind be pressed down with painful sorrows?

How long (O God) will thou reject my prayers which daily I power out before
thee? will thou Lord hear me at no time, or will thou now cease to show mercy?

Have thou (O Lord) cast me away for ever, and will thou never hereafter be
pleased with me?

Thy hand is not weakened but it may help, and thine ears are not stopped that
they should refuse to hear.

I beseech thee (O my God) for Jesus Christ's sake to regard ye tears that
fall: and let the sighings and inward desires of my heart, move and incline
thee to hear me, I have been a stubborn and froward child to thee, I have
not feared thee, but have been ever disobedient and stubborn against thee.

I am in prison and bound in fetters of sorrow, and so shall be til thou with thy
gracious presence shall vouchsafe to visit me, and bring me again to
liberty and joy.

Keep thy mercy therefore for me always, O Lord, and ye covenant which thou
have made with me, oh let it be surely performed.

Keep me, Lord, from sin, and so shall I dread neither death nor hell; and
as thou have been always merciful to penitent sinners, so now good Lord
forgive me my sins.

Keep my heart to thee, and then shall it rejoice in thy mercy, because thou
have looked on me, and have regarded my soul in my great distress.

Let me never hereafter go away from thy ways, and leave me not now in the
deepenes of my troubles.

Lo now be the days of health and grace, now is the accepted time, for in
death who remembers thee O Lord? or in hell who shall praise thee?

Lord behold therefore my weakness and frailnesse best known unto thee: and
look down from heaven upon the sorrow and heaviness of me thy poor creature.

Mollify my heart (O Lord GOD) that I may return to thee, and walk in thy
ways: for I have wandered too long in the way of sinners.

Make a perpetual league with me that thou will put thy fear into my heart,
that I never swerve from thee again.

O Lord my prayers be ever unto thee, let thy anger be turned from me, that I
may find favor in thy sight.

O Lord, look thou not upon ye hardness of my heart, but as thou art a merciful
God, so now be merciful unto me, and forgive me that wherein I have offended
thee.

A Prayer.
MOst righteous God, and merifull father in Christ, for thy great mercy sake
hearken to these my humble prayers which I make before thee, and cons^der
Lord, the desires and thoughts of my heart. Let my loud cryings come unto thee,
and let mine unfeigned prayers enter into thine ears. Hear me (O Lord) for I
am destitute of thy help. Take care for my soul, save me thy servant which
wholly trusts in thee. Have mercy O Lord, have mercy upon me, for I will
never cease crying unto thee for thy help and mercy. In the day time ^ll I
call on thee, and in the night my cry shall not be hid from thee.

O thou God of the Heavens, and maker of all creatures, hear me a most
wretched sinner, calling on thee, and take away from me all my sins, and
make steadfast my faith and confidence in thee, and in thy merciful promises, yt
I putting my trust in them, may have, as thou have promised, everlasting life,
thorough Christ Jesus thy Son our Lord. Amen.

A Psalm that may be said. For Evening Prayer.
COnsider and hear me (O Lord my God) lighten the eyes of my soul, that I
sleep not in death: for if I be cast down, they that trouble me, will rejoice
at it.

Defend me therefore (O God) from the way of the ungodly, and out of ye hands
of the unrighteous and cru^ man, deliver me.

Even in thy fear do I worship (O Lord) toward thy holy temple: be merciful
unto me, and hear the request of my heart.

For happy are they whom thou hear, and regardest in the needful time of
trouble.

Have mercy upon me (O God) have merce upon me: even as thou have promised to
them that love thy name.

I will call on thee, O Lord my strength, I (...) trust in thee, O thou ground
of my salvation.

Keep thy servant therefore (O Lord) from presumptuous sins, lest they get the
dominion over me: and so shall I be undefiled, and innocent from the great
offense.

Let I beseech thee (O Lord) the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my
heart be always acceptable in thy sight, O Lord God my strength and my
redeemer.

^^t my prayers be set forth in thy sight as the incense, and let the lifting
up of my hands be an evening sacrifice.

O Lord grant me thy light, that I being delivered from the darkness of
sin, may come to the very light which is Christ.

Turn thee unto me (O Lord) and show me the light of thy countenance.

Yea Lord hear my prayer also I beseech thee. And let my cry come unto thee.

O Lord God, I beseech thee for Christ Jesus sake to lighten my darkness, both
outward and inward, and of thy great goodness to deliver me from all the
dangers of this night either bodily or spiritual, that thou being my savior
in watching, and my keeper in sleeping, I may wake in Christ, and rest in
peace, through thy son Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee in
unity of ye holy ghost world without end. Amen.

O Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me (O
Lord) thou God of truth.

A prayer of a sinner to be said daily before he goes about any worldly
business.
O My celestial Father, be now merciful unto me thy repentant sinful
servant, fled from mine enemies to thy help and succor. Impute not unto me my
sins for Christ's sake, for I have heard thy Fatherly voice, and yet it
sounds daily in my ears out of heaven, promising me, and affirming
constantly thy self to be appeased, pleased, and at one with me for thy
Sons sake, whom thou command me to hear and believe, whom I am sure is
made of thee, my righteousness, my satisfaction, my reconciliation, my peace
maker, my mediator and intercessor, with his prayer, my fulfiller of ye law, my
deliverer, and my whole holy acco^plisher of all my just desires, and my Savior
Christ Jesus, God and man, in whose name this day I attempt and take in hand
all my just doings according to my vocation, for his glory: and my neighbors
profit, desiring thy gracious goodness most merciful Lord and father for thy
dearly beloved sons sake to prosperit, and to give it happy increase, and
whatsoever I take in hand according to thy will, grant me grace to finish the
same. O holy father, bless all things I take in hand, with thy blessed
increase, and let me not seek mine own will, but ever to pray that thy will
be fulfilled in all things, now and for ever. So be it.

Thou may, if thou will, after this say the Lords Prayer. And so having
commended thy self to almighty God, may fall to some honest and virtuous
exercise according to thy calling: but whatsoever thou do, do it with
pureness of heart, and with singlenes of eye, yea so do it, as though God were
present and looked upon thee, as undoubtedly he does.

A Prayer.
Hear us O heavenly King, Father of mercy, our life, our sweetness, our hope:
for unto thee do we cry even we which are the banished children of Eua, unto
thee do we sigh, weeping and wayling in this vale of lamentation: come
therefore our advocate, cast upon us those merciful eyes of thine, and after
this our banishment, show to us the glorious light in thy heavenly kingdom. O
merciful, O holy, O sweet Savior, in all our troubles, and heaviness, O
Jesus our health and glory, succor us. Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Jesus Christ the Son of God, our Redeemer, which deiectedst and humbledst thy
self from that glorious state and shape of thy Godhead, to the shape of our
vile servitude, because thou would reconcile us (being the children of wrath
and damnation) to thy father, and so make us the children of grace: we beseech
thee grant us such an excellent measure of thy grace that we may ever follow
even thee thy self in all blessed obedience, and may ever find and feel thee
to be our present mediator before our father, for all ghostly gifts, whom we
acknowledge with perfect faith to be our Savior, which art the living God with
the father and the holy Ghost, living and reigning without end. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Pitiful Lord God, always showing thy mercy upon me a grievous sinner, I
humbly acknowledge the same, yet Lord notwtstanding I cannot but heartily pray
thee to hear my prayer: though I have bin a sinner, I am now thorough thy
grace sorry therefore, and purpose by thy goodness and assistance to take no
more pleasure therein, but am glad and willing to exercise the truth, and to
forsake all vaineglorie. Wherefore therein I humbly pray thee to fortify me
with thy grace, to withstand my secret enemy in all my temptations: and to
assist me so, that thy most holy spirit of sapience and understanding, may
have continual dwelling in me, direct me unto the obedience of thy pleasure
and will, that so I may at the last inherit thine eternal rest.

Another Prayer.
OMnipotent and merciful God, Father eternal, which do not despise
sinners, bewayling with contrite heart the offenses, which they have committed
against thy high Majesty, we pray thee by thy grace to draw us near to thee
and hear our prayers, and forgive us our offenses, comfort us in our
afflictions: and forgive Lord them that oppress us, and grant that our
ghostly enemy have no power to devour us, as he desires, but that we strongly
withstanding his frauds and snares to our comfort, may die in the true
Catholic faith, and rest with thee eternally our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sundry holy petitions to our Savior Jesus Christ.
LOrd Jesus have mercy on me, and forgive me my great offenses, which I have
done in thy sight.

Grant me grace also for the love of thee, to despise all sin, and worldly
vanity. Lord Jesus enable me to wcstand and to overcome the temptation of
sin, and the malice of my Ghostly enemy, to spend my time in virtue and
labor acceptable to thee.

Lord Jesus strengthen me in soul and body, to perform the works of godlynes
and virtue, to the glory and praise of thy name, and that afterward I may come
to everlasting joy and felicity.

Grant me a steadfast purpose, merciful Jesus, to amend my life, and
recompense those years which I have misspent, to the displeasure of thee, in
evil thoughts, delectations, consentings, words, works, and evil customs,
and also in b^eaking thy laws: whereby I have deserved damnation.

And good Lord inlighten me so with thy ghostly wisdom, that I may know thy
goodness, and those things which are most acceptable to thee: and confirm me so
with thy grace, that I may give good examples to all men. Make me profitable
that none be hurt by me: and guide me to help those with good counsel which
have offended thee: make me proceed from virtue to virtue, until I shall
clearly see thee in thy Majesty. Let me not return to any of my wonted
sins, specially those sins which I have sorrowed for, and by confession
have justly accused my self of.

Let not the horrible sentence of endless death, nor the terrible judgment of
damnation, nor thy wrath, ire, and indignation (merciful Lord) fall upon me.
But let thy mercy and merits (my Savior) ever be between them and me.

Lord Jesus grant me grace to fly evil company, and when I come among them,
for thy passion I beseech thee to preserve me, that no occasion of any either
mine own, or their sin overcome me, and send me ghostly comfort and strength
by ye true love of thy word, and power of thy spirit, shed abroad into my
heart. Keep my mouth (good Lord) from slanderous speaking, lying, false
witness bearing, cursing, swearing, uncharitable chidinges, dissolute laughing
and words of vanity, make me, blessed Lord, with child-like reverence to
remember, that thou presently hear me, which of al my words shall judge me.

Lord Jesus make me to persevere in the blessed service of thee, in religious
exercise, and all holy and virtuous affairs. Lord keep my soul and body,
make me flee sinful delectation, and patiently to suffer injuries and rebukes,
as which my disobedient heart to thee have deserved more the^ all men can
inflict or lay upon me: provide (good Lord) that state of life for me, which
thou know shall most tend to thy honor and my eternal felicity.

Lord Jesus grant me grace at all times, but specially in the time of prayer
to fix my mind on thee, and then also effectually to remember my
wretchedness, and faithfully to call for help of thee. Yea, good Lord, give
me grace to order my life, and ye works of my body and soul with actual
intent to please thee, that through thy merits and mercy, at the end I may
obtain the reward of thy infinite joy, and eternal felicity. Let the water
and blood which can from thy blessed heart, be powerful to wash my soul from
sin and iniquity, and to purchase me abundance of thy grace, faithfully to
serve thee. O my Lord, my might, my life, my light, lead me, feed me, and
speed me in the pilgrimage of this mortality: grant me (O Lord) by the
merits of thy passion, and power of thy most excellent and glorious godhead,
whatsoever thy Wisdom knows most expedient for me, which howsoever in my
miserable life I am most unworthy of, yet vouchsafe them unto me, all the time
of my pilgrimage, but specially at the hour of death; when I shall be accused
before thee, have mercy on me, break my froward heart, and make it obedient
to thee. Preserve me also good Lord, from sudden and unprovided death, and of
thy own singular grace and goodness, grant me these supplications in this
prayer, which now I have made to thee according to thy will. Yea by thine own
mediation, purchase for me, and bestow upon me a holy life, and blessed
ending, and grant I beseech thee, after my bodily death, everlasting life with
endless bliss and felicity, through thy merits and bitter passion: O Lord
Jesus, who with the Father and the holy Spirit, live and raignest ever one
God, world without end.

Holy Trinity one very God, have mercy on me. Amen.

A devout prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ.
O My sovereign Lord Jesus, the very son of almighty God, and of the most
clean, and glorious virgin Marie, who sufferedst bitter death for my sake, and
all mankind, and did rise again the third day: I beseech thee Lord have
mercy upon me, that am a wretched sinner, but yet thy creature: and for thy
precious passion save me, and keep me from al perils bodily and ghostly, and
specially from all things that might turn to thy displeasure. And with all my
heart I thank thee most merciful Lord, for thy great mercies that thou have
showed me in the great dangers that I have been in, as well in my soul as in
my body: and that thy grace and endless mercy has ever kept me, spared me,
and saved me, from the hour of my birth to this present time. For these I say,
and al other thy mercies, I humbly thank thee, Lord Jesus Christ, further
desiring thee that thy mercy may preserve me always. And I cry thee mercy
with all my whole heart, for my great offenses, for my great unkindness, and for
all my wretched and sinful life, and for this in particular, that I have not,
or cannot lead my self as becomes thy servant. I thank thee also with all
my heart my most gracious Lord, for the benefits and graces that thou have
given me so largely in this world before many other of thy creatures, upon whom
(if it had been so thy good pleasure) thou might a thousand times better
have bestowed them, than upon me. But most gracious Lord, I wot and knowledge
verily, that it comes of thee: wherefore with all my heart I thank thee
continually crying and saying: all honor, praise, and glory be unto thee O
Jesus, with the Father and the holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

Another prayer for an householder.
O Lord GOD almighty, most merciful and heavenly father, thorough Christ I
freely confess, that thou art my life, my soul and my body: yea all the good
which I have and all whatsoever is mine, have thou given unto me, and that of
thine own singular grace and goodness. Now since of thee I have received it, and
in me there is corruption to abuse it, make upright and order thou (O Lord God
of heaven) all that is in my house. And teach me and mine to handle and guide
all these outward things, after thy godly will, we being thereby more and more
provoked to love thee, and in thee, and for thee, every one of us to profit
another. I say unto thee, I believe, Lord help my unbelief. And yet in this
weakness I cannot but entreat thee, not to forsake me, nor my wife, my
children, nor any of my householde. Defend us Lord from sin before thee, from
shame in the world, and from sickness in our selves, according to thy good
pleasure. Send us thy holy Angel to guide and guarde us, that so we may be
defended in ye whole course of our lives, and may be lead forth the right way,
so as we may not talk, do, or think any thought against thy holy
commandments and will, but thereafter to live, worshipping thee, and praising
thee for evermore, thorough Christ Jesus our Lord thy only well-beloved Son.
Amen.

Blessed be the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. Let us praise him and exalt
him world without end. Amen.

An other Prayer.
Almighty GOD our heavenly Father in Jesus Christ: we unfeignedly confess
before thee that thy mercy and goodness toward us is infinite, and without
measure.

It is thy mercy and no goodness that is in us or of us which moved thee to
send into the world thine only begotten and eternal Son, to take our
nature upon him, and therein to work the mystery of our redemption and
salvation, as thou had appointed, and spoken before by ye mouths of all thy
Prophets which were from the beginning. And likewise it was thy blessed will,
thy mercy and goodness toward us, that thy heavenly Son did suffer
persecution, trouble, and adversity, was betrayed of his own friend and
disciple Judas, traitorously taken and carried away, to be falsely accused, and
unjustly condemned, to be cruelly beaten and scourged, and finally, with most
scornful rebukes, to be put to the most painful and shameful death that
could be devised. All this (O heavenly Father) was done through thy mercy and
blessed will for our sakes, and that not only to answer and satisfy thy just
wrath and anger which we had deserved, and daily do deserve, both for the
offenses of our first parents, and our actual transgressing of thy holy
comma^dements, but also to restore us again to thy grace and favor, to indue
us with thy heavenly gifts, that we might serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life: And finally to make us by the benefit
of thy dearly beloved Sons passion, and also through ye price of his most
precious blood, partners with him of his infinite, and unspeakable glory and
bliss in heaven. Wherefore, O heavenly Father, we beeseech thee power upon
us thy holy spirit and make us in our hearts clearly to see, comfortably to
feel, and most steadfastly to believe this thine infinite gracious goodness,
showed and given unto us in thine own son our Savior Jesus Christ: and with
this belief make us to put all our confidence and hope of salvation in him
alone, whom thou have appointed to be our only redeemer and Savior. Make us
always ready and able to render unto thee most humble and hearty thanks, for
this thine incomprehensible mercy and goodness toward us: finally, so to make
us profess the death of thy dearly beloved Son, that we renounce and forsake
all sin, yea, that we may always feel it in our selves, and plainly show
it forth to others, that we arise with him in newnes of life, in righteousness,
innocence, and all true holiness, and after this life may reign with him in
everlasting glory: hear us O heavenly Father, for our Lord Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

Almighty God our heavenly Father, we beseech thy gracious goodness now and at
all times so to assist us, that like as thy only begotten, and dearly beloved
son our Savior Jesus Christ, according to his blessed will, suffered death
willingly, and bitter passion for our redemption, and salvation, having thereof
foresight, and perfect knowledge: so in like manner when it shall please thee so
lay any cross, and afflictions upon our backs, that we may both willingly
undergo it, and patiently bear it, and powerfully overcome it, to thy
everlasting glory, other men's spiritual benefit, and our own endless
salvation through Christ. Hear us herein, O heavenly father, for our Lord
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

O Our Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ, which in thy last Supper with the
Apostles, did give thy blessed body and blood under the visible elements of
bread and wine, grant us grace we beseech thee, ever steadfastly to believe,
and sincerely to acknowledge in this most blessed Sacrament not only thine
infinite and Almighty power, but also thine incomprehensible love toward us,
yea assist so, that when we come to the participation of these blessed
mysteries we may always worthily receive the same, according to thy holy
ordinances in such sort, as that thereby we may always obtain strength of
faith in the truth of thy promises, and increase of holiness by the uniting of
the spirit with thee our head, and by thee and thy spirit, with all the
company of them that be truly thine, which be thy spiritual and mystical
body, and our spiritual, and Christian brethren.

Herein hear us O Christ our Savior for thy names sake. Amen.

ALmighty GOD and our most loving Father in Christ, whose holy Apostle Peter
presuming of his own power and strength did miserably fall not only in the
denial of his master Christ, for fear of an handmaide, but also in
sorswearing, and cursing himself, if ever he knew him: grant us grace we
beseech thee mercicifull Father, that we never presume of our own might and
power, but that being in our own hearts humble and lowly, and acknowledging our
infirmity, frailty, and weakness, we may ever in all our affairs, receive at
thy hand outward and inward strenght and comfort also, and may thereby be
enabled unto the acceptable performance of thy holy and blessed will. Hear us
O heavenly Father, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

O Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, which in that great heaviness of thy soul
and intolerable anguish, which thou sustainedst before thy passion, did
fall down upon thy face in prayer unto thy heavenly Father, give us grace also,
and the aid of thy holy spirit, that we likewise in all heaviness of mind,
and troubles of this world, may run evermore by most humble and constant
prayer, unto the only aid, strength and comfort of thee our heavenly father,
hear us our Savior Christ, for thy names sake. Amen.

ALmighty God eternal father, we do remember that in the condemnation of thy
only and dearly beloved innocent Lamb, our Savior Jesus Christ, the Judge
did sit, witness was brought, Christ himself was presented and condemned,
and all truth there was trodden under foot, all unrighteousness did reign, and
innocence comdemned. In consideration whereof we cannot but entreat thee, O
most gracious Lord and Father, to grant unto our heads and rulers such a
notable measure of grace and assistance even from thine own self, that they
may ever in all their judgments, judge according to true justice and equity,
without corruption, partiality, and wicked dissimulation, and that to the
beating down of wickedness and sin, and to the maintenance of thine
everlasting truth, justice, honor and glory. Hear us our heavenly Father,
for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A prayer for trust in God.
O Most gracious and most wise guide, and our almighty Savior Jesus Christ,
who do lead them the right way to immortal blessedness, which truly and
unfeignedly trusting in thee, commit themselves to thee, grant us grace we pray
thee, not only to see this, that we be blind and feeble indeed, but also that
we may so take and repute our selves: that so we may not presume of our
selves, to see to our selves, but may always wholly commit our selves unto
thee, to be guyded by thee, and from thee may be enabled so far to see, that
always we may have thee before our eyes, to follow thee being our guide, to be
ready at thy call most obediently, and to commit our selves wholly unto thee,
that thou which only know the way, and art alone the way indeed may lead
us the same way to all heavenly desires. To thee with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be glory for ever. Amen.

A prayer of any captive, according to the form of David, when he was hid in
the cave.
WIth my voice I cry to thee, before thee I open my lamentations, in thy bosom
I disclose the secret words of my heart, my dolours and griefs I show unto
thee, my heart is almost like to brust, so great is my discomfiture. Thou
know all my fashions (O Lord) and thou see well enough how ye ungodly have
laid their snares for me.

Lo, I cast mine eyes on this side and that side, as well on my friends as
kinsfolks: but all is in vain, none of them all helps me. And again, I
cannot run away, I am so laden and ouercharged with yrons. O Lord my maker, and
father, unto thee I cry, thou art mine only shot-anker, defense and help.
Thou art my portion and heritage in all countries, yea, I have none other
possession but thee only. To thee therefore I stick altogether, knowing
certainly that nothing can go amiss with me, when I am under the shadow of
thy wings, and thou guidest me. Consider then my lamentable complaint, behold
how I am low brought by the cruel pursuers, which be much more of power
than I am, defend me, deliver me from all this prison, and horrible fear of
sin and death, yt I may set out thy name. This once obtained, the godly folk
shall flock about me, and shall not stint to give thee thanks, when they see
that thou riddest me forth of these dangers to the high praise of thy name.

Lord be merciful unto us, take part with us, then we shall for ever lift up
and magnify thy glorious name Amen.

A prayer for patience in trouble.
HOw have thou O Lord humbled and plucked me down? I dare now uneath make my
prayers unto thee, for thou art angry with me, but not without my deserving.
Certainly I have sinned, Lord I will co^fes it, I will not deny it. But O god
pardon my trespasses, relese my debts, make me to feel again, and ye
effectually and continually also thy grace within me, stop my wounds for I am
all to plagued and beaten, yet Lord this notwithstanding, I do abide patiently,
and give my attenda^ce on thee, continually waiting for help at thy hands, and
that, not without some knowledge and belief of thy truth, for I have received a
token of thy favor and grace toward me, I mean thy word of promise
concerning Christ, who for me was offered on the Cross, for a ransom,
sacrifice, and price for my sins. Wherefore according to that thy promise,
defend me Lord by thy right hand, and give a gracious ear to my requests,
be thou my stay in perils, for all men's stays are but vain. Beat down
therefore my enemies, thine own self with thy power, which art mine only aid
and protector, O Lord God almighty. Amen.

The humble confession of Job in his most grievous adversity, and loss of
goods, children and all. Job. 1.
NAked I came out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return again: the
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, as it has pleased the Lord, so is it
done: now blessed be ye name of the Lord. Amen.

In great trouble of conscience. Psalm. 143.
LOrd hear my prayer, receive my supplication, hearken to my plaint for thy
righteousness.

Try not the law with thy servants, for truly then shall no living man be found
vnguiltie, yea, not one of ye saints should escape quit at the bar, unless
thou grant him thy gracious pardon, in so much as the very stars be not pure
and faulties before thee, in the Angels thou foundedst sin. O Lord mine enemies
grievously hunt my soul, they beat and drive it down, they thrust it into
dark dungeons, where fello^s (convict and condemned to death) were wont to be
kept, my spirit is sorrowful, my heart is heavy and sad within my breast, to
thee I hold up my hands, requiring thee of mercy. For like as the dry ground
longs for a shower of rain, so my soul thinks long til it has thy help
and succor, hear me therefore speedily: if thou do not, I am in despair, my
spirit is all weary of this bondage. I have bidden my life fare well. Wherefore
(O God) hyde not thy face that I be not likened to those that be hurled into
the pit of damnation: after this night of misery ouerpassed, let the pleasant
morning of comfort graciously shine upon me, that betimes I may hear and
feel thy goodness, for in thee is al my trust: point me the way that I shall
walk in, for if thou be not my guide, I must needs wander and stray out of
the way.

To thee (Lord) I lift up my soul, and that with all mine heart. I beseech
thee take me forth of mine enemies hands.

Thou only art my succor and sauegard, teach me to work whatsoever shall be
thy pleasure, for thou art my God, let thy good spirit conduct me into the
land of the living, raise up my spirit within me: for thy names sake bring me
forth of all these troubles, for thy righteousness deliver me: destroy mine
enemies as thou art gracious and favorable toward me.

Those that will work me any sorrow or grief, pluck forth of the way, for I
am thy servant, for thy sake suffer I all this hurly burly. As thou art God
almighty and most merciful, so help thou me, thy unworthy servant, who stand
in need of al supportation from thee.

A prayer in adversity.
O Lord God, without whose will and pleasure, a sparrow does not fall on the
ground, seeing it is thy will and blessed ordinance that I should be in this
misery and adversity, seeing also thou do punish me with adversity, not
to destroy and cast me away, but to call me to repentance and save me: for whom
thou do love, him do thou chasten. Furthermore, seeing affliction and
adversity works patience, and who so patie^tly hears tribulation, is made
like unto our Savior Christ our head. Finally, seeing that in all trubulation
and adversity, we are in assurance of comfort at thy gracious hands, for thou
command me to call upon thee in ye time of tribulation have promised to
hear and succor me: grant me therefore (O almighty God) and merciful father,
in all trouble and adversity generally, and even in this particularly to be
quiet without discouragement, and patient without distrustfulnes, that so I may
have grace to praise and magnify thee and to put my whole trust and confidence
in thee: because thou never forsakest them that trust in thee-but workest all
for the best to them that love thee, and seek the glory of thy name. To thee
be glory for ever. Amen.

A thanksgiving, and prayer also to be used, in the time of prosperity.
I Give thanks unto thee (O God almighty) which not only have endued me,
with the gifts of nature, as reason, power and strength, but also have
plenteously given me the substance of this world. I acknowledge (O Lord) that
these are thy gifts, and confess with the holy Apostle Saint James that there
is no perfect nor good gift but it comes from thee (O Father of light) which
give freely, and castest no man in the teeth: yea I further in particular
acknowledge with the Prophet Aggeus, that gold and silver is thine, and to whom
it pleases thee thou give it, to ye godly, yt they may be thy disposers and
distributers thereof, and to the ungodly to heap up their damnation withal.
Wherefore since I feel in mine own heart an inclination, to abuse these as
other good things, I cannot but humbly beseech and desire thee most merciful
God, and loving father to frame in me with thy holy spirit a faithful heart,
and ready hand to distribute these thy gifts according to thy pleasure, that so
I may not lay up treasure here, where thieves may rob, and moathes corrupt, but
may lay up treasure in thy heavenly kingdom, where neither thieves may steal,
nor moathes corrupt, and that only to mine own comfort, whom of thy mercy
thou have promised to reward, therefore neither yet alone to the good example
of the humble and meek of thy congregation, but also to the glory of thy
name, to whom be all honor and praise world without end. Amen.

The prayer of Manasses King of Judah.
O Lord almighty, God of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of the
just seed of them: which have made heaven and earth, with all the ornaments
thereof, which ^ast ordained the sea by the word of thy commandment, which
have shut up the deep, and have sealed it for thy fearful and laudable
name dreaded of all men, and honorable before the face of thy power, the fiery
anger of thy threatening is above all measure heavy to sinners, but the mercy
of thy promise is great and unsearchable, for thou art the Lord God most high
above all the earth, long suffering, and exceeding merciful, and sorry for the
malice of men, I have provoked thine anger, and have done evil before thee, in
committing abominations, and multiplying of offenses. And now I bow the knees
of my heart, requiring goodness of thee: O Lord I have sinned, Lord, I have
sinned, and know my wickedness, I desire thee by prayer, O Lord, forgive me,
O Lord, forgive me, and destroy me not with mine iniquities, neither do thou
always remember my evils, to punish them: but save me (which am unworthy)
after thy great mercy, and I will praise thee everlastingly, all the days of
my life: for all the power of heaven prayseth thee, and unto thee belongs all
glory, world without end. Amen.

A prayer of Jeremy. Iere. 17.
Heal me (O Lord) and I shall be whole, save thou me, and I shall be saved:
for thou art my praise. Be not thou terrible unto me (O Lord) for thou art he
in whom I hope. When I am in peril, let my persecutors be confounded, but not
me. Thou shall bring upon them the time of their plague, and shall destroy them
right soon. Amen.

A prayer of Ephraim or Israel in the Prophet Jeremy. Ierem. 31.
O Lord, thou have chastened me, and thy chastening have I received as an
untamed calfe, convert thou me, and I shall be converted, for thou art my Lord
God: for as soon as thou did turn me, I repented my self: and when I
understood, I smote upon my thigh, I confessed and was ashamed, because I
suffered the reproach of my youth.

The prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach, in necessity, and for wisdom.
Eccles. the last chap.
I Thank thee (O Lord and King) and praise thee O God my Savior, I will
yield praises unto thy name. Thou have delivered my body from destruction, for
thou art my defender and helper, from the snare of the false tongue, and from
them that are occupied in lies. Thou have been my helper from such as rose
against me, and have delivered me according to thy great mercy, and thy holy
names sake: thou have delivered me from the roaring of them that prepared
themselves to devour me, out of the hands of such as sought after my life,
from the multitude of them that trouble me, and went about to set fire upon me
on every side, so that I was not brent in the midst of the fire. From the
deep of hell thou deliueredst me, from the unclean tongue, from lying words,
from the wicked judge, and from the unrighteous tongue. My soul shall praise
the Lord unto the death, for my life drew near unto hell downward, they
compassed me round about on every side, and there was no man to help me: I
looked about me if there were any man that would succor me, and there was
none. Then thought I upon thy mercy (O Lord) and upon the acts that thou have
done of old, namely, that thou deliuerest such as put their trust in thee, and
riddest them out of the hands of the false Paynimes. Thus lifted I up my
prayer from the earth, and prayed for deliverance from death, I called upon the
Lord my Father, that he would not leave me without help in the day of my
trouble, and in the time of the proud, I will praise thy name continually,
yielding honor and thanks unto it, and so my prayer was heard. Thou sauedst
me from destruction and deliueredst me from the unrighteous time. Therefore
will I acknowledge and praise thee, and magnify the name of the Lord.

When I was but young ere ever I went astray, I desired wisdom openly in
prayer. I came therefore before the temple and sought it very busily, and I
will seek for it to my last hour. Then will it flourish unto me as a grape
that is soon ripe. My heart rejoiced in it, then went my feate the right way:
yea, from my youth up, sought I after it, I bowed down mine ear a little and
received it: I found in myself much wisdom, and prospered greatly in it.

Therefore will I give the glory unto him that gives me wisdom, for I am
advised to do thereafter. I will be jealous to cleave unto that that is good,
so shall I not be confounded. My soul has wrestled with it, I lifted up my
hands on high, then was my soul lightened through wisdom, that I
acknowledged my foolishnes: I ordered my soul after it, I found her in
cleanenesse, I had my heart in it from the beginning, and therefore shall not I
be forsaken. My heart longs after it, and therefore I got a good treasure.
Through it the Lord has given me a new tongue, werewith I will praise him: Oh
come unto me ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of discipline, withdraw not
your selves from it, but commune on these things, for your souls are very
thirsty. I opened my mouth and spoke, O come and buy wisdom without money,
and bow down your neck under her yoke, and let your soul receive
discipline, it is even at hand, and ready to be found. Behold with your eyes,
how I have had but little labor, and yet have much rest. Oh receive wisdom,
and you shall receive plenty of silver and gold in your possession: let your
mind rejoice in her mercy, and be not ashamed of her praise, work your work
betimes, and she shall give you your reward in due time.

A prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ.
MOst merciful Lord Jesus Christ, which wast sent from the most highest tower
of the father almighty, into this world to relieve sinners, to gather together
them that were scattered abroad, to redeem them which were punished, to loose
them that were in prison, to their country again, to heal them that were
sore, to comfort them that were wayling and sorrowful. Vouchsafe I beseech thee
of thy singular goodness to comfort me in the punishment that I am in. And thou
Lord Jesus Christ, that did restore mankind in peace and concord, to the
high inheritance of Paradize, whom thou boughtest with thy precious blood, and
did make peace between God and men, vouchsafe to assure even thy singular
mercy toward me, and cause me to feel reconciliation between me and mine
enemies, and vouchsafe to show thy glory upon me, and to quench the anger of
them al, and put away from me their hatred, and cease the malice that they
bear against me, and as thou did not only allaie Esau his malice
against his brother Jacob, but also did deliver Jacob from the same: so
assuage the rage of my enemies, and deliver me with thine almighty power, from
them that owe me malice, and from their laying await and desires, as thou
did deliver Abraham from the hands of the Chaldees, and Joseph from the
hands of his brethren: Lot, from the city of Sodom: thy servants Moses and
Aaron, from the power of Pharao, and from the bondage of Egypt: King David from
the power of Saul, and Goliath the Giant: Daniel from the den of lions: the
three children from the furnace of flaming fire: Peter from hands. Even so
vouchsafe to deliver me thy servant from all troubles and anguishes, in which
presently I am: yea deliver me from all my sins, which have pulled down
upon me all these myseries, and free me from the laying awaite, and from the
desires of all mine enemies vsible, and invisible. And thou Lord Jesus Christ
of thy singular goodness, did save that which the old serpent did hurt, and
destroy by suggestions and wicked council vouchsafe me such a notable measure
of thy grace and defense that I may avoid from the devilish counsel which
mine enemies have done and would do against me: and frustrate and avoid all
their evil counsels, as thou did overthrow the counsels of Achitophell,
which gave counsel to Absolon against his father David: Amen.

A fruitful meditation not to be said with the mouth lightly, but to be
cried with heart, and mind, often and mightily.
O Most excellent goodness, withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O most
mighty maker, despise not me, which am the work that thine own hands have
made. O most prudent redeemer, suffer not to perish that which thou have bought
with so dear a price O most holy and heavenly host and guest, both purify,
save, dress, and keep thy house, and dwelling place, the which thou have
sanctified and dedicated to thy self, by thy word and spirit.

When shall I love thee? when shall I be sorry and contrite for my sins? when
shall I turn to thee by grace? when shall I remember thy benefits, thy
meeknes, thy poverty, and thy painful and bitter passion, thy patience, thy
obedience, thy love and thy charity? when shall I sanctify, worship,
magnify, and love thee? If thou be most dreadful, where is my dread O Jesus
Christ? If thou be a most loving father, where is my love? If thou be my Lord,
and redeemer, where is my service? If thou be mine host, and dwell in my soul
by thy grace and mercy, where is my holiness and cleanness, according to such
an host? Now therefore good Lord Jesus Christ, draw my heart after thee, with
the sound love and feeling of thy sufferings, moysten my mind with thy most
precious blood, that whithersoeuer I turn me, I may behold about me and feel
within me the merits of thy death, that thus beholding thee, I may not with
delight fix my sight in any thing but only in thee, which live and raignest
God, world without end. Amen.

A godly and devout prayer.
Grant me merciful Lord God to desire fervently, to search wisely, to know
truly, to perform effectually all things that thou have given me in charge,
by thy holy word: and give me grace to do them simply and only, for the
glory and lawde of thy holy name, good Lord direct and order the state and
manner of my living. And all things thou would I should do, grant (I beseech
thee) that I may know it, will it, and have power to do it, and give me grace
to execute it, as I should do and as it is expedient for thy glory, and the
comfort of my soul. My way toward thee, let it be fair, right, and well
performed, not failing, nor wavering betwixt prosperity, and adversity, but
guide me so good Lord that in prosperity I may continually and unfeignedly give
thee thanks, and may be enabled by thee to hold patience in adversity; in
all estates so carrying my self that I be not exalted in any pride, when
prosperity abounds, neither in the days of danger and distress be
depressed by any deiection or heaviness of mind above that is meet. Let me
inwardly joy in nothing but in that, that serves and promoteth unto thee:
neither suffer me to be sorry for any thing but that, that leads and
withdraws from thee: let me covet to please no man but in thee, nor fear to
displease any for thy sake, but only thee: let all transitory things be vile
unto me, good Lord, for thy sake, and all things that belong to thee, let them
be dainty and dear unto me, and thou good Lord God most dear of all other.
Let me be weary of that joy that is without thee, and al rest and quiet that
is not in thee, let it be tedious and painful unto me: grant me most to
address and direct my heart to thee, and when I do amiss, give me grace to
know and consider it, yea work in me for it a godly sorrow with a full
purpose and intent of amendment of life. Make me now sweet Lord Jesus, meek
without any fayning, glad and cheerful without dissolutenes, sorry without
excessive heaviness or distrust, sad and sober without hypocrisy, quiet, and
merry without lightness, trusting in thee without presumption ready always to
tell my neighbor his fault without neglect of mine own, and without
dissimulation and fear, as in regard of him, laboring always in charity to
edify him in word and deed.

Make me obedient without contradiction, patient without murmuring, content
with mine own without covetousness. Give me (most loving Father and God) a
waking, and a diligent heart, that no vain or unclean cogitation withwrawe it
from thee: give me a noble heart that no unworthy affection pluck it
downewardes to earthly things, give me a firm and constant heart always
laboring to break, or overcome evil: give me a free heart, yea, a heart of
such liberty, yt no wicked thought, or evil thing, hold it at any time in
bondage or slavery. Grant to me my sweet Lord God, understanding, that I may
know thee, diligence, yt I may seek thee, wisdom yt I may find thee,
conversation, that I may please thee, long perseverance, that trustily I may
abide for thee, and sure hope, that finally I may embrace thee. Grant yt I be
not here so afflicted with pains, and torments in the way of this life, yt I
should any manner of way be drawn from thee: but so Lord let me have the use
of thy benefits here by grace, that also I may have fruition of thy joys and
rewards in thy heavenly kingdom and everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

A godly prayer to desire the life to come.
THis my body is the very dark and filthy prison of my soul, this world is
an exile and a banishment, this life is care and misery. But where thou art O
Lord, there is the very country and kingdom of liberty and everlasting
blessedness: stir our minds therefore continually to remember so great
felicity: power into our hearts a desire of such precious things, and of all
things most to be desired. Give quicknes unto our mind, and grant that even
in this life we may have a good taste of everlasting joys, whereby these
things of the world may seem filthy and be loathsome unto us. And howsoever
we do now too earnestly and too greedily seek for the^, yea account them as
if it were our strong rock, yet give us grace in respect of thee and eternal
blessedness to refuse and despise these bitter and filthy things, and most
fervently to desire the sweetness of thy familiarity, in the which all
goodness is contained. To thee be honor and glory for ever. Amen.

A thanks giving, and also an intercession and prayer unto our Savior Jesus
Christ.
O Most merciful Jesus, my sweet savior, and most gracious Lord God, I thank
thee heartily for that thou have created and made me of naught, and for thy
manifold benefits and graces that thou have given unto me here in this world
before many other, not only preserving me from vile and loathsome sickness,
from shame, and many grievous dangers besides, but also giving to me most
unworthy, many great and irrecompensible, yea and incomprehensible gifts also.
All which gifts, most sweet Jesus, I know full well, and meekely acknowledge
to come of thy goodness only, and nothing of my deserving, nay, indeed without
yea contrary to my deserts. Wherefore most mighty Lord God my creator, my
redeemer, and most merciful Savior Jesus Christ, which when we were lost,
boughtest and redeemedst us again with thy own most precious blood, have
mercy on me most unworthy wretch, which have committed, and done many great
sins and trespasses against thy merciful goodness, and have misspent thy
gifts of grace, that thou so lovingly and bountifully did give to me, and
I for my part have so unkindly behaved my self to thee, that surely I am much
unworthy to be called thy son: yet most benign Jesus, thou art so
bountiful of thy mercy and pity, that notwithstanding mine unkindness toward
thee, yet thou will still have mercy, and during my life, wilt also I hope
assist me to put all my whole trust and confidence in thy mercy. O Lord thou
command (I wot) to cry and call upon thee, that thou thereby might have
occasion to give unto us thy most gracious gifts. Wherefore most glorious Jesus,
which forsakest no sinner, but gladly receiuest to thy mercy all them that
will meekely call for it: give me ever grace in earnestnes and feruencie of
heart to call upon thee for thy goodness. And assist me so, that I may
continually dread thee, love thee, and serve thee with all my heart and mind,
with all my will and reason, with all my might, power, and strength of body and
soul, and grant me grace good Lord, that of all my acts and deeds done to
thy will and pleasure, I may render all the honor and praise unto thee, as to
whom alone of very duty it belongs: And further I beseech thee (gracious
Lord) of thine infinite mercy, that all my misspent life in times past may be
forgotten before thee, which I cannot but confess that I have consumed and
spent very evil, and yet I pray thee pardon and pass by it for Jesus Christ
sake, assisting me to walk in better courses ever hereafter: yea work in me
the gift of good perseverance in virtuous living, that I may now from
henceforth order my life here in this world to thy pleasure. Also (my sweet
Savior) grant me not only time and space here to repent, before I depart
out of this world, but also that I may truly repent, and that so, I may be
assured that I am thy servant to the comfort and salvation of my sinful soul.
And (most merciful Jesus) I humbly pray thee to preserve me from sudden
death, and so to stand by me, at my departing, out of this transitory world,
that I may not only have a stayed memory and fruitful utterance, but also
may be endued with steadfast faith, very true hope, and fervent charity: and
most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, give me now whilst I live, thy merciful aid,
and grace to pursue and follow always thy will and commandments, and so to
eschew mine own frail will and wicked desires, and the devils false
inticements, that in thy sight I may appear and be found to be (as I am named)
thy son, and a true Christian man, and after this present life I may come to
the sight of thy most glorious face in heaven. Amen.

We worship thee Christ, with praise and benediction, for thou redeemest the
world through thy passion.

Another Prayer unto our Savior Jesus Christ.
O Maker of heaven and earth, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, which of
nothing in comparison did make me to thy image and likeness, and did
redeem me with thine own precious blood, whom I a sinner, am not worthy to
name, neither call upon, neither with my heart to think upon: humbly I desire
thee, and meekly I pray thee, that graciously thou would behold me thy
wicked servant, and have mercy on me, which had mercy on the woman of
Canaan, and Mary Magdalen, which did forgive the Publicane, and the thief
hanging on the Cross, unto thee I confess (most holy father) my sins, which
(if I would) I cannot hide from thee, because all things are naked before thee,
with whom I have to deal: have mercy therefore on me, Lord Jesus Christ, for I
a wretch have sore offended thee, in pride, in covetousness, in gluttony, in
lechery, in vain glory in hatred, in envy, in adultery, in theft, in
lying, inbackbiting, in sporting, in dissolute and wanton laughing, in idle
words, in hearing, in tasting, in touching, in thinking, in sleeping, in
working, yea every manner of way, in which I (frail man and most wretched
sinner) might sin. My default, my most grievous default, I unfeignedly confess
before thee, and do humbly pray and beseech thee, which for my health
descendedst from heaven, to have mercy upon me miserable wretch that I am. And
as thou did forgive Peter that did for sake thee. So vouchsafe graciously
to pardon and pass by my grievous iniquities. Thou art my creator and my
helper, my maker, my redeemer and governor, my father, my Lord, my God, and my
King. Thou art my hope, my trust, my governor, my help, my strength, my
defense, my redemption, my life, my health, and my resurrection, thou art my
stedfastnes, my refuge or succor, my light and my help. Therefore I most
humbly and hertily desire and pray thee help me, defend me, make me strong
and comfort me, make me steadfast, make me joyful and cheareful, give me light
and visit me, revive me again which am dead: for I am thy making and thy
work (O Lord) therefore despise me not, I am thy servant I confess it and thy
bondma^: although evil, although unworthy and a sinner. But whatsoever I am,
whether I be good or bad, I am ever thine. Therefore to who^ shall I flee except
I flee unto thee. If thou cast me off, who shall or will receive me? If thou
despise me, and turn thy face from me, who shall look upon me? therefore
recognize and knowledge me, for thine own, although unworthy, coming to
thee, yea although I be vile and unclean? For though I be vile and unclean,
yet you can make me clean. Though I be sick, thou can heal me. Though I
be dead and buried, thou can revive me. For thy mercy is much more then
mine iniquity. Thou can forgive me more then I can offend. Therefore (O
Lord) do not consider nor have respect to ye number of my sins and to ye
grieuousnes thereof, but according to the greatness of thy mercy, forgive me,
and have mercy on me most wretched sinner. Say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation, and the rather speak this again because thou have said and always
performed it, I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he live and
be converted, and turn to me. O Lord, be not angry with me, I pray thee most
meek father, for thy great mercy sake: yea I most humbly beseech thee, that
thou would for Christ Jesus sake vouchsafe to bring me to bliss that never
shall cease. Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Bountiful Jesus, O sweet Jesus, O Jesus, the son of the pure Virgin Mary,
full of mercy and truth, after thy great mercy have pity on me. I pray thee
by the same precious blood, which for us miserable sinners thou wast content to
shed on the altar of the cross, that thou will vouchsafe clean to remove and
take away all my wickedness, and not to despise me, I humbly requiring this,
and that in, and for thy most holy and blessed name, O Lord Jesus. This name of
thine, Jesus, is the name of health: what is Jesus, but a Savior? O my Savior
Jesus Christ that have created and redeemed me with thy precious blood, suffer
me not to be damned, whom thou have made of naught, and whom thou have redeemed
with a most precious ransom. Oh let not my wickedness destroy, that thy
almighty goodness has made and formed. Lord Jesus reknowledge, that which is
thine indeed, and wipe clean away that which withdraws or withholdeth me
from thee. Now and in all time of mercy have mercy one me and confound not
me in the time of thy terrible judgment. And though I wretched sinner for my
most grievous offenses, have by thy very justice deserved eternal pain, yet I
do appeal from that exact righteousness of thine, to thy singular goodness,
and steadfastly trust in thine unspeakable mercy: wherefore I pray thee, as a
loving father and merciful Lord to take pity on me. Lord Jesus, what profit
is my blood, seeing I must descend into eternal corruption eternally? They
that be dead shall not magnify thee, nor likewise all they that go to hell. O
most merciful Jesus, have mercy on me therefore, and deliver me, yea, be
always comfortable unto me and accept me a wretched sinner into the number of
them that shall be saved. And fith thou art the health of all them that trust
in thee, and thou have given grace in some measure to believe, have mercy on
me: endue me with thy grace, wisdom, charity, chastity, and humility: yea
and in all mine adversities uphold me with steadfast patience, so that I may
sincerely love thee, and in thee wait and look to be glorified, and have mine
only delight in thee, world without end. Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Glorious King, which among thy Saints art praised, and nevertheless
incomparable, thou art in us Lord, and thy name has been called upon by us.
Therefore do not forsake us Lord God, and in the day of judgment vouchsafe to
glorify us among thy saints and elect. O blessed King. Amen.

If thou be sick, or in tribulation, say thus.
LOrd God which do punish and scourge thy people, not after their deserving,
neither yet to destroy them, but to convert them mercifully to thee: and yet
notwithstanding know, that thorough our frailties, we are ready in the
midst of thy corrections to fall away, grant us we pray thee, and that for
Jesus Christ's sake, the strength and comfort of thy blessed spirit, that to the
glory of thy name, other men's good, and our own consolation, we may both
patiently bear, and graciously profit by, and at the last be mightily
delivered from this malady, which worthily we do suffer, as the chastisement
of our sin, and the time of faith. Amen.

A very godly and necessary prayer to be said most specially at the hour of
death.
O LORD Jesus Christ, which art the health of all men living, and everlasting
life to them that believe in thee, and dye in thy faith, I wretched sinner give
over and submit my self wholly unto thy most blessed will, I being sure by the
promises of thy word, and the pledge of thy spirit, that the thing cannot
perish which is committed to thy mercy. In full persuasion whereof, O Lord
give me grace, that willingly I may leave this frail and wretched flesh, in
hope of the resurrection, which in most perfect manner shall restore it me
again. And further I beseech thee most merciful Lord, that thou will by thy
grace make strong my soul against all temptations. And that thou will so cover
and defend me with the buckler of mercy against all assaults of the Devil,
that he may not any manner of way prevail upon me. I see and acknowledge,
there is in my self no hope of salvation, but all my confidence, hope and
trust is in thy most merciful goodness, I have no merits nor good works at
all which I may any manner of way allege before thee: sins and evil
works, alas I see a great, yea an innumerable and infinite heap:
notwithstanding through thy mercy I trust to be in the number of them to whom
thou will not impute their sins, but take and accept me for righteous and
just, and to be the inheritour of everlasting life in and by the obedience of
thy son, and my Savior, who was borne for my sake, who did suffer both
hunger and thirst for my sake, who did both preach and teach for my sake, who
did pray and fast for my sake, who did all good works and deeds for my sake,
who suffered most grievous and painful torments for my sake, and finally, who
gave his most precious body to dye, and blood to be shed upon the cross for
my sake.

Now therefore most merciful Savior, I humbly beseech thee, which have given
thy self for me to make all these things, and every other grace of thine,
which thou have freely given me, profitable to me, and powerful in me: Let thy
blood cleanse me, and wash away the spots and foulenes of my sins. Let thy
righteousness hide and cover my unrighteousness, by the merits of thy passion and
blood which I acknowledge to be the only price of satisfaction for my sins and
offenses. Strengthen me so good Lord, by thy grace, that my faith and salvation
in thy blood waver not in me, but may ever be firm and constant: Lord let not
the hope of thy mercy and life everlasting ever decay in me, but let it
always rest and be felt pourefully in me, and that even to and in the last
gasp. And grant further I pray thee, that charity ware not cold in me:
finally, that the weakness of my flesh be not overcome with the fear of death,
or any other temptation whatsoever. Yea grant me merciful Savior, I humbly
beseech thee, that, when death has shut up the eyes of my body, yet that the
eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee, and may assuredly feel
thee in my self, for my self, to be the mighty conqueror of death and the
devil, sin and hell, and all other enemies of mine whatsoever, so that when
death has taken away the use of my tongue and speech, yet that my heart may
cry and say unto thee:

O Lord, into thy hands I give and commend my spirit.

Lord Jesus, receive my soul unto thee. Amen.

The prayer of Solomon for to obtain wisdom. 1, King. 2.
THOU have showed, Lord, unto thy servant David my Father, great mercy, when
he walked in thy sight in truth, and justice, and in vprightnes of heart with
thee. Thou show unto him thy great mercy, and gave him a son, sitting
upon his throne, as it is at this day. And now, Lord God, thou have made thy
servant to reign in the room of David my Father. I am a very babe, and know
not how to go out and in. And thy servant is in the midst of an infinite
number, which thou have chosen, which cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude. Wherefore give to thy servant an heart apt to be taught, and full
of understanding, to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and
bad. For who is able to judge this thy mighty people.

A prayer for obtaining of wisdom. Sapient. 9.
GOd of our fathers, and Lord of mercy, thou have made all things with thy
word, and ordained man through thy wisdom, that he should have dominion over
the creatures which thou have made, that he should order the world according
unto equity and righteousness, and execute judgment with a true heart, give
me wisdom, which is ever among the children of Israel. For I thy servant,
and son of thy handmaide, am a feeble person, of a short time, and too young
to the understanding of thy judgments, and though a man be never so perfect
among the children of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be
nothing worth: Oh send thy wisdom out of thy holy heavens, and from the
throne of thy Majesty, that she may be with me, and labor with me, that I may
know what is acceptable in thy sight: for she knows and understands all
things, and she shall conduct me right soberly in all my works, and preserve
me in her power, so shall my works be acceptable. Amen.

A prayer for a competent living. Proverb. 30.
TWo things Lord I demand, that thou will not deny me until I dye: vanity
and words of leasings remove far from me, poverty or riches give me not:
only give me that is necessary for my living, least being in full abundance,
I might be provoked to deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or being compelled
by necessity, I might steal and forswear the name of God.

Another Prayer.
GOod Lord God and sweet Savior Jesus Christ, the son of the everlasting
God, grant unto me most frail sinner, and miserable wretch this grace and
mercy, that I may ever have present before the eyes of my soul, thy holy
life, thine example and behavior, and that according to any measure of mercy
thou have been pleased, or shall be pleased to bestow upon me: I may in living
and manners follow the same. And cause me good Lord to profit, grow, and
increase therein to such a notable measure, as may be acceptable unto thee,
being thine own grace, and comfortable to my self, as coming from thee for
the salvation of my soul. Lighten Lord, and make clear and bright my heart,
with the glorious light of thy grace, that it ever may go before me, and
follow me in all my acts, so that by thy grace and power conducting and
guiding, I may accomplish and fulfill all that may please thy goodness, and
utterly eschew and avoid all, that in any wise should displease the same.
Vouchsafe sweet Savior, I beseech thee, to direct and order all my
cogitations and thoughts, all my speech and words, all mine acts and deeds in
thy law and commandments, in thy monitions and counsels, and take me good
Lord wholly so unto thee, that here in all things doing thy will, I by grace
may be one of the souls that thou have appointed to everlasting salvation
thorough Christ Jesus. Amen.

A devout prayer to our Lord God.
O LORD which have vouchsafed of thy unspeakable goodness to make me, and
ordain me thy creature to live in this transitory life, giving me a
reasonable soul by the which enlightened with the truth of thy word, I know
thee to be my Lord, my God, and my maker, which also I may in some sort well
perceive by the visible sight of thy wonderful works, as by heaven, the
earth, and the creatures in them contained together with the commodities and
blessings yt we daily receive by them at thy hand, all which declare the great
love that thou hadest in our first creation, and also do express the singular
care and providence, that yet still thou have for us, and further do declare
to us, thee to be the only God and Lord over all, and that there is none above
thee, and that there is no wisdom, knowledge, power, or strength of value
besides thee: and yet further also thou knowing our necessary need, of thy
holy, of thy most loving favor, have not disdained to say to me, and to other
thy people by thine own most blessed word, to the great comfort of all our
consciences: Ask, and it shall be given: seek, and ye shall find: knock,
and it shall be opened to you. And yet for further declaration of thy great
love toward us, have most familiarly said, If we that be evil, can give unto
our children when they ask good things: how much more then shall our heavenly
Father give his holy spirit to them that earnestly desire it. What a sweet and
comfortable saying is this? In confidence of this truth, O most blessed Lord, I
wretched sinner, do ask at thy hands mercy and grace, confessing my self to
be a most wicked and abominable sinner in thy sight, most weak of all other
to stand to or in thy truth, most frail to fall, and ready to break all thy
holy commandments: by the keeping of which, we are known to be thy true
servants. O most merciful Lord God, I acknowledge my self daily and hourly
to break the same: but where I have thus offended thy divine Majesty, I
humbly for Christ Jesus sake ask of thee mercy and forgiveness, minding by
thy most mighty assistance never hereafter to offend in the same. And Lord,
that I may be the better persuaded of the assured performance of the same, I
humbly ask, and desire thy strength continually to make me stand fast in
faith: thy knowledge and power from thee to work thy blessed will: thy might
to resist all error and wicked imaginations: thy wisdom to know the truth.
For I confess and know, O Lord, that all worldly wit, policy, knowledge and
strength, is but foolishnes in thy sight. Therefore I ask and continually
crave, good Lord, that help, and most humbly desire that thy holy spirit may
guide all the imaginations, thoughts, and desires of my heart, not only
altering in me my fleshly mind, but also inabling me in body, soul, and
spirit, to serve thy blessed majesty: for this I know the most perfect amongst
men, lacking thy wisdom are nothing worth. And great reason, because the
thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our forecastes are uncertain. And
why? Our nature surely is so vitiated, and our will so depraved, and our
understanding so corrupted, that it museth most, yea altogether on vain
things. Therefore good Lord, I beseech thee comfort my sick soul, that it may
walk in thy laws and ways, and work thy will. And Lord like as thou know
the secrets of my heart, and the desires of the same, and see indeed that I
would very earnestly walk in thy truth, and work the works of the same
truth: so Lord I beseech thee refresh my soul according to thy merciful
calling, where thou said, Come to me all that labor and are laden (and lowly
of heart) and you shall find rest to your souls, and I shall refresh you.

O Lord, I miserable sinner would gladly labor in acceptable ways, and have
some care that my good will and desire might not swerve from thee, but be
wholly bent toward thee, and like as thou know the same to be unfeigned in
me because it is thine own work: So Lord refresh me with thy merciful grace,
that now and for ever I may be steadfast in the true faith, and that I may be
always obedient unto thy laws and commandments, and that I may never swerve
from the holy and blessed ordinances of thy true and catholic Church, which is
thy spouse, and for the most part speaks thy words of truth and life, but
that I may use them, receive them, and honor thee in them so far forth as
they concern thy worship, and are according unto thy most holy will and
pleasure, as in things which thou have left to declare thy love unto us, and by
them to assure our hope, and to exercise our faith, that it should not be idle
nor wavering: whereunto howsoever I be prove, thorough the corruption of my
nature, and Satan's malice against me (as I am on the other side unwilling and
unable to do that which is good) yet O Lord since all things are possible with
thee, though they seem never so impossible to us, help and reach out thy most
mighty and merciful hand. O most loving father I know that by my sins, I am
not worthy thy blessed comfort: nay I am most worthy to be deprived of that
and all other favors: but Lord since thou have said, that in what hour soever
a sinner does repent him of his sins, thou would no more remember them: and
also thou would not despise the sighing of a contrite heart, I am bold in
confidence and trust of thy mercy meekly and with a lowly heart to call to
thee for grace and help in this troublous time of temptation, and trying of
our faith. I am as one laden, yea over laden with ignorance, not knowing the
height of thy heavenly mysteries, nor the deceitful deepnes of the crafty and
subtle arguments and persuasions of my ghostly enemies, which daily do
assault my sinful soul, and so burden the same that it can find no rest.
Therefore O Lord, like as thou know my will and hearty desire is to serve
thee notwithstanding these suggestions within me and without me, and that I
have a desire to live and dye in thy most holy faith: so Lord I beseech thee,
never suffer the subtle persuasions contrary to thy truth to take place or
root in my heart. But like, Lord, as thou have created my heart, and given me
in some measure a will to order the same according to thy blessed will: so Lord
I humbly yield the same again into thy hands, desiring thee by thy holy spirit
so to direct my ways, words, and works, that now and always they may be
accepcable in thy sight. And good Lord, suffer not my soul to perish, which
thou have bought so dearly with thy most precious blood, for the which great
mercy sake, of thine heretofore showed unto me, have mercy on me
continually, and make me poor in spirit, and low of heart, and content with my
vocation, submitting my self wholly into thy hands, so that my desire may be
to thy will, and that no desire remain in me, but only to do thy will and
pleasure: And grant I beseech thee that I may have none other trust but only in
thee, which art only to be trusted, and all trust it self, and none besides
thee. Grant further O Lord, that my poor soul may rest in thee, yea in thee
alone, for thou have said, they shall never be confounded that put their trust
in thee: which trust Lord grant me never to forsake, for any vain trust, or
temptation, or tribulation that may any manner of way fall out to vex my poor
soul: but grant me thy holy spirit to comfort and defend me from all things
that should procure thy displeasure. As thou art in Trinity one God and Lord
over all, which live and raignest world without end. To thee be all honor,
glory, and praise for ever. Amen.

A prayer that we may have the fear of God before our eyes in all our doings.
O Almighty, and everlasting God, thy holy word teaches us, that thou art not
only a father, but also a Lord, not only a forgiuer, but also a revenger, not
only a Savior, but also a judge: and as thou being a father, a forgiuer, and
a Savior, do pardon and show mercy; so thou being a Lord, a revenger and
a judge, punishest and condemnest. Neither does thy holy scripture only set
forth unto us a Gospel which comfort us, quickneth us, shows us glad and
joyful tidings, forgiueth our sins, and quieteth our consciences, and
brings us unto everlasting life: but also a law which reproves, accuses,
condemns us, wounds and slays our conscience, yea, and throws us down
headlong into the deep dungeon of hell. And as the holy Gospel lifts us
up and makes us glad with the hope of remission, and forgiveness of our
sins: so does the law pluck us down, and almost drive us unto desperation
for fear of thy plagues, and everlasting punishments: so that we not only
love thee, as a father, a forgiuer, a Savior, but also fear thee as a Lord, a
revenger, a judge. For as much therefore, O most gracious God, and merciful
Savior, and most righteous judge, as this does so mightily put away sin, and
make us to walk in the way of thy commandments, namely, reverently to fear
thee, and to stand in awe of thy judgment and heavy displeasure: we most
entirely pray thee to give us that fear which thou requirest of us thy
children in thy holy scriptures, and whereunto thou have promised, so many
large and bounteous blessings: that we may not only love thee as a Savior,
honor thee as a father, but also reverence thee as a Lord, and fear thee as a
judge. But yet with that fear and reverence good Lord, that belongs to
children, and not to slaves, otherwise it will do us small good.

O Lord, all things are open to thy eyes, neither is any thing hid from thee,
which see the very secrets and most inward thoughts of our hearts. Give us
therefore grace, that in all our enterprises, we may ever set thee, and thy
fear before our eyes, and so stand in awe of thee and of thy righteous
judgment, that we attempt nothing whereby we should provoke thy heavy
displeasure against us, but so walk in thy fear, and thy holy ordinances,
that we may at all times love thee as a most gracious Savior, honor thee as a
most loving father, reverence thee as a sovereign Lord, and fear thee as an
upright, yet most merciful judge. So shall it come to pass, that we
reverently fearing thee, as a child does his father, shall not only avoid
all such evils, as might make thee our heavy Lord and fierce judge: but also
embrace those virtues, which shall both evidently declare our faithful love,
true honor, unfeigned reverence, and humble fear toward thee, and also cause
thee that art our loving Father, and most merciful Savior, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to acknowledge thine own grace in us, and to crown it at the
length with everlasting glory, through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A prayer against the enemies of Christ's truth. Psalm. 140.
Deliver me, O Lord from the ungodly, and stifnecked persons, for thou see
how in their hearts they imagine mischief, and have great pleasure to pick
quarrels: their tongues be sharper then any adders sting, and under their lips
lies poison of adders: but O merciful Lord, let me not fall into their
hands, least they handle me after their own lusts.

Thou only art my God, that must hear my piteous plaints, Lord, that rulest
altogether, that art the strength and power of my defense, be thou as a helmet
upon my head, wheresoever the ungodly shall assault me, and suffer thou not the
wicked thus to prosper in their matters. Suffer not their cankred and malicious
stomachs to increase and spightfully to revile me.

Look upon thy poor wretches cause, and rid me out of these daily
grieuances: then shall I with an upright heart, and pleasant countenance,
extol and magnify thy holy name. Amen.

A prayer to keep the tongue and to eschew the affection of the world. Psalm.
141.
TO thee I cry, O Lord, hear me speedily: let my prayer be as a sweet taste
and savor in thy presence, and the lifting up of my hands as an evening
sacrifice.

Lord set a watch before my mouth, keep my lips, and my tongue also that they
speak nothing amiss, as does the ungodly, who can speak nothing save evil;
but that they call purely and heartily upon thee, and report thy worthy
praises.

Bow not my heart to last after evil, nor to follow the fashion of the wicked,
and abominable sinners, least I happen to cloak my wickedness with other
sins, as hypocrites do. Let me not live as they would have me to do, but
rather as it shall best please thee. Let me not approve their counsels, nor
their deeds, though they carry never so goodly a show, and fair face to the
world. Let me not hearken to the entising and sweet baits of the ungodly,
which counsel me to filthy and unclean things, but rather let me give
good ear to the righteous and godly man, though he sharply correct and chide
me. Let me always have a ready eye toward thee, only in thee to trust
always and to apply my self unto thee continually. Cast not away my soul,
neither suffer it to perish: keep me, that I be not tangled with the snares of
the ungodly: and from the privy traps of malicious persons save me: deliver
me, O Lord, through thy grace, for in all our own devises and works, can
nothing be found sure for us to trust upon.

A Prayer of the Church against sin. Sapi. 1^
THou, O our God, art sweet, long suffering, and true, and with mercy
orderest thou all things, for if we sin, yet are we thine, because though
sin in it one nature separate between thee and us, yet does thy goodness
surmount all iniquity: so excellent I know thy greatness to be. And if we
sin not in so high a measure (for otherwise who lives and sins not?) yet
are we sure that with thee we are allowed, for to know thee, is perfect
righteousness, and power is the root of immortality.

In the time of wars, a prayer of King Asa. 2. Paral. 14.
LOrd, it is all one with thee, to help them that have need, with few, or
with many: help us, O Lord our God, for we trust in thee, and in thy name we
be come against this multitude, thou art the Lord our God, let no man prevail
against thee.

A Prayer for keeping of a good name.
THAT wise man which was privy of thy secrets, O heavenly Father, taught us,
that an honest name is a treasure right precious when he says: better it is to
have a good name, than precious ointments. But this so excellent and good
thing, we neither can get, but by thy goodness; nor keep, but by thy grace,
aid and help. Now surely the well and fountain of a good name, is a faultles
life: this therefore in especial, we demand and crave of thee, O Lord
almighty, and that for Jesus Christ's sake. Yet nevertheless, for as much as
oftentimes, innocence and faultlesse living is not enough, neither yet a sure
buckler, and defense, namely against such as under their lips bear the
poison of serpents: yea and oftentimes, it happens that when we suppose to be
among our trusty friends, we dwell as Ezechiell did amongst scorpions and
venomous serpents, we cry with thy holy prophet, O Lord deliver my soul from
wicked lips, and a guilefull tongue. But if nevertheless it seem good to
thee, to exercise us thy servants also in this affliction, to the intent they
may be better brought to godliness before thee, and be bettered in this world,
then grant we pray thee, that with Paul thy most valiant champion, we may by
reproach and glory, by infamy and good name, abide still in thy commandments,
through Jesus Christ, which also himself (when he walked here on earth) was
reviled, slandred, evil spoken of, and called to his face a Samaritane, a wine
drinker, a deceiuer of the people, and one that had a devil, and yet the same
now reigns with thee in glory, whither also we beseech thee, in good time to
bring us, and that together with the rest, whom thou have put apart to
everlasting blessedness through Christ Jesus. Amen.

A Prayer against worldly carefulnes.
O Most dear and tender father, our defender and nourisher, endue us with thy
grace, that we may cast off the great blindness of our minds, and carefulnes of
worldly things, and may employ our whole study and care in keeping of thy
holy laws: and yet that we may travail and labor, for our necessities in
this life, like the birds of the air, and the lillies of the field, without
carfulness: for thou have promised to be careful for us, and have commanded
that upon thee, we should cast all our care, which live and raignest world
without end. Amen.

A Prayer against the devil.
Jesus Christ our Lord, which by the mouth of thy holy Apostle S. Peter did
say, that our adversary the devil goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom
he may devour, we know the truth of this by our own experience, and feel
that he is busy and fierce and breaks in upon us: so that if thou help
not, he will soon deceive us with his craft, ouerturne us with his might and
with his cruelty tear us in pieces. But if thou which have vanquished him
wilt appear, but as it were a far off, thou will make him afraid, and with
thy only look, put him to slight.

Vouchsafe (O Lord) to receive us into thy tuition, being but infants, weak,
feeble, and unskillful, lest the ^^^rce and cruel beast all to tear us: yea,
give us grace always, not only to bear before us the sword of the spirit in
our sight, and to tarry it in our hands, but also courageously to use it, as
from thee, that so our enemies may well, know that we do our business by thy
counsel, aid, and strength and in thy power may be put to flight, to thy
glory, and our everlasting comfort through Christ. Amen.

A thanksgiving unto God for all his benefits.
WE very humbly in Christ thank thee, O heavenly Father, for thy manifold and
inestimable benefits, which thou have given to us, both for our souls and
bodies, yea and that freely of thine own goodness not only without, but
contrary to our deserving. We thank thee, that it has pleased thee of thy
great mercy, first, to create and make us according to thine own image and
likeness, and to place us in joyful Paradise, where we should have continually
remained in a blessed and quiet state, if through the subtle and deceitful
suggestions of Satan, our old enemy, we had not transgressed thy holy
commandments. We thank thee also, O most gentle Father, for thy loving
kindness, which thou shewedst to us, when we were all perished and lost through
the sin of our first parents Adam and Heua.

For when thou might justly have condemned us, and cast us into perpetual
damnation, thou like a father of singular great love had pity on us, and
sauedst us by the death and passion of thy well-beloved son our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself a ransom for all our sins, and paid
a sufficient price by his precious blood, for all the wickedness that we at
any time heretofore have committed, or hereafter shall commit through our
frailty and weakness, so that we believe thy promises, and repent and amend
our lives. Neither wast thou thus contented, that he only should die for our
sins, but also did raise him up again for our justification, and to make
us righteous in thy sight. Moreover after that he had showed himself
unfeignedly to live to his Apostles, by manifest and evident tokens certainly
through the power of his Godhead he ascended up into heaven, perfect God and
perfect man, where he now sits on thy right hand, and makes intercession
for us, being our alone mediator and advocate: from thence we look for him to
come again at the day of judgment, not as a fearful Judge to condemn and
cast us away, but as a most loving Lord and gentle Savior, to carry us with
him into everlasting glory, there world without end to remain in such joys,
as eye has not seen, nor ear has not heard, nor yet any heart is able to
think.

For these thy most bounteous gifts, and for all other thy benefits which
thou daily give to us of thy great mercy, both for our body and soul, we
humbly thank thee, most merciful Father, beseeching thee to give us grace
through thy holy spirit, not to be either vnmind full of them, or unthankful
for them, but to walk worthy of this thy kindness, and so behave our selves all
our life time in this wretched world, according to thy holy will, that at the
last day we may be found in the number of them, to whom thy only begotten
soon shall say, Come ye blessed of my father, possess the kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of this world. Lord let it so come to pass even for
Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

A devout Prayer to be daily said.
O Almighty and eternal God which vouchsafedst that we (as it were) heavenly
children, should every one of us call thee our heavenly father. Grant that
among us by pureness and example of innocent life, thy most holy name may be
sanctified, that all other nations beholding our goodness, and virtuous living
that thou workest in us, may be stirred to hallow and glorify thee. Grant (O
Lord) that the kingdom of thy grace and mercy in this life may so rule and
reign continually in our hearts, that we may be by thee accepted and
accounted, as worthy in Christ to be partakers of thy kingdom of glory and
majesty, in the life to come. Grant that unto the very death, yea and in death
it self also, we refuse not to follow thy divine will, but that we according
to the example of the celestial citizens, agreeing together quietly, united in
spirit, all controversy in opinions contrary to thy holy truth, being laid
apart, and the lust of the flesh being subdued, and the flattering assaults of
the world and the devil overcome, we may willingly, faithfully, and
constantly, obey thy blessed will in all things. Grant O Lord, for our body
such a measure of necessary and needful sustenance, that thereby we may be
the better enabled, more freely and hearefully to serve thee, and abound in all
good works, toward thy saints and servants here upon earth, knowing that our
goodness reaches not to thee, but to the excellent that are in the world,
whom we beseech thee make us more and more to delight in, and to love for thy
sake.

Give me grace, O Lord, not only patiently to bear and suffer our enemies,
and such as hate us, together with the injuries, which they do lay upon us,
making good use of them, for thy glory and our instruction, but also
unfeignedly to forget and forgive, whatsoever they have devised, said or done
against us even as we our selves would gladly obtain at thy merciful hands,
and feel in our selves the free pardon and full forgiveness of all our
transgressions. And for such temptations to evil, as from the corruption of
our nature arise up in our hearts, give us grace first clearly to discern
and discover them; then courageously to stand up against them, and soundly to
loath and leave them, that we be not in the strength of them, as it were in
the midst of a violent tempest, carried headlong into sin, and by means
thereof into everlasting destruction.

Especially strengthen us (good Lord) against the suggestions of Satan, whose
marvelous malice, wily subtilties and very great power against us, we are
not ignorant of: as not unacquainted neither with our own weakness and
disability to withstand: What say we? more with our pronenesse and readiness
to yield: and therefore cannot but in both these respects, again and again
entreat thee, that art the God of our strength to cause thy grace to be
sufficient for us and in us, and to make thy power perfect through our
infirmity, that so having fought valiantly, and mightily overcome through thy
strength, we may through thy goodness and mercy, for evermore live with
thee, in that heavenly city, where and against which, as also against such
citizens of thine, as are gathered into it, no manner of temptation shall
assail, much less be able to prevail, and there for ever have the full
fruition of celestial delectation, not only accompanied with Angels and
blessed Saints, but enjoying the most comfortable sight of thy glorious
countenance, in whose presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy right hand
there are pleasures for evermore, which vouchsafe unto us, for Jesus Christ's
sake thy dear son, and our all and only sufficient Savior. Amen.

Another Prayer to our Lord God.
O Heavenly Father, God almighty, I pray and beseech thee in mercy, graciously
to behold me thy unworthy servant, that I may, by the gifts of thy holy
spirit, fervently desire thy kingdom, and by the light of thy word, may
soundly know thy will, and faithfully work and walk thereafter. Give me, O
Lord, wisdom, even the wisdom that is from above. Make me constant in thy
truth, patient in tribulation, and strong in thee unto the end. Keep me
Lord, from the sleightie invasion of the old wily serpent. Defend me from the
counsels and cursings of evil tongues. Let thy mighty arm be my
continual shield against all the malignity and mischief of this wicked world:
Remember not Lord my offenses: instruct and prepare me to repent, and teach me
to be truly sorrowful for my sins. Make me to love justice and hate wrong,
to do good, and abstain from all evils, that so the fruits of my faith, may
pledge up to my conscience, that thou have graciously called me to be thy
child. To thee therefore be glory and honor for ever and ever. Amen.

A devout Prayer.
HEarken Lord to my words, consider the thoughts of my heart. Behold how loud
I cry to thee, Let my just prayer enter into thine ears, which unfeignedly
comes from my heart. Hear me Lord, for I am poor and destitute of man's
help. Take care for my soul. Save me thy servant which wholly trust in thee.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I will never cease crying to thee for help,
for thou art mild and more merciful, than my tongue is able to express, yea
than my heart is able to think. As often as adversity assaileth me, I will
cry and call for help unto thee: I will call upon thee in the day time, and
in the night my cry shall not be hid from thee; O thou God of the heavens,
maker of the waters, and Lord of all creatures, hear me a poor sinner calling
upon thee, and putting my whole trust in thy mercy, have mercy upon me, O
Lord God, have mercy upon me, and for thy manifold mercies sake forgive me
all my offenses. Amen.

A prayer for meekenes and chastity.
O Lord, thou father and God of my life, let me not have a proud look, but
turn away all voluptuousnes from me. Take from me the lusts of the body,
let not the desires of uncleanness take hold upon me, and give me not over
into an unshamefast and obstinate mind. Amen.

A prayer of Esaias in the 6. and 64. Chap.
LOrd look down from heaven, and behold from thy holy habitations, and from
the seat of thy glory: where is thy strength? where is the plenteous rich
multitude of thy mercies? are al these hardened against us? verily thou art our
Father: Abraham now knows us not, nor Israel knows us not, but thou Lord
art our father, thou art our redeemer, thy name is from the beginning.
Wherefore have thou made us Lord to err from thy ways? have thou hardened our
hearts least we should fear thee? Turn thee to thy promise made to thy
servants, for the tribes of thy heritage: for few of thy people have enjoyed
the possession of their land, and that but a little while. Our enemies have
spoiled thy holy place, and trodden it under feet. And we were regarded so
vile, as if thou had never been Lord over us, as though thy glorious name had
never been called upon by us, and showed over us. I would that thou would
all too break the heavens and come down once, that these hills might melt
away at thy presence, like as at a hot fire, and that the malicious might boil
away, as does the water upon the fire, that thy name might be known to thy
enemies, and these ungodly might be shamed and troubled at thy presence. When
thou wroughtest for us marvelous things, then we looked not for them: thou
camst down, and the hills wasted away with trembling before thy face, and
from the beginning heard they not, nor perceived with their ears, neither
with any eye was there seen any besides thee, that wrought such marvelous
things, and that to men, which waited not for thee: sometime thou meetest with
them that gladly did righteousness, and thought upon thee in thy ways. But
now Lord, thou art angry, because we are sinners, and ever have been in sin,
although we were delivered from perils. And all we are wrapped in filthy
uncleanness, yea all our righteousness is spotted like the clothes of a
me^struous woman, and all we are taken away like leaves, and our iniquities
have carried us away like a whirle-winde, and there is none left that will call
for help in thy name, and not one that will rise up and hold thee with
prayer, for thou have hid thy face from us, and have dried us up in the hand of
our iniquity. But now Lord thou art our Father, we are but, clay, and thou
art our potter, and all we are the works of thy hands, be not angry, O Lord,
for ever, and remember not all our wickedness. Lo, behold we beseech thee, all
we are thy people, the cities of thy holy places are forsaken, Syon is turned
into a desert, Jerusalem is desolate, the house of holiness and prayer and of
our glory, in which our fathers praises thee, is turned into an he^^e of fire
and all things that we delighted in, into a wilderness. Will thou, Lord, be
avenged of these things? Will thou hold thy peace, and scourge us ever so
grievously?

Before the receiving of the Sacrament, say thus.
LOrd, although I be not worthy to receive thee into the house of my soul, for
mine innumerable offenses and sins done against thy great goodness, yet
trusting in thy great pity, and infinite mercy, I come to receive thy blessed
body, not grossly and carnally as the blind suppose, but spiritually and by
faith, together with all the fruits and effects of thy sufferings, yea as a
sick creature to thee, that art the health of life: unclean to thee, that art
the well of mercy and holiness: blind by ignorance to thee, that art the light
everlasting: needy of grace and power, yea of will to any good thing to thee,
that art the King of heaven and earth and workest therein whatsoever pleases
thee: naked of good works, to thee, that art the author of all grace. I come as
a wretch to thee my Lord and maker, all desolate and comfortles, to thee my
refuge and succor, for besides thee there is no consolation. I come as a
sinner to thee, that art the mediator between God and man. I come as a caitife
to thee my most merciful Savior. I come all sinful to thee, granter of
remission and pardon: I that am dead by sin, come to thee, the restorer of
life, evil to thee, that art all goodness: hard hearted, to be relieved by
the infusion of thy superaboundant grace: desiring thee to heal mine
infirmity and sickness, to wash away my sin and filthiness, to lighten my
blindness, to reduce me to the right way, when I am out thereof, to comfort me
desolate of goodness. Have mercy on my wretchedness, pardon my sinfulnes,
give me the light of grace thus buried in sin, that I may receive thee to be
the spiritual food and nourishment of my soul: and that with such chastity
of body, with such pureness and cleannes of soul, with such contrition of
heart, and abundance of weeping tears, with such spiritual joy and gladness,
with such dread and reverence, with such strong faith, steadfast hope and
unfeigned charity, with such obedience and humility, with such love,
devotion, faithfulness, and thankfulness, as it is beseeming for such a Lord
to be entertained and received withal, and that to the comfort of my
conscience in this life, and my endless salvation at the last.

And be not displeased good Lord, that I a sinner, with an unclean heart, and
polluted mind, (or sure I am not so sanctified outwardly and inwardly, as were
fit) come hither this day to receive the blessed sacrament of thy precious body
and blood, by a lively faith: but remember merciful Lord, that thou refusedst
not the sinful Magdalene being penitent, from the kissing of thy most blessed
feet. And in likewise despise me not, ne put thou me away as unworthy, from
this blessed Sacrament, for my sins and unkindness, though I confess thou
may justly do so, and do me no injury: but grant thou me godly sorrow of
heart, plenty of unfeigned tears, to testify unto my heart, the washing away
of my sins and wickedness: so that with a pure heart, and clean conscience, I
may this day come to, and be partaker of the holy Communion, to thy glory and
the comfort of my soul and conscience, whilst I receive therein an effectual
pledge of everlasting life, with all holy saints in heavens glory, and of the
fellowship of thy people in this present life, these things being wrought in
me, by thy holy spirit inwardly, as well as offered unto me by the outward and
visible elements. Grant me blessed Jesus, so reverently and religiously to
receive the Sacrament of thy flesh and blood, that thereby I may assuredly
feel my self incorporated into thy Church, as a sound member of thy body here
on earth: and though as yet I be not meet or fit, by reason of my filthiness,
to be numbered among the simplest and lowest of thy servants, but rather to be
reject for my sinfulnes: yet good Lord, of thine infinite power I know thou
can, and of thy singular goodness I hope thou will, and therefore am also
the more bold humbly to entreat thee, to make me equal, and like to thine
elect and chosen servants.

Come thou father of the fatheries, come comfort of the comfortles, come I
beseech thee, and cleanse my soul from contagiousnes of sin: for it is not
convenient, and according, that there should be any uncleanness, where thou
then, the fountain of all true holiness, yea holiness it self, should come
in and dwell. Come therefore good Lord, and apparel my soul and body both with
such ornaments of virtue and grace, that it may delight thee therein to abide.

And as thou disdainedst not to touch the sore Leapers with thy holy hands: so
good Lord vouchsafe to annoint my sinful soul with the ointment of remission
and pardon of sins, and so to replenish it with strength and power against
sin, and to fill it with ability to do good duties, that in this life, by
steadfast hope, firm faith, and unfeigned charity, I may so increase in virtue
from day to day, that I may attain to the glorious fruition of thy Godhead in
the kingdom of heaven, where I may see thee face to face, world without end.
Amen.

After the receiving of the Sacrament, say thus.
I Thank thee, good Lord, of thine infinite goodness for yt this day you have
vouchsafed to feed me with thy blessed body in this holy Sacrament of thine,
and that by a lively faith, thou have made me a fruiteful partaker thereof,
humbly desiring thee, further to grant, that this thy blessed Sacrament, which
I have received, may be powerful in me, to lessen in me, and purge from me
the power of my particular iniquities, and to fit me to all good works of
blessed obedience, yea make it in me a fortitude, and a spiritual strength
against my frailty, a sure defense against worldly troubles and adversity, a
sure seal of grace and pardon: a medicine of life, and a continual
remembrance in my mind and heart of thy blessed passion, so that in the way it
may conduct and guide me, and when I am out of the way, it may reduce me: when
I stumble, it may uphold me, and when I am falling, it may raise me: so that
by this and other gracious helps that thou have ordained, and by good
continuance, and daily growth in the obedience of thy will I may be brought to
everlasting glory. And during my life upon earth, vouchsafe so to order the
tallage and taste of my heart, that I never feel other sweetenes but thee,
that I never seek other but thee, that I care not for any other delight but
thee, neither that I regard any other honor but thine. And give me such a sound
love toward thee, and in thee, and for thee, toward my brethren, that in it,
I may continually and comfortably feel, that I am translated out of darkness
into light, and be well assured, that thou will graciously deliver me from all
tribulations of body and soul, captivity, anguish, and perils, together with
all the elect and chosen. Amen.

A devout Prayer
O My Lord Jesus, with all my mind, with all my might I do laud thee, and praise
thee for thine innumerable benefits which thou have showed unto me
heretofore, and show daily: but alas, good Lord, sure I am of this, that I
cannot praise thee as I would, and as my duty requires: wherefore I meekely
beseech thee, both to accept this my bounden duty and service, and also to
supply and fulfill mine insufficiency, so that thy absolute righteousness
and obedience may for me be acceptable before thy father, and may to me, and
in me, be comfortable to my soul. O sweet Jesus, I love thee as my God, my
maker, and my redeemer: what though I love thee not so fervently, as I ought to
do? yet I humbly beseech thee, to accept me according to that I have, and not
according to that I have not, and the rather, because that I have, is thine,
which I pray thee so to acknowledge and daily more and more increase, that my
peace in he, and love toward thee, may more and more abound. O sweet Savior
hear me here^^: even so be it.

The complaint of a penitent sinner, which is sore troubled and overcome with
sins.
O Lord God merciful and patient, and of much mercifulness and truth, which
of thy abundant charity, and according to thy great mercy, have taken us out
from the power of darkness, and have saved us by the fountain of regeneration,
and new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost: whom thou have shed upon us
abundantly by Jesus Christ our Savior.

If I have found grace and favor in thy sight, suffer me to speak a word unto
thee, and be not displeased with me.

Why do thou ever forget me and leauest me in the midst of my troubles and
evils?

Where is become thy zeal and strength? where is the multitude of thy tender
affections, and of thy mercies?

O Lord, may not he which is fallen, rise up again? Or may not he which
has gone away from thee, return unto thee again?

Shall my sorrow ^^er endure? shall my ^ound be incurable and never healed?

How comes it to pass, that I still turn away from thee, surely Satan's
malice and mine own corruption carry me violently. But stay me O Lord, and
turn me, yea cause me to turn, for of my self I cannot return.

In as much as it is not given to man to direct his (...) ways, neither to
(...) perfect his own proceedings.

For in thy hand is the life of every living thing: and the spirit also of
every man.

Thou show thy mercy to whom thou will, and thou art gracious to them, whom
thou fauourest.

Thou do kill, and thou do quicken, thou leadest down to Hell gate, and
bring up again.

Thy eyes behold the ways of every man, and thou searchest the hearts of men.

There is no place so secret or dark, wherein sins may hide themselves from
thee.

Nor any man may so lurk and hide themself in Caves, but thou shall see him,
which do fulfill both heaven and earth in every part.

Why have thou cast me away from thy presence, and ^^est me for thine enemy?

Why have thou laid upon my head the heavy weight of my sins, seeing no man
is able to bear thy displeasure?

What means it that thou show thy power against a wretch? why destroyest
thou me for the sins of my youth?

If I have sinned, what shall I do to thee? and if my sins be increased what
shall I do?

If I do justly, what shall I give to thee? or what shall thou receive a^ my
hand?

My wickedness shall hurt my self, and my righteousness shall not profit me.

The life of man is a temptation upon the earth, and if I have sinned (as all
m^^ have) what may I (...)?

shall (...) man be found (...) without sin (...) or shall any man (...)
without fault in his deeds?

How may a mortal m^^ be pure of sin in thy sight? or how may he which is
borne of a woman, be righteous?

Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, that thou have made me of the earth, and
that thou shall bring me again into the ^ust of death.

My days pa^^ and v^nish away like (...) waste daily, there is no ta^ying.

My life flies, as the wind, and considers not that which is good.

I was but lately borne in this world, and shortly I shall be taken away hence
by death, I never continue still in one state.

The days of my life be few, and short, thou have appointed an end, which I
shall not pass.

Naked and bare I came out of my mothers womb, and naked and bare I shall
return again, truly all men living are but vanity.

Have pity O Lord, on them that are in misery, and despise not the works of
thy hands.

Though we sin, yet are we under thee, for we know thy power and strength: and
if we sin not, then are we sure that thou regardest us.

Cease thy indignation, O Lord, and turn it from me: and cast all my ^^nes
behind thy back.

Take away thy plagues from me: for thy punishment has made me both feeble
and faint.

For when thou chastisest a man for his sins, thou causest him by and by to
consume and pine away.

Whatsoever is delectable in him, perishes like unto the cloth that is eaten
with moaths.

Would God I had one (...) defend me a while, until thy anger were turned
away, or that thou would remember me.

I am clean cast away from thy presence: shall I never hereafter see thy face
again?

Behold I have opened the griefs of my soul, the day of my sorrows have
taken me.

The floods of tribulation compass me round about, and the streams of thy
fury run over me.

And I cry unto thee, O Lord God, but thou hear me not: I ask mercy, but
thou reiectest my prayers.

Why thrustest thou down a poor wretch from thy presence? or why forsakest
thou me so long time?

Why take thou not away mine in^^uitie? and why put th^^ not away the
wickedness of my heart?

Arise and tarry no longer, O Lord, arise, and reject me not for ever.

Have me in remembrance I beseech thee, for I thoroughly tremble and shake for
fear.

Yet will I not hold my tongue, but cry still unto thee with a mourning and an
heavy hear^.

Turn away the stroke of thy ve^^eance from me and bring my (...) out of
troubles into rest.

I am here no long continuer, but a pilgrim and a stranger, as all other
mortal men be.

And what is man that thou should be angry with him? or what is mankind,
that thou should be so heavy Lord unto us?

What, will thou bring sorrow upon sorrow? I pant for pain, and find no rest.

My sorrow grieueth me, when I should eat, and sudden sighs ouerwhelme my
heart.

I am as if my bones were all to broken, when I hear my enemies rail upon me,
and say to me day by day where is thy God?

Why turnest thou thy face from these things, O Lord, why have thou no regard
of my trouble?

I earnestly make my prayers daily in thy sight, and the heaviness of my heart I
do show unto thee.

My spirit is careful and troubled within me: and desperation has entered
into my heart.

Is it thy pleasure, O Lord God, to cast away thine own handie works?

Deliver my soul from ^^rruption, and my life from everlasting darkness.

What avails it me, that ever I was borne, if thou cast me straight into
damnation: seeing that the dead shall not praise thee, nor any of them which go
down to hell?

I have sinned, what shall I do to thee? why have thou put me to be contrary
to thee? I am weary of mine own self.

Why searchest thou out my sins so narrowly? when there is no man that can
escape out of thy hands?

If I would say that I were righteous and without sin, then thou might
worthily condemn me to the fire prepared for the devil and his angels.

But I confess that I am a sinner, and do humble my self here in thy sight.

Surely if a man would ^^and with thee in judgment, he shall not be able to
answer one word to a thousand things wherewith thou might charge him.

This makes me to fear all my deeds, knowing that thou sparest not him that
offends.

If I look upon thy power, O how mighty and strong art thou? If I shall call
for judgment, who shall defend my matter, or speak for me?

To thee O Lord, I call and cry, to thee my God I make my humble suit.

Turn away thine anger from me, that I may know that thou art more merciful
to me than my sins deserve.

What is my strength that I may endure? or what is the end of my trouble, that
my soul may patiently abide it?

My strength is not a stony strength, and my flesh is not made of brass.

There is no help in my self, and also my strength flies away from me.

Although thou hide these things in my heart, yet I know that thou will
remember me at length.

For thou art true and just, O Lord God, thou do not condemn unjustly,
which rewardest man according to his deserts.

All this is come unto me because I have forgotten thee, and not used my self
truly in thy testimonies.

My heart has turned backward, and I have followed the desires of my flesh.

And thou have surely known this thing, which know the secrets of the heart.

Lay not against me, O Lord, the sins of my youth: nor have in remembrance
my old injuries done against thee.

Daily sorrow ^^commeth me, and sadness possesses my heart.

I look after peace, but I cannot have it: I look for a time of health, but
my grief continues still.

When the time of thine anger is past, let mercy come, yet am I unhappy more
and more.

Woe and alas that ever I sinned: my heart therefore mourns and is sad, al
mirth and joy is vanished from me.

How am I wasted? how miserably am I confounded, because I have forsaken and
cast away thy law.

Death has ascended by the windows, pearcing the inward parts of my heart

W^^^ I daily one while must secretly with my self: another while with loud
voice cry out and complain, the mean time my life draws near to the pit.

Who shall give me a place to rest in, from all my griefts and troubles?

And I will forsake all men and get away from them.

Who shall give me water to my head, and a fountain of tears to mine eyes,
that I may bewail my sins both night and day?

And I will look for him which may save me, and deliver me from the wrath to
come.

I have no trust neither in life nor death, but I fear thy judgment, O Lord,
and the pains prepared for sinners.

The fear of my sin makes me careful: and the burden of my conscience
oppresses me sore.

O God which tenderly love mankind, and art a most righteous Judge, s^are me
now I beseech me, and show me some favor while time is. Forgive that which
I fear, put away that which I dread, before I depart hence and shall not
return again.

My sins do vex and trouble me sore, they be so great that none can be
greater.

Alas my fall, alas my misery, alas the grief of my plague, and stroke:
certainly my sin is the cause of all this, and so I will take it, and suffer
it.

A Psalm in which he gives thanks to God, that his enemies have not gotten
the upper hand of him.
I Will magnify and praise thee, O Lord God, for thou have exalted me and set
me up, and mine enemies have not gotten the upper hand of me.

O Lord of ho^^ I have cried unto thee and thou have saved me.

Th^^ ^ast brought my soul out of hell: thou have holden me up from falling
into the deep Lake, from whence no man returns.

Thou have not closed me up in the hands of mine enemies: but thou have set my
feet in a place both wide and broad.

I have sought thee, and thou have heard me, thou have brought me into
liberty out of great distress.

Thou ha^^ ^urned my sorrow into (...) have ceased my mourning, and compassed
me round about with mirth.

Thou have declared thy great magnificence in helping thy servant.

Thou have ^^ne meruailously with me in my miseries.

Thou have regarded the ^^ne of the poor: thou have not turned away thy face
from me.

I will be singing and speaking of thy mercies: and I will publish to other
thy fidelity and truth, so long as I shall live.

My mouth shall never cease to speak of thy righteousness, and of thy benefits:
which be so many, that I cannot number them.

But I will give thee thanks till death take me away, I will sing in the
praise of thee, so long as I shall continue.

I will triumph and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have looked upon my
necessities, and regarded my soul in distress.

Thou have been my sure refuge, and the strength of my trust and hope.

I thank thee Lord of thy goodness always: and for thy exceeding mercy.

Thou have been my com^or^ ^n the time of my trouble, thou have been merciful
unto me, O Lord, and have revenged the wrongs that mine enemies have done to
me.

According to the multitude of the heavy thoughts that I had in my mind, thy
comforts have cheared and lightened my heart.

Thou have sent me now joys, for the days wherein I was in sorrow, and for
the years in which I suffered many a painful storm.

Thou have called to remembrance the rebuke that thy servant has been put to,
and how furiously mine enemies have persecuted me.

O Lord God of hosts, who may be compared unto thee? thou art great, and
greatly to be praised.

Thou art high upon all (...) earth, thou art exalted fa^ (...) all gods.

^^orie and honor is (...) thy face: holiness, and magnificence is in thy
Sanctuary.

With justice and judgment thy royal throne is established, mercy and truth
go before thy face.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, which have not holden back thy mercy from thy
servant.

After that I had long looked for thee, O Lord (...) the last thou did attend
upon me, and hearof (...) ^rye.

Thou have taken me out of the Lake of misery, and set my feet upon a rock,
and made my steps sure?

Thou have given me my desire, I have seen thy joyful countenance.

Thou have stricken all my adversaries, and have abated their strength.

Thou have rebuked the ^ablement of them that vexed me, and have plucked me
forth of their hands.

^hou have cast them h^^^^^ng into their own (...), their feet be wrapped in
the net which they laid privily for me.

Mine enemies are recoyled back, they are fallen down and destroyed from thy
sight.

Thou have been the poor man's defense, and his helper in tribulation, when
most need was.

Thou have executed judgment for me: thou have defended my cause against mine
accusers.

And although thou were very angry with me a little, yet now I live through
thy mercy and goodness.

Verily I supposed with my self that I was clean cast out of thy favor.

But thou have heard my prayers and according to thy great mercy have taken me
again into thy ^^^our.

O Lord of th^^ own (...) have (...) ^^rength (...) when the^ (...) from me, O
Lord how greatly astonished was I?

When I was in adversity, then I cried unto thee, and thou did answer me:
When my soul was in great anguish and trouble then O Lord, I remembered thee.

I have tasted and seen how s^eet thou art: truly blessed i^ ^he man that
trust^ in the

(...) ^^rding to thy (...) thy commen^ (...) and praise, but thy counsels
touching us, be without example, and greater then with words can be expresse^

Dominion, power and glory he thine, for thou have made all things, and because
thy w^ll is so, they do still ^ontin^^^

Thy name (...) blessed, p^^ised, and m^^nified both (...) wo^ld with (...)
^men.

A Psalm of the benefits of God with thanks for the same.
MY soul praises thee, O Lord, and all that is within me, praises thy holy
name.

My soul gives thee humble thanks, and thy benefits ^ will never forget.

Wh^^ for (...) sins (...) heal^^^ (...) infirmties.

Which have saved my life from destruction, and showed in me thy grace and
mercy.

Which have satisfied my de^^e with good things, and shall once restore my
youth again.

Thou have entreated me mercifully at all times, and have revenged me of my
enemies.

Thou ha^^ ^een a defense to m^ O Lord, and a sure foundation of my wealth.

Thou have guided me with thy counsel, and taken me unto thee through thy
mercy.

Thou have many ways declared in me thy great might and power, and after thy
anger has been past, thou have turned again, and comforted me.

Thou have sent me many grievous troubles, but at the length thou have brought
me out of the bottomes heepenes.

Thou have made me privy to thy ways, and have not hid thy counsails from me.

Thou art full of mercy and grace O Lord, slow to wrath and ready to goodness.

Thy displeasure lasts not always, and thou keep not back thy mercies in
thine anger for ever.

Thou rewardest us not after our sins, nor punishest us according (...) our
deserts.

Look how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth, so great is thy mercy
toward us.

How far as the East is distant from the West: so far, O Lord, remove our
sins from us.

Like as a natural father has pity upon his children, even so, O Lord God,
thou have had compassion upon us.

Thou have not forgotten thy creature, thou remembrest that we are flesh, yea
all men living are vanity.

And that the age of man is like unto grass, and may be compared to the
flowers of the field, which as soon as the sharp wind has blown upon them
with his blasts, wither away, and die: so that no man can tell where thy did
grow.

But thy mercy O Lord, and loving kindness is always upon the (...) that fear
thee, and thy righteousness endures for ever.

So that we keep our promise, and covenant with thee, and so remember thy
commandments that we do them indeed.

O Lord thou have stablished thy throne in heaven, thou gouernest al things by
thy imperial power.

I will magnify thee, O Lord, and land thy name world without end. I will give
thanks always, and make thy name glorious for ever.

O Lord thou art puissant and great, and thy magnificence is unsearchable.

One generation shall show to another thy works, and they shall declare thine
ancient noble acts.

They shall ever praise the magnificence of ye glory of thy holiness, and the
memory of thy great goodness. For thou art good ^^d gracious to al men, and thy
mercy exceeds all thy works.

The e^^^ of all things behold (...) fruit upon thee, that thou should give
the^ their sustenance in time convenient.

Thou openest thy hand, and sillest every living creature with food necessary.

O Lord thou art rightful in all thy ways, and holy in all thy deeds.

Thou keep all them that lo^^ thee, and the torment of malice shall not
touch them.

My mou^h shall sprake thy glory and praise, and all living creatures shall
honor thy holy name for ever.

Praise our Lord, O ye his angels mighty in power which do his
commandments, and obey the voice of his word.

Praise ye altogether God, O al ye hosts, you his ministers that due his will
and pleasure.

Praise our Lord as I do, and let us ^^gnifie his name together.

Pr^^^ our Lord, O ye al his saints, for his name is glorious, and his praise
above heaven and earth.

Praise our Lord together, O ye al his works, every thing that lives, praise
our Lord. Amen.

The complaint of a sinner.
MY God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? it seems that I shall not obtain
deliverance, though I seek it with loud cries.

My God, I will; cry all the day long, but thou will not answer, and all the
night long, without taking any rest.

The mean time, thou most holiest, seem to sit still, not caring for ye
things that I suffer, which so often has helped me heretofore, and have given
to thy people Israel sufficient arguments and matter to praise thee with songs
wherewith they have (...) thanks to thee for thy benefits.

Our forefathers were wont to put their trust in thee, and as often as they did
so, thou did deliver them.

As often as they cried for help to thee, they were delivered, as often as they
committed themselves to thee, they were not put to shame.

But as for me^, I seem rather to be a worm than a man, the dunghill of Adam,
the outcast of the vulgar people.

As many as have seen me have laughed me to scorn, and reviled me, and
shaking their heads in derision at me, have cast me in the teeth saying:

He is wont to boast and glory that he is great in favor with God, wherefore
let God now deliver him, if he love him so well.

By thy procurement, O Lord, I came out of my mothers womb and thou gave me
good comfort, even when I sucked my mothers breasts.

Through thy means I came into this world, and as soon as I was borne, I was
left to thy tuition, yea thou wast my God when I was yet in my mothers womb.
Wherefore go not far away from me: for danger is even now at hand, and I see no
man that will help me.

Many b^lles have closed me in, both strong and fat, they have compassed me
round about.

They have opened their mouths against me, like unto a lion that gapeth upon
his pray, and roreth for hunger.

I am poured out like water, and al my limbs loosed one from another: and my
heart is melted within me as it were wax.

Al my strength is gone and dried up like to a tilestone, my tongue cleaves to
the roof of my mouth: and at the last, I shall be buried in the earth, as the
dead be wont.

For dogs have compassed me round about, and the most wicked have conspired
against me, they have made hoales through my hands and my feet.

I was so ungently entreated of the^, that I might easily number al my bones:
and after all the pain and torment that they did to me with grievous
countenance, they stared and looked upon me.

They divided my clothes among them, and cast lottes for my coat.

Wherefore Lord I beseech thee, go not far from me, but for as much as thou
art my power and strength, make have to help me.

Deliver my soul from danger of the sword, and keep my life destitute of all
man's help, from the violence of the dog.

Save me from the mouth of the L^^^ and take me from the horns of the
Unicorns.

I will show unto my brethren the majesty of thy name, and when the people be
most assembled together, I will praise and set forth thy most worthy acts and
deeds.

And all that worship our Lord, praise him, all the posterity of Jacob magnify
him, al ye that be of ye stock of Israel with reverence serve and honor him.

For he has not despised and set at naught the poor man, because of his
misery, neither has he disdainefully turned away his face from him; but
rather as soon as the poor man cried to him for help, he heard him by and
by.

I will praise thee with songs openly in the multitude of thy people, and will
perform my vows in the sight of the^ that honor thee.

The po^^^ shall eat and be satisfi^^, ^hey shall praise our Lord that study
to please, and as many of you as continue still such, your hearts shall live.

All the ends of the world shall consider these things and be turned to our
Lord, and all heathen nations shall submit themselves, and do homage unto thee.

For our Lord has a power royal, and an imperial dominion over the heathen.

The most mighty and greatest of all them that dwell on the earth have eaten,
and after that they have tasted the spiritual gifts of our Lord, they have
submitted themselves, and made humble suite unto him: yea and all the dead
which are buried in the earth, shall kneel and make reverence in his honor,
because he has not disdained to spend his own life for them.

They that shall come after us, shall honor and serve him.

These things shall be written of our Lord: that our posterity may know and
understand them.

That they also may come and show these things to the people that shall be
borne of them, that our Lord has done these things which be so marvelous.

A Psalm of thanksgiving.
Rejoice and sing in the honor of God, all ye that live on the earth.

Worship and serve our Lord with gladness, come unto his sight and presence with
joy and mirth.

Acknowledge you, and confess that our Lord is that God which has created and
made us: for truly we made not our selves, but we be his people and his
flock, which he nourishes and feeds continually.

Go ye through his gates to give him thanks for the innumerable benefits which
ye have received of him, and to sing through his courts his worthy acts and
deeds, praise him, and highly commend his name.

For our Lord is both good and gracious, and his mercy is infinite: he is most
constant in keeping of promises, not to one generation only, but even to all.

A Prayer for the night.
O Lord God and my heavenly father, for as much as by thy divine ordinance, the
night approaches and darkness begins to ouerwhelme the earth, and time
requires that we give our selves to bodily rest and quietness: I render unto
thee most hearty thanks for thy loving kindness, which have vouchsafed to
preserve me this day from the danger of mine enemies to give me my health, to
feed me and to send me al things necessary for the comfort of this my
poor and needy l^fe, I most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, that
thou will mercifully forgive me all yt I have this day committed against thy
fatherly goodness, either in word, deed, or thought, and that thou will
vouchsafe, to shadow me this night under the comfortable wings of thy
almighty power, and defend me from Satan, and from all his crafty assaults,
that neither he nor any of his ministers have pe^^^ over either my body or my
soul: but that although my body through thy benefit enjoys sweet and
pleasant sleep, yet my soul may continually watch unto thee, think of thee,
delight in thee, and evermore praise thee: that when the joyful light of the
day returns according to thy godly appointment, I may rise again with a
faithful soul, and undefiled body and so afterward behave my self all my life
time, according to thy blessed will and commandment, by casting away (...)
see^ (...) there^ (...) ^rifie thee (...) ^ther, which (...) begotten Son, I
(...) our only Sau^ (...) sweet comforter, liue^ (...) raignest one true and
eu^^lasting God, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

