To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of Thomas Russell, Esquire.
Shows:
THAT WHEREAS, the making of Saltpeter within His Majesty's Realms and
Dominions, is a great safety and benefit to His Majesty, and His Subjects in
general, for that it effects and assures a certain provision thereof, for
the furnishing of his Majesty's Stores, for the strength, defense, and benefit
of his Majesty's said Realms and Dominions; which if it should be had from
foreign parts, is not to be obtained, but at the pleasure of other Princes,
and most commonly at unreasonable Rates, and the same so obtained, might happen
to be intercepted, or by contrary winds hindered, in time of need, or utterly
lost by Shipwreck, or other casualties on the Seas: And if no such hazard
were, yet the same is not usually to be bought, but for ready money to be
transported, and paid for the same; whereby the Treasure of his Majesty's
Realms would be diminished, and other foreign Kingdoms thereby enriched. And
whereas for making of the Saltpeter, which has been formerly, and now is made
in his Majesty's said Realms and Dominions, the Subjects have had, and still
have their Houses, Douehouses, Cellars, etc. dug up to their great trouble;
and also their Carts taken for carrying of the Liquors, Tubbes, etc. to places
far remote, to their exceeding great prejudice, which has occasioned many
complaints, not only to the Justices of Peace in most parts of his Majesty's
Dominions, but oftentimes to His Majesty, and the Lords of His Highness
privy Counsel. And whereas also, there was never yet made, since the first
making of Saltpeter in this Kingdom, being about the beginning of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory, notwithstanding all the trouble and
grieuance of the Subject, a third part of the Saltpeter, used for the ordinary
service of the Kingdom, and in diverse years not so much as was spent for the
Kings Store, nor near so much in time of War, when there was most occasion
of it, but as well the King, as the Subject, were forced to procure the same
from Barbary, France, Poland, Hamborough, and other places in Germany. The
Salt-peter-men having formerly used, as commonly they now do, to the abuse of
the King and the Subject, to take Composition money, of some two shillings, of
some five shillings, of some ten shillings, of some more, of some less, to
spare their Houses, Stables, and Douehouses from digging, whereby the service
intended, for making Saltpeter, for his Majesty is wholly neglected, though
the Subject be continually charged with such composition money. And further if
the Salt-Peter-men, in their accustomed course of working, should for a few
years longer dig Houses, etc. for making of so great a quantity of
Saltpeter as the Kingdom shall require, they would so impouerish the earth,
that they would in short time hardly make any at all, there being no
artificial means used by them for enriching the earth, but that which
casually happens, of which it is not fit to make Saltpeter, again in many
years. And whereas his Majesty was informed, that the Petitioner had by his
great travail, pains, industry, and charges discovered and made known, a new
way and means, not heretofore known, practiced and perfected, for the making
and refining, of perfect, good, serviceable, and Merchantable Saltpeter, etc.
whereby the Subject should be freed from the digging of their houses, etc. And
likewise from taking up Carts for carrying their Liquors, Tubbes, Ashes, etc.
from place to place. And withal, that by this new way, the King should have
what quantity of Saltpeter soever should be required both for his own Store,
and all provisions of the Subject, and for his neighbor Nations, being in
league and amity with his Majesty

Upon which Information, It pleased King James of blessed memory, to refer
the consideration thereof unto the Duke of Buckingham his Grace, the Right
Honorable the Earl of Middlesex, then Lord Treasurer of England, and the
Right honorable the Earl of Totnes, Master of the Ordnance: Who after long
and many serious debatings (diverse trials being made of the certainty of making
Saltpeter in this new course proposed, and the goodness thereof,) were pleased
to recommend it back to the said King James, as a proposition fit to be
embraced, and a Privilege for the said Work to be granted to the inuentor
(for his encouragement) for 21. years. But the warrant to Master Attorney
General to draw up the said privilege, being made solely by the said Earl of
Middlesex, was so unequally limited to price, and no certainty for the payment
thereof being delivered, with other strict Conditions and Prouisoes, unfitting
for so great a Service, intended for the general good; That those who intended
to adventure the Stock for erecting the Works, were thereby utterly
disheartened, and would not proceed therein, whereby all the former charge of
bringing the Invention to perfection, and procuring the Privilege being solely
laid out by the Inuentor, was like to be utterly lost, and the service intended
for the good of the Commonwealth wholly neglected.

WHEREUPON a Petition being lately exhibited to His Majesty that now is, for
enlargement of the said Grant, It has pleased His Majesty, for the
encouragement of the Inuentor, and to ease the Subject of the now grieuance,
and secure the Kingdom with quantity of Saltpeter, graciously to condescend
thereto: For the speedy execution and advancement of which work, The Inuentor
is ready upon his own charge to erect a Work forthwith, about the City of
London, which after the Earth is ripened, and impregnated for making of
Saltpeter, shall produce weekly as much Saltpeter, as now is or usually has
been made in London and the liberties thereof; notwithstanding all the trouble
the City is now put unto: By which means there shall be made a full
demonstration to such Persons as this honorable House shall appoint, both of
the certainty of the Works, the profit of it, the quantity, and the
continuance thereof for ever. And that the Saltpeter which shall be made in
this new course, shall be far better, and more useful in all conditions
required in Saltpeter, for the making of Powder, then any that now is brought
into His Majesty's Storehouse, from any Salt-Peter-worke in this Kingdom, or
imported from any parts from beyond the Seas. But because so great a work as
this, for speedy making of the quantity of Saltpeter, for the service of the
whole Kingdom, cannot conveniently be effected by any private Purse: The
Inuentor therefore most humble prays, That this honorable house, will settle
some present course, That upon the demonstration made, as aforesaid, the sum
of 20000. li. may be in a readiness, which will be required for erecting,
and stocking so many works, as shall be sufficient to make 500. tun of
Saltpeter yearly, for his Majesty's, and the Subjects expense. The said sum
of 20000. li. to be laid out according to the direction of the Inuentor, by
such persons as this Honorable House shall for that purpose select; which
Stock of 20000. li. shall be repayd in seven years, by even and equal portions
yearly, either in Saltpeter, or in money, the first payment thereof to
commence from the time that the Works shall be erected, and made fit to make
Saltpeter, which may be completed and fitted within one year, and the
Stock of Coals, Urine, and Ashes provided; By means of which Stock of
20000. li. the Petitioner may be enabled, (after demonstration upon his own
cost and charges made as aforesaid) to erect and stock so many works, as
shall serve to make sufficient quantity of Saltpeter for the service of his
Majesty and His Subjects, as aforesaid. It being a thing so much tending to
the Subjects ease, and the Kingdoms security. And further, that this House
will be honorably pleased to confirm his Majesty's Grant to the Petitioner,
for the said term of 21. years by Act of Parliament. In consideration
whereof, besides all the former advantages to the Subject, in freeing them from
the now grieuance, and safety of the King and Kingdoms, by making quantity of
Saltpeter sufficient for the service of the Kingdom; The Subject in general,
which have any occasion to use Powder, shall for ever reap a great benefit,
far beyond the use of that money which the Petitioner does require, for
erecting and stocking the works: both in regard of the goodness of the
Saltpeter for making Powder, and in the cheapnesse thereof: For the Subject
shall have Saltpeter double refined, 10. li. in every Tun better cheap then
now they pay for Saltpeter, brought from beyond the Seas, which though it be
but once refined, is now worth 90. li. the Tun. The difference of these two
being above 5. li. the Tun, which is upon just account 15. li. on a Tun
cheaper; By which means they will also have their Powder 15. s. on every
Barrel better cheap. For the Powder maker will deliver 100. weight of Powder
for 112. li. weight of Saltpeter once refined, which loses 12. li. in the
great hundred at the second refining: So if the Subject spend 400. Tons of
Powder a year, the advantage will be to the Subject in general 6000. li.
yearly. And in regard the only material for the artificial impregnating of
Earth for engendring Saltpeter is Urine, there may be most of all the common
Beggars about London, and in other Cities and Towns corporate, where the
works shall be erected, continually employed, for gathering of Urine for the
use of the said works, whereby they may have a competent means for their
living without begging.

If it please this Honorable House to accept this offer of the Petitioner, he
will make it apparent by this course, that there may be provided within two
years next following a Magazin of Powder in every City, Town corporate,
Fort, and Port of this Kingdom, for seven years Store, always before hand in
readiness, for any service; there being sufficient Materials in the places
aforesaid to be had every year, for seven years provision, and the truth of
this may be shown to such as this Honorable House shall appoint, within two
months.

The Petitioner humbly profereth, and dedicateth this his service, with all his
labor, time spent, and charge formerly bestowed, for the good of his Majesty,
and the honor and safety of the Kingdom, to the grave consideration of the
Honorable Assembly, in this high Court of Parliament; And if any can propound
a better course, for easing the Subject of the now grieuance, and the safety of
the Kingdom in general, by providing sufficient quantity of Saltpeter to be
always in readiness in several places of the Kingdom, where Works may be
erected, the Petitioner will ever be ready, to the uttermost of his skill and
endeavor, to further and advance the same.


