FEAREFVL NEVVES. Of Thunder and Lightning, with the terrible effects thereof,
which Almighty God sent on a place called Oluestone, in the county of Gloucester
the 28. of November last.

Having prefixed before it, a short discourse, concerning two other admirable
accidents that soon after ensued.

Truly related by P. S.

And dedicated unto the Kings most excellent Majesty.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Frauncis Burton. 1606.

To the most puissant, potent, and Maiestious, my dread Sovereign James by the
grace of God, of great Britain, France, and Ireland King defendor of the
Faith: the Great-Commaunder of the West, and North-west parts of the World;
Grace, and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, unto all
happiness: in this life, godliness, and righteousness, and in the life to
come, immortality and glory.
MOst puissant King, my dread and dear Sovereign, in most humble and submisse
manner, I your highness most duetifull, and loyal Subject, do herein present
unto your excellent Majesty, the true report of a most fearful accident,
which Almighty God the King of kings, and Lord of Lords, sent among us, your
Highness poor subjects at Oluestone in the county of Gloucester, on Thursday
being the 28. of November last: whereof I (your Majesty's said subject) was
both an ear, and an eye witness. The powerful and admirable works of God
are for none more fit, and profitable, then for the Kings of the earth, whom
the God of heaven, has substituted next under himself, to order and rule the
several societies of men, in promoting piety, and preserving justice:
forasmuch as next unto the word, and the appendances thereof, (the most
effectual means) nothing does, or can more effectually frame, or having
framed, can more constantly continue them in the manage, and performance of all
kingly duties, then the serious and often meditation of Gods wonderful works,
in the whole frame of the world, and the several parts, and portions of it.
For as hystories, which are the remembrances of time, and successes in time,
are for all men meet, and commodious, but especially for Kings, Potentates,
and great personages, their volumes being therefore well denominated, and
called theirs; Principum bonorum, et heroum libri, good Kings, and great
councellers books: so the large volume of Gods works are open, and set before
all, but for none so fit, and profitable, as for their Majesty's, that
represent unto us the majesty and power of almighty God. That as the beams of
Gods glory shine in them, more then in others, so they before, and more then
others should amire, and reverence the beams of his glory, and greatness in
heaven, and earth, that has made them so glorious and great on earth. And if
the knowledge of all the great, and admirable works of God, be so necessary
for all Kings, then the several events and successes that wonderfully, and
extraordinarily fall our, and come to pass in their several territories, and
kingdoms, are in no sort to be neglected, but so much the more to be
remembered, and reverenced, as God has therein come more nearer unto the^, then
unto others kings, and has as it were spoken first, and more particularly unto
them, that thereof they might make first and most especially unto themselves, a
heavenly and christianly use: humbly, and heartily to commit, and commend
themselves, and their estates, to his ouerswaying and all ruling providence;
That bears rule over the kingdoms of men and gives it to whomsoever he
will. Dan. 4.29.
And being thus devoted personally, they may with all devotion, and care,
(according to the trust committed unto them) order and direct, all their
subjects in the fear of the Lord; Who according to his will works in the
army of heaven, Dan. 4.32.
and the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand, nor say unto him
what do thou? Whereby both King, and Subject may know, and serve him, in
whose hand is their breath, Dan. 5.23.
and all their ways.

Wherein forasmuch (my dear Sovereign I speak it withal reverence of your
excellent Majesty) as the best Kings have, and do sometimes show themselves
forgetful, it were to be wished, (...) Georg. Codinus de efficial. palatii.
Con. vulgo Cuciopal:
the like of that old honorable office, Of a Kings remembrancer, were renewed,
and restored, not so much to mind them of men's actions, and exploites, that
have worthily or valiantly behaved, or carried themselves in peace or in war,
that so they might receive deserved honor, and recompense: as often, and
again to put them in mind of Gods great, and wonderful works, that his
Majesty might have his due praise, and glory never sufficiently to be
remembered.

But since there is no such particular office, which was Functio optime
instituta, male exercita, possime abolita, well ordained, ill ordered, and most
wretchedly abolisht; F. Iunij not: in Curopalatem. page 313.
and that kings are left to be remembrancers unto themselves, as of many other
things, so of the wonderful works of GOD, abroad or at home, and that it
does so highly concern your highness, to make a good use, of what has so
extraordinarily succeeded, within your Majesty's owns kingdom, which is not
possible without direct notice. I have therefore thought it very dutiful, in
the dutifullest manner, to make known to your Highness, and under your
Highness, gracious approbation, to all your Majesty's subjects what, has so
wonderfully, and admirably fallen out, the time and place forementioned.

Prefixing a remembrance, but in brief, of two other memorable, and most
famous spectacles which within the space of forty days, have likewise been,
to the admiration of the whole land. I wish also with the like commemoration,
and praise of the Almighty power, and never failing goodness of our most
gracious, and merciful God: Who for Christ his sake protect, and preserve your
Highness, the Queens Maiesly, the young Prince, and all your Highness royal
offpring, and issue, all your Majesty's kingdoms, dominions, and faithfu^
subjects, from the entrage of Satan, and all his limbs, specially from the
bloody attempts of all Antichrists brood: most particularly from the desperate
villainies of all shorelings shauelings, and Jesuits, this ages (as they are,
truly called) King-killers: long to reign over us, to the glory of Almighty
God, and the joy, and comfort of all faithful and true hearted Subjects.

Your Highness most humble, and most loyal subject P. S.

FEAREFVL NEWS.
THree things there are, which in this I Will, within the space of 40. days have
very extraordinarily, and wonderfully succeeded, that deserve likewise more
then ordinary remembrance. Of the first, withal others that had an use of their
eye sight, I was for many nights together an ey-witnesse, but not without great
wonderment. Of the second, I was only an ear-witnesse, and that with great
thankfulness. Of the last, I was both an ear, and an eyewitness with great
astonishment, seeing, and hearing the terrible lightning, and thunder, and an
admirable effect of them both.

The two first, I will not handle so amply, because many others according to
their places, and gifts, did with more deep contemplation weigh the accidents
themselves, and with consideration can more effectually remember, and deliver
them to the glory of God, and the praise of his great power, and mercy.

Of the latter I will (God willing) be more large, my place, and profession
requiring thereof in this kind a more ample testimony, then of any others
present, from the beeginning of the accident, and action, to the end thereof.

The first therefore worthy of admiration, and so of commemoration, was the
streaming, flaming, and burning of the heavens for many nights together, both
before, at, and after the time that that horroble, inhumane, and more then
butcherly treason, (the like whereof was never heard of among infidels) should
have been executed, to the extinguishing of the light, and taking away of the
life of the whole state. The heavens as it were taking a bloody, and fiery
impression, and blushing as it were at those most bloody attemptes of cursed
Caitifes, and of those furious flames which they most treacherously, were
kindling, to the utter ruinating of their dear country and common wealth.
Which great work of God, although all did, or might behold, and see with
wonderment, yet who could or did know the end thereof, until in the end the
Lord himself made it known, and open to the view of all men? And now having
opened it to all who is so blind, (as F I^s^phus in lib. de I^^ae^. bell. 7.
cap. 12.
he says, on the tokens that proceeded the taking, and ouerture of Jerusalem)
neither having eyes, nor soul, as not to see, that God has a singular care of
mankind, and does every where foreshew betime, what is most expedient for them?
especially what care the Lord has of Kings, and kingdoms, and of their
regalty, and royalty? That the heavens do even take notice, openly foreshewe,
and publicly bewray, the horrible treacheries, and conspiracies that shall be in
earth, and as it were under the earth in secret, desperately complotted, and
contrived for the overthrow, and ruin of their high estate, and soueraignety,
whereon depends, as the life of the body on the head, the wealth, and
happiness of the whole commonwealth.

That he that seateth, and vnseateth Kings at his pleasure, should so watch
over their persons, and places, and watch them, that shall seek by most
undutiful indignities to wrong their persons, and places, that where the earth
cannot, the heavens shall hold out a light, and even bring to light, those
cursed complots, that are in obscurity most deuilishly hudled up, against the
Crown and dignity of the Lords anointed.

Is it admirable in the eyes of al men almighty God should so wonderfully
tender ye good of humane societies, especially of their heads, and governors,
that the heavens, ouerspreding the earth, should return such a reflection of
the actions done therein, as not to suffer unrevealed, but publicly by flaming
lights therein, to give a light, to the search, and finding out of that, to
their singular benefit, whereof otherwise to their Imminent danger, they are
utterly ignorant, is this (I say) admirable in the eyes of all, and ought not
every one, and shall not all, both King and subject, Prince, and people, head,
and heart, make a holy, and happy use of almighty God^ this so wonderful, and
unspeakable goodness? God forbid else. The use therefore being manifould, I
will hear draw it to a double head: general, particular. The general does
generally call upon all men, that fith almighty God has such a care of all,
head, and body, crown, and foot, that he has, and does not only enrich us
with infinite good things, prossperity, plenty, peace, (and what not?) all
which we are altogether utterly unworthy of: but has, and does also daily
prevent, and forestaie so many deserved evils, reuerting them upon their
heads, that are the instruments of ill: all of us therefore should from the
highest to the lowest, from his sacred Majesty, that fitteth on the Throne, to
the drawer of water, and hewer of wood know, and acknowledge with fear, and
reverence, the almighty presence, and providence of our good God, and always
to laud, and praise him for his goodness.

And for that we are all forgetful, and dull by nature, each one according to
his place, and calling: to provoke, and stir up on another, with that of the
prophet, not for fashion, but with affection. O come and let us sing unto the
Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation. As this is the
general use, so the particular is double, according to the double estate of
men, for each King has his use, and every Subject his use.

All Kings who acknowledge with reverence, for their sovereign the King of
Kings, have their use of singular comfort, and courage ever to behave
themselves Kingly; not to congratulate this Estate, or that person at any time,
by houering policy, and hidyng piety, considering the great founder, and when
it pleases him confounder of all Estates. and persons, does over shadow, and
shelter their thrones, and kingdoms: that so long as they serve him, Job. 5.23.
and forward his commands, their is no power there is no policy in earth, or in
hell, that shall harm their Majesty's one hair: for all the powers of the
heavens, and of the earth, are combined, and confederated together, for the
maintainaunce, and upholding of their thrones. But if any shall so far forget
their allegiance to the highest, as to set themselves against his high
commanders on earth, he himself from heaven will sight against them; and
cause all the rest of his creatures to cry out upon them, and to hale them on
to due, and most deserved execution.

As this is a kingly comfort and encouragement, to kings in their godly
government: so the second use is loyal, and respects the subjects in their
faithful obedience, to teach, and continue them in loyalty, and fidelity. Is
the King seated by the king of Kings in his throne, has the Lord himself
thought him sit visibly to represent unto thee, his invisible majesty, and
wilt not thou in the Lord yield unto him fear, and reverence? or dare thou
so, and worm of the earth, whatsoever thou art, lift up I say, not a sword in
thy hand, but a thought in thy heart against his sacred power, and government?
When the Lord himself says, This man, and his posterity shall reign over
thee, and the land of thy subjection, and shall rule this Empire, this I Will,
these, and these people and nations, art thou sound, or will thou only be
appeacht for a traitor? not only against the Crown, and dignity, of thy
earthly king, who has power of this thy life, but against thy heavenly
Sovereign, who has power (after thy head is taken from thy shoulders, thy
body vnbowelled, and quartered, and the parts of thy body imparted here and
there, as an horrible, and odious spectacle of thy disloyalty) to cast thee,
body and soul into hell? Cannot thy house contain thee, within the bounds of
fidelity? will not the love, and credit of thy country, and kindred, the
woeful outcries of thy sweet children, the pitiful lamentations of thy dear
wife, if thou have these; or otherwise the fear of imprisonment, the Rack, the
Halter, and so at last the terrors of death it self, terrify thee from
treachery? yet have a regard to thy soul, set not light by that which is the
price of the precious blood of the son of God. This thou hazardest, this
without doubt thou will cast away, and cast thy self headlong into hell, if
wilfully, and treasonably thou set thy self against him, whom the Lord has
set over thee, and the kingdom wherein thou art a subject.

Subject thy self therefore under the mighty hand of God, and of him whom that
hand has placed on the throne of the kingdom.

Consider with me (says he) who ever perished being an Innocent? and consider
with me (say I) who ever prospered being a traitor? Since the beastly Bull of
Pope Impius Quintus; were there ever heard of so many, and so bloody treasons
against the sacred persons of two christian Princes, as against that most
famous, and peerless Queen, that dead is, and his most excellent majesty
now living, and long may he live, to the comfort of all true-hearted subjects,
and to the confusion of all hollow-hearted Traitors. Amen, Amen.

In this succession of times, and treasons, we see by the admirable providence
of our good God, what has succeeded.

And unless the enemies themselves, had their consciences seard with an hot
iron, and were utterly given over to a reprobate sense, they must needs know
and confess, that hitherto they have, and if they yet persist, still will as
Giants fight against God.

Who to the praise of his glory, and their everlasting shame, has ever, (and I
hope ever will) vnbowelled, and ripped up all their freasons and Traitors. But
what shall I speak of Traitors, or to traitors, who will never make use
hereof, til the ladder, and halter by lamentable experience teach them; to
the turn whereof I leave them, and turn to you that are true, and faithful
Subjects in deed, exhorting, and charging you in the name of God, by all means
in these Traitorous times, to strengthen, and encourage your selves in your
faithful subjection.

Remember the counsel of God by wise King Solomon, commanding all Subjects,
Eccl. 10.20
not to intertaine a disloyal thought against their King in their hearts, nor
to speak ill in their privy Chambers, for the fowls of the heaven shall carry
the voice, and the birds of the air shall bewray it.

And if we may not admit a disloyal thought into our hearts, against a bad,
and a wicked King, how muchlesse may we do it, against such a King (as it
has pleased God to give us? (immortal thanks be given his Majesty for it)
as is a patron, and pattern of goodness, and virtue to the hole land. Give
(says our Savior Christ) to God that which is Gods, to Caesar that which is
Caesar's. If we will yield to God his, we must yield obedience to his word,
inioyning us to fear him, and to honor the King. If we will give Caesar his,
what is more due to the King then loyalty, Romans 13.1.2.3. etc.
and subjection? This being hearty, and inward, will questionless draw other
duties willingly with it. Who thus beeginneth and continues in fidelity, and
dutifullnesse, especially in conscience of Gods command, the blessing of God
shall go with him and his: contrariwise he that does not, the curse, and
vengance of God will find him out, and follow him at the heels, and rather
then he, and his desperate designs shall lie unrevealed, the heavens, the
fowls of the heaven, one, or other of the creatures of God, shall give a light
to the opening of it, to his eternal shame, and confusion.

And hitherto of the first admirable action, and accident: the second (whereof I
now come to discourse) was the most horrible, bloody, and barbarous treason,
that ever was heard of, which the fore-remembred fiery, and bloody streams
did accompany, which by the singular providence of God was detected, defeated,
and diuerted to the utter subversion, and confusion of the wretched Traitors
themselves. It abhors me to use more words of it and yet what words are able
to express the horror of it? I will only content my self, to make some good
use of this their damnable ill.

The first respects the hellish Traitors, and hel-bounds themselves with all
their accomplices: the second, all against whom that desperate, and devilish
proscription was made. For the wicked complotters themselves, and their
wretched accomplices, I mean al Papists, their former traitorly attempts, with
this more then brutish, surpassing all others their bloody, and t^^kish
enterprises: not^bly bewr^ieth the fruit of their Popish religion* and does
notoriously preclaime unto us, what we are to expect at their Traitorous hands,
so long as they abide, and breath a^^ng us. Who so with attention reads the
histories either divine, or profane, he shall (...), tha^ a^ Godly pity has
^l^^aies accompanied true piety, so idolatry, and cruelty have commonly gone
together. And if ever any idolaters were famous, or rather infamous for
truculency, and inhumanity, then without doubt the men eating Papists. I need
not instant herein, that one bo^ne of the Acts and Monuments has cased me of
this l^bor, and does entry where fore them for it. Neither is it any marvel
they so malice the book, and the man for his book, that they cease not to
inueigh against his dead bons which if they were within their reach, as P.
Phagius, and Bucers were, should not smell of the smoke, but smoke in the
fire. Then which what can be imagined more cruel? what greater inhumanity can
be devised?

Corpora maegnanimo satis est prostrasse leoni,
Pugna suum finem, cum iacit hostis habet:
At lupus, et turpes instant morientibus vrsi,
Et quaecunque minor nobititate fera est.
The Lion stout does rest,
when he has feld to geound
His foe, when he lies flat,
an end of fight is found.
The Woulfe and filthy Bears,
do rend the dying beast,
As each is cruel more,
that is in courage least.
They are worse then the Lion, Woulfe, or Bear, of which, the worst preieth
only on the dead flesh, but these after the flesh is rotten, cease not to prey
on the dead bones. What marvel, since they pray to dead bones and stones, and
what not? Idolatry, and cruelty may not, they cannot be at any time parted or
divorced.

As their cruelty is first noted, and but noted, because it is otherwise
notorious in all m^ns eyes, if ^euer before, yet now by their last more then
heathenish, and brutish cruelty, so secondly let us see; what we are to expect
from their accomplices, so long as they continue among us.

It is observed as a singular point of wisdom, to foresee what will fall out,
the fool only looking forth right, and to that which is before his feet,
not comparing times past, with the present; and both these, with that which is
to come, thereby to provide for his own good, and prevent his own harm,
which if we will do with wisdom, and circumspection, in this case of Jesus
Christ's most professed, and our heavy enemies the Papists, we may eastly
conjecture what their future, and after behavior will be; by their former, and
present, cruel, and Caniballike carriage.

If a she Bear robbed of her whelps, or a hungry woulfe, will not prey on the
silly Lamb she meets in her way, then may we trust the Popish crewe, and
suffer them to continue, and range up and down among us.

The she woulfe of Rome, has had heretofore, and now for their treasons is
like to have, such a loss of her whelps; whether she, and hers yet living,
will not seek revenge, I will not make question, least I should seem to
doubt, whether a Woulfe, be a Woulfe, and Rome the same to day that it was
yesterday: Revel. 17.9.
for certainly so long as she piercheth on seven hills, she will either
ouercrowe the Kings of the earth, or seek to pluck their Crowns from their
heads,

And what she does, she will teach all her brood, Revel. 17.16.17.18. Revel.
18.6 Revel. 18.6 eDut. 13.1
and chickens to do, until the Kings of the earth, according to Gods fore
council, and justice, and according to his command in that behalf, join
together, and execute the wrath of God upon her, and her adherents. Which if
almighty God, command them to do in the head, I desire to know what they ought
to do in the members? Every professed idolater, by the law of God is to dye, but
the Papists are professed Idolaters: the assumption, or minor proposition will be
doubted of; I will not therefore conclude, till I have strengthened, and
confirmed it, knitting it up after this sort.

If Papists be the grosest idolaters that ever were, then idolaters, but the
former is as true, as the seven hild city, is the seat of Antichrist, ergo the
latter as she shall certainly be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God
that will do it. The antecedent will not be granted me: for the consequent;
S. John warranteth me: I therefore fortify it thus. All they that worship so
base a thing a^ a piece of bread for the maker of heaven, and earth, idle
Pictures, rusty nails, rotten timber, and old rags, are the grosest
Idolaters that ever were; but the Papists do all these, therefore they are the
grosest Idolaters that ever were. And now I conclude, Papists ought by the law
of God to die. But me seems I see some man step forth, now I have concluded
pleading for Idolatry, and Papistry, denying my proposition the groundsell of
all: and yet me thinks it cannot stand faster then on the eternal, and
unalterable word of God. But says he, it is one of Moses iudicialls. Is it
indeed Moses, and not Almighty Gods? He reioyneth therefore, yes, and those
Iudicialls were temporary, and for the state of the Jews, and taken away by
the appearing of Christ. To this reioinder, I adioyne, that Christ says no
such thing, but that he came, not to take away the law, but to fulfill the law.
He came to destroy, and take away the works of darkness, not to make a way for
the works of darkness: which he must needs do, if he should either take the
sword out of the Magistrates hands, or give it in his hand, there to suffer it
rust in the sheath, and not draw it forth against offenders. And I pray you in
good part, against who^ should he use it, if not against Idolaters, the
greatest and notoriest Traitors against God, and his glory, that the earth
yields?

Shall Kings draw the sword which the Lord has put in their hands and that
most justly, for the cutting off, of them that complot treasons against their
own persons, and shall they be less zealous in the Lords cause, then in their
own? But what speak I of the Lords cause only, when in this case of the
Papists, there is a double treason, first against God by their idolatry, next
against the King by their disloyalty. This latter I affirm, and confirm it
thus. Whosoever holds the Popes supremacy, is a Traitor to the King, but all
Papists hold the Popes supremacy: My assumption will here again be baited
at, I will therefore bar it thus. If every Christian have his name for that in
truth he acknowledges Christ his head, then every Papista, Papist has his
name from Papa the Pope, for that he acknowledges him his head, but the former
is true therefore the latter. So that if once I bear him say he is a Papist, I
can truly say by and by he is a traitor. But we will have a shift for this,
he is no Papist, if there be such danger in the notation of the name, but a
Catholic, I promise you it is now well amended, as one washing off the filth
of his face with ink.

From whence I pray you comes this name? what sounds it? After this sort,
whosoever holds the Popes supremacy, is a traitor, every Catholic holds
the Popes supremacy: my assumption need here no more words, for this very
name sells me, that he holds the universality of the church of Rome, and so
the universal authority of the Pope of Rome. And this will always be the
keeping of the dirige, a Papist, a catholic, a traitor, a traitor. But it may
be our language is harsh, and barren, giving graceless names to gracious men:
will the smooth Latin, lend us a couple of names in steed of them, to steed
these men, for I would saine tid my self of them? What say you to Pontificius,
and Papicola, will either of these better Papist, or catholic? Surely no;
never a barrel better hearing: for when all comes to all, either he must
forget his Papistry, or he can never forgo his treachery. Notwithstanding all this, if he will continue a Papist, and so his treason, and so his double
treason, first against god, next against the King, what remains but the
reward of a treator. Yea but we condemn papistry of cruelty, and what were
this to execute all Papists: first therefore we must know a difference between
one that is foolishly Popish, and that smacketh of the corrupt dregs of Rome,
and an other, that has drunken of the wine of her fornications, peeuishly
popish, and a perverse papist, a young Cubbe, and an old Fox, one that is
creeping out of the shell, and another that is fledge, for when I speak of a
Papist, which instantly ecchoeth a traitor, and by and by calls for a halter,
I mean such a one as is a true Papist, a Catholic, Po^tificius, Papicola,
that has the grounds, and is grounded in the fundamental points of his
rebellion, I should say his religion, for as sure as the Lord lives, if he be
a resolute papist, he is an absolute traitor to God and his King: and it was
never heard of, that to execute him should savor any way of extremity, and
crulty, but of most just severity. Nay rather to spare such a one, as a rotten
member, to the utter hazard of the hole body, may be well accounted in humanity
and more then desperate folly. God almighty, in whose hand are the hearts of al
men to turn them whether it pleases him, so in wisdom direct his vicegerents
herein, that they may in their several kingdoms, do that which may most serve
for his glory, and the good of their several estates. Hitherto of the
traitors, that did complot the former horrible treason, and their accomplices:
now for the use we are to make, against whom, and whose good, it was most
deuilishly complotted, and desperately contrived.

Which is likewise double, the first, respecting Gods justice, the second, his
mercy. Concerning his Justice, let us know and remember with profit, that he
by the hand of these unjust wretches, shaking his rod unto us, did thereby show
what we for our many sins had justly deserved: Even all of us to feel, and
see an utter demolition, and desolation of our state, and common wealth.

For although these more then wicked traitors, had no just cause, nor occasion
to draw them on, but most desperately by the instigation of the devil, and
their deuilish madness, were carried on headlong to attempt, and enterprise so
horrible a treason, the like whereof no history does afford, as at an instant
to kill the King, the Queen, the Prince, and all the flower of the Church, and
common wealth, and that after a most hellish and fearful manner, by blowing
them up in the air, and so to leave the commonwealth as a forsaken widow,
prostituting her to be deflowred, defaced, and desolated by the bloody hands of
bastard children at home, and the furious invasions of foreign tirants, and so
to make her a terror to herself, and a terrible spectacle of extreme misery,
and calamity to the whole world: howsoever I say, they had no cause to do or
attempt this, yet we may acknowledge, and confess that by the just judgment of
God, all this, and more (if more might be) might have come upon us, and
overtaken us. But almighty God even in the midest of his judgment, remembering
mercy, did only shake the rod at us, and then cast it into the fire. That so
long as we live, and our posterity after us, in that common wealth, which by
the justice of God we had almost lost, but by his mercy yet possess, and
enjoy, and I hope shall to the end of the world, maugre the malice of the
devil, we may learn to fear Gods Justice, to love his mercy, and so for his
justice, and mercy, to fear, and love him, and to praise him with the prophet
in that excellent song. If the the Lord had not been on our side (may we now
say) If the Lord had not bin on our side, when men rose up against us, and so
forth to the end of that psalm. Who so makes not these profitable uses, of
this wonderful deliverance of the lord but runs on in sin without remorce,
let him remember what Christ said to the man delivered from his malady, go and
sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. And here an end of the two
first wonderful accidents, I mean an end of my discourse thereof: but I hope
the inhabitants of this land will never cease, with thankfullnes to God, to
remember his justice, and mercy therein never sufficiently to be praised.

O Eternal God, creator of heaven, and earth, and in Jesus Christ my most
merciful father, I thy unworthy servant return unto thy divine majesty most
humble and hearty thanks, as for all other thy unspeakable mercies, so
especially for the great and wonderful deliverance of my self, and many other
of thy poor and sinful creatures, from the rage, and force of the horrible
thunder and lightning, which of late thou did send amongst us. The true
report whereof, since I am herein to deliver to thy servant King James, whom
thou by thy almighty providence have made thy vicegerent in this mighty empire,
and so unto thy people his subjects: so sanctify (good Lord) my memory, and
meditation, and therewith all my report and relation, that the truth herein
being effectually delivered, it may redound to the glory of thy great name,
the profit of thy beloved children, and the terror of thy professed enemies. Amen

Now I come to the third wonderful, and terrible accident, whereof I was both
an ear, and an eyewitness.

First I will according to the truth, deliver the report thereof, and next make
such profitable uses, as so great, and wonderful a work does require. First
therefore where a report is to be made of an action done, the time, and place
are of no small moment, for the evidence of the matter. The time therefore was
on Thursday being the 28. of November last, about a month after ye foresaid
fearful flaming of ye heavens, and most horrible treason complotted and
detected. The place was at Ouelstone in the county of Gloucester, situated some
eight miles from the famous city of Bristoll, and two miles from Aust, which
is well known, in regard of the often transportation, and passage there over
the River of Seuerne.

This for the time and place, when, and where this wonderful work of God, was
by his al nighty hand wrought, and done: now for the action, and work it
self. The morning of the foresaid day being lowering, and sad, did yet a little
after eight, begin to smile, and look somewhat cheerful toward the east:
which was indeed but a smile, and for a very small time, for even anon before
nine of the clock, the west as it were envying the easts meriment, sends me
up with a strong wind, a most dark mantle, which ouerspred the whole heavens,
as if the sun had upon some sudden fear, suddenly retired, and again hid it
self under our horison, giving place to the dark night, to wrap up all
things in her black mourning gown. So dark and black was it, that but for
the note of the time, it was hard to judge whether it were day, or night: yet
after half an hour, or there about, this black mask was again taken off,
and the heavens begin to smouth up, and clear their countenance, the sun
sending forth from the south, his goulden rays for an hour and half: which
the north disdayning with a most scornful lower, thinking it self wronged, as
the west did before, and terribly menacing the south (notwithstanding the wind
stood between them to stay the quarrel) with a most terrible and ougly visage.
Neither was it satisfied with threatening looks, but her fearful forces come
on amain, admitting yet between, them and the sun, a short parle, made known
by a goodly, and beautiful rainbow. The sight whereof did not a little comfort
me, notwithstanding ye frowning face of the heavens, did otherwise pretend
some fearful event: for beholding the worlds Sacrament, I remembered not only
that covenant of God, which it does seal unto, but his other covenant made
with us in Christ, whereby he has bound himself, and that with an oath, to
be our God, and we (even as many of us as by faith apprehend the force and
fruit of it) to be his people. And that therefore though east, and west, north
and south, heaven, and earth, should be iumbled, and tumbled together, yet the
anchor of our hope, and happiness, being cast within the veale, and founded on
Christ the vnmoouable rock, could not fail, nor deceive, nor be deceived.

With this or the like meditation, I past from under the Canopy of the open
heavens, under the roof of the house.

Where after a very little while, being set at dinner, the terrible darkness,
that was in the North, so gathered on the south, that it became very dark,
considering the time of the day, and the clear light that was but a little
before. But the thick clouds had indeed their burden, whereof they hasted to be
eased, for down falls with a boisterous wind a very plentiful hail, which
with the abundance (for it was better then half a foot thick on the ground,
every where after the tempest, which lasted a quarter of an hour or there
about) and the wind made a very terrible rattle, which was accompanied with
fearful flashes of lightning, and some three, or four claps of more then
ordinary thunder.

Whereof I took occasion of talk, to the gentle woman of the house, and her
young plants, which (being five sons with the son of a friend) sat at table
with us, to this effe^^ That the Atheists of the world, and such as did not
know, acknowledge, and fear God, had great cause to be terrified, and to
tremble, at such terrors of his: but for such as did truly fear God, they
need not be appaled, or dismayed at it, considering they know^, it came from God
their gracious father in Christ Jesus.

She replied with a remembrance of the day of judgment, that if this, then
much more terrible, would the day of the Lord be unto such, as did not know
God in Christ, and in him, had a feeling of his fatherly love.

In the midst of our talk, behold, there flameth in a wonderful flash of
Lightning, seconded with as horrible a report of extraordinary Thunder, as I
think any man living has heard. It was not as the manner is of thunder, a
rattling and rumbling noise drawn in length, but as if a thousand tun weight
had fallen from a loft upon a loft able to endure the weight of it, making a
most inexplicable and unspeakable thumpe and hownce, to them that are under
it. Such was the furious and fearful report of this terrible clap of thunder,
wherewith according to the infirmity of this corrupt flesh, I was touched, but
not without assured hope in God, using the words of the Psalm. Power out thy
wrath, O Lord upon the heathen, that know thee not, and upon the kingdoms that
call not on thy name.

The table being taken up, and God for his mercies, praised, I betook me even
upon 12. a clock to my school, where finding my scholars amazed with what
had even then past, I put them in mind of that I had spoken in the morning (for
with our morning prayer, we had the first Chapter to the Romans read)
concerning the two means whereby God makes himself known unto the world, his
word, and his works According to the present occasion, I urged the second,
which I had that very day delivered out of those words of the Apostle, in the
20. verse, for the invisible things of him, that is his eternal power and
Godhead, are seen by the creation of the world, being considered in his
works to the intent they should be without excuse.

But in the midst of my speech, I heard the Belles knole extraordinarily, and
sending one forth to enquire the occasion, he presently returned answer, the
Steeple was a fire.

So concluding abruptly, and passing forth at doors, I saw it was no false
report of a fained fire. For behold, the force of Gods terrible voice, had
shaken, rifted, and rent the Tower of stone, whereon the Spier of Lead of a
great height stood toward the West, from the rest of the Battlement, almost to
the roof of the Church. And as it appeared afterward, all the west end of the
Church was likewise shaken, which was so much the more to be wondered at, as it
being crushed in diverse places, as a rotten apple: it was only so done within,
and no appearance of it without: and of three great glass Windows that stand
in that end, not one of them hurt by it, either in the Glass or lights, Albeit
the wall were shaken both immediately above and under them, the stronger being
hurt, and the weaker scaping harmless.

So powerful and provident is Almighty God, that he strikes and leaves
vnstriken where he will, and whom he will, that strength to him is weakness,
and weakness to him is strength.

And although this Thundering voice of Almighty God, did no where show so
terrible an effect, as on and in the Church, yet without the Church, in the
Field and in the houses near, an extraordinary presence of his power, not
without his mercy, was sensibly to be perceived by diverse, whom it cast, one
hither, another thither, and some down, but hurt neither man, woman, child,
nor any living creature else, for ought that I have heard.

As this was the effect of the terrible Thunder, so his fearful fire (the
lightning I mean) had fiered the steeple, about three quarters of a yard
beneath the foot of the bar, whereon the weathercocke pearcht, which
fearful fire, considering the powerful hand that had kindled it, the matter
whereon, and the bellows which did blow it, being at first a strong western
wind, how it did rage, they may well imagine that saw it not, which they may
farther understand by this, that within the space of two hours, it did
devour, consume, melt, and throw down all the timbers, lead, and irons that
were from the top of the Steeple, (being as I have said of a great height) to
the tower of stone, and in other three hours, did burn to the ground, melt,
and cast down with an irresistable force, all the lofts, timbers, stocks, and
wheels of five very tunenable but often abused bells.

The Clock, which before had notified precious time, calling on men as it were
to take time, and to take heed of the abuse of so excellent a treasure, was
likewise hereby silenced. The Chancell, through the flered timbers and
firebrands, which fell from the Steeple, on the roof of it, was fiered and
defaced. As it was very probable, the Church would have been also with the
like, had not the wind carried the rage of the fire so much on the Chancell,
which stood on the Eastside from the church, which is seated on the west. But
the fire it self did not much harm the church, the most hurt it received being
great, was from the hands of men, who fearing what was likely, that the rage of
the flames, would have had the like force on the Church, as it had on the
steeple; sought to save what might be. They therefore ripped up and cast out
almost all the seats, and uncovered the three Isles of the Church in the
middle, in hope to save, if it might be, that half which was westermost, if
the other half, next the steeple were fired. But their labor indeed turned to
loss, as it fell out, for God by his good providence, did not only restrain
the rage of the fire, from the Church which was on the West, but likewise from
the houses near, most admirably, especially, from the ministers which stood so
under the merry of the fire, and the wind. that (...) thousand stakes of fire
might be seen, to light a^^^ng his wood, on his hay, and corn mowes* and soon
whatsoever almost ^as about his house, and yet so gracious is (...) are (...)
only, I think did him not (...) (...) of hurt. In the mean season, it (...)
to r^^ie (...) not withstanding this so mani^^st (...) ^^^^^able a toolke of
God, in weath speaking vnto^^^n, (...) such sort, as you haus heard that saw
it not, and that (...) from heaue^t, of many that ca^^e (...) scarce one (...),
amongst many, (...), (...) a ^^ishap is (...), what a mise^^^^^^ here, what
(...) hap, what bad forfu^^e, wish such heatho^ish speec^^^, (...) the spears
of heaven were the wheels of fortune, (...) the clouds, hayle; lightning,
thunder, and alt the (...) God else, were but a cast a^ hazard. So little we^^
they ^^^rected est he with the great power of God, or the (...) their own
great sins, yea I dare say (and yet I think before the Lord I say the truth
more did truly for the present what they have done since I know not) bewailt
the ^o^e or their sweet ring of Bells, which the se^^e^e wrath of God, would no
longer suffer to ^angle, then orther for their ignorance of God, and his
goodness, or their unthankfulness, or for any other sin, which was does the cause
of this, and is the cause of all other his judgments. And least I should seem
to speak without book h^r^^^ I will allege that restimony, which is without
exception, the greatest of al other, of the abundance o^the heart, the mouth
speaks. The truth whereof not being doubted, then I say, it is an vndoubled
truth I have affirmed, for I heard with mine ears, diverse lament the death (as
it (...)) of their Belles, but no one; there so much as mention, the guilt or
punishment of sin.

And if they that were present spectators, and had a sp^^^all interest as it
were in so manifest, and public a pre^^^ent of Gods wrath revealed from
heaven, made so little use of it, what great cause is there, some special uses
be^ ripped up, as well for them that are nere, as for them that are farther of: I
come therefore to the use. Which is double first, in regard of places, secondly
of persons, for places it being a tower, and a Steeple of great height,
proudly aspiring as it were, and advancing it self in the apre, that was thus
fearfully stricken with the piercing force of thunder and lightning, as it
many times has fallen out ^^nes the tower of Babell began to be founded, that
God writes confusion on models erected with ambition, it is a document to all
places to take heed of the like ambitious fully, least they have the like
pernicious fall. It is feigned of (...), that it creeps at first on the
ground, but at last it r^^steth on the top of high topt turrets, but for the
fame of Gods wrath lighting on places, most while it arises from the
ouerturning of that, which has been turretted and raised up alost. That where
the proud spiers seems to threaten the heavens, they are by the heavens over
topt, and turned topsey turney to the ground. And as this is exemplisted in
proud towers, and turrets, so may it be in trees, that peeping out of the
earth, will at the length advance themselves so haughtily, as if they disdained
the drops that come from the clouds should light on their crowns. But it is in
vain to speak of the places without the persons, for though god write
confusion on them, they know not ne feel their own pride or perdition; which
lights on them, not for any sin of theirs, for they are unreasonable and
insensible, but for the sin of men's persons, who^ God has endued with reason
and understanding, and unto who^ he has committed ye dominion and use of his
other creatures, for the abuse whereof he does in justice, not only sometimes
set the stamp of his wrath upon their persons, but more often in mercy does
spare their persons, and brand it in the other creatures, that he has given
for their profit or pleasure. I come therefore to the personal uses hereof,
which shall be threefold, according to men's threefold estate, highest, lowest, or
between both.

Men of the first order, and rank, I do most humbly entreat often and again
to remember, who has so highly advanced them, and whereunto; for the
forgetfullnesse of these two points, is followed with an impotency of mind, ye
archenimye of moderation, and the most potent procurer of the hasty downfall of
their high estate. Prou. 8.15.
For if they did ever remember of whom they hold their places, and of what
importance, that it is the son of GOD by whom kings reign and statesmen
decree justice, by who^ princes hold their principality, and all the good
Judges of the earth: and as by the son of God they are placed, the importance
of their places to be such, as Moses the best commander, on that ever was,
groned under the burden of it: and Solomon makes it a matter of impossibility,
for any man to discharge it, 1. King 3.9
without more then humane ability. If they did remember (I say) these things
together with the peril, whereto great men in that they are great, are subject,
could pride so have preuaild with many of them as it has, as Pharaoh,
Nebucadnezar, Herod, and not only with such bad governors but with the best
likewise, as David and Hezechiah? Which desease the Lord who knows the hearts
of men, foreseeing how it would infect, did before hand prescribe a diet, and
gave an an tedate, which may be there more fitly and profitably seen then here
remembered. And since it is the Lords prescription, Deu. 17.19.20.
it is not without manifest danger to be neglected, but to be used of men in
highest places, as they love their own health and happiness. A word to the wise,
I will therefore conclude, this first use, unto men of the first room, as
Kings, their great councellers and assistants, with the speech of the Kingly
prophet David; and leaving them unto the gracious blessing of God, most humbly
take my leave. Ps. 138.4.
All the Kings of the earth shall praise thee O Lord: for they have heard the
words of thy mouth. And they shall sing of the ways of the Lord, because the
glory of the Lord is great: for the lord is high, yet be beholds the lowly,
but the proud he knows a far of. Now I descend to men of yt second ra^ck and
order, who are as models of means state, neither so high, that they stand to
the mercy of every threat of ye air, nor so low, that they are subject to
every inundation of the water.

Who as they stand between two, so they must make this use to take heed,
especially of two faults, envy toward their superiors, or disdain to their
inscriours. Envy nor emulate they must not any way their superiors, nor the
highest places possessed by the highest personages, since it is the good will of
God to erect both.

The places are of great importance, possessors of them are subject to much
peril, as the high steeples to the force of all blustering storms. They watch
when others sleep, they fast when others eat, they carke when others are
secure, they bear the wood, and others warm themselves by the fire, they sow
the corn and others reap the harvest, yet all this while for recompense, their
places, persons, and lives, are aimed at, that their estates are beleigered
with millions of miserable labors, and fears of extreme losses. In the mean
season, thou do sleep when thou will, eat what thou have, rest secure,
warm thee, sow and reap, and though these be great blessings, to these is
added hearts ease, if God give thee a heart to conceive thine own good. Thou
whatsoever thou art of this order, have the goulden mean, if thou demean thy
self accordingly, the goulden mean I say, which Agur the son of lakeh, did
so importune the Lord for.

Read the place with attention, I leave the search and sweetness of it, to thy
self and thine own experience. In the mean time, as men of the second rank
must for many respects, without enny but with singular submission, and
reverence, demean themselves to them that are above, so they must avoid all
disdain and contempt of them that are below.

This latter they will the sooner be drawn to do, if they remember the double
account they are to yield, of the which, the one though for a time delaid never
fails. If they wrong, despite, or despise their inferiors, they shall answer
to their superiors on earth, who with King David sing of mercy, and judgment:
of mercy to the merciful, of judgment and justice to the cruel. But if
either by their own ability of friends, money, flattery, or any other indirect
means: or the inability of the oppressed, not able to complain, or follow it;
they foredoe, and foregoe this account in earth, yet certainly they shall not
fail to come before the heavenly judge, who tells them plainly before hand,
whereto they shall trust. He that despises the poor reprocheth him that made
him. And think thou he will bear reproaches at thy hands, and not pay thee
home? Or will thou not remember that the law of God, and nature, will condemn
thee, if thou hurt him, whom both of them command thee to help? I might here
open a sea of reasons, and al legations in this behalf, to diswade men from
contempt, and disdain of the meanest, and to persuade them to pity, and
compassion. But one shall be to them and me, instead of all. It is taken from
that solemn manner of proceeding in general convocation, of all before the
great judge, at the fearful day of judgment, when Christ shall denounce that
terrible doom (Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels) not against them only that have plucked the meat
from the hungry, taken away drink from the thirsty, wronged the stranger, drawn
unjustly the skin as it were over men's ears, and so afflicted their souls
and bodies, for there is no inquiry nor question made of them, being Ipso facto
condemned to hell: but this heavy doom they shall also have, that have not fed
the hungry, given drink to the thirsty, lodged the stranger, clothed the
naked, visited the sick, and such like. Thou see how the case stands,
weigh the truth by the aucthority; and practice it for thy own safely. So in
the name of God, I exhort thee not to envy, but to honor thy superiors, not
to despise but to help thy inferiors, of whom commending thee to Gods grace
in Christ Jesus, I come now briefly to speak. These therefore to the 2. former
estates, are as poor cuttages to the highest ^urrets, as mold-hills to the
mighty mountains, the shrubbes to the Cedars of Libanon. Yet though they be
such, the highest among men, may not set them at naught, nor the second sort
little account of them. Forasmuch as the lower they stand, and the less able
they are, to help and right themselves, the more does the Lord tender their
case, and the more severely will be revenge their wrongs. But they have a fault,
which if they would amend, notwithstanding their poverty, they might be passing
happy, and that is impatiency. Men in the highest places, except god grace
them, extraordinarily labor of impotencie of mind, and cannot bear their
estates, or their estates abide with them for pride: and men of the lowest
places, except God comfort them, exceedingly labor of impotencie of mind, and
cannot brook their places, for want of patience. Whereas this being possessed,
they would not only comfortably endure, the indifferent calamities of their
estate, but by their hearty and humble prayers unto God (as in duty they are
bound) ease much their superiors, those especially yt are in ye highest
places, most traueld and troubled, and therefore needing most the assistance of
their godly prayers. The God of patience, grant this unto them, and so unto all
estates, conditions, and sorts of men, so to carry, demean, and behave
themselves, as in his glorious presence, who will bless all them that fear him
both small and great. Ps. 115.13.
Here an end of ye threefold use delivered, to the three estates of men,
concerning the third wonderful work of God, and so of the three admirable
actions: Which being three, and all very extraordinary, are a sufficient
testimony against all, that hearing thereof, will not yet in time repent and
amend their lives, but have their ears and hearts so shut up, and hardened
against the power of God, revealed both in his words and works; that nothing
will deter them from sin, and draw them to godliness, til Christ come from
heaven, with thousand thousands of angels, in flaming fire to judge the world:
Revel. 22.
which as it hastes, so hasten Lord Jesus, for thy promise sake: surely I come
quickly, Amen Even so come Lord Jesus. Amen.

Hallelu-iah.


