QVEENE EL'ZABETHS LOSS, AND King James his vvelcome.

printer's or publisher's device VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE

TC


LONDON Printed by T. C. for John Smythicke, and are to be sold at his shop
in Saint Dunstons Church. yard in Fleetstreete. 1603.

Queen El'zabeths loss, and King James his welcome.
YOu sacred spirits that haunt Pernassus spring,
Whose soaring thoughts mounted on Pegas' wing
Do pierce the ^^ies (...)ising from lowly dust
Even whom you let, and whom you list down thrust.
You whom the Muses all do jointly greet,
Eat, and drink Nectar, and Ambrosta sweet.
My weakeling Muse did many wishes make,
That some of you her task would undertake;
I thought in silence still my cares to keep,
These are true tears, which we vnwitnest weep.
But since my plaints I do so publicque make,
Seems I put on black for fashions sake.
This caused my Muse her wishes to power forth,
Some abler wit would show his Muses worth.
But since in vain: she takes in hand the same,
And sings sad Anthems to Elizaes name.
What, is Elizaes name so soon forgot?
It cannot be: how then? she hears them not.
Scarce one is found to sing her dying praise,
Whom all admired and honored in her days.
But whilst she lived: O God! yet still she lives
In heaven! I, and on earth. Her virtue gives
Her this: she lives in her late subjects hearts,
She lives in her successors virtuous parts,
She lives in him (even in despite of Fate)
To whom she left her virtues, crown, and state.
Her virtues fame have built her such a tomb,
As she shall live even till the day of doom:
And then enjoy the happy company
Of all the blessed, everlastingly.
Her soul (no doubt) can now already tell
What guerdon Princes have that govern well.
My Muse dares undertake for to disclose
Nothing, but what the meanest reader knows.
What subject lived in her happy days
That felt no warmth from her resplendant rays?
And feeling them, who would not seek to know
The spring from whence these happy blessings flow?
Her birth and virtuous life are so well known,
Each one can tell as much as may be shown,
Yet cannot this my zealous duty stay,
Though I show nothing but what each can say.
Greenwich, Westminster, Richmond, famous be,
For she was borne, crowned, died in these three.
Henry the eigth (sprung from th'vnited Rose,
Which match for Englands good God did compose)
Had by his second choice this budde divine,
Whose luster through the world so clear did shine;
Elizabeth whom God Almighty gave
Fullness of peace, and honor to the grave.
Fullness of God, so does her name import:
How well the event and name together sort?
Sure there is a mystery in Princes names,
For we do hope our royal L. King James
Will prove a true Maintainer of the faith,
(As both his name and his just title says) Fidei defensor.

The Pope he wll supplant, Christ's Church maintain.
Kings have their names seldom imposde in vain.
But we put on too fast, let us back return,
And thinking on our loss again let us mourn.
I will not speak of her exterior parts,
But of of her mind, adorned with liberal Arts:
Yet he that would describe them with his quill,
Had need of Homer's or a greater skill.
Not England only, but the world does know
Her learned wisdom: then what need I show
What Is so well known? how each Ambassador
She answer could without Interpretor?
Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, Italian,
She understood: and spoke them every one,
Or of her knowledge in divinity?
Her practice showed it most apparently.
Why tell I this? but to lament her death,
Under whose happy reign I first drew breath.
This rose is cropped, alas, a heavy case:
But that it is planted in a better place.
But of her life since that she lived so well,
Be bold my Muse a little for to tell:
So well she lived, the learned man of all
It to describe would find his wit too small,
My simpler wit, doing the best it can,
Scarce shows a drop of that huge Ocean
Of her praiseworthy virtues, my good will
May (as I hope) excuse my slender skill.
First, for her infancy and childish years
I ouerslip; though even in them appears
Matter well worthy of a brazen pen,
And leaves of hardest Marble: but yet when
Her riper years with judgment we do deem,
The former then we not so much esteem.
These virtues then come to perfection,
The which before seemed in election.
My slender reed does purpose to set down
Only such virtues as adorned her crown.
And first as chief of all shall be expressed,
How Gods religion which her self professed
She did establish: banished Popery,
With superstition and Idolatry.
Her hearty zeal sought both by deed and word,
To build the ruind Temple of the Lord:
Proud Antichrist, and hautie Spain did strive
To cut her off, whom God preserved alive,
Safely preserved with his outstretched arm
From murder, poison, and all other harm
Which Popish bulls, or Spanish gold procured,
Blind zeal prouok'd, or wicked Mammo^lur'd.
Nay that indeed at which Spain most repines,
She stored her treasury with Indian Mines:
The which her bounty mo^gst her subjects parts,
And laid up surer treasure in their hearts.
Never was Prince of subjects better loved,
Never in Prince like care for subjects proved.
From poor man's suit she never turned her face,
Her meanest subjects right she still would grace.
Blessed be that God who lent us such a Queen,
Whose like before no mortal eye had seen.
The five and fortith year of her blessed reign,
When she had lived near three score years and ten,
She paid the God of nature her last debt,
And di'de in peace, without impeach or let
Of homebred traitors, or else foreign foes,
God gave this comfort to appease our woes.
Who though she lived and di'de a perfect maid,
Left such an Heir of whom it may be said,
We lost the Jewel which we loved best,
Had it restored again with interest.
We may well say; Had not our loss been such, (...)jssemus perijss(...).

(It Is well we may so say) we had lost much.
Richmond it was first brought in Tudors name,
Richmond it was abolished the same.
Henry of Richmond brought to us that peace
Which al true English hearts pray never may cease.
Now pray with me all that love Englands good,
God would for ever stablish in his blood
This kingdoms rule, and these to it belong,
God still defend them from all manner wrong.
My hopeful spirit says it so shall be,
Since Peers and people do so well agree.
For now the Council and the Peers are bent,
A new King to proclaim with full consent:
Both Peers and people make the streets to ring,
God save King James the first, our royal King.
Each faithful subject now himself does strain
The best he may, his King to entertain.
How many a joyful Aue's sent before:
My ( Hayle) comes limping latest of a score.
My tears (alas) do so be-blind my sight,
I wipe mine eyes whilst they outstrip me quite;
Yet doubt I not but that his royal mind
Holds me excused, although I come behind.
How can that heart loyal to him appear,
That for Eliza cannot shed a tear?
He knows her loss what subject does not moan,
Would do the like by him, if he were gone.
And those that wash her tomb with their salt tears,
Do wish him many, many happy years.
Now my black plume's to red and yealow turned,
And now I joy as fast as erst I mournd.
My sorrows all lie buried in her tomb,
Heart leap for joy, for now King James does come.
Come Englands hope, come hither merrily,
Bring with thee many years of Iubily.
The Locusts that did wish Eliza dead,
At thy names sound suddenly vanished.
O if thy name had power to daunt them so,
(Most royal King) what would thy presence do?
Thy lineall right banished dissension,
Thy princely virtues wrought this union.
Our hearty prayers sent before to meet thee,
Wish thy good speed: our eyes do long to greet thee.
Those whom Elizaes loss wounded to death,
Thy glorious name has given a second breath.
The Merchant traffiques still without disturb,
Th'artificers or tradesmen, fear no curb
Of malecontent, Papist, or Libertine,
Next unto God (great King) the praise be thine.
The earth is tilled in peace, the ground is dressed,
Each under his own vine in peace may rest.
Thy princely wisdom, or thy rightful claim,
My infant Muse dares scarce presume to name:
This, has a riper pen already done,
And made apparent as the midday Sun:
For that, the spacious world full well does know
Thy self (heroic Monarch) best can show.
The Princely Poet, and the Poets Prince,
That name thou art acquainted with long since.
Thy many virtues also are proclaimed,
Thy justice and thy fortitude are named,
As peerless among the rest, happy our land
When fortitude and justice take in hand
To guide the helm, nay thou may challenge all:
Four kingdoms, and four virtues cardinal.
Thy kingly virtues, thou a King can tell,
No other can declare them half so well.
When David teaches Solomon his son,
Fear God (my child) and live as I have done.
O happy is that land when Kings so teach,
Where virtue by example they do preach.
My Muse weeps tears of joy, in hope to prove
David does reign the man who^ God does love.
King James does reign whom God does love so much,
God loves them still whose love to him is such.
Now Saturnes golden times will come again,
And now no vice our co^mon-weale shall stain.
For as the King to good or bad does frame
His life, the people imitate the same.
Thy England now does like a longing wife
Expect thy coming; then she hopes no strife
Should dare disturb her quiet: all with one accord
Wish to behold their King, their dread liege lord.
And I amongst the rest of meanest place,
Throw up my hat, and say God save your Grace.
FINIS.
Ad Detractores Inuidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis.
SNarle on and spare not, Curres will snarle by kind,
Momus to carpe at, needs must something find.
To strive with such, is labor spent in vain:
Though an Ass kick, I will not kick again.
Would any know who it was did write this book?
He that never thought so many should ore-looke
His eight hours folly: yet now, hopes to find
Kind censure of each well-deseruing mind.
Trusting his Majesty will pardon grant;
Accept good will, bear with his Muses want.
H. S.


