ABRIEFE TREATISE, To prove the necessity and excellence of the USE OF
ARCHERIE.

Abstracted out of ancient and Modern Writers. By R: S.

Perused, and allowed by Authority.

HEB DDIM HEB DDIEV



AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Iohnes, at the Rose and Crown; next above S.
Andrews Church in Holburne. 1596.

To the Nobility and GenTLEMEN OF ENGLAND: The Companies of Bowyers and
Fletchers wish increase of Honor, continual health and all happiness.
MAy it please your good Lordships, and the worcester thie minded Gentlemen of
England, in all humility to give us leave to remember you of the ancient
honor, whereby many foreign Nations, but espe ciallie this Realm of England,
has benlong holden famous for victories achieved, under the conduct of their
right prudent and valiant Princes and Captains, by the wonderful effect of
Archerie: and to deplore unto your honors and wisdoms, the disco^tinuance, yea
(almost) the utter extirpation thereof, within this Realm: And withal, our own
miserable estates, who with many other poor Artificers that have had their
maintenance thereby, are (in great number) brought to utter ruyn and decaie. In
the rowme whereof, is crept in the noisome use of unthrifty and unlawful Games:
Wherefore, to stir up in your honors and worthiness, a due commisseration of
these great mischiefs, we have caused this Abstract to be taken out of former
Writers, and from right credible and true Reports: Not intending hereby to
insinuate to our selves any such favor or relief within this Commonwealth,
for our private avail, as to innouate any supperfluous thing, or to drive the
same to any charge at al, unless the quallytie of the Subject whereof we
entreat, shall in your grave discrescions be adjudged to be worthy thereof, more
for the honor and sauegard of her Royal Majesty, her knigdoms and dominions,
then for our private regard.

For if (in your judgments) the Examples and Reasons in this Brief contained,
shall not be holden of weight and momentworthie the preferment of Archetie, then
shall we be pleased rather to sincke in our own miseries, then to become
unprofitably burthenous to our Prince and Country.

And therefore, do we (humbly) entreat, that we may be with savor,
permitted to propose the same, to your Honors and Wisdoms: to the end, that
if they shall seem forcible, and worthy your considerations, it would then
please you with a favorable zeal to further those proceedings her Royal
Majesty, has and shall take for our relief herein, which is, that by your
good endeavors, her Majesty's forward Subjects in the exercise of Archerie,
may be cherished, and obstinat persons refusing to be reformed (disposing
themselves rather to practice unlawful Games) may be chastned and corrected
according to the form of the laudable laws in that behalf made and provided:
nor is it our meaning, to derogate from the reputation of the use or excellence
of any other strong or approved weapons fit for the wars, be they of fire or
others, such as your wisdoms and counselles have provided to be had and
ordained: but that both (not compared together, whither should in all respects
be better then the other, but so joined together, that the one should be an
aid and help for the other) might so strengthen the Realm on al sides in
their several natures, that not any Nation may become dangerous unto us* nor
we disarme ourselves of that weapon where in God and Nature has made us excel,
and whereby we have ever ben preualent over al our enemies: For by the Supply
to be made by Archrie amongst the greatest number of persons (which if any
present need should require, could not be furnished with other warlike munition,
both for want of ability, and also by reason it can not well be had for so many
as there be able men to serve with the same) it will fall out, that noe fit
persons will be found naked or unprofitable be the accidents of War never
so sudden: Of the want whereof, we have heard men of good Judgment lately
complain, in respect of the late petie incursion made by the Enemy upon the
Seacoast in the County of CORNWALL: Wherefore, it may please your Honors and
Wisdoms to accept of our good intents (though we be of the meanest sort of her
Highness Subjects) who do not so much herein pretend our own prefermentes or
aduauntages, as the advancement of the Honor of this Realm, which has
shoane bright in your noble Ancestors, by their manifould Conquestes,
famouslie achieved, especially, by virtue of this Weapon: And we shall
(deuotely) pray to God, that that Fame and Honor may redouble upon your
selves and yours, in this time of her Majesty's most happy reign, and so
successively, for ever.

Certain Collections out of ancient and Modern Writers, proouing the necessity
and excellence of the use of Archerie:
Divided into three parts, vz.

I. That the use of Archerie is a most ancient and noble Exercise: And that
for Princes and great men, it is a most fair and honorable Practice. II. That
it is most necessary for the Subjects to use the same both in peace and war.
III. And for Battelles and victories in the field (whereupon our Nation void of
strong Towns does specially repose it self) Archerie to be of far greater
effect then any other weapon that ever was invented: And that in respect
thereof onclie, this Realm of England has been ever feared and honored of all
Nations.
The first Part.
PLATO, Calimachus and Galene, very noble writers bring the invention of
shooting from Apollo: for the which cause, Shooting is highly praised of Galen
in his book of Exhortation to good Arts, where he says, that mean crafts
be first sonnde out by men or beasts, as weauing by a Spyder, etc. But high
and commendable Sciences by Gods, as Shooting and Music by Apollo. And if
we shall believe Nicholas de Lyra, Lamech killed Caine with a Shast.

Cyaxares the king of the Medes, and great grandfather to Cyrus, kept a sort of
Scythians with him only for this purpose, to teach his son Astiages to shoot.

Cyrus being a child, was brought up in shooting, which Xenephon would never
have made mention of, except it had been fit for Princes to have used, seeing
that Xenephon wrote Cyrus life (as Tullie says) not to show what Cyrus did,
but what all manner of Princes both in pastimes and earnest matters ought to
do.

Darius the first king of Persia of that name, showed playnlie, how fit it is
for a king to love and use Shooting, who commanded this sentence to be written
on his tomb for a princely memory and praise.

Darius the King lies buried here,
That in Shooting and riding had no peer.
Herodian his opinion of Commodus the Emperor, was: that he had no Princely
thing in him, but strength of body, and good Shooting.

Themistius the noble Philosopher, in an Oration made to Theodosius the
Emperor, commends him for three things that he used of a Child: Shooting:
Riding of a horse well, and feats of Arms.

It is most manifest in the histories of our Nation, that the kings and Princes
of this Realm have bin excellent Archers: And this age can witness with what
love and affection the right noble kings of famous memory, king Henry the
eight, and Edward the sixth, did use and exercise the same in their own persons.

By Shooting is the mind honorably exercised, where a man always desires to
be best (which is a word of honor) and that by the same way that virtue it
self does, coveting to come nighest a most perfect end, or mean standing
between two extremes, eschuing short or gone, or on either side, wide. For
which causes Aristotle himself says: that Shooting and Virtue be very like.
And that of all other, it is Aristotle de Morib.
the most honest pastime, and least occasion to naughtiness, two things do
very plainly prove: vz Daylight and Open place. If Shooting fault at any time,
it hides not it self, but openly accuses and bewraieth it self: which is the
next way to amendment, as wise men do say.

THE SECOND PART.
NOt only kings and Emperors have been brought up in shooting, but also the
best common Wealths that ever were have made goodly acts and laws for it: as
the Persians (who under Cyrus conquered very many nations) had a law, that
their children should learn three things only, from five years old to
twenty: To ride a horse well, to shoot well, and to speak truth always and
never lie.

The Romans (as Leo the Emperor in his book of the sleightes of war
tells) had a law that every man should use Shooting in time of peace, while he
were forty years old: And that every house should have a Bow and forty
Shaftes ready for all needs: The omitting of which Law (says Leo) among the
youth, has been the only occasion, why the Romans lost a great deal of
their Empire.

The first Statute and Law that ever David made after he was King, was this:
that all the children of Israel should learn to shoot (according to a Law
made many a day before that time, for the setting out of Shooting) as it is
written (says Scripture) in libro Iustorum, which book we have not now Reg,
2, 1
extant.

Plato would have common Masters and stipends De Leg 7
for to teach youth to shoot: And for the same purpose he would have broad
fields near every City made common for men to use shooting in.

Leo the Emperor in his sixth book: Let all the youth of Rome be compelled to
use shooting, either more or less: And always to bear their bow and their
quyuer about them, until they be forty years old: For since Shooting was
neglected and decayed among the Romans, many a Battle and field has been
lost.

Again, in the xi. Book and 50. Chap. Let your Soldiers have their weapons
well appointed and trimmed, but above all other things regard most shooting:
And therefore, let men when there is no war use Shooting at home: For the leaving
off only of Shooting has brought ruin and decay to the whole Ruin and decaie
to the whole Empire by leaving off of Shooting.
Empire of Rome.

After wards he commands again his Captains by these words: Arm your
host as I have appointed you, but especially with Bow and Arrows plenty: For
shooting is a thing of much might and power in war, and chiefly against the
Saracens and Turks, which people have all their hope of victory in their Bow
and Shafts.

Besides all this, in another place he writes thus to his Captain.
Artillery is easy to be prepared, and in time of great need a thing most
profitable. Therefore we straightly command you to make Proclamation to all
men under our dominions, either in war or peace, to all Cities, Burroughes
and Towns, and finallye to all manner of men: that every several pearson have
bow and shaftes of his own: And every house besides this, to have a standing
bearing Bow and forty shafts for all needs: And that they exercise themselves
in holtes, hills and dales, playnes and woods, for all manner of chances in
war.

And yet Shooting (although they set never so much by it) was never so good
(then) as it is now in England: which thing to be true, is very pro^^table, in
that Leo does say: That he would have his Soldiers take off their
Arrowe-heads, and one shoot at another for their exercise: Which play if the
English Archers used, I think they would find small sport, and less pleasure
in it. But the exercise thereof otherwise, brings a notable advantage to them
that do practice the same: For experience does teach us, that the strongest
men do not always make the strongest shoot, which thing proves that
draweing strong lies not so much in the strength of man, as in the use of
Shooting.

To conclude this second part, if a man should peruse all pastimes and exercises
profitable to be set by of every man, worthy to be rebuked of no man, fit for
all ages, persons and places, and a medicine to purge the whole land of all
pestilent gaming, only Shooting shall appear, wherein all these commodities
shall be found, being strengthened by putting in execution such laudable acts
and statutes as have bin on that behalf made and provided by the Parliaments
of this Realm.

THE THIRD PART.
EVripides (every of whose verses Tullie thinks to be an Authority) does
say, That of all weapons the best is, where with least danger of our self, we
may hurt our enemy most: And that is (as may be supposed) Artillery: which
now adays is taken for two things, Gunnes and Bows.

Peter Nannius a learned man of Louain, in a Dialogue shows exceeding
commodities of both: And some discommodities of Gunnes: as infinite cost and
charge, cumbersom carriage if they be great, the uncertain leuelling, the peril
of them that stand by, etc. Besides all this, contrary wind and weather, which
hinders them not a little, and sometime makes the^ unprofitable: yet of
shooting he cannot rehearse one discommoditie.

But because some sort of men at Arms would bring our Magistrates and the
better sort of our people and nation to mislike this ancient weapon, as
unprofitable for the wars of our days: and would attribute alexcellence to the
Musket and Caliuer: See Sir John Smyth, Knight, in his book treating of
Archery from fol. 20, to fol. 28. where you may find he utterly consuteth them,
proouing three especial points against them, vz.

1 Archers to be most ready in the field. 2 Archers to fail least in shooting.
3 And that they do anney the Enemies most, be they horsemen or footmen.
And then after many vnreplyable reasons, offers that he will never refuse
with 8000. good Archers to adventure his life against 20000. of the best shot
in Christendom.

Where fol. 23. 27. 28. he proves long Bows to be most excellent for
battles and great encounters, both against horsemen and footmen, for that it
is a ready weapon both in fair and foul weather which shot is not: and that
the arrows in flying both in their desce^t and fall, kill and wound from the
face to the foot, into many ranks of ye aduers battle or squadro^, Which the
shot does not, but in their point blancke (staying at the first, second, or
third rank of the Enemy) nor then, but seldom by reason of many
imperfections, which he sets down there. Where it is further to be noted,
that very many ranks of Archers may (with couenience) altogether, one behind
another, shoot into the Enemies battle, which the gunnes cannot do by reason
of their point blanck, whereby they must needs endanger their fellows before
them: So that in fol. 29. he concludes, (as well he may) that there is no
doubt, but Archers with their vollees of Arrows, will wound, kill, and hurt
above an hundred men and horses, for every one so to be done by the shot.

In fol. 18. 19. He (having showed many imperfections belongyng to the Shot)
auerreth, that for those causes in many great encounters very hot, and
continued many hours with Shot, with new Supplies on both sides, within three,
four or five skores and nearer, there has not been slain and hurt on both
sides with Bullettes thirty men. And therefore in fol. 28. he says: that it
comes to pass, that when men and horse have been in three or four skirmishes
and do see that they receive no hurt, neither by fire, or smoke, nor noise: nor
that in many thousands of men there are not twenty men slain, nor hurt, they
grow after to be tar less in doubt thereof.

Howbeit the vollees of Arrows flying together in the air as thick as hail
do not only terrify and amaze, in most terrible sort, the ears, eyes, and
hearts both of horses and men, with the noise and sight of their coming: But
they also in their discents, do not leave in a whole squadron of horsemen or
footmen (although they be in motion) so much as one man or horse vnstricken
and wounded with diverse Arrows, if the number of Archers be answerable to the
number of the squadron. Downward-pointing arrow


Besides all which, it is to be noted, that horses in the field being wounded,
or but lightly hurt with Arrows, they through the great pain, that upon
every motion they do feel in their flesh, veins, and sinews, by the shaking
of the Arrows with their barbed heads hanging in them, do presently fall a
yerking and leaping, as if they were mad, in such sort, as be it squadron, or
in troop, they do quite disorder one another, and never leave until they
have thrown and cast their masters. Whereas contrariwise, Horses that are in
vital parts hurt with Bullets, or the bones of their legs, shoulders or backs
be broken, they do presently fall down: Or otherwise, although they be
stricken clean through, or that the Bullets do still remain in them, they
after the first shrink, at the entering of the Bullet, do pass their carier as
though they had very little or no hurt. In which Treatise fol. 26. 27. he
complains of all sorts of Magistrates, for that they do not see those
notable Laws made by former kings for the aduanceme^t of Archerie to be put
in execution, whereunto people of this realm (of a singular gift of God) by a
natural inclination, come to be perfect and excellent: Whereby we are
suffered to discontinue a weapon ever terrible to the enemies, and whereof they
never had skill: and upon any sudden shall be enforced to sight with them at
their own weapons wherein (by necessity) they are continually trained up, we
being therein unpracticed.

The same knight, in the Proeme of his book proves that the Egyptians did
first conquer a great part of Asia, Europe, and Affricke by their Army, which
did consist most of Archerie: But they falling into security and drunkenness,
and neglect of that weapon, were conquered by Alexander the great, the
greatest part of whose Army did consist of Archerie.

In like sort, and with the like weapon were the Grecians conquered with the
Arabians. After the same Discipline of Archery they revived. And after (upon
neglect thereof) again conquered and quite overthrown by Mahomet with his
Turks and Ianissaries that consisted most of Bow-men.

King David and Josiah performed great effects, therewith: By this weapon God
gave many victories to the Jews: and by the same for their transgression Psa.
7. 63. 75
they received diverse overthrows of the Gentiles. Besides that, king David
does call Bows a mighty power, and in his Psalms the vessels of death.

God when he promises help to the Jews, he uses no kind of speaking so
much as this: That he Deuteronomy. 32.
will bend his Bow, and die his Shaftes in Gentiles blood: Whereby it is
manifest, that Shooting is a wooderfull thing in war, whereunto the high
power of God is likened.

When Demosthenes the valiant Captain slew and took Prisoners, all the
Lacedaemonians besides of the City of Pilos, the Shaftes went so thick that day
(says Thucydides) that no man could see their enemies. I Lacedemonian taken
Prisoner, was asked of one of Athens, whether they were stout Fellows that
were slain or no of the Lacedaemonians: Thucid. 4.
He answered nothing else but this: Make much of those Shaftes of yours, for
they know neither stout nor vnstout. etc.

The Goths. Vandals, Alans, and other Northren Nations, invaded and conquered
Rome and Greece and besieged Constantinople, spoiled Hungary, Austria,
Illiria; and Dalmatia, wasted all Italy, sacked France and Spain, invaded
Afric, etc. And it is most evident they achieved all these victories, more
with the effect of Bows, then with all the rest of their weapons.

With the like weapon did the Arrabians invade Constantinople, Mesopotamia,
Surria, Armenia and Persia, Jerusalem, Egypt, Barbary, etc. They discontinuing
this weapon, were by the same chiefly conquered by the Turks.

The like did the Tartars against Parthia, Media, Armenia, Mesopotamia and
Surria, with innumerable numbers of Archers on horsback.

So did Tamberlaine the Tartar Emperor, overthrow Baiazeth the Turkish
Emperor, by reason his Army did far exceed the Turks in the number of
Archers.

Which most excellent effects of Archery, was the cause that Amurath the second
Emperor of y^ Turks, did within few years after institute for the guard of his
person, a number of Ianissaries on foot (being Christians renyed) taught from
their youth to exercise the Bow: And so of the Harquebuze: So that when the
Turk sends any his Baslaes to besiege any towns, they all use to take with
them both their bows and Harquebuzes: their Harquebuzes to use in trenches
against places fortifyed: and their bows for services of the field: But the
Turk for guarde of his person, and for all battles and great encounters in the
field, does ever prefer the Bows before the Harquebuzes, fol. 41* 42. So
likewise do the Tartars, Persians, and Parthians under the Sophie: who
although they have had the use of shot long before us in Europe, yet have they,
and do still prefer their Archers, and Bows for Battles and Victories before
their weapons of fire. fol. 42

It is very certain, that shooting is the chief thing wherewith God suffers
the Turk to punish our sins withal: The youth there is brought up in Ca^p
de rebus Turc,
Shooting: and it is well known to the Spaniardes the might of their shooting,
who in the town called Newcastle in Illerica, were all slain by the Turks
Arrows, when the Spaniardes had no use of their gunnes by reason of the rain.

And since that, the Emperors Majesty himself at the City of Argier in
Affricke, had his host sore handled with the Turks Arrows, when his guns
stood him in no service at all by the like accident of rain.

And therefore, as concerning all these kingdoms Plin, lib, 16 Chap. 36
and common wealths, I may conclude with Pliny, thus: If any man would
remember the Ethiopians, Egyptians, Arabians, the men of Indie, of Scythia, so
many people in the East of the Samaritanes, and all the kingdom of the
Parthians, etc. he shall perceive half the part of the world to live in
subjection, overcome by the might and power of Shooting.

Proofs from our Nation of former and modern times.
THe said Sir John Smyth, knight, fol. 29. 30. 31. Tilburie Camp.
proouing that by ye example of placing Bows in the Army at Tilburie. An.
Dom. 1588. Captains of this age in general, not to be expert in that
Discipline, he teaches the order of our Ancestors therein, in this sort. vz.

They placed the^ in the face of the men at Arms of France and other Nations
(who were then better armed then now we use to be) and the effect was such,
that flying in the air as thick as snow, with a terrible noise (much like a
tempestious wind) they did leave no disarmed place of horse, or man vnstricken
and unwounded, as may well appear by the battle of Cressey; that king Edward
the third, and his son Prince Edw. won against Philip of France, where the
French were six to one well armed: where were slain xi. Princes, a thousand and
two hundred knights, and thirty thousand Soldiers: The wonderful effects
and terror of the shot of Arrows was that day such, as neither men at arms
nor other Horsemen of diverse Nations, were able to enter and break the Archers,
being without pikes stakes, banks, and trenches to guard them, but in the
plain Fields: The Archers with their Vollees of Arrows did break the ranks
both of Horsemen and footmen, wounding and killing both horse and man, the
French kings horse being slain under him, and himself in peril.

The like or greater overthrow was acted by the same Prince, against John king
of France in the battle of Poicters, with six thousand Archers, and two
thousand armed men against 60000. French.

The same Prince fought the like battle in Spain overthrew a hundred thousand
men in one battle by the wonderful effect of Archers.

So was the battle of Herringes fought there in Henry the sixth his time, and
won by Archery,

In the same kings time (as the French Chronicles do report) the L. of Belay
accompanied with two hundred French Lances going to Man's, met with an English
Captain called Berrie, and with him 80. Archers, by whom the Lances were
overthrown, and diverse taken prisoners.

The like encounter happened about that time, between Guyan de Coing, a French
Captain with 120. Lances, and Sir William Old with twentye Archers, with like
success.

But for that it may be objected: That it may be granted, that Archery was a
preualent weapon in ancient times before the Musket and Calliuer came to the
perfection of their use: It is not amiss to produce later instances of these
our ages.

Services of great effect done by Archerie of our Nation in these our times.
NOtable service was done in the time of king Henry the 8. of famous memory
(upon a conuoy between Guiens and Teroun) by Archers.

In the time of king Edward the sixth, 1548. Ket with his Norfolk Rebels, by
one conflict and a foughten field (being men unarmed) did great exploits
against the Duke of Northumberland by Archers: So that the Duke lost his good
opinion of Harquebuzies, and would ever after say publicly, the Bow to be the
noblest weapon of the world: This Sir John Smyth sets down from the certain
report of the late Earl of Warwick, who was there present.

In the same kings time the Western Rebels The right honorable the Lord of
Hu^ldon, L, Chamber lain that now is, an eie-witnes.
drove the Spanish and Italian Harquebuzies from all their strengths with
vollees of Arrows, which sir John Smyth also has hard the L. Chamberlain
that now is very notably report (who was there an eye witness) Captain Spinola
an Italian, a very brave Soldier, and wounded with Arrows in these
services, gave singular commendation of the Archerie of England.

The Battle of Floddon hill, where James king Scotts was slain, is very
famous: where the Archers of Cheshire and Lancashire got immortal name and
praise for ever.

The fear only of English Archers has done stranger things then is read of
else where: and that not long sithence, betwixt Eske and Leven at Sandy Sikes
did appear, where the whole nobility of Scotland, for fear of the Archers of
England, were drowned and taken Prisoners.

There is an old proverb in Scotland, that every English Archer bears under
his girdle twenty four Scotts.

And if it be true, as it is said, when the king of England has been in
France, the Priests at home (because they were Archers) have been able to
overthrow all Scotland.

Bishop Latimer in his sixth Sermon made before Bishop Latimer his commendation
of Archerie.
king Edward the sixth, desired the Lords, as they loved the honor and glory
of God, and as they intended to remove his indignation, to provide for the
practice of Shooting: which he called the gift of god, whereby we excelled all
other Nations: and an Instrument whereby he has given unto us many victories.

The foresaid Lord Warwick did also report, that when he was Lieutenant
general at Newhauen, he did send to the Admiral of France, then favored by
her Majesty, six hundred harquebuziers, who thankfully receiving them, yet
said, he had rather have had two hundred Archers: And that he would with them
perform greater service: This message was brought from the Admiral by Sir
Francis Sommerset, Sir Richard Throgmorton, and Sir William Pellam, knights.

Woonderful service was sithence done by four score of our Archers, against
Dutch and French Harhusiers in France, to the great admiration of the
Reingraue: whereupon he did protest and acknowledge the Long-bowes of England
to be the best weapons for the field that were used by any nation of
Christendom: And said that the Queen of England had great cause so to esteem
of them. Reported by the said Earl of Warwick.

Sir James Croft declared many notable services he had seen done by Archers
in England, France, Scotland and Ireland.

About Bartholmew tide last, 1595. there came out of Scotland, one James
Forgeson, Bowyer to the king of Scots, who credibly reported, that about two
Scots become Archers.
years past, certain rebels did rise there against the king, who sent
against them five hundred horsemen well appointed: They meeting three hundred
of the Rebels Bowmen, encountered each with other, where the Bowe-men slew two
hundred and four score of their horses, and killed, wounded, and sore Scots
make provision of Archerie
hurt most part of the kings men. Whereupon the said Forgeson was sent hither
from the king with Commission to buy up ten thousand Bows and Bowstaues: But
because he could not speed here, he went over into the East countries for them:
This report will be proved by credible persons of the city of London.

It may therefore be well concluded with Sir John Smyth: That all conquering
Nations have made chief choice of the Bows, as of the most excellent kind of
weapon for victories and conquests.

And yet (as he says) it is evident by all histories and all such as have
traveled many parts of Europe, Asia, and Affricke, that English Bows and
Arrows do exceed and excel all others used by all foreign Nations, not only
in substance and strength but also in length and bigness.

Neither is it unknown, that the French Captains and Gentlemen of this age,
attribute all the former victories of the English against themselves, and their
Ancestors, more to the effect of Archers, then to any extraordinary valiancie
of our nation.

It therefore were great pity (or rather impiety) to suffer this noble ancient
weapon (being so mighty a strength and honor to al nations that have and do
use the same, and especially to our English people above all others, for the
reasons and examples above rehearsed) to go to decay amongst us, while there
is godly laws provided for the same, and while it may be used of any person,
and the same person fully provided of Bow and arrows for exercise (according
to the prescription of the law on that behalf) under twenty pence. The
practice whereof (besides his own excellence) will greatly diminish the noisome
and pestilent custom of unlawful games now crept in use in the room thereof,
being far more chargeable then Archery is.

But there is great hope that this honorable weapon now (by use of unlawful
games) greatly decayed, will resume to it self within this realm, his ancient
strength and virtue (and that in short time, the people of a natural
inclination being given thereunto) seeing it has pleased her royal Majesty,
under her Highness hand, to have given out warrant unto the right Honorable
Sir John Puckering knight, Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, to grant
out Commissions under the same Seal, to put in execution one laudable Statute,
made in the time of her right Princely Father for exercise of Archery, and
debarring of unlawful games: And seeing that the Lords of her Highness privy
Counsel have also by their Letters directted to his Lordsh. commended the
same, as an Act fit to be performed for the honor and strength of the Realm.

FINIS.

