THE PICTVRE OF A VVanton: her leawdnesse discovered.

LONDON, Printed by W. White for T. P. and are to be sold in Iuie Lane.

1615.

To the Christian Reader.
Solomon in his Prouers, Prou. 5.
does in many Chapters so wisely and pithily describe the impudency and lewd
behavior of an Harlot, Prou. 6.
that if men would advisedly read them, Prou. 7.
and diligently obey the divine Counsel in them contained, they would refrain
coming near her doors, least they might be ensnared with her allurements.
But there are some that frequent Harlots houses to bear their Friend company
(as they affirm,) not knowing, or at least not considering the corruption of
their Nature, nor their own weakness to resist temptation, nor the danger to
walk in the counsel of the ungodly, and to stand in the way of sinners. Some
being settled on the Lees of their Sins, make it almost their daily practice
to converse with them; not regarding how griuously they offend Almighty GOD,
transgressing his holy Ordinances; nor weighing how they Defile their bodies,
which are the Temples of the holy Ghost: nor considering into what penury and
want they may be brought to: nor fearing the Judgments and Punishments which
God has threatened to unchaste lyuers: Heb. 13. 4.
For, Fornicators and Adulterors, God will judge. Almighty GOD, who is holy*
yea, holiness it self, rightious in all his ways, and holy in all his
works, hating all uncleanness; though he had abundance of Spirit, yet he
made but one Man for one Woman; and one Woman for one Man, joining them
together in holy Matrimony for the procreation of Children, to gather unto
himself a Church out of mankind; as also to avoid Fornication: Therefore GOD
says, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not commit Adultery. Know ye not, (says S. Paul,) that your
Bodies are the members of Christ? 1. Cor. 16. 15.
Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an
Harlot? God forbid: Yea says; 19
or, Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in
you, whom ye have of God? and ye are not your own: ye are bought with a price.
Consider then how such as couple themselves with Harlots, defile the members
of Christ, and pollute the Temple of the holy Ghost, and cut themselves off
from the fellowship of Christ, and drive away the holy Spirit from them: For
what fellowship has Rightiousnesse with Vnrightiousnesse? 1. Cor. 6. 14.
What communion has Light with Darkness? What concord has Christ with
Beliall? Wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart, Wisdom. 1. 4.
nor dwell in a body subject to sin. And who does not know to what penury,
yea to extreme beggarie many have been brought by following of Harlots. Pro.
6. 26.
For because of the whorish Woman, a man is brought to a morsel of Bread.
Alea, Vina, Venus, tribus his sum factus egenus.
The example of the Prodigal Child does plainly declare it. And lastly, God
has, and will judge Fornicators Corporally Spiritually, and Eternally:
Corporally, in this life with many foul and noisome Diseases, as Batches, the
French Pox, wherewith many are consumed and eat to the bones. Spiritually, in
their Understanding; For, Hose. 4.
Fornication and Wine, take away a man's heart. Pro. 2. 18.
Eternally, both in body and soul in Hell fire; For, her House tendes to
death, Pro. 7. 27.
and her Paths to the Grave. Therefore, Scortorum pertis scribatur Ianua mortis.
says S. Paul, Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Wantons, nor Buggerers, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Raylers, 2 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. And S. John says,
But the fearful and unbelieving, Revel. 21. 8.
and the abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and
Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burns with
Fire and Brimstone: which is the second death. And let not the secret
Fornicator and close Adulterer, Job 24. 15.
whose Eye waits for the twilight, and says, no eye shall see me, and
disguiseth his Face, think that he shall go unseen: Heb. 4. 13.
For, all things are naked and bare to Gods eyes, with whom he has to do.
Darkness and Light are all one to him. Psalm. 139.
He knows the thoughts of all men: Job 21. 27.
And will set in order all that they have done; Psalm. 50.
for he is the searcher of the Heart and Reins. Therefore says Solomon, Prou.
5. 20.
Why should thou delight, my Son, in a strange Woman, or embrace the
bosom of a stranger? 21.
For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
paths. His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, 22.
and he shall be holden with the cords of his own sin. He shall die for
fault of instruction, 23.
and shall go astray through his great folly. These things while I considered
with my self, I remembered a Dialogue between two, written in Latin by that
reverend learned man Erasmus, to dissuade young Women from this evil kind of
life, by showing the abominable filthiness thereof. I have enlarged it both
with addition of more persons, and larger matter; endeavoring to warn both
young Men, and young Women; yea, and all of what age or condition soever, to
take heed of this foul vice, and abominable sin, which will exclude them
out of Heaven, if they repent not. I know that the multitude of Books in this
age, are many: but good Books, which tend either to the instruction of
Virtue, or to the destruction of Vice, are to be regarded, and diligently read:
But filthy and unchaste Pamphlets, (whereof the World is too full) are fitter to
be burned as corrupters of Youth: And who soever does so misspende his time,
and abuse his Wit, and pervert the good guiftes and graces of God, shall
receive condign punishment, and his own Books shall be produced as witnesses
against him. I now entreat thee (courtious Reader) to peruse this little
Treatise: and if thou think it needful for these times, fit to promote Gods
glory, and profitable to men; as I hope, and am persuaded it is, give God the
glory, and pray for me his unworthy servant.

Thine in the Lord, F. S.

THE PICTVRE OF A LEAWD HVSWIFE.
The names of the speakers: Thais, a Harlot, a Courtizan. Parmeno, a Pandor.
Sophronius, a young Gallant. Dorio, a Baud. THAIS. PArmenio, I marvel I have
not seen Dorio this Morning; nor received any Suitors from her.


Parmeno. If it please you, I will go for her, to know when she will come: or
when you shall expect any Suitor.


Thais. Nay stay a while. But who comes yonder?

Parme. I know not yet who it should be: But he is a proper young man.

Thais. I like him the better. But if I am not deceived, it is Sophronius my
old Friend, who has been at Rome; for I heard that he is newly returned home.


Parme. It is he indeed.

Thais. My Sophronius, my sweet heart, my desired Friend, welcome: I rejoice
that you are returned in safety; I have often wished your company since your
departure.


Sophro. I thank God, I am returned in safety: But I thank God the more,
that I am returned a New man.

Thais. So me thinks; for when you departed, you were beardlesse, but now you
have got you a handsome Beard. You seem to me also, to have changed your
Countenance; for you had a merry and pleasant Countenance when you departed;
but now you seem very grave and sober.


Sophro. Thais, I desire to speak with you secretly apart.

Thais. Are we not alone, sweet heart? Here is none but Parmeno my Pander, who
has been acquainted with our dealinges.


Sophro. I know it well: but let us go into a more secret place.

Thais. If it be your mind, we will go into an inward Chamber.

Sophro. This place is not secret enough unto me.

Thais. From whence comes this new shamefastness? I have a Closet, wherein I
lay my Head-attire and my Jewels, which is so dark, that I can neither see
you, nor you me.


Sophro. Look about all the Creuices.

Thais. There is not one Creuice, believe me.

Sophro. Is there no body near to hear us?

Thais. Truly not a Fly, my sweet heart: Why do you linger and stay?

Sophro. I but tell me Thais, Can we here deceive the eyes of the Almighty
GOD?

Thais. No, he sees all things; we cannot avoid his sight.

Sophro. How comes it to pass (my Thais) that we should not be ashamed to do
that thing in the sight of Almighty God, and his holy Angels his witnesses,
which we durst not for shame do in the sight of men?


Thais. What new matter is this? Come you hither to preach? I think you are
turned Puritan.

Sophro. Thais, I would entreat thee, if thou do tender the salvation of thy
soul, to hear me a little what I will say unto thee.


Thais. Say on.

Sophro. You confess that we are in the sight of God: and we all should know,
Pro. 15. 4.
that Gods eyes are in every place, beholding both good and evil. Heb. 4.
All things are naked and bare to him, with whom we have to do. We cannot
hide our selves from him, Psalm. 139.
nor go from him; for If we climb up to Heaven, he is there: If we go down
to the Deep, he is there: If we take the wings of the Morning, and fly to
the uttermost parts of the Earth, yet thither shall his hand lead us, and his
right hand hold us: If we say the Darkness shall hide us, even the Night
shall be light about us: He is round about our Bed, and spieth out all our
ways.


Thais. I pray you my Sophronius, what will you conclude of this?

Sophro. My Thais, this is the scope of my speech; that seeing our Witness is
in Heaven, and our Record with the Highest: seeing that God is the beholder of
all our actions, and neither secrecy of place, nor darkness can hide us from
his sight, we should take heed what we do; for he does not only see our
actions, but he will also judge them: for he can do it, because he is
Almighty, and he will do, for he is just.


Thais. I but (my Sophronius) God is merciful, he would not the death of a
Sinner.

Sophro. God indeed is merciful; Psalm. 130.
but to them that embracing his mercy, do fear him: and not to those which
abusing his mercy, Romans 2.
do offend him.


Thais. You are become very precise, and grown monstrous holy: You should go
up into the Pulpit, and then I would hear thee.


Sophro. I do not wonder that you scoff at my good Counsel, for it is usual
with the World to despise wholesome and godly Exhortations: but I would not
refuse to do any good Office, that I might recall you from this shameful and
wretched life.


Thais. Wherefore, my sweet Sophronius? I must get my living by some means:
every Art nourishes his Artificer; this is my Trade, this is my Rent.


Soghro. I wish (my Thais) that thou would shake off this madness of mind,
and awake out of thy security, and consider of the matter in good earnest.


Thais. I pray thee ( Sophronius) keep thy Sermon till another time: If I were
sick, or aged, I would hearken unto thee: but let us now be merry, and enjoy
our pleasure together.


Sophro. O Thais! hearken now unto my good Counsel: Delay in all things is
dangerous; he that is not fit to day, may be less fit to morrow: now thou
art in health and thy senses are fresh, and thy understanding strong, and thy
memory ripe; if thy body were sick, it may be sickness would weaken all
these, and thy pain would make thee impatient. And whereas thou speak of
old Age; Who has any charter of his life? We are Tenaunts at will, God may
thrust us out of our house and give us no warning: And this we have seen often
how suddenly many have been taken out of this life; as the Rich man that
promised unto himself many days, Luke 12.
and gloryed in his abundance, and this sentence was given against him, Thou
Fool, this night they shall fetch away thy soul. Therefore let us not presume
to repent when we are old, but even to day let us repent, because we know not
whether we shall live till to morrow. Moreover, thou would have me merry
with thee, and enjoy the pleasures of sin: Let me tell thee Thais, that I
have learned to be merry in the Lord; for other mirth is but momentanie and
transitory: and I have learned to renounce the pleasures of my Flesh, and of
the World, because they are but for a little season; but they do procure
eternal torment, as the example of the Rich Glutton does teach.


Thais. My Sophronius, why do you speak so much Scripture unto me, you know
that I, and others of my fashion, little regard it, and care not how little we
hear it; for it reproves our life, and does overthrow our gain?


Sophro. Indeed Thais, they which are evil, hate the Light, and love Darkness
more then the Light, because the Light discovers their evil deeds. But if
you and others of your fashion; yea, if al sinners would harken unto the word
of God and obey it, it would teach them to reform their lives, and to escape
out of the snares of the Devil: hear therefore my good Thais, the word of God
diligently, give obedience unto it; neither think it will hinder your profit:
but assure your self, that will it procure greater and much better gain then
you can think.


Thais. If you can show me that, I will hearken unto you gladly.

Sophro. My Thais, the gain you think you reap by this evil kind of life,
does nourish your body; but the means is so evil, that it will destroy both
body and soul, except you repent: But if you hearken to the Word of God, and
reform your life by it, it will teach you to save both body and soul in the
day of the Lord.


Thais. My Sophronius, this kind of life which I lead, is common; yea, many
Ladies, and gallant Women commit the same fault, though not so commonly known
as our life is.


Sophro. It may be most true, but the more is the pity; yet ought not we to
follow an e^ill example, no not in great ones: neither should we follow a
multitude to do evil.


Thais. Why then I pray you, Sophronius, do you set on me as if I were alone
thus ill disposed? Have you since your return, instructed any other of this
life? if not, you seem to me, to single out me from all other, as if I were
the greatest Sinner?


Sophro. O Thais, Thais! I have not talked with many since my arrival; but I
first come to thee, because (with grief of heart I speak it) I have lived
dissolutly with thee: and whereas I do kindly admonish thee, thou have cause
to take it in good part, and make good use of it. Neither do I judge thee to
be the greatest Sinner this way; but I know that you and I are great sinners:
therefore let us both repent, and crave mercy of God in the mediation of Jesus
Christ.


Thais. If you wish me well (my Sophronius,) as you pretend, and tender my
salvation, as you say, speak on, and I will hear you gladly?


Sophro. And I will do it chearefully. But first let me entreat thee to
answer me to one or two questions.

Thais. I shall most willingly (my Sophornius.)

Sophro. Tell me, Thais; Have you not some Divines that wish you evil?

Thais. Yes, too many.

Sophro. Would you willingly do that thing which is evil, to procure your
own destruction; and to minister matter of joy unto them?


Thais. No verily. I would rather give them Poison to bane them.

Sophr. You speak indeed like a natural Woman, for before we be regenerate,
Luke.
we all Hate our Enemies; we are ready to render evil for evil: we are eager
to revenge our selves; but our Lord Jesus does teach us, not to resist Evil;
For Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, I will repay. But to return to that
which you say, you would not do, and yet you do commonly.


Thais. Not so (my Sophronius) I hope.

Sophro. Yes Thais, it is too evident, as hereafter I will show you more at
large. But tell me again ( Thais,) Would you willingly do that which should
offend your dear Friends?


Thais. No verily.

Sophro. I, but your evil and unclean life, does not only greatly grieve,
but much offend your Parents, your Breathren and Sisters, and your Kinsfolk:
You have renounced all natural affections unto them unto whom by nature you
are most nearly joined: they are ashamed of thee, and thou art ashamed to come
in their sight.


Thais. Though I have changed some few Friends, and have renounced my
affections to them; yet I have by this kind of life which I live, gotten me
many more Friends: whereof you are one, whom I esteemed all ways as my
Brother.


Sophro. Let these words pass, and consider seriously of the matter as it is:
You which think you have so many Friends, have no Friend, (believe me my
Thais,) for they which come unto thee, esteem thee not for a Friend, but use
thee as a Harlot. Consider then thou miserable Woman, into what mischief thou
have thrown thy self. Christ Jesus the Son of GOD, esteemed thee so dear,
that he redeemed thee not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but
with his precious Blood, that he might make thee one of his members the Child
of God, and an inheritour of the kingdom of Heaven; And thou make thy self
a public Sink, in which euey filthy, unclean, and scabbie person, does
discharge their filthiness. And if as yet that infectious Leprosy which some
call the Spanish Pip, some the French Pox, has not touched thee, yet thou
can not long escape it: which if it come to pass, who can be more miserable
then thou, though all other things else prosper well with thee. Weigh with thy
self thy substance and thy report, what else shall thou be then a living
Carcass. Thou were grieved to obey thy Mother; now thou seruest Dorio a
shameless Baud. It wearied thee to hear the Admonitions of thy Parents; but
now often times thou art beaten of Whore-maisters and frantique Fornicators. It
was irksome to thee to do any work at home, whereby thou might get thy
livings but now, What watchings, what tumults, what intolerable indignities
do thou endure of these filthy and unchaste persons, to whom thou do
prostitute thy body?


Parmenio. I Will be sworn, Sophronius, you seem to be new changed indeed; for
from a gallant youthful Gentleman, you are transformed to a Puritan Preacher;
but I think if Dorio were here, you would turn your tale, and change your
coppie: she would hold you ^acke, and make you sing a new Song; and I purpose
presently to fetch her.


Sophro. You speak Parmeno, as you are: you are a goodly Apple-squire, a
Pander to such Punks as Thais is: you draw by one line, and are an vpholder of
bawdry? and though you fetch that old Baud, neither she nor you, shall make me
go from that truth which I have spoken; and if you make have, you shall find
me here to auerre that I have uttered. And now Thais, consider with me, that
this flower of thy beauty which procures thee Lovers, it will shortly vanish
away, for either sickness, or age, will deface it; what will thou then do
thou wretched woman? No Dunghill will be abhorred more then thou. Then of a
Harlot, thou must become a Baud, for such are the proceedings of your wicked
trade: which if it happen, what can be more vile? What can approach nearer unto
the Devils malice?


Thais. I confess, (my Sophronius,) that all these things which thou say,
are true; but tell me I pray you, from whence you have learned this holiness?
You were wont to be a good fellow, and to delight in me: no man came more often
to me, and more untimely, then you. Come you not lately from Rome?


Sophro. Yes, I came from Rome very lately, as before I told you.

Thais. I wonder not a little, that you are so transformed, my Sophronius; for
commonly they which go to Rome, return not better, but much worse* how then
are you grown so Godly?


Sophro. I will tell thee, my Thais: Because I went not with the same mind,
nor after the same fashion that many young Gentlemen and others do; for they
go to Rome to see the Pope that Antichrist, Papastupor Mundi.
the wonder of the world, to see and learn Italian tricks, to learn to court
and serve their Mistress. And I will tell thee Thais, the occasions to make a
man a Libertine, are there abundantly offered; for a man may be there, what he
will, so he show not any liking of godliness and honesty, and therefore no
marvel though they that have been at Rome (for the most part) return worse
then when they went.


Thais. O my Sophronius, you forget your self, Rome is accounted a holy place,
the Pope is called Christ's Vicar; they call others which consent not unto them,
Heriques, and profess them selves the only Catholics of the world.


Sophro. I know, Thais, that Rome is accounted a holy place; but I think they
that esteem it so, have not bin there: for though it was some times an holy
City where many of Gods Saints did live, yet now it is become an unfaithful
City, a Cage of unclean Birds, a receptacle for perfidious and fugitive
persons, and a sink of al evil. When I diligently observed how
licentiously, how viciously, how inordinatly men lived there, committing most
sins without check, I did admire how they could call that place Holy, where
men did lead such unclean lives. The Pope is called Christ's Vicar, and is
borne upon men's shoulders, and worshipped as a God; but he does not follow the
steps of Christ herein, but does clean contrary to the precepts of Christ,
and therefore he may rather be called Antichrist; And whereas the Romanists
call others Heretics who dissent from them, I can assure thee Thais, that
they hold and maintain foul and shameful Heresies, as I can prove by the
holy word of God. And whereas they call themselves Catholics, and appropriat
that name unto themselves, they do but as some that called themselves Jews,
and were not Jews, as S. John does teach, Revel. 3. 9. for they hold many
things contrary to the holy Catholic Faith.


Thais. If this be true (my Sophronius) which you say, I do the more admire
that you should return so holy from so unholy a place; We see that men
generally are so besotted and inchaunted with the pleasures of this life, that
they affect those places where they may most enjoy them; and desire rather to
abide there where they may have liberty to enjoy the pleasures, of the flesh,
then where men are warned to avoid these Syrenes and have the Judgments of
God denounced against them for their sins. I speak this from my own
experience. Tell me therefore (my Sophronius,) by what means you are so
transformed?


Sophro. I will tell thee (my Thais) plainly, wishing that it may be as
profitable to thee, as it has bin gainefull to me. I chanced (by the goodness
and grace of God) to fall into the company of a grave Father, who was a
Protistant Minister, who had bin at Rome to seek his Son, who secretly had
slipped from him to see the Country, and to learn fashions; but hearing that he
was returned to Venice, he came back again, and as we travailed together, he
inquired of me of what Country I was? I told him an English man: he demanded
of me the cause of my coming into those Countries: I answered him, to see
Fashions, and to understand the state of the Romish religion which I heard
commended in mine own Country; and also to observe the manners and fashions
of the Catholics which I had heard exceedingly praised of our English
Catholics, in my own Country. And when he had heard me to the end, he spoke
on this manner unto me. My Son, says he (for so he called me, speaking in
Latin) Beware and take heed of those Popish Catholics, which are the
Sinagogue of Satan, and thank God that you are come out of Rome, yea out of
Babylon, who exalts her self as a Queen, and yet is that Strumpet spoken of
in the Revelation of S. John. And believe me, Popery is a bundle of
Iniquity: For, have you not seen how Curtizans are suffered and maintained
under the Popes nose: yea, many of the Popes have had their Paramours. The
Stews and Brothell houses are every where allowed. They boast of the
Scriptures, and yet they falsify them, and keep them from the people, that
they may keep them in blindness. They justify themselus, and yet are most
wicked. Their Clergy live in all manner of pleasures of the flesh. They hold
it that a Priest living in Adultery and Fornication, does not sin so much,
as when he takes a Wife. The Jesuits (which is the last Order amongst them,
and the worst) do hold it meritorious to kill the King of the Country, if he
be not of their Religion: And therefore who soever holds the grounds of
Popery, is in a most dangerous estate. But my Son, search the Scriptures, as
our Savior Christ exhorts, and they shall reveal unto you the mysteries of
our Salvation, and discover all their iuglings and impieties. I gave him great
thanks, and have followed his counsel: Since which time, I have been studious
in the Scriptures, and every day I perceive the gross errors of the Papists,
their counterfeit Holiness, their deep Hypocrisy, and their great Iniquity.
Now therefore, my Thais, if you tender your own salvation, detest Popery, and
forsake this ill kind of life that you have led: yet there is hope, if you
earnestly repent, God will receive you; for he would not the death of Sinner,
but rather that he should repent. To day therefore, whiles God does admonish
you, hear his voice, and harden not your hearts against God; so shall you
escape eternal condemnation.


Thais. If this kind of life (my Sophronius) be so evil, if it be so
dangerous, and if so great a punishment does belong unto it, I marvel that it
is so common; and I marnaile why some have affirmed, that Fornication is but a
trick of Youth: and that it is no fault for a Young man to commit Fornication?


Sophro. I told you, that the universality of a sin, does not make it to be
no sin, nor excuse a sin; for we ought not to follow a multitude to do
evil. And whereas some say, that it is but a trick of Youth, to commit
Fornication, and that it is no fault; these are the words of Heathen men, which
had not the light of Gods word: such evil Words corrupt good Manners. But the
Word of God does tell us, Heb. 13. 4. ^ Cor. 6.
that Fornicators and Adulterers God will judge, and punish. Neither shall
Fornicators and Adulterers, enter into the kingdom of Heaven.


Thais. This is a heavy sentence, if it should be executed; and indeed my
Heart trembles to hear it. If the state of this life which I have led, be
so odious to God, and liable to so great punishment, I will, by Gods grace,
forsake it. But alas ( Sophronius) how shall I live? How shall I maintain my
self?


Sophro. I am glad to hear that you fear the Judgments of God, threatened to
sinners in his Word. No doubt Gods spirit will rest upon them that tremble at
his Word; and I hope that God will make me an instrument to convert you. And
whereas you demand how you should live? how you should maintain your self? I
will tell you what I would advise you: You shall secretly and suddenly gather
up all your Apparel, and your Stuff, and I will help you to convey it to my
House: and I would have you, to serve some Lady or Gentlewoman, and I my self
will help to prefer you: yea, and if I can prefer you to a good Match, I
will give a reasonable Portion to further it: and I will labor to reconcile
you to your Parents, and to your Breathren and Kinsfolk.


Thais. Blessed be God (my Sophronius) that brought you hither this day, to
give me this good Counsel: and I thank God that I have such a Friend, that
is so careful for my good and salvation: And that you may know how you have
prevailed with me, I submit my self wholly to your disposition, and am content
to be ordered by you in all things. But see, Dorio is at hand, and P.


Dorio. I am at hand indeed, and I have this good while heard your
communication; and your conclusion I utterly mislike, and altogether distaste.
Will you Thais, commit your self to Sophronius to be ordered? Will you give
over this pleasant and gainefull kind of life? No, no, (my Thais) let not him
deceive you, to draw you unto Misery and Penury. What can you more desire,
then you have? You have the Pleasures of this life, you have costly Garments,
dainty Fare, Money at will, and the company of lusty Gallants at command;
and will you leave this kind of life, to wait and attend upon others, who are
now attended upon? Will you be at the command of others, who may your self
command? To do so, were extreme folly. And you Sophronius, who seem to be
so altered from the man you were, when you went from us; I doubt not, but you
will be as kind to Thais: as you have bin: for if you have not her to use at
your command, you will have your haunt some where else: therefore play the good
fellow, do as you have done, and let it not be said, that you are turned
Puritan.


Sophro. Avoid thou old Baud, I defy thee and thy counsel: I utterly detest,
and I do from my heart hate my former life, and do fly unto the mercy of
God, in Jesus Christ; And I tell thee Dorio, thou art an unclean woman, and an
Instrument of the Devil to corrupt and destroy young persons, thy heart is
full of Gall and bitterness: Repent therefore, if so be the Lord will have
mercy upon thee; Or if thou will not, God shall punish thee in the end, as he
has done many, for the same fault.


Dorio. Marie muffe Sophronius* are you become a Preacher? In sooth sir your
years are to young to teach me. I mean not to forsake this kind of life yet?
I have used it too long to leave it, I will endeavor to bring young Gentlemen
to Thais, to enjoy their pleasure: Should not young men rejoice in their youth,
and cheer their hearts in the days of their youth, and walk in the ways of
their heart and in the sight of their eyes?


Sophro. I confess indeed, that I am young, yet my counsel ought not to be
refused in respect of my youth, but rather it checketh your old age, continuing
still in uncleanness. And whereas you say, you will not leave that filthy
course of life yet, take heed that you harden not your heart against God, and
so heap up wrath against the day of wrath. And whereas you say, you have used
it too long to leave it herein, you show how dangerous a thing it is to
accustom ones self to any evil; It is an easy thing to fall into any sin,
but it is hard to get out of it. And whereas you say, you will be an Instrument
to bring others to folly and to impiety, know this, that thou shall the more
severely be punished, for as much as thou do not only evil of thy self,
but art a Soliciter and abettor of others in sin. Neither ought young men live
laciuiously and dissolutely; for if they do, God will call them to judgment
for it.


Dorio. I tell thee Sophronius, thou art become a precise Fool; or rather I
think thou do but dally with me and Thais, that we may know and understand
thy sharp Wit. But come Sophronius, be unto us as thou have been: for thou
shall not find us changlings.


Thais. Speak ( Dorio) for thy self; for I tell thee plainly without any
equivocation, that Sophronius has so prevailed with me, that I disclay me
thee, and utterly detest that filthy and unclean life whereunto thou have
brought me: for had not GOD in mercy made Sophronius an instrument to
reclayme me, I had good cause to curse thee; for thou did draw me to this
abominable life. Thou art she that did procure me to forsake my Parents, and
their good counsel, to practice this odious and wicked course: therefore I
do now defy thee, and all such lewd Women as you, which are the destruction
of many young Women about this City, bringing them into evil company, and
giving them leawd counsel.


Dorio. Why how now Huswife, are you become so Holy? It does not agree with
your profession; Have not you promised to be ordered and ruled by meet Do not
you call me Mother, and confess your self to be my Daughter? I think you
dare not forsake me on this fashion; for if you do, I will display your life,
and make you to be poynted at in the streets.


Thais. You may term me at your pleasure, but your mockes and scorns shall
not much offend me: and though I promised to be ordered by you, I now see my
folly therein, and am sorry for it; and I know that evil Promises are better
broken then kept. And though I called thee Mother, I see now (to my grief)
that thou were a wicked Mother to me. And though you dare me, and fear me
with discovering my folly; I had rather be hated of thee and the World, and
poynted at, then have the displeasure of Almighty God; but if he love me, (as
I know he will) if I love him, and hate all iniquity, I little care for the
hatred of the World: For I now see that they which are Gods friends, shall be
hated of the World. And indeed, if you had your desert, you deserve to be
poynted at, and to be severely punished for intising of young Maids unto
folly: and I will make you known to others, that they may take heed of you,
and others of your fashion.


Dorio. Mary you are a goodly Gossip indeed, you will be shortly, one of the
Holy Sisters; I shall have you shortly, one of the Family of Love: I will
observe you, and mark your fashions; and I swear by my Honesty, if
Sophronius were not here, I would so beat thee, that thou should not lift
thine hands to thy head: But I shall find a time to be revenged of thee for thy
malipartnesse.


Sophre. It is the manner of such as you are, to frumpe and mock at such as
forsake your evil life, and begin to serve God, and to make a conscience of
their ways: But you shall smart for it one day, if you do not repent. And
whereas you say, you will observe Thais, and mark her life; I would wish thee
to observe thy self, and seriously consider what an abominable and hateful
life thou do lead. And whereas thou swearest by thy Honesty, thou swearest
by that thou have not; for such as thou art, are at defiance with Honesty, and
wholly delight in dishonest and shameful life. And whereas thou say that
thou would beat her if I were absent, and do threaten to be revenged of
her, I tell thee, thou shameless old Baud, that if thou do touch her, or
do any way wrong her, I will cause thee and thy companions to be punished.


Dorio. Nay then I defy thee, thou proud Puritan, and if Parmeneo will help
me, I will scratch out thy eyes, for abusing me in this manner, but I hope, I
shall be revenged of thee, ere it be long. But Parmeneo come, let us leave
them: let us be gone, they are no company for us; they are a couple of precise
Fools, and so they will prove.


Sophro. I perceive, that thou have a Harlots face, and have hardened thy heart
that thou will not repent; but know thou, thou evil woman, that God shall
punish thee, and all such persons: Ye shall be excluded out of heaven, and
cast down into Hell: this shall be the portion (...) Adulterers, Fornicators,
Drunkards, and all unclean ^^rsons, that will not repent. Oh that thou, and
such as thou it, would consider this, and be wise, and lay hold on grace whiles
the day of grace lasts; for when the day of judgment comes, Pro. 1. 28.
it will be too late to call for mercy: for as you stop your ears, Zacha. 7. 7.
and will not hear God speak unto you now, so he will not hear you then, but
will say depart from me, you workers of iniquity, I know you not.


Dorio. I tell thee, thou young Puritan, that thou pratest in vain to me, I
am no fit hearer for you; I will when I think good, alter my trade of life,
and not be at your disposition, nor be directed by the best Preacher of the
Land: Therefore take your Puritan Punke with you, you have made her a holy
Sister: I, and Permeneo, will go seek some other young Mistress; which I doubt
not, will be more faithful then your Huswife has been, who has broken her
honest word: and so a diew.


Sophro. Farewell thou old Baud, happy are they that are farthest off from
such rotten members, and from such noisome and infectuous plagues, which are
able to destroy many. And now, my Thais, consider with me how sinners hardened
in sin, refuse to hear good counsel, and stopp their ears like the deaf
Adder, refusing to hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.
She will (she says,) reform her life at her pleasure; as if she could
repent when she listed; whereas it is the gift of God. Her purpose is (as she
says) to corrupt some other, as she has done you: But God (I trust) will
cross her in her evil purpose, and confound her wicked enterprise.


Thais. Amen (my Sophronius:) And God Almighty grant us his grace to continue
in that good course whereinto we are entered, and guide us with his holy
Spirit, that the rest of our life may be wholly consecrated unto him* that we
glorifying him in this life, m^^ be glorified of him in the life to come,
through Ies^^ Christ our Lord.


Sophro. Amen, Amen.


FINIS.

