THE SHEPHERDS HOLY DAY. A PASTORAL TRAGI-COMAEDIE. ACTED BEFORE BOTH THEIR
MAJESTY'S AT WHITE HALL, by the Queens Servants. WITH AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH
of the most noble Lady, the Lady VENETIA DIGBY.

VIR. Nec erubuit Sylvas habitare Thalia. WRITTEN BY J. R.

LONDON: Printed by N. and I. Oaks, for John Benson, and are to be sold at his
shop in St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1635.

TO THE TRVELY NOBLE Sir KENELME DIGBY, Knight.
SIR,
IT is said, that all things naturally affect their place of birth. Fire feigned
to be stolen from Heaven, of its own Nature tends upwards. The Soul of Man
desires to be united with the Divine Essence from whence it is derived. It Is
then but reason that these Poems should of themselves return to you, by whose
influence they were conceived; Both of them being borne in your house: The one
whilst I admired the serenity, and sweetness of your disposition: the other
when I kept time with your grief, which you took for the loss of that noble
Lady, your dear wife: So that now I doubt whether I may call my self the
Author, or you. At least, if this be my work, I am yours: And could my
capacity have reached those Heroique virtues, which in the time of my attendance
I beheld in you, I might perhaps have dared a higher flight, and from the
humble strain of shepherds, have grown up to you, as you are, the subject of
all moral virtues: I shouldh have then described your valor, Industry, and
Prudence in your actions at sea, your Bounty still exercised in the right
place, your Piety in the memory of your deceased Lady, of whom, (besides the
Monument you have erected to her,) the statues and pictures you have, and what
ever else might render her, testify what a value you set on the original.
Vxorem enim vivam amare voluptas est, defunctam religio. But these aims are
too high for me, yet may you somewhat raise my thoughts, if you descend to
keep these in your esteem, and with them,

Your true servant, JOS. RVTTER.

To my dear Son, and right-learned Friend, Master JOSEPH RVTTER.
YOu look, my Joseph, I should something say
Unto the world, in praise of your first Play:
And truly, so I would, could I be heard.
You know, I never was of Truth a feared,
And less ashamed; not when I told the crowd
How well I loved Truth: I was scarce allowed
By those deepe-grounded, understanding men,
That sit to censure Plays, yet know not when,
Or why to like; they found, it all was new,
And newer, then could please them, by-cause true.
Such men I met withal, and so have you.
Now, for mine own part, and it is but due,
(You have deserved it from me) I have read,
And weighed your Play: untwisted every thread,
And know the woofe, and warpe thereof; can tell
Where it runs round, and even: where so well,
So soft, and smooth it handles, the whole piece,
As it were spun by nature, off the fleece:
This is my censure. Now there is a new
Office of Wit, a Mint, and (this is true)
Cried up of late: Whereto there must be first
A Master-worker called, the old standerd burst
Of wit, and a new made: a Warden then,
And a Comptroller, two most rigid men
For order, and for governing the pixe,
A Say-master, has studied all the tricks
Of Finenesse, and alloy: follow his hint,
Yo' have all the Mysteries of Wits new Mint,
The valuations, mixtunes, and the same
Concluded from a Carract to a dram.
Ben. Ionson.

To my much respected Friend, Master Joseph Rutter* upon his Pastoral.
WHy should I vainly strive to vindicate
Thy fame, or fear thy well-writ Poems fate?
Why should I wrong the age, to think a strain
So clearly sweet, so elegantly plain,
Should be mistaken? that a Reader, though
Not of the best, who judge because they know,
But of the venturing rank, should therefore cease
To praise, because he understands with ease?
Because he is not puzzled, but may find
A quick delight, such as should moove the mind
In Plays or Pastoralls, whose gentle strains.
Should not perplexe, but recreate the brains?
Can unjust ignorance offer so much
Wrong to it self? yet I have heard that such,
For whom no language can be plain enough,
Praise naught but intricate and clouded stuff,
As if that conscious to their own weak sense,
Because they know not perfect Eloquence,
And yet would seem; they think that best must be,
That Is farthest off from their capacity.
Let such, if such there be, have their desire;
And, though nor pleased, nor profited, admire.
I wish who ere shall read thy sweetest strain,
May love the Authors skill that made it plain,
And so be just both to himself, and thee:
But I Will no more anticipate, nor be
Tedious in censure; to that Worthy's breast,
To whom thou send'st thy Book, I leave the rest.
Thomas May.

TO this fair Company I am to say,
You're Welcome all, to a well meaning play,
For such our Author made it, with intent
To defame none. His Muse is innocent,
A Virgin yet, that has not found the ways
Out of foul crimes to raise her self a praise;
And therefore She desires, you would excuse
All bitter strains, that suite a Satyr Muse:
And that which so much takes the Vulgar Ear,
Loosenes of speech, which they for jests do hear;
She hopes none such are here, therefore she dares
Venture this story, purged from lighter airs:
A piece entire, without or patch, or maime,
Round in it self, and every where the same.
And if there be not in it, what they call wit,
There might have bin, had it bin thought so fit.
A Shepherds Muse gently of love does sing,
And with it mingles no impurer thing.
Such she presents unto your ears, and eyes,
And yet your Christian freedom not denies
Of liking, or disliking what you will,
You may say this is well, or that is ill,
Without dispute; for why should you that pay
For what you have, be taught what you should say,
Or made to judge by any square, or rule,
As if you came not to a Stage, but School?
No, he that made it, says, if you will eat,
He will not force your stomachs, there is your meat,
Which if you like it is well, if not, all is one,
There must be difference in opinion:
Besides, he is sure what ever he could wish,
Your taste, and not his Art must praise the dish.
The Persons of the Play.
Thyrsis, the Lover of Sylvia. Hylas, the Lover of Nerina. Mirtillus, the
common Lover. Daphnis, the rich Shepherd. Montanus, an ancient Shepherd.
Charinus, Father to Nerina. Alcon, an ancient Shepherd. Nuntius.
Chorus of Shepherds.
Sylvia, beloved of Thyrsis. Nerina, a huntresse, beloved of Hylas and of
Daphnis Dorinda, enamored of Daphnis. Delia, a Court Lady. Euarchus, King of
Arcady. Eubulus, his Counselor. Cleander, Son to Eubulus. Attendants.
The Scene Arcady.

THE SHEPHERDS HOLY DAY.
ACTVS. 1.
SCENA 1.
Thyrsis, Montanus. HEre in this Grove I left her, here amongst
These Poplars, Laurells, and these Sycamors,
Guilty of her sad loss: And yet behold
They do appear as fresh and full of verdure,
As when my Love clothed in her clearest looks,
Did give them grace and luster: Why do we
Poor silly men bred up in cares, and fear,
The Nurse of our Religion, stoop to Nature,
That only knows to form, not to preserve
What she has made, since careless of her work,
She leaves to giddy Fortune the whole power
Of ruling us: These senseless Trees stand still,
And flourish too, and in their pride upbraide
My loss to me; but my dear Sylvia being
Natures best piece, made to excuse the rest
Of all her vulgar forms, ay me! was left
To desolation, till some horrid Satyr
Bred in these Woods, and furious in his lusts
Made her his prey, and now has carried her
Into his dark retirings, or some Cave
Where her poor Thyrsis never more shall see her.
But I will be revenged, this Wood that now
Is so bedeckt with leaves and fresh array,
I Will level with the ground, until it be
As desolate as I.
Mon. Alas poor shepherd!


Thy. It shall afford no shade to any thing
That hither used to come for its releife;
But henceforth be for ever infamous:
That when some gentle shepherd passes by,
And sees this ground rent with the crooked plough,
Here, he may say, here 'twas that Sylvia
Was lost, and then shall turn another way.

Mon. Good Thyrsis, do not make so much of grief,
You Have fed it with too many tears already,
Take comfort now.

Thy. What has my present state
To do with comfort? if you see the trees
Widdow'd of leaves, the earth grown hard, and spoild
Of the green mantles which she wont to wear,
You wonder not if winter then appear.

Mon. By these we know that season.


Thy. And must I,
When she is gone, whose Sun-like eyes did cherish
An everlasting Summer in my life,
Feel any spring of joy to comfort me?
No father, grief with me is best in season.

Mon. But whilst you mourn thus, who looks to your flock?


Thy. All as the shepherd is, such be his flocks,
So pine and languish, they, as in despair
He pines and languishes, their fleecy locks
Let hang disordered, as their Masters hair,
Since she is gone that deskt both him, and them.
And now what beauty can there be to live
When she is lost that did all beauty give?

Mon. But yet, me thinks, for one that is a stranger,
Scarce known to any here, but by her name,
These plaints are overmuch: besides there are
In fruitful Arcady as fair as she,
I Am sure more rich and wise, make out of them
A choice. Nerina is as fair as she,
Dorinda's flocks are more then Silvia's,
And carry on their backs more wool then hers.

Thy. Let such base Pesants, as the Gods, do hate,
Admire their wealth, and them, for what they have,
Their bodies, and their souls material
Alike, of drossie substance are compounded,
And can contemplate nothing but the earth.
No, Silvia, whom some better God (perhaps
For the reward of my well tuned pipe)
Sent down to me made up of air, and fire,
Though since, because I knew not how to use
With fair respect a gift so great as she,
Has justly reft her from me, is so much,
So great a part of me, that in her absence,
Amidst my grief I feel some little joy,
To see how much of me each minute wastes,
And gives me hope that when I shall dissolve
This earthly substance, and be pure as she
(For sure the Gods have taken her undefiled)
I may enjoy her looks, and though it be
Profane to touch a hallowed thing like her,
I may adore her yet, and recompense
With my religion the proud thoughts I had
once to enjoy her.

Mo. See how fond you are
To Embrace a shadow, and to leave the substance.
The love of Hylas to Nerina has
More hopes then yours; though she be young and coy
Yet whilst Nerina is, and Hylas too,
One time or other, they may both have joy

Thy. May they prove happy in each others love,
And nothing please, but what each other do,
For so lived Thirsis and his Silvia,
Whilst Silvia was, and Thirsis was her love,
What ever Thirsis pip'd pleased Silvia,
Thirsis admird what ever Sylvia sung
And both their joys were equal, or but one,
Well I can now remember (and it is
Some comfort to remember what I moan)
That when our loves began, how first I gazed
On her,, and she was pleased that I should look
Till greedily I had devoured the hook.
Love gave me courage then to speak my thoughts,
And gave her pity to receive my words,
They linkt our hearts together: from that time
When ere she saw me strike the furious Boar,
(Though then my case she ru'd, and sighed full often)
Yet was she pleased to see my victory,
And I received my vigor from her eye.
Then would she make me Chaplets of the best
And choicest flowers to adorn my head:
Which when I wore, methought I then did graspe
The Empire of the world; but what of that?
The more I then enjoyed of heavenly bliss,
The more my present grief and passion is.

Mon. Well Thyrsis, since my words do but renew
The story of your grief, I Will leave to use
Persuasions to you; for it is time I see,
And not my words, must cure your malady

Exit. Thy. That time must put a period to my life,
Or else it never will unto my grief:
Come Boy, and under this same hanging bow,
The note which thou attemperst to my words,
Sing, and be happier then thy Master, Boy.

Boy. 1.
SHall I because my Love is gone,
Accuse those golden darts
Which to a blessed union
Struck our two loving hearts,
Since Fortune, and not Love has caused my moan?
2.
No, her pure Image I shall prize,
Imprinted in my breast,
More then the fairest Mistress eyes
That ever Swain possessed,
Which in eternal bonds my fancy ties.
3.
Come then you sharpest griefs, and try
If you can pierce my heart,
But use, if you would have me dye,
The best you can of Art,
To wound a breast so armed with constancy.

Thy. Enough: I Will sigh the rest out: Go my boy,
Be careful of thy tender Lambs, whilst I
Seek out some hidden place to pine and dye.

SCENA SECUNDA.
Hylas, Mirtillus. Believe Mirtillus, never any love
Was bought with other price then love alone,
Since nothing is more precious then it self.
It being the purest abstract of that fire,
Which wise Prometheus first indu'd us with;
And he must love that would be loved again.
Mi. Why? who can say Mirtillus does not love,
Mirtillus, he who has employed his youth
Ever in service of the fairest Nymphs.

Hy. Mirtillus cannot love.


Mi. No, gentle Hylas?
This Ribband, and this hair you see me wear
Are they not ensigns of a lover? say
What shepherdess whom ever Swain thought fair,
Has not Mirtillus courted, and obtaind
Some favor from? but you will think because
I do not fold my arms, and sigh, and spend
The days the Gods have given me to rejoice,
In whining passion, walking still alone,
Now proud with hopes, then cast down with despair,
Unequal to my self in every thing,
I cannot love. No, Hylas, know I love
Dorinda, Cloris, Amarillis, all
Whom ever love did to his Altars call:
And when this Mistress frowns, I am content
To take another, when that flame is spent
By time, or put out by a Rival, strait
A third supplies her place, perhaps more worthy,
If less, because she loves, I Will think her so.

Hy. Alas, Mirtillus, I do pity thee,
Pity the error which thou wandrest in,
That think thou love, and know not what it is,

Mi. Why what is love say you, if mine be not?


Hy. I know Mirtillus, that no lover yet
Purchased a lasting pleasure without grief;
For love has gall in it, as well as honey,
And so compounded, that who so ere will taste
The sweetes of it, must take the bitter too,
Out of both which is made our constancy,
You that embrace the false delights alone,
Are a faign'd lover, or more truly none.

Mi. I know not what you mean by constancy,
I Am sure I love the fairest.

Hy. Still you err,
For if you loved the fairest, none had bin
The object of your choice but my Nerina,
Nerina, she the glory of these woods
The only subject of all shepherds song.

Mi. She has her share of beauty with the rest,
And I confess she is fit for love as any;
But why she only should take up your breast,
And shut out all that have a right as good,
Whose equal, or transcendent beauty pleades
As just a title to it, as hers can do,
I cannot reach the reason, but admire
Your faith, and what you praise, your constancy.

Hy. Mirtillus, though I know your stubborn heart
Could never entertain a lovers thought,
Yet did I think you would have bin more tender
How you profaned a name so sacred as
Nerina's is, whom never any Swain
Nor rural God, nor Satyr, though he be
Of savage kind would ever violate;
Nerina in whose form love ever dwells
Attended by the Graces, which do range
Themselves in order 'bout her comely face,
Whose breasts without are hills of whitest snow,
Within the seat of blameless modesty,
Regard of honor, and pure chastity
Nor may a loose thought ever harbor there
To tempt such lovers as you seem to be.
Is it for that you slight her?

Mi. No, I love her
As I do others, with whom I compare her.
But you that love with such intemperance,
Make of your love a glass, wherein you see
Each thing much greater then indeed it is:
My loves too cold you say, but I am sure
Yours is too hot for any to endure:
A mean perhaps 'twixt these I might approve

Hy. You might, if there were any mean in love.


Mi. But whilst we talk thus, see, the flame has caught you,
your beauteous flame Nerina is at hand
Dorinda with her, dare you stay the encounter.

Hy. No let us with draw, and watch her where she gos.


SCENA III.
Merina, Dorinda. DOrinda, I have mist the chase to day,
Such is my chance, and he that lodged the dear,
Told me it was the fairest in these Woods.
Do. The Gods do love you sure, that have left
Your thoughts so free for sport; mine are not so.

Ne. Thou art in love, I warrant, art thou not?


Do. That angry God pursues me in his fury,
And forces me to love where I am scorned.
Hapless Dorinda, why should he despise thee?
Many a Swain, and many a rural God
Have sought thy favors, and have sought in vain,
Now thou art justly punished with disdain.

Ne. Trust me Sweetheart, I cannot choose but wonder,
To think that one of such a comely grace
(I do not flatter you) could sue to any
For love, who are much fitter to be loved:
Scorn him as much as he does thee, for men
Love us no more, when we love them again.

Do. Ah good Nerina, you have spoken truth:
It may warn other Nymphs by my example
How they profess their loves to any man:
I Am past the cure, he that wounded me,
Has left me quite disarmed, and robbed me of
All those defensive arts which men will say
Are natural and proper to our sex:
I cannot change a face, or weep one tear,
Or laugh against my will, so violently
My Fate has thrust me to this love, that all
My faculties confess their weakness, and
My flame is got so much above my reach,
(...) can not put it out, nor smother it.

Me. Alas poor wench, tell me who is the man
Made up of so much rigid cruelty,
That I may shun him wheresoere I go.

Do. Do not you know him?


Me. No.


Do. I hear he boasts
To every shepherd, and to every Nymph,
How much I love him.

Me. Then it must be Daphnis.


Do. Venus forgive me, if I do disclose him,
But he will do it himself: It Is he Nerina.

Me. Daphnis, that woes my father to win me,
He is my daily suitor, now I know
How much he owes to pity, and to thee:
Until he pay that debt, I shall despise him.

Do. Why, do not you love him as much as I?


Me. Love him? I know no greater misery,
Then to love one that is not of humane race,
A Tiger rather, but a Tiger is
More mild then he.

Do. For loves sake say not so.
He has a manly feature, and does show
As much of grace in his comportment, as
The best of shepherds can him Titan made
Of better clay, then he did other men:
Although his heart be flint, and hardest rock.
Yet is his heart so hard, or are my parts
Rather unequal to his high deserts?
For he can love I see, since you he loves,
And you deserve it: had he thought me worthy,
He would have loved me too; but as I am
Worthless Dorinda, I am made his scorn,
And I had rather be so, then Nerina
Should want a servant such as Daphnis is.

Me, Prithee no more of him, I hate his name
As much, as I would do the loss of honor,
Which he injuriously would rob me off,
No, no, Dorinda, if by love I be
In^hrald to any, Daphnis is not he.

Do. Why, is there any can deserve you more?


Me. Yes many, that I could tell how to love
Rather then him: for why should I love him
Whilst Hylas lives and languishes for me?
Hylas who loved me in my infancy,
And being then a boy was never well
If I was absent, nor indeed was I
Content with any but his company.
Our flocks still fed together, I on him,
And he on me did feed his greedy eyes.
Since though his years have stild him man, he has
Continued that first love with such respects,
So full of innocence and simple truth,
That howsoere my outward coyness is,
My heart within tells me, it is only his:
Ay me! my father! prithee let us away.

Do. But Daphnis comes with him, for loves sake stay.


SCENA QVARTA.
Hylas, Mirtillus, Charinus, Daphnis. PAn be as cruel to his flocks and him,
As he has bin to me.
Mi. Go, leave your cursing,
And follow her, let me alone with him.

Cha. Ha! have I found you? Hoh! Nerina, stay,
Your father calls you; was not that my daughter
That made away so fast?

Mi. Who, she that's gone?
^eleeve your eyes no more, they are false to you.
Could you take one for her, that's nothing like her.
It Was Cloris went from us.

Cha. Is It possible?


Mi. It Is true.


Da. I thought, that it had bin my love.


Cha. I durst have sworn that she had bin my daughter,
What made she here? 'Twill nere be otherwise;
Young women will be chatting with young men,
What ere their father say. It was not so
When I was young, a boy, as you are, shepherds.

Mi. We are not men with him, till after fifty.


Cha. We never durst keep company with women,
Nor they with us, each one did carefully
Attend his charge: And when the time was come
That we grew ripe in years, and were staid youths,
Our Fathers would provide us wives: we did not
Carve for our selves, as now a days they do:
But now our children think themselves as wise,
Nay wiser then their Fathers, and will rule 'em:
They can no sooner peep out of the shell,
But they must love forsooth; I would feign know,
Whether 'twere fit a Maid should be in love,
(I speak now of that skittish girl my daughter
Before she ask her Fathers leave and liking?

Da. It Is true Charinus, 'twere not fit indeed:
Who should bestow the daughter, but the Father?

Mi. But Shepherds did you never hear, that once
There was an Age, the nearest to the Gods:
An age we rather praise then imitate;
When no man's will, nor woman's was enforced,
To any bent, but its own motion:
Each followed Natures laws, and by instinct
Did love the fairest, and enjoyed their wishes;
Love then not tied to any interest
Of blood or fortune, hastened to his end,
Without control, nor did the Shepherd number
Her sheep that was his choice, but every grace
That did adorn her beauteous mind or face;
Riches with love then were not valued,
Pure uncompounded love, that could despise
The whole worlds riches for a Mistress eyes.
Pray tell me Daphnis, you are young and handsome,
The lover of our fairest Nymph Nerina:
Would you for all that fruitful Sicilie
Can yield, or all the wealth of Persia,
Change one poor lock of your fair Mistress hair,
Whilst she is yours, and you her shepherd are.

Da. Would she were mine, I Would ask no portion.


Mi. Spoke like a Lover of the ancient stamp.


Cha. Son, son, she shall be yours: why? am not I
Her Father, she my daughter; may not I
Bestow her where I please?

Mi. Yes if she like
The man, she will bestow her self, never fear it.

Cha. What? she bestow herself without my leave?
No, no, Mirtillus, you mistake my daughter.
I cannot get her once to think of marriage,
And truly I do muse to see a wench,
That in all other things (although I say it)
Has wit at will, can pin her sheep in fold
As well as any, knows when to drive them home:
And there she can do twenty things as well:
Yet when I speak to her of marriage,
She turns the head, she will be a Dryade, she
Or one of those fond Nymphs of Dians train.

Mi. Old man, believe her not, she means not so,
She loves to keep the thing for which she is
So much beloved, I mean her Maidenhead;
Which, whilst she has, she knows to play the Tyrant,
And make us slaves unto her scornful looks:
For beauty then it self most justifies,
When it is courted, if not loved, it dies.

Cha. Well, we will think of this: Come Daphnis, come,
I see you love my daughter, and you only
Shall have her, it is I that tell you so,
That am her Father.

Da. Thank you good Charinus:
But I had rather she had told me so.

ACTUS SECUND.
SCENA PRIM.
Thyrsis, Montanus. To them Mirtillus. THis day the Sun shot forth his beams
as fair
As ere he did, and through the trembling air
Cool Zephyrus with gentle murmuring
Breathed a new freshness on each Tree and Plant:
My Kids as game some too, as ere they were;
All show a face of gladness but my self.
Mon. And why not you as well by their example?


Thy. Not in this life, here joy would be untimely:
The Gods reserve for me their comforts in
The Elyzian fields, or else they mock my sorrows.

Mon. O say not so, they are just and pitiful.


Thyr. They are, but Father, (so I still must call you)
When in the sadness of my soul I asked
Before the Altar of our great Apollo,
What should become of me, or where my love
Bright Silvia was, whether alive or dead,
Why should the Oracle reply, Go home,
Thou shall enjoy thy Silvia?

Mon. What more could you
Desire to hear?

Th. I, but when greedily
I asked the time, the answer was, That day
Thou art not Thirsis, nor she Silvia.
Then in this life I Am sure it must not be,
For I was Thyrsis ever called, and she
Known by no other name then Sylvia.

Mon. It may be for your importunity
You might deserve this answer, or else is it
Because the Gods speak not their mysteries
To be conceived by every vulgar sense?
I now remember what Acrisius,
The wise and virtuous Acrisius
Was wont to say.

Th. Why? what said he?
Does it concern me ought?

Mon. It may do son,
He bid us fly all curiosity.
Seeking to know what future time may bring
To us, which only Gods above do know,
And if at any time they do impart
This knowledge unto us, it is inwrapt
In such a mist, as we shall near see through it:
Because, said he, we have enough to do
With what is present: the celestial powers
Would not cut of our hopes, nor multiply
Our cares, by showing us our destiny.

Thy. Oh this discourse to a despairing lover,
What comfort does it bring? for heavens sake leave it,
And me; for I am best, I find, alone:
Yet stay, there is something that I feign would ask you:
You said this Circle here about my neck
Has so continued from my infancy,
When first you took me up.

Mon. It Is true, that Circle
Hung loosely then about your neck, which since
Is filld with it. I left it there, because
I saw some letters that were wrought about it.

Thy. And may they not be read?


Mon. I think they may:
But I could never find so great a Clerk,
As could tell how t'expound the meaning of them.

Thy. My life is nothing but a Mystery;
That which I was, and that which I shall be,
Is equally unknown. Now, if you will leave me
Unto my thoughts, they will keep me company.

Mon. I will, but here is one come to supply me.


Enter to him Mirtillus. Mi. I, let me alone.
Sings. HE that mournes for a Misteris,
When he knows not where she is,
Let him kiss her shadow fair,
Or engender with the air;
Or see if with his tears he can
Swell at an ebb the Ocean:
Then, if he had not rather die,
Let him love none, or all as I.
This is the doctrine that I ever taught you,
And yet you profit not; these scurvy passions
Hang on you still: You that are young and active,
That may have all our Nymphs at your devotion,
To live a whining kind of life as this,
How ill it does become you?

Th. True Mirtillus.
And yet I do not envy thee the pleasure,
Thou have in thy dispersed affections.

M. You would, if your head were right once; but love,
Your love does make an Ass of all your reason.

Th. Sure, a true lover is more rational
Then you, that love at random every where.

Mi. I do not think so; all the reason love
Has left you, to employ in this discourse,
Will hardly bring me to confess it to you.

Th. Why? all men's actions have some proper end,
Whereto their means and strict endeavors tend:
Else there would be naught but perplexity
In humane life, and all uncertaintie.

Mi. Well, what will you infer on this?


Thy. That you,
Who know no end at all of wild desire,
Must in your wandering fancy see this way
Leads unto madness, when too late you find
That nothing satisfies a boundless mind.

Mi. I, but I do confine my self to two,
Or three at most; in this variety
I please my self, for what is wanting in
One, I may find it in another.

Th. No.
Not in another, one is the only Center
The line of love is drawn to, must have all
Perfections in her, all that is good and fair,
Or else her Lover must believe her so.

Mi. I, there is your error, that is the ground of all
Your tears, and sighs, your fruitless hopes and fears,
When she perhaps has not so much t'adorne her
As the least grace your thoughts bestow upon her.

Th. Well, be it so; and yet this fair Idea
Which I have framed unto my self, does argue
Virtue in me; so that if she be lost,
Or dead, (ay me! the sad remembrance of
My Sylvia causes this) yet I must love,
Because the Character is indelible,
Writ in my heart, and heaven is witness to it.

Mi. Well, I Will no more of this, I Will be converted,
Rather then call this grief to your remembrance.

Th. Why? do thou think I ever shall forget her?
Or that where ere I set my careful foot,
As in this place, will it not tell me, that
Here Sylvia and I walked hand in hand,
And here she plucked a flower, and anon
She gave it me; and then we kiss't, and here
We mutually did vow each others love?

Mi. Nay leave good Thyrsis, I did come to tell you,
This holy day our Royal Prince Euarchus
Being removed to his house here near adjoining,
Sent to command us to attend his person,
With all our sports and wonted merriment,
Wherein you always bore the chiefest part.
And I have heard, ('it is not to make you blush)
The Princess has commended your rare Art
And hansome graces, which you gave your Music.
Come, you must go with us, for Hylas is
So far engaged in love, and near his hopes,
He will not stir unless his Mistress go.

Thy. Alas Mirtillus, I have broke my Pipe,
My sighs are all the music which I now
Can make, and how unfit I am to attend
So great an expectation, you may see.
Yet give me leave to think on it, at night
Perhaps I Will go with you.

Mi. Till then farewell.
The gentlest youth that ever played on Pipe:
But see, who is here? oh, it is my other Lover,
His Mistress with him, I will not disturb him.

SCENA SECUNDA.
Nerina, Hylas, Mirtillus. Shepherd, I would you would leave to follow me.

Hy. How can I sweetest, when my heart is with you?


Ne. With me? then tell me where, and see how soon
I shall restore it you. Aside.

Mi. Oh, this is fine.


Hy. It hangs upon your eyes, where being scorcht
With their disdain, and dazel'd with their luster,
It flies for ease unto your rosy lips.
But beaten thence with many a harsh denial,
Feign would it come for better harbor here,
But here for ever it must be an Exile:
For pity then fair Nymph, receive it you;
And if you can, teach it the hardness of
Your own, and make it marble as yours is.

Mi. I see he is not such a Novice as Aside.
I took him for; he can tell how to speak.

Ne. Well, if my heart be such as you will make it,
I am so much the gladder; that it is
Of strength to be a fence unto my honor.

Hy. In vain a fence is made to guard the sheep,
Where no wolf ever came.

Ne. What if within
It keep a dog of prey, would they be safe?
For my part I Will not cherish in my breast,
The man that would undo my chastity.

Hy. Then cherish me, for you best know, I never
Attempted any thing to cast a spot
On that white Innocence, to which I am
A most religious votary.

Mi More fool you; Aside.
It may be if you had, it needed not
Have come to this.

Ne. Yes, yes, you may remember,
I blush to tell it you, when first my thoughts
Were pure and simple, (as I hope they are
Still, and will so continue, whilst I fly
Such company as you) I thought you one
Whom never any flame impure had touched:
Then we converst without suspect together.

Hy. And am I not so still? why do you now
Fly from me thus?

Ne. The cause I shall tell you,
Since you will not remember; though it be
Unfit for me to speak, yet you shall know
How just my anger is.

Hy Ay me! most wretched!
What have I don?

Ne. When tending of my flocks
Under the shade of yonder Myrtle tree.
(Which bears the guilt of your soul misdemeanour)
My maid Corisca cried out for my help,
Because a be had stung her in the face:
You heard me speak in pity of her smart,
A charm, my mother taught me, (that being said
Close to the place affected, takes away
The pain) which gave her ease, but you uncivil,
Turning my courtesy to your vile ends,
Feigned you were stung too, and cried out, your lips
Had from the same sharp point received a wound;
Prayed me to say the same charm over there.
I charitably lent my help to you,
Mistrusting nothing of your purposes,
When with ungentle hands you held me fast,
And for my thanks gave me a lustful kiss,
Can thou remember this, and yet not blush?
O impudence!

Hy. You will excuse the heat
Of my desires; still I feel that sting
But dare not ask the cure, nor did I then
Do any hurt, but since you think it was
A fault, I do repent it, and am sorry
I did offend you so.

Mi. Better, and better
He Will cry anon, he has already asked
Forgiveness of her. Aside.

Ne. Well shepherd look
You never see me more, I cannot love
At all, or if at all, not you: let this
Settle your thoughts.

Hy. Oh, it distracts them more:
But since my presence is offensive to you,
I must obey, yet if I thought you would,
When I am dead, the Martyr of your beauty,
Shed one poor tear on my untimely grave,
And say that Hylas was unfortunate
To love, where he might not be loved again,
My ashes would find rest, and so farewell
The fairest, but the cruellst Nymph alive.

Mi. What will you leave her thus?


Hy. I prithee, come,
The sentence of my banishment is past,
Never to be recalled.

Mi. Are these the hopes
You fed upon? O what a thing in Nature
Is a coy woman! or how great a fool
The man is, that will give her leave to rule.

SCENA TERTIA.
Nerina. ALas my Hylas, my beloved soul,
Durst she, whom thou have called cruel Nerina,
But speak her thoughts, thou would not think her so,
To thee she is not cruel, but to her self:
That law which Nature has writ in my heart,
Taught me to love thee, Hylas, and obey
My father too; who says I must not love thee?
Oh disproportiond love and duty, how
Do you distract me? if I love my choice,
I must be disobedient; if obedient
I must be linkt to one I cannot love.
Then either love give me my liberty,
Or nature from my duty set me free. Exit.
SCENA QUARTA.
Daphnis. NErina, since nor tears nor prayers can move
Thy stubborn heart, I Will see what gifts can do:
They of my rank, whom most do deem unworthy
Of any virgins love, being rough, and bred
To manage the estates our fathers left us,
Unskild in those hid mysteries, which loves
Professors only know, have yet a way
To gain our wishes: first we get the father,
He knows our pleasures, and gives his consent:
The daughters eyes being blinded with our gifts
Cannot so soon spy our deformities,
But we may catch her to: This Alcon says,
A man whom age and observation taught
What I must learn; yet though most women be
Such as he has delivered, my Nerina
Seems not to have regard to what I give,
But holds me and my gifts both at one rate.
What can I hope then out of this poor present,
A looking-glass, which though within our Plains
It Is seldom seen; yet I have heard in Cities,
They are as common as a lock of wool:
However, if she take it, I am happy,
So Alcon tells me; and he knows full well,
(He gave it me) that whosoever shall look
Her face in it, shall be at my dispose:
In confidence of this I will present it,
And see my Fortune; sure I must needs speed:
My friend, her father comes along with her.
But oh my Fate! is not that Nymph Dorinda
Which keeps them company? Yes, sure it is she;
A curse light on her importunity.
Her father urges something, and I hope
On my behalf; let me observe a little.
SCENA QUINTA.
Charinus, Nerina, Dorinda, Daphnis. ANd as I often have told you, I do wish
To see you wise.
Do. Is she not so Charinus?
Does she say any thing that is out of reason?

Cha. Do not tell me of reason; I would hear
Of her obedience, therefore I say, be wise,
And do as I would have you.

Do. What would you
Have her to do? you see she answers not
To contradict you.

Cha. I will have her answer
To what I now demand, that is, to marry
Daphnis, and I will have her love him too.

Do. Love him Charinus? that you cannot do.
Her body you may link in the rights of Hymen,
Her will she must bestow her self, not you.

Da. Oh, she was borne to be a plague unto me. Aside.


Cha. Why should she wish or hope for any thing,
But what I Would have her wish or hope for only?
Come, to be short, answer me, and directly;
Are you content to marry Daphnis, say?

Ne. What is your pleasure Father?


Cha. You do not hear
It seems, but what you list; I ask you once
Again, if you will marry Daphnis, speak?

Ne. Sir, I would marry whom you please to give me:
I neither can, nor ought to make my choice,
I would refer that to you: But you know
My inclination never lay to marry.

Cha. I know you shall do that which I command.


Ne. Now heaven forbid, that I who have thus long
Vowed to Diana my Virginity,
To follow her a Huntresse in these Woods,
Should yield my self to the impure delights
Of Hymen, and so violate my faith.

Cha. A fine devotion, is it not? to make
A vow, and never ask your Father leave;
The Laws will not permit it to be so.

Do. The vow Charinus, is not made to men:
The Laws have not to do with that which is
Sealed and recorded in the Court of Heaven.

Cha. Do not tell me of vows, I Will have her marry;
And marry Daphnis: Is he not rich and handsome?

Do. Ay me! I would he were nor rich, nor handsome,
It may be then he would regard my sufferings. Aside.

Cha. No, Daughter, do not you believe, you can
Catch me with shifts and tricks: I see, I tell you,
Into your heart.

Ne. Alas, I would you did,
Then your discourse would tend another way.

Cha. Yes, you have made a vow I know, which is,
Whilst you are young, you will have all the Youth
To follow you with lies and flatteries.
Fool, they will deceive you, when this color fades,
Which will not always last, and you go crooked,
As if you sought your beauty lost in the ground:
Then they will laugh at you, and find some other
Fit for their love; where if you do as I
Command you, I have one will make you happy.

Ne. Ay me most miserable!


Da. Now I Will come in,
And see what I can do with this my gift.

Cha. Look now, as if the Fates would have it so,
He comes just in the nicke of my discourse:
Come, use him kindly now, and then you shall
Redeem what you have lost, my good opinion.

Ne. O most ungrateful chance! how I do hate
The sight of him!

Do. Were it to me he came,
How happy would this fair encounter be!

Cha. Daphnis, you're welcome, very welcome to me,
And to my Daughter: what is that you have there?

Da. A present, which I mean to give my love.


Cha. See but how true a lover Daphnis is;
His hand is never empty when he comes:
Welcome him Daughter, look what he has for you.

Da. O good Charinus, none must look in it,
But she herself to whom it is presented.

Cha. I am an old man, I, and therefore care not
To see my withered face, and hoarie hair:
Give it that young thing, she knows what to do with it.
Daughter, come hither, use him courteously,
And kindly too: (Be sure you take his gift.)
Daphnis, I Will leave you both together here;
My sheep are shearing, I can stay no longer.

Da. Farewell old man; health to my dearest Mistress


Ne. And to you shepherd.


Do. Daphnis am not I
Worthy to have a share in your salute?

Do. How can I give thee part of that, whereof
I have no share my self?

Do. If you would love
There, where you are beloved again, you might
Make your content such, as you would your self.

Da. If you, Nerina, would vouchsafe to love
Him that loves you, and ever will, you might
Make your content such as you would your self.

Ne. Shepherd, I often have wished you not to trouble
Me and your self with words: I cannot love you.

Da. As often Dorinda have I spoke to you,
To leave to trouble me: I cannot love you.

Do. Will you then slight my love, because it is offered?


Da. Will you then slight my love, because it is offered?


Ne. Some body else may love you, I cannot.


Da. Some body else may love you, I cannot.


Do. O cruel words; how they do pierce my heart!


Da. O cruel words, how they do pierce my heart!


Ne. How can I help it, if your destiny
Lead you to love, where you may not obtain?

Da. How can I help it, if your destiny
Lead you to love, where you may not obtain.

Do. It is not destiny that injures me,
It is thy cruel will, and marble heart.

Da. It is not destiny that injures me,
It is thy cruel will, and marble heart.

Ne. No Daphnis, it is not hardness of my heart,
Nor any cruelty that causes this.

Da. Then it is disdain of me.


Ne. Nor is it that:
I do not see in Daphnis any thing
To cause disdain.

Do. Why do you not reply
In those same words to me, malicious Echo?

Da. Pray leave me, I have other business now
To trouble me; if you disdain me not,
Fair Nymph, as you pretend, receive my offer.

Ne. What Is that?


Da. My heart.


Do. I will gentle Daphnis.


Da. O importunity!


Ne. Give her thy heart,
She has deserved it, for she loves thee, Daphnis.

Da. First I would tear it peecemeale here before you.


Do. O me unfortunate! O cruel man!


Ne. Stay good Dorinda, I Will go with thee, stay.


Da. Let her go where she will, behold sweet saint
This Mirror here, the faithful representer
Of that which I adore, your beauteous form,
When you do see in that how how lovely are
your looks, you will not blame my love.

Ne. If I refuse it,
My father will be angry, let me see it:
Here take thy glass again: what ailes my head?
I know not where I am, it is so giddie:
And something like a drowsiness has seized
My vital spirits.

Da. How do you love? not well?


Ne. Heavy o'th sudden; I Will go home, and sleep.


Da. So, let her go, and let this work awhile.
She cast an eye upon me as she went,
That by its languishing did seem to say,
Daphnis I Am thine, thou have overcome at last:
Alcon, thou have made me happy by thy art.

ACTUS, 3.
SCENA 1.
Sylvia, Delia. Q. TEll me what you think on earth
The greatest bliss?
A. Riches, honor, and high birth.
Q. Ah, what is this?
If love be banished the heart,
The joy of Nature, not of Art?
2.
What Is honor worth, or high descent?
Or ample wealth,
If cares do breed us discontent,
Or want of health?
A. It is the order of the Fates,
That these should wait on highest states.
3.
Cho. Love only does our souls refine,
And by his skill
Turns humane things into divine,
And guides our will.
Then let us of his praises sing,
Of love, that sweetens every thing.

Del. Madam, you're overheard.


Sy. I care not Delia.
Although my liberty, and free discourse
Be here denide me, yet the Air is common:
To it then will I utter my complaints,
Or to thee, friend, to whom my love will dare
To show the secrets of my heart, for others
I do not care, nor fear; so thou be faithful.

Del. Madam, I have no life, but what I wish
May be employed to do your beauties serice;
My tongue is ruled by yours: what you would have
It speak, it shall; else further then my thoughts
Nothing shall venture, that you leave to me:
And those my thoughts, I Will keep to such restraint,
As they shall never come within my dreams,
Lest they betray your counsels: this I vow
Religiously by --

Syl. Hold, I will not
Have thee to swear, nor would I thou should think,
That I so much suspect thee, as to urge
An Oath; I know thou have too much of goodness
(That Is bred within thee) to betray a trust:
And therefore without further circumstance,
I Will let thee know my fortunes, part of which
I Am sure the have heard already.

Del. Madam, I have,
And wished that they had sorted to your wishes.

Syl. I thank thee Delia, but my evil Genius,
That has pursued my innocence with hate,
Brought me from thence where I had set my heart,
Unto this cursed Court, which, though it be
My place of birth and breeding, I do find
Nothing but torment, and affliction in it.

Del. I guess the cause sweet Madam, but that is past
And now forgotten: if you clear your looks,
Your Father will enlarge you, and never think
On what you did, but that you are his daughter.

Syl. Alas my Delia, thou do mistake,
My liberty is of no worth to me,
Since that my love, I fear, will never be free:
Nor do I care what idle Ladies talk
Of my departure, or my strange disguise,
To color my intents; I am above
Their envy or their malice:
But for the unluckie chance that sent to me
The overcurious eyes of him I hate,
Thou know the man.

De. Yes, you mean Cleander,
Son to Eubulus, who is now your keeper:
What Star directed him to find you out?

Syl. His love forsooth, for so he colored his
Unseason'd boldness, told me, he was not able
To want my sight: and so, when every one
Had given over their strict inquiry of me,
He only with too much officiousness,
Observed me in the Woods, walking alone:
And when I would have shunned him (which perhaps
Had I not done, he had not so well known me)
He came, and uttered, as his manner was,
His tedious complaints; until at length
He brought me with him, making no resistance:
And to ingratiate himself the more,
He said he would convey me where my Father
Should have no knowledge of me: I refused it;
Willing however to be rid of him.
And now you know, it is a full Month since
I did return to Court, but left my heart
Behind me in those fields, wherein I joy'd.

Del. Madam, has not the Court more pleasure in it,
Then the dull Country, which can represent
Nothing, but what does taste of solitude?
'Twas something else that carried you away.

Syl. It Is true my Delia; for though thou were
Privy to my departure, yet the cause
Thou could not tell, which I will now unfold,
And think I trust my honor in thy hands,
And maiden modesty: 'twas love that did it.

Del. Love Madam? sure it is impossible
You should find any thing there worth your love.

Syl. Thou know the shepherds, that do dwell about
This place (which for their entertainements only
The King my father built) did use to come,
As now they do, being sent for unto Court:
I ever liked their sports, their harmless mirth,
And their contentions, which were void of malice,
And wished I had bin borne just such a one.

Del. Your state is better Madam as you are.


Syl. But I confess the rather, cause there was
One amongst them, of a more comely grace
(Though none of them did seem uncomely to me)
Called Thyrsis; and with him me thought I could
Draw out my life, rather then any other,
Such things my fancy then suggested to me:
So well he sung, so passionate his love
Showed in his verse, thereto so well expressed,
As any one would judge it natural:
Yet never felt he flame, till this of me:
Often he came, and oftener was desired
Of me, nor did I shame in public there
Before my father, to commend his graces;
Which when I did, the whole Court, as they use,
Consented with me, and did strive to make them
Greater then I, or any else could think them:
At last I was surpised, I could not help it;
My Fate with love consenting, so would have it.
Then did I leave the Court, I Have told thee all.

Del. It Is strange, but Madam, though in that disguise,
How could you hope, a stranger, to be loved
Of him you held so dear?

Syl. I feigned my self
Of Smyrna, and from thence some Goats I had,
And Sheep, with them a rich commodity.
Near him I bought me land to feed them; he
Seemed glad of it, and thinking me a stranger,
Used me with such civilitie and friendship,
As one would little look for of a shepherd;
And did defend me from the avarice
Of the old shepherds, which did think to make
A prey of what I had. At length I saw,
He did address himself with fear to me,
Still gazing on me: knowing my love to him,
I easily believed he loved me too:
For love, alas, is ever credulous.
And though I was resolved, having my end,
(Which was no more, then to discourse with him)
Nev^r to let him know what flame I felt:
Yet when I saw his tears, and heard his vows,
(Persuasive speakers for affection)
I could not choose but open to his view
My loving heart; yet with this caution,
That he should ever bear respect unto
My honor, and my virgin chastity:
Which then he vowed, and his ambition
Never was more then to attain a kiss,
Which yet he hardly got: thou see, sweet Delia,
How willingly I dwell upon this Theme.
But can thou help me now, that I have opened
My wound unto thee.

Del. Alas, I would I could
Invent the way to cure you; I should soon
Apply my help: yet stay, this day it is
The shepherds come to Court.

Syl. It Is true, they come;
But what is that to me, if Thyrsis come not?
Or if he come, how shall he know me his,
Or I enjoy his company?

Del. Let me alone
To work out that.

Syl. Thou dreamst, thou can not do it.


Del. I Will undertake it, but how shall I know him
Without inquiring, which must breed suspicion.

Syl. True, and beware thou ask; the Majesty
Which sits upon his brow, will say it is he,
Thyrsis my love; but yet perhaps at this time,
If I my self not flatter, thou shall know him,
By his eyes cast down, and folding of his arms,
And often sighs, that interrupt his words.
For if his sorrow wears the liveries,
Which mine does for his absence, by these signs
Thou shall descrie him.

Del. These are silent marks:
Yet will I not despair to find him out.

Syl. But when thou have, what will thou say to him?

Del. Give me but leave to use my mother wit,
You would be gone together, would you not?

Syl. Thou speak my thoughts: do this, and I will crown
Thy faith, thou shall be Queen in steed of me.

Del. If you could crown me with your virtues Madam,
I should be a Queen indeed; in the mean time,
As I am Delia, I Will do this business.

Sil. Do it, and when the have don, the God of love
Reward thee with thine own desires for this.

Del. Madam withdraw, I hear your keepers coming.


SCENA 2.
Cleander, Eubulus. SIr you have put a bridle on my passions,
And given my soul the liberty it wished:
I now entreat your pardon, for beginning
A thing of so great consequence without
Leave and advice from you.
Eu. It Is well Cleander,
It will behove you then to be reserved,
And lock this secret up: for it is no jesting
With Kings that may command our lives and fortunes:
You now perceive her whom we call the Princess,
To be your sister, and the love you bear her,
Must be a brothers freindship, not a lovers
Passionate heat; but yet she must not know,
That I her father am, and you her brother:
And trust me son, had I not seen despair
Of life in you, which this love brought you too,
I should not have revealed, what now you know.

Cle. It was a comfort Sir, I do confess,
That came in time to rescue me from death,
So great her scorn was, and my love so violent.

Eu. Now you're at peace, I hope.


Cle. I am: but if
I be too curious in asking where
The Kings son is, I shall desire your pardon:
For sure it were injustice to deprive
So great a Prince, of that which he was borne too.

Eu. You are too far inquisitive; yet because
I have engaged you in a secret of
As great importance, this I will not hide.
The King, I told you, when his wife grew near
The time of her deliverie, sent to know
Of our great Oracle, whether the child should be
Female, or Male, and what should be their fortune.

Cle. What said the Oracle? have you the answer?


Eu. It only was imparted unto me,
And this it is which I have never shown
To any but the Queen: here take and read it.
If ere thy issue male thou live to see,
The child thou think is thine, thine shall not be,
His life shall be obscure: twice shall thy hate
Doom him to death. Yet shall he escape that Fate:
And thou shall live to see that not long after,
Thy only son shall wed thy only daughter.
This Oracle is full of mystery.

Eu. It is; and yet the King would needs interpret
That should it prove a man-child, it was a Bastard:
And being loath that one not of his blood
(As he conceived by this) should be his heir,
Told me in private, that if it were Male,
He would not have it live, yet fearing most
To publish his dishonor, and his wives,
He charged me not reveal it unto any,
But take the child, and see it made away,
And make the world believe it was still borne.

Cle. And did you so?


Eu. No, for indeed I durst not
For any thing, become a murderer.

Cle. How did you then?


Eu. I went unto the Queen,
Showed her the state she was in, and besought her
To be as careful of me, as I was
Of her, and we would work a better end
Then she expected, so we both agreed;
That if the Child she then did labor with,
Proved to be Male, I should with care conceal
The birth of it, and put a female child
Instead of it, which I was to look out.
It fortuned that your Mother then was ready
To be delivered of your sister, and
Time and good fortune did conspire to save
The Kings child, and to make my daughter Princess.

Cle. But what did then become of the young Prince?


Eu. The Queen protesting to me, that it was
The Kings own Child, conjured me to preserve it,
Which as mine own I could not; for already
Many took notice that my child was female:
And therefore I was feign to publish her
As dead, and buried an empty coffin.
I rode forth with the child a full nights journey,
With purpose to deliver it to some
Plain honest man, that would be careful of it,
And not inquisitive to know whose child
It was, but give it breeding as his own:
When being frighted with the noise of Arms
Of some outlawed thieves, that did infest
The place, I made all haste I could to escape 'em,
Considering my charge; for that I knew
If I were taken, though they spared my life,
The charge I had, must needs betray me to
The King, and then I could not hope for mercy:
I laid it down there covered closely over,
A circle 'bout his neck, wherein was writ,
Archigenes Son of Euarchus and Eudora, In characters known only to my
self,
And to the King; in which I used to cloth
Secret dispatches, when I writ to him
From foreign States, and within the Circle
I engraved the Kings less Seal, which then I kept.
Some Gold besides, and Jewels there I left,
That whosoever should find him, might with that
Defray the charge of his education;
However, next day I purposed to return
With speed, and carry it to some abode.

Cle. But did the Queen know this?


Eu. She did not,
Till my return next day: then when I told her,
The child was thence removed where I had left him,

Cle. Belike those thieves had carried him away.


Eu. It Is probable.


Cle. How could the Queen take this
So sad a story?

Eu. With such impatience,
That being weak before, she shortly di'd.

Cle. But yet sir, with your favor might you not
Have made inquiry after him?

Eu. I durst not,
For fear of being discovered; on your life
Take heed how you reveal this.

Cle. I am charmed.


Eu. Then let us watch my daughter, for I fear
The flight she made was for some other end,
Then for retirement which she does pretend.

Cle. Henceforth I shall obey her as my Princess,
And love her as my sister, not my Mistress.

Eu. You shall do well: Come, let us to the King.


SCENA 3.
Hylas, Mirtillus, Chorus of Shepherds and Shepheardesses, representing Paris,
Oenone, Venus, and the Graces. IT was my dream, and I will send it to her;
Though I my self by her too cruel sentence,
Must never see her face.
Mi. What paper's that?
Love-verses, as I live; what is here, a Dream?
Nay, I will read 'em, therefore stand aside.
Mirtillus reads. Sleep, thou be calmer of a troubled sprite,
Which leadst my fancy to that sweet delight,
Wherein my soul found rest, when thou did show
Her shadow mine, whose substance is not so:
Wrappe up mine eyes in an eternal night.
For since my day springs only from that light
Which she denies me; I account the best
Part of my life is that which gives me rest.
And thou more hard to be entreated, then
Sleep to the heated eyes of frantic men;
Thou that can make my joys essential,
Which are but shadows now, be liberal,
And out-doe sleep, let me not dream in vain,
Unless thou mean I never shall sleep again.
Alas poor fool! will she not let thee sleep?

Hy. I knew I should be mocked, but I Will divert him;
What are these thou have brought along with thee?

Mi. The Masquers, Hylas, these are they must trip it
Before the King: do like their properties?

Hy. What Paris, and Oenone, the old story?


Mi. But newly made, and fashioned to my purpose;
Brought hither to make good my own positions
Against the company of puling lovers;
Which if I do not, and with good effect,
Let me be one my self; and that is a torture
Worse then Apollo laid upon the Satyr,
When the rude villain durst contend with him:
Look this way Hylas, see Oenone here,
The fairest Nymph that ever Ida blessed,
Court her departing shepherd, who is now
Turning his love unto a fairer object;
And for his judgment in variety
See how the seaborne Goddess, and the Graces
Present their darling Helena to him.
Be happy in thy choice, and draw a war
On thee, and thine, rather then set thy heart
Upon a stale delight: Do, let her weep,
And say thou art inconstant. Be so still;
The Queen of love commands it: you that are
The old companions of your Paris here,
Move in a well paced measure, that may show
The Goddess, how you are content for her
Fair sake to leave the honor of your woods:
But first let her, and all the Graces sing
The Invitation to your offering.

Venus, and the Graces sing. COme lovely boy unto my Court,
And leave these uncouth woods, and all
That feed thy fancy with loves gall,
But keep away the honey, and the sport.
Cho. Come unto me,
And with variety
Thou shall be fed, which Nature loves, and I.
2.
There is no Music in a voice,
That is but one, and still the same.
Inconstancy is but a name,
To fright poor lovers from a better choice.
Cho. Come then to me, etc.
3
Orpheus, that on Euridice
Spent all his love, on others scorn,
Now on the banks of Heber torn,
Finds the reward of foolish constancy.
Cho. Come then to me, etc.
4
And sigh no more for one love lost,
I have a thousand Cupids here,
Shall recompense with better cheer
Thy misspent labors, and thy bitter cost.
Cho. Come then to me, etc.

The Dance ended. Enter a Messenger. Nun. Shepherds, if you have any pity,
come,
And see a woeful spectacle.

Mi. What is it
That can be worth the breaking of our sports?

Nun. The gentle Nymph Nerina.


Hy. What of her?


Nun. The last of her I think, she lies a dying,
And calls to speak with you.

Hy. Curse of your follies;
Do I live here whilst she is dying there?

Mi. But shepherd, what disease is it that so soon
Could spend his force upon her? she was well
This morning, when she made poor Hylas sick.

Mun. I know not, I am sent unto the well
Of Aesculapius to fetch some water
For her recovery. I must be gone.

Mi. Shepherds here let us end. I think we are
Perfect in all the rest: This night the King
Must see it, resolve on that.

Cho. We are all ready.


Mi. Then lets away, and see what will betide
This gentle Nymph Nerina.

Cho. We Will go with you.


SCENA. 4.
Charinus, Nerina, Dorinda, Hylas, Mirtillus, Nuntius. HOld up thy head good
child, see he is come;
Bring me the water quickly, whilst there is
Some life in her: now chafe her good Dorinda.
Ne. All is in vain, I cannot live; dear father
Farewell: what shepheard's that lies on the ground?
Is it not Hylas?

Do. Yes, it is he, Nerina.


Ne. Alas poor shepherd, it is my greatest grief,
That I have grieved him, I would beg life
For nothing but to make him satisfaction.

Mi. Hylas, what on the ground? look up and speak
Alas, he is dead.

Ne. It cannot be: good father
Let me go to him, and but touch his ear,
It may be that my voice may have more virtue.

Cha. Do what thou will sweet heart: see my poor child
How charitable she is, being half dead
Her self, she pities others.

Ni. Mark her finenesse,
Now at the brimm of death: she kisses him:
And took this way to mock her simple father;
O fine invention! sure a woman's wit,
Does never fail her.

Ne. Hylas, Hylas, speak,
Nerina calls thee; speak to thy Nerina.

Mi. What cannot love do? It revives the dead,
He Is come to himself again.

Hy. What God is it,
That has the power to return my soul
From the Elysian fields?

Mi. It is no God,
A Goddess rather, Hylas. It Is Nerina,
Look where she is.

Hy. Ah then I do not wonder
I cannot die, when my best soul comes to me:
Shall we live ever thus?

Ne. How feign I would
Forthy sake, Hylas, but it cannot be:
I feel a heavy sleep sit on my head,
And my strength fails me, help me sweet Dorinda,
Farewell for ever: oh I die, I die.

Hy. And must I then be called to life again,
To see my life expire before my face?
You Fates, if you will take a ransom for her,
Then take my life: but you are sure of that
You Will say already: for in her one death
Two lives are forfeit: Nerina, gentle Nymph,
The cause why now I live, open these eyes
Once more, and I shall flourish like those plants
The sun gives life to: else I fall, and wither,
Leaving behind naught but a worthless stem:
Speak to thy Hylas, sweet Nerina, speak.

Cha. Ay me! my daughter, had thou lived, perhaps,
I might have seen thee married to Daphnis,
Now we must see thee buried: Ay me!

Ne. Hylas.


Hy. She lives, give me some more of that,
That water there, see now she comes again:
O gentle destinies, but spare this thread,
And cut a thousand courser, speak Nerina,
Give me some comfort, give thy father some,
Or else behold three lives fall in thy death.

Ne. You Fates, that keep the account of all our days,
Add but one minute to my life, that I
May quit my soul of those two heavy burdens
Which now oppress it: Dry your eyes good father,
Remember that the Gods do send us nothing
But for our good; and if my journey be
Shorter then yours, the less will be my trouble:
Will you forgive me father, that I have not
Paid so much duty to you; as I owed you:
Take my good will, I pray, instead of it.

Cha. See her good Nature: I child, it is enough,
Thou always were obedient.

Ne. Shall I dare
To speak my thoughts, and so discharge my soul
Of one load yet?

Cha. I, do my child, speak freely.


Ne. I Have heard you say, that no sin was so heavy
As is ingratitude.

Cha. It Is true, Nerina,
How she remembers what her father said!

Ne. Then be not angry, if I now must tell you,
That this poor shepherd, whose swollen eyes you see
Covered with tears, for many years now past
Has courted me: but still with such a love,
So full of truth and gentle services,
That should I not requite him with my love,
I should be guilty of ingratitude:
Therefore before I die, spray give leave
That he may have my dying heart, which living,
I still debarred him of. Hylas, thy hand.
O stay a little death: here, take thou mine,
And since I cannot live the wife of Hylas,
Yet let me die so: Sir, are you content?

Cha. I am, with any thing that pleases thee.


Ne. Tell me, are you so Hylas?


Hy. O my love,
Ask me if I would live amongst the Gods,
But ask not this: Sir, have we your consent?

Cha. You have, it is in vain now to deny it:
You see, Dorinda, what her vow's come to.

Ne. Then let me die, take me into thy Arms,
Sweet love, you will see my coffin strewn with flowers,
And you Dorinda, will you make a garland?
I die a virgin, though I die his wife.

Do. Alas, she is gone.


Hy. She Is dead, and do I live?


Cha. Look to the shepherd there: oh my Nerina!


Do. Vex not her soul, I pray, with often calling,
You see she is dead.

Cha. Then there is no hope left:
Pray help us shepherds now to bear her hence;
You Will come I hope to see her in her grave.

ACT. 4.
SCENA 1.
Thyrsis, Delia. HEre I am come unto a place, where grief
They say has no abode. In Princes Courts,
I Have heard there is no room for loves laments:
For either they enjoy, or else forget,
Thrice happy men, to whom love gives such leave:
It may be that this place, or people may
Work so with me, and melt this frozen heart:
Ah fool, that can believe the change of place,
Or air, can change thy mind; the love thou bearst,
Is woven so within thy thoughts, that as
Out of this piece thy Sylvia wrought for thee,
Thou can not take her name forth, but withal
Thou must deface the whole: so Thyrsis think
The wind that here may rise, or heat, or rain
Thou may avoid, thy love will still remain,
And when thou die, then may it die with thee;
Till then resolve to endure thy misery.
Del. This is the garden, which I saw him go to,
And that is he, for all the marks she gave me
To know him by, he bears.

Thy. A heaviness
Weighs down my head, and would invite me to
Repose my self; I Will take the offer, here
I Will rest awhile, for I have need of it.

Del. How if I be deceived, and this should prove
Another man: what then? I can excuse it;
He Is laid already, and I fear, asleep,
I Will stay until he wake, but then suppose
That any body come, and take me here,
What will they think of me? Best wake him: shepherd:
It is a hansome youth, see what a grace
Shows it self in his feature, such a face
Might take the heart of any Lady living,
I, though she were a Princess: shepherd: what
Not yet? his sleeps are sound.

Thy. Ah Sylvia,
Preserve thy life, oh let me die; Alas
I do but dream; me thought I saw my self
Condemned to die, and Sylvia to save me,
Offered her self, and would needs die for me:
'Twas a sweet shadow, let me court this dream.

Del. He must not sleep again: shepherd look up.


Thy. Who envies me this small repose, indeed
I do not often sleep; ha, who are you?

Del. Sent to thee, from thy Sylvia, shepherd rise
And follow me.

Thy. Do I dream still? what are you?
Came you from heaven where my Sylvia is,
And must I thither? whosoever ere you are,
An Angel, or a feind, in such a name
You come, as I Am conjurd to follow you:
But I must die first: Here is to be with thee.

Del. Stay, hold thy hand, I live, thy Sylvia lives
To make thee happy, if thou will go to her.

Thy. You're habited like those I Have seen at Court,
And courtisie they say is ever there,
Yet mingled with deceit: if you do mean
To Abuse me for your sport, this way will prove
Too sad to raise mirth out of. There Is no ill
That I have done to you, or any else,
Unless my constancy be here a sin.

Del. His griefs have made him wild, I have no time
Left me to use persuasions, or to make
This truth apparent to you; on my word
You shall be safe, and if you dare believe me,
I Will bring you where your love is; follow me.

Thy. Why should I doubt, or fear to go with her?
Ill does he call for physic, whom the Law
Has doomed to die: There Is no condition
Can prove worse to me then my present one.
Pray lead me where you please, I Am sure of this,
To one that is desperate, no way's amiss.

SCENA 2.
Euarchus, Eubulus, Cleander, Attendants. Ev. ALl leave the room. Eubulus,
I Am resolved
To hold an easier hand over my daughter
Then I was wont: Therefore I sent Cleander
To bring her to my presence, though she have
Wronged her great birth and breeding by her follies,
Yet I consider that she is my daughter,
And this restraint cannot but harden her
In her fond resolutions: have you sought
By all the means you can to sift the cause
Of her departure?

Eub. Sir, I have tried,
By all the ways that fit a subject, to
Enquire a truth of one that is his Princess.

Eu. And what have you discovered?


Eub. Nothing more
Then what my son Cleander did before.

Eu. I have heard his relation: but I wonder
How for a whole months time, she should abide
Within our confines, when so great a search,
Through all our Countries, and loud proclamations
Were made for her recovery.

Eub. It Is true.
She herein was ingenuous, and confessed,
That she foresaw what search would be made for her,
Therefore with some about her she had plotted,
To hire a bark, that might convey her hence,
In a disguise to Smyrna, where she stayed,
Till time did fit her; that with safety
She might return in habit of a Nymph,
Unto the place, where then Cleander found her:
But why she left the Court, she will not tell.

Eu. I will not force her to it: some little time
Perhaps may make discovery of that secret:
But unto thee my faithful Counselor.
(As unto one my heart has still bin open)
I will discover what my purpose is,
In sending for these shepherds to my Court.

Eub. I should believe, they' resent for to delight
Your Majesty, as they were wont.

Eu. No Eubulus,
But for a greater end; I fear my daughter,
And therefore I have sent for her to see
These sports, with purpose to observe her looks,
For I suspect she loves some shepherd there.

Eub. It cannot be: she will not stain her birth
With such ignoble love; yet I confess,
Revolving all the causes of her strange
Departure, I could fix on none but that.

Eub. Well, if she do so, I will let her forth,
Forth of my blood, and whosoere he be
Whose fortune marked him out to be the object
Of this her love, shall find Ixions Fate,
He shall embrace a shadow; by my life
They both shall die.

Eub. O my gracious Lord,
Remember she is your daughter.

Eu. I, thou still
Do plead for her, but yet am I her King
As well as father, private men respect
Their profits, and their private interests
Of kindred, but the actions of a King,
To honor, and renown must be directed: Cleander enters.
Consider that, and then thou will forget her.
Cleander, welcome, how does Calligone?
Is she not glad to come unto our presence?
Why do not answer? art thou frighted man?

Cle. I know not how to answer any thing,
Unless your Majesty will sign my pardon.

Eu. Why what is the matter, speak, and speak it freely


Cle. Then know great sovereign that when I went
As full of joy, as speed, with your glad message,
I found the Princess.

Eu. What, not dead, I hope?


Cle. Dead to her honor.


Eu. Ha!


Cle. In short my Lord,
I found her walking in the garden with
A shepherd, (more of him I cannot tell)
But she was habited in that attire
She wore, when from the woods I brought her home,
I slipped away, not being seen by them,
And if you please to go, perhaps great Sir,
You still may find them there.

Eu. How now Eubulus,
Are my presages true? shall I then sleep
With this disgrace, and let my neighbor Princes
Mock at my humble fortunes, when they hear
The daughter of Euarchus matched her self
With a base shepherd? Go Eubulus quickly,
Here take my signet, let this be your warrant
To put them both to death.

Eub. How? both my Lord?


Eu. I, both.


Eub. Your daughter too?


Eu. Why do you question me?
Have I not said they both shall die: dispatch.
Let me not see thee, till they both be dead. Exit.

Eub. What have thou done? thou rash inhumane boy?
Deprived thy father of a child, thy self
Of thine own sister, whom but now thou knewst.
Well may the King take that dear life away,
Which he did never give: I will go tell him,
I am her father: but I loose my life
If I do that, as guilty of a treason.
Go Murderer, had thou no pity in thee?

Cle. Sir I do feel so much of grief within me,
For this my act, that if my blood will serve
To save her life, I Will make no price of it:
Yet could I not imagine, that the King
Would have bin so enraged; or if he would,
I had no time to think of it before.

Eu. No time? who bid thee hasten to the ruin
Of thy poor father, and thy family?
The messages which come to do us hurt,
Are speedy: but the good come slowly on,

Cle. But Sir, remember what a straight we are in:
It will concern us, to invent some way
To save my sister, though the shepherd die;
He will deserve it for his bold attempt.

Eub. Go take thy way, whither thou will thy self,
That way is best, which leads me to my grave. Exit.

Cle. What luck is this? This is more haste then speed:
I am resolved (though my life lie at stake)
To stand the fury of the enraged King:
Who knows but he may be as sorry for
His sudden act, as I for mine. It Is here
To save her, though it cost her lover dear.

SCENA 3.
Sylvia, Thyrsis, Cleander. NAy stay a little Thyrsis, we are safe,
My wary keepers now are with the King.
Thy. Madam, for my poor self I do not fear,
But when I think on you, and how your name,
And state that is so eminent, must needs
Receive a certain scandal, and foul blot,
If we be seen together, blame me not,
Though I do fear or doubt: What cruel fate
Angry with men, that gave us hearts alike,
And fortunes so asunder; you're a Cedar,
I a poor shrub, that may look up unto you
With adoration, but never reach your height.

Syl. But Thyrsis I do love you; love and death
Do not much differ, they make all things equal:
The Monuments of Kings may show for them
What they have bin, but look upon their dust,
The color, and the weight of theirs, and beggars,
You Will find the same: and if amongst living men
Nature has printed in the face of many,
The characters of nobleness and worth,
Whose fortune envies them a worthy place,
In birth, or honor. When the greatest men
Whom she has courted, bear the marks of slaves,
Love sure will look on those, and lay aside
The Accidents of wealth and noble blood,
And in our thoughts will equal them with Kings.

Thy. It Is true divinest Lady, that the souls
Of all men are alike, of the same substance
By the same maker into all infused,
But yet the several matters which they work on,
How different they are I need not tell you:
And as these outward Organs give our souls
Or more, or less room, as they are contrived,
To show their luster; so again comes fortune,
And darkens them, to whom the Gods have given
A soul divine, and body capable
Of that divinity, and excellence:
But it is the order of the Fates, whose causes
We must not look into: But you dear Madam,
Nature, and fortune have conspired to make
The happiest alive.

Syl. Ay me most wretched!
What pleasure can there be in highest state,
Which is so crossed in love, the greatest good,
The Gods can tell how to bestow on men?

Thy. Yet some do reckon it the greatest ill,
A passion of the mind, formed in the fancy,
And bred to be the worst disease of reason.

Syl. They that think so, are such as love excludes,
Men full of age, or foul deformity.
No Thyrsis, let not us profane that deity:
Love is divine, the seed of every thing,
The cause why now we live, and all the world.

Thy. Love is divine, for if religion
Binds us to love, the Gods who never yet
Reveald themselves in any thing to us
But their bright Images, the fairest creatures,
Who are our daily objects; loving them,
We exercise religion: let us not
Be scrupulous, or fear; the Gods have care
Of us, and of our piety.

Syl. But take heed,
We cannot be too wary: many things
Oppose our wills, yet if you think it fit,
And this nights silence will so favor us,
We Will go together: if we quit this Country,
It is no matter, all the world to me
Will be Arcadia, if I may enjoy
Thy company, my love.

Thy. No Sylvia,
(Pardon me dear, if still I call you so)
Enjoy your fortunes, think how much your honor
Must suffer in this act: For me I find,
It is enough that I have ever loved you:
Now let me at the light of your bright eye,
Burn like the bird whose fires renew her nest,
I shall leave you behind me to the world,
The Phoenix of true love and constancy:
Nor is that bird more glorious in her flames,
Then I shall be in mine, though they consume me.

Syl. It must not be, for know my dearest shepherd,
I shall not tell one minute after thee;
I find my soul so linkt to thine, that death
Cannot divide us.

Thy. What then shall we do?
Shall we resolve to live thus, till we gaze
Our eyes out first, and then lose all our senses
In their succession? shall we strive to leave
Our souls breathed forth upon each others lips?
Come let us practice: this our envious Fates
Cannot deny us. Cleander enters.

Cle. What a sight were this
To meet her father? This would make him mad
Indeed, and execute his rage himself.
Madam, your father's here.

Syl. Ha Delia!
Cleander, is it thou? then I Am betrayed
The second time, but must thy fortune make thee
The instrument of my undoing still?

Cla. Shepherd, I will not honor thee so much
As to enquire thy name) thou have don that
Thou will pay dear for: And I hope thy death
Will take away the blot of this disgrace
Thou Have laid upon the Princess.

Thy. If you do this,
You Will make me happy, it was this I looked for,
My trivial acts of life, this of my death
Will recompense with glory; I shall die
To save my Princess, and what is more, to save
The life of her life, her unspotted honor.
Blessed Lady, though you are as innocent
And chaste as purest Virgins, that have yet
Seen nothing in a dream to warm their blood,
Yet the malicious world, the censuring people,
That haste to cast dirt on the fairest things,
Will hardly spare you, if it once be known
That we were here together: As for me,
My life is nothing but variety
Of grief and troubles, which with constancy
I have borne yet: it is time that now I die,
Before I do accuse the Gods that have
Brought me to this, and so pull on my death
A punishment. Will you be merciful,
And end me quickly?

Cle. Shepherd, know for this
Thy resolution, which in noble bloods
I scarce have found, I willingly would grant
What thou desir'st. But something must be known
Before that time either from you, or you.

Syl. I know Cleander, it is me you aim at:
I do confess this shepherd is my love;
For his sake I did leave the Court, and thee,
Unworthy as thou art, to be his Rival.

Cle. Madam, my duty bids me speak to you,
Not as a lover now; but as you are
My Princess, and the daughter of my King.
I would not for the world have those desires
Which I had then; for sure my bolder love
Would have transgrest the limits of all duty,
And would have dared to tell you, that this shepherd
Was not a match for great Arcadias heir,
Nor yet one fit for my Competitor.
It Is not his outward feature, (which how fair
It is I do not question) that can make him
Noble, or wise: Whereas my birth, derived
From ancient Kings, and years not far unsuiting
Those of your own; to these my education
(To you well known,) perhaps might make me worthy
Of being your servant.

Syl. Can thou look on this,
This piece Cleander, and not blush to boast
Thy follies thus, seeking to take away
From his full virtue, if but this one act
Of his appear unto the world? (as know
It shall; for I Will not shame to publish him,
Though I die for it) will it not devour
Thy empty glories, and thy puffed up nothings,
And like a grave will bury all thy honors?
Do, take his life, and glory in that act,
But be thou sure, in him thou shall kill two.

Cle. What mean you, madam?


Syl. Not to live a minute,
After his death.

Gle. That all the Gods forbid.


Syl. No, they command it rather, that have made
Our souls but one: Cleander, thou were wont
To be more courteous; and I do see
Some pity in thee: if not for pitties sake,
Yet for thine own good spare this life, and take
Mine; for thou know, when I am dead, this kingdom
Thy father will inherit, or thy self.
It Is but the waiting of an old man's death,
Who cannot long outlive me: will you do it?

Thy. Sir, you are noble, I do see you are,
You loved this Lady once: by that dear love
(With me it was a conjuration
To draw my soul out, whilst I was so happy)
I do beseech you spare her noble life,
Her death will sit full heavy on your soul,
And in your height of Kingly dignities
Disturb that head, which crowns will give no rest to.
To take my life is justice.

Syl. Rather mine;
I have offended in first loving him,
And now betraying him unto his end.

Thy. Be not so cruel madam to your self
And me, to envy me a death so noble.
Sir, as you hope your love shall ever prosper,
Your great designs, your fights, (what ere they are)
As you do hope for peace in your last hour,
And that the earth may lightly cloth your ashes,
Dispatch me quickly, send me to my death.

Cle. A strange contention! Madam will you please
A little to retire: It Is your honor
That I do strive to save, as well as life:
Pray do not cross my purpose, I shall do
Something that you may thank me for.

Syl. Cleander,
Save but the shepherd, and I Will crown thy merit.

Cle. Will you be pleased to enter here?


Syl. But swear
That thou will save him.

Cle. I shall do my best,
I dare not swear, for it is not in my power
To do what you command.

Syl. But will you swear
To let me know of it before he die?

Cle. I will by heaven.


Syl. Then I take my leave.
And Thyrsis be thou sure, what ever Fate
Attends thy life, the same does govern mine:
One kiss I must not be denied.

Cle. Fie Madam,
How low is this in you?

Syl. Then thus we part,
To meet again, I hope.

Thy. Down stubborn heart,
Will thou not break yet? In my death I find
Nothing that is terrible, but this Farewell
Presents my soul with all the pains of hell.

SCENA 4.
Mirtillus, Chorus of shepherds. 1 shep. I Am sorry that this business went not
forward.


2 shep. So am not I, we are rid of so much trouble.


2 shep. Yet it is strange the King should send for us,
And when we were come, command us to return.

Mi. No, it is not strange, it was his will to do so:
But if you have an itch of dancing, friends,
Next holy day we will have it amongst our selves,
And every man shall dance with his own sweetheart:
What say you shepherds, will it not be as well?

1 shep. It will be very fine. But where is Thyrsis?


2. shep. I, where is he! you went along with him,
Where did you leave him?

Mi. Walking in a garden,
Where when I came to call him, he was gone.

2 shep. It seems he cares not for our company.


Mi. Neither for yours nor any man's besides.


1 shep. He is much altered, since his love was lost;
Methinks he is nothing like the man he was.

Mi. Well then beware my friends how you engage
Your selves in love: He is a fair example,
And Hylas too, he is drooping for his mistress;
Daphnis is mad, they say; if you have a mind
To die, or to run mad, then be in love.

2 shep. See where he comes, in what a fume he is.


Mi. I do not like his fumes: pray let us away.


SCENA 5.
Daphnis, to him Dorinda. HE will not now be found the Traitor: but
Where e're he be, nor heaven, nor hell shall save him
From my revenge. To take away the life
Of that sweet innocent, without whose sight
He knew I could not live, and to do this
Under the name of freindship: O you Gods,
What age can parallel so great a mischeife?
This is his Magic glass, which had the virtue
To make her mine, but sent her to the Gods.
Blessed soul, I will revenge thy death, and then
I Will follow thee my self.
Do. Daphnis, my love,
Whither so fast?

Da. Now love deliver me;
And must you come to trouble me? Be gone;
I cannot stay to hear thy tedious follies.

Do. Were all your vows then made but to abuse me?
Are there not pains to punish perjured men?
And will they not ore'take you?

Da. Alas poor fool,
The Gods do laugh at such slight perjuries
As come from lovers.

Do. Yet it was no conquest
To deceive one that would be credulous,
A simple maid that loved you.

Da. Then I see.
There is no end of women's reasoning;
Or else this might suffice thee, that I cannot
No nor I will not love thee.

Do. Never?


Da. Never.


Do. Go cruel man, and if the God of love
Will hear my prayers, thou in thy love shall thrive,
As I in mine: that when thou art forlorn,
Thou may remember her thou now do scorn.

ACT. 5.
SCENA 1.
Hylas. IT was the cruel practice of my Fate,
That lifted me unto the height of bliss,
To make my fall the greater: for no sooner
Did I enjoy the love of my Nerina,
But in a moment she was taken from me:
A love so dearly bought with sighs and tears,
So many years spent in the gaining her,
And lost in one poor minute: It is better
Always to live a miserable life,
Then once to have bin happy: she is dead,
And I alive that cannot live without her:
It Is fit that I die too; but by what means?
By violence? No, that the Gods forbid.
A lingering grief, I need not fear, will kill me,
When every day I shall repair, as now,
Unto her tomb, and consecrate my tears,
And tearing sighs unto her blessed Ghost,
Some pitying God, when I Am disolv'd away
Upon her ashes, will congeale those tears,
That they may cloth her dust: whilst some kind shepherd
Passing this way does write this on her grave.
See here Nerina, that from Hylas eyes
Fed her fair flame, now in their dew she lies.
Thus I will have it, so the words shall run.
SCENA 2.
Daphnis, Alcon, Nerina: to them Hylas, Montanus, Carinus, Mirtillus. IT shall
not serve thy turn, malicious shepherd,
Though thou have taken my love away by tricks,
Yet all thy cunning, and thy practices
Shall not secure thee from my revenge.
Al. Are these the thanks I have for that rich jewel
Which I bestowd on thee, ungrateful man?

Da. Yes, for a poysond glass, a precious jewel.


Al. I do confess 'twas poysond.


Da. Do you so?
And to do me a courtesy, you killed her.

Al. Yet hear me, she is not dead; and if she be,
^^e pay my life for hers.

Da. Be sure thou shall:
But can thou hope for such a strong illusion
To mock my sense? did I not see her dead?

Al. She did appear so: what you thought was death,
^s but a lethargy: though I profess not
To draw the Moon down from the sphere she is in,
Or make the sun look bloody by my Art,
Yet am I well informd in everything
This glass is made of, and I know the effects
^t works, and can dicourse 'em.

Da. Let me hear them.


Al. Have patience, and you shall; the Glass you see
Of this rare Mirror which I gave you, is
Made of a Memphian stone, that has the power
To bring a deadly sleep on all the senses:
With it, to make the effects more strong, is mingled
The Quintessence, extracted in a Limbecke,
Of the Torpedo, which has such a quality,
That if the Fisher touch it with his hook,
A poison strait will creep through all his veins,
Till it benumme his senses: This compounded,
And made into a glassie metal, soon
Reflects upon the eyes of him that looks in it
A sleepie poison, which will stupifie
The vital parts. Yet, he that gave it me,
Taught me the Cordial water, which he used
To restore spirits and heat unto those vitalls;
And I have brought it with me for our purpose.
What have I wronged you now? or is my present
Worthy the thanks you give me?

Da. Yet you were
Too blame, that you would not tell me this before
I gave it her.

Al. In that I showed my love;
For I did fear your resolution,
Though I were certain of recovering her.

Da. And what must now be done?


Al. Here, where you found me,
(...) saw her laid, and buried in the clothes
^^e wont to wear, her father so would have it:
(...) waited on the funeral, with purpose
^o see the stone laid hollow on her grave,
^or fear of hurting her.

Da. It was well don.


Al. Here I Will apply my medicine; you shall see
Whether I lie or no.

Da. Let Us lose no time.
(...) long to see my love alive again.

Al. Then help to lift this stone; see where she lies,
^he same Nerina?

Da. She is dead, I see.


Al. Love is still full of fears: give me the water.


Da. Here, but take heed it do not spoil her face.


Al. If she be dead, you need not fear the change
Of any color; what a child is love?

Da. The Gods, I see, will not let beauty die:
^he breathes, she stirs, her eyes begin to open
As after sleep. O miracle!

Al. How now?
^s she alive? will you believe your sense?
Now I have put her in your hands, be sure
You do not let her go, and lose no time.
If you give credit to her words, you're lost.
What cannot women's words and flatteries
Effect with simple lovers? think on that,
Be confident: I Will leave you to your Fate.

Ne. You Gods where am I now? what place is this?
What light is this I see? are the same things
Seen in this new world, as they are in the other?
Or in the grave do men see waters, trees,
As I do now, and all things as I lived?
But sure I live still: if I do, why then
Was I here buried amongst these flowers?
Sure I am dead; but yet I walk and speak,
And I have heard that those who once are dead,
Can never use their voice, or action:
But who is this I see here? Daphnis, ha!
Are you dead too, as well as I?

Da. No sweet,
I live to be the servant of Nerina.

Ne. I, so said Hylas, whilst I lived with him.


Da. She thinks of Hylas still, what shall I do?


Ne. But tell me Daphnis, in what place am I?


Da. In Daphnis heart you live, and ever did.


Ne. And so said Hylas, when we lived together.


Da. O Gods again? Nerina think not on him,
You must love me.

Ne. Must they in this new world,
As they have changed their lives, so change their loves,
I never shall do that.

Da. You are deceived.
You are not dead.

Ne. Not dead? how came I hither then?


Da. By my device to keep me company.


Ne. But will you not declare, how I came hither?


Da. Ask me not that, but go along with me.


Ne. Stay shepherd, whither would you have me go?


Da. Where love and silence shall befriend us best.


Ne. But tell me Daphnis, was not I once dead?


Da. You were, but I your servant changed that death unto a sleep.


Ne. I know not what you mean,
Can you change death into a sleep?

Da. I can,
And did for love of you.

Ne. This is a riddle,
Pray let me know what you do mean by it.

Da. Come with me, and you shall.


Ne. Nay, tell me first.


Da. Then know fair shepherdess, that when I saw
My love, my services, my gifts, my vows,
Did all return to me without your love,
I had recourse unto this Artifice,
A pleasent one of loves Invention,
Which you may well remember.

Ne. What was that?


Da. I did present you with a looking glass.


Ne. You did, but what of that?


Da. Nothing at all.
Pray go this way with me.

Ne. But tell me first.


Da. That cast you into this deep lethargy:
Such was the Magic of it.

Ne. To what purpose
Did you do this?

Da. To make you mine.


Ne. Yours, Daphnis?
How could you hope that without my consent?

Da. My services I thought would merit it,
Besides the world not dreaming but you were
Dead, and here buried, we two might live
Together without being known to any.

Ne. But could you practice tricks on those you love?
Now you are paid with your own Artifice:
For know, there is none that can dispose of me
But Hylas, who has long preserved my heart,
And now my father, (whom I did resolve
For ever to obey) has made him mine,
By giving his consent, which had not bin
But for this trick of yours.

Da. Why then it seems
You do not love me.

Ne. Love you? know I had
Rather embrace my death again, then thee.

Da. Then it is no time to dally, come along,
Or I will force you.

Ne. Help me shepherds, help.


Da. Fool, stop your mouth, no humane help shall save thee


Enter Hylas. Hy. This is the place where I am come to pay
My tears first sacrifice, upon this tomb
That glories in the spoils of all my wealth.

Ne. Hylas, come help me, see thou not that Daphnis
Will ravish me?

Hy. Ha, what do I hear?
The voice of my Nerina? so she spoke
When she did live; but now, alas, she is dead:
Some Devil mockes me with a vision,
And voice unto it.

Ne. Will you see me ravished
Before your face? O Hylas! oh my Love!

Hy. It Is she, it is no vision* hold Ravisher,
My love thou can not take without my life.

Enter Mirtillus, Montanus, Charinus. Mi. What noise is this?


Mo. Some shreike much like a woman's.


Ne. Oh help my love, Mirtillus.


Mi. Shepherd, hold,
Let go this Nymph.

Da. Or death, or victory
Shall crown my enterprise.

Cha. Who makes this outcry?


Mi. Sir, I shall cool you, if you be so hot.


Cha. My daughter here? was she not buried?
Away foul spirit, away; let us part these shepherds.

Ne. O father, do you think that I am dead,
I am alive, as you are; touch me, see.

Cha. She is alive indeed: how came thou hither?


Ne. Daphnis, whom you would have to be my husband,
Brought me to this supposed death and grave.

Cha. By what strange means, Nerina?


Ne. By the glass
You bid me I should take: he has confessed
To me that it was poisoned.

Cha. Can it be?
Can Daphnis do this? he had little reason.

Da. She was a fool to cry, I should have pleased her
Ere this perhaps.

Cha. Here Hylas, take my daughter,
For she is thine: you Daphnis, I did further
In all I could, till you would find a trick
To put your self beside her.

Ne. I forgive him:
For though it was ill meant, yet did it sort
By accident unto my good.

Mo. But will
Our Laws permit a Ravisher to live?

Hy. No, no Montanus: let him live, and envy
Our present happiness.

Da. Cover, you Gods,
The world in public ruin, or else show me
A way to hide my shame.

Mo. What will he do?


Mi. He will go hang himself: what plots he had
To fool himself with!

Mo. They that practice tricks
Find them as jades, that throw 'em first, then kick 'em
As his has don.

Cha. Come shepherds, lets away,
And solemnize these nuptials.

Mi. Stay Montanus,
Did the King send for you?

Mo. He did.


Mi. And how?


Mo. The message came from Thyrsis.


Ni. I Will go with you:
It Is strange the King should send for you: pray heaven
Thyrsis have done no mischief there, he is hansome,
Of a good grace, and moving eloquence:
Perhaps some Lady may have taken him
Up for her self, and he, I Will lay a wager,
Will be so squeamish, that if Sylvia
Come in his mind, he never will do her reason,
And then her plot will be how to betray him:
Would I were in his place.

Mo. I would thou were,
So he were safe.

Mi. I would comply, never fear it;
They live a heavenly life of love in Court,
To that which we do here; a Mistress there
Will satisfy the longings of her lover,
And never trouble Hymen for the matter:
Then if they like not, they may look elsewhere,

Mo. Thou will be punished one day for thy mischief.


Mi. The mischiefe's in my tongue, I never do any.


Mo. No, I have heard that Stella was with child
By thee, and thou must father it.

Mi. Who, I?
Take me at that once, fathering of children,
And make me common father of them all:
A child's a pretty thing, and I should joy
To see one of mine own. I Will tell thee truth
Montanus, by this hand I never lay
With any woman in my life.

Mo. How then?
You' have courted all; who is it that Mirtillus
Has not professed to love?

Mi. I do confess it,
And that is all I could do; for before
I could get earnest of any ones love,
To whom I made address; even she would say,
You have another mistress, go to her,
I will not be her stale: and so by this means,
Nor this, nor that would do me any reason.

Mo. You had ill luck, it seems, 'twas not your fault.


Mi. No, for if they would believe me, I did swear
I had no other. Pray, Montanus, tell me,
For you have known the several ways of wooing,
Which is the best, and safest?

Mo. O Mirtillus,
Gray hairs have put the wilder thoughts of love
Out of my head; cold blood and frozen limbs,
Fright all those heates away, in place of which
Discretion and sobriety should come.

Mi. But I have heard, old men do sometimes love.


Mo. They dote, Mirtillus, give it the right name;
In old men's bloods Cupid does quench his flames.
But as we go, I Will tell thee, not to love
At all is best; but if you needs must love,
Love one, and seek no further, thou will find
Enough of her, if once she prove unkind.

SCENA 3.
Daphnis, Alcon. To Daphnis, Dorinda. THere is no way to avoid the shame of
this:
Each shepherds boy that sings unto his flock,
Will make me the scorned subject of his song.
Al. Had you bin sudden as I counsail'd you,
You had not faild: but you young men do never
Go through with any thing.

Do. For heavens sake,
Call not that wicked deed to my remembrance.
I do repent me, that I e're began it:
I would not for a world have ended it:
Nerina's chaste, and fair, and I a villain.
Leave me, I pray, for something tells me, you
Did first advise me to this damned act.

Al. Nay, if you prize my friendship at this rate,
I Will leave you to your penance. Exit.

Da. This old man
Is full of malice, nothing troubles him;
The ills that he has done, fly from his thoughts,
And he rejoices that he did, them queintly:
I have begun my youth, as if I meant
To have my age so punished as his is, Enter Dorinda.
Who Is this? Dorinda? I have done her wrong:
I su'de for love to her first, which obtained,
I stuck disgraces on her; let me ask
Forgiveness now, for 'twere too much to hope,
That she should love one stained with such a deed
As I have done, so foul and impious.

Do. Great love, if yet thou art not satisfied
With all the wrongs I have sustained for thee:
My blood, I hope thy anger will appease,
Which thou may glut thy self with.

Da. Gentle Nymph.


Do. I Have been too gentle, do not mock me with it:
O Daphnis, is it you? this is not well,
To mock me thus; your looks when armed with frowns,
Gave not my heart so deep a wound as this.

Da. I mean no scorn, I come to ask your pardon
For what I Have done already, not to heap
More sins upon my head.

Do. It Is very strange.


Da. But true Dorinda, will you spit upon me?
Take your revenge, for I have well deserved it.

Do. But is this serious Daphnis? oh take heed,
Crack not my heart with such a load of grief
And scorn, so pressed as this is; if you do,
The Gods will punish it: for though they have
Neglected me thus long, they will revenge
Such injuries as these.

Da. My many ills
Discredit my repentance: if my words
Can find no faith with you, believe my tears,
Indeed they are not feigned.

Do. Even so you looked
When first you stole my heart: but I forgive you,
What ere become of me; I still must love you.

Da. Forgive me first, and then I will begin
By my endeavors and true services
To deserve something of you, if not love.

Do. There is not that hard heartedness in man
Which I did think, for he repents I see:
O Daphnis, if thou mean not this as scorn,
Take me into thine arms, and I will be
Thy slave.

Da. O say not so, let me
Rather be thine; it will be pride in me
To be ambitious of it.

Do. Oh my heart!
What sudden joy thou strik'st into it now!
But yet methinkes I fear thou do not love me.

Da. Why should you fear? by Pan you are to me
What ere you can imagine; equal, above
All that I ere thought fair; and if you be
Content to hide my faults, and take me to
Your nuptial bed, (which yet I dare not hope)
But if you will, when ere that day shall come,
Th'embraces of my love and me, shall be
Such as the Cyprian boy from our abundance,
Shall take his fires to kindle other hearts,
Yet leave with us a flame, which we will cherish,
And keep alive unto eternity.

Do. Women are ever credulous most then,
When knowledge of the truth would but afflict them:
I dare not now distrust you, though I knew,
What you have said, were false, it has a semblance
Of such a pleasing truth: Give me thy hand,
And take thou mine; whilst we walk thus intwin'd
I shall think Daphnis never was unkind.

SCENA 4.
Eubulus, Cleander: to them Thyrsis, Sylvia. WHat, are they dead? Is the Kings
will obeyed?
Cle. No Sir, they live, and Hymen in his bands
Has tied them both; the happiest knot that ere
Knit two such equal hearts, and loves together:
Oh I am ravished with the news, my joy
Is greater now, then if sh'had been the daughter
Unto our King, and I had married her.

Eu. I am amazed; pray Jove thou be not mad.


Cle. Somewhat exalted, Sir, beyond my my self,
But yet not mad: Go, Sir, unto the King,
Tell him, Cleander lives to make him happy.

Eu. Sure thou will come unto thy self anon,
Prithee bethink thee.

Cle. Yes Sir, I do think,
And know that I have news to make him live,
And you an age yet longer.

Eu. This is strange.


Cle. It Is true.


Eu. But what is true?


Cle. It Is true, my Sister
Shall be a Queen.

Eu. If she do live, I think
She will; but yet you know we were commanded
To cut that life off.

Cle. But your hasty son,
That came so speedy with a fatal message,
Was not so forward now; they both do live,
And both are married.

Eu. Jupiter forbid.


Cle. The Fates command it, it is their proper work*
The Shepherd is a Prince, your Prince, and mine,
And married to my Sister,

Eu. Ha! what is that?
Prithee digest thy troubled thoughts, and tell me
What Prince is this thou mean?

Cle. Archigenes.


Eu. Thou dream'st, it cannot be.


Cle. No, then come forth
You royal pair, and testify your selves. Enter Thyrsis and Sylvia.

Syl. Father, your blessing.


Eu. Ha!


Cle. Nay, I Have told all.
She knows she is your daughter: look Sir here;
Here we must place our reverence.

Eu. Who Is this?


Cle. Not yet? then look upon this Circle, that
You know for certain, though you know not him.

Eu. It Is it, it is the same: Archigenes
Son of Euarchus and Eudora:
This is my character, and this my seal.

Thy. Sir, I have heard that by your piety,
My infant life was saved: now by the goodness
Derived from you, unto your son, I have
Not only found my life, but my content,
The sum of all my hopes, this Lady here,
Without whose love my life had bin a torment.

Syl. And I the happiest maid that ever was
Conducted by the power of simple love,
Have found in place of him I thought a shepherd,
A Princely lover.

Eu. Rise Calligone:
The Gods are just I see, that favoring
My innocence, have brought this match about.
But say Cleander, what Fate guided thee
To this discovery?

Cle. Sir, should I tell you,
How many ways I cast to save my sister
After the fatal message which I brought,
I should be tedious, and keep you from
What you do long to hear: In short I soon
Resolved to make away this royal shepherd.
And knowing that in this affair, to keep it
Secret, dispatch was needful, I commanded
A servant, of whose faith and courage I
Was well assured, to kill him in my presence.

Eu. It Is strange, thou should be present at a murder.


Cle. 'Twas a necessity was laid upon me,
Because I would be sure to see him dead,
I bad him choose his death, when manfully
He said, he cared not how, so he might die.
I knew to strangle him, was the readiest way,
Which death himself was ready to embrace:
This his so noble resolution,
Did stand me from mine; my servants hands
Trembled for fear,
Presaging what a sin they were to act:
He bad him be assured he would not start,
And often called him to dispatch him quickly.

Syl. What man could have a heart for such a deed,
And see his face.

Cle. The Prince, before he came
To put the fatal twist about his neck,
Besought me, as I ever hoped for peace,
I should preserve the Princess: this I promised,
And whatsoever else he would desire:
He answered, nothing now, but hasty death,
Then stripping off his doublet, I espide
With a quick eye this golden Circle here,
When hastily I bid my servant hold,
And let him go. He ask't me why I staid,
I told him that about his neck was Sacred,
He would have rent it off, but I forbad it.

Eu. What did you then?


Cle. Sir, I did well remember
What I had heard of the Oracle and you,
Which with the computation of his years,
I found agreeing to make up a truth
Which you before assured me; then I ask't him,
Whether he would be married to the Princess
Before he died; he thought that I had mocked him,
And said, I practiced Tyranny upon him:
Then went I to my sister, and desired
The same of her; in fine, I saw them both
Join hands and hearts together, but the Prince
Thought this a dream of life, which certain death
Would wake him from, until I did assure him
Of his great State, and that his love, whom now
He thought to be the Princess, was my Sister,
All which I did refer unto your knowledge.

Eu. This day for ever let it holy be,
And you whom love has brought through deep despair,
Unto the haven of your happiness,
Enjoy each other freely. Of you brave shepherd,
(But now my Prince) I shall enquire anon
Where, and with whom you lived.

Thy. Sir, the shepherd,
whom I call father, stays without; Montanus
^s name is, by whose gentle hands, (as he
as often told me) I was rescued first
^om cold and death, since under his kind roof
^osterd, and bred as his.

Eu. Go call him in, Enter Montanus, Mirtillus.
^ou're welcome both, you may applaud your fortune
that brought you such a Shepherd: stay all here,
Whilst I go to the King. This day will add
^ore years unto his life, when he shall say,
^o day shone brighter on Arcadia. Exit.

Mon. We are both come to do our duties to you.
as being sent for, and Mirtillus with me,
^o celebrate your joys: within a while
^he Shepherds and the Nymphs will all be here.

Thy. My old companions shall be welcome all,
^s you are now; I never shall forget
^our courtesy, nor theirs.

Syl. Nor I the Nymphs
^nce my dear fellows; but you Mirtillus,
though you did scorn to love, yet could you sing
^ell, if you listed of it.

Cle. Can shepherds then
^espise that Deity which we adore?

Mi. Madam, I reverence it in you,
^he perfect'st pattern of a constant lover,
and in the honor of your Nuptials
(...) have a Song, which if your Grace will hear,
'Twill entertain the time.

Syl. Let it be sung.


Song.
Hymen, God of marriage bed,
Be thou ever honored:
Thou, whose torches purer light,
Deaths sad tapers did affright,
And instead of funeral fires,
Kindled lovers chaste desires:
May their love
Ever prove
True and constant: let not age
Know their youthful heat t'asswage.
2.
Maids prepare the Genial bed,
Then come night, and hide that red
Which her cheeks, his heart does burn:
Till the envious day return,
And the lusty bridegroom say,
I have chased her fears away,
And instead
Of virgin head,
Given her a greater good,
Perfection, and womanhood.

Thy. Thanks good Mirtillus, this indeed was proper
Unto your subject.

Mi. Your thrice happy match,
^eing but now come to my knowledge, made me
^ontract my self into a straiter room,
^hen the large subject might afford.

Cle. The King.


To these, Euarchus, Eubulus. Eu. Although I wonder, yet I do believe thee,
^y faithful Councellor.

Eub. Your Majesty
^as found me always real, but this truth
^he Oracles accomplishment will prove,
that did foretell their match.

Eu. Read it, Eubulus,
^nce more; and then call in my son and daughter.

^ub. If ere thy Issue Male thou liv'st to see,
The child thou think is thine, thine shall not be.

Eu. Calligone is not my child, proceed.


^ub. His life shall be obscure, twice shall thy hate
Doom him to death, yet shall he escape that Fate.

Eu. It Is true, that twice I did command his death,
first thinking him a bastard, then a shepherd,
^or his offense; the Gods are just: Go on.

^ub. And thou shall live to see that not long after
Thy only son shall wed thy only daughter.

Eu. This was a riddle ever till this day,
Their marriage has made it plain. Eubulus,
Call in Archigenes, and call thy daughter
The fair Calligone, that I may power
My blessings on them: And I long to see
Those characters, thou writst about his neck,
That I may call him mine.

Eub. See where they are.


Eu. Archigenes come nearer, for thou art
A stranger yet, although thou be my son:
The Character is plain, it is the same
Eubulus writ to me: you heavenly powers
Give me a heart that may be large enough
To Express my joy for these, and thanks to you.

Thy. My royal father, (for I am instructed
To call you so) If I have don amiss
In hasting to this match, I ask your pardon.

Syl. And I for daring to aspire so high
Without your leave.

Eu. Rise both, you have my blessing.
But who are these?

Thy. This is the shepherd Sir,
Who took me up first, whom till now I called
Father, and he deserved it for his care.

Eu. Eubulus, this is he, Montanus, is it not?


Eub. He is deliverd to me for the shepherd,
Of whom your Majesty may if you please
Be well informed of all those passages,
I left untold.

Eu. Some other time we will hear them.
Let him be well rewarded.

Thy. Sir, these shepherds
Are come to entertain your Majesty,
With their devices, as their custom is,
In which sometimes, until my fortune changed,
I bore apart.

Eu. Let them be feasted all,
And studdy something new to celebrate
These Nuptials, which I will have proclaimed
Throughout my kingdom: and Eubulus, see
That every thing be fitted for their honor.
Come let us to the Temple, that we may
With holy sacrifice appease the Gods,
Whose great decrees, though we did strive to hinder,
Yet are they now fulfilled. It is in vain,
To Oppose the Fates, whose laws do all constrain. Exeunt

FINIS.
The Epilogue to the KING and QVEENE.
TO you most royal pair, whose lives have brought
Virtue in fashion, and the world have taught,
That chaste innocuous sports become the stage
No less then civil manners do the age:
We dedicate this Piece, but yet with fears,
To have displeased so chaste, so tender ears;
Which, if you free us from, we will call this play
No more the Shepherds, but our Holy Day.
THYRSIS. A Pastoral Elegy in the person of Sir Kenelme Digby, on the Death
of his Noble Lady, the Lady Venetia Digby.
THe gentlest Swain that Arcady ere bred,
Who Thyrsis hight, the saddest of that name,
Close by a Rivers side his heavy head
Laid down, as he with tears would fill the same,
Regarding naught that might him pleasance give,
Since what was his delight, had left to live.
And whilst that other Shepherds of his rank,
(If any Shepherd of his rank might be)
Played on their merry Pipes upon some bank,
Making the hills resound their jollity,
He in sad plight his woeful days did spend,
Their joyous sports caring not to attend.
There as he by that silent water lay,
Regardlesse of his youth, and lusty head,
His swelling grief in vain he did assay
To vent in grievous plaints, which more it fed,
Whilst to the ruthlesse waves he did relate
The story of his loss, and heavy Fate.
You Nymphs (if any do inhabit here)
(And I have heard that Nymphs in waters dwell,)
Lend to my careful Verse a gentle ear,
Whilst I, the saddest wight that ere did tell
His own mishaps, unfold to you my case
In this your balefull place.
If to the Sea, of which you branches are,
I ever honor did, when list me change
My Shepherds staff, to seek adventures far
In the wide Ocean, where I long did range,
And brought renown home to my native soil,
The glory of my toil.
Do not mistake, nor offer to compare
Those days with these, wherein my grief exceeds
The joy, which once I had, to see my fair
Welcome me home, and gratulate my deeds,
Which to atchieve, her grace as well did move,
As did my countries love.
But now with her those graces all are gone,
Weep with me waters to make up my moan.
Gone is my Love: and why then do I see
Nature the same, as ere she was before,
Since to her making all her forces she
Wisely employed, and she could give no more?
Though she should frame the most caelestiall mould
That ere the Earth did hold,
To draw from all the heads of noble blood
The best, and to infuse it into one,
To make a mixture of all fair and good.
Rare Symmetry, and sweet proportion,
Was it to show that such a thing might be
Without eternity?
It was, and we are taught how frail the trust
Is, that we give unto mortality,
How soon she is resolved into dust,
Whom erst the world so beautiful did see.
But you were just that took her, though unkind
In leaving me behind:
Alas! why was I left thus all alone?
Weep with me waters to make up my moan.
She Is gone, and I am here; yet do I find
With some small joy the languishing decay
Of the other half, which she has left behind*
For half of me with her she bore away
Unto those fields, where she immortal is,
Heaped with heavenly bliss.
I see her fair soul in that blessed place,
Where joy for ever dwells: and now I know,
How in a dream she saw an Angels face,
And it admiring, wished she might be so:
Which the celestial powers would not deny,
So did she sleeping dye.
So did she break the bonds of heavy night,
And when she wak't, wak't to eternal day:
Where she in forms Angelicke now is dight,
And sees her maker, and shall see for aye.
O happy soul, I will not thee envy,
O let me rather fly
Unto that blessed place, where thou art gone,
Then waters, weep no more, but end your moan
I come; yet something does retard me here,
The pledges of our love thou left'st with me:
Those whom thou living did account so dear,
Who still with me preserve thy memory;
For their loved sakes yet must I longer stay,
Then will I post away.
Then to thy lasting name I have uprear'd
A Monument, which time shall never deface,
And made the world, which as yet have not heard
Of thy rare virtues, and thy honored race,
Know who thou were, and that thou wentst from hence
At Natures great expense.
Then world farewell, you I have seen enough,
And know how to despise your vanity:
Your painted glories are of baser stuff,
Made to delude those that with half eyes see:
He that is abstracted from you, stands much higher,
And greater things admire.
It Is you I leave, to go where she is gone,
Then waters weep no more, here end your moan.
This to the empty winds and waters, he
Alas, in vain, (they cared not for his tears)
Did thus unfold to ease his misery:
When lo, the Messenger of night appears;
For the fallen Sun (which warned him to be gone)
Changed to the light uncertain of the Moon.
DE TVMVLO PER ILLVStrissimum Dominum Kenelmum Digby lectissimae conjugisuae
structo, ejusque memoriae dicato EPIGRAMMA.
HAc tua chara jacet Digbeie, Venetia terra,
Quae pietate tua nobile marmor habet:
En Parios lapides, atque hac in mole repertum
Quod Phidiae potuit, Praxitelisve manus.
Aspicis ut vivunt statuae, caelataque docta
Era manu, quin ut vertice and ipsa micat:
Gloria defunctos si tangit, posse videtur
Credibile hoc illam velle cubare modo,
Quaerenti cineres respondent, cord jacebo
Conjugis, and tumulo nobiliore tegar.
Obijt 1. Maij, 1633.

