The Safeguard of Sailors, or great Rutter.

Containing the Courses, Distances, Soundings, Floods and Ebbes, with the
marks for the entering of sundry Harboroughs both of England, France, Spain,
Ireland, Flaunders, and the Soundes of Denmark, with other necessary Rules of
common Navigations.

Translated out of Dutch into English, by Robert Norman Hydrographer.

And newly corrected and augmented by E W. 1605.



Imprinted at London by E. Allde for H. Astley, 1605.

To the right Honorable his singular good Lord, Charles Howard, Earl of
Nottingham, Baron of Effingham, Lord high Admiral of England, Ireland, and the
Principality of Wales: Knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one
of his Majesty's privy Counsel, etc. R. Norman wishes increase of honor,
in perfect felicitye.
THe learned (right Honorable and my very good Lord) have always in their
account and register of moral virtues, assigned a certain prerogative of
excellency in one more then in an other; not for that they deemed the troop of
virtues (being in the^-selues simply considered) to surmount one another in
singularity, al being perfectly good, and mutually combined together, but in
respect of some general benefit and public commodity, accrewing and issuing
from some one, more then from an other. And in this respect have they dignified
and privileged Justice with this honorable title, tearming her: The
sovereign Queen and chief Lady and Mistress of all virtues, because she
not only is a virtue, in each degree perfect with the rest, but also for that
(besides her other offices, parts and effects) she is distributive, ye^lding
unto every one, that which in right is due thereunto: wherein she shows her
self publiquelye beneficial to all Countries, States and co^monweales, where
she is had in price, reverence, regard and honor, and where she i^ fostred,
vpholden, maintained and cherished.

Which ass^rt on being granted (as it cannot but be true) me thinks there is
great reason off^red and ministered to prefer Hydograph^e or Navigations before
any other art or science, not so much for that it iumpeth in equality, and
matcheth in singularity any other whatsoever, in sundry subtle devises and
ingenious inventions, with the use of many notable instruments, as Compasses,
Astrolabes, Plats, Quadrants and many other appendances incident to the same,
as chiefly for the great and pulike commodity in general, redounding (by the
use and practice thereof) to the whole body of the common wealth, and each
particular member in the same.

The first invention whereof, furthered with the artificial aid of many a
hidden, strange, and almost supernatural device since added to the same by the
studious trauailer and industrious M^chanician: he yt would thoroughly consider,
should find matter rather miraculous to wonder at, the^ to be thought
compassable with the reach of human brain^ or penetrable to the capacity of
a frail silly worldling: yea he may he^rin as it were in a mirror, behold
and see the inestimable bounty and infinite goodness of the Lord, who of an
especial love and purposed good will, which in his secret wisdo^e he had
determined for the maintenance and relief of humain society, has from above
infused this so excellent a skill and knowledge in to the minds of men, only
thereby to have his wonderful works every where known, his praises
resounded, and his holy name from one generation to an other glorified.

By this art we enjoy by participation such commodities as grow in other
Regions and have the same plentifully brought home to our doors by excha^ge and
intercourse of such wares as we (even in superfluous measure) possess within
our own country: by it we see and learn the cituation, natures, custo^^ and
dealings of other countries, by mutall traffic, bartering with them, and
entercha^geably giving and taking by excha^ge one commodity for an other,
whereby the need that one man has of an other, more clearly appears: and
thereby is societ^e the more willinglye embraced and brothe^ly, frequented. By
it many a poor commoner laboring about these commodities is relieved, and
many household from pine preserved: by it the Mar^ner is maintained, whose
service ^n al marine exploits stands the Prince in special steed. To be
short, by it is the Navy Royal furnished, the Realm fortified, and the common
wealth enriched. Is it possible therefore that there can be any so unnatural
to his country, or so injurious to himself, that without blushing face ca^
say, he is not maintained or at least not greatly furthered (if not wholye and
entirely, yet in great part and quantity) by Navigations? Truly I think
none. And if any should be so fond or vndescreet, his absurd opinon would
soon be discovered, and the in conueniences or rather mischeefes wherein we
should be so soon enwrapped, would quickly fall upon us, if God in his wrath
and justice for our unthankfulness should stay the use thereof, whereunto we are
most humbly still to beseech him in mercy to grant continuance.

These so many, so necessary, and so profit^ble uses of Navigations, aduauncing
the honor of our country, and increasing the wealth of the same, have enforced
me in discharge of some part of my duty to my native soil and Region, and
the rather because of my profession, to further the same with this small work
translated out of Duth, containing the gatherings of diverse experimented men,
necessary to be known and observed in o^r common Navigations: as Tides,
Depthes, Soundings, Mark^s and Sands, with the rising of sundry lands which
by no Chart or Plat is expressed or known, but r^steth only upon the relation
of the experimented Traveler.

All which being finished and according to my slender skill ended, I am the
bolde^ (being thereunto by duty bou^^, to present unto your honor as a pledge
or token of my thank^full heart for the manifold be^efi^s and no^le
^ncouragementes which to my great comfort I have conti^ua^ly so^n^ in your
^ordship toward me, ^ese^ching you^ ho^o^ to (...) ^rotect the same, as the
poor labors of him, who in all points of loyal duty acknowledges himself
your Honors most bounden suppliant and servant. For although the work be
entitled. A Safe-gard for Sailors, yet so small is the force of a litt^e paper
in this our dainty age, that it is not able to defend or shift for it self,
much less to be a safe-gard to others, except your honor according to your
accustomed goodness and wonted generositie, persist and still remain as a
Bul-warke both unto it, and the Marine Coats, who continuallye pray for your
Lordships daily increase of Honor in this life, and after your mortal race
here (heroically run) a place among the elect of God in the heavenly
Hierarchy.

Your Honors most humble servant Robert Norman.

To the friendly Readers, Sailers, and Mariners.
Seeing by the positive and divine law of God all men be generally bound any
way they are able, to be profitable and helpful to their Brethren, country
and common wealth, for whose sakes as much a^ for their own, they are borne
and created: how can we but judge very hardly of their meanings and
inuention^, who publish and commit to the view of the world, their travails
and labors to no other end but to reap thereby either private gain or
popular applause and commendation, as though indeed they were not thereunto by
duty bound, with their whole studdy, care, endeavor, and all the faculties of
their mind whatsoever. From which sort of Ambitious persons, as my own
conscience does clearly exempt me: so yet nevertheless, I fear that shall
hardlye escape the hard censures and critical doom of many Linxes, whose
glancing penetrancie and quick eye sight, being able (as the fable reports)
to look through a stone wall, will (no doubt) be ready enough to encounter my
honest meaning in simplicity, and be a great deal forwarder to find faults
then able to amend faults. Howsoever such severe Stoics shall daine to think
of me, my own conscience acquiteth me of al sinister pretense, and what
peremp^orie sentence soever shall be pronounced upon me, I doub^ not but the
better moitie of the Marine sort (for whose v^e this present wo^ke is
especially published) will accept in wo^th th^se my pains and travails.

Neither n^ede I to fear, (as I hope) any sinister construction at the hands
of those, which wi^h indiffe^^n^ie, will weigh my m^aning, and without
preiudicate opinions, consider my labors.

For as the work is the observations and collections of diverse and sundry
experimented Trauailers: So if they any where be found somewhat in matters of
small moment, to ia^re or a little to disagree, consider that the judgments of
sundry men be and ever have been diverse and sundry. Besides, there may some
petty faults escape in the Dutch Coppie by often imprinting. But truly as
near as I could, I have followed, yea and in many places by my own
observation bettered the original. Which travail for thy behooft,
furtherance, and safety in thy worthy and most excellent trade, I was the
willinger to enterprise, and (as thou see) accomplish because of the great
commendation, praise and approbation given thereunto by diverse skillful men,
expert in those Coasts whereunto this serves. All which I have done (Gentle
Reader) with intent profit my Countriemen, in whom I wish increase of skill in
all profitable arts and Sciences.

Robert Norman.

How to know all your Courses, marks, and dangers, from London to Barwicke.
YOu shall come down the river of Theme^ from London, till you come to the
^ast end of the Norre and there you may anchor. And because you shall know how
to anchor clear o^ it, your marks be Pritkelwell Steeple, shut in the
highwood yt stands on the North sho^e, by the water side, and so you shall
anchor clear o^ the ^ast-end of the Norre, also if you d^ bound fro the eas^end
of the Norre, to the northward, your couse lies from the said place to the
sho^w, northeast and southwest, and upon the said show, there stands a
Beacon, and to take heed of the black tail that lies on the north side of
that course, and come no near it th^n 5, or 4, fatham and take heed of the
Hens eggs yt lies on the east ^ide of that course, and come no near it then
3. or ^. fatham: and take heed, come no near the said show, then 12. or a 11.
fatham. Also your course lies between the show and the spires north
northeast, and south southwest, and so t^ke heed of the red board that lies
on the east side of that course, and ^ome no near it then 3. or ^. fatham. and
also o^ the white (...) that lies on the West side of that ^ourse, and come no
near it then 6 or 5. Fatham, and so take h^e^e of your ^ide, for it sets west
southw* up among ye sands, and so you shall have in the fair way of that
course 12. or 13. Fath: And when you come at the Spittes, look well to your
marks, for your thwart marks of the Spite is Brodwell that stands on the west
side, and bring it shut up in the wood that stands in the north end of it,
also your length marks to S. Towses steeple shut in the channel end of the
Abbey, or else the two woods the one in the other, and so you shall have on the
Spits at a low water, two fatham and a half, and at nepe tides three fathams,
at a high water four fatham, and in spring tides at a high water 5. fatham
upon the said spits, and so if ye be bound into Coome water, go your ways
up northweast, and so take you heed of ye O^se^ that lies on the northside of
the Channel, and come no near it then 4. or 3, Fathams, and also the Knole
that lies on the west side of that channel, and come no near it then 3.
fatham, and so your length marks of that channel are a high tree tha^ stands
in thetle of Marse, and bring it in the ^or^^r of the green feelde three
square like a trivet, and so when ye be shut up as far as the Ware head, go
your way north northwest or north, till ye come as high as M^rse block house
and there you may anchor, and there it foweth ^n your chang^ day, south and by
west, and north and by east: also ^f ye go from the Spits to the northwarde,
take heed to the Conflit that lies on the east side of you, and come no near
him then 6. or 5. Fath, and so run your North till you have brought the end of
Naas in the high land on this side it, and so go northeast til you come at the
Na^s, and come no near, i^ then a Fatham and a half at low water, and so you
shall have 4. Fatham at a high water, also if ye be bound from the Naas into
Harwich water, your course lies northwest or northwest and by west, and so
take heed of the Pies that lies on the west side of that course, and come no
near them then two Fatham, and so take heed of the Pole head that lies on
the ^aste side entering into Harwich water, and come no near it then 4. Fatham:
Also take heed of the Altar that lies on the west side of that channel, and
come no near it then 3. fath, and so run up along by the Beech that lies on
the east side of that channel. Also take heed of the Wars that lies on the
west side of that Channel, and so you may run up till you come before
Harwitch Town, and there you may anchor, and there it flows on your change
day, south and by east and north and by west.

Also, if ye be boun^ from the Naas with Orford Naas, your course lies
between the^ northeast and southwest, and take heed of the Platters, and of
the long land, that lies on the south side of that course, and so you may go
hard aboard of the Naas, and so run ye no farther off than nine or eight
fatham. Also your course lies between Orford and Lestoffe road, north and by
east, and south and by west, and so take heed of the Home head, as you enter
into Lestoffe south road, also your course lies between Lestoffe North rode
and Yarmouth rode, north and south. Also if you be bound south of Yarmouth
rode to the Northwarde, take heed of the Fr^nchmans sand that lies between
you and the main: and your marks of that sand are two high trees, brought in
the midst of the long house, yt stands upon the cliffes end. also your thwart
mark of it, is a low tilde house in the valey, and bring the eues of it in
the edge of that land, and so you may bear within eight or nine fatham of it,
and so you may go with Winterton Naas, and come no near the Naas then six or
seven Fatham, and so take heed of the Skirte Knock that lies thwart of
Hemeshicots, and it lies on the east side of the Channel* and come no near
it then 7. or 8. fatham: Also your course lies between Winterton Naas and
Cromer North and by west, and south and by east, als^ your course lies
between Orford Naas and Cromer a sea board of all the sands, north northeast,
and south southwest, and take heed of the Blunchbarrel that lies in the fair
way of that course: also take heed of the Limmer and Ore, that lies east
southeast between Winterton Naas and Cromer, and lies along the land to the
water: also your course lies between the Daggar and shield, and Burnam flats
that lies in the inner part of the well, west south west, and East northeast:
also your course lies between the Daggar and the shield and Laurenas, west
north west, and east southeast: and so take heed of the inner part of the
well banks which is the vttermoste part of Burnam flats.

And many other blind sands and dangers also if ye be bound from Laurenas
into Humber, take heed of the Bull, that lies on the west south west side of
that channel and come no nearer it then 12. or 11. Fathams, Also take heed of
the Sunk that lies on the north northeast side of that Channel and come no
nearer it then 7. or 8. Fatham, and so ye may run into Grimple rode, or to the
White both if ye please: and if ye go from the White both to Hull, run up
alon^ by the west shore, till ye come against Scutter milles, which is thwart
of Paul, and give it a little birth of the haven, for there runs a great
tide in the midst of that channel, and there is naughty anchor hold, and
there it flows on your change day, west and by south, and to the westward.

Also, if you go from Laurnas to Flamborow head, your coorse lies between
them south south east and north north west, and so take heed of the Smith sand
that lies thwart of between Burlington and Flamborow head, and if your wind
hang westerly that you cannot gat about the head, take heed how you anchor in
Flamborow rode, for there is foul ground and your marks that you have to
anchor in clear ground is the Windmill that stands on the lower part of
Flamborough head, and bring the said Windmill in the midst of the great ditch,
and so you shall anchor in clear ground, also your course lies between the
Dagger and Shield, and Flamborow head Northeast and Southeast, also if ye be
bound about Flamborow head, look that the tide set you not into the Sea, for
it is but ill haling of the coast again, also your course lies between
Flamborow head, and Scarborowe, Northwest and Southeast, and so take heed of
Fillibridge that lies in the way, and give a fair birth of the shore. Also
your course lies between Flamborowe head and Huntley Foot, Northwest and
Southeast, and take heed of Whitbye Rock, that lies in the fair way of that
course, and come no near it then the windows of the Abbey clear of the
land: and also if ye be put off with Whitbie haven take heed how you go
in, for there sta^ds upon the rocks of the S. side of ye haven a cross, and so
you may go in and leave the cross on the southside of you, and give it a
little birth of you, but your ships breadth, and so you shall go clear into
the haven, and there it flows on your change day southwest to the westward,
also your course lies between Huntley foot, and Tinmouth haven, West
northwest and east southeast, and if ye go into the haven take heed of your
Beacons, which is 2. little white houses, and the one stands upon the Cliffe,
and the other stands upon the sands beneath, and also bring them together one
above the other, and so shall ye go clear into the Haven, also if he be put
beside it by night, there is in one of the^ a light: also if your wind be
scant yt you must turn in, you may be bold to borrow of the south west side
at 2. fatham and a half at three quarters flood, and at the northeast side at
three fatham, and so it flows on your change day upon the Bar Southwest and
Northeast, also it flows on your change day at Newcastle bridge, West
southwest, and east northeast, also your course lies between Tinmouth and holy
Island, north northwest and south southeast, and so take heed of Cocket Island ye
lies in the midway of that course, and if ye be put to anchor in Scate road,
take heed, for there is foul ground, also there are marks to tell you to
anchor in clear ground, that is the draw bridge of Ba^borow in the midst of the
Castle ditch, and so you shall have good ankerholde in clear ground between
holy Island and it, if ye be bound into holy Island haven, be sure you take your
marks with you, which is holy Island church, shut in the square tower of the
Abbey, and so you shall have upon the Bar, at a low water two fathams, and so
you may be bold to borrow of Bibeile side, and if ye be put out of Scateroade
with Barwicke, between the Plow and the Goleston, your course lies north
northeast and south southwest, and if ye go to Barwicke haven, look out for
the cross that stands on the northwest side upon the rocks, and so ye may
go in on the south side of the Cross, till you come as high as Twedmouth.
Also your course lies between ye Fern Island and saint Tabs head in Scotland,
north and by west and south and by east: also your course lies between
Scarborough and Saint Tabs head, north northeast and sou: southwest, and so ye
shall go clear a seaboord of Fern Island, and when ye be past it, you may
hale in with Saint Tabs as your wind will serve you, and there it flows on
your change day south and north: so fare you well.

In Commendation of the painful Seamen.
WHo so in surging Seas, his season will consume,
And means thereof to make his only trade to live:
That man must surely know the shifting Sun and Moon,
For trying of his Tides, how they do take and give.
So must he duly seek the Eclipticke course of Sun,
How he from West to East his proper course does keep:
His labor then (God knows) as yet is but begun,
For he must watch and ward, and shake off sluggish sleep.
And have a careful eye, to hand that is at Helm,
For many one there is, that false his course will plye:
And swelling Seas likewise, the Ship may ouer-whelme,
Or set her on the shore, without the Pylots eye.
When Boreas is abroad, and blustering blasts do blow,
In season must he seek to short in loftye sail:
For that, if not in time he very well does know,
That all too late indeed, no labor will prevail.
But when the raging storms do swinge the ship on hye,
Often times (against his will) he spoones before the seas:
Else in goes all the sails, and takes her from her try,
In haste to drive or hull, till God the same appease.
Thus when he all the night, with weary toil has tried,
And sees the swelling seas has set him from his way:
Then when a little slack of calm he has espide,
With joyful heart to take the height he does assay.
His Astrolabie then he sets for the Sun,
Or Crosse-staffe for the star called the Ballastile:
And thus with help of them and declination,
How land does bear of him, he knows within a while.
Then by his Compass straight he duly sets his course,
And thus he brings the ship in safety to her Port:
Where of his hazards past he makes a great discourse,
And each man (by desert) does give him good report.
If Pylots painful toil be lifted then alofte,
For using of his Art according to his kind:
What fame is due to them that first this Art out sought,
And first instructions gave to them that were but blind?
R. N.

Finis.
A Table for the Tides.
South-hampton Quinborow Portesmouth. Redban-Aberden. Graves end. Dondy S.
Andrew^s The ag^ of the Moon London, Tinmouth, Hartilpoole, Barwit. ^^lth.
Cythe. Dumbar Falmou. South. S. by w. S.S.W. S.w.b.^ S. West s.w.b.w. w, S.W w.
by S. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M H, M H. M H. M 2 48 1 33 2 18. ^ 31 1
16 3 48 4 23 5 12 5 3 ^ 36 2 21 3 6 3 51 2 17 4 36 5 21 ^ 6 6 51 ^ 24 3 9 3 54
4 30 3 1^ 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 ^9 ^ 12 3 57 4 42 5, 27 4 19 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 ^ 0
4 45 5 30 6 15 5 20 7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15 ^ 48 5 33 5 18 7 3 6 21 7 48 8 33 9 18
10 3 ^ 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 7 2^ 8 33 9 11 10 6 10 51 ^ 24 7 9 7 54 8 3^ 8 2^ 9 24
10 9 10 54 11 39 ^ 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 9 24 10 12 10. 57 11 ^2 12 27 ^ 8 8 4 9 30
10 15 10 25 11, 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 ^ 48 9 33 10 1^ 11 ^ 11 26 11 48 12 33 1 18
2 3 ^ 36 10 ^1 11 6 11 51 12 27 12 36 1 21 2 6 ^ 51 ^0 ^4 11 9 11 54 12 39 13
28 1 24 2 ^ 2 54 3 39 ^1 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 14 29 2 12 2 56 3 42 4 27 ^2 0 12
45 1 30 1 14 15 ^0 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 North. N. by E N.N.E N e.b.n N. E. n.e.b.
E E N E n.w.bw

Foy L^n ^umber. Ueimot. ^erimo. ^limot Bristol Milford Bridge-Water. Portla^
Peter Port. The age of the Moon Orkney Poole. Orwin Deep Lux Lenoye Boleiue.
Dover. Harwich Yarmot. Callice. ^ast. E. by S. E. S. S.e.b.E S. East. S.E.b.^
S, S, E, S, by E H, M H, M H, M H. M H, M H, M H, M H, M H. M ^ 48 7 33 8 18 9
3 1 16 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 3 ^ 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 2 17 ^0 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 ^
24 9 9 9 5^ 10, 39 3 18 11 24 12 10 12 54 1 39 ^ 12 9 51 10, 42 11 27 4 19 12
12 12 57 1 42 ^ 27 ^0 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 5 20 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 ^0 4^ 11 33
12 18 1 3 6 21 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 ^1 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 7 22 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51
^2 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 8 23 3 2^ 4 9 4 54 5 39 ^ 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 9 24 4 12 ^ 57
5. 42 6 27 ^ 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 10 25 5 ^0 5 45 6 30 7, 15 ^ 48 3 32 4 18 5 3 11
26 5 48 6 33 7 18 8 3 ^ 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 12 27 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 ^ 24 5 9 5 5^
6 39 13 28 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 ^ 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 14 29 8 11 8 57 9 42 10 27 ^
0 6 4 7 3^ 8 15 15 ^0 ^ 40 9 45 10 ^0 11 1^

How to sail from Amsterdam going out to Sea.
First, When you shall Sail from Amsterdam to Thyoorte, keep you in the
middle channel. And when you are without Thyoorte, then go Northeast so long,
till you have brought Markerkerke with the low Land o^ Edam. And then keep
so, till that you have brought Amsterdam a good way open to the northwards of
the Chapel of Thyoort, and then keep your course Northeast and by east, and
East Northeast till you have brought Edam by East Merken, and then you are past
Pampus. Then go northeast toward Urke, and when you see Urke bear northeast
and by north from you, or more Northerlye, then are you in the right course.
And having observed these points, you shall find hard ground, and then again
soft ground, and a better depth, and then are you in the right Cha^nel. But if
Urke bear northeast from you, the^ are you very nigh to the north shore sand.
Then go now and then more westerlye, till you have brought the Church and the
houses in one, and then go west northwest with the Hoft, and keep the church
and the houses in one, until you have brought Memelick a little without the
land of the Uen, and keep it so, till you have brought the end of the Uen
directly over Ankenson, keeping this course and the marks in one till you
bring Grosbrocke and it together, they have two sharp steeples, and keep
Memelick open to the northwards of the Castle, as much as the breadth of the
Castle or more. These are the marks of the Channel, you shall have 4. fatham,
and in the best 5. fath. 3. foot less, and hard streamy ground.

Item, to sail from the Hoft to the Creile, you must go northwest and by
north. After as the wind and tide will serve, the marks of the Creile, is
Twiske church a little to the westward of the Corn mill, which is on the west
side of Memelicke, and Mirnes a flat steeple which lies at the south end of
Cliffe, these brought together are the marks of Creile, and the Buies lie in
four fatham, and in the best deep is five fatham, The Course from Creile to
the plat is north and by east, the marks are Pendergas flat Steeple standing
within the Land, and Buerthwisen a Uillage in the midway between Worwolt and
Panderga, (to wit) Buerthwisen, and then next Panderga, and Mirnes is the third
mark, and then by east Stauerne you shall see a sharp steeple. These are the
marks of the plat, and does lie in two fatham, and in the best deep is but
three fatham.

Item from the plat to the Tuffler, the course is North Northeast, the marks
is a small sharp steeple which stands at the Corner of Panderga, Mirnes,
Molquerum, Hemelium, and the long Buerthwisen: goeing by these marks you shall
come to the Bay, which lies in two fatham at a low water, and between the
plat and Tuffler does the shauld of the Ulack lie, a southeast and a Northwest
moon does make there a full sea.

Item from the Tuffler to go to the westwardes of Worcom, you must go north
and by west, or more Westerlye, until you have two little Steeples northeast
of you, and shut one in another, they stand upon the sea side, and when you
have brought them open one from another, then you shall see other two small
steeples something to the Eastwards, then edge northwardes something offwardes
keeping them open one from an other, as far as the other past which stand by
the sea side: Then have your thwart marks for the Buy is a high house at the
East end of a Kowdom, and comes in at the South end of Hind, And these are
the marks of the Buy or Tun that lies west from worcom, and lies scarce in
three fatham. And the best deapth is three fatham, and is soft ground.

Item, from by west Worcem, to Yeghelhocke, Northwards, the thwart marks is a
long village by the Seaside, coming into a valley, and in the same vallie
comes a small steeple, and against these marks the Buy or Tun of Yeghelhocke
lies at three fatham and a half, the best deapth is four Fatham soft ground.
The West shore is very deep, the Eastland shore is flat or plattie.

Item, from Yeghelhocke to the middle gront, the course is north, the land
marks are two sharp steeples, northeast from you: those twain brought
together, there lies the middle ground, on which is four Fatham, the best
deapth is six fatham, and the west part is very deep, and then go north
northwest with Swanballick.

Item the thwart marks, for the Buy of Swanballicke are Bolstwert, brought
open a little by south Cormure by a little round house. These are the marks
for the Buy which lies toward the East shore in three Fatham, you may sail by
them as ye come from within outward, but as ye come outward you may not sail
by the west shore.

Item, then from Swanballicke to Skutland, the course is northwest, until you
have brought Panderga to the northward Yoschwisen, which is a round village
with a little flat Steeple, and is to the Southward of Macom the next to it,
and keep Panderga in the midst between the South end of Macom, and that
round village, then can you not go amiss. And when you have brought Panderga
near to Macom, then are you nigh the north land, and if Panderga be near the
round village, then are you nigh to the Southland, therefore keep Panderga
always in the middle between that village and Macom, as long as you can see
them, till you come about Kashock.

Item, the mark of Skutsand, is a flat Steeple which shows over the
blockehouse of Harling, the Land marks is Bloswert Northwards of the Stintsen,
which stands on the Northwardes of Women's, that Buy lies in six Fatham of
the North shore, and is very deep, and in a manner shore deep, and the best
deapth there is seven or eight fatham You may sail by the south shore by your
lead.

Item, the course from Skutsand to Caishocke is west northwest, The marks of
Caishocke are these, Fromiker with Harling, or very nigh unto the houses of
the Town of Harling, and upon the north land lies the Buy at five fathams.

Item the course from Caishocke to Woolfehook is north northwest, and you may
be bold to sail by the east shore, from Caishocke to Woolfehooke and the
channel, is ten or twelve fatham deep, and the west shore is there very steep
to the Castle.

Item, from Woolfehook to Schierinchalles the course is North and by West, and
the best depth is seven or eight fathams, and then from Schierinchalles to
Langersande, the course is northwest, there you may not sail too near the
shore, as you come from within outwardes: these two Buies (to wit) Woolefhook
and Langersand, are no marks to make account of, but Woolfehooke lies also on
the east side, at 4. fathams, and Langersand likewise lies in the same side at
five Fathams, and coming from without inwards, you may sail along on the east
side of Langersand by Schierinchalles: upon the west side coming inwards,
keep you at seven fathams, and you cannot do amiss.

Item, from Langersand to the Castle, the course is north, the east side is
shallowe and flat.

Item the course from the Creile to the South Buy of Wyringen flats, is west
northwest. And when you have brought Twiske in the midst between the two
Steeples which is Derdoes, and Almerdorpe, then take heed you come no nearer
to that flat with any ship, that draws much water, especially at a low water,
and then set of northwest and by west. Here a south east and northwest Moon
makes a full sea. And when the Moon is east or west, then is it there still
water, and best tune to sail over it.

Item, the marks of the souther Buy from the flat of Wiringen, is Twiske
beyond Almerdorp, and the thwart marks is Cleuerst when it comes by south
the west end of the Church of Wyringen.

Item, from the south Buy, to the next Buy or Tun by Scorn, the course is
northwest and by north, and this Buy lies of the went shore of three fatham, a
quarter less. Then must you keep by the east shore, that is the deeper side,
the Mark is the Mill on the south end of the River.

Item, from Scorn to the North buy, the course is North northwest, The east
shore is flat, and the best of the Channel is three Fathams at low water, the
West shore is the deepest, the thwart marks for the North Buy, are two Towers
standing to the East wards by Wyringen brought in one and the Buy lies in
three Fathams of the wester shore.

Item from the North Buy to the Nese, keep the North Buy with Memelick, so
far as you can see, till you bring those two Steeples or Towers into one, and
then shall you have water enough. And then run on north and by west, and
keep off from the Wester shore, for that is flat, and the easter shore is
deeper. And in the right channel is seven fatham deep about the Buy. And
marks of the Nese that is westward is a steeple by Wyringen, brought a little
way by West the vttermoste houses of Wyrengen, and lies toward the East shore
in 6. fatham: You must then go more Westerlye with the west shore in five
fatham, and keep so till the Watermill come without the north end of the
river, keeping so til you find ten or twelve Fatham, then go west northwest to
Uoge^sand, and then you have both the shores very deep. And when you come
near to Uogelsand, you shall see Coger church to the westward of the houses
which stand by the west of the mill, then keep Coger Church to the westwardes
of the houses yt stand westward of the mil, so long till the high st^eple come
without the end of the houses, which stand to the northeast of that high
Steeple, keeping them so a little without the houses, and so can you not
miscarie on the south shore, keep in five Fatham till you come to the Roode,
which is the Herne about Weringerdicke.

How to sail to Amsterdam coming out of the Sea.
ITem from the Busse inwards to Hobsand, the course is south a little to the
Eastwardes.

Item the thwart marks from the Busse is the Cape upon the corner of
Schellinck, and the south end of the downs of Schellinck, and lies in five
Fatham on the easter shore, and in the deepest is nine or ten Fatham, and on
the West side is deep till you be past Hobsand, and being past Hobsand, the
fore flood sets you thwart over to the Buy. And you may go that way, when you
come from without inwards. Therefore you must keep your self in deep water.
And the sore Ebb does run again directly toward the Fleland.

Item, the Marks of H^^sand is the easterliest sharp Steeple upon Schellinck,
brought a little to the eastwards of the long house and the sand banks of
Fleland. Those brought a little within the white Leden, and thereupon the Buy,
and lies in six Fatham by the east shore.

Item from Hobsand to Langersande, the course is south and somewhat westerly,
come not nearer to the east shore then seven Fatham, and so you may not sail
fast by Langersand, for the Buy lies in five fatham of the East shore, and
lies at the end of Langersand, where you use to turn into Getsing for to
sail to Harling. Then from Langersand to Schierinchalles, the course is
southeast, come not in any less water then seven fatham, and you may not come
nere Schierinchalls: on the west shore thwart over against Schierinchalls you
shall have 10. or 11. fatham.

Item, from Schierinchalls to Woolfhooke, the course is South southeast, set
your course along the west shore, and keep in six or seven fatham. About
Woolfehook it is eight Fa^ham, and the eastermoste Buy lies in four fatham,
ye may sail hard by it when ye come out of the sea inwardes, therefore keep
ye in deep water.

Item, from Woolfhook to Raishook, the course is southeast and by south. Then
you may keep by the East shore in four or five Fatham, till you come to
Raishooke. In the maine Channel, is eleven or twelve fatham, the west side is
a shore almost steep too. The after flood sets into the old Ulye, the marks of
Raishooke is Franker, brought open to the Eastwardes of the town of Harling, a
little by the west Mil, which is to the westwards of the Steeple of Harling.
Here does the Buy lie in five Fatham.

Item, from Raishooke to Scutsand the course is east southeast, until you have
brought the Beacon southeast of Raishooke, and thwart of you, and then within a
while you shall have sholder water: the south shore is flat but you may well
sail by it, the best deapth shall be five fatham or there abouts, and then you
shall see Marcum bear southeast from you, which stands by the water side with
a mil, and to the southward of Marcum does lie a little round village with a
flat steeple, and between this Uillage and the south end of Marcum stands a
flat Tower, and is called Panderga, keep this Tower in the middle between the
middle of this Uillage, and the south end of Marcum, and so you cannot take
any hurt on neither shore. And if Panderga be nearer to Marcum, then are you
by the north shore, and if Panderga be next the Uillage, then are you by the
Southland, therefore keep Panderga in the middle, until you have brought
Winaldom over the highest of the Town of Harling, and then you shall have
deep water. Then have you the Beaco^ of Doueballigh upon the thwart marks of
Scutsand, which is Winaldom with the blockehouse of Harling and Bulswert by
North, the two Stenghen lies by north Wocustaem, and the Buy lies by the
North shore in six Fatham and it is steep too.

Item from Scutsand to Swanbalch, the course is northwest and southeast* There
you may not sail near the east shore, and yet with an after flood and a fresh
gale of wind at a still water, you may come nere to the Easter shore. The flood
runs southward when the moon is S. or N. and the ebb again runs
northwards so long as the Moon is E. or w. yet notwithstanding, a southeast or
northwest M. makes a high water. And here the streams sets to ye westwards
and like wise upon the flats. And about Swanebalch, you may keep by the west
shore, but take heed that you come not in less depth then fine fatham.

Item, the thwart marks from the Buy to Swanebalch, is Bolswart brought over
a little round house, which stands to the southward of Curmor, and against that
does lie the buy on the east side, and lies in three fatham water.

Item from Swanebalch to the middle ground, ye course is south southeast and
north northwest, keep the Buy of the middle ground lying about Hind to go
by, and so go ye well. And between the two Buys you may be boldest toward
the west shore, and yet you may sail hard by the East shore: when you come
from without inwards, you shall find the buy of the middle ground to lie in
four fathams, or there abouts of the east shore.

Item the marks of the middle ground, are two sharp steeples and they lie
northeast from you, the one is called Arom and the other Peningen, these are
the thwart marks, and you shall see likewise two flat Steeples, by east
Harling, which are called Winaldom and Middelum, those twain are the land
marks, and these two Churches must be brought both in one.

Item from the middle ground to Yeghelhooke the course is south, the East shore
is flat, and the west shore is steep^ too, the thwart marks of Yegelhooke, is
a village upon the water side to be brought in a gut or vallie, and directly
upon this Gut or vallie, comes in sight a small Steeple: these are the marks
of the Buy. And Yeghelhooke lies on the east side at three fatham and a half.

Item, from Yeghelhooke to the west of Workum, the course is south, the east
shore is flat, and the West shore, not so flat, in the Channel is soft ground,
the thwart marks to the westwardes of Workum, you shall see a sharp steeple
lying far within the land, to the northwardes of Hindelopen, and when they
come with the houses standing by North Hindelopen, and thwart of Hindelopen
there lies the Buy in two fatham at a low water in the best deapth is three
fatham, hard ground. Then west of Workum to the Tuffler, the course is south
and by East, Easterlye: so long till the marks of Tuffler, that is Panderga a
flat steeple to the southwards of Uorwold within the land, and you shall see a
little steeple come over Core, of Panderga. These are the land marks of that
Buy, the thwart marks are Hemellum, the country houses of Molquellum and
Myrus flat steeple, keeping along these, you shall come to the Tuffler, which
lies in two fatham ^/2.

Item, from the Tuffler to the plat, your course is south southwest, according
as the wind or stream does serve, between both these Buys lies the sholdes
of the Ulacke, and you must keep Panderga in one with the Countri^ houses and
by south, so long till you have brought Mirus which is a flat steeple to the
Eastwards of Stauerre state, and these are the thwart marks of the Plat, and
lies at two fatham. The land marks are the country houses standing scant
half way betwixt Uorwold and Panderga (to wit) the country houses next to
Panderga, and these marks being in one, there you shall find the Buy which
lies in three fatham.

Item from the Plat to Creile, the course is south and by West, and going so,
you shall now and then have deep water, and so go til you have brought Tuyex
by west the corn Mill, which stands by west Memelicke. These are the la^d
marks, and the thwart marks is Myrus, a litttle flat steeple, which comes
in at the south end of the Eliffe: these marks being in one, there lies the
Buy of the Creile in 4. fatham, the best deapth is five fatham.

Item, from the Creile to the Hooft, the course is southeast, go so until
there appear a sharp Steeple at the South end of the Cliffe, and bring
Grootbrooke and that in one. These are thwart marks of the two Buys, and then
Memelick steeple brought by North the Castle, as far as tho Castle is broad or
more, that is likewise a thwart mark: the land marks is one end of the Uen,
with the east church of Ankeusen. The Creeple lies in three fatham large. And
Hooft lies in four Fatham toward the east shore, and the Creeple lies on the
wester shore, the best depth is scarce 5. fatham and hard ground.

Item, from the Hooft to Urk, the course is east southeast til you have brought
Medenblincke a little without ye land of the Uen, goeing so till you bring the
Church of Urke within the houses, and keep it so til you come near unto Urk,
and now and then edge to the southward, til the church of Urk bear almost
north northeast from you, and then go southeast with Pampus. And when you are
come so nigh unto Pampus, that you can see Amsterdam with the Chapel of
Tyort, keeping your course so until Merkerkerke be brought in the plain land
of Uidam, then keep Merkerkerke so of you till you come unto Tie, and keep you
in the mid channel till you come to Amsterdam.

Item, now for to sail from Huysdwinen inwards, go Northeast and by East, for
the lands are steep to, on either side and cannot well be sounded: Therefore
keep your course so until the Churh at the east end come to the East of the
highest and most easterly f^rme house, which stands to the westward of the
Church: and doing thus you can take no hurt by Burksand. Then go northeast so
long til the highest spire steeple appear without the houses which stand to
the northeast of Howberich, and keep those Steeples still by north those
houses, so long till you have brought the church in the Cooch, which is without
a steeple, and covered with blew slates, nigh unto the mill which stands
between Oosterend and the Duaell, and go east southest, and keep the Church
and the Mill together as long as you can see them, and then you shall see the
water mill that stands on the other side of Wieringhen, will come between the
Dover and the other corn mill: keep this course toward the West shore in
five fatham, and at seven fatham y^ shall have the Buy which is the best
deapth.

Item, the marks of the Buy upon the Nes is the westward steeple: brought a
little without the mos^e westerly houses of Wieringhen, and does lie at five
fatham on the East shore, and so you may direct your course. Therefore ke^p by
the west shore, from the Nes Buy, to the North Buy, which lies on the
flattes, the course is south and by east, and then when you have brought two
sharp steeples over Wieringhen in one: then shall you have 4. or 5. fath.
there you must stay with Ships of great draught to be lighted, The west shore
is flat: the east shore is deepest, then going south and by east, within a
while you shall have sholder water, that is to say 3. fatham less at low
water. And when you come so near that you can see the Buy thwart Memelicke,
then you shall find the norther buy of the Ulack: and the Buy lies in 2.
fath. at low water, and lies on the west shore, you must sail by the east
side: the thwart marks of this Buy are two easterly steeples brought in one.

Item from the norther Buy to the other Buy thwart of Sochorne, the course is
south southeast: the marks is the Mill on the South end, and lies in two
Fatham 1/^ against the middle of the west shore, you must sail by it east.

Item from Sochorne to the south Buy, the course is south southeast, and lies
in two fatham 1/^ between these 2. Buies lies the shallow of Ulack: the
thwart marks of the south buy of the Ulacke, are 5. or 6, houses brought a
little by south, the most westerlye Steeple of Wieringhen, and these houses
are called Cleuern, the land ma^kes is a sharp steeple by west Memelick, which
you must bring over Almerdorp, Almerdorp has a little flat Steeple.

Item from the south Buy of the Ulacke to the Creille the course is east
southeast, and to keep the right Channel, run southeast and by east so long
till you find deep water, or till you have the land of Creile, that is Myrus,
at the south end of Cliffe.

Item, when you come from by north inwards, and will sail to Ankewsen, then
bring that high red house to the westward of the steeple so that you may see
between them, and keep so till the west end of it come right over that great
high Farm house which stands by north the Watermil, and these are the marks
of the first Buy, then go south southwest toward the wester shore in two
Fatham, and then off again into two Fatham 1/^ the thwart marks of the other
Buy is Boecaspell, brought over that Farm house, the land marks are to bring
the Mill by south of Ankewsen, a little by East of that high stone house which
stands at the south end, and against that does lie the Buy, then keep your
course by the west shore. Upon a flowing water you may sail fast by the East
shore coming inwards.

Item, the thwart marks of the third Buy is Grotebrooke, brought over the
same farm house to the Northwards of the water Mill. The land marks of the
same buy is a stone house which stands at the north end opening from the
Steeple, so as you may see between them: these are the land marks of the
third Buy.

Item to know the land marks of the Buy to the southw^^ds of Ankeusen: next
to Ankeusen the watch house by the gate being brought by East the Steeple: And
by these marks when the Mill comes in on with the quire of Boecaspell, there
shall you find the Buy on the East shore.

Item the land marks of the most southerlie buy, is the little tower of the
hospital, being a little by west of a little steeple that stands upon the
tower that the ankers do hang upon: the thwart marks is a sharp steeple
brought on the south end of Buerthwisen nigh unto a high Farm house: with
these marks lies the southermoste Buy.

Item, now it is necessary that al men should know that these creekes and
streams before specified, are to be understood for waters of pilotage, or
lademanage: therefore by the Sea right it is plain, that the Master of any
Ship sailing these streams, and refusing to take in a pilot or lodesman and
that thereby the Ship does perish, and miscarie: he is bound to make
restitution to the Merchants for their goods.

These following are the Seven Islands of Yotland. Witholm, Ameren, Dil, Kem,
Menow, Fanow, Numink.

Of Bombergen.
Item from Bombergen, to the Elue, the land lies northwest, and southeast, and
are distant 52. leagues. And a south and north Moon makes a full Sea in all
those havens. And like wise in Yotland.

Item, Bombergen is a flat long Hill, and on the south end of it stands a
steeple, and to the north part of the same northeast end, does likewise stand
a steep Hill or Tower, and from that are high round Sand hills, as though it
were salt houses all along even to the Holmes: and the course from Bombergen
to the holmes, is North northeast, and they are distant a 11. leagues.

Item, the riffe lies along between Bombergen and the holmes west, or
thereabouts in the seawards.

Item, in all havens between Bombergen and the Elue and thereabouts, a south
or north Moon makes a full Sea.

Of Friezeland side.
Item the Coast of Frizeland lies along, East northeast and west southwest.

Item, the Eider and the Holy land, lie east and by north, and west and by
south one from an other, and are distant two small kennings.

Item, Ripen lies from the holy land Northeast and by north, two great kennings
a sunder.

Item, the holy land and the Schelling, lie northeast and by east, and south
west and by west one from an other, and are distant 31. leagues.

Item, you may sail into the south Havens, at 5, fatham.

Item, you shall come no near the Holy Land on the westerside, then nine or
ten fatham so the Northwards, for from the Steene at some places it is seven
Fatham deep.

How to go in with Holy land.
Holy land

Coluerhoeck



Item to sail from the Holy land to the Elue, the cours^ lies south and by
east, and distant two kennings.

Item, he that will ride under the holy land, and comes from the west, let him
not come any nearer by the west part then ten fatha^, so long as you can see
between the Monk^ and the high Cliffe, and then you may go boldly with the
south shore in four fathams, by that side or five.

Item, when the Cliffe bears southwest, or west southwest of you: and the
Coluerhooke lies north northeast from you, there is the best Rode in four or
five Fatham water, fair white sand, and by Coluerhook is likewise fair ground
to anchor on.

Item, when the Werk lies south east and by south from you, then are the marks
in one.

Item, when as Mensen lies south from you, then are you open of the Weser.

Item when the Cape of Roten lies southeast and by East from you, then you
shall see them also in one.

Item, when the Tower or steeple of Bor^um does lie south from you, then are
you open against the easter Emes.

Item, when you have Iuster tower northeast from you, then are you within the
river of Iuster.

Item, whem the Beacons of Shermerinkocke lie to the east southeast of you,
then you shall see them in one.

Item, from Rose borkin to that Beacon in the Meme: the course is southeast and
by east, go by the Southland in seven or eight fatham.

Item, from the Beacon on the (Meme) to the Buy on the east side of the course
is east and by north.

Item from the Buy on the east side, the course is East and by north. And hold
the North shore till you come to the Stoor Toee.

Item when as you come from vewest, and will sail into the Elue, then keep the
south shore in fourteen fatham, and in Elue, you shall have fifteen fatham,
and is hard ground.

The course to go into the Elue.


Item when you go with the Elue, you must brin^ the Cape and the new Work in
one, which will bring you with the Buy, and the shore Buy lies on the South
shore. Then from the shore Buy, to the Buy the Newgate, the course is East and
by North: reckon always your streams, for the floodes sets commonly East and
by south inwards. Then run toward the North shore in six or five fatham,
and so shall the Newgate come in with the first Buy or Tun, and when you have
the Work south at the first Buy, there shall you have it four fatha^ or the
caebouts: keep that Buy on the steereboord and go with the other Buy east
(in) and something to the Northwardes from that other Buy, the Work lies
southwest, and in five or six Fatham water: then forwards to the third Buy or
Tun: go East southeast, somewhat southerlye (in) And the Work lies from the
third Buy Southwest and by south, there is deeper water seven or eight Fatham
taste by the Buy, then bear on to the fourth Buy east Southeast, and the Work
lies of it south west and by west, And that fourth Buy lies on the highest of
the new grounds and the new grounds are steep to, and lie dry at low water
Then when you come out of the Seas, you may go in five or six fatham wat^r by
the foresaid second Buy, hence away to the Rose beacon without any danger, and
keep by the southland. Then keep your course from the fourth tun to the
first, southeast, and the first tun or Buy lies at the end of the new
grounds: and when you have brought the mill within the Land, and Crwis Kirk
in one, then are you past the new grounds. The Work and the first Buy or
Tun, lie the one from the other west southwest something more southerly.

Item, when any ship comes from by west and will go into the Elue, and has a
southerly wind, or a west southwest wind: let him bear aloft by the south
shore in twelve Fatham, so long as he keeps the south shore, for when he
comes right against the Elue, he must then keep the south shore in seven or
eight Fatham, going so along the south shore till you have brought the Work
south from you, or niether abouts: and then go more northerly til you come to
the Buy of the new gate or entry in. And from the fifth Buy, go southest and
by south til you come to the sixth Buy, and when you shall see a mil in a
certain black heath with a house: then hale in toward the land, and when you
have brought the mill to the eastwardes of that house, then are you within the
Rose Buy, then go east and by south to the Rose Beacon, and when you are
against the Rose Beacon, then shall you see a little Church with a small sharp
Steeple within the land: when you have brought ye Church right over a long
house a Cable length to the Eastwardes of Rotsebetell, then shall you be hard
by the Rose Beacon. Then go Southeast and by east up toward the Moen, and
keep the south shore in seven, eight, or nine fatham, so long, till there
come to the westward of you a sharp Steeple, brought in one with two other
steeples, that stand in one Churchyard within the land, which is called
Oldenbrook, and when one of the steeples is come so far by the east, then you
shall see a couple of trees, when you have brought the steeples into these two
trees, then are you past the sholdes of Romerder, and then go east with
Bunsutell and keep rather along the north shore at five or six Fatham, but
take heed of the souther shore for fear of Pelgheremsand, for you shall sail
along by it.

Item, if the weather so serve that you may then keep by the north shore still
till you come at Billingborch, and when you are come to Billingborch, yet keep
you on the north shore still in seven or eight Fatham, and hale so in till you
come so far as Rugeroort, then you shall come to the Easter shore, then you
must hale up something more Southerly to Staderland.

Item there is the south Elue which now lately in Anno 1571. is bowed.

Item, from the Schore Buy, to the next Buy, your course is east and by South.

Item, from the second Buy to the third: the course lies east southeast, and
something more to the southwards.

Item, from the third Buy to the fourth, the course is east and by south.

Item, from the fourth Buy or tun to the fifth, the course is east and by
north.

Item from the fifth Buy to the Buy in the Rose, the course is southeast.

Item from the Rose Buy to Rose Beacon the course is southeast, and something
southerly.

The course to sail to the Weser.
Item, he that comes from the westwards and will sail to the Weser, having a
Northwest or a North Northwest wind, let him not come any nearer to Wangeroge
then six fatham, and then let him run east so long till he see the vt^ermoste
Buy: and then there lies a sand on Larbourd, which is called the mid plat, on
which is but two fatham at a full sea, and lies open before the Weser, then
from that Buy to the other course is northeast.

Item if you should have the wind southerlie, then go^ with Wengerorge, and
keep you in nine or ten Fatham, and take heed of the wester Weser that lies
at 9. fatham inwards, then take your course over from Wangerorge Northeast till
ye come at ten or eleven Fatham, then shall ye have Menser Church bear south
and by east from you, there lies the vttermoste Buy.

M^nser Church.


Item, Menser Church is a flat Church, without any steeple, and lies in
Urowkens land: from the uttermost buy to the second Buy your course is east.
And when you are a little from the second Buy, then lies Menser from you South
and by east, and from that Buy to the third, your course is east. And when you
are at the third Buy, then lies Menser south from you: from the third Buy to
the fourth, your course is east, but see that you always account your tide,
and then lies Menser from you south and by West. Then from the fourth Buy to
the Buy on the head, the course lies east and somewhat to the northwards, And
when ye come to the Buy, then lies Menser South southwest from you, then go
Southeast and by South to the Buy in the Fair way that lies in 10. or 11.
Fatham, and take always good heed of your stream. That Buy is laid for the
Beacon, then southeast is the course to the Buy on the Coers.

Item from the Buy upon the Coers to the Buy on ^he Steene of the Bollensill,
the course lies southeast* and to the eastwards. And when you are about the
Buy of Bollensil then set your course to the southward, with the west shore,
there are two Beacons standing.

Item, when you come ^igh unto the second Beacon th^re is a good road for a
westerly wind. And the^ have you Langhwoord Langhwoorde.
Church in Gotirland, and if you will go further, then set your course
southeast to the Buy or Tun upon the Ulacke. And when you are within that
Buy: then go with the west shore in three or four fatham, and so you shall
come now and then hard by ground land, until you come to Blexhemkerk* There be
in the road commonly such ship^ as are outward bound and do tarry for a
wind.

Item when Newarke lies southeast and by south of you, then have you both the
Capes in one.

Blexhem Church.


Item, when you have Menser Church south from you, then are you open before the
Weser.

Item, when the steeples of Borkum bear south from you then are you open
thwart of the easter emes.

Item, when the steeples bear nue northeast of you, then you are within both
ye Iuster Reuens, in the wester emes.

Item, when the head lands of Rotum do lie southeast and by east from you,
then are they in one.

Item, when the headlands lie south southeast from you, then they are both in
one.

The going into the Jade.
Item, if you will go into the Jade, when you are past the ^ed sand, bear in
southwards, even as far as you may, and you shall leave Menser Church on
steereboord side: and if you will sail to the Wood, then leave the church on
Larboord side.

Wangeroge


Item, you shall know Wangeroge by that there stands a little Church upon it,
and the steeple stands at the west end.

Item Sprigeroge is to be known by that it is plain^ Sandhilles, and then you
shall know Langeroge, for that it appears in two Sandhilles.

Item, you shall know Balterom by that the west end is high Sandhilles, and
the east end low Sandheaps.

Just


Item, you shall know Just two ways, there stands a Church over it, and the
Steeple stands at the east end of the Church, and the mill that was in Just is
blown down and is cleene gone, so that there stands nothing where the Mill
was.

Burkum.


Item, you shall know Burkum, by that it rises in three parts, and about the
midst of the land stands a church with a flat steeple and stands at the
east end of the church,

Item, you shall understand, that the Easter Emes goes in betwixt Just and
Burkum.

Item, to know Burkum well, when you shall fall with it coming from by west,
it seems to look upon as it were three Islands: for betwixt every one of the
hills of it which seems Islands: is a Ualley or slack of plain sand without
any hills, and on that which seems the middlemoste Island, stands a church
with a great sharp steeple, and stands at the west end of the church.

Item from the northwest corner of Burckum, does lie a riffe of sand, and lies
west in the Sea, at least a league and a half, and you may sail along by
the same into the easter emes, and go in east by south.

Item, the easter emes lies in east southeast, and when you have Burckum
Steeple south of you, then keep by the shore, in four Fathams and a half,
and edge over, and fetch sounding of Iuster riffe, and you shall by and by have
deep water, and then keep in by him.

Item when you have brought Iuster steeple Northeast of you, then are you past
both the Riffes of Iuster, and then you are within the Easter emes.

Item, there is a new Channel, that is when ye have broken in the wester
Emes, which lies a little to the westwards of the old Channel, and is as deep
at a low water, as the old deep is at a full sea or high water.

Item, when any man will seek to enter in at the wester-Emes, let him bring
the bush south and by east of him, and the west end of Rotum southeast, and
bring both the two great Capes in one, and then you shall find the vttermoste
Buy, and that lies in five fatham, then go from the vttermoste Buy to the
second Buy, East and by north, and that lies at four Fatham, then from the
second Buy to the third Buy, likewise east and by north and that lies in six
fath. And then is the longest Cape and the ^^ast Cape upon the old deep to be
kept both in one, and so you shall have ever the deeper water. Then from the
third Buy to the farthest Buy, go east southeast, and then edge something
over toward Burckum riffe, toward the north shore, least ye fall to the
eastwardes of Hakenballge, which goes in by east Rotum. Also, when any man
coming from by E. with an east^rly wind, would go in at the old deep, let
him bring the longest Cape, and the least Cape as they stand in one, against
the old deep, and run so in, and there you shall find the third Buy, and
the old gate or entry at a low water has but two fathams being an easterly
wind.

Item, Bosch is on the west end full of high Sandhilles, and there is no
habitation upon it.

Item ye shall know Shirmerkerog by the low Sandhilles* and at the West end
of it stands a high round sandhill, and there stands two Capes upon it for to
sail into Scholbalch, and you shall bring that East Southeast from you, and
then you shall have both Capes in one, and then run right toward him till
you find the first Buy. And there lies two Buys in one gate or entry, and
then when you come to the second Buy, go east northeast, and east and by north,
and you may sail by either of these Walls, and when you come at the third
Buy, then go south and by west or south southwest, and you shall have no less
at a low water then three Fatham. Now when you come out of the sea and fall
with Borne riffe, then edge toward the Wall at six Fatham, and at five fatham
and a half. And do even as hear before written, when you will sail into ye
Scholbalch.

Schirmonckeroghe


Item, to know Schirmonkerogh: those are low sandhilles: and at the west end
stands a hill which is something higher: as for the Church, you cannot see it
till you come hard by the Land: and Schirmonkerogh is two leagues and a half
in length.

Ameland


Item, upon Ameland there stands a high great Church with a flat steeple
toward the west end of the Island: and is covered with blew states, and there
is a stone house standing by east of the Church: and it seems to look upon,
as though it were an old ruinous farm house: and there lies thre^ high sand
hills above the midst of the land, and Ameland is four leagues in length.

Item, between schirmonkerogh and Ameland, goes in Scholbalch, and has two
gates or entries, one goes in by Ameland, and the other by Schirmonk^ro^h.

Skelling.


Item, upon the Skelling are five steeples, one standing at the ^ast ^nde is
sharp, and about the middle of the land are three steeples: two flat ones, and
the highest of all is sharp, and that which stands on the west end is a high
flat steeple: and is called S. Brandatius Church: and the Island is three
leagues in length.

Item, a southeast or northwest Moon makes a hie water in Rauster deep.

Item, Huis^winen and the Mase: are distant 24. leagues huysduinen

oglie



Item, Petten be high ragged sand hills.

Item, Kettle down is a white forked sand hill.

Item, the Coast of Holland lies along south southwest and somewhat to the
westwardes, and north, northeast somewhat to the Northwards.

Item Marsedeepe and the Hosden lie one from the ^ther southwest and by south
somewhat westerlye: and Northeast and by north somewhat easterlye: and are
distant three and fifty leagues.

Item, an East or west Moon makes hie water in Marsedeepe.

Scrauesand


Item the Mase and the UUellings are distant 3. kennings

Item, the Mase, and the Marsdeep, are distant four and twenty leagues.

The Mase.

The briel



Item, the Mase lies up East Southeast, and somewhat Southerlye.

Item, the East Uorn^olt goes in by Fwerboden* and then by the Maine land: a
West south southwest Moon makes a full sea: also before the Mase mouth, and
within the Mase, a south south west Moon makes a full sea.

Item, before the Flee: you must take heed to the tide, for the fore flood
does set thwart over the shallow grounds to the Eastwardes, and the first of
the ebb sets likewise to the westwards.

The Flee Island.


Item the Flee is known by the high white sand hills, and there stands a
small steeple in the Church.

Item, the Flee and the Riffe, are distant the one from the other 11. gaeat
kennings, and Uliland is four leagues in length*

Item, there is an Island that lies between the Flee and the Tessell that is
called Yereland, and there stands a little house upon it: see that you take
heed to your tides always before the Tessell, for the fore flood, and latter
end of the Ebb sets over to the Northwards, and the last of the flood and
first of the ebb sets to the southwards.

Item, Tessell is two leagues in length.

Item, from Marsedeepe to the Sweene is nine kennings

Item, from Marsedeepe to the Ulie, is 8. leagues.

Item, whosoeue^ will sail out of Ulie to Shotland, the course is north
Northwest, and somewhat weste^lye, and so sail with a fore wind, it is three
days and a half sailing, and is 152. leagues.

^ussel


Item, for to know Holland, Egmont is a flat steeple, and stands upon the sea
side, and within Egmont are two steeples standing together in one Churchyard.

Item, Fairehill and Shotland, lie by North Northwest and south southeast 150.
leagues.

Item Shotland and Boffamnes lie North and to the eastwards and south, and to
the westwards, and are distant 46. leagues.

Item, Shotland and Orteny, lie southwest and Northeast ^0. leagues, and when
you are about midway between them, you may see them both at once in a clear
day.

Item, Ortenye and Boffamus, lie south southeast and north northwest 26.
leagues.

Item, the southwest end of Shotland, and Fayre-hill lie North Northeast and
south southwest, two kennings distant.

Item Fayrehill and Farie, lie Northwest and by west, and south east and by
east, a great day and night sailing.

Item, Shotland and Barghen lie near east, and west 60. leagues distant.

Item, Shotland and Farie lie west northwest, and East south east a day and a
night sailing.

Item, Shotland and the Osterhooke of Island, lie North West and by West, and
southeast and by east, three days sailing.

Item, Farie and the Osterhooke of Island, lie northwest and southeast two
days sailing.

Item, from the Osterhooke of Island to the Bear fort, the course is south
south west, and North Northeast twenty leagues.

Item, from the Bearefort to the Siden, is 16. Leagues, the course is West
southwest, and East Northeast is the course to Mydall, from Siden is all low
plain land, and within high.

Item, from Mid^ll to Webnie the course is West, and Webnie lies three mile
from the land: and between Webnie and Midall is 6. leagues.

Item, from Webnie to Robenes, the course is west, north west: and east
southeast, sixteen leagues: Robenes is a little black point: between UUebnie
and Robenes is four Havens. And likewise there lies of Robenes west southw.
three Islands: whereof twain are two leagues and a half a piece, and the third
is five leagues long.

Item, from Robenes to the Snens iockle, the course is northwest and by north,
and south east and by south, and are distant sixteen leagues. And between
them are many Havens, as Dorse Haven and Busande^, Cabelwick, Morwicke,
Walstruse, Strent, Hamfort, Hullin, an and Island called Widow half a mile
from the land, an other also called UUalfort.

Item, from Snens Iockle to the Bederstand, the course is south and north, and
are distant sixteen leagues. And by the Iockelles lie three Havens called
Bodem, and then Stapen and the Riffe, and by Bosten Riffe does lie three
Havens, Kurmwork, and Grindfort, and an Island called Sletten.

Item, from the Berderstant to the Schaghen, is 7. leag. and do lie North and
by East, and south and by west, and between them lie four Rivers, and called
in that tongue Foordes, The first is Paters fort, and then Telkfort, Admerfort,
and in Admerfort are three Havens.

Item, from the Schaghen to Disefort, is 8. long leagues and they lie one from
an other North Northeast, and south southwest: and between them are two
Foordes, Orenderfoord, and the Sugheford.

Item, Disefort, and Schalwicke lie Northeast and by North, and southwest and
by south, and are distant four leagues: in D^sefort lie three havens,
schutelfort, and Alfort, and the Island Edoc.

The fords in Island, that is the rivers or creekes going up into the Land.
FIrst Swidens fort, Heeft fort, Scort fort, Meise fort, the Disefort,
Gruniwick, Nerd fort, the Iocklefort, Rabben fort, Hesterbeche: and in that
Haven lie Whale fish bones.

Item, from Schaelwick to the Haddenstrant, the course is north northeast, and
south southwest, and are distant 11, leagues. Here lies three mountains and
yet is whole land.

Item from the Haddenstrant to the Schagen Fort, is 16 leagues and lie North
Northeast, and south southwest: between these lie many Fordes or Creekes
going up into the land. And first the Singrins Foord going into the landwards,
Griens ford, and then the Bitter, and the Putiford, the Nide foord, and
Wydaell, and Wasedaell, the long Dear.

Item, from Schargenfort to the Widalen, the course is East southeast, and West
Southwest, and are distant five leagues.

Staghenfort is a Haven, and is called Lapsand.
Item from the Widalen to the Raven hook is twenty Leagues, and lies east^
northeast, and west southwest, beetweene these twain lies three Havens, the
first Sigelfort, and then Dackfort, then Huiswicke. And likewise three Fordes
or Rivers, the first Ydlefort, and then Oneselfort, and then Lerefort, all
which are Rivers or Creekes going up into the Land.

Item from the Romehooke to Grinsie, is eight leagues, and lies east and west.

Item, Grinsie is an Island, and lies from Huiswicke, 8. leagues south
southeast, and north northwest.

Item Grinsie and Denfort lie south southwest southerlye, northeast northerlye.

Item, Grinsie and Sighelfort lie southwest southerlye, and northeast
northerlye. And under Grinsie you may anchor for a northeast wind in 17 fatham.

Item, from the Roemhooke to the Langnesse, the course is East southeast, and
west northwest, and are distant sixteen Leagues: between these twain lies a
sound and a River, the sound is called Rooder sound, and the river is called
Sescelfoert and lies at the westwards of the Langnesse: and Ynwicke and
Roodhauen lies eight leagues from Langnesse, and they lie in a manner east and
west.

Item from Langnesse to Osterhooke, the course is south southeast, and North
Northwest: and are distant four and twenty leagues, and between them lies a
Haven called Worneforte, and to the Eastwards of the Langnesse there lies a
great mountain.

The going in at Vergate.


Item, if ye will go in at Uergate, bring the steeple of Middelbrough and E.
Capplen in one, or to the southeast southerly and run directly so till you
find Shald water at three Fatham, and go ye so forth over the Shald: then
against Meiland, you shall come into nine or ten Fatham, then keep on so
until ye come where the Mermaide is set up at Teruere, and till you have
brought those towers or steeples which are called Ualentines towers in one:
then shall you be over against the easter Towers, and keep those towers of
Teruerre in one, and so run even hard to by them: and always account of your
tides: for a south or north Moon there makes a full Sea. Now to know Warkeren
by the land, West Capplen is a gross or a flat Steeple, and to the Eastwardes
of West Capplen* stands East Caplen, and that is a sharp Steeple, and to the
North and by East of East Capplen stands Dombrough, and is likewise a sharp
Steeple,

This is couke^ick within the sondhills


The Order to be observed in coming out at the Wellings.
ITem to come out of ye wellings, you must leave one third part of the way on
the Larboordside, so long as you have the church by north the steeple of the
abbey of Middleborough, or to your sight, until they be within half a fath.
one of another, then you shall have Eastmunster, as far from the Steeple of the
abbey as yt Could Kerk stand by N. it, and when the steeple of the abbey
stands so in the midst of those two Churches, then you shall have to the
Northwardes of Could Kerke another steeple, which is called Westmunster: and
that stands to fight more then a ships length to the northwards of Could
Kerke, and when as the Steeple of the Abbey is brought in the midst betwixt
both the two before named Churches: then you must run directlye with them,
keeping the steeple so until you have brought Arde^brough a great ships length
without Heisant, and then you must keep Flanders side, for fear of the Pooles
of the Willing, and that you may be sure of the other marks. Then you shall see
Weindwine with a plain, and the valley by it that seems to be two ships
length, and then you shall see the small steeples which are called Weindwine,
open against the middle of the valley, and then the corner of the Steeple is
the mark of the deapth of the water for the nearer to the Poles, the deeper
water like as is the Heilegen before written: and when you see the Heilegen as
it were two ships length a sunder: there you may bring saint Lamberth by North
the sandhilles. Or when you are clear past them, you may keep the^ half a
fatham a sunder in sight, and hale so outward a good while: and to come in at
the Wellings from without, then keep saint Lamberth as is aforesaid, till you
have brought the Heilegen in one, then you must bring Saint Lamberth three or
four fatham open to the Northwards, and after govern your self by the marks
of the steeples of the abbey, as is before written. And if it be such weather
that you can not see the steeples of the Abbey, then bear in Northeast upon a
flood, until you have brought Arenburch and saint Lamberth in one, and then
hale in directly east northeast.

Item, before Wellings: a southw. or a northeast Moon makes a full sea, and at
Walkherne, a south and a North Moon.

The going in at the Wellings.


Item, first you shall understand that the Steeple of saint Katherins is a
sharp steeple, and is the Steeple that stands on the west side on the Sea
Coast next to the Sluice. And from Saint Katherins up within the Land stands
another sharp Steeple, and that is Knock. And to the westward from Saint
Katherins by the sea side stands Heyes and has a sharp Steeple, and is
something greater then Saint Katherins, and after that by the Sea side stands
Lisweighen, whose Church has a great flat Steeple. And from Lisweighen up into
the land wards stands an abbey, which is called Terdoes, and that is a Church
with a little sharp Steeple in the middle. And from Lisweighen Westwards,
stands Blankenburch upon the Sea side, and that is a Church with a flat
steeple, but it is much less then the steeple at Lisweighen, and between
Lisweighen and Blankenburch up into the landwards stands Wot Kerke, and that
has a sharp steeple, and stands nigh unto Blankenburch, then by Lisweighen
to the Westward of Blanckenburch, there stands Weindwine, and that is a sharp
steeple.

Item, when the steeple of Lisweighen, and that of the Abbey of Terdoes are
brought in one, then are you right against the utter sand that lies thwart of
Mailand, and then are you within the English Pole, and if you have six Fatham
of Mailland side, then lies the Pole on the Larboord side of you, then keep
over Mailland in six or seven Fatham, but no deeper, and run in so long,
till you have brought the Steeple and saint Katherins, and the steeple of
Knock in one, those are called the Heileghen, and then are you clean past the
English Pole, and then bea^e inwards so long, till Saint Katherins Steeple
comes in one with a high black hill, and then you are against the French Pole.

And when the Steeple is hidden with the land that lies by North of the Sluis:
then are you past the French Pole.

The marks and order to be kept when ye will sail in at Botkill.
ITem when as you will sail in at the Botkill, having recovered the shore, you
shall bring the Steeple of Middleborough southeast of you or thereabouts. And
go so in till you have west Capplen east southeast from you, and then you
shall see the Church of west Capplen come in a glaid of the sandbankes, then
keep the Church so of you, so long till Saint Actens comes past east Capplen,
and then are you past the Shalds. Then run inwards toward the shore to
Flushing.

How you shall sail in at the Doerloe.
ITem, when you pretend by Gods grace to sail in at the Doerloe, bring the
high steeple of Middelborough to the northwards of the flat Steeple, and also a
little from thence the two south towers almost together, the innermoste as it
were within the length of a Capstein bar from the vttermoste, and run so into
Flushing east and by south, or thereabouts is the course. And the Southberghen
are two sharp steeples standing betwixt Middleborough and Flushing.

Item, East Capplen is a sharp steeple: west Capplen and Saint Actens are
likewise sharp steeples, That stands from it to the Eastwardes, and is much
higher then East Capplen.

Selland.
ITem, the land on Selland side lies along southwest and northeast, and a
south southwest Moon makes a full Sea.

The Clocken deep by Flanders side.
ITem, when as you will go in at the Clocken deep, you must bring west
Capplen in one with Saint Katherins church by Clocken, and so go you in at the
best deep, and ^aint Katherins steeple is the next steeple to the Sluis by the
water side, and those other steeples stands up into the landwards, and after
that Heys, and then Blancken-Church that has a flat steeple: after that, there
stand three steeples to the westwards.

The Coast of Flaunders.
ITem, on Flaunders side, the Coast lies along East Northeast, and West
southwest, and a south or north Moon makes a full sea at the shore. And without
the sholds a southwest or northeast Moon: and along all the coast of
Flaunders in the vttermoste Channel, it is not in an^ place above four and
twenty fatham deep.

The Swine.
ITem, if you will go in at the Swine to come in, the wind being contrary:
then take the latter end of the flood, and the first of the ebb. And when you
will sail in at Heyes deep, you must bring the four Beacons of Heyes which
stands by the Mill in one, over Core at Heyes: and then shall you go in at
the best deep, and so you shall go far enough from the utter sand: and so
you may bear on to the Weelings east northeast. And you shall understand, that
Anchewisen, Buisen and the Swine, do keep all one just time of flowing and
ebbing.

Item when as Donkerke lies due south southeast from you, and that you can then
but see it upon the hatches, then is there a flat of two fatham deep at a low
water.

The order and course of the streams and tides along the Coasts of
Flaunders, Normandy, and of Britain to the Seames.
ITem, first you shall understand, that along all the coast of Flanders and of
Sealand, the flood runs to the eastwards, and the last quarter of the flood,
ye streams sets to the seawards, and the last quarter of the ebb to the
landwards. There are sand banckes about which, as well at sometimes of the
flood, as at sometimes of the ebb, there goes no stream at all.

If you come to an anchor by east of the Nese in ten Fatham you shall be well
defended for a west southwest wind.

Item thwart of the head, the flood sets in Northeast and by north, and the
ebb sets out southwest and by south.

Whosoever will come to an ancker at lands end of England by Dover, let him cast
ancker and ride at five or 6 fatham, and he shall ride well for a south wind.

He that will come to Ancker by the Gulles, let him ride at five fa^ham, and
saint Margets Church shall bear south sou^heast to him.

And whosoever will come to ancker within saint Margets, let him ride at six,
seven or ^ight fatham.

Note, that from Ostend to Saint Katherins: the Flood sets east northeast and
the ebb west southwest.

Between Grauelin and Dunkerke: the flood runs Northeast and by North, and
the ebb sets southwest and by south.

From Woltersland to Graueling: the ^loud sets North northeast: and the ebb
west southwest.

From the Nesse to Woltersland: the flood sets North and by east land the ebb
sets south and by west.

From Bullen to Blackness, the flood sets to the northwa^ds, and the ebb to
the southwards.

From Staples, to Bullen, the flood sets north northeast and the ebb southwest.

From Cane to Staples the flood sets northeast and by north, and the ebb
southwest and by south.

From Deep to Cane, the flood runs northeast and by north: and the ebb
southwest and by south.

From Fecam to Deep in the fair way, the flood sets Northeast and by east,
and the ebb southwest and by west.

From Bereflecte to Fecam, four or five miles of the land in the fair way,
the flood runs eas^ northeast, and the ebb sets west south west.

From Berefleete to Sainehead: the flood runs ea^^ south east: and the ^bbe
west northwest in the fair way: and you may not come any nearer then 12.
fatham.

Item from Berefleete into the Bay of Hags: the flood sets southeast and the
ebb west Northwest.

Item, from the Cape of the Hagge, to the Island called Alderny: the flood sets
northeast, and the ebb southwest: and in the race of Blanchey it is so
likewise.

Item, from the Caskets to Berefleete, the flood sets to the eastwardes, and
the ebb westward.

And between Britany Bay and the Caskets, the flood sets northeast and by
north, and the ebb southwest and by south.

Item from Garnesay to the Caskets, the first quarter flood runs East
southeast, and then after northeast and the ebb south west.

It^m at (...) well within as without, the flou^ runs ^ast south wes^ and
the ebb west northwest.

Item from the (...) ufe to A^^^wracke along the shore, the flood sets east
and by south, and the ebb West and by no^th.

Item from the Fourne to Saint Powles de Lions, or the I Will of Bas^ the flood
runs east and by north, and the ebb west and by south.

Item, from Saint Mathewes to the Fourne, the flood runes north and by east,
and the ebb south and by east.

Item from the race of Fontenie to saint Mathewes, the flood sets North and by
East, and the ebb South and by west.

Item nigh unto Ushant North northeast of is a place which is two and fifty
fatham deep: and no ship can ^ide there, for the tide goes round about as a
which pool^.

Item from the Sean^es in the broad s^nd ^etweene that and Ushant, the ^^oud
runs east northeast, and the ebb west southwest.

Item, from Woltersland to Graueling, the coast along lies northeast and by
east.

Item, Woltersland lies off of the before wr^tten Rocks northeast, and a
little to the Eastwardes, and are distant 29. leagues.

Item, three Rocks which lie without the Cape of Cause, lie north northeast
from Swine head, and are distant five leagues.

Item, Sainhead lies from Berefleete east and by south and is distant 21.
leagues.

Item, Berefleete lies from the Caskets: east and by south, and are distant 16
leaques.

Item, the Caskets lies from the Fourn^ northeast, and a little to the
Eastwards, and are distant three and forty leagues.

Item, the Caskets lies from Saint Powle de Lions northeast, and are distant
33. leagues.

Item, Garnsay lies from Saint Powles Northeast, and a little to the eastwards
and are distan^ ^5 leagues.

Item, set Isles lies from saint Powles east northeast, and are distant 12.
leagues.

Item Saint Powles lies from Ushant East and by north, and are distant 26.
leagues.

Item, the race of Fontenie and the wester Penmarke, northwest and southeast
and are distant 9. leagues.

Item the course from Bellille to Penmark is west north west, and so you shall
go clear without the Pens, and it is from the wester Penmarke, to the
southeast end of Bellille 24. leagues.

Item Bellille lies from Use northwest, and it is from the northwest end of
Use, to the southeast end of Bellille 16. leagues.

Item the course from the tail of Aise to Use, is West northwest, and it is
from the tail of Aise to the northwest end of Use 13. leagues.

Item, whosoever will anchor by the Caskets or Hagge: let him go with the land,
within three or four cable length o^ the shore, for fear of the bank which
lies out from the land in four or five fatham, till you come at the Caskets,
and then when ye^ come before the Uillage, then let fall your anchor at five or
six fatham: and the bark do lie from Seine head southwest.

Item if you will anchor before Deep, bring the Church and the gibbet in one,
and then let your anchor fall at 10. fatham at a full Sea, and at a low water
at 7. fatham.

Item, if you will anchor in the Fossis by Fecam: you shall bring the m^l and
the fire Beacon in one, and keeping them foe g^e (...) west to the single, and
Anchor between the head of the Hordrelles and Reihem. And a ship that draws a
fatham an^ (...) water, m^st have half flood or better: and you^ (...) the
Fo^fis, for there you have ^ut a fatham and a half at a low water.

Item, who^oeuer will anchor under the Nesse: he must let fall his anchor before
Coudey at ten or twelve fatham, and if you go in any sarthar, you shall have
foul ground.

the kaskets


Now you must note when as you have the west end of the Caskets south from you,
being four Leagues or there about^ off there you shall have it eight and
thirty or nine and thirty fatham deep, reddish and s^elly ground, and
likewise many white stones: and there between Caskets and Portland, you shall
have 40 fatham deep.

Item, he that will go to Garnsay, must sail so the cape of Rokeine that is
the westermost part o^ the Island, and let him sail to the southwardes of that
Cape three or four Cable length. And then he shall go in along that souther
side until ye see the Castle, and when ye have the Castle thwart of you, then
anchor at five or six fatham.

Item, he that will anchor before Sherbrocke, let him cast anchor before the
Castle at six fatham, and he shall have good road for a west northwest wind.

It^m, without the west end of the foreland of Berefleet, lie rocks which are
dry at a low water, and lie a leagu^ from the shore, right before the great
sandy Bay.

Item, he that will anchor before the Hook, let him keep off a good way from the
Headland, and then ye shall see two Churches westwards off from him, the one
upon the high land, and the other Church below. And when you hau^ brought
those two Churches in one, then come to an anchor at a low water at six
fatham, and at a full sea, at nine or ten fatham.

Item, S. Powles and Ushant, are dist^^t 13. league^, and lie the one from the
other West southwest, and East northeast.

S. paulus


Item, he that will sail to the I Will of Base before Saint Poule de Lions, ye
shall see to the southwards a great rock and you may hale in fast by the
rock: and when ye are right against the rock, you may come to anchor at three
fatham at a low water, and at a full sea at seven or eight fatham. And from
the East corner of the Island, there lies a great rock, which at half flood is
under water.

Item, whosoever will sail into Aberwracke, he must leave the great rock to
the eastward of him, and run in South southeast, and when you come in by an
Island, and the rock is to seawards of you, then you shall keep along by the
shore of the East side. And when you have sailed a while, then you shall see a
rock that lies under water, and the sea breaks on it continually, and lies
in the midst of the entrye: and you may sail on which side you will of it. And
when you are a good way past the Rock, then you may anchor at four or five
fatham.

Item, north northwest from Aberwracke a league into the sea lies a bancke,
which has but six fatham on it at a low water.

Item when you lie off and about the Mollens, then must you bring the Abbay of
S. Mathewes, a little without the corner of Conket, but you may not bring it
far without.

Item, when you have Hieman hill in the northwest end of the foresaid little
Island, then are you right against the souther Mollen, then keep along the
east shore, till you come to Blanckhauen.

Item the Mollens are six little Islands, which lie in a manner southeast from
Ushant.

Item he that will sail from Blancke haven Northwards, let him r^nne North
Northwest: and let him take heed of the North corner of the Blanck haven, for
fear of a great Rock that lies before it, and then northwest and by west of
it lies a rock under water, which lies not above three fatham and a half deep
at a low water, and is a very sharp rock.

Item, whosoever will come to anchor in Blancke-hauen, let him let fall his
^nker against the middlemoste Bay, at fifteen or sixteen fatham.

Item a little by south of Conket, it is not above four fatham and a ^^lfe,
deep at a low water in a spring tide.

Item whosoever will sail by west the Uintner, he must keep the corner of
Blanke haven over the Blanken Mongie. And sailing so, you shall find four
fatham deep at a low water and a spring tide. And when as you cannot see
Conket from the North part: then are you by North the Uintner. And if you can
see in at the haven of Conket, then are you by south the Uintner.

Item he that will anchor before S. Mathewes corner in the best road: let him
cast anchor at sixteen or seauenteen fatham, and look that the said corner lie
northwest and by by north from you.

^tem, Saint Mathewes point and the race of Fontenie, lie the one from an other
north and by west and south and by east and are distant 5. leagues.

I^em, the corne^ of Saint Ma^hewes and the point of Cro^don lie the one from
the other east south east and west northwest, and are distant 3 leagues.

Item, the Collier lies of Saint Mathewes po^nt south sou^heast, and something
to the Eastwards two leagues.

Item, the Hen with her Ch^ckens lies by the West corner of Croidon, or Clers
down, and are covered at a high water.

Item, the Rock called the Nome i^ (...) the mouth or entry of Breast, and to
the Southward of tha^ about a quarter of a leagu^ lies a Rock which is not
(...) us at a s^ring ^ide.

Item the Falconers lie without Cr^^^on ^ little to the southward and it is a
great high rock: and ^ou may sail within it if ye go from Croidon to the
r^ce of Fo^tenie.

Item west southwest from the Collier h^^ to a league off, lies a rock no
deeper then so, (...) a (...).

Item, when you are forced to lie off and (...), nigh about the Collier and the
weathe^ i^ such (...) ^^^horite the Collier then keep the corne^ of the (...)
without the corner which lies from the northwe^^ and of Sa^nt Mathews Abbey:
and then you cannot (in so doing (...)).

Item, the thwart m^^nes of (...) the Borborow and when you have (...) in one,
then are you against the O^^h^rland and when you can see the Colliers break
above the water, then you man if you will sail hard by it.

Vsshiant


Item when you are of Ushiant, North and by West, so far as you can well see
the same from the Deck, then does the East corner appear the highest part of
the Island, and the corner is to the eastwards very steep down, and then the
land is plain almost to the west point, and the west point something steeping.

Item, when you are northwest and by North of Ushant then may you see through
the point which is to the southwards of the maine Island, and when you are off
o^ Ushant Northwest and by West, then is that point shut in on the shore.

Vsshiant


Item, wh^^ Ushant bears north Northwest from you, then does it app^^r^ like
as it is here above demonstrated.

Item, when you are off o^ Ushant northwest and by west, or west Northwest,
then lies there a great Rock of the northeast point, but you cannot well see
through betwixt the Roc^e and Ushant from thence. And along the northwest for
of Ushant, it is all full of great flat Rocks, and lie all under wate^: and by
the West end a little from the shore, ^^en a sm^l rock as it were two little
hillockes.

Item when ^ou are West and by North from Ushant, then their (...) another
rock to appear o^t at the north and but you cannot (...) see through betwixt
the rock and Ushan^.

Item, when you are one West of Ushant, then may you see two great rocks lying
without the northwest co^ner of it: and you may also see through betwixt the
corner and the ro^k (...) and ^he lands seems then to be all plain aloft,
seeming eue^ (...) place almost like high.

Item, when you are south and by west from Ushant, so far off as you may well
see it from the Hatches a^ Hull of the ship, if ye then look out of the top,
you shall see the West northwest end all ragged with many rocks, and at the
east southeast end lies a round rock, and you may easily see betwixt the Rock
and Ushant. And then a little from that east southeast of you, you may see the
Mollens which do lie in two little Islands, and there lies yet other three
Islands toward the maine, but those you cannot see from hence, and they lie
every one a good way off from an other and there lies many great Rocks about
that Island that lies next to Ushant and is full of Hillocks.

the mill

the abbe



Item, a Bow shoot from the point of Konket, lies the Uintner, and at a low
water you may see it, it is a little flat round Rock, and you may sail round
about it.

Item, the course from the Fourne to Blanchie haven, is East, and from the
Fourne to Blanchsablen Bay, South southeast.

Item, when you will sail from Saint Mathews point into Breast or Croidon, keep
the southermoste Island of the Mollens open to the Southwards of Blanck Mongie,
and go East Southeast in with Breast, and so you can take no hurt on the north
side, for it is broad enough.

Item the Mollins are six little Islands, and the highest of them is that next
to Ushant.

Item, on the shore at Fontnes head, a Southwest and a northeast Moon makes a
full Sea.

The Keyser.

The Lauender.

The Se^mes.



Item, the Seames lie off into the sea, 3. leagues west northwest.

Item, when you will anchor in the race of Fonteny, you must anchor at fourteen,
or at fifteen fatham.

Item, when any man will pass the race of Fonteny, let him set his prowe to
the North northeast, and let him take good heed of the Lauender, for ye flood
sets directly toward it, and there is a sonken rock hard by. Also, hard by
the Keiser there lies a flat rock, in the race on the easter side.

Item, if you come out of the sea with Saint Mathews point through the broad
sound, you shall see a high land up in the land eastwards, with three hills as
it were three heads, and the northermost is the highest, and half a league to
the southwards, there lies an other high hill, and is the highest above the
high land.

The shee^


Item, when the Sheet bears north from you or thereabouts, so as you may see
it out of the top, then it rises a^ here above is showed: and the ground is
small white sand, and many small Mazes in it: and it is there seven and fifty,
eight and fifty, and nine and fifty fatham deep, and you cannot from thence see
the Seames out of the top.

Groy


Item, when you are three leagues from Groy, or thereabouts, then it shows
thus as is set forth: and Groy and Bellille rises almost of one fashion, and
lie the one from the other North northwest, and South southeast, and are
distant seven leagues: and under Groy is likewise very good riding.

Groy


Item when Groy lies east north^ast from you, then it shows as is here above
described.

Groy


Item when Groy lies north and by w^st from you, then it shows as is above
figured.

groy


Item when Groy lies Northeast from you, then does it show as is above
portraied.

belille


Item when Bellille bears north northeast from you, then it shows like as
is above portraied.

Item the point of Saint Gindast and Glanons at the entering of Penodet lie the
one from the other southeast and northwest, and are distan^ four leagu^s. And
forts eschew the danger of the Sholdes in this Channel, let these marks
following be well remembered, and you cannot do amiss.

There is lying between Glanons and the I Will of Moton a ledge of Rocks, and to
go clear of them, you must leave one third part of the way toward the
Glanons, and the other two parts toward the I Will of Moton and so you may sail
without fear.

Item, when any man will sail into Penodet, he must borough hard by the maine
land, and the point of Glanons shall bear Southeast of him: then let him go
Northwest till he come before the haven, and there he may anchor at four fatham.

Item, whosoever will sail out of Cantper to go through between the I Will of
Moton and the Ledge, he must sail hard by Moton, so nie as a man may throw a
pound stone a shore, and then go southwest and by south, and when you are come
out with Glanons, then you may sail boldelye without danger to Penmarke: they
lie the one from the other east southeast, and west northwest, and are distant
9. leagues.

Belille


Item when you are West of Bellille, from the Northwest part of it four
Leagues from the land, then does it show thus as i^ here portraied.

Item, from Bellille to Use, the course is southeast and northwest and are
distant 16. leagues.

Item, when you will anchor at the east end of Bellille, bring your self a
little to the west wards of the Mill: and ancker in ten fatham, and ye shall
ride well for a northwest wind and for a southwest and by west wind, and there
is indifferent good ground, great red gravel: and when you will ride on the
Northeast side in Poldye Bay, anchor at 11. or 12. Fath. and then will the east
point cover you for a southeast wind. And for a west Northwest wind, set over
again toward the sharp steeple, and seek no better deapth then twelve or
thirteen Fatham and he that will, may ride in eight, ten or twelve fathams.

Item, he that will sail from the inner part of Bellille to Glanons, he must
go Northwest and by west, till he come against the the ^oint o^ Glanons,
which is called saint Ginvast, because of Sholds that lie there between
Glanons and Groy.

Use


Item when Use bears southwest and by south from you, about half a league
off, then does it rise thus as above is showed,

Item, Use is a league and a half in length.

Use


Item, when Use does bear north northeast from you: then it shows thus as is
above figured.

Item, he that will ancker under Use, he must let fall his ancker at seven,
eight or nine Fatham, for it is no deeper there, and you may not ride there at
less then seven Fatham, in the northeast side is the best Road of Use but
beware of a Rock that lies at the easter end as you come by it, for it is
very dangerous.

Item, the course from Use to the tail of Aise, is East southeast and are
distant 14. leagues.

Item, whosoever will sail from Use to Pillar, let him not come any nearer the
maine land of Larmester, then 12 fatham.

Item Pillar and Use lie the one, from the other North and by west, and south
and by east, and are distant a great kenning, and in that course lie many
sholds.

He that will sail from Pillar toward the Baye, let him beware of the Monkins
ledge, and let him go east north east, for the Castle of Larmester stands on
the east side of the Abbey. And when you have brought those two marks in one,
then you must ^et thwart over to Pietermein. And from P^etermein you may very
well go east Southeast, till you have brought the Ca^^le of Larmester and a
t^ee in one then you may anchor at 6. or 7. fatham, where you list, it is soft
g^ound

Item, he that goes without Bellille bound for the Bay, he must go east
southeast with Pillar, and it is distant from Bellille fourteen leagues. And
then from Pillar to the Monkens, the course is east northeast: and are a league
a sunder, and from the Monkens to Piet^rmein, the course is due east, a small
league of.

The marks to go into the Bay.
ITem, when you sail into the Bay, you shall see a little church standing upon
the high land, you must keep that Church in one with the land of the Collets,
and so you shall go in at the best of the Bay. And when you have the haven of
Premdie open, then you are directly thwart of the ledge: when you are past
that, then you may keep along by the shore of Collet in four fatham, and in
the Bay, a northeast and by east Moon makes a full sea.

He that comes to ride under B^llille before Saint Powles, may ride at 13.
or 14 fatham, and if he will ancker before Pogemeison, he must ride at 21. or
22. fatham.

And he that will sail in at the south Pe^trees, let him go along by the
south shore in 8. or 9. fatham, and when ^e is come as far as saint Ma^is,
then shall he keep the four of Rochell right over the Wood which lies to the
southwardes of the other poin^ of Rochell, and when the corner of the Wood
bears northeast of you, then he may set his course southwards or ^^rthwards
without danger.

Item, he that will sail by in the north Pertrees, let him edge from the
north side, for that is the sholdest, and the south shore is something deeper.
And when you are against the Blockhouse then shall you have 8.9. or 10. fatham
of the tail of Ayse, they lie southeast and northwest, then keep near to the
north shore, till you are thwart of the Wood, and the south sho^e from the
Monastarie is fl^t* and when it is half flood you may go over with a ship
that d^awes twelve foot water.

Item, he that will ride thwart of the Wood, must let fall his anchor at 7. or 8.
fatham, and there is soft ground.

Item, the tail of Aise lies east southeast and west northwest.

Item, the south Pertries lies from Rochell: from the road of Charle de Bloys,
west southwest into the sea.

Item, you must have the tide to sail from Rochell to the road of saint
Georges Island: and then forth to ^orage, and your course from the road of
Rochell to saint Georges Island, is south southeast, something more southerly,
and they are distant two leagues.

.S. marti^s yland


Item, when saint Martins Island lies northeast and by north from you: it seems
to you as it is here above portraied: and the land lies east southeast, and
west northwest and it is of length four leagues.

Item, when you come in by the south Petris, then take good heed to the south
shore of Oleron. for there lies out a great ledge of Rocks that breaks
always: and it lies not far of from the Island of Oleron: they are called the
Dogs, and you may boldly bear along by saint Martins Island in 6.7. or 8.
fatham.

Item the Lauerden lies a great league from the point of the Bosse, and in a
spring tide at ^ low water it is dry and uncovered. And you may very well
sail through between saint Martins Island, and the Lauerdin: for it is deep
enough, and then when you see the great tower at Rochell clean without the
Bosse: then are you clear of the Lauerdin: and in the Bosse there is at a low
water 5 fat.

Item a southwest or a Northeast Moon makes a full Sea there.

Item, when the white flat tower in Rochell (which is called Duke Charles
tower) comes to the southwardes of the point of the burned Island. then are
you right against Bangert, and then you may boldly sail into the Island of
Oleron.

The grounds and deapths of Britain.
ALso, he that is south southwest from the pole head of Burdiaux and in seven
and twenty fath. he shall see sandhills to the southwards. And he that will
sail from the pole head of Burdiaux to Rochell, and will come in at the so.
Peretrees, let him not run any nearer the Land, then thirteen or fourteen
fatham.

Item, at the ent^ng of the Peretrees, you shall have 13. or 14. fatham come no
nearer the shore then that deapth.

Item, when you are west northwest from the south Peretrees, and about 5. great
leagues from the shore: you shall have four and twenty fatham, and gross red
stony sand.

Item, if you be Southwest from the pole head of Burdiaux: and have (...) and
three fatham, and will go with the Pole head, th^n go Northeast, and you
shall not sail long, but you shall have sixty three, and sixty fatham. And
thereby you shall perceive you be in the right course to the polewards. And if
you have five and twenty fatham: then you shall see the tower of Cordon: that
lies east and by south of the polehead, and the same tower lies East
southeast of the wester Swach.

He that is betwixt Bellille and Use in 74. Fatham, shall be from the land of
Poitow about twenty and three leagues: and if then he sail toward the land
thirteen leagues, he shall find but 42 fatham.

He that is from saint Ellens southwest, and has three and thirty fatham: he
is about nine leagues, from the shore and when he comes to seven and twenty
fatham, he shall see the land if it be clear weather.

Item, to the westwards of Oleron: when you are two kennings from the land: you
shall have 50. fatham, And west northwest in the Sea from Olleron, about
eighteen leag. lies a ledge of Rocks which is called the Toper, and is not
above three fatham upon it at a low water.

Hoe that comes from Rochell outward by the North Peretrees, let him keep
in 15. fatham, and he shall not need to fear the Barges of Olleron, for hard by
the Barges you shall have twelve Fatham. And he that keeps this course
along West Northwest, he shall find without Use thirtye Fatham. And
between Use and Bellille in the fair way, or Northwest course, he shall
find thirty fatham, and in the inner channel five and twenty fatham.

Item, without Use, being within sight of the Steeple of the Church, you shall
have eight and forty fatham: and 2. kennings from Use, you shall have forty
^^tham.

Item, he that is southwest from Belille, and has seauentie two fatham he is
sixteen leagues from the Island. And if he be southwest from the west end of
Bellille, and have seauentie fatham, he is then twel^^ le^gu^^ from the land,
and if he be against the middle o^ the Island in sixty three fatham, he may
see the Island out of the shrouds.

Item being southwest from the west point of Bellille: and as far off as you
may in a clear weather see land upon the Hatches, you shall have about sixty
Fatham, and the ground is like Mustard seed^ br^s^^ in ^ mortar.

You shall have the deapth without thwart of Bellille, about five and forty
Fatham: come no nearer the land by night.

From Bellille to the Seames, come no nearer the Land by night then fifty
fatham.

He that sets forth from Bellille, and goes west and by North, and keeps on
till he come thwart of the Glanons, shall find fifty or sixty fatham, and
there lie Rocks without Glanons in the fair way, and on both sides of them is
about forty fatham.

He that is without Penmarke in forty five Fatham, sailing from thence
northwest, he shall double the Seames, and within the Seames he shall find five
and fifty fatham come no nearer by night for fear of the Bridge, for that
Rock lies a great way in the Sea west southwest off.

From the Seames, two leagues and more into the Sea lies a great ledge of
Rocks, and between the Seames and Ledge is 50. Fatham, and there is upon one
part of the Ledge but 7 Fatham deep, and 12. Fatham in some places.

Item, three leagues to the southwards from the race of Fontenie, you shall
find 64. fath. and the ground is something soft.

Item, betwixt the Seames, and Ushant is 56. Fatham and hard by Ushant you
shall have 45. fatham. And also far in the sea you shall likewise have the same
deapth, and therefore it is perilous to trust to the deapth there.

Item, seven leagues without Ushant, at the entering into the Sleue, you shall
find 70. fatham, and between Ushant and Aberwracke, in the fair way is 40.
fatham.

Item, in the course between Ushant and Silly, which lie southeast and
northwest, you shall find 70. fatham.

The Color of the ground in sundry soundings.
IN primis, he that soundes thwart of Glanons, shall find small black sand.

And he that soundes against Penmarke, shall find soft gravel like wax.

He that soundes against Fontenie head, shall have read sand mingled with
black.

He that soundes beeween Ushant and the Seames, shall find great read sand,
and some small red stones, and some black mingled withal.

And he that soundes being thwart of Ushant, shall find small white sand
mingled with white shelles, and certain things like white Hackes teeth, and
then he has Ushant northeast from him. And if he find all along small things
like needles, then Ushant bears from him southeast.

And if he cannot well judge by the grounds, let him then bear to the
northwards: and if he find deeper water then he is in the sholding of the
Seames, and open the broad sound.

And if he be between Ushant and the Seames in 70. Fatham: then you shall have
the ground small black stones with black sand. And if he find the sounding
to be great red sand, then he must stand to the northwards till he find
white sandy ground: with long small things like Hackes teeth, and then he shall
know thereby that he is in the entering of the Sieue.

He that sets out from Siserge: must go north northeast to go without Ushant:
and when you have 10. fatham then he is 19. or 20. leagues from Ushant: and
sailing on forwards, he shall have 70. fatham, and then he is a 11. or 12.
leagues from Ushant: and if he sound and find small whole shells, and little
stones like wax, then he is thwart the Seames. And finding this ground, let
him stand northwards, and if it be on a flood, let him take heed of Ushant.

Item, if you be between Ushant, and the Iel of Basse, in 60. fatham, you
shall find in the sounding small stones as big as beans, and thereby you may
know that you are on Britain side.

Item, if you be about the lands end of England, or about the Lesart in 70.
fath. then you are from the land 17. or 18. leagues, and you shall find in
your sounding small black stones, mingled in great red sand.

And if you be in the same course at 60. fath. then are you 12. or 13. leagues
from the shore, and there your ground shall be great red sand and under it long
small white things.

Item, if you find the like deapth toward the coast of Corenwa^l, you shall
not see the land so soon as you think, for you shall have that deapth endure a
long time.

Item by the Lyzard it is shore deep 25. or 30. fatham and the land hard by.

Item southwest of Silly, the ground is full of all sorts of little stones
like the parings of Cheese, and white small shelles mingled withal.

Item, to the southwards of Silly, the ground is gross sand.

Item, to the southwest of Silly, the ground is red stones and fine white sand.

Item 16. (...) s^^th of Silly, there is the ground likewise small (...) and
white sand.

Item. in 37. and 65. fatham, the ground is shelles and whitish stones with
sand.

Item, if you have small black stones something long and mingle^ wi^^ ^l^cke
gross sand, that shows the entering of the Sleu^.

Soundings along the Coast of Britain.
ITem if you be on the Coast of Lions between Ushant and Saint (...) sixty
Fatham, you are then within two leagues of the land, and take heed you come no
nearer by (...) Fatham, for you shall see base Britain and the R^cke al a
right.

Item within a league of Aberwracke, you shall have 50. fatham and three leag.
from the shore is there 56. fatham.

Item if you (...) thwart of Set Isles Northeast of ten leagues, you shall
(...) 52. Fatham.

Item, if you sail southwest from the Caskets 13. or 14 leagues past Garnesay,
and from thence to Set Isles in the Drech course, is 35 and 40. fatham.

Item, if on the day you lie off and on between Aberwrack and the Fourne, come
no nearer the Rocks then 35 or 40. fatham, and take good heed in the night.

Item, if you lie off and on in the day time between the I Will of Base and
Lanterger, you may come within 25. fatham of the maine without danger:

Item, he that comes with Dragnesse West southwest from Set Isles, let him come
no nearer by night then 40. Fatham.

The course to be kept sailing from the tail of Aise.
THe course from the Killiats or tail of Aise, to Use: is west northwe^^, and
from the tail of (...) i^ the northwest end of Use is 14. leagues.

Item, Bel^^lle and Bluet (...) ^^rthwest, and it is from the Northwest and of
(...) southeast end of Bellille, 16, leagues.

The course from Bellille to the (...) P^nmarke, is West Northwest: and so you
shall (...) enough off the Pens, and from the west (...) to the southeast and
of Bellille: is 19. leagues.

Fontenie or the Raze, lies from the wester Penmarke: northwest, and are
distant 8. leag^^^.

Saint Powles de Lions lies from Ush^nt east and by north: and are distant 16.
leagu^^.

Set I Will lies from saint Powl^^ (...) and i^ distant 12. leagues.

Garnesey lies from saint (...), and a little to the Eastwards, and are distant
(...).

The Caskets lies from saint (...) ^^^theast, and are distant 28. leagues.

The Caskets lie from the (...) and a little to the eastwards, and are dista^^
45 (...).

Berefleete lies from the (...) and by south, and is distant 16. Leagues.

Seine head lies from (...) and by north, and is distant 21. leagues.

Item, the Rocks which do li^ without the Cape of Cause lie north northeast
of (...) head, about 5. leagues.

Blacknes lies from the said Rocks of Cause northest and a little to the
eastwards: and is distant 30. leagues.

From Blacknes to Graueling, the land lies along northeast and by east.

And all the Coast of Flaunders lies east northeast and west southwest.

The lying of the Headlands of the Coasts of Porting all and Spain.
IN primis the point at Farao or Cape saint Mary, lies from the Rocks of
Chipiona, which lie at the east point of the entering of the Ru^er of Swill east
and West, distant 28. leagues.

The Cape saint Uincent lies from the Cape of Saint Mary's, West and a little
to the Northwards, and are distant 18. leagues.

Cape Picher lies from the Cape of saint Uincent, North and to the westw^^^s
distant 33. leagues.

The Cape of Rockesemper lies from Cape Picher northwest and by north and is
distant 8. leagues.

The Burlings from Rockesemper lie north northwest and are distant, 1^. leagues.

Cape Finister lies from the Burlings due North: and are distant 68. (...).

The entering (...) lies from Burlings, north and by east 55. leagues.

The Island of (...) lie from Cape Finister southeast and by south distant 16.
leagues.

The entering (...) Moors, lies from Cape Finister southeast, and (...) 5.
l^^gues.

The Cape of (...) lies from Cape Finist^r due north and is distant two leagues.

Siserge lies from Cape Corian Northeast and by east, and is distant 10.
leagues.

The Cape Pri^r li^^ from Siserge East northeast, and they are distant ^.
leagues.

The Haven of Ferr^e lies from Siserge due East, distant 7. leagues.

Ortingal lies from Cape Prier Northeast and by East and is distant 8. leagues.

Ortingall, U^r^ point, cape Penny, and Martinchaco in Biskaie, lies one from
an other east and west, and are a sunder 66. leagues.

The Island of Saint Cyprian lies distant from Ortingall 7. leagues.

The entering into Rebadew, lies from the Island Saint Ciprian southeast, and
they are distant 8. leagues.

The Rocks of Cappenye lie from the ^ntring of Rebadew northeast and by east,
distant 14. leagues.

Martinchaco lies from the Rocks of Cape Penie east, and is distant 43. leagues.

The point of Pewger lies from Martinchaco east and by south: and are distant
14. leagues.

The point of Bayone lies from the H^wgar northeast and are distant five
leagues.

Arkason lies from the point of Bayone due North, and is distant 18. leagues.

The Pole head of Burdiaur lies from Arkason due N. and is distant 18. leagues.

The south Peretris by Rochell lies from the Cole head of Burdiaux north
northwest, and they are ^^^tant 1^ leagues.

The courses to be kept in cro^^ing the Sea.
IN primis, the Cape of Clear and (...), do lie one directlye from the other,
south (...), and North and by West: and are distant the one from the other 155
Leagues.

The Tower of Waterfoord lies from the Groine, next hand due North, and are
distant 156. leagues.

The old head of Rinfal and the (...) south and to the eastwards, and north
and to the We^^wards, and distant 155. leagues.

Silly lies from Cisarge North and by east, and is distant 133. leagues, and
keeping that course, you shall go four leagues to the eastwards of Silly.

Ushant lies from Cisarge north northea^^, and are distant 108. leagues.

The Cape of Ortingall and the Lyzard lie the one from the other north and by
east, and south and by west, and are distant 130, leagues.

The Seames and the Haven of Rebadewe do lie one from an other north and by
east, and south and by west, and are distant 94. leagues.

Item, Pem^ark^ lies from Uiueris north northeast, and are distant 90. leagues.

Mouse hole in Cornwall lies from Cape Prior, North and by east, and are
distant 136. leagues.

Fontenie li^^ from Ortingal north northeast, and is distant 90, leagues.

Groy lies from Uiueris northeast and by north distant 97. leagues.

Bellille lies from Ortingall Northeast and is distant 90. Leagues, and keeping
your course so, you shall fall seven leagues by east (...).

And you mu^t (...), that seven leagues are here reckonev for a kenning.

Item Set I Will is three kennings to the Eastwards of the Fourne, and ther^ lies
by them a great soncken rock in the sea, and when (...) are North and by west
from the land so far an you^ (...) from the Hatches of the ship, then it
seem^ (...) loine Hill, and on the top on the east side thereof is a little
valley, and it seems to be half a ships length, and on the west side of the
Hill, is likewise a little valley: and it seems also to be about a ships
length long, and (...) that ^halle^ upon the west side stand 2. little Hills,
and the vttermoste of the two is the greatest. And then there (...) high hill a
good way within the land, and that lies a little (...) east the foresaid rock.

And when you are off from the said out Rock northwest and by north then you
can perceive but one Hillocke upon that valley that lies at the west end of
the Rock, and then the foresaid high hill lies a little to the westwards of the
out rock, and when you are a kenning from the land, west and by North of the
Rock, that is the East end of the foresaid deep Rock, and the west end
goes down a little slope, and you shall see a little hill or knot on the West
side of it, and then westwards from the said Rock lies another outer rock,
which is something lower and ^lmoste round. And on the east side of the Rock
lies a little ^not, and that i^ something greater, and a little way to the
westwardes of the same, lies yet two out Rocks more and are proportioned like
as if they were long h^lles, and the east side is the longest. And between
those (...) lie also 2 little small Rocks not much above the water, and ^hen a
man is a kenning northeast from the foresaid long hill, if ye look out of the
top, then it is all along between those out Rocks full of Rocks: and at the
west end of the broadest long hill do also lie long Rocks, and then a good
way westwards of them lies a long ledge of l^we Rocke^, and those lie in four
or five parts, and in in the (...) lie four round hillocks, which are little
higher then the l^^ge, and the most easterly hillocke lies alone a little to
the Eastwards from the ledge.

And then when you are past over the Stert, so far that you can see the land
to the northw^^^^ of Blanchie haven, then is there a long high hill, and is a
good way on the top all plain, and both the ends go ^^^^ping down.

The course of the tides of Portingall, Spain, and France.
ITem, at Calis Malis, an East southeast Moon makes a low water.

At saint Lucas of Barame^he, a southeast and by east Moon makes a low water,
and so along from thence to the River of Lishborne the like.

Item all the Coast of Spain, Gascoine, Poitow, and Britain, till Fontenie
head: a southeast Moon makes low water.

Item, in the River of Bordeaux at the mouth, a southeast and by south moon
makes a low water.

Item, in the race of Fontenie, a southeast and by east Moon makes a low
water.

Item, at saint Mathewes, a southeast and by south moon makes a low wat^r.

Item a south sout^ ^a^t Moon makes a low water at the Fourn^.

And likewise a south southeast Moon makes a low water at Aberwrack^.

Item, at the (...) Base or Roscow which is within that Island, and li^^ (...)
^ennings to the Eastwards of the Fourne, a south moon makes a low water, and
within the Island, a south southeast m^one.

Item, two (...) without Ushant, a South moon makes a low water, and the same
tide holds to the I Will of Base.

Item, in the fair way off of Ushant, a southwest moon^ makes a low (...).

Item, seven (...) within the i will of Base, a southwest moon makes a (...).

Item before (...), a south and by west moon makes a low water.

At the Set Isles, a south southwest moon makes a low water, and four leagues
^ seaboord the Isles, a southwest and by south moon m^kes a low water.

Item, before the Islands of Briehack, a south southwest moon makes a low
water.

And from Briehack to within the haven of S. Malloes, a south and by east moon
makes a low water on the shore.

And without in the fair way, from the I Will of Base to Saint Malloes, a
southwest and by south moon makes a low water.

Item, from Rock to saint Mallows, and from Granuile to Garnesey, there a
south moon makes a low water.

And within the road of Garnsey, a south and by east moon makes a low water.

Item from Ga^nsey to the Caskets a southw^st moon makes a low water.

And 6. or 7. leagues without Garnsey, a southwest and by west Moon makes a
low water.

Item between Caskets and Portland, a southwest and by west Moon makes a low
(...) the Coast and 7. or 8. leagues a sea board, a west southwest Moon makes
a low water.

Item, from Bearfleete to the Seinh^^^, in the fair way a west southwest Moon
makes (...), and when it is a high spring, then a west (...) ^oone makes a low
water.

Item from the point of (...) within the River of Seine, a West and by south
^o^ne makes a low water.

Item a southwest Moon makes a low water in the river of Seine within.

From the Strowter to Some, in the f^ire way, a south and by west Moon makes a
low^ (...).

Item, at Some in the Fosse, a (...) southwest Moon makes a low water, and at
(...), a west southwest moon makes a low water, and at a west Moon it is but
little flood.

Item, at Bullein and at Callic^, at Graueling, at Dunkerke, Newport, and
along all the Coast of Flaunders a west Moon makes a low water.

Waltersland.
Item from Waltersland to the abbey of the Brothers a southwest and by west
Moon makes a still water. And from thence to Blankenborow, and saint
Katherins, a southwest Moon makes a still water. And from Blankenborowe to
Saint Katherins, a southwest Moon makes a still water.

Item, a south Moon makes a high water at Swine.

Of the Havens along the Coasts of Spain and Portingall.
ITem he that will sail into Ribadewe, he shall go in hard by the point on
the east side and then he shall keep forth in the midst of the River, till
he come open of the sandy Baye, and there he may come to ancker at six,
seven or eight fatham.

And from Ribadewe eight Leagues to the Northwestwards, lies the sound of
Utueris, and he that will go into Uiueris with a southwest wind, he will go
in by a high point on the west side: and then let him keep on in the midst
of the harborough, going in a good way. And then come to an Ancker, where he
shall think good, at ten or twelve fatham.

Item, west northwest from Uiueris, six Leagues off, lies the point of
Ortingall, and it is a high land and without the point there stands five or
six high Rocks, which may be seen in the Seawards, at the least two
kennings of from the land. And those are Cleues, and there is between them and
the land 1^ fatham.

On the east side of Ortingall is a barred haven, and that goes to the town
of Saint Mathewes. And he that will ride there, let him ancker before the
Uillage, called Karinoo, which lies beneath the Castle of Ortingall. And that
is but a quarter of a league from the Rocks, which lie of the southwards. And
he shall have the Uillage North from him.

And Northwest from Ortiger three leagues or more, lies, the Haven of Sidero,
which is a good harborough: and goes Southwest in. And the Southside is a low
point, and he that will go in there, let him keep by the south side for the
northside is all Rockie and soul ground. And when he has sailed a little way
in, let him ancker at six, seven, or eight fatham.

cape prior


When you are north northeast from the Cape Prior, about five or six leagues,
then does the Cape show as here above is set forth.

Item, the flat end is the southeast end, and the other end is the northwest
end, and it lies by the Sea, and it is a high Hill and all ragged aloft. When
as you are to the northward, or southwestwards from the Cape Prior, and that
you are not far off from it, then is the Cape very high all along, and
seems on the top of it, as though there were many men sitting on a row,
every one a little way from another: and in the Northside of the Cape lies two
sandy Baies one by another, and on the north northeast corner of the Cape lies
a row of low Rocks, and in the midst of the row lies a great Rock, like
as it were a stack of Hay. And when you are come within the Cape, then is
there lying on the south side of the Cape a sandye Baye, and to the south of
the sandye Bay, lies a low flat Hill, which is not half so high as the high
land that lies within it: and westward from the south end of the flat hill,
there lies two great Rocks hard one by another, and to the southwards of the
sandye Baye, lies a point out from the entry, within which is the Haven of
Faroll.

When you will sail into the Haven of Faroll, you shall bear into the sound
of the Groyne, so long till you see the Haven of Faroll open on your Larboord
side, and then you may bear boldly in with it. And when you are in, then
before the town of Farol, you must go no farther, for within is all should, the
haven lies Northeast in, and it is a good Haven for Carracts which are bound
southwards.

He that will sail into the Groine, shall keep his course from Cape Prior
South and by east toward the Groyne, and if he be without the Cape Prior, then
let him keep nearest to the East side, for the Westerside is all foul ground.
And he shall see to the southwards from him about two leagues off or more, along
small tower with a flat head, and does not show veri^ hi^h abo^e the Sea: and
southward from that tower, as you would judge two bow shootes of* there
stands the town of the Groine: and at the Southeast end of the town stands
a Castle, and there is a great four cornered Tower which has no covering
above to be seen: and to the Eastward from the Castle, about four ship^
lengthe^ from ^he shore, there lies a ledge of Rocks, and when it is a full
se^, then you shall see but three or four rocks break above the water, but
when it is a low water, then you shall see a great many. And Southward from the
Castle about four ships length from the land, there lies a little green Hill,
and on that stands a little Church of S. Anthonies, and it seem^^ as though it
were a little flat house, and you must leave the high Tower* the ragged Rocks,
with the low (...), and that green little hill altogether on your s^arboord
side, and when ye are clean past that green (...) toward, go westwards in
before the Town, (...) he clean defended from the Sea, then ye may anchor
where you will and in what depth ye list.

Item, Sisarge l^es a little to the westwards of ye Groin^ and there is a
little Island, and is (...) on the top, and when you are a little way within the
Cape Prior, you may then see betwixt that little Island and Sisarge, and there
is no good Road under Sisarge, for the ground is not clean.

Mongi.


When you are northwest and by north of Mongie, then it shows as here above
is set forth.

Item, he that will sail into Mongie, and comes from the eastwards, he shall
find without at the east point a great high Rock which is called Uillen, and
by it stand high cliffes, which are sharp on the top, there stands 3. or 4. of
them a good way a sunder one from another, and they lie East south east and
west northwest, and along north from this point; and to the westwards about
four cable length of there lies a Rock under water: that he must leave to
the stereboorde side of him, and when he^ is past the Rock, then let him go
southwest in and then when he shall see the church of our Lady that is to the
wes^wa^ds, then let him sail directlye toward it, and then he may anchor
before the town, or between the Town and the Church at 7. or 8. fatham.

Mongy


Item, when you are from Mongie North and by West then it shows in this sort.

Item h^ that will sail (...), and comes from the westwards let him keep the
(...) the Groine without the point which lies there within, which is a great
round point, of a Ships length and it is called Bontrie, going thus till you
have opened our Ladies church, and when ye can see the church, ye may anchor at
12. or 15. fatham in the sound, or ye may sail^ in before the d^sage to the
best road.

Item, betwixt cape Finister and the point of the Groine lies a ledge of rocks
half a league into the seawards.

And whosoever will sail into Mongie, let him take heed of those rocks. And
betwixt Finister and the Groine lies a great sandy Bay: where is good riding
with an east wind at 10. or 12. fatham.

Item, when you have the Cape of Finister southeast and yeast from you or there
abouts, and are distant from it about five leagues or more, then it seems to
be as is figured above.

Item he that will ride under Cape Finister, let him sail two Cable length off
from the Cape, and go so on a good League till ye see our Ladies Church, and
then let him anchor against the Church at 10. or 12. fath. but when he has the
Cape west from him, there is no good road for a south wind, for the ground
there is foul and rockie all about.

Item, half a league to the southwards of Cape Finister lies a good haven for
ships that are bound southward which is called Seche, and lies eastwards from
the Cape: to go into that haven, you must sail in on the North side, but you
may not come very nie the North land, for it is not all clear of Rocks nie the
shore. And when you come nigh the haven, there lies a black Rock not much
above the water, which you must leave on the sterboord side and sail in about
the midst, between the rock and a point^ that lies toward Cape Finister,
going so a good way into the northwards, keeping you in the middle of the
sound, til you see a sandy Baye to the Stereboord side of you, and against that
sandy Baye, you may anchor at 10.11. or 12. fatham: and if you go further in it
is shalsower.

Four leagues from Cape Finister, to the southeastwards, lies ta^ point of
Mounteluer, and in the course thither lie many rocks on both sides, and the
most part of the rocks that may hurt you, are in sight. Mounteluer is a great
round hill, and there is a little tower on the top of it, and that is the north
point of the Moors.

He that will sail into Haven of Moors he must first bring the middle of the
Mounteluer right over a little valley, and when he comes before the Haven, then
let him run in east northeast toward Mounteluer, and when he is against
Mounteluer, he shall then see another high point lying on the Larboord side of
him, and then he shall sail off from Mounteluer in toward the other point, and
then he shall see the Town to the Westwards before him, and then let him
sail in before the Town, till he come to twelve or fifteen fatham, and
there anchor.

He that will sail into Pontasedre, he must sail in by the Island called
Bleedednes which is a flat land.

Then he shall keep the south side, going East northeast two leagues, and
then he shall finds before the midst of the haven a little Island, he shall
leave that on hi^ Larb^ord side, and to the southward of the Island, he shall
see a great Tower: then let him sail directlye before the tower, and there
come to an ancker, at six, seven or eight Fatha^, and he will ride under
that Island, which lies before the middle of the haven, let him bring the Island
to the westwards of him and so ancker at 7. or 8. fatham.

He that will go in to ride under the Islands of Bayon, let him keep near to
the Island: for at the northeast point of the Island, there lies a rock under
water, about a cables length from the point, otherwise all is clear.

He that comes out of the sea with the Islands of Bayon he shall not perceive any
other land but Graye Cliffes, and he that will sail in there coming from the
south let him leave the rocks which are in the southside of the Island between
him and the Island, and so sail in by the middlemoste Island, wherein the
Eremetage stands. Over against the great sandye Bay^, there is the best road
in twelve or fourteen fatham, and you may ride so nigh, till you have brought
that north end of the Island directly with that land which lies to the
northwards of the Island.

He that will sail into Bayon* let him sail in between the little Island of
Baiona, that lies on the north side of the eu^rie and the town, going in East
and by north, till he be as far within as the low town, which he shall see
on the south side, and there he may anchor at ten or twelve fatham: but he must
take great heed of a ledge of rocks that lie off the Island on the north side.

I^em* there lie five or six rocks by the point or corner of ye Cape Pasalis
these he must leave on ye stereboord side: and he needs not come to ancker,
before he see them shut in the other point that the high town stands on.

Item 19. Leagues to the southwards of this Island of Bayona, lies the river of
Portugal.

Item the river of the port of Portugal, is a good bard haven, and he that
will go in there, must keep the south side ^ee^^st him. And let him take good
heed of the Rocks which lie at the entering into the haven, and that is but a
short cut in. The south side is a lower land then the north side is.

Item, eleven leagues to the southwards of the port of Portugal, lies the
haven Aueiro.

Item, the Haven of Aueiro is a bard haven, and the land by the water side is a
low sandy land: To sail into this Haven, you must take your marks upon the
south land, and those are three Beacons of mastes, those three Beacons must be
kept in one, so long till you be come almost hard by them, then you must set
of northwards from them toward the other Shingle, which lies in the North side
of the Haven, and there ye may ancker at seven or eight fatham.

Item, seven leagues by south that haven, there lies the point of Teliacke by
Mo^dego, which is a fair foreland, and from the south point of Teliacke, a
mile to the east, southeastwards: there lies Mondego, which is a bard haven.

And westward from that haven a quarter of a league from the land, lies a
bancke of seven fatham, and behind that one may ride in 12. or 13. Fatham, it
is there good ground and fair, and there is a village thereby North Northeast
from the road.

He that will ancker under the Burlings, let him ancker before the Eremitage at
ten Fatham, he may come to it by which side he will, for it is clear there of
danger.

Twelve Leagues to the S. southeast of the Burlinges, there lies the Cape of
Rocksemper, a little within that point is the Road of Kaskales and he that will
ride there may anchor where he list, for there is good anchor hold in every
place, but no covert for a southwest wind.

Then a league Eastwards from the Kaskals of saint Gilians point and is the
north point of the River of Lisbone, and he that will sail in by the
Northland, he must keep the middle, and sail in betwixt the point of of
saint Gillians, and the land of the Kachopes, till he be within ^he point of
saint Gillians, and then let him sail on forth by the Northland till he come
to saint Katherins Bay, and then he must keep off again from thence toward
the S. land, for fear of the Rocks which lie by the Rastelles a bow shoot
from the north land, and that rock is at a low water in sight, and at half
flood it is under water.

The first white Church is Saint Katherins Church, which stands upon the
foreland of saint Gillians to the Eastwards by the water side, and the other
Church is the Rastelles and southeast from thence in twelve Fatham, is a good
road for all winds.

He that will sail in by the great deep of Lisbone coming from the
southwards, let him leave the sand of the Kachopes on his Larboord side, and
all the other sands that break on his Sterboord side and then he shall see the
white sandy Baye that lies next to the Eastwards of the point of Saint
Gillians, and keep that Northeast and by north of him going still along the
Kachop^s in 6. or 7 fatham and by these marks he may sail into the Bay of
saint Katherins and then let him keep two third parts of the river on his
Larboord side, and the other third part on the s^^rboord, and sail on so
until he come before the town of Lisbone, and he that will ancker before the
Coupers, let him ancker before the Lime Kill and more a thwart the River, and
lay the one anchor at 13. fatham, and the other at 4 f^t^am.

He that will sail in before the Fisher town, let him not come near the shore
before the Coupers gate, for there lies a rock a pretty way off, and it is il
riding thereabout in any place, because the streams turns about so there at ye
eb, and it is all rockie.

Item, within a stones cast to the southwards of the Kachopes is 8. fatham
deep, and by the same sand by the south side, it is 13. fatham deep within a
Ships length of the sand. And let him that will sail out at Saint Gillians
deep, take good heed of the ebb, for that sets sore toward the sand of
Kachopes.

Item, he that will sail in by the great deep of Lisbone, let him bring the
Castle of the Rastelles east, and by north of him, or let him bring the tower
of the Rastelles to the northwards of the souther foreland, keeping them so
till he have brought the little Church at S. Gilians point North northeast, or
there about from him, then go northeast off it toward S. Katherins bay: and
always reckon your tides well.

He that will sail to S. Toous, he must have half flood with him, and must
sail east from Cape Pitcher, then he shall see before him to the northwards,
a great high land, when he is past that high land, then let him keep the point
of Cape Pitcher open a good way without the high land, going with those marks
til he see the Tower to the northwards of him, then let him sail right with
the Tower, till he come near to it. And when he is as far in as the Tower,
then let him edge into the middle of the channel, and ancker at ten fatham.

Cape S. Vincent


Item, when you are off from Cape S. Uincent West or thereabout, then does it
show as is above figured.

He that will ride under Cape S. Uincent, shall pass on by the first point,
and sail a League further in under the other point by a red land, and there
ancker at 15. or 20. Fatham, for the ground is all clean thereabouts, and ye
may sail fast by the shore that ye may in manner leap a land.

He that will sail into S. Lucas, he shall at the entering into the mouth of
the river of Civil, when he is without before the haven, keep the steeple or
Tower of S. Lucas to the eastwards of him, and so go in at six fatham, and ye
shall continue so at six fatham almost a league. And when he comes in six
fatham he may ancker, and then he shall have have pilots come to him.

Item, to the westwardes of S. Lucas lies a sandy Bay* and you may sail
along by that in six fatham, or come to an ancker if you list.

Item, if a man come from the Northwardes, or North westwards then the point of
Chipiona lies thus, and to the southwestwards about two bow shootes, stands a
castle at the utter point of the land, and shows in form as here appears.
And about four bow shootes at the westwards of that, are certain rocks, which
at a low water are dry, that you may see them, you may by night come no near
to them then 12. or 13. Fatham, and then from thence to Rotta the coast is
Southeast three leagues and it is all a white shore and Southeast from Rotta
lies out a ledge of rocks about two bow shoots off the shore, and appears
always above water, behind that is the road for small ships, And the Castle
of Rotta shows thus, and the village stands a little to off the Northward or
there abouts, and has such a flat steeple, as is here portraied. And if you
will go with S Marie port then go E. or East and by south, and shun the north
shore something, for fear of the rock that lies about the midst of the
Chruel, about north from the Porkers, and if you will go to the southward of
the rock then take h^^^e of the Porkers, yet you may come meetely near them,
for it is indifferent clear ground to turn in at five or six fatham.

Callis.

Sebas^^an



WHen Callismallis is northward of you, then does it show thus, as is above
set forth.

He that will ride before Callis, let him sail in by the Rocks which lie to
the westwards of Callis, which are called the Porkers, and he must leave them
Rocks on the steereboord side, and bear in at six Fatham or more. And when
he is 3. or 4. cables length within the Porkers, that he may see the Town of
Callis open to the southwards, or South south west from him, then let him
ancker, at 3.4. 5. or 6, fatham. And right off the Porkers to the northward lie
sonken rocks, and there is at a low water but a fatham and a half upon them,

Item, the marks for the rock which lies between Rotta and the Porkers in the
channel are these, when S. Katherine Chapel which stands by west S. Mary's
Port by the waters side, and the house that stands upon the high hill which you
go over, two sheeres be brought in one And S, Mary's Cloister in Callis
without the north point of Callis, and also two high hills lying to the East
northeast, or thereabouts from you brought together, also after this manner, as
is here under showed, the less under the greater then are you even hard by
the said rock.

in granado


Item, when you are come out of the sea, with a large wind, then keep the two
hills open in that order, as they stand above figured, but if he keep them
shut in one then ye go directly upon the rock.

The Tides along the coast of Ireland and England.
ITem, on the West part of Ireland, an east northeast, or a west southwest
Moon makes a full sea.

Item to the Bay of Carmardin, in the mouth of Seuerne, and without in the
Channel, and at the Momlesse, an East and by north, or West and by south Moon
makes a full sea.

Item at the Island of Londey, an East Moon makes a full sea, and the same tid
holds to the Holmes. And at Bristowe an east and by south moon makes a full
sea.

Item, a northeast and by east, or a southwest and by south Moon makes a full
Sea at Silly.

Item* in Mousehole and in Falmouth an east northeast Moon makes a full Sea,
and three or four Leagues off the shore in the fair way, an east southeast
Moon makes a full Sea.

Thwart of Falmouth and Foye in the midst of the Channel, an east and by
south Moon makes a full Sea.

Thwart of Plymouth and Dartmouth, and all betwixt that and Portland in the
middle of the channel, an east southeast Moon makes a full sea.

In Foy, in Plymouth and Dartmouth, an east and by-north moon makes a full sea.

In the fair way between Dartmouth and Portland a southeast and by south
moon makes a full sea.

In the midst of the channel over against Portsmouth a south southeast Moon
makes a full sea. And the like tide is off the I Will of Wight in the midst of
the channel.

Po^tland.
IN the r^ce of Portland, a southeast moon makes a full ^ea, and in the road
of Portland, an East Southeast Moon makes a full sea.

A southeast and by south Moon, makes a full sea at the Needles in Wight. And
the same tide goes to Wolter horn on the land, and 3. or four leagues a
seaboord, a south and by east moon makes a full sea, and at saint Ellens a
southeast moon.

And it is to be noted that the flood sets in at the east end of Wight, till
the moon be at southeast or northwest.

At Calshot, Hampton, and at Portsmouth, a south and by east Moon makes a full
Sea, before Hampton a south moon makes a full sea.

From Wight to beachie, a south and by east Moon makes a full sea on the shore.

At Rye in the Cammer and Winchelsey, a south and by east Moon makes a full
sea, and without in the O^tune a south southwest Moon.

A south southwest Moon, makes a full sea in the road at Dongie Nesse, and a
south moon upon the Stell, and without in the channel there a southwest
moon makes a full sea.

From the Nesse to Romney head, a southwest Moon makes a full sea.

In the Channel and hard by the head, a southeast or north west Moon makes a
low water.

Item, a south moon makes a full sea at Dover, and in the Downs and at
Tennet, a south southwest Moon makes a full Sea, and a south or north Moon
makes a full Sea at the Shore.

The course of the streams of Ireland, and England.
IN primis, from the Cape o^ Dorsey, to the Island called Dordon, the flood
runs north northwest, and the ebb sets south southeast.

From Dorsey to Cape clear the flood runs East and by north, and the ebb
west and by south.

From the Cape of Clear to the Islands called Salteis, the flood runs east
northeast, and the ebb west southwest.

From the Cape of Ireland to the Island of Londey, the floods sets in northeast
and by east, and the ebb southwest and by west.

From Londey to Milford, the flood goes east southeast and the ebb west south
west.

From Milforde to Calvie, to the Bay of Carmardin which is the mouth of
Seuerne, and to the Islands of Momlesse, the flood runs northeast, and the
ebb southwest.

In the midst of the mouth of S. Georges channel, the flood runs north
northeast, and the ebb west Southwest.

In the Channel of Bristowe, the flood sets east northeast, and the ebb west
southwest.

From Silly to the Lyzart, the flood runs East and by north, and ebbes west
and by south.

From Silly to the lands end of England, the flood sets east northeast, and
the ebb west southwest.

From the Point of the lands end, to the cape of the Lyzard: the flood sets
east, and the ebb west.

From the Lyzart to the Stert, the flood sets northeast and by east, and the
ebb southwest and by west.

Item, in the middle of the channel, against Falmouth, Foy* Plymouth, and the
Stert, the flood runs northeast, and the ebb west southwest.

From the Stert to Portland in the middle of the Channel, the flood runs
East north east, and the ebb West southwest.

Against Dartmouth about two leagues from the shore, the ebb sets southwest
and by south, and to the Eastward, and on the south southwest side of the
entering in toward E^cester, about two leagues from the shore, the ebb sets
likewise southwest and by south.

Portland.
ITem, within Portland in the Bay, the flood sets northeast and the ebb
southwest.

From Portland to Wight tht flood runs east and by north, and the ebb west
and by south.

From Wight to Beachie, the flood runeth East and by north, and nie to the land
in 15. fatham, the flood runs northeast and by east, and the ebb southwest
and by west

He that will sail into Silly coming from by South, let him look well in
time, and take good heed of the rocks which lie in the midst of the sound
^ight before the mouth, and he may sail in on either side, ^ut it is best to
keep next to the east side, and keep the steeples or towers in the middle of
the same Bay* and then he may bear in an anchor at 6.7. or 8. fatham.

portland

.S. andrew



Item, when the Beel or point of Portland bears northeast and by east from
you, and that you are 2. leagues or more from the shore, then does it show
thus as before is portraied: but to the Westwards is much more land then here
is set forth, and a great deal of the west part, the land seems whitely to
look to.

portland


Item, when Portland bears North and by East from you, and that you are five
or six leagues off from the land, then it shows thus as above: and when it
lies north Northeast from you, then it seems plain ab^^e and r^^nd to look
on, From Dongie Nesse to Dover, the f^oud sets Northeast and by East, and the
ebb northwest and by west, At the south foreland the flood sets northeast and
by north and the ebb southwest and by south.

Hereafter follow the havens along the west coast of England.
ITem, east northeast from Beachie nine leagues off lies the Nesse, which is a
fair low point westward from the Nesse, two leagues off lies the Cammer of
Rye* a bard haven, and he that will sail into the Cammer coming from by
west, he must keep Beachie open without the point of Fairlee, and bear
Eastwards in till he have brought the house northwest from him, and then sail
by the Shingle in, and when he comes at the end of the Shingle, then let him
anchor within a cables length of ye Shingle northwest from the point in ten
Fatham, it is not wide there,

Beachey


Item, when Beachie lies northwest and by north from you, and that you are
about four or five leagues from the land, then it shows thus: and it is a
white chalkie land.

Item, he that will ride under Beachie he may ancker where he will, the East
side is all should, and on the West side is all good ground.

Beachy


Item when Beachie lies northeast off from you, and that you are two leagues
from the land, then does it appear thus, as above is figured.

Beachie lies from the Caskets, northeast and by east about forty leagues.

Wigh^


Item, when Wight bears Northwest from you, and that you are fou^e leagues
from the land, there you shall have 35. fatham, and the ground is great rough
stones.

He that will sail^ in at the east end of Wight, let him take heed of the
Ow^^s, and fetch the sholding of the west side of the deapth before saint
Ellins Church, and there he may ride at seven or eight Fatham. And he that
will sail in, let him bring the Lime kill that lies above Portsmouth, and the
steeple of Portesemouth in one, and so sail in keeping two third (...) of the
channel on the Larboord side and sail in so to (...).

At the East end of Wight a northwest Moon makes the entry of the first
quarter of the flood.

He that will sail in at the west end of Wight, he must look well to the
tide, for the flood sets very sore upon the needles, and the ebb likewise
westwards upon the Swingilles, and chalkie Rocks, which lies westwards of the
Needles, and is very narrow between the Needles and the swingilles, and let
him directly sail with the Needles, even tht he come fast by them, and sail
in very near them, and when he is on^e within the Needles, then let him keep
off from the land before him because of the ^ocks called the Wardens, which
lies on the Wight side near the shore.

And he that will ride under the Beachie which lies on the other side, let him
ancker at seven Fatham, and if he will go any further in, let him keep two
third pa^ts of the Channel toward the maine land, and sail so in till he
come before the Uillage of Yarmouth where the new Bulwark stands upon the
Wight side: and if he will sail up to Caus^o^, then he must sail on till he
may see the town of Hampton appe^r without the abbey, and ancker nerest to the
west part of Causho^.

He that will ride without Hurst by the Needles, let him bear in and ancker
before the Uillage in the North Channel at three Fatham at a low water, and he
shall ^aue the Needles South southeast from him, and at a deep tide, ^he flood
does not rise there above one Fatham.

He that will ride in Portland road, let him ancker at ^. fatham.

Item, 12. leagues to the Westwards of Portland, is a road called Torbaie, and
lies within the head which is called the Berrie, and Portland and that lie east
and West, and on the East side of the Berrie head stands a Church and there
against the Church is very good riding at 6. or 7. Fatham.

Item, when as Torbay bears North Northwest from you, and that you are about
three Leagues from the shore, then the land appears in this fashion.

Dartmouth.


the stert




He that will ancker under the south point of Torbay let him ride at 7.
Fatham, and he shall ride well for a southeast wind.

dort

(...)

Torsbay



the stert


Item, when Der^mouth bears north northwest from you, and the point of Torbay
north and by east of you, then shows the Stert and Dertmouth after this
manner as is here figured, and then you may see the little Bulwark in the
East side. and Sa. Patricks chapel in the west side, and a little ^lat Church
to the westwards of you.

Item, the Stert lies from the Fourne, north Northeast easterlye, and they are
distant 43. leagues. the stert


Item, when the Stert is west northwest from you, and two leagues off from it,
then does it show like as is above portraied.

the stert


Item, when the Stert bears Northwest from you, and you being 4. or 5. leagues
off it, then does it show like as is here above set forth.

Portland lies from Ushant Northeast, and is distant 48 leagues.

portland

portland



Item, when Portland lies west and by north from you, then it shows after
this manner.

Item, when Portland bears Northeast and by North, then does it show thus.

He that will sail into Dertmouth, let him go directlye with Saint Patricks
Chapel, which stands on the west point of the Haven, and let him take heed
that he do not bring that village which stands within on the west side of the
haven without Saint Patrickes Church, but let him keep the uttermost house of
the same Uillage on the East side of the haven a way in sight without the
Bulwark of the west side by Saint Patri^kes Chapel, and then can he not take
any hurt on the rocks in the Range by the West p^int, and when he is a little
way within the point that lies on the east side, he shall see a sharp corner
of a Cliffe, and without ye sharp corner of the Cliffe lies a rock under water
very dangerous, let him leave yt on the steereboord side, and when he is past
that Rock then he may keep himself in the midst of the haven, and bear in
without danger.

He that will ride under the Stert, let him Ancker in ten Fatham there he
shall have cle^n^ ^round: the road is to the Eastwards of the S^ert. To the
West Northwestwards of the Sterte six leagues, goes in the sound of
Plymouth, he that will go in there, must bear in the midst of the sound
directly with an Island that has a Chapel on it: and if he be disposed to
ri^^ within the Island: when he is so far in as the Island, then he must
borrough hard by the East side thereof in 10. ^a^ham, and when he has brought
the Island to the southwards of him, let him anchor in six or seven fatham.

He that will sail into the E^ster harborough which is Catwater, let him go
along by the east shore, ^ill he come before the Blockhou^e at the entry of
Catwater, and he must take very good heed of the southeast point of the
entry of Catwater, for it is al foul ground and shallowe, let him sail in by
the N^rthwest point within two ships length of the Blockehouse, and then run
into the northeast and by E. about a bows shoot in and ancker in 4.5. or 6.
fatham.

To the Westwardes of Plymouth lies a round hedge, which is called Rams head,
and south and to the westwards of that 3. leagues into the sea, lies a rock
which is called the Edie stone, and it lies south southwest southerlye from the
How of P^imouth.

He that will ride under the Rams head to the eastwards may ancker at eight or
nine Fatham within a bow shoot of the Cape, for there is all clean ground.

Item* four leagues from the Rams head to the Westw^rds, l^^s an Island hard by
the shore, and it is a little round Island and with small Barqus ye may ride
within it, and go through betwixt the maine and in the east side is the best
coming in, and the best riding is against the midst of the Island, hard by it
to ye eastwards goes in Low haven.

Item, two leagues to the eastward of Low, lies the haven of Foye, and a
little byeast Foye, lies a Rock under water, and so long as you can see Low
Island without the point which lies to the westwards of it, you can take no hurt
by it.

Item, Foye is a bard haven, and at the entry of the haven, there sta^ds on
either side upon the high land, a church, and that which stands on the east
side is the lesser, they are square towers something white, and has a flat
steeple at the west end.

He that will sail into the haven of Foye, must have half flood at the least,
and let him sail in the midst of the chanel, and when he is between the two
points, he may keep along which shore he will, but the west shore is the
wydest chanel, by the stakes and tower of the steeple which stands in the west
side of the haven: and if he come in by the west shore, then he must when he is
within those stakes, bear off a little from the west shore, almost into the
midst of the channel next to the west shore. Before the village which lies on
the west side, is a little dock, and there a ship may lie a flote at a low
water, or ye may sail further in, and then you shall see a wall standing on
the west side of the haven, and a village behind it, there is good ankering a
ships length by south that wall on the east side, but ye must ride by two
Cables, or else you may sail further in along by that Swach that lies on the
west side, wherein the water mill stands, but take heed you come not too nigh
the north corner of the Swach, for there lies a rock, and when you are a
little past that. ye may row into the midst of the stream, there is best
lying for ships that draw much water: and to the southwards of the foresaid
wall, a ship that draws 18. foot water, may well ride a flote

Item, there lies within the east point, a village even at the first entrye,
and before the village is a poole, where two or three ships may well lie, and
the deepest is within at the east point. And if he that comes in by the east
shore, will not go into that poole, then let him (when he comes a little way
within the stakes on ^he east shore) fall something off, and keep nearest to
the west shore, for on the east side lies a Flat all along, until you come
against the first house of the west village. And if perchance the wind were so
scarce that you cannot bear in, then ye may come to an anchor without, so as
the ship may ride without the stakes. And then ye may warpe in with Hausers,
and lie behind the stakes, with a ship that draws twelve or fourt^ene soot
water a flote at a low water.

Item, the haven lies N. northeast in, till you be past the Church of the
Uillage which lies on the west side, and then it lies north in, til you be past
the watermill, and then north northeast in.

And he that will anchor without, to tarry his tide, or for any other occasion,
he may come to an anchor at six, seven, o^ eight fatham, so that he have the
Church that stands on the east side, north northeast of him, for there it is
clean ground all without.

The haven of Foye and Daddeman, lie the one off the other, southwest and
northeast.

Whosoever sayleth into ^almouth, let him take good heed of the rock that
lies without in the middlo before the entering. And he may leave the rock on
which side he will, but the deepest water is to the eastward of the rocks. And
when you are past the rock, then may you anchor in the midst of the haven
where you will, at five, six, or seven fatham, and take heed how you sail in
any further, for fear of the banks which lie within. And if you will sail
within the banks, then you must have good knowledge of the marks of the haven.

He that will sail into Helford, had need to take a quarthe flood with him,
and let him sail by the east point nigh the land at four fatham, till he see
the steeple on the southside bear south of him; then he may anchor against the
steeple at four fatham. And by the west point lies a rock under the water, in
the west side of the haven.

He that will come to anchor in the road of Moushole, he must sail hard to
bywest of a high round hill, and to the northwards of the hills side, lies a
white ledge of rocks on the shore, and against that is the road, in five or at
seven fatham, it is not very clean ground.

He that comes from the south, and will sail into Silly, let him look out in
time, for fear of the Rocks, which lie in the middle of the entering, right
before the mouth on either side, but it is the best to keep nearer the east
side, and then keep the Church of Saint Mary's in the midst of the sandy
Bay, and then you may anchor at six, seven, or eight fatham.

Item Silly lies west southwest off the lands end of England nine leagues

Item, from the point of the lands end, to the Lyzard, the course is southeast
and by east eight or nine leagues.

Sands at the Thames mouth.
NOw to know the marks of the last, there stands a thick bushie tree upon
the foreland, and you must bring Margate by south off that Bushy tree, to sight
wit^in two yardes length, and keep them so, and you shall pass between the
Norther and the Souther last, and when ye have brought the recouluers in one,
then are you out of ye danger of the Lasts, then keep on your foresaid course
toward Sheppy, and when you have brought the high land Sheppy to the Southward
of you, then you shall see a white Church standing on the North side, and three
or four high trees there by it, bring the said white steeple into the trees,
and go so into the lowernesse, and the you shall come to the sea Rocks, and
that lies West Northwest in.

At the Foreland, a south or north Moon makes a full sea, and the Reculuers
are two sharp steeples upon one Church, take heed you come not on the lands
end at a low water, for there is not above two foot water deep.

The deapths over against England.
IN primis, the Coast of Flaunders in the right and used channel, is not above
24. fatham deep.

In the midst of the chanel between Dover and Blackenesse, lies a bank, which
has not at a low water above 3. fatham deep on it.

And within half a league to the southwards of the bank it is 27. fatham
deep, and to the northwardes, five and twenty fatham.

Between Winchelsey and Pickardie, the deapth is 26. fatham.

Item, under Ouldersey in the channel, the deapth is 25. fatham.

Item, the channel by east of Beachie, two leagues off, is 27. fatham deep.

Between Beachie and Seine head, in the channel, is 38 or 40 fatham deep.

Between Wight and Beachie, it is in the channel, 38. or 40. fatham deep,

And three leagues without Wight, it is 37. fatham deep and it is not very
clean ground there.

Item, from Berefleete to the midst of the depth of the channel, you shall
find it all rockie, and from the midst of the channel, to the East of
England, it is all clear ground,

It is very perilous to trust to sounding by the Island of Aldernay, for hard
by the land is forty fatham deep, and west southwest off, by the Kaskets, it
is eight and thirtye fatham deep.

Between Portland and the Kaskets, in the channel, is fortye fatham And two
leagues a sea-boord the Island of Aldernaye, is a certain place, which is but
thirtye fatham deep, whereas in all other places between Porteland, and that
Island, it is forty Fatham deep in the channel.

Item to the south southwestward, about a kenning from the Stert is about
fortye Fatham, and the ground is red sandy clay.

South southeast into the Sea from the Stert, and a kenning of it, is 45.
Fatham deep, and sailing from that depth southeast a little further forth, ye
shall find 55. fatham. And these uncertain deepes are between Rocketo and
the Stert.

Item, to the Southwards of the high land of Dertmouth in the sight of the
land, it is about 43. fatham deep, and the ground is white sand, with some
little shelles amongst it, and very little small long things like unto such
Maggots as are sometimes in Bacon.

Item, 5. or 6. Leagues southwest from the Stert is 40. Fatham deep, and the
ground is gray red sand, reddish, and shellie.

Item, 10. or 12. leagues Southwest from the Stert it is 47. fatham deep, the
ground is black gross sand and shellie and little rough things like Maggots,
with some small stones amongst.

Between Dartmouth and Set Isles, in the channel is 55. Fatham, and from the
town of Plimmouth 4. leagues south southwest into the Sea, it is 30. fatham
deep fair white sand.

Between the Lyzart and the Stert, come no nearer the land by night then 40.
Fatham. And if you will ancker between those two heads, you shall ancker at
25. fatham, and be within the stream of the foreland.

Between Joy and the I Will of Basse in the Channel is 58. Fatham, and at the
lands end of England it is 50. fatham deep.

Between the Island of Londey and Silly, it is in the right course 40. fatham
deep.

Item ten leagues to the southeastwardes, from the Island of Saltes is but 20.
fatham, and the ground is small red ozie sand.

Item between Milford and the Saltes, in the channel is 40. fatham.

East southeast from the dale of Milford, right against it about a bow shoot
off lies a sonken rock under water.

From the Island of Saltes to the Cape of clear, in the right course is 56.
Fatham, come no near the land in the night than 40. fatham, for then you are
but three leagues from the land.

Item, if you sound being thwart of the cape Clear, and find 80. fatham deep,
and the ground clammie, and small white sand, then if it be clear weather,
you shall see the Cape out of the top, and that ground and deapth is to the
southward of the cape.

Item southward from Dorsey three leagues from the land, it is 70. fatham deep,
and the ground is gray sand mingled with small shelles.

The lying of the land of England along the coast.
IN primis the point of the Nesse, lies from the point of Dover southwest.

Beachie lies from the point of the Nesse West Southwest.

Donnoze in the I Will of Wight lies from Beachie West and by South.

Item the coast along the I Will of Wight, lies West and by north, and the Wight
lies from Nulfers Haven Westwards.

Portland lies from Wight, West Southwest twelve leagues.

The Haven of Dertmouth lies from Wight west south southwest westerlye.

The Stert lies from Portland west, and by south 16. leagues.

Plimmouth lies from the Stert, west northwest six or seven leagues.

Dodman lies from Plimmouth, southwest and by west 13, leagues.

The Lyzart lies from the Stert, West and by south 25. leagues.

The lands end of England lies from the Lyzart, UUest northwest westerly 8. or
9. leagues.

Item, it is from the point of Dover to Beachie eighteen leagues.

And it is from Beachie to Donnoze 20. leagues.

From Donnoze to Portland, is 16. leagues.

From Portland to the Stert, is 16. leagues.

From the Stert to the Lyzart, is 22. leagues.

From the Lyzart to silly, is 18. leagues.

And from the Lyzart to the lands end of England is 9. leagues.

From the lands end to ^^llie is 8. leagues.

Silly lies from the lands end of England west southwest, and from the Lyzart
silly lies due west.

The lying of the land about the lands and of England, and of the coasts of
Ireland.
IN primis, the Island of Londey, lies from silly northeast and by North, and
are distant 30. leagues.

Waterfoord lies from silly, North and by east 30. leagues,

The haven at Waterfoord lies from the lands end of England, northwest and by
north, 31. leagues.

The haven of Crock lies from silly northwest 35* leagues.

The Cape of Clear lies from the Island of Salteis, west southwest 43. leagues,
and between them lies the Old head which lies from waterfoord 24. leagues.

The Island of Salteis and the Island of Beumaries or Holihead, lie the one from
the other northeast and by north and southwest and by south, and are distant
42. leagues.

The Islands of Dorses lies northwest and by west from the cape of Clear, and
are distant 12. leagues.

The Islands of Blaskey lies from the Dorses North and by west, and are distant
19. leagues.

The Cape of Strauen lies from Blaskey North and by west and are distant 8.
leagues.

The courses, the lying of the coasts, and the tides upon the North Coast of
England.
Orfordnes. Leistow. Yermouth. Winterton.



NOte well, that here the flood comes from the Northwardes. And first you shall
understand, that the lands end and the Nesse, lies North and something to the
Westward, and south something to the east ward, and they are distant two great
kennings, and there a south or North Moon makes a full sea.

Item from the Nesse to Orfordnes, the course is north northeast and to the
eastwards, and they are distant two small kennings, and a south or north Moon
makes a full sea.

Item from Orfordnes to Leistowe, the course is north, and they are distant 8.
leagues, and at Leistow a south southeast Moon makes a full Sea.

Item, when you have the foreland southwest of you, and that you are about
eight leagues distant from it, there are bancks of 17.20.23. and of 24. fatham,
and the ground is red sand with white shelles, and some stonye ground likewise.

Item our Ladies bancke lies at the head between Calis and Blacknes, about
7.10. or 12. fatham.

Item, hard by Goodwin you shall have 26, fatham, and the ground is gross red
sand.

Item, the west point of the foreland and the Northeast point of Goodwin sands,
lie the one off the other southeast and by east, and northwest and by west, and
are distant 10. Leagues.

Item, the Souther head of the Goodwin and the point ar Dover, ^ye the one off
the other southwest and northeast.

Item from Leistowe to Yarmouth, the course is north northwest and they are
distant 2. leagues, and a southeast or north northwest Moon makes a full sea
at Yarmouth.

Item from Yarmouth to Winterton, the course is north northwest, and they are
distant 2. leagues.

From Winterton to the Shield is no direct course, but they are distant 9.
leagues, and there an east or west Moon makes a full sea.

Item from the Shield to Humber, the course is Northwest, and they are distant
three kennings, and a west southwest moon in Humber makes a full sea.

Item, from the Shields to Flamborough head, ye course is Northwest, and they
are distant 30. leagues.

Item, from Humber to Flamborough head the course is North and by west, and
they are distant 12. leagues.

Item, from Flamborough head to Whitby, the course is northwest and by west and
they are distant 10. leagues.

Item from Scarborough to Whitby, the course is north west, and they are
distant 5. leagues.

And between Scarborowe and Whitby, lies Robin Hoods Bay, and a Southwest or
a northeast moon makes a full sea there.

Item from Whitby to Hartlepoole the course is west northwest, and they are
distant eight leagues.

Item, from Hartlepoole to Tinmouth, the course is north northwest, and they
are distant nine leagues, and a southwest or a northwest Moon makes a full sea
there.

Item, all along the North Coast of England, the flood comes in from by north.

Item from Robin Hoods Baye to Tinmouth or Newcastle, the course is northwest.

Item from the Naze of Norwaye to Skeutnesse, the course is Southeast and
Northwest, and they are distant five kennings. And to know Skeutsnesse it is a
plain low land, and to the eastward of Skeutsnesse, there goes in a deep
sound toward Berghen. And on the east side of the same sound, lies a high
round rock or Cliffe dry about water.

A note how you shall know Skeutsnesse.
SKeutnesse is a plain low land, and to the the eastward of it does a sound
run into Berghen. And to the eastward of the said sound, lies a high round
rock or Cliffe, and is called the Bocke. And four leagues to the southward of
the same sound, lies another round rock or Cliffe in the sea and is called the
west Stone, and between the west stone and the sound lies a little low Island
which is called the Whitings eye, and to the westward of Skeutsnesse 4. leagues
in the sea lies a little Island which is called Whitskersen, and shows as it
were two little hills, but it is not high.

Item, skeutnesse and Oldersound lie one from an other, north northwest, and
south southeast, and are distant seven kennings.

Item nine Leagues to the northward of Skeutsnesse lies a high round Cliffe
which is called sick, and to the Southward of it, does go in the Bomwell, a
little by north the Saltfoorde, and to the southward of the Saltfoord it is all
low land, and to the northward is high land.

Item between Skeus^nesse and Oldersound, being a pretty way from the land,
if you look on it. It seems as it were all broken land on the south side, and
there are many sounds that go in between Skeutsnesse and Oldersound.

Item to know Oldersound, there is a high cliffe yt lies alone, and when you
are a good way off to the northwards, it shows like a sail to the southwards
of you, and seeing it from the westward, it is round.

And from Oldersound to Kin it is four leagues and they lie north and south:
and between those two is a haven but you must either go into Oldersound, or
into Kinsound, and a seaboord Kinsound, a goo^ way from the land, are many high
rocks, And to know Kin, there is a round dry rock^ at the southwest end of
Kinsound, that stands up forked, like a Bishops miter and lies all alone.

Item from Kinsound to Oldersound is three Leagues, and they lie north and
south, and between those two lies a high round sharp Rock, and there is no
haven between them.

Item, from Oldersound to Stade is eight leagues, and they lie northeast; and
south southwest.

Item you shall understand, that between Oldersound and Stade, is a high land,
and there you may sail all along by the shore, there are no out rocks,
whereby you may take any hurt, for they are all in sight. And there is a good
haven in Oldersound, and by Kinsound is likewise a good haven which is called
Ulwatch.

Item from Stade to Flouare, or Herie, is four leagues and they lie east
northeast, and west southwest, and is all broken Cliffes betwixt.

Item, from Stade to Flo Godsche sound, the course is northeast, and S.w. and
they are distant 7. leag. and Flo watch is a round Cliffe and lies alone, and
the East end to look upon, seems a little lower then the west end, and
coming in from the southwards, or by the southwest end, there goes in Flo,
and it is a good haven: and by west off that you shall go into Giske, and that
lies in east and West, and is a very good haven, and between Stade, and
Go^ssanne, lies a little Island which is called the Swin, and is clean ground
to sail about.

Now for to know Giske, it is a low plain land, and there is church with a
church yard on the land, and before it lies a black rock, and two or three
sonken rocks, whereon the sea does commonly break.

Item, when as you are three or four leagues West in the sea of Giske, then
does that land lie along northwest and southeast, almost threescore and
seven leagues, and then more easterly.

Now sailing from Giske, you shall not of long come to any other land, but an
Island called Grip, then when you are thwart of Stames Heft, which lies on the
maine land, for Grip lies a kenning off into the sea, and to the Southward of
Grip is the best going in. And your course from Hellen is all easterlye, and
then you shall see a high land, lying before you, and that is called Toster
Poster. And when you come by the east land, run all Northeast in, so long till
you have a stream or a tide that meets you, and you have havens on both sides
of the land.

The courses to be kept in sailing on the Coast of Norway.
NOw he that will sail in at the easter strait or entry by the Naze of
norway, then let him with an east wind sail in hard by ye Naze, and let him
take heed of ye rock called the Bishopbode^, for that lies in the midst of
the entry, and lies above water. And when you shall be within that sound
where you shall ride in, there lies a bom^ within the head of that land: anchor
behind that where you will.

And if it be so, that you will go in at the Easter straight, or entry, then
you shall bear in by Maren, and when you are a little within, there stands a
little Warder which is a Beacon or mark before the entry, which you may see
through the midst, and take heed of that shelf, and then go on so in, and
let fall your ancker.

Item, if you will sail in at the Scarsound, you shall know that land by the
Cow and her Calfe, which is a broken land, and there lies a rock without which
is called Mels, and there is an other which is called Sparuay, and then when
you come further inwardes as far as the Heart, then you may sail between the
two Beams or marks, or else through between the other shore and the two marks.

Item, if you will sail into Hesnesse, then keep you near to the west shore,
there lies a rock which is called the Cognaile, take good heed of that And
also there lies yet an other which is called the Gray Hollome, you mu^t leave
that on your starboord side: there are two Beacons set up, and when you have
brought those two in one, then are you even thwart the Cognaile: and then as
you come inwards, there lies a Bome, which is a mark to take heed by, on the
Larboord side: You shall know that land, by that it is a high land, and to the
eastwards lies the Drommelles, and you may well see the Church of Mardowe, and
if the weather be such that you cannot fetch Mardowe, then you shall run three
leagues further into an other haven, which is called Long, there lies a round
dry rock before it, and there stands as it were a Beacon with a Barrel on
it, keep well on that shore where the Barrel stands, and at the entering in on
the starboord side, there is a hand which points you to hold off from that
place: and also there is a Baye or Bome, which lies in two fatham and. you must
take heed of that place.

Item, if it were so that you would sail into Calfesound, then you shall hale
in by a high land which is called Winge, and there stands five Warlockes or
Bemes upon it, the middlemost is the highest, and is on the north shore, and if
you come out of the Sound, you shall know that land by the Distill, and those
are all out-rockes, and there where the five Warlocks or Beacons are upon the
shore where the middlemost is the highest, there you must keep something off
from Distill, for it is not all clear, and keep on so North, or rather to the
westwardes, then to the eastwardes there abouts, for that shore is clear of
Rocks, and look that you run not upon the Rocks which lie above water,
behind which you shall ride.

The courses and d^stances along the coast of Norway.
ITem, wederow and the Scaw do lie the one of the other north and by west, and
south and by east, and are distant thirteen leagues.

Item, from the Naze to Scarsound, the course is east, northeast, and they are
distant four leagues.

Item, from Scarsound to Flecorie, the course is east northeast and they are
distant 5. leagues.

Item from Flecorie to Reeperwicke, the course is East northeast and they are
distant two leagues and a half.

Item from Reeperwicke to Mardowe: the course is northeast, and they are
distant 8. leagues.

Item from Mardow to Longsound, the course is north northeast, and they are
distant 8. leagues.

Item from Longsound to Uerdrro, the course is Northeast, and they are distant
11. leagues.

Item, from the Naze of Norway to Uinesound it is a league, and Uinesound lies
in Northwest.

Item from Uinesound to Scarsound or Westersound, the course is northeast, and
they are distant a league.

Item, from Scar sound, to Hellicksounde it is four leagues.

Item, from Hellicksound to Fleccorie is a league, and then forth two leagues
to Woolfsound.

Item, from Woolfsound to Blindsound, it is a league, and to Hesines three
leagues.

Item, from Hesines to Mardowe, and to Ostersound, three leagues.

Item, from Ostersound to Ioffer land, 3. leagues.

Item, from Ioffer land to Longsound it is a league, and likewise to Larwicke
three leagues.

Item, from Larwicke to saint Ueert, a league.

Item, from Saint Ueert to Miles water, three leagues.

Item, from Miles Water to Uerdero, three leagues.

Item from Uerdero to Roast four leagues, and from thence to Iacksound four
leagues.

Item, from Iacksound to Otturen a league, and Norder Wickholme a league.

Item, from Norder Wickholme to sonder Wickholm four leagues.

Item, from the Uoort to Busher two leagues, and so forth to Malesound a
league.

Item from Malesound to Kirkesound a league, and then forth to Malstrand three
Leagues, and then forth to Calfe sound ^oure Leagues, and there men go into
Koy, and so forth.

From Calfe sound to Reffesand three leagues, and there they sail into Meluos.

Item from Reffesand to Westersound, behind Ning four leagues. From thence to
Weesbergen it is three leagues. And from thence to the Col, sixteen leagues.

The going in by the Westergate, or entrye of Flecory.
ITem the wester gate or Wester entrye of Flecory does lie in North northeast,
and the easter gate or entry lies west northwest in And you must leave the
Island, with all the great rocks on ye larboord side, and keep within the white
Holm, and leave the little black^ rocks on the larboord side, and there you
shall have eighteen fatham deep, and before the easter gate entry, you may
see the Fox.

Item a league to the Westwardes of the Hesnes there lies Hamersound, where are
gray outrocks.

Item, half a league to the Eastwards of Hamersound lies Kerkfort, and there
stands two Beacons or warlocks upon the black rocks, and the one stands on
the Starboord side, and the other on the Larboord side. And first go in
northwards, and then after m^re easterly, and anchor in thirteen fatham: and
toward the west shore in the fair way, lies a blind rock, which has four
fatham at a full sea upon it.

Item, half a league to the eastward of Kerkfort, lies Hesnes and if you will
go in there, then keep a good breadth off from the west shore, for there lies a
Rock before it at the entrye, which is called the Cognaile, and there is
another rock called Gray Hollome: you shall leave those on the starboord side,
and there stands two Mastes set up upon it, and when you have brought these
two Mastes in one, then are you thwart of the Cognaile. And as you come
inwards, there lies a dry rock on the Larboord side. And you shall know that
land, for that it is a high land and the Drommelles are from you, north
north-west, and to the westwards are gray rocks* and to the eastwards are round
rocks: and hard by the sea side there stands a white church, which you cannot
see unless you be hard by it.

Item, when the Drommelles lie northwest of you, then are you open of Mardow,
and the east end of the uttermost Mainholme and that Island, lies north and by
west, and south and by east, and you must lie northwest in, if you will go
clear of them.

A league to the eastwards of Mardow^, lies Ossenfort, and a league to the east
wards of Ossenfort lies Fuert: and when the Drommell^s lie west from you there
lies Long, and before it lies a round rock, and there stands a Beacon or
mark upon it with a Barrel, keep you near by the land whereon the Ba^rell
stands. And there stands a hand to the Starboord side of the entrye, and that
hand points, that there lies a blind rock, on which is but eleven foot
water.

Item, the west Stanffort, and the easter Risen, lie three leagues to the
Westwards of Iofferland, and one of them goes North in, and the other goes
west in.

Item, a little to the Westwards of Iofferland lies the Kill.

Item, he that will sail into the Kill, let him keep the high hill that lies
next unto Iofferland, alone within the land to the west of Iofferland, and when
you have the Hill Northwest and by west from you, then you are open before the
Kill. And upon the West shore stands a Beacon, and it is a white point.

Item, between Iofferland and Langsound, does lie Abbisuert, by great steep
rough rocks.

He that will sail into Langsound, he must go North Northeast in, from the
easter out Scarre of Iofferland, and these great out Rocks of the Nesse, and
then North northwest goes with the high rough round Rock, where the bars
lies before, so al is north north west in.

From Uerdro to Soenwater, the course is north and by west, and thence to Roge
North north east, and if you will ancker by Roge by east, it is a should sandy
Bay. And you may likewise sail through between Roge and the Calfe. And if you
will ancker under Fletto, then go without the two small Rocks.

Item the course from Uerdero to Elffange is Northeast and by north, and that
goes within the out Rocks, which lie within the Sisters a seaboord Roge, and
keeping so right against the land you shall see a great gray Rock, leave that
on your Larboord side, and there within lie small Rocks, leave those on the
Starboord side, and go about by the west shore, then are you right in the
narrowest of the gate or entry, and there is good ground to ancker in, and
within it is flat and soft ground.

Item from Uerdero to the Graswicke within the Sisters, the course is
northeast, and leave the sharp point on your Larboord side, there is good
anckering, and within lies a round Rock, you may go on either side of it, and
to the northwards of that rock, stands a great warleeke, and there is
likewise good anckering, and room for a great fleet of ships, which tarry
for a wind, and if you will go in, then go along by the west shore, and
there within lies likewise a round rock, leave that on your stereboord side,
and there you may ride if you will, and the first of the entry lies in
northwards, and after about the Island north northeast, and then north northwest
in and about the west shore.

Item, a good way without the Sisters lies a shippell which is likewise a good
hard haven.

Item, Malstrand lies from the scawe East northeast, if you will sail in
there, you shall see a great long Hill, keep that same hill to the east
northeast from you, and so you shall leave the Pater Nosters on the Larboord
side, and then you may see Malstrand lying before you where upon the great
Beacon or UUarlocke is standing.

Item eight leagues to the eastwardes of Malstrand lies UUinne, which is a long
Rock, and is small to be known, for there lies at the end of it small Rocks,
like as they were in three parts, and that lies east and west from the scawe.

Item, three leagues by east of UUinne, lies Konsbacks and Malesound, and
Nidinck, lying the one of the other Northeast and south west, and Malesound is
a round Island, and you may sail round about it at five, six, seven or eight
fatham. And west northwest from Malesound lies a sonken rock a small base shot
from it: and then as far from that lies another little Rock in sight above
water, and there stands a Warder or mark upon it at the west northwest end.
And further upon the maine land stands two warders or marks, those are great
ones, and stand upon the sea side, either of them upon an out rock a little
a sunder, and there goes in a little haven between the warders: and the same
haven lies east northeast from Malesound and along by the low point, you
shall see Konsback lying northwards from you, and there it is very shallowe,
and you may well pass through between Nidincke and the maine land, it is all
fair ground there, and something shallowe.

Item, the Naze of Norway lies from the Scawe west and they are distant 32.
leagues.

Item, Uerdero lies from the ^caw, North northwest and they are distant 13.
leagues.

Item, Malestrand lies from the Scaw East northeast, and they are distant 13.
leagues.

Nidincke lies from Watersbergen southeast and they are distant five leagues.

Item Watersbergen lies from the Cole south and by east, and they are distant
twelve leagues.

Item, Watersbergen shows as though it were an out rock, and the land to the
eastwards from Watersbergen is all plain whole land, and Werstwards it is
altogether rockie.

Item Breto is a high round hill, and lies by Malestrand and westwards from
Breto lies a long high hill.

Item, when as Breto lies East northeast of you, then are you right before
Malestrand.

Item, Nidincke is a low plain out Rock, and lies a league from the shore,
and you may sail round about it.

Item, the Scawe Riffe and the Trendelles, lie the one from the other southeast
and Northwest, and are distant 9. leagues.

Item, the Trendelles and Anold Riffe lie the one from the other southeast and
by south, and Northwest and by North and are distant 11. leagues.

Item Anold Riffe and the Cole, lie one from the other, next hand southeast and
northwest, and are distant twelve leagues.

Item the Trendelles lies Northeast, something northerly from the Wend of
Lesol^e, about three small leagues from the shore, and lies along into the
sea, hard by the Trendelles: it is four fatham deep, and on the Trendele it it
is but a fatham and a half, and within them it is five fatham deep or there
abouts.

Item the Scawe Riffe and the Trendelles, lie the one from the other southeast
and northwest, and are distant 9 leagues.

Item, the Scawe and Watersbergen, lie one off an other East Southeast, and
West northwest, and they are distant 16. leagues.

Item, when the Scaw bears west and by south from you, and that you are a
great league and more from the land, there you shall have 37. fatham, come no
nearer to the scaw in the night, then 13. or 14. fatham, and especially when
you are come from the westwards.

Item when you are south southwest from the point of the Scawe, and that you
are a great league from it, you shall have ground there at 38. fatham.

Item, when you have the Scawe Northwest, or thereabouts from you, and you are
a league from the shore, then you shall have 17 or 18. fatham.

Item between Anold and Waesbergen, it is in the channel 22. fatham deep.

Item from Lesold to Waesberghen, the course is East, and when you are east
from Lesold so far as you can well see it off the Ships Hatches, then shall
you have no ground in 40. fatham.

Item between the Scawe and Lesolde it is twentye fatham deep and soft
ground, even hard to the Coast of Norway.

Item between the Scaw and Lesolde is no hard ground, but that you have about
Yotland side, and that is hard sandy ground, and between Lesolde and Anold it
is al hard ground.

Item, by Waesbergen lies a Flat of seauenteene Fatham deep.

Item from Flastenbrowe lies a Flat of ^welue fatham deep along to Brunt
Holland.

Item, there lies a bank^ between Anold and Cole of seven fatham, and
sometimes the stream runs round^ about and breaks upon it.

Between Anold and Zeland lies an Island, which you may sail round about, and
ride on any side of it, and the same lies has by Zeland, and there lies out a
riffe from it toward Zeland, and toward Zeland it is hard, and toward
Norway soft, and also there lies another riffe off it toward the Belt, and
those banks are very steep too, and the Island is called Sedero.

Item, Northeast and by north, of the norwest end of the Cole, lies an Island
called Wede^or, he that will ride within that Island, let him anchor against the
white church at 7. fatham or thereabouts. It is there a flat soft-ground, you
may sail round about it, Norwardes or southwardes whethr you will.

From Anold to Waesbergen, the course is Northwest and they are distant 9.
leagues.

Item, when Anold is south southwest from you, there is the north end deep,
and you may sail to the westward of the riffe 18 fatham all along to the
sound. And if you come out of the sound with a scant wind, that you can not
keep your course, or near the land, then ye may ride under Anold.

Between Anold and Lesold is 7. fatham deep, and you may sail through that
Says into the Belt.

Under the North end of Anold you may ride at 10. or 11 fatham, and you must
go rowme of the riffe, for to go further in.

He that will sail into Waesbergen, let him bring the uttermost Buy to the
Northwards of the Castle, and so go on north northeast, and take good heed, for
there lies a great Rock, even a little under the water, and you must leave
that on your starreboorde side, and run so in, till you come against the
Castle, and come thereto an anchor at four fatham or there abouts.

Item, Lesold lies along south and north, and on the south end stands a long
flat Church, and there lies a riffe of a good half League, and you must sail
without that riffe in five or six fatham, for it is shallow, and bear Eastward
off. And when you are out of the sound, you may then boldly sail on, and then
you must bear out Eastward again at five fatham, until you have brought the
south end to the westward of you, and then you shall have there 7. fatham.

Item North and by east from Nidiucke, lies an Island which is called
Malesound, you may ride within that yland, for behind it li^s a good haven,
which is called Monstersond, and lies North and north northeast in. And to the
west northwestwardes, lies a rock about two or three bowshootes off And there
stands a warder or Beacon upon it, and you may sail round about these two
Islands before named.

Item, about 12. leagues south west from the Naze, lies a bank of 14. fatham
deep, and the ground is gross red sand.

The courses from the Swine Eastward.
ITem note that Walgheren and Skentinesse, lie the one from the other, south
and north, and are distant a hundred thirty and eight leagues.

Item Walgheren and the Naze, lie the one from the other south and by west, and
North and by east, and are distant 10 leagues.

Item the Naze and Borneriffe lie one from the other south and North, and are
distant 9^ leagues.

Item the Naze and the Frith lie the one from the other east northeast, and
west southwest distant 108. leagues.

Item the Naze and the sands before Yarmouth lie the one from the other north
northeast, and south southwest and are distant 112. leagues.

Item the Naze and the Holmes, lies one from the other Southeast and by south,
and northwest and by north, and are distant 18. or 19. leagues.

Gotsgesand lies from Walgheren northeast, a little northerly and they are
distant 16. leagues.

Holland lies along north northeast, and south southwest, and he that will
sail from Gotsgesand without the Haeken, he must go north and by east, and it
is from Gotsgesand to hacken 2^ leagues.

Item, when a man coming out of the Sea does fall with holland so as he may
see the land, he shall know it by two steeples which stand both vp^n one
Church which is called S. Albert^: and you may be bold to borough by that
land in eight fatham, so that you keep your self as you may get off again
with a northwest wind, for that shore is flat far of from the land.

From the Haethen to Borneriff, the course is northeast, and they are distant
12. leagues.

Wangeroge lies from Borneriffe east northeast, and is distant from it 35.
leagues.

Holy land


Holy land lies from Wangeroge North and by east, and they are 9. leagues.

Item, the riffe lies westward into the Sea from Yotland, and if ye be in 20.
Fatham of the riffe, then are you to the southwards of Naze 20. leagues off.

Bouenbergen lies from Holy land North and by west, and is distant from it 51.
leagues.

From Bouenbergen to the Holmes, the course is northeast, and the distance ten
leagues.

Bouenbergen is a long flat hill, and on the south end of it stands a st^eple,
and to the northwards at the north end stands likewise a high steeple, and it
is al high rough sandhilles along toward the Holmes, and that shore lies
north northeast along.

The riffe or sand lies out between Bouenbergen and the Holmes west into the
sea.

It^m, from the Holmes to Robs^ot, the course is northeast, and they are
distant 8. leagues.

Item, at the west end of Robsnot, lies a bank of 12 or 13 fatham deep which
lies 3. league a from the shore.

Item, your course from hearts Hals^ to the Scaw, is east northeast, and they
are distant 8. leagues.

Item, Trendell and Scaghen riffe lie one from an other southeast and
northwest, and are distant 8. leagues.

Item, from Robsnot, is four Leagues to Hearts Halse, and Hearts Halse lies of
it northeast and by east.

From Hearts Halse to the Scaw is 8 leagues.

Item, the Scaw is a low sandy Land, and Lacklie is a high land, and when you
come from by west, you may see it over the Scaw.

Item, the Scaw riffe lies east northeast into the sea, a great half league.

Item, a great league to the northeastwardes from the west end of Lesold, lies
the grounds or flats of the Trendelles, and in some places they are not above a
fatham and a half deep.

Item, when you have Leisold West from you, and that you may see it out of the
waste of the ship, you shall have no ground at 40. fatham.

Lessold is a plain low Island, and Anold is a ragg^d or knottie Island, and the
Riffe lies a great way off.

The Cole is a high land, and shows it self in three knobs.

How to sail from sundry places to the Scawe.
ITem, he that is ^^ue leagues to the northwards of Callis and will sail in at
the (...), let him go North northeast, something more north^^^ (...) h^ come
in twenty Fatham of the Riffe, which is an hundred and eighteen leagues off
and the course is north (...) and something easterlye to Holme, and then north
and northeast to the Scaw.

From the Scawe (...), southeast and by east, and distant 8. leagues, and th^^
(...) to the east wards of the Trendelles.

From Lesold to Anold southeast, distant 8. leagues.

From Anold ri^^e to the Cole, south southeast twelve leagues.

Item, when you have the (...) a great half League to the northeast of you,
there it is ^5. Fatham deep or thereabout. And between (...) C^le and Zeland
it i^ 14. or 15. Fatham deep, and (...) of veale^ in the night any nearer
Zeland then twelve fatham. And between Anold Riffe and the Cole, there is 20
and ^^ fatham deep.

Item, the South (...) lies a good way within the Cole and when you will sail
into the sound, then keep the castle of Elsenbrowe without the land, and then
you can take no harm there.

Laysand lies something to the northward of Olsenure, on the west side of the
sound, ^ome no nearer there then 7. fatham, and you may sail in less.

Item the Cole and Elsenure lie five leagues asunder, and the course lies from
Draker, to Faste^ borne Riffe south.

From Elsenure to Rerichol, the course is south and by east, and they are
distant 5. leagues.

From Draker to Fasterborne riffe, the course is south and by west. And when
you can not see between the Castle of Fasterborne and the rhurch* then are
you upon the shal^owest of the riffe.

Item, Fasterborne and the Moons lie the one off the other, south and by west,
and north and by east.

Item, between the Moons and Fasterborne, it is in the channel 15 or 16.
fatham d^^^e or thereabouts.

Item, between Steeden and Fasterborne are twelve fatham deep in the channel
and by Fasterborne it is shallow, and by Steeden it is thirteen or fourteen
Fatham deep.

Item, the Moons and Steeden, lie the one from the other southeast and by
south and Northwest and by north, and they are distant 3. great leagues.

Item, Fasterborne and I^smount ly^ one from an other south east and northwest,
and (...) distant 16. leagues.

Item, Iasmount and Whitmount lie one of an other east southeast and west
northw^st, and are distant 3. great leagues.

Item, Whitemount and Dorn^hes lie one off another south and by west, and north
and by east, and are distant 4. leagues.

Item Iasmount and the Moons lie one from another southeast and by east, and
northwest, and by west, and are distant 9 leagues.

Item, Whitmount and Brenth^llom lie one from an other, southwest and bywest,
and northeast, and by east, and are distant 19. leagues.

Item, Bronthollom and Bl^ckside lie one of another east and by north, and West
and by south, and are distant 9. leagues.

The courses to Misloude and Gripewood.
ITem, the course from Fasterborne to Iasmount lies southeast, and they are
distant 16. leagues.

Item from Iasmount to Peert, the course is south southeast, and the distance
is 3. great leagues.

Item, from the Peert too the new Deep, the course is south and westerly, and
the distance is 3. leagues.

Item, he that will ride by Whitmount, he may sail into the Wicke as far as
he will, for it is there all fair ground: when as you are a long league from
the shore, in 14 or 15. Fatham, there is all good fast ground, and there you
are defended from a Northwest, or North Norwest wind, but at 7.8. or 9. fatham
toward the land it is all foul stony groued.

Item, if you do ancker at Iasmo^nt very near to it it is stony ground, but if
you do ancker at 14. fatham, there it is good chackie or claie ground.

The courses through the flats or grounds which are in the sounds.
First, for the course through the grounds or flats, from Fasterborne riffe to
Drakor, you must sail North and by east, and hard by Drakor it is 5. fatham
deep, and a little off there abouts is the shallowest of that deep, and there
lies the second Tun or Buy. Kasperkury lies in 6. Fatham or thereabouts, and
hard by it, it is 7. or 8. fatham deep.

Now, the Marks for too bring the Castle at Copenpen haven, and the sharp
steeple in one and go directly North and by west to the middle Tun or Buy
according as the wind or stream do serve, you may well lie off and on under
the Cotholme. The middle mark is the Southerliest Mill by South Copen haven.

Then soorth to the thi^d Tun or Buy, the course is North northwest and
there lies a high hillocke, by West of other three hillockes, that b^ing
^^^ught by North the town, next to Copen haven, there you shall have ten or
eleven fat^am. And then going forth north and by east to Elsenure, there you
shall have, ^tr^ight as soon^ as you are past the buy, 7.8. or 9. fatham.

The course from E^senure to Draker.
THe right course from Elsenure, to the grounds or stat^, thwart Copen haven
and Draker is south and by east, and the distanc^ is 8. leagues.

Then forth from Draker to Steeden, the course is South and by west, the
distance five leagues. And between Steeden and Fasterborne, it is 10 or 11.
fatham deep, and by Steeden you have deep water.

Item, the Moons and Steeden lies Southeast and by south, and northeast and by
north, distant four leagues.

Item, in the channel between the Moons and Fastenbrowit is 15. or 16.
fatham deep.

Item, the Moons and I^smount lie one of another, southeast and by east, and
northwest and by west, and are distant nine leagues.

Item, Iasmount and Whitmount lie one off an other East southeast, and West
northwest, and are distant three leagues.

Item Whitmount and Dorrembos lie one from an other southwest and by west, and
northeast and by east, and are distant 4. leagues.

Item, Whitmount and Bronthollem, lie the one from the other northeast and
byeast, and southwest and bywest, and are distant 12 leagues.

The courses from Fasterborne to Danske.
First, from Fasterborne to Bront Hollom, the course is East and by south, and
they are distant 21. leagues, and Bront Hollom lies along east southeast.

Item your course from Bront Hollom to Recoll, is east and by north, and the
distance 24. leagues.

Item, the course from the Recoll to the Rose head, is east northeast, and they
are distant 16. leagues.

Item, from the Rose-head to Externes, the course is east southeast, and they
are distant four leagues.

Item, from Externes to Uernoord, the course is southeast and they are distant
one league.

Item from the ^^rnoord to the Heel is south southeast and they are distant
one league.

Item the course from the Heel to the Wissell, is south and by west, and they
are distant five leagues.

Item, from the Nierinck of Danske to the Memell, the land lies along
northeast, and south southwest.

Item Lobsted is a Castle, and stands upon a high hill, and lies three leagues
to the eastwards of Quinshorowe and there is likewise a Mill by it.

Item the land of Lobsted does lie along to Dermemble north northeast, and
south southwest, and they are distant the one from the other 25. leagues.

Item from Dermemble to Seuenbergen, the land lies north north west, and south
southeast, and they are distant twelve leagues.

Item, from Seuenbergen to Leserort, the land lies north and by east, and
south and by west, and they are distant 11. leagues.

Item, Dermemble and Leserort, are distant twentie-two leagues.

The courses and distances along the coast of Pomerland.
IN primis, from the Rose head to Seruenis head, it is four^ leagues, and from
thence to Wolnesacke other 4 leagues, and then so Lida a league, and at Lida is
but five foot water.

And then from Lida to the Recoll, you have 7. leagues and from Recoll to
Granshood four leagues, and then forwards is a deep bay into Iasmount.

Item, from Granshood to Siuolde, is three leagues, and there comes out a small
River which is called Wiper.

Item, from Riuoold to Colbergen is 9, Leagues, and there comes likewise a
small river out.

Item, Colbergen and Iasmount lie East and west, the one from the other, and
are distant 19. leagues.

Item, the course between Iasmount and Granshood is east northeast and west
south west.

Item, the coast of Pomerland lies along west Southwest, and east northeast.

The courses to sail to Revel.
ITem from Fosterbo^ne Riffe, to go by the North side of Bronthollome the
course is east, and to the Northwards and are distant 20. leagues.

Item, from Bronthollome to go to the southwardes of the Goteland, the course
is northeast, and they are distant 47. leagues.

Item from Howbrough in Goteland, to Easter Gore, the course is Northeast and
something to the Northwards and they are distant 14. leagues.

Item, from Easter Gore to Dagerort the course is northeast northerlye, and
they are distant 37. leagues, then from Dagerort to Sipiernes it is 7. leagues
northeast and by east.

But take deep of Sipernes. And then your course from Sipernes to UUodhollome,
is likewise northeast and by east and they are distant 9. leagues.

Item, UUodhollome is a little low Island, and lies two leagues from the maine
land.

Item, from Wodhollom to Roge the course is east northeast, and rather more
easterly, and they are distant 6 leagues.

Item from Roge to Nargen, the course is east northeast rather to the
eastwards, and they are distant six leagues, and you must have Nargen on your
Larboord side.

Item, from Naruen to the Buy, you must go east a great league, and ynu shall
have Buy on your steareboord side,

Item, you must go from the Buy to Revel south, and something to the east
wards, and they are three leagues distant.

How Dagerort is known.
THe b^st knowledge is this: the governors of r^uel have made a high Tower or
steeple* upon Dagerort without any church to it,

Item Dagerort and Hontsord lie the one from the other south southeast, and
north northwest, and are distant eight leagues.

Item, between Dagerort and Hontsord is a great gulf or bay, and the same is
called Hondeswicke.

The courses from Dagerort to Derwinda.
THe course from Dagerort to Derwinda, is north and by west, and south and by
east, and they are distant 14. leagues.

Item, from Derwinda to Seuenberghen, the land lies along south by and by
west, and north and by east, and they are distant 32. leagues.

The course from the Rose-head to Derwinda.
DErwinda is a Castle, and there are three small Towers upon it, one stands
in the middle of the Castle and that is the highest, and the Castle stands in
Coreland.

Item the course from the Rosehead to Derwinda, is Northeast and by north, and
they are distant threescore and three leagues.

The thwart courses from Coreland to Goteland.
FIrst Derwinda and Eastergore lie one from another East and UUest, and they
are distant eight and twenty leagues.

Item, Derwinda and Howbrough which is the southwest end of Goteland, lie one
from an other East northeast, and UUest Southwest, and they are distant 44.
leagues.

Item, the southwest end of Goteland and the Heel, lie one from another South
and North, and are distant nine and forty leagues.

The course from the Rose-head to Quinsbrow.
THe course from the Rose-head to Quinsbrowe, is east and by south, and they
are distant 18. leagues.

Item the Heel and the UUissell of Danske, lie the one from the other South
and by west, and North and by East and are distant 5. leagues.

The course from Bronthollom to Rye.
ITem the course from Bronthollome to Derwinda is Northeast and by ^ast, and
they are distant 77. leagues.

Leserort. Derwinda. Bacouen.
Item, the course from Derwinda to Leserort is Northeast and by north, and they
are distant 4. leagues.

(...)


Item, the course from Leserort to Domesnes, is East northeast, and the
distance 13. leagues.

Item and if you do not sound, it is dangerous on Corland side, therefore you
must go ye way by your lead. And take good heed of Oessell side, for that is
stony ground.

Item, you may borrow by Leserort in 4.5. or 6. fatham without danger, and the
ground is red sand, and when you come to 13. or 14. fatham, then go northeast
and by east with Domesnes.

Item, the course from Domesnes to Rye is southeast, and something more
easterly, and the distance 21. leagues.

Item, between Coreland and Oessell, it is 15 or 16. fatham deep. And thwart
of the church of Oessel lies a riffe two leagues off from the shore, and the
same riffe is called Swalueroort, you must take heed you come no nearer that
riffe then seven Fatham.

Item between Domesnes and Oessell it is 20. fatham and is fast or hard ground.

Item he that will ride under Oessell for a Westerlye wind, let him bear in
till he come in seven Fatham or thereabout, and there he shall have good
clean ground and good Ankerholde. And ye shall keep the Church of Oessell
half a league from you, west and by north or therabouts. And there you shall
be well for a went southwest wind. And the point of Oessel by west the church
whereon the houses stand, that shall bear^ w^st from you. And the Riffe lies
thwart off from the church two leagues, south and by west into the sea, and in
some places it is dry nigh to the land. Take heed therefore you come no
nearer the out side of that riffe then 8. fatha^, for it is very vne^en ground
and stony. And when you are at anchor in the road at Oessel, then have you the
point of Domesnes, southest from you or thereabout, and distant three great
leagues.

Also the land along from Derwinda to the Seuenbergen lies south and by west,
and north and by east, and they are distant 11. leagues.

The thwart course^ of Domesnes, Round, and Oes^ell.
ITem Domesnes is a a Riffe, and lies a great League from the land East
Northeast into the sea, from the point.

Item, Domesnes and Round lie one from an other east and by north, and West and
by south, and are distant right leagues.

Item, Round and Ambroke lie the one from the other north west and by west, and
southeast and by east, and are distant 8. leagues. And Ambroke is a little
Island, and lies a league from Oessell and the ground about it is foul stony
ground.

Also the Round and Rye lie one off another, southeast and northwest, and are
distant 16. leagues.

Also Round is an Island, and is in compass a great league about, and you may
sail round about it without danger, keeping you in five fatham and a half.

Also he that will ride by the northeast point of Round: let him anchor against
the Chapel in 5. Fath. it is al clean ground there. And on the west southwest
side of Round, it is a fair flat land.

Now follows the course from Round to (...).
FIrst, from Round to Kin, the course is ^ast northeast, and they are distant
22. leagues.

Also from Kin to Serkhollome, and from thence to Parno, the course is
northwe^^ and by north, and the distance ^ight leagues, an^ Parno lies in the
Baye of Ryes bottom.

Item, Kin, Serkhollome, and Magno, are three Islands, and these you must leave
all on larboordside, when you sail into Parno, and at Pa^no stan^es a sharp
steeple.

Also Kin is a lower ragge^ Island, about two leagues of length, and there is
f^ule ground about it.

Item, it is broad between Corela^d and Kin, four^ leagues.

Also Coreland (...) is a g^od faite shore, and between Corland and Kin it
is 10. fatham deep, and between Serkhollom and Corland is five fatham deep,
and between that and Parno, now and then less water: to wit, 4. fatham and
three fatham.

Parno and Ry^ do lie the one from the other south an^ by west, and north and
by east, and they are distant nineteen leagues.

Item, the deapth at Parno ^s one fatham and a quarter.

Now you must take heed that by night you come no nearer to Domesnes, then
15. fatham, and hard by the vttermoste part of the Riffe it is 17. fatham
deep, and at the vttermoste parts of Domesnes and Round, it is 24. fatham
deep.

Also Domesnes and round lie the one from the other east and by north, and west
and by south, distant eight leagues.

The course^ bac^e again from Revel to D^gerort.
IN primis, from Nargen to Sipernesse, the course is west ^outhwest, and
something more southerlye, and they are dis^ant 21. leagues.

Item, the course from Sipernesse to Dageroort, is southeast and by south, and
they are distant 6. leagues.

Item, the course from Dagerort to Eastergor, is southwest and they are distant
19. leagues. And Eastergor, lies by the south side of Gotland near the midst
of it, or rathe^ nearest toward the east end. Gotland is a good road for such
as are bound either eastward or Westward, you may save in all places round
about that Island.

Item, from Eastergor to Bron^hollom, ^our course is southwest, and they are
distant 6. leagues.

Item, Westergore lye^ in the Northside of Gotland by Wesbuy.

The course that is to be kept in saylin^ from Dagerort, to go about by the
North part of Gotland to Bronthollom.
FIrst the course from Dageroort to Gotsgesand, is southwest and by west, and
^om^what westerly, and they are distant 25. leagues.

Item, from Gotsgesand to Karelse your course is southwest and by south, and
they are dis^ant 28, leagues.

Item, from Karelse to the south point of Yolland your course is south
southwest, and they are distant eight and twenty leagues.

Item, the course from the southermost point of Yolland to Bronthollom, is
southwest, and something more southerly, and they are distant 19. leagues. And
from that south point of Yolland, lies out a Riffe into ye sea, a little
league from the shore.

Item, it is from Revel to Narghen 4. leagues.

Item, from Narghen to Surpeis 1. league.

Item, from Surpe to Roge is three leagues.

Item, from Roge to Woodhollom, is 4. great leagues.

Woodhollom is a little low Island, and lies a league and a half from the
maine land.

Item from Woodhollom to Sipernesse it is 8. leagues.

Sipernesse is a high land, and there lies out a Riffe from the land half a
league into the Sea, and on the east side it is flat, but on the west side it
is deep, and is a sandy ground.

The course from Dagerort about by the north side of Goteland.
FRom Dagerort to Gotsgesand, the course is southwest and by west and they are
distant 24. leagues.

Gotsgesand is a little Island and full of trees, and there is no h^bitation
upon it, and there you may choose your made where you will under the land, for
it is all clean ground and fair white sand round about that Island. It lies
north northeast from the ^astermoste point of Goteland which is called Fero,
about 4. leagues off.

Item, there lies a Riffe of sand out from that point of Fero, a great league
from the land, and the same Riffe is called Salve Ontein^, and it is all
shingle stones, and lies out from the land North and by east into the sea.

Item the point of Fero and Eastergore do lie the one from the other south and
by west southerlye, and north and by east northerly, and are distant 9. leagues.

The deapthes and soundings about Goteland and Yolland.
BE^weene Goteland and Yolland is very uncertain ^ound^ng, for in some place
you shall have 33. Fatham and in some other place twenty two fatham, and the
ground black gritty stones, and sometime stones as great as peason which are
black and earthie* and sometime you shall have 19. fatham and all black stony
gro^nd.

And when the souther Norden bears West off from you, and that you are three
Leagues or thereabouts from the land, there you shall have hard ground, and 28,
or 29 fatham deep.

Item, when as you are two leagues to the westwardes of Eastergore, and three
leagues or thereabouts from the land, you shall have rough ground, and one and
thirty fatham deep.

Also when you are Northwest, or Northwest and by north from Howbrough, which
is the southwest point of Goteland three leagues from the shore, you shall have
gross Grauelye Sand, mingled with some black stones as great as beans.

Also when the Chapel of Souther Norden does lie North Northwest, or more
Northerlye from you a league from the shore, you shall have there thirteen
fatham deep.

Also when you are North Northeast, or thereaboute^ from Howbrough 6 leagues
from the Land, you shall hau^ fifteen^ Fatham, and ^^onie ground. And when you
are Southwest of Howbrough, two leagues from the land, you shall have twenty
two Fatham, and likewise gross stony ground.

Item, when Souther Norden bears West Northwest from you, and you are two
Leagues off in the Sea, you shall have there one and thirty fatham, and hard
stony ground.

Also when you are past souther Norden, and are in the fair way about Clippen,
there you shall have hard Slymish ground, and 39. fatham deep.

Also from Karelse to the South end of Yolland, your course is south southwest,
and they are distant seven and twenty Leagues.

Item, the course from the South end of Yolland to Bronthollom is southwest and
by south and they are distant 18, leagues.

Item, Yolland is 18. or 19. leagues long, and a great League broad, and upon
Yolland all the steeples are flat and Yollands south coast lies along North
and by east and south and by west.

Item, from the south point of Yolland, there lies out a shrord stony riffe,
which is called Souther Norden, and lies out a league from the shore.

Also by west Yolland goes in Cormersound, and that way you may sail to Stoke
holme, and by east Yolland it is foul stony ground.

Also seven leagues from Yolland West southwest, lies an Island which is called
Clippe^, you may sail round about that Island, and it lies north northeast from
Bronthollom, and is distant 16. leagues.

Item, Bronthollom and the Island called Hanno, lie the one from the other,
south and by west, and north and by east, and they are distant 11. leagues.
Hanno is a high round Island, and you may ride there if you will, and the land
lies from Hanno to Blacksit south southwest.

Also the Castle of Bronthollome and the Earthollome, lie the one from the
other west and by south, and east and by north, and are distant 3. leagues.

Item, the Earthollome and the south end of Bronthollom, do lie the one from
the other South and by east, and north and by west, and are distant 3. great
leagues. And in the Earthollom there goes in a little sound* which is four
fatham deep. This Island is two great leagues from Bronthollom.

Item, southwest and by south from Bronthollom, nine or ten leagues off from
the shore, lies a Riffe called the Browers Riffe, which is a bank, and there
is five fatham upon it, and it lies along southeast and northwest.

Also you may sail round about Bronthollom without danger, keeping 12. fatham.

A note for riding under Gotel^nd.
FIrst you shall understand that great K^rle and little Karle are two small
high rockie Islands which do^ lie v^r^e near the one to the other, and they lie
to ^he North^wards of the wes^ part of Goteland hard by it: and ^or such as
are bound westwardes, is a good road under litt^^ Karle which lies next unto
Goteland, and all is clean ground round about. But great Karle is not clean
ground neither on the northwest side, nor southeast side.

Item, between great Karle and little Karle, it is 13. or 14. fatham deep.

Item, Karlesse and Wisbuy lie the one from the other northeast and southwest,
and are distant 7. leagues.

Item, between Karlesse and Wisbuys lies Westergore.

Item take heed you come not any nearer great Karle on the other side of it,
than 11. or 12. fatham.

Item whosoever will sail into Eastergore, coming from by west, let him pass
by the first point and bear in to the other steep point, and anchor there in
7. or 8. fatham there you shall have clean ground, and between the Island and
the Maineland it is 11. fatham deep, and 16. ^atham hard by the land.

Item a little league by west Eastergore lies likewise a good haven and it is
called Sandwicke, and there stands a Chapel hard by the shore side, and five
leagues from thence to the west wards lies another haven which is called
Nerwicke, and is five fatham deep, and so likewise other more, as Buiswige,
and Heilicholme, and Farasound, and the Island of Eastergore, and do lie the
one off the other south and by west, and north and by east, and are distant 9.
or 10. leagues.

Item, between Howbrough and Eastergore, lies a bancke of 24. fatham, gross
red stony sand, and from that bank you cannot see the land of Goteland out of
the top. And you have also to the Eastw^rd thereby, an other bank of thirteen
or fourteen fatham, and the ground is gray or whitish sand, and when ^ou are
over that, you shall not have ground at forty f^tham.

The courses from Earthollom to Derwinda.
ITem the course from Earthollom to Dermemel is east northeast and they are
distant 63. leagues.

Item* when the Rosehead bears southeast from you, and that you are four
leagues from it, you shall have there twenty six fatham, and the ground red
stones like the riffe sand.

Item when the Rose-head lies south southeast of you, being a league from it,
there you shall find fourteen or fifteen fatham, and it is white sandy
ground.

Item, the Rose-head and Goteland lie one from an other south and North, and
are distant 38 leagues.

Item, if you come from Bronthollom being bound for Danske, and have 30. fatham
deep, you shall scant see the land out of the top, and the land is great white
sand.

Item, when the Rose-he^d bears south southeast from you, then it seems like
a saddle with two Hillocks.

Item, when the Rose-head bears south sout^west of you, and that you are a
little leagu^ off, there the g^ound is gross white sand, and ye shall have
about 30. fatham deep.

Item, when as the Rose-head bears West from you, and that you are a small
le^gue from the L^nd, there you shall have small white sand, and 15. or 16.
fatham deep.

Item when you are bet^eene the Rose head and the Heel, and the East of the
Heel, about half a league from the land there you shall find 33. fatham and
a white sandy ground.

And before the Heel in the road, you shall have 25. f^tham deep, and black
sandy ground.

Grounds and Deapthes.
ITem, the bank that is at the easter end, lying northwe^^ from the Rock, and
the wester end of the bank that lies northwest from Haerlem, has a sweche in
the midst of the bank, in which is 12.14.16. or 17. fatham, and when you are
at the broadest, there is 14. fatham, and then you have the Fly east southeast
from you.

The deapth and ground thwart of Ameland.
FIrst at 20. fatham ye shall have gross red sand mingled with some black sand,
and shelly. And to the southward of that in 15. fatham, there you shall have
small sand with shelles. And for the space of the running of 4. or 5. glasses,
continually ye shall have 16. Fatham, and the ground all small sand, and that
is the bank or flats of Ameland.

Item, in 24. or 26. fathom North from the Skellings, there you shall have fine
white sand.

Item, upon the Riffe from three and thirty fatham to four and twenty. And
from three and twenty to six and twenty fatham, the ground is all white
sand, and continues so till the last end of four and twenty fatham, and
twenty Fatham. And from twenty to seauenteen fatham is all gross stony sand:
and that is about Bortkum, and where white shelles are mingled withal, and is
thwart of the Skellings.

Item, at 18. fatham of the Skellings, the ground is white sand mingled with
black sand.

Item, the ground thwart of the Fly Island is whit^ sand, and mingled with some
read Sand, and redd^ shelles.

Item, at 18. fatham by the east end of the Skeilinges, the ground is fine
white sand mingled with black seeds, and small long white things like
Needeles.

Item, about North northeast from the Neas, there lies a should of fourteen
fatham, and the ground is gross red sand, there we lay at drift three hours,
or there about^ and it was still to the southwards, and then we came to four
and twenty fatham, and the ground was gross stony sand.

Certain notes set down by the Author, what his Ship did run at sundry
times.
ITem, I have sailed from Bronthollom to Goteland in 18. hours.

And from thence to Derwinda, in seauenteene hours, having a fresh continual
wind, and the Ship being in her ballast.

Item, Earthollom and the West end of Bronthollom, lie one from another west
and by south, and east and by north, and are distant three leagues.

Item, the Castle at Bronthollom and the Bleckeside, lie the one off the other,
southeast and northwest.

Item, I have sailed out of the Flee over the Riffe in 28 hours, having a
mighty and continuing wind, the ship being in her ballast.

Item, I have sailed from Bronthollom to Domesnesse, within 4. hours with a
stout gale a fore wind.

Item, I have likewise sailed within ten hours from Bronthollom to Yotland,
having a continual fresh gale of wind.

Item, I have sailed from Bronthollome to Gotelande, within four and twenty
hours, and from Goteland to Derwinda in seauenteene hours, bearing as much
sail as the Ship was able to carry.

Item, I have sailed out off the south Perdris by Rochel to Bellille in four
and twenty hours, with a reasonable gale of wind.

Item, having a very great gale of wind I have sailed from the Fourne to the
I Will of Wight in 33. hours.

It^m, I have sailed out of the Hoofden to the Scaw in 33, hou^^s having a
fresh cool of wind, which carried us w^ll in the running of three glasses two
leagues 1/^. and I have sailed to the Riffe of Scaghen in 17. hours, and was
as much as the ship could bear up, and this was the third day of July. 1574.
with a laden ship.

The same third day of July, I sailed on forth from the Scawe to thwart of the
Trendelles in 3. hours.

Item: I have with a fresh through bearing wind sailed from Flushing to Callis
in ten hours.

Item I have sailed from the Hoofden to the Scawe, in three days carrying as
much sail as the Ship was able to ^eare, and in three days and three nights
to the Nase, which was every glass a league.

Item, I have sailed from Friburch out of the Elue to Rochell in five days,
and we were two nights in the north sea, and two nights between the Hoofden
and the Fourne, and a night between the Keyser or race and Rochel, with a
mighty continual wind, as much as mast and Tackle were able to bear.

Item with a fresh through bearing wind I have sailed from easter Penmarke to
Bellille in 8. hours.

Item with such a like wind, I have sailed from Bellille to Use in 6. hours.

Item I have sailed having a continual great gale of wind, out of the race of
Fountanie to Saint Martins Island, in twenty four hours.

Item, I have sailed from the south Peeretrees to Bellille in four and twenty
hours, with a reasonable gale of wind.

Item with a reasonable bearing gale, I have sailed from Bellille to Use in 10
hours.

Also with such like weather I have sail^^ from Bellille to the Toper in 7.
hours.

Also I have sailed from Saint Martins Island to Use, in 7. hours having a
great cool of wind.

Item, with such a like wind I have sailed from Bellille ^o Penmarke in 9.
hours.

Item, I have sailed out of the race of Fountany to Use in 22, hours, having
but a reasonable gale of wind and fa^re weather.

Item I have sailed from the Fourne thwart of Portland with an easy gale of
wind in 24. hours.

Also I have with a good reasonable wind, sailed from the Needles in the I Will
of Wight, to Saint Powles in 28. hours.

Also I have sailed from the Fourne, to thwart of the I Will of Wight in 33.
hours, having a continual fresh gale of wind.

Also I have sailed from Beachie to Wight in 10. hours and forth to Portland
in 7. hours.

Also I have with a fresh wind sailed from the Hage to thwart of Dunkirk in
18. hours, and forthwith to the Hooffeden in 4. hours.

Also I have sailed from the Hage to the Hooffeden in 23. hours, which was
with a mighty gale of wind, as much as mast and tackle could bear.

And I have sailed with a fresh large wind, from Nargen to Woodhollome in 9.
hours.

Also with a like wind I have sailed from Nargen to Dagerort in 17. hours.

Also in the running of 28. glasses, I did sail from Banges riffe to Scaghen.

Also I have with a reasonable gale of wind sailed from the Peertrees to
Bellille in 24. hours.

Item, I have with a reasonable gale of wind sailed from Bronthollom to
Fosterborne Riffe in 9. hours.

Item I have sailed from Elsenore to the Scawe in 20. hours, having but a
reasonable gale of wind.

Item Dagerort and Huntsfort lie the one from the other north northwest, and
south southeast, and are distant 8. leagues.

The course through the Belt, and these leagues are to be counted for Wekerses.
FIrst from the Trauen to Femeren it is 9. leagues and without to go about to
Stabuy it is 10. leagues, and the course is northeast and by north.

Item Stabuy is two leagues in l^ngth, and the cours^ is northwest.

Item from Stabuy to Langland, it is 5. leagues and the course is west
northwest, and against the south end of Langland, there lies a shallow within
half a League of Langland, you may sail between them both.

Item Langland is six leagues long, and the course is north a little to the
eastwards.

Item from Langland to Siroe it is 3. long leagues, and the course is northwest
and by north.

Item from Siroe to Rins is three leagues, and the course is northwest and by
north.

Item from Rins to Sessions is five leagues and the course is north and by west.

Item, from Sissiones to Siroe is 4. leagues, and the course is north
northeast. And directly over against Siroe lies an Yland, which is called
Wedero, from thence lies out a Riffe or bancke, a great half league from
Siroe, and you may pass through between Siroe and the same riffe or bank.

Item, from Siroe to Steuenshot is six good leagues, and the course is north
northwest.

Item from Steuenshot to the Sea Buy, it is 10. great leagues, and the course
is north and by west.

When you are very nigh unto the land, you have on Larboord side the grounds
of Yotland, on which is 4. or 5 fatham, but you may not come any nearer to
them. And on your starboord lies the Riffe of Lesold, you may come within 5. or
6. fatham to that riffe, but in the right channel is 10. or 11.

Item, when as you shall sail off from Steuens, and that you will sail over
the sweetring, toward the Dwaell grounds, the course is north northeast 14
leagues, and then when you are come so far, that you can see the high land
behind seabuy, then bring that high land which lies behind Seabuy, so far
northerly of you, that Seabuy may bear north northwest, and so show it self
clear without the said high land.

And then sail on north northwest, and you shall have fast ground, and if you
have then 8.9. or 10. Fatham deep, then are you in the right channel.

Item from Seabuye to the Scawe is 6. great leagues, and the course is north
and by east: and on your Larboord lies a little Island which is called the
Helmes, you must take heed of that Island.

How to sail from the Scawe through the Belt.
^he scawe



Item, the Riffe stretches out East Northeast from the Scawe, about a great
league from the Land, and you may well sail by it in 14. hours.

Item, from the Scawe to the Helmes, the course is South and by west, and they
are distant 4. leagues, and in the right channel is 14. or 15. fatham, and the
more to the eastwards so always is the deeper water.

Also from the Holmes to Seabuy, the course is south and by west, and they are
distant 4. leagues, and against seabuy there lies the Dwaell grounds along by
the shore, and lie about half a league off from the land, and you may sail by
those Dwael ground^ keeping at 7.8.9.10.11. or 12. fatha^. For in the maine
channel is 10.11. or 12. fatham deep, and is fast ground.

And when the ^owne of Seabuy bears west from you, then are you right against
the Dwaell grounds, and East and by south from Seabuy, there lies the Island of
Lesol^ about three leagues off, and then leave two third parts of the water to
Lesold wards.

Lesolde


Also there lies a Riffe west off from Lesolde about a league from the land:
and when you have the Church of Lesold east from you, then are you right
against the R^ffe.

Also when you shall sail through the Dwaell grounds to Steuens Hoof, the
course is south southwest, but and if you will leave Steuens Hoof on your
Larboord side, then sail south and by east, and there in the right Channel is
six or seven fatham, and soft flat ground which is called Sweetring, and you
may boldly come on that side of Steuens Hoof at five fatham. But when you are
within Steuens Hoof, then you shall have deeper water, to wit 11.12. or 13.
fatham and hard ground. And the further you are off from Steuens Hooffe East
wards, the deeper water ye s^all have.

Also, about 3. leagues to the southwardes of Steuens Hooft, lies a little
town called Orund buy and along that runs a quick sand or landloose ground,
which is called black ground, and lies about half a league from the land.

Item, the course from Steuens Hooft to Siro lies south southeast, and they are
distant 8. leag. And Helmes (which is a little Island) lies off from Steuens
Hooft about south and by west and they are distant 4. leagues. And in the right
Channel between Steuens Hooft and Siro it is 11.12. or 13. fatham deep and
is hard ground

And note, that in the right course east southeast from Helm, lies a quick
sand ground, which is called Hattes Riffe, and it is not past 4.5. or 6. fatham
upon it, but when you are past that, then thencefoorth to Siro, you have 12 or
13. fatham deep, and fast ground.

And this quick sand lies on the east side of the fair way, and east
southeast from this should lies an Island which is called Haslow, which lies so
far off that you can but eue^ see it, and you may sail through between Haslow
and Zeland along to the sound, and about west from Siro lies a little Island
which is called Wedero, and there lies out a Riffe that stretches to within
half a league of Siro, and you may sail through between Siro and that Riffe,
and you must leave two third parts of the way toward the west land (that is
to say, on that side ye Wedero is in,) and the other third part of the water
on Siroes side, but come no nearer then two third parts of the way or more,
which leave on Wederoes side, to wit, on ye west side, and the Riffe lies off
from Wedero about east, and in the right channel it is 12. or 13. fatham deep.

Item, the course from Siro to Ruffenes, is south southwest and they are
distant 4. leagues. And there lies a fl^t off from Ruffenes, and runs southwest
off a little, half a league from the shore, and take heed you come no nearer
there then 10 fatham.

Item, the course from Ruffenes to Roems, is South southeast and they are
distant 4. leagu. And there lies a flat off from Roems, east southeast, about
a third part of a league, you may ride behind that for a Northeast wind, and
for a north and northwest wind, but you may not sail about by the westwards
of Roems: hard by south of Roems lies a little town which is called Cartmune.

Item, from Roems to Siro the course is south southeast and they are distant 4.
leag. And from the southend there lies out a small Riffe northeast off about a
quarter of a league, and Neborke lies west southwest from Siro, and Neborke
lies in Uaneuan side. And there lies a little Island west southwest from Siro
about 3. leagues distant, and is called Uresselles, and there lies a Riffe off,
and you must pass through between the Riffe of Siro, and the Riffe of
Uresselles And that Riffe lies northwest and by north from the Uressel, and
there lies a should on the east southeast side of the channel.

Then from Siro to Langland, the course is southeast and they are distant 4.
leagues. And about west and by south of that, there lies ^ little Island, (which
is called Olmes,) and about 3. leagues from the North end of Langland to the
northwards, and there lies a Riffe northeast from Langland, about a third part
of a league off. And Langland is 7. leagues long, and lies along south and
north. And to the east southeastwards of Langland, lies an Island called Laland,
and from the south end of Laland, there stretches out a Riffe or bank West
Southwestwards about half a league from the shore, and to the southeast or
east southeastwards, there is a shallow water, as five, six, or seven fatham.

Item, from Laland to Femeren the course is east south east, and they are 5.
leagues distant.

Item, from thwart off Roborgherhert and Femeren, the course lies west
southwest.

Item from Femeren to the Trauen, the course lies south southwest, and they are
distant 13. leagues.

Item for to know the marks of Lalands Riffe. First there stands a high
steeple on Laland, which stands in the town of Nascow, when as you have that
steeple east and half a point to the northwards off you, then shall you see
two little round Hillocks, seeming as though it were two Fishers boats, when
as you have broug^t those two Hillokes, and the said steeple in one, then you
are near the Riffe of Laland.

The course from the Moons to Lubecke.
FIrst from the Moons to Ghestro Riffe, the course is south southwest, and
they are distant two ke^nings. Ghestro Riffe is a flat, and is a great league
from Ghestro, and Rostick, and the Riffe lie one off another south and north,
and are distant 9. leagues.

Item, the course from Ghestro Riffe to the the Trauen, is southwest and they
are distant 3. kennings. Missond and Rosti^ke are distant 7. leagues by land.

Rosticke and Wismer are distant 8. leagues by land, and Wismer and Lubecke are
distant 8. leagues by land.

Item in the channel sailing to Lubecke it is 14.15. or 16. fatham deep.

How to sail into Wismer deep.
TO sail in at the deep of Wismer, which goes in by the east side, you must
have ye steeple which stands on the southland to ye southwards of you, and
sail in so till you have brought the steeple which stands on the West land,
near to the most easterlye house of those five or six houses which stand
there, and by those houses stands a tuffe of Trees together from the East
land, and there lies out a small Riffe, that stretches off from the Eastland
Nort^west and by north, and when you have brought those steeples that stand
upon the Eastland, and those houses in one, then go south southeast in, and
in that deep you shall have 14. foot water. And in the Summer there are two
tuns or Buys lying: the one lies on the tail of the Riffe, and the other on
the shallowe ground, and you may sail through between them.

Here follows farther of Wismer deep.
ITem, to sail into Wismer deep, when you come from by east, then bear
southwest in with the west shore, till you have brought the sharp steeple of
Wismer, and the point of the east shore in one. And then hale in southeast and
keep the steeple under the land, and there you shall have shallow water off 4.
or 5. fatham deep, and the very sholdest is but 3. fatham, and when you come
at 3. fatham then you shall have the point or corner of the west shore west and
by south from you, and after that three Fatham, you shall have again now and
then three Fatham and less, but doubt not, but trust to your course, and to
the before written marks.

The Floods and Ebbes from Callis in Andolozia, to Hambrough.
FIrst at Calis Malis a south southwest moon makes a full sea.

Item, at Saint Lucas a Southwest Moon makes a full Sea.

Item, you have the like tide from thence to Lisbone.

Item, all the Coast of Spain, and Gascoine, Poitowe and Britain to Fonteny,
it flows a southwest and northeast Moon.

Item, in the River of Burdeux a southwest and by west moon makes a full sea.

Item, a southwest and by west moon makes a full sea in the race of Fonteny.

At Saint Mathewes a southwest and by west Moon.

At Fourne a West southwest moon makes a high water.

At Aberwracke a west southwest, and an east northeast moon makes a full sea.

Item, in the sea before saint Poules, an east northeast moon makes a full
sea, and within the Haven of Roscow a west southwest moon.

Item, two leagues without Ushant an east or West moon makes a full Sea, and
the same tide keeps on to Saint Poules.

Item. 9. Leagues without saint Poules it flows west northwest.

Item in the Road at Garnesey, a west and by south moon makes a high water.

Item from Garnesey to the Kaskets it flows Northwest.

Item 6. or 7. leagues without Garnesey it flows a northwest and by North
moon.

Between the Kaskets and Portland along the coast a northwest and by north
moon makes a full sea, and seven or eight leagues off the land, a northw.
moon makes a full sea.

Item, at Silly, an east or west moon, and in Falmouth an east and by north
moon makes a full sea, and without in the sea an east and by south moon.

In Plimmouth and Dartmouth, an east and by North moon makes a full sea, and
without in the sea, an east S. east moon: along to Portland and within
Portland, an east southeast moon, and in the Raze southeast, and four Leagues
a seaboord, it flows a south southeast moon.

Item, at Needles in Wight, a southeast and by south moon. And at S. Ellens a
southeast Moon, and at the east end of Wight, and without in the Sea, a south
and by east moon makes a full sea.

Item, at Beachie a south moon, and without a south southwest moon makes a
full sea.

In the Camer a south and by east moon, and in the Downs a south southwest
moon. And without upon the north Coast of England east southeast the flood
comes from by north.

The Tides of the Coast of Flaunders.
ANd upon Flaunders Coast, a south and north moon makes a full sea at the shore
and in the Havens, and without in the fair way a Southwest and Northeast Moon.

Item in Zealand a southwest moon makes a full sea.

Item, a southwest and by South moon makes a full sea before the Mase, and
within, a south southwest Moon makes a full sea.

Item, in the Marsedeepe, an east or west moon makes a full sea.

Item, at the Flee, a southeast and northwest Moon.

Item, before the wester and easter Cames, a southeast and northwest moon
makes a full Sea.

Item, before the Weeser and before the Elue, and before Ankewsen a south or
north moon makes a full Sea.

Item, at Hambrough, it Flows at an east or west moon.

Item, a Southwest and a northeast moon makes a high water at Amsterdan.

The Tides serving specially for the Coast of England.
THe Moon south or north on the lands end full Sea.

The Moon south and by east, at the Gore end, full sea.

The moon south southwest between Holy Island and Tinmouth full sea.

It flows between Tinmouth and Flambroughhead, a southwest and northeast
moon.

It flows between Flambrough-head and Bridlington in the Bay, a southwest
and by west moon.

The moon in the west southwest between Bridlington and Laurenas full sea.

It flows between Laurenas and Cromer, all along the well an east and west
moon.

It flows between Cromer and Yarmouth road to Layslow north road, a
southeast moon.

It flows between Laistow road and Orfordnes, a southeast and by south
moon.

It flows between Orford and Orewell waves a south southeast moon.

It flows between the Naes and the ware head of Colne, a south and by east
moon.

It flows at the Spittes, and at the Scaw, and al along the Swinne, a south
moon.

At the west end of the Nore, a south and by west moon full sea.

It flows at Graues-end a south southwest moon.

It flows at London bridge a south west moon.

It flows at the Northland, a south southeast moon, and so along the Coast
till you come to Beachy: and in the Offing from the north Forland to the south
Forland, it runs half tide. And from the south Forland to the Naes to
Fairly, it runs half tide. And from fairly to Beche, it runs quarter
tide under other.

It flows to ye westward of Beche a kenning, a southeast and by south moon.

It flows at Portesmouth, a south and by east moon.

It flows at S. Elins a south southeast moon^.

It flows on the sea side of the Island, a southeast and by south moon, and
so on the Land, and at the Needles, and runs qu^rter tide in the Offing.

It flows at Poole in the haven, a south east moon.

It flows at Waymouth, an east and west moon.

It flows at Portland, a southeast moon.

It flows from the west part of Portland til you come unto Plimmouth an east
and west moon.

It flows on the shore from Plimmouth to the Lizard, a west and by south
moon, and in the Offing a southeast moon.

It flows at Mount Bay, an east and west moon.

It flows at Selly: a west and by south moon.

It flows at the Lands end of Goolfe: a west southwest moon.

It flows all along the Coast up to Bristow, and the coast of Ireland from
Waterfoord to Kinsale, a west and by south moon.

Furthermore it flows (for the most part) from the Poole head of Burdeaur,
all along ^he Coast of Biskey, Ga^iza, Portingale, til you come to the
straights of Maliga, a southwest and northeast moon.

It flows at Flushing a southwest and by south moon

It flows at Antwerpe an east and west Moon.

It flows all along the Coast of Flaunders from the Wildings to Callis, a
south and by east moon: and so runs half tide under the other. It will flow
a point of ye Compas^e more in the Spring tides then in the neap.


Now here is one special thing to be noted, and that is this: it flows o^e
point of the Compass more in the Spring streams, then it does in any of the
quarters of the moon, (so that it be a river where there is any indraft
having distance from the sea) when there is neither rage of winds, nor any
cause either to hinder or further the said effect.

As for example, thus: it flows at Grauesend at the change of the moon or
full, a south south west moon, Tides in a river that has any distance unto
the Sea.
but in any of the quarters of the Moon, it scant flows, a south and by
west moon: and this is general for ever.

The marks to go by the east, and of the Flee hard aboard the shore.
ITem your marks to go into the Souther sea, by the East end of the Flee,
being to the Westwards of it, you shall see two beacons, which stand on the
east end of the Flee, you must keep them both together, until you come
within 4. or 5. fatham of maine, and then you shall have sight of the first Buy,
which ye must go withal: and being at the first Buy, you shall go in along
by the shore with the second, in three Fatham, for it is not much deeper in
that channel: you may leave the Buy on which side ye will And as you draw
near to the east end of the Flee, you shall come to 7.8. or 9. fatham, but take
heed you come not too near the Flee, for it is there as you Looffe in very
steep: therefore you must give the point a prettye b^arth, going up in 4. or
^. Fatham, until you come to the Buy which you shall see to the south
southwestwards of you, which you must leave on your La^boord side, and so go
up along by the Flee, until the Beacons begin to come together, where you
may anchor in 4.5. or 6. fatham, as you think best.

The marks to go in at the West gate by the Flee Island or Skelling.
IF ye come out of the Sea, and mean to go in at the wester Gate by the
Skelling, you shall see a Beacon stand upon the West end of the Skelling, hard
by the Tower, you must run in with the maine, keeping the Beaco^s of the Flee
together, until you see the foresaid Beacon and Tower in one, and thus you
shall find the first buy, which you must go in by, and so go in from it until
ye come to the other, your least water in this deep will be 3. fatham, and
thus going in from Buy to Buy, you shall come into the norther gate, and then
you may go up in that deep by those Buys, your course is then south and by
west, next hand.

The going in at the Norther gate.
IF you come out of the sea, and will go in at ye norther gate, look for a
great Beacon ye stands upon the west end of the Skelling, to the Eastwards
of the tower by the sea side, and thus having the Beacon and the Tower
together, you shall find the first Buy of this Gate which lies in 3 fatham at
the least. Leave it on your Starboord side, and go next hand south in with the
next Buy, leaving it on your larboord side: to the next go in south and by
west, and leave that also on your Larboord side: with the fourth Buy go south
southwest.

How to go in with the wester Eames.
Coming out of the sea, to go in for ye wester Eames, if you will look out for
the first Buy, you shall see it when you have brought the Bosse south southeast
of you, the second buy lies from the Bosse south and by east, the third Buy
is from that south: the fourth is south and by west: and these Buys do lie
east and by south, and west and by north one off another, and by this you may
know what Buy you go in withal.

The courses from Hedland to Hedland about Island.
ITem from Ynge to Merchant Foreland, the course is west Afteene leagues, and
between them is the Buy called Portland Buy, and a league to the westwardes
of Ynge is an Island called Ynge Island, and lies not a league from the maine.

Item, from Merchant Foreland to Westmonie, the course is west and by north 12.
leagues, and to the northwestwardes of Westmonie is a Bay, wherein is a
Harborough called Oribag, and to the Eastwardes of Westmony lies two Islands,
the one called Risbell, and the other the Scatter, and they lie not two leagues
from that hau^n, and to the southwards of Westmony there lies also three or
four Islands called the Gant Islands, and the vt^ermoste of them lies 4.
leagues of the maine.

Item, from Westmony to the Roock the course is west northwest, 16, leagues,
and three leagues to the eastwards of the Roock is a haven called Genswick, and
at the point of the Roock lies two Islands, called the Ganet Islands, and they
lie three leagues off the Roock, to the west southwestwards.

Item, from the Roock to Snoffall foot, the course is north northwest twelve
Leagues, and between them is Hamford Baye, in the which goes in two soundes,
the one is Hamford and the other is called Keblewicke, and in the south part of
the Bay, is Rossimers Nesse, and the north part is Snaffa^ foot, Rosimers
Nesse, and the northwards of the Roock five leagues, and Botsum Haven is to the
northwards of the Roock three leagues.

Item, from Snoffall foot to fair Foreland, the course is north 11. leagues,
and between them is a great Baye called Snoffall Bay, and 3. leagues to the
northeastward of Snoffall foot in the Bay, is a haven called Gamlike.

Item, from Fair Foreland to Kettle Bay point, the course is northeast 16.
leagues distant, and between them in the Baye are these soundes, the next to
the Foreland is called Lousie Bay, and is there three leagues off, and to the
northeast of it is Anderffer, and the next Dereffer, next Northe^ffer, then
Pigges Holl, and Soundiffer, which is a sound yt is two leagues over: in that
sound is a good harbrowe called Scottelffer, and an Island called Blunt Island.

Item, from Kettlebaye to the Rag, the course is Northeast and by east six
leagues distant, and between them are these Baies, First Kettle Baye, then
Floudon Baye, next Wolffe Bay, and then the rag Bay.

Item, from the Ragge to sound riall point, the course is east northeast 20.
leagues, and betwixt them are these Baies and sounds, there is a Bay six
leagues to the eastwards of the Rag called Orgen Bay, and the easter point of
that Bay is called the Orgen point and that is the west point of a sound called
Langerdall, and within that sound is a Harborough called Stingarffer, and the
east point of Langerdall is called Shell Nesse, and it is betwixt both points
eight leagues, and to the eastwards of Shel Nesse is a sound called Calkerffer,
and in the mouth of that sound there are two Islands, the one is called the
Barnard and the other the Scate.

Item, from sound Riall point to Simbernesse, the course is east northeast ten
leagues, and off the mouth of sound Riall lies an Island called Gremsie, next
sound Riall is flat and Flatstrand Bay, next is Oxenfer, and it is betwixt it
and Simbernesse 25. leagues.

Item from Simbernesse to La^gnesse, the course is east and by north 12.
leagues, and betwixt them is a black bay.

Item, from Watlingfer point to silly, the course is southwest 20. leagues
distant, and betwixt them is Strond Bay and Watlingfer.

Item, from Watlingfer point to Silly, the course is southwest 15. leagues,
and these are between them. First Rose bay, next Southerfer, and then
Red-cliffe, next silly and in the mouth of Silly is an Island called Silly.

Item from Silly to the Horn, the course is west southwest 30. leagues off
and between them is first Dofhouse, Rock Baye, Pry Bay, Gooderwick, ne^t
Pappe Island which lies a league from the shore, and off Doshouse lies a Rock
five Leagues off the shore, called the Whales back.

Item from the Horn to Ynge, the course is West and by south six leagues, and
between them is Ynge Bay.

Brief Notes of Saint Georges Channel.
NOw first from S. Denis head in Wales, to the Calfe of Mamis is 37. leagues,
and at S. Denis head it flows east and West half tide, and at the I Will of man
it flows southeast, and the flood runs to the Northeast wards.

Item, from the Calfe of Man to the moulde of Galloy, the course is north and
by E. and they are 12. leagues distant.

Item from the Mould of Galloy, to the mould of Kinter, the course is N.
northwest, and they are distant 20. leagues.

Item the mould of Kinter and the sound of Ellye, lie the one from the other
north northwest, and south south east, and are distant 12. leagues.

Item, the Mould of Kinter and Carles I Will lies south and north, distant six
leagues, and it flows there northeast.

Item betwixt Caraway and Cormeck I Will, it is five leagues.

Item, between Cormecke and Dentram five leagues and it flows there
southwest and by west.

Item, between Dentram and the sound of Ellie it is six leagues.

Item, between the small sound and Dowret it is four leagues, and it flows
there west south west.

Item, between Dowret and Lasternel is two leagues.

Item, b^tweene Lasternell and Albermorick, is four leagues and it flows
there east and west.

Item, from the mould of Kinter, all the sound along, until ye come to the
Lough against Abermorick, the flood runs to the northwards, and from the
great Lo^gh to the northwards, the ebb sets out West and the flood east, till
ye come to the sound of Moule.

Item, from Abe^moricke to Rowre Remory the course is east south east two
leagues.

Item, from Rowbrie Demorye, to Kittles Croffe, the course is north northest
14. leagues, and it flows there east and by south.

Item, between the Kittles and Macknelles Castle, is two leagues, and it
flows a seaboord Macknelles Castle a Northwest and by west Moon, and the
flood runs there to the Northwestwards, and the ebb to the southeast.

Item, from Macknelles castle to seal Island, the course is west northwest, and
they are distant two leagues, and there is a very good road in the east
southeast side of the Seal Island.

Item, from Seal Island to Rowre, is ten leagues, and the course is North and
South, there the flood runs to the southwards, till you come to the
northwardes of Lohcarim, and it flows there northwest.

Item, from Rowbrie to Fair head, the course is north and by east thirty
leagues, there the flood runs along the Coast to the Northwards, and the
ebb to the Southwards.

Item, Fair head and Holborne head, or Catnesse, lie East Northeast six
leagues distant, and there it flows a southeast and Northwest Moon, and the
flood sets to the nothwards.

Here follows the course from Woods Hollom up to the Narue.
ITem, from Woods Hollom to the I Will of Nargen* the course is east northeast
six Leagues, and rhere lies a Rock east northeast from it two leagues off. At
this Island ye may see Revel steeple east southeast from it, about ten or twelve
miles.

Item, from the I Will of Nargen, to the I Will Hogland on Finland side, the course
is east northeast 26. leagues, and from Nargen over to Finland side, it is not
past 8. or nine leagues, and all the said coast of Finland, is full of rocks
and dangers.

Item, from the I Will of Hogland to the I Will Tuto, the course is southeast 4.
leagues, and with that course ye shall go to the westwards of Tuto.

Item from Tuto to the Narue, the course is southeast and by east 8. leagues,
but in going from Tuto to the Naruewardes, ye must hale southest, or southeast
and by south to go clear of the sholdes on Rufland side, the Latitude of the
Narue is 60. degrees and 10. minutes.

Item, from the Narue road the land lies west, until ye come as fa^re as
Revel, it is a fair Coast to sail by, and better passing by it then by
Finland side, or by Hogland except the wind be northerlye.

Item, there is an Island west 12. leagues from ye Narue, called Earthollom. The
said I Will is 2. miles from the main, there is good road about it. Also there is
an other Island between Earthollom and the Narue road, that is but 8. leagues
west from the Narue, and there is a good road about it, there is the castle of
Keysor^w by it, and on the Northside of it is a great ledge of Rocks called
the wrangles, they lie in the midst of the Sound, therefore beware of them.

A brief way to shift the Sun and Moon by memory.
First, ye have to consider, that although the moon have prorperly but 29.
days 12. hours and 44. minutes from Conjunction to Conjunction, yet in
shifting the Sun and Moon for knowing the tides, it shall not be hurtful
to give her 30. days just, only to avoid fractions, or broken numbers in the
use thereof, for so small is ye error that grows thereby, that it is not to be
accounted in any one tide, to be any annoyance to the Mariner.

Further, you have to note that ye 32. points of the Compass contain in this
use 24. hours of times, so that every point is just of an hour. or 45. mi.
and every 24. hours the Sun and Moon depart the one from the other 48.
minutes which is just a point and 3. minutes more. And being 48. hours or two
days old, they are two points and 6. minu apart, and after this manner for
every day of her age ye must ad to their aper^iment 1. point and 3. mi. until
she come to the full or 25. d^ies old. And also ye shall note, that from the
change to the full she rises by day and has her horns to the eastwards: and
from the full to the change has her horns to the westwards, so that always
her horns are turned from the Sun, and also at the full she is directly
against the Sun as appears by the figure following on the other side.

And likewise ye shall note, ye continually at the instant of the full, the
moon rises at the present time, yt the Sun goes down in ye This is to be
understood when the moon has no Latitude, but is just under the Ecliptic
line, for otherwise when the M. has her greatest N. or So. Latit. she will
differ for the most part more then half a point and sometimes an wholepoint
and more f^o^ the Suns oposit point in such places as be f^rre toward the
North or South.
opposite or contrary point, and therefore those that hold opinion yt the moon
always rises at the quart. at 12. of the clock at noone, and at the full at
6. of the clock at night, they are much deceived. For if the sun set at 4.
of the clock in winter, he goes near the southwest and by west, the moon
being then at the full in Canc. must needs rise at northeast and by east, at the
same present hour that the sun sets. And as many are deceived in this
point, so are there also many mistaken, and oftentimes greatly anoyed in an
other point, and that are those ye use in going with any bard harbrough, should,
or land, to set the moon by the compass, to know the time of the ^ull sea in
any place, and this is surely a dang^rous practice. For if the moon be in
north signs as in Gemini or Cancer, and that he seek the full sea on the
East, or East Southeast, then by setting the Moon by the compass, to know the
full sea he may miss almost 2. hours of his tide, and thereby come to a great
annoyance, and knows not how nor by what means it chances. Therefore let
every man that shall stand in need of this rule, practice ye use thereof by
memory, which is more commendable then Tables, but if their capacities serve
the^ not to do it by head, the^ I wish them to use rather such tables as are
extant for that purpose, until they are otherwise able to do it by memory.
For as the Compass lying in all places horizontally, is imperfect to show the
true apertiment of the Sun^e and moon in the Zodiac, so likewise by ye
imperfection, the compass is at no time a true dial to show the hour of the
day, except for ye instant time of the midday, or directly under the Poles of
the World, where the Equinoctial is in the horizon, or else in the Equinoct.
points, except the flee of the compass be lifted up a^ the Equinoct* is
eleu^ted in the Lat. where the observation is made. And this is most found in
summer time, when the Sun is in north Agnes, as in Cancer or Gemini, at which
time it is almost ^. of the clock, before the sun come to the east point of
the compass, yet it is commonly counted with many, that an east Sun by the
Compass is alwaie^ 9. of the clock in the mo^ning, and a west Sun to be 6.
of the clock after noon, and so consequently for all the other points o^ the
compass. But all this error comes by the Horizontall lying of the Flee of
the Compass as I before has said. And because the imperfection of the
compass is caus^ of the error in reckoning the tides, by setting ^he (...) it
by the eye, the^fore I wish no man to use it to ye par^^se bu^ to reckon their
appertiment by memory or by tables as I have before said. And further here is
to be ^oted yt the common compass being set a point to the eastwar^^ of the
true meridien of any place, as some Compa^ses are almost^ a whole point, then I
say by that Compa^se where the North point so varieth from the true meridian of
the place, so much shall it be uncertain to find out the ^oure of midday or
noon, yet many makes not observation of the Suns meridian Altitude, until he
be at S. by this da^ted compass, and then is the Sun past the iust^nt of the
meridia^, and his Altitude some what decreased.

And ye more the Compass is varied to ye eastwards, the more shall the Sun^
altitude be decreased when he is come to that point, And as the south of the
compass ^oth make difference from the true Merid. in the Horizon, so does all
the other points in like proportion from their propper place. And as the
varying compass is the only impediment heereof^, so is it likewise being
varied imperfect to know the appertiment of the Sun and Moon by the point
showed in the Horizon. Therefore for the easier understanding of the willing
learne^. I have hereafter set down in plain sort a Compass Fi^e, and the
manner how to know the appertiment by memory: how many points and minutes the
Sun and Moon shall be apart, for every particular day of her age.



The order of your compass, that is to know your points both with the Sun,
and against the Sun, beginning at the north point, as hereafter follows.
NOrth, north and by east, north northeast, northeast and by, north Northeast,
northeast and by east, east north East, east and by north, East* east and by
south, east southeast: southeast and by east, southeast, southeast and by
south, south southeast, south and by east South, south and by west, south
southwest, southwest and by south, southwest, southwest and by west, west
southwest, west and by south, west, west and by north, west northwest,
northwest and by west, northwest, northwest and by north, north northwest,
north and by west, north.

Thus it is said with the Sun, and as here ^^lloweth against the Sun: north,
north and by west, north northwest, and so forth contrary wise.

And thus must you learn to say your Compass, both with the Sun and against
the Sun.

Now when you have learned your compass with the Sun, and against the Sun
perfectly, you shall learn to bring 32 to 24, as heareafter follows.
Here is mentioned before, your Compass wherein are 32. points, also you
have to every point 45. minutes and to your 32: points are 24. hours, and to
your 24. hours there are 1440. minu. also your, 32, points are not an hour
apeece, for they lack 15. minutes a piece, of an hour. Also you shall take
out of your 32, points 8, points, so there rests behind 24, points, which
24, points must be brought into 24 hours, you have mentioned here before
your Compass, wherein are 32 points. Also you have here mentioned your 24
points, and also your 8 points. Now for to bring your 24 points to 24. hours,
you have to every one of your 24 points, 45. minu. a piece, and so they lack
15. minutes a piece of an hour. Now for to make the 24. points 24. hours you
have 8. points which you did take out of your 32. points: also these 8.
points must be parted into 24. parts to make the 14. points 24. hou. Also you
have to every one of your 24. points 45. min. the which 45. min. is three
quarters of an hour. Also you have to every one of your 8, points 45. min. a
piece, and to your eight points there is 6. hou. and to your 6. hour. there is
18. score min. these 18. score min. must be parted into 24, parts, and to
every part 15. min. And when your 18. score min. are parted give to every one
of your ^4. points 15 minut, and that shall make every point an hour, for 45
min. and 15. minut. makes threescore minutes, and threescore minutes are an
hour, and so your 24. points are 24. hours. So that 8. points, make the 24.
points 24. hours. and 32. points 24. hours. And so giving to every 4
points 3. hours through your whole compass, in your 32. points 24. hours,
and you have to the 24. hours 1440. minut^, and this is called the bringing of
your thirty two points to 24. hours, and your 32. is twenty four.

This rule of bri^ging 32. to 24. or any other number of points, given to the
number of hours contained in them, may eastlyer be performed thus:

As 3. is to 4. so is the number of the points given to the number of hours
contained in them. Therefore multiply the points given by 3. and deui^e the
Product by 4. for so the quotient shall be, the hours sought for.

As for Example.
If you would know how many hours 13. points of the Compass will make,
multiply 13. by 3. the Product shall be 39. which being divided by 4. the
quotient gives you 9 hours and three quarters.

Particular notes from the change to the full, to know how many points and
minutes the Sun and Moon are apart, during which time, the Moon seems by
the course of the diurnall motion to be behind the Sun: nevertheless by her
proper motion in the Zodiac, being swifter then the Sun, she goes
continually before him, until the instant of the next conjunction or change.
FIrst at 1. day old, the Sun and Moon are one point and 3. minutes a
sunder, and the Moon to be behind^ the sun to the eastwardes* and so unto
the full.

At 2. days old, they are 2. points and 6. minutes a sunder.

At 3. days old, they are 3. points and 9. minutes a sunder.

At 4. days old, they are 4. points and 12. minut. a sunder

At 5. days old, they are 5. points and 15. minutes a sunder.

At 6. days old, they are 6. points and 18. minutes a sunder.

At 7. days old, they are 7. points and 21 minutes a sunder.

At 8. days old they are 8. points and 24. minutes a sunder.

At 9. days old, they are 9. points and 27. minutes a sunder.

At 10. days old, they are 10. points and 30. min a sunder.

At 11 days old, they are 11. points and 33. min. a sunder.

At 12. days old, they are 12. points and 36. min. a sunder.

At 13. days old, they are 13. points and 39. min. a sunder.

At 14. days old, they are 14. points and 42. min a sunder.

At 15. days old, they are 16. points and just a sunder, the one directly
against the other, and then is the moon at the full, until which time ye must
reckon the moon always to be so many points behind the Sun, as is above
expressed.

The apertiment of the Sun and Moon, from the full until the change: in all
which time the Moon is to be reckoned before the Sunn^.
ITtem, at 16 days old, the Sun and Moon are 14 points and 42. minutes a
sunder, the Moon seeming to be before the Sun to the westwards.

At 17. days old, they are 13. points, and 39. minutes a sunder,

At 18. days old, they are 12. points and 36. minut a sunder

At 19. days old, they are 11. points and 33. minu a sunder

At 20. days old, they are 10. points and 30. minu. a sunder

At 21. days old, they are 9. points and 27. minutes a sunder.

At 22. days old, they are 8. points and 24. minutes a sunder.

At 23. days old, they are 7. points and 21. minutes a sunder.

At 24. days old they are 6. points and 18. minutes a sunder.

At 25. days old, they are 5. points and 15. minutes a sunder.

At 26. days old, they are 4. points and 12. min. a sunder.

At 27. days old, they are 3. points and 9. minut. a sunder.

At 28. days old, they are 2. points and 6. minu. a sunder.

At 29. days old, they are 1. point and 3. minut. a sunder.

At 30. days is the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon.

Now when you know by these Rules before showed, how many points the Sun
and Moon are apart, and whether she be before or behind the Sun, then is it
easily known by the course of the Sun, the hour and min. when the Moon
shall come upon any point of the compass, w^ere ye desire to know the hour
of the full sea, according to her age, as hereafter follows to make it plain
by example.

An Example.
WHen the Moon is 10. days old, I desire to know^ at what hour the comes
to the south southeast to make full Sea at Callis, or in any other place where
it flows on that point^ ^ say then 10 days of her age shows her to be 10.
points, and three times ten minutes from the sun and behind him. Now for
seeking of the hour of the full sea, the Moon being at south southeast, you
must reckon the Sun to be 10. points, and 30. min. before her to the
westwardes, which falls on the west point, and 30. minutes to the Northwards.
And therefore the Sun being on that point, and 30. minutes to the northwards
of the west, I say the full Sea shall be at six of the clock and 30 minutes at
Callis, and in all other places where a south southeast Moon makes a full sea.

Another Example.
WHen the Moon is 18, days old, being before the Su^ne, I desire to know the
hour of the full sea, where an east moon makes a ^igh water, I consider that
the M. being but 18. days old, there is yet 12. days of her age to come which
shows the Moon to be 12. points, and ^6. min. from the Sun, and before
him, the Moon then being at the east and the Sun must be 12 points and 36.
mi. behind her, which is at northwest and 36. min: to the westwards. So the
full sea where it flows east or west, and the Moon 18. dai^s old shall be at 8
of the clock 24. minutes. And that by this computation is easily found in all
places, and upon every point of the Compass, the time of the full sea or high
water, the age of the moon being known as is before declared.

H^w to know the hour of the night by the Gwards, by knowing on what point of
the Compass they shall be at midnight, every fifteenth day through out the whole
year.
FIrst you must understand, for the certain knowing of the points of the
compass, that North is always to be understood, directly over or above the North
star, and south under east, as you behold the star to the right hand wards,
and West to the left hand, ye gwards seem to go against about the sun
lattrallye coming from East to north, and from north to west, and from thence
to the South, and so ^ound every three months of the year, occupying one
quarter of the Compass as follows.

January, Februa^ie, and March, occupy the Northeast quarter.

April, May, June, the northwest quarter.

July, August, and September, the sout^ west quarter.

October, November, and December, the southeast quarter.

And although I have only showed the hou^ of the night by Gwards or little
Bear, yet the like also is to be known by any other notable fixed star^e, that
is near the Pole because the fixed ^tarres contain^d within the constellations
keep always one equidistant motion from the Pole, with out any great variety,
moving always about the Pole, in.24. ho. every one in his proper Ci^cle,
according to the diurnall motion. So that by the point or place considered that
they occupy every month at midnigh^, may also easily be known the other
hours of the night, in reckoning every point to be of an hour of time. And
although in this rule for the hour of the night, by the Gward, there be 4.
imperfections or error, growing by our view, being upon the face or superficies
of the earth or water, yet so small is the error and so great the benefit of
the hour of the night, that I have rather thought it necessary to let dewn it
with that error, then to omit it and lack the benefit and use thereon. And
here I have occasion given me somewhat to speak of them that have written
against mariners for their gross judgments and erroneous ^ules, promising
general reformation with new instruments, which I long have desired, and daily
look for to see extant, I confess the Compass (which is the chief
instrument of Navigations) to be most erroneous and variable, by reason of the
natural property received from the Stone, as also because of the Horizontall
lying of the Flee, for some uses. Yet necessity causes us to use it, because
we may by no means find better, nor without it are able to help our selves
in any Navigations. Also the Ma^ine plats commonly made for the sea and
Marine^s use, I acknowledge to be very erroneous, and far from the true shape
of the Globe or round body: yet I may not prefer the use of the Globe in
Navigations before them, ^or sundry causes, both for want o^ true courses as
also because ye variatio^. And the^^o^e al such ^ules, and inst^uments of
Navigations, be the^ never so e^ronious and false, yet of necessity they are
tolerable and not to be ^mitted, except it be possible either to refourme the
old, or to make new more exact.

Now further to our former purpose for more plain understanding thereof, I
will set down where and on what point of the compass the Gwards are found at
midnight, every ^5. days through the whole year, as hereafter follows, and
for the better understanding, I have here set the Flee of the Compass, with
all the points present.



Where the Gwardes are at midnight, every month in the year.
I. The 15. day of Ia. the Gwards are at east at midnight.
The end of Ia. east and by north northerly at midnight
F. The 15. of February at northeast and by east at mid.
The end of February at northeast at midnight.
M. The 15. of Mar. at northeast and by N. northerly at mid.
The end of Marc. north and by east easterly at midnight.
A. The 15. of April north at midnight.
The end of April the Gwards north and by west westerly at midnight
M. The 15. of May at northwest and by north at midnight
The end of May at northwest and by north at midnight.
I. The 15. of June northwest and by west Guards at mid.
The end of Iu. at w, and by N northerly Guards at mid
I. The 15 day of July at west Guards at midnight.
The end of July at west and by south southerlie at mid,
A The 14, of August at southw, and by west westerly, at mid
The end of August the Gwards southwest at mid.
S. The 15, of Sept, at southw and by So, southerly at mid,
The end of September at south and by west westerly mid.
O The 15 of October a south Guard is then midnight.
The end of October at south and by east easterly midn,
N The 15, of Nouemb, at southeast and by S, southerly mid
The end of November at southeast, then it is midnigh
D, The 15, of December, at southeast and by east easterly mid.
The end of December at east and by south southerly mid
Now when you know on what point of the Compass the Gwards are always at
midnight, then may ye by it also know the hours before or after midnight,
always reconing for every point that they shall lack of the midnight point of
an hour, and for every point that you shall find them to be past the
midnight point, likewise of an hour, as for example.

Example.
THe 15. of January the Guardes are at east at midnight, if then you find
them at south east, which is four points short of the east, that shows it
to be four times 1/^ of an hour before midnight which is nine of ^he clock
in the evening.

If you find them past the east point, look how many points they are past, so
many times of an hour is it past midnight, and this is a gene^all rule for
every month in the year. If the very same day of the month be not here
expressed, which you shall then occupy, then take the midst, or the end of
the same month that is next unto the same day, and so the error cannot be great.

The hour of the night is also known by the Gwards or any other star ne^re
unto the north Pole, by diverse sorts of instrum^nts made to that use, some
divided as the compass into 32. points, thereby reckoning of an ho. for every
point: others divided into 24. hours, as this Instrument following which is to
be made of a Hoope of metal divided into 24. hours, every hour having a
little pin, that it may be felt in the night when it cannot be seen, to
number the hours. This Hoope being divided into 4. equal parts, ye sh^l make
fast a thread to every quarter thereof, and the other 4. ends of them shall be
fastened to a ring in the midst of the instrument, through the which ye shall
see the north star. And thus holding it very upright, and of a reasonable
distance from your eye, ye shall have the Gwards directly with the pinnes in the
Hoope, at such hours as is numbered under the pin. But it is necessary that ye
know by memory (as I have before showed) what point those stars shall be on
at midnight, and thus it serves for any star near the Pole.



AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde, for Hugh Astley, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the corner of S. Magnus Church. 1605.


