THE POOR VICARS PLEA.

Declaring, that a competencie of means is due to them out of the Tithes of
their several Parishes, notwithstanding the Impropriations.

Written by THOMAS RYVES Dr. of the Civil Laws.

Ad tenuitatem Beneficiorum necessario sequitur ignorantia Sacerdotum. Panormit.



LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL. AN. DOM. M. DC. XX.

two lions holding up a crown surmounted shield of the coat of arms of the
United Kingdom above plaque DIEV ET MON DROIT.


TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY.
MOST Religious and Gracious Sovereign, As it is not unknown to the world, in
how miserable a plight our poor Church of IRELAND stands at this present; So
we of that Kingdom know right well, and with all thankfulness acknowledge,
that your Majesty has ever made it one of your most Princely and Christian
cares, to raise her up again, if by any means you could, out of the dust, and
to set her among the Daughters, as sometimes you did her Sister of SCOTLAND,
which formerly lay buried under the like heap of Impropriations, as the other
does at this present time.

The knowledge whereof, dread Sovereign, has emboldened me, the meanest of
all the Professors of the Laws, to present this short Discourse unto your
Highness: wherein I have endeavored to prove, that the poor Ministers of
that Church, ought to be more competently provided for, then now they are, and
that, out of the Tithes belonging to their several Churches, not by
Praerogatiue, whereof your Majesty is ever sparefull, but by a due course of
Law, already there established: Wishing from my heart, that this cause of GOD
and of his Church, had found an Advocate, answerable to the dignity and
justice of it. As it is, I shall humbly beseech your Majesty, that neither the
unworthiness of my person, neither yet the unlikelihood of the matter, be any
prejudice to the worth and truth of the cause it self; but rather, that your
Highness will vouchsafe to look down upon this poor endeavor of your
humble Servant, with a favorable eye, and to supply those manifold defects,
which may happily be found in the handling of so great and difficult a cause,
out of that abundant and incomparable treasure of Learning and Wisdom, which
GOD has so richly endowed your Princely mind withal: In hope whereof, with
my humble prayers to Almighty GOD, for the preservation of your Majesty's long
and prosperous Reign, I rest

Your Highness most loyal Subject and humble servant, THO. RYVES.

THE POOR VICARS PLEA for Tithes.
THe prosperous and happy peace which this poor Kingdom of Ireland has of
late years inioyed, is such, as neither our Fathers ever saw, nor can be
sampled out of any Records or Histories of former ages. The plough now walks
without fear, the wayfaring man trauaileth without danger, the laws are
executed in every place alike. Cocherings are reduced to Chiefe-rents; The
poor Tenant begins to stand for his right against his tyrannizing and
cutting Landlord: The name of a Kerne is almost forgotten. The woods and
fastnes are left for beasts. The men are drawn to Villages and Towns, and all
reduced (thanked be God) to a measure of good ciuility.

Only the Church in this common joy mourns, looking pale and wan, as if she
had been either newly taken out of a burning fever, or came lately flying out
of a bloody battle. The Churches in most places lie waste: and where Churches
are, there want, rather Ministers able to instruct the people, then people
capable of instruction. So that, if his Majesty should be pleased to cast his
eye upon the Temporal and Ecclesiastical estate of this his kingdom both at
once, he might well sigh in himself, and say as sometime King David did, Ecce
Ego nunc habito in domo cedrina, ^. Lib. Chronic. c. 17 v. 1.
dum arca foederis sub aulaeis.

Neither is the cause of this her poverty, and extreme calamity hard to be
discerned: would God the remedy were as easy to be found. The sole cause
therefore of this her misery, is the multitude of Benefices, long since taken
from the daily Ministers of the Churches, and converted to other uses: But
principally and in greaest number appropriated to the luxury of the Monks. For
there was an age when Christian Religion seemed to consist only in building of
Monasteries, and in bestowing large revenues upon them when they were built.
But those Monkeries, as they were from the beginning exceeding burdensome to
the Temporal estate of all kingdoms in which they were erected, so in short
time they grew banefull to the Churches, by reason of the multitude of Church
livings which they procured daily to be appropriated to their uses: whereupon
it was, that (among other grieuances) which the Christian Nations complained of
in the Council of Constance, and whereof they required reformation; this was
one, That the number of Unions and Incorporations; that is to say, of
Appropriations was over much increased in all kingdoms. And the Council
thereupon decreed, That all such Appropriations as had bin in certain years
before should be reuersed; Yet with this reservation, viz. Unless they were
made upon just and lawful causes: which was nothing else, but to blind the
eyes of the world, and to send away the complainants, content for the present.
The Council of Trent Council. Trident. Sess. 7.
also not long after revoked all Appropriations which had been made in forty
years before. But I could never find that this Canon took effect any more
then that other of Constance did. Sure I am, that the French writers complain,
that they have been as frequent in France since that Council as before: and so
frequent, that the Universities, (which by a laudable custom of that Realm
have a right of Nomination to a Petr. Rebuffus Tracta. nominat^^num.
third part of the Benefices therein, together with the Secular Clergy, and
Lay-Patrons, finding no measure in them, nor other remedy against them) use to
appeal from them, as from abuses, to the high Court of Parliament in that
Kingdom.

Neither have these Monasteries done more harm to the Church in themselves,
then they have by their example. For from them, Chantries, Colleges,
Hospitals, and Nunneries, learned to procure Appropriations to be made unto
them. By means whereof, the several Parishes throughout Christendom began in
short time to grow destitute of learned Teachers, and by this occasion more
then by any other, fell from civility to barbarism, and from the knowledge of
true Religion, to gross ignorance and mere superstition.

But of all Kingdoms of the Christian world, I suppose that never any was so
surcharged and ruined with this heavy burden as this poor Kingdom of Ireland
has been, and is. For the more barbarous the people was, the more were they
addicted to superstition; and the more superstitious, the more easy to be
wrought upon in this kind. To instance in one for all: I have observed out of
an old Liger book of the Abbey Regist. Sancti Thome in le Breminghams Tour
Dublin.
of S. Thomas near Dublin (a house of no very old foundation) That in few
years after it was erected, it had procured fifty nine Church livings in
part, or in whole, to be appropriated to their uses. Neither may we doubt, but
that Kilmainim, Saint Mary's, and other such houses, which were in great number
in and about Dublin, and other parts of that Kingdom, had their share alike.
By means whereof it is come to pass, that a man shall there find few
Churches served by other then poor Vicars and Stipendarie Curats, and those,
for the most part, men of such course stuff, as hardly can a man say, whether
such men be less worthy of better maintenance, or such maintenance of better
men.

I have been told that Doctor Weston, a learned Ciuilian, and (not long since)
a worthy Lo. Chancellor of this Kingdom, pitying the miserable plight of this
poor Church, devised the means how to have all those Impropriations restored
to their primer use again, and that he wrote a large Discourse to that
effect, which he intended to send to her Majesty of happy memory, but that
death prevented him, and (he dying) that work aborted with him. I must
confess, that the line of my understanding is too short to reach to so deep a
point of learning: but well can I show, what has been done heretofore in the
like case, for the benefit of the Church; and how (without wrong to any man,
and by a laudable due course of law) there may and ought to be a competent
maintenance raised unto every Minister, out of the Tithes belonging to his own
Church; and that by the immediate authority of the Bishop, notwithstanding the
Appropriations as now they stand, and so the poor estate of this Church be
made a great deal more tolerable then now it is. And this is the Argument of
this short Discourse ensuing: an Argument, which I know will seem harsh, and
not sound well in the ears of those men who have hitherto lived in the quiet
possession of the whole. But they a^e for the most part, men of honor and
wisdom, and such as can easily apprehend, That if happily my love unto our
Mother the Church, has driven me into an error, my error cannot hurt them:
And if I shall maintain a truth, the truth will defend both it self and me:
In the one case they need not, in the other they ought not; and therefore I
hope and presume, that in honor they will not be offended at me. As for the
Argument it self, it will in my poor understanding be made clear and
sufficiently proved to all men of indifferency and wisdom, if I shall be
able to make it appear. First, that by the Laws Ecclesiastical, which were
in force before, and at the time of the dissolution of Abbeys in the reign of
Hen. 8. The Bishops had full power and authority within their several
Diocesses to allot, or cause to be allotted out of every Benefice, so much of
the Tithes as might well serve for a fit maintenance of the Minister, any
Impropriation notwithstanding. And secondly, That the same Laws and Canons
stand hitherto in full force and uncontrolled by any Statute of either Kingdom.

To put hook to corn therefore. And first to make it clear, That by the
course of the Canon Laws, and by the practice used in those days, the Bishops
had such power over the Monasteries, and other such like houses, while they
were in their cheifest Ruff. It is to be observed, That it was the opinion
which the world had conceived of the piety, charity, and devotion of Monks,
that first caused those ample revenues, both Temporal and Ecclesiastical to
be cast upon them. This opinion was the more confirmed in the minds of men by
their laudable beginnings, for as the liberality of the rich to themwards, was
very great; so were also their hospitality in receiving strangers, their
charity in redeeming captives, their devotion in releeuing the poor, and
other Almesdeeds no less. As for these Benefices which were annexed to their
houses, and appropriated to their uses, it is reported, that they used them, as
if they used them not, and taking thereof a small pension for themselves, they
left the rest to their Vicar, which performed the daily office in the Church.
And no marvel: for had they appeared in their own likeness at the first,
every man had shut doors against them: But in process of time, as their
Luxury, caused by their idleness, swallowed up their devotion, so their
Avarice, the natural begotten daughter of their Luxury, quenched the fire of
their Charity. Then began they to take the whole fruits of those Benefices
into their own hands, and to thrust the Curate to his pittance, not regarding
how unworthy the man were, so he would content himself with little wages.
Insomuch, that the Popes themselves, who use to wink at small faults in their
trusty servants, grew offended at this their insatiable avarice, fearing, and
foreseeing, that in the end, it would turn to the discredit of the Papacy,
whose creatures they were, to the ruin of the Parish-Churches, and decay of
Religion in all places where they came. The first which opposed himself
against them, was Pope Alexander the third, about the year of our Lord God
1170. He wrote to the Monks and other Regulars of the Church and Diocese of
York, a certain Decretall, wherein having first blamed their covetous
disposition in this kind, he adds these words. Intelleximus quod in Ecclesijs
vestris (...) A^aritia. extra d^ preben^.
de quibus certas Pensiones consueuistis percipere, portiones and antiquos
reditus minorastis, quos nonnulli Clerici Ecclesiarum ipsarum habuisse
noscuntur: Idcoque mandamus, quatenus, fi quas portiones, velantiquos reditus
Clericorum fine consensu Archiepiscopi vestri minuere praesumpsistis, ad
integritatem pristinam reuocetis. From whence that appears to be true which
was said before: That in the beginning Monks, and others were wont to reserve
to themselves a pension only out of those Churches which they held
appropriated to their uses, leaving the gross of their Tithes which were the
proper ancient revenue of the Church, to the Vicars or other Curats (...). ad
(...) extra de pr^b^nd
of them. And so Panormitan understands this Decretall, and therefore summeth
it in this manner: Religiosi reditus Ecclesiarum ipsarum diminuere non possunt,
respectu portionis quae debetur Rectoribus Panormit. ib.
seu vicarijs earundem; And a little after he says, that the religious men
could not increase their own Pension, Nec possunt diminuere portionem solitam
dari Rectoribus earundem Ecclesiarum: Some men I know, and among them Aufrerius
a learned Canonist in his 109. Decision Aufrer. dec^^. 109.
will have it to be understood of the Couents of inferior Priories, rather then
of the Vicars of Parish Churches, being led into this opinion, no doubt, by the
word Clericorum; which yet, as Suidas and others testify, comprehends all
sorts of Priests and Deacons, and all others which had taken upon them any
degree of holy Orders, were they Secular, or were they Regular, and does more
properly signify a Minister of the Church, as one which is more peculiarly
called in sortem Domini, then it does a Monk or Friar.

But of whomsoever it was meant, it seems that this Constitution served only
for a warning piece, and did but randon over the Monks for that present,
without doing them any greater harm; for, vana est omnis constitutio quae
contra facientibus poenam non imponit. And therefore as the disease increased,
so was the remedy more and more enforced: wherefore the same Alexander, not
long after, being duly informed of the ill behavior of our Monks in this
kind, and that contrary to the old custom, they suffered the poor Curats to
take all the pains, and not to partake of the gains in any reasonable sort,
wrote to the Bishop of Worcester in this manner. De monachis c. de Monachis
Extra de prebend.
qui vicarios Ecclesiarum parochialium ita grauant, vt hospitalitatem tenere
non possint, eam prouidentiam habeas quod ad praesentationem eorum nullum
recipias, nisi tantum ei de prouentibus Ecclesiae coram refuerit assignatum,
vnde iura Episcopalia possint persoluere, and congruam sustentationem habere.

For the better understanding of which Constitution it is to be noted, that in
all those Churches which were appropriated to any Monastery, the Monks as
they were to receive the fruits to their own uses, so were they to present
their Vicar to the Bishop, by him to be canonically instituted to the cure of
souls, and were also to allow so much out of the Tithes, as in the discretion
of the Ordinary might seem enough to mainetaine the Vicar in a competent and
a convenient manner, his calling, degree, and quality considered, as also to
discharge Procurations, and other duties belonging to the Bishop, to mainetaine
hospitality, and to support and defray all other charges belonging to such a
Benefice, as shall hereafter more fully be declared. But because the Monks
would make them no other allowance then such as is now commonly made to our
hirelings here in Ireland. Therefore the Pope willed the Bishop (to whom the
care of these things properly belonged) to reform this abuse, and not to
admit of any Clerk at their presentation, unless the Monks would first
make an allowance of so much of the Tithes or other profits to the use of the
Vicar, as would suffice for all the above named charges, so says Panormitane,
Innocentius, Rebuffus, Panormit. and Innocen. ad D. 6 de Monarchis Rebuff. de
congr^.
and other Writers, expositors of the Canon Law. For albeit there were not in
those days any Vicarages endowed (for this is a term of our Common Laws, and
unknown unto the Canons) yet was there ever a perpetual Vicar to be resident
in the Parish, no^ by license (as now is used) but by Canonical institution
from the Ordinary, at the presentation of the Monks: unto which institution
the Bishop could not be compelled, unless the Monks had first set out a
competent allowance for the Vicar, as the Ordinary should think meet. And
this was then thought to be a sufficient tie upon the Monks, to restrain
their avarice, and to compel them to make a more liberal allowance for the
Vicar: seeing that the cure of souls, which originally, or (as the Canonists
speak) habitually resided in them, could not otherwise be supplied. And not
long after the same Alexander, sitting in the Laterane Council, issued forth a
Canon of the same nature with his Decretall, but in terms more general, and
in form as follows. Extirpandae C. extirpandae extra de ^^^ben^.
consuetudinis vitium in quibusdam partibus inoleuit, quod scilicet
parochialium Ecclesiarum patroni, and aliae quaedam personae prouentus ipsarum,
sibi penitus vendicantes, Presbyteris earundem seruitijs deputatis relinquant
adeo exiguam portionem quod ex ea nequeant congrue sustentari; nam (vt pro
certo didicimus) in quibusdam Regionibus parochiales Presbyteri, pro sua
sustentatione non obtinent, nisi quartam quartae: i. sextam decimam decimarum.
Cum igitur os bouis ligari non debeat triturantis; sed qui altari seruit de
altari viuere and debeat. Statuimus vt consuetudine qualibet Episcopi vel
Patroni, vel cuiuslibet alterius non obstante, portio Presbyteris ipsis
sufficiens assignetur.

This Canon (as Panormitane in his Commentaries upon the same says) is
Panormitan. ib.
properly to be understood of those Churches, Quarum proprietas pertinet ad
alium, i. The property whereof belongs to another, then the Vicar or Minister
of the place; which may, or rather indeed must, be understood, either of
Monasteries to which they were appropriated, or of dignities to which they were
annexed, or of lay persons, to whom they were given to be held in fee, as they
are now held by proprietaries with us, especialy in France thorowout, and in
some parts of Germany, where Charolus Martellus (as the French Histories
report, and no less appears out of the body of the Canon Law) after that
great and glorious battle near Tours upon the Loire, against the Sarasins,
wherein he slew of the Infidels De^ Ser^^^ en son ^^^ectaire de France.
three hundred threescore and fifteen thousand men, not having wherewith else
to reward and content his Army for that days service, gave all, or the
greatest part of the Tithes to them in fee for ever: yet in all these there was
still a Vicar to be maintained, and a reasonable allowance to be made for his
entertainment. But because all these in their several places took the whole
revenue of every Benefice unto themselves, not allotting to the Vicar above the
sixteenth part of the whole profits: by reason whereof sundry mischiefs grew
unto the Church: every man pleading a custom, and that they had long used to
pay no more. Therefore the Pope (who according to the course of those times,
was reputed to have sovereign authority in cases of this nature) commanded all
Bishops to root out this evil practice, and notwithstanding any custom
belonging to any Bishop, which held them peradventure united to his table, or
Patron which had them in fee, or any other, as Monks, to whose uses they were
appropriated, they should reform this abuse in themselves and others, within
their several jurisdictions, and cause a larger proportion to be made unto
every Priest or Vicar deputed to the service of the Church.

There was after this another Decree published by Clement the third, in these
words. Sicut nobis tua fraternitas intimauit C Si^^t extra de (...).
Monachi quidam and Canonici Regulares Ecclesias quae ad praesentationem eorum
pertinent proprijs vsibus deputare nituntur; nec volunt ad eas, cum vacauerint
vocare personas, etc. admissos ita pensionibus onerantes, etc. Nolentes autem,
vt status Ecclesiae debitus and antiquus per insolentiam alicuius subuertatur.
Mandamus quatenus nisi a jurisdiction tua exemptae s^t Eccles^^ supradictae,
praedictos excessus stu^eas rationabiliter emendare: Et nisi praedictae
personae infra tempus in Lateranensi Concilio constitutum, ad vacantes
Ecclesias tibi personas idoneas presentauerint, extunc tibi liceat,
appellatione remota, in iisdem ordinare Rectores qui eis praeesse nouerint and
prodesse.

This Constitution suffers some quarrel and dispute upon sundry points. But
for our present purpose, Petrus Rebuff. tra^t. de congr^. port.
Petrus Rebuffus says, that it issued forth upon this occasion. Alexander the
third (as has been said) had decreed that a Bishop should not admit of the
Presentee of the Monks, unless they would first assign a sufficient portion
of the profits, for his maintenance: whereupon the Monks would not present any
Vicar at all, but either left their Churches unserved, or served them with
poor mercenary Curats, such as we have hundreds here in Ireland, and so the
Church was worse served, and the Churchmen worse provided for, then before.
Whereupon this Clement by this Constitution ordained, That in case they did not
provide sufficient persons within the time limited in the Lateran Council,
which was of six months, Then the Bishop should collate by his own authority,
as in other cases of laps and deuolution: Excepting always those Monks, which
by special privilege were exempted from his Jurisdiction; for with these the
Ordinary was not permitted, but rather forbidden to deal.

But Clement the fourth, about the year of our Lord 1240. perceiving that the
above mentioned Constitution of Alexander the third, had taken some good effect
with the ordinary sort of Monks: and taking notice: That the Exempt Monks
which were immediately subject to the Sea of Rome, continued still to oppress
their Vicars with intolerable exactions, and to make them such small
allowances, that the poor men were not able to live thereon, made a Decree,
That the Constitution of Alexander, should also take place and be of force
against the Exempt Monks: The words (after mention made of the Decree of
Alexander, and of the great abuses which grew by the avarice of the privileged
Monks) follow in this manner. Nos itaque volentes super hoc c. Suscepti. de
praebend. in sexto.
salubre remedium adhiberi, praesenti Decreto statuimus and mandamus
Constitutionem huiusmodi, quoad omnes patronos Ecclesiarum, religiosos, tam
exemptos quam non exemptos and alios, inuiolabiter obseruari, consuetudine
contraria non obstante.

But all these Laws, though grounded upon great reason were of little force to
prevail against a mischief which had spread it self so far, and rooted it
self so deep, by custom, and the redress whereof must pinch the belley of
the Monk: For what effect could a bare Mandamus work in a case of this
nature, there being no penalty inflicted upon the offender.

Non canis a corio facile absterrebitur vncto. The Templars (for they were
those which most offended in this kind, and which of all others were the
principal occasion of these Decrees) were too covetous to obey for conscience,
and too mighty to be terrified with words. And for mine own part I cannot
see, what this was else, but either a fear to displease them; or else a mere
mockery of the world, to command this thing to be done, and yet neither to
inflict a penalty upon the offender, nor give authority to the Reformer. I
confess, that our Doctors and Interpreters of the Canon Law, reckon this for
one of the cases wherein the Ordinary, had power given him over the privileged
Monks: But neither were these such men as would give their beards for the
washing, neither would the Bishops venture upon such a point of Reformation
without a more express warrant: seeing that Kings themselves had their power
in suspect and jealousy, which also was in the end their bane and overthrow.

At the last came Clement the f^^t, a through man, in whatsoever he undertook
This Pope in the Council of Vienne in France, made a Canon for the reformation
of this abuse, more absolute then any of his predecessors had made before him:
For, having repeated the Constitutions of Alexander the third, and of Clement
the fourth, and finding them both to be imperfect, he adiureth all Bishops: Ne
praesentatum alique^ per quamcunque personam Ecclesiasticam, ius C. Vt c^nst
(...). de Iurepatr. (...) Clemens.
praesentandi habentem, ad aliquam Ecclesiam admittant, nisi intra certum
terminum competentem praesent antibus per Diocesanos ipsos praefigendum fuerit
coram ijs congrua de prouentibus Ecclesiae por tio assignata.

And knowing well by the experience of times past, what little effect a bare
command was like to take with this kind of men. He further ordained, that in
case the Monks should not make such allowance as was fit for the uses there
expressed within such reasonable time as the Ordinary should prefixe, Vt extunc
Diocesani debeant praesentatum admittere, ^^id.
and in poenam praesentantium ad Diocesanos ipsos potestas assignationis
huiusmodi deuoluatur.

By which words both the Presentee was secured in his possession, as taking it
by Collation from the Bishop, and the right of assigning the Vicars portion
taken from the Monks, and settled upon the Ordinary of the Diocese: And
moreover, to arm him as well with power to execute, as with authority to
command over the exempt and privileged Monks, In the end of the constitution
he adds these words, Ad quae omnia integraliter adimplenda, nec non ad
obseruationem debitae assignationis per ^^id.
Diocesanum faciendae Religiosos praedictos, and alios quoslibet a Diocesanis
ijsdem Ecclesiastica volumus censura compelli; non obstantibus exemptionibus,
aut alijs quibuslibet priuilegijs, consuetudinibus vel statutis, quae circa
praemissavel eorum aliquod Religiosis ipsis, aut alijs, in nullo volumus
suffragari.

And this authority granted to the Ordinary over the exempt Monks, is yet
more clear by another constitution of the same Clement, and in the same
Council, wherein because Abbats and other regular Prelates were wont to hold
their subordinate Priories and other Churches belonging to them, in their own
hands; or otherwise to oppress them with exactions, or happily not presenting
any at all to the Bishop for institution, therefore it was ordained, that in
case they presented not within six months. Diocesani locorum C. Vnico de
su^ple. neglige Praelato. in Clement.
in non exemptis sua, in exemptis vero Apostolica authoritate negligentiam
super hoc suppleant eorundem, Prioratus, Ecclesias, Administrationes, and
Beneficia huiusmodi conferendo.

And to the end the Ordinaries might have power in themselves, not only to
supply their negligence, but also to restrain their avarice: Therefore it
follows in the same Decree in this manner. Eadem quoque authoritate Diocesani
suffulti, nullo modo permittant quod ijdem Praelati, Prioratus, Ecclesias,
Administrationes aut Beneficia applicent mensis suis, pensione^ue nouas ijs
imponant, aut veteres augeant, sieve quae ipsis de nouo imp^sitae sieve auctae
soluantur.

The difference between this and the former constitution is this. In the
former, Bishops had power to make or cause to be made a sufficient allowance to
the Incumbent, In the later, to see that the Monks laid no new exactions, or
imposed greater pensions upon them: which difference arose from a diversity of
custom used among the Monks. For sometimes (and that was the more ancient and
better fashion) they left the gross of the tithes and other profits to b^
received by the Vicar, reserving to themselves only a pension, to be paid
out of the whole by the Vicar, which afterward they sought immediately to
increase: and sometime they set their own Proctor to take up the maine
profits, and left only a part or portion to the Vicar, which they sought
continually to diminish: But in both cases the Bishops Crosier had the
privileged Monk by the leg, as well as he had the other.

This Clement made bolder with all sorts of Monks then any Pope did before or
after him. And as for the exempt Orders of them, whereas they were by virtue of
their exemption immediately subject to the Sea of Rome, which could not from so
far off, look well into their dealings, he made them in this and certain
other cases liable to the Bishops, of the several Diocese; not as unto
Ordinaries, but as to Delegates from the Sea of Rome for perpetuity, as here
appears. And lastly subjected them wholly in this manner to the visitation
and rod of correction of the Bishops, with a Non obstante of all their
exemptions or other Prerogatives and Privileges whatsoever.

As for the Templars, of whom I spoke before, This also was that Clement,
which, either fearing or envying their (...) in v^ta C^ement. ^.
greatness, by reason of their wealth, reputation in wars, alliance with
great houses, and populous fraternities, which they had in every corner of
every State and Kingdom, laid the train to blow them up in an instant; and
combining with Philip of France and other Princes, caused them all to be
surprised in a moment, and to be made away, some by massacre, and some by
course of Law, laying to their charge Confederacy with the Sarazens,
abnegation B^ason (...) Ar(...).
of Christ, secret rites, strange lusts, and other crimes, whereof, some say,
they were not guilty. A Mirror for the Jesuits to behold their greatness,
and to foresee their ruin in. They are (as the Historian says of Elephants)
Li^. Deca^ ^. lib. 3.
anceps Belluae genus, as likely to turn upon him that uses them, as to run
upon them against whom they are used. Henry the fourth, late King of the
French, flattered them for fear, and could not thereby eschew their plots. And
it is not long since that La Marteliere the Kings Attorney general in Paris,
in the case between the University En son plai d^i^ pour l' university contre
le^ Jesuits.
and them, delivered in open Court, That they are so fortefied and cabled up
with the Graunts and Privileges of Gregory the 14. and other Popes, that now
no gunne-shot or thunder of Excommunication can make breach upon them; That
sundry Popes of latter times have sought to bring them into some order, but
have not been able to prevail. And lastly, that Aquauiua their General had
at that present no less power and credit in Rome then the Pope himself. The
saying is old and true, Quem quisque metuit periisse expetit; and the Pope
cannot long endure a fellow Pope in Rome.

But to return to our purpose. By that which has been said, it may clearly
appear, That the Bishop of every Diocese, what as Ordinary, what as a legal
and perpetual delegate of the Pope, had full power in all cases of
Appropriation, to compel the Abbat of what sort, order, or privilege soever,
to make a convenient allowance out of the Tithes and other profits of every
Benefice, for the sufficient and decent maintenance of the Curate so that had
these Laws been as carefully put in ure, as they were in writing, the Avarice
of the Monks had been restrained, and the Curats better provided for But,
Quid leges, sine moribus? The miserable event and calamity of all Churches
shows, that the gate being once set open to their avarice, it was too late to
shut the wicket: yet the Popes of succeeding times were not altogether
negligent in seconding this ordinance of their predecessors. For Petrus
Rebuffus says, That in those Appropriations which pass immediately from the Sea of Rome, this clause or the like is always added in the end. Reseruata
tamen De congrua portio. nu. 103.
de fructibus, and prouentibus huiusmodi pro vno vel duobus Vicarijs perpetuis
Canonice instituendis congrua portione, ex qua ijdem vicarij possint de caetero
sustentari, iura Episcopalia soluere, and alia incumbentia onera commode
supportare, non obstantibus exemptionibus, priuilegijs, aut alijs quibuscunque.

And again. Reseruantes tamen de ipsis In ^rax. Beneficiaria (...) de
Res^ript. (...).
fructibus and prouentibus Beneficiorum ipsorum, si Ecclesiae parochiales
fuerint, pro singulis perpetuis vicarijs in singulis eisdem parochialibus
Ecclesiis instituendis, portiones ex quibus dicti vicarij congrue sustentari
valiant, and alia sibi incumbentia onera supportare.

Also in all Confirmations granted from that See, of Appropriations made by
inferior Bishops, the same clause or the like in effect was ever used, so
says Speculator. In confirmatione de Ecclesiis in proprios vsus retinendis
ponitur haec clausula. Speculator ^tit. de confirma.
Ita tamen, quod perpetuo vicario qui pro tempore seruiet in eadem, ad
sustentationem suam, and subeunda episcopalia and Ecclesiae onera congrua
portio de ipsius prouentibus relinquatur.

By which clauses of Reservation, it is manifest, That the Popes meaning was to
have the Vicar first provided for, and to give the surplusage only to the
Monks, as the same Rebuffus says. And Panormitan also affirms, That
Panormit. ad c. de Monachis, extra de Praebend.
those which have Churches granted unto them in proprios vsus, cannot by virtue
thereof challenge the whole fruits unto themselves, sed reditus tantum
superfluos, detracta prius congrua portione pro Vicario seu Rectore ibidem
instituendo. So that if there be sufficiency for both, each may have a share:
but if one must go without, in all reason, the daily waiter ought to be first
provided for. And because there are many things ordained in the Cano^ law which
yet are not received for Canons, nor obeyed as laws in all places, therefore
will I show unto the world, that the practice of our Bishops of England and
Ireland in former times agreed with this very praescript and Rule of the Canon
Law. For I have seen the extract of a certain Impropriation bearing date Ann.
1387. made by the Bishop of Sarum of the Rectory of Erchford to the Abbess and
Covent of Saint Mary's in the City of Winchester, running in this manner. Salua
portione pro Vicario dictae Ecclesiae hactenus assignata, and per nos propter
eius exilitatem and insufficientiam, and alias causas legitimas moderate
augmentanda, praefatam Ecclesiam Parochialem de Erchford, etc.

And in the end thereof. Haec autem omnia and singula statuimus, and finaliter
definimus salua nobis and successoribus nostris libera facultate praemissa.

Likewise I have seen another of the Rectorie of Shapwick in the County of
Dorset made by the Bishop of Sarum to the Kings Chapel in Winburne Minster of
the same County, with this clause. Reseruantes tamen nobis and successoribus
nostris liberam potestatem portiones dictae Vicariae quoties necessarium, vel
opportunum esse videbitur diminuendi, and si oportuerit, augmentandi,
supplendi, immutandi, etc.

Also of the Rectory of Collshill in the County of Berks with this clause.
Reseruata prius de dictis fructibus and prouentibus ad arbitrium nostrum vel
successorum nostrorum pro perpetuo Vicario ibidem Domino seruituro, congrua
portione, ex qua idem vicarius commode valeat sustentari, iura Episcopalia
soluere, and alia incumbentia onera supportare.

And for Ireland, I have seen a Grant made by the Bishop of Kildare of the
Rectory of Cloncurry and sundry other Churches of the same Diocese, to the
Abbey of Saint Thomas near Dublin, by way of Appropriation, in the end whereof
I find always this clause added, Salua sustentatione Vicariorum eisdem
Ecclesiis deseruientium. And without this or the like clause of saving and
reserving to the Vicar, have I not seen any union or appropriation made in
either Kingdom.

And to show yet further, that our Bishops have not only in words reserved to
themselves this power, but also in deed executed the same upon occasion, and
that without any former reservation, and only in pure right of Law, I shall
desire credit in reporting what I have seen in an old liger book belonging
Regastrum St. Thoma in i^ Breminghams Tour Dublin.
to the Abbey of Saint Thomas near Dublin, and is to be found in Breminghams
Tower in Dublin, wherein (among other Records) there is one fol. 50. which
bears this title. Ordinatio portionum Vicariorum in Midia. By the tenor
whereof, and by that which follows it appears; That upon controversy
moved between the Bishop of Mead on the one party, and the Abbat and
Convent of Saint Thomas of Dublin on the other, which held many Benefices in
that Diocese, and made small allowance to the Curats, The Pope directed his
commission to certain Delegates in Ireland, to hear and determine the case
between them. The Bishop alleged among other things, That whereas they by
law could not serve the cure of those Parishes themselves, yet they would not
present their Vicars for institution, nor suffer him as Ordinary to tax the
Vicarages. The Monks in their answer replied, That those Churches were passed
to them pleno iure, without any such reservation of Taxing by the Bishop, and
that they had so held them time out of mind, with the knowledge, and without
impeachment of the Bishop, and thereupon pleaded a praescription in bar of
the Bishops jurisdiction. Notwithstanding all which, the Delegates ordered,
that the institution of Vicars in those several Churches, and the tax of
their allowance, should be left to the discretion and arbitrament of the
Bishop: who thereupon (the Abbat submitting himself and his Covent to the
order) proceeded in this manner. Ordinamus quod in Ecclesia de Rathtoth
ordinetur vicarius, cui vicaria assignetur, ad aestimationem quindecim
Marcarum. And so goes forward, creating many other perpetual Vicars in
several Parish Churches, and making them certain allowances by way of tax,
which remain unto this day. Neither do I doubt but that upon diligent search
made in such like liger books of other dissolved houses many more examples and
precedents of like nature might be found. But by that which has been said it
may sufficiently appear, That this power of ordaining Vicars in these
appropriated Benefices, and taxing the rates of their allowances, is so fast
nailed to the Bishops See, and so inherent in his person, that no privilege,
no exemption, no prescription, is able to dispossess him of it.

And as this right of ordaining Vicars in appropriated Churches, and taxing
their allowances out of the Fruits, is bodily settled in the Bishop, so the
right of claiming and receiving the same is so deeply rooted in the person of
the Vicar, that nothing but injustice and sacrilege can take it from him. For
howsoever this falls out otherwise in practice (such was the corruption of
former times, such is of ours) yet in law, this is an infallible, and
immovable foundation, That notwithstanding all grants, duties, rights,
privileges, or other devises whatsoever, yet the Church is still to be kept
in statu quo prius. And therefore Clement the third gives this as a reason of
his Decree above mentioned. Nolentes autem D. C. sicut de supple. neglige.
Prelatorum.
vt status Ecclesiae antiquus and debitus per insolentiam alicuius subuertatur
Mandamus, etc. And Innocentius gives this as a lesson. Episcopus nunquam debet
consentire Innoce. ad D C. de monachis extra de praebend.
quod red^tus soliti Clericorum minorentur: and nisi ita prouideatur, quod
hospitalitatem seruare possint, and de iuribus Episcepalibus respondere. And
therefore another Rebuff. de congrua portio. nu. 104.
learned Author also says; Non potest Episcopus, vel alius donare vnius
Ecclesiae temporalia Monasterio, vel alteri in destructionem and praeiudicium,
primae Ecclesiae; nec vnum altar d^scooperire, vt alterum cooperiat.

And to make this clear by particular cases in the Law: Commendams (which,
though not utterly and in all cases to be condemned, yet Rebuffus, seeing the
great excess and abuse of the^ in the place where he lived, calls Pernitiem
and exitium totius Reipublicae Rebuff Prax. Benefic^tit. a Common.
Christianae, because they are never granted, but with some nuisance to the
Church) were anciently wont to pass with this clause. Volumus aute^ quod
propter Rebuff. ibid.
huiusmodi Commendam, diuinus cultus et solitus Monachorum and ministroru^,
numerus in dicto Monasterio nullatenus minuatur, sed illius and illorum congrue
supportentur onera consueta; De refiduis vero Monasterij fructibus and
reditibus and prouentibus disponere and ordinare libere and licite valeas, etc.

The like to be understood, and much rather of the Vicar, in case a single
Benefice were so granted. For in his case (as Panormitan reports) though no
Panorm. ad d. ^. de monachis.
such clause were expressed in favor of him; yet the Law of a Commendam will
give the Commendatarie no more, then the remainder of the fruits, after the
Vicars allowance made, and other necessary charges borne, and duties paid:
whereof he makes bold to put the Bishops and Cardinals in mind; and joining
these Commendataries with Proprietaries, says, that neither of them both
Potest immutare statum Ecclesiae; vnde debent facere deseruire, per Clericos
seu numerum Clericorum consuetum, and hospitalitatem ibi more solito seruare.
Again, the Bishop or other Visitor is so rooted in Law for the receiving of
his procurations due for visitation, that no custom, no Grant of Predecessor,
nor ought else, but a privilege from the Pope, which was a Transcendent above
all right and reason, could take it from him; yet in case that by any occasion
the profits of the Benefice come to be diminished, the Bishop must either in
part or in whole forgo them, and take as the Church is able to spare them. Et
pro modo facultatum Ecclesiae (as Ludouicus Ludouic. Rom^. Consil. 369.
Romanus says.) And Hostiensis affirms, that in this case the visitor must
bear his own charges: Est enim (says he) de mente and verbis iuris, quod
Ecclesia vltra posse non grauetur (as Panormitan alleges him.) And albeit
they both spoke in case, where more Visitors fall upon the Diocese in the same
year; and all look for Procurations: yet Petrus Anchoranus says, that it is
the same, Si vel vnus procurandus fuerit: Ideo enim (says the same Author)
bona dignitatis suae Episcopo sunt attributa.

Moreover a Patron which foundeth and endoweth a Church may reserve unto
himself a yearly Pension C. ^. extra de ^ensibus.
to be paid out of the same Endowment: Notwithstanding, if by any accident the
other revenues of the Rebuff de pa^^^. ^^ssess. nu. ^28.
Church fall out to be so short that they cannot conveniently and competently
maintain the Incumbent, the Patron must in this case forbear his right, not
as if it were now taken from him, but as if it had bin tacita conditio, and so
to be understood from the beginning. And therefore Panormitan says, That that
power of reserving a pension upon the Endowment of a Benefice must be
understood, Quando fructus sunt abundantes, and sufficientes Clerico.

The like is to be said, If a Bishop should reserve a pension out of a fat
Vid. Rebuff. Tracta de pacif. possesso nu. 134. and nu. 141:
and wealthy Benefice to the use of a Student or other Clerk. (a custom much
used heretofore in England, but taken away afterward by Act of Parliament) For
if either by error at the first the pension was so great, or afterward the
remainder grew to be so little, that the Incumbent was not able to maintain
himself of that which did remain, the Ludouic. Ro^^^ consil. 369.
pension was either to be abated, or taken clean away, to the end the
Incumbent might be still provided for.

And lastly, to instance in a case or two concerning these very Monks of whom
we speak, The Pope was wont heretofore to grant large Privileges to Monks
and Monasteries concerning non-paiment of Tithes: so long as they benefited
themselves, without enormous hurt unto the Churches, it was tolerated: But if
they either begged, or bought the whole or greatest part of the Parish, and so
their privilege De non decimando, grew over hurtful to the Parson, the Monks
were forced to grow of themselves to a new composition with the Incumbent, and
to disclaim the rigor of their Privilege, Reuocatur enim priuilegium, fi ex
Extra de priuileg.
post facto incipit enormiter esse nociuum, says the Law.

Neither were the Popes less prodigal in granting them privileges, De
percipiendis Decimis, whereby they were authorized to receive the Tithes of
Parishes unto themselves without any appropriation or union of the Churches:
yet in this case also Alexander the fourth published a Decree of all such
privileges in this manner. Vbi autem per huiusmodi C. Statuto. de decim^ in
sexto
Concessiones decimarum, parochiales Ecclesias adeo grauari contingit, quod
earum Rectores de ipsarum Reditibus congrue sustentari, and commode iura
Episcopalia exhibere non possint; prouideatur per Locorum Ordinarios, and
ordinetur taliter, quod ijsdem Rectoribus tantum de illarum relinquatur
prouentibus, quod exinde competentem sustentationem habeant, and Episcopalia
iur a soluere valiant, aliaque onera debite supportare.

If then the Law be so careful of the Curate and actual Incumbent, or daily
Minister of the Church, as to revoke Privileges, to take away Pensions, to
debar the Patron of his right and to lessen the profits of Commendataries,
rather then he shall want; much more then may it be thought, that it will not
suffer the Monk, who was never compared to better then a Drone, by virtue of
an Appropriation, to eat up the sweet of the Be, that is, the necessary
maintenance of the laboring Priest and Minister of the Gospel. And if the
reverend Bishops, which are de iure diuino, suffer their own hands to be
tied, in receiving their duties from the Curate, where it cannot well be
spared, much more ought the Monk, who was never a man of Gods making, but a
mere creature of the Pope, who also may unmake them all again at his
pleasure, (as Felinus says) be forced to make him a more liberal allowance
out of that, which of right wholly belongs to him, for his daily service in
the Church. For in this and all other cases of this sort, where the profits of
the Curate are impaired, and diuerted anoth^r way, the Rule prescribed in the
9. Council of Toledo is to be observed, namely, Vt Con^il. Tolet 9. c. 5. 2.
q 2 c. Bona Re^ consultum.
haec temperamenti aequitas obseruetur, quod cui tribuit, competens subsidium
conferat, cui to^ic, grauia damna non infligat. Neither shall it be amiss, by
the way, to let the world know what this Council in those days thought to be
Competens subsidium. i. a competent relief unto the poor Monks, and what to
be, grave damnum, unto the Churches. The words of the Council are these,
Quisquis Episcoporum in parochia sua Monasterium D. C. 5. Council. tolet.
construere forte voluerit, and hoc ex rebus Ecclesiae, cui praefidet ditare
decreuerit, non amplius quam quinquage simam partem dare debebit, vt haec
temperamenti, etc. vt supra.

In those days a pension of the fiftieth part unto the Monks was thought a
burden heavy enough to be laid upon the Churches, whereas now adays, and
since those appropriations came up, scantly is the fifteenth part left for the
Ministers of the Churches; so far are we gone from the temper by them
prescribed; which temper had it been observed heretofore in this Realm of
Ireland, neither should there have been so many Abbeis here erected with the
ruin of the Churches, nor should the Monks have spent that in luxury which
should have served for the necessity of the Preacher. But every Church should
have been provided, if not of a rich, yet of a convenient maintenance, and
consequently, if not of an excellent, yet of a reasonably learned Minister.

And to go forward with the course of the Ecclesiastical Law in this point, as
it was in force at the time of the dissolution, and to show how careful the
Popes and Prelates of those days were, to mend a fault which themselves had
made, and to daube up that gaping and irreparable breach which they had made
upon the Church, in appropriating her living and revenues to the Monks, by
providing a perpetual competencie for the Vicar, It is further to be noted,
that if this allowance, were once made, and yet afterward came to be
impaired, and less then enough, it was still made good again unto him out of
the Appropriation. As for example, If the Vicars part consisted in a certain
kind, as in haie; and the owner should afterward convert the ground to
tillage: If it were to arise out of certain men's lands, and they should
afterward plead and prove a privilege de non decimando: If by war or any
other occasion it came to be extinct: For in all these cases, the Vicar is to
sue to the Ordinary for a new allowance, and he is to make it out of the
remainder of the fruits in the Abbats hand, so says Felinus, Bonis deperditis
De offic. Vicar.
Vicario assignatis, Index ei de aliis prouidere debet. And Rebuffus. Si portio
fuit destructa and extincta bello, vel alio casu, De congr. port.
and adhuc fructus sufficientes remanent apud Rectorem vel Patronum, eo casu
adhuc iterum perenda est congrua portio instar illius qui legitimam consumpsit,
vt de filio prodigo est in Euang^lio.

Whence it is also that Panormitan, Felinus, and other Canonists, deliver this
for a ruled case in law, That if any shall implead the Vicar for any part of
his portion, the Proprietary or Rector, may also come in for his interest, by
way of assistance unto the Vicar, Ratione Felinus ad C. G. Vi^arius extra de
fide Instrument.
praeiudicij quod sibi ex contrario euentu litis possit irrogari, cum perditis
bonis Vicarii, oporteret prouideri de aliis bonis Ecclesiae.

And I showed before, that our Bishops in England and Ireland, were wont to
reserve unto themselves a power of increasing or altering the Vicars portion at
their own discretion. Neither was it material whether this competencie being
provided for the Vicar, there were ought or naught remaining to the Proprietary
or Monk: for if the whole tithes would serve but for the Vicar, the Monk was
to go without: for from the beginning the tithes belonged to the Church, whose
immediate Pastor the Vicar is; neither were they given but for the daily
office in the Church, which office the Vicar does: and if nothing be left unto
the Proprietary, yet are his wages answerable to his pains. And as one says,
Vicarius agit de damno vitando, Monasterium vero de lucro captando; ideo
praefertur Ecclesia vicarij, monasterio. And reason good; for the Vicaris the
laboring ox which treads out the corn, whose mouth must not be musled, as
says the law of God.

And for the further clearing of this whole point, it is to be observed, that
whatsoever has hitherto been spoken concerning the Vicar, it is to be
understood not of a Te^porarie, but of a perpetual Vicar, which is a person
founded in law, without a new Act of Parliament: and is in the Canon Law, and
by the Canonists called Parochialis Presbyter, Parochialis Ecclesiae Sacerdos,
Rector Ecclesiae, Perpetuus Ecclesiae Presbyter, vel vicarius, not to be
appointed by the Abbat, and licenced by the Bishop to say service; but to be
presented by the Patron, what ever he be, and to receive Canonical Institution
at the hands of the Ordinary of the place. And as the Bishop is not only
authorized, but also commanded, and sub obtestatione diuini Iudicij by the Law
required, not to admit of a Presentee, unless the Presentor shall first
assign and lay forth a legal portion of the profits for his maintenance, and
may ex officio proceed so often as the cause shall so require. So also has the
Vicar his action to implead the Parson, if either it was not assigned from the
beginning, or if it fall out afterward to be insufficient, and the Patron
refuse to supply, and to make it good again unto him. And therefore
Hostienfis, the question being put, Quod ius habeat Vicarius in Ecclesia? among
Hostien. in summa. de ^ffic. Vicar.
many others, puts this for one. Item habet ius petendi congruam portionem
de reditibus Ecclesiae, cui seruit si minus idoneam habeat. The Action which he
is to bring is called, Actio secundum Canonem; and answers to that which we
call an Action upon the Statute; and is then brought, when a man is privately
interessed in the breach of a Canon, and yet has no special Action given him
thereby. And this Action lies, Whether the Patron or other Receiver of the
Tithes, be exempt or not exempt, Religious or Secular, Monk or Canon, Clerk
or Laike: For in this case there is no exception: but whosoever receives the
profits is liable to the Action. And therefore I will say as a learned Canonist
has said before me, Cum in hoc casu neminem Inueniam priuilegiatum, illi dare
priuilegium non est mihi liberum. Et ideo omnes tenentur ad hanc Portionem qui
decimas and Beneficij fructus recipient.

And this Action is to be brought before the Bishop or Ordinary of the place,
as one which stands principally charged with this duty. Notwithstanding in
France their high Sedentarie Courts of Parliament, though temporal, yet use to
lend a helping hand unto the Vicar in this case, and are often sued unto. The
reason is, because the Bishops stand as much in fear in those places of
offending those mighty Societies, as ours do of Prohibition and Praemunire.
And therefore Johannes Andraeas says merrily Johan. Andraea^. ad c^fin extra,
de Rebus Ecclesiae non a^^enand.
of them: That,

Cum sint cornuti non audent cornibus vti. Meaning, that they dare not use that
power which the Law gives them in this case: yet the Ecclesiastical Judges
use to repine at this usurpation of the Parliaments: And the Popes as well to
supply the negligence of the Bishops, as to give the Parliament no occasion to
trespass upon their Jurisdiction, use to give in charge to those which are
called Conseruatores Apostolici, in special to take knowledge of the Vicars
portion. To these their Vicars, if either their allowance be in it self too
small, or ouerburthened with Pensions, and other payments, use to resort, and
by them have they remedy against the Monks and others. And for poofe hereof
Petrus Rebuffus says, That himself has been often called to counsel in the
assignation of these portions for the Vicar: which could not be, unless the
case were clear, and void of al doubt in law: for upon the least doubt or
demurrer in law that could arise, the Conseruators hands were closed, and they
forbidden to proceed, as men appointed for redress only of such apparent
injuries as these were. Happy Vicars, where so many men of greatest place
strive together, who shall be most forward to do them right.

There is also with us some contention about them and their livings, but it is
not who shall do them good.

But what do I stand, either to maintain the right, or to lament the wrong of
our poor Vicars, or to declare the Jurisdiction of the Ordinary in these
cases by proofs and arguments taken out of the Canon law, seeing that nothing
has hitherto been said which has not been long since acknowledged, approved,
and confirmed by the Common Law of these Kingdoms? To let pass many others,
and to instance in one for all. There is a Case reported Term. Michael. An. 2.
H. 4. fol. 10. Termino Michael. in 2 H 4. fol 10. Cas. 44.
Cas. 44. which seems a Brief of all that hitherto has been said, and is as
follows.

The Abbey of Saltash in the County of Deuon. was appropriated to the College
of Wind or. And upon the Appropriation the Vicar that then was, endowed with
certain Houses for his entertainment, to the value of twenty pounds per ann.
by the Ordinary, and by all those which had interest therein. And moreover
took an Oath, and was also bound in a great sum of money before the
Collector of the Pope in England with the assent of the Ordinary, to be paid
into the Chamber of the Pope, upon condition that he should hold himself
content with the said Endowment, and should never will the contrary: neither
should procure any thing, or do any thing against the said endowment, or to
the disanulling thereof: nor should ever claim any more to belong to his
Vicarage, but should hold himself to the payment of the said Endowment. And if
he failed in the said Conditions, or in any one of them, that then he should
incur the pain of the said sum to the Chamber of the Pope.

Afterward came the Deane of the said College into the Kings Chancerie, and
declared this matter, and further auerred, That the said Vicar had claimed
another Endowment, contrary to the Endowment made by the Ordinary of the
place, and contrary to his Oath. And that the Vicar upon suggestion made, That
the Pleas of Covenant and Debts arising of Contracts within the Realm belonged
to the Kings Court, had purchased a Prohibition directed to the Collectour. And
hereupon as well the Collector as the Deane prayed a Consultation.

Here we see, first, that not only the Reservation of a Vicarage upon an
Appropriation, but also the Endowment thereof belongs to the Ordinary of the
place. Secondly, that the Vicar brings his action against the Deane, which
was the proprietary of the Tithes, by virtue of the Impropriation. Thirdly,
that he brought this Action for a second Taxation; as either pretending the
first to have been too little from the beginning; or showing that it had been
abated or diminished afterward; whether by chance of fire, or falling of Rents,
or lack of Tenants, or by some other accident: And lastly, That this Action
was brought before the Ordinary of the place: For whereupon was the
Consultation prayed, but upon a Prohibition granted out of the Kings Court?
whereupon was the Prohibition granted but upon the Deanes action, brought before
the Collector of the Pope? And whereupon should the Vicar be sued upon breach
of Oath and Bond before the Collector, but upon his claim of a new Taxation
before him which made the old i before the Bishop.

Neither can it be said that this is a Case, and not a Judgment, and
therefore proves nothing. For the Case being so put, there was no exception
taken; neither against the Vicar, that he had not, personam standi in iudicio,
neither yet against the Bishop, that he had not jurisdiction in these cases,
(for these exceptions had been peremptory if they had been true) neither yet
that the Endowment once made, it ought not afterward to be increased in favor
of the Vicar. Only the Deane granting all this, sued the poor Vicar before
the Collector for breach of Oath, and forfeiture of his Bond: For this was ever
the policy of that kind of men, to secure themselves both from the poor
Vicars lawful claim, and from the ordinary Jurisdiction of the Bishop, by some
collateral and indirect security. As for example, in a Case before mentioned
between the Bishop of Mead and the Abbat of S. Thomas. The Abbat got the
Bishop to be bound in a Bond of a thousand pounds, never after that to trouble
the Monks with a new Taxation. And here we see the Vicar tied, not only in a
Bond of a great sum, but also by a solemn Oath, never afterward to claim a
new Endowment: which needed not, had not the Laws of the Land agreed with the
Laws of the Church in favor of the distressed Vicar. But the Devil, I
think, was in those men, only to ruin the Church and Christian Religion by
them.

But to make these points yet more apparent according to the course of the
Common Law. It may not be forgotten, That anciently in these Kingdoms, the
Vicars right was much challenged in the Kings Courts for bringing Actions in
his own name, especially against the Parson But the Parliament (as it seems)
being informed of this mischief, and seeing the misery which the Vicars fell
into hereby, provided for them by a Statute Anno 14. Edw. 3. cap. 17. wherein
it is ordained, That Vicars An 14 Edw. 3. cap. 17.
may bring their Writs of Iuris vtrum, or recover by any other Writ as well as
the Parson might. And this was it which not long after, namely Anno 40. of the
same King, in a Case reported Term. Trinitat. Cas. 15. fol. 28. Term. Trinitat.
cas. 15. fol. 28.
Fincheden said, That it was true, that in ancient times the opinion was, That
the Vicar should not have action against the Parson: but, I find (says he)
that this is changed for the better: which (as Brook says) Nemo dedixit: i.
no man gainsaid. Abridgement. tit. Vicars.
And consequently it was then taken to be clear in Law. And as touching the
Jurisdiction of the Ordinary in providing for the Vicars maintenance,
Belknappe in debating the same Case uses these words: We have these lands
assigned to the Vicar by the assent of the Ordinary: And you will grant that
the Ordinary may increase or diminish his portion, having regard unto the
charge which belongs unto him: which Fincheden there grants to be true, in
case the Vicars estate become weak and feeble: And we desire no more. And in
this case, although the Parson or Proprietarie be said to be interessed; yet
is all the power and right of assigning the Endowment in the Bishops hand. For
(as Belknapp there says) The Ordinary shall endow, and the Parson shall do
nothing but consent, because the thing it self is merely spiritual. In which
case, if the Parson will not consent, yet the Bishop goes on without him. And
if (perchance) he shall exceed in his tax, the Proprietarie is left to his
Appeal, ab excessiua taxatione, by the course of the Canon Law, as Rebuffus
says: But other remedy he has none, no not at the Common Law, as Belknapp
there affirms. And it is further to be remembered, that this power of
assigning the Vicars portion, even out of the lands and principal possessions
of the Abbat, as Parson of the place, was ever held so proper to the Bishop,
that he might do it sans Conge, sans license du Roy: i. without the leave or
license of the King, as is there affirmed: And therefore shall not now need a
new Act of Parliament for his warrant, but only the hand of justice, for his
assistance in the execution of his right.

It should seem, that about the times of Edw. the 3. Rich. the 2. and Hen. the
4. which was an age of horrible confusion, by reason of those bloody wars
wherein the Crown of England was then entangled both at home and abroad; the
greater fish of the Clergy went about to eat up the lesser. My reason is,
because in those days there were so many solemn laws made to maintain the
one in his right, and to repress the injury of the other. For ill customs
commonly give occasion to make good laws. In the time of Edward the 3. (as
has been formerly said) there was a Statute made, to enable the Vicar to bring
his Action against the Abbat, who detained the Glebe or other duties from him.
In the time of Richard the 2. anno 15. a Statute was Stat. ^^n. 15. Richar. 2.
made, That in every License from thenceforth to be made out of Chancerie of
the Appropriations of any Parish Church it should expressly be contained and
comprised, That the Diocesan of the place, upon the Appropriation of such
Churches, should ordain, according to the valuation of such Churches, a
convenient sum of money to be paid and distributed yearly out of the Fruits
and profits of the same Churches, by those which have them in proper use, and
by their successors, to the poor Parochians of the said Churches, in aid of
their sustenance and living for ever. And also that the Vicar should be well
and sufficiently endowed. cap. 6. Also by a Statute of 4. Hen. 4. 4. Hen. 4.
It was ordained, that the Statute of 15. Rich. 2 should be kept, and put in
execution. And that Appropriations made since that Statute, contrary thereunto,
should be reformed by a certain time, or else be void: And that from
thenceforth in every Church so appropria^ed, a Secular person should be
ordained a Vicar perpetual, canonically inst^tuted, and inducted in the same,
and conuenably endowed by the discretion of the Ordinary, to do divine
Service, and to inform the people, and to keep hospitality there, with other
conditions and limitations there expressed.

Here we see first, That although the Parliament was careful to have the Vicar
provided for; yet it left the disposition of these things unto the Bishop of
the Diocese. Secondly, in case the Bishop was defective in his first
Assignation of the Vicars portion, he was enjoined to reform it, and make it
better by a time prefixed; otherwise his act of Appropriation to be void. That
the measure of the Endowment was to be conuenably, sufficiently, and well
endowed. That there was no other Rule of this measure, but the discretion of
the Bishop, for the uses mentioned in the Law. That this Vicar must be secular,
perpetual, canonically instituted and inducted, all suitable to that which
has been formerly declared out of the Canon Law. The fruit of all which
Statutes is, That throughout the Church of England a man shall scarce find an
Impropriation without a Vicarage, or a Vicar without a reasonable good
allowance. And lastly we find, That besides this reasonable and sufficient
allowance due unto the Vicar, the Statute most wisely and charitably provides
that the Ordinary shall ordain a convenient proportion of money, to be
distributed yearly among the poor of the Parish, meaning (as it seems) that
every bird taking his own feather, and every man his due, the Abbat should be
reduced to that small pension which was only due unto him at the beginning by
the law of Impropriations.

THus have I as plainly as I could, and as briefly as the matter would permit,
showed, That out of every Benefice appropriate, there was ever a competent
portion certain, or uncertain, by the Canon law due, and by the practice of
all times and places, especially of England and Ireland, reserved to the Vicar,
for his daily service in the Church. Also that the Bishop in his own Diocese,
has authority to require the Proprietarie to make this allowance before he
admit of his Presentee: or upon his refusal or delay, to present in his own
right, as in other cases of Lapse and Deuolution: and out of the whole profits
to make a competent and sufficient allowance for the Vicar, and to compel the
Proprietary to performance thereof by excommunication. And lastly that both the
right of the Vicar, and the power of the Bishop in these cases have ever been
warranted by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom. If then this was law
heretofore, it is law still, unless it be either expressly revoked, or
tacitly disanulled since the time of the dissolution. And this is the point
which comes next to be discussed.

And truly for mine own part, I must confess, that I could never yet learn
of any Statute made since the dissolution in either Kingdom, which either
tacitly or expressly does wholly abrogate, or in part derogate from the Canon
laws, and the laudable Customs and ancient Statutes of these Kingdoms in
this point. And pity were it, That the Laws of the Kingdom, having left unto
the Church, especially to this of Ireland, this only board, whereby to save it
self from the miserable wrecke which it suffered by the ouerflowing Deluge and
Inundation of Unions and Impropriations in time of Popery, the Parliament
should be thought guilty of so great a sin, as to rob her of this poor
means, to save her self withal. Rather it might be hoped, that being put in
mind thereof, and if need should so require, they would more plainly expound
their meaning, and in such sort, as might best stand with the glory of GOD, the
good of the holy Church, the honor of so high a Court, and with the wisdom
of every particular member thereof. But my purpose is not at this time, to
persuade a Parliament to make a Law; but to prove unto the world, That the Law
is of force already, and wants nothing but a fit and a willing hand to put
it in execution. In pursuit of which point, I list not frame unto my self an
adverse party: Rather I wish, that the justice of the cause may never find an
enemy; Neither will I be curious in forging Arguments against mine own
opinion, for that were but like tilting at a Sarazens head. Only I will show,
that all those Statutes which most properly concern this matter, make nothing
against, but altogether for the Vicars maintenance, in such sort as has been
before declared; wishing and hoping also, That some religious Professor of the
Common Law, may hereafter upon these poor grounds of mine, go on, and
maintain this cause of GOD and of his Church, with more strength of wit, and
force of Arguments, then I am able to do, in a point which does not so
properly belong unto mine own profession.

The Statutes therefore that principally ^7. and 31. H. 8. 1. Edw. 6. in
England. 28. and 32. H. 8. in Ireland.
concern this matter, are those of 27. and 31. Henry 8. and 1. Edward 6. in
England, and those of 28. and 32. of Henry 8. here in Ireland to the same
effect. All made for the dissoluing, suppressing, surrendering, and taking into
the Kings hands the Monasteries, Free-Chappels, and other religious houses in
both these Kingdoms. In these Statutes it is intended, that the King shall
have and hold the said Monasteries with their Parsonages appropriate, and other
lands, in as large and ample manner and form, as the late Abbat or Prior held
them, at the time of the dissolution, suppression, or other giving up of the
same: for so say the Statutes. His Majesty shall have and enjoy to him and his
heirs for ever, all and singular such Monasteries and tithes; and in as large
and ample manner, as the Abbats now have them, in the right of their Houses.
And in another place of the same Statute it is said; That the Takers from the
King, shall have and hold all such lands, etc. And shall have all such Suites,
Actions, Entries, etc. in like manner, form, and condition, etc. And in
another passage; That the King shall hold them in the same state and condition
as now they be, etc. Which words of manner, form, state, and condition, are
not to be restrained, as I conceive, to the present and actual possession of
the Abbat, at the day of the dissolution: but to the universal right which he
had in the name of his House. And therefore we find it sometimes added in
those Statutes; Or of right ought to have had, held, or occupied the same, at
the time of the dissolution. For whether the Abbat had any thing unjustly
detained from him, the King succeeding in his right, had action to recover it;
because the Abbat might, and of right ought to have recovered the same: Or
whether the Abbat owed any thing to any man, or wrongfully detained from any
man, the King or his Grantee, standing seized in his right, might be impleaded
for it, because there was no more passed to the King, then the Abbat ought of
right to have possessed. And therefore the law charge the King with the
payment of all the due debts of the Abbats, or their Houses, by the Statute 27.
Henry 8. in England not printed. Whereas therefore it is said, That the King
shall hold those lands and Impropriations, in the same manner, form, and
state, as the Prior did at the time of the dissolution; I take the meaning to
be, that he shall enjoy them by virtue of that Act, with the same limitations,
privileges, and burdens, as the Prior did. As for example. The Templars held
their lands exempt from payment of tithes, not simply, but sub modo: scilicet,
quamdiu propriis manibus excoluntur: wherefore sub eodem modo, and in the same
form and state, the King does, and ought, to hold those lands exempt from
payment of tithes unto this day. And that this is so, and that those Acts of
dissolution did not only look to the present actual estate of those lands,
but had an eye to the whole right of the Abbats, and to all future
possibilities, appears plainly by a Case of the 11. of the late Queen,
reported by Dier. 11. Elizabeth. Dier.
Where a Prior of a late dissolved house of St. John of Jerusalem, had long
before the dissolutio^, made a lease of the Manor of D. for term of years
unto A. which A. being tenant, did pay tithes of the said Manor, to the Abbey
of Rochester. Upon the dissolution, the King granted the reuersion of the said
Manor in fee, unto one Stathome and his heirs. Afterward the lease expired,
and Stathome taking the land into his own hands, refused to pay tithes,
alleging, that the Manor was passed to him, To have and to hold the same in
as ample manner as the Prior held it, etc. And further declared in Chancery;
That the said Prior, so long as he held it in his own hands, was discharged
from payment of tithes, by a privilege from Rome, as all the Cistertians,
Hospitalers, and Templars were. And upon consideration of the Statute of 27.
Henry 8. It was resolved by Catlin, Saunders, Southcote, and Dier; and upon
their opinion it was accordingly decreed by the Lord Keeper that then was, That
the said Stathome and his heirs, should hold the said Manor, discharged from
payment of tithes, Tanque a ceo, quils ceo lesseront and misseront a ferme; i.
until such time as they should let it out to farm: for sub hoc modo was the
privilege granted to the Prior, and sub eodem modo was the land to be held by
the King, and from him by Stathome and his heirs. By the same reason, if at
the time of the dissolution, the Prior had held it in his own hands, and
consequently it had come to the King, and from him to Stathome, discharged from
tithes in the beginning; yet if afterward he had let it out to a Farmer, his
Farmer should not at this day be discharged, because the Priors farmer was to
pay it, notwithstanding the privilege. And Stathome was to hold it, In such
and in like ample manner: True, but in no more ample manner then the Prior did.
Now the Prior was to hold it discharged from payment of tithes, no longer then
while he held it in his own hands, therefore also Stathome shall hold it in
the same manner, and with the same limitation.

This have I heard delivered by men of good sufficiency and skill in the Common
Laws. And Dier seems to auerre as much, when he says; Tanque a ceo quils
ceo lesseront and misseront a ferme. Implying thereby, That so soon as it
should fall into a Farmers hands, the privilege should be suspended, as being
not Simple, but Modall, and restrained only to the person of the principal
Lord or owner, not extended to his Farmer. And generally, look what
privileges the Abbats had concerning those lands, the same are still pleadable
by the Takers from the King: and what burdens soever the Abbats were
chargeable with, with the same are their Successors at this day; for quoad hoc
they still retain the nature of Abbey lands.

From whence I conclude, That these words of manner, form, state and condition
are not restrained to the present and actual possession wherein those lands
were held at the time of the Suppression: but do comprehend the whole nature
of their title, with all privileges and burdens whatsoever thereunto
belonging, or in any wise appertaining. And therefore to draw now unto our
purpose: Whereas upon every Impropriation a convenient maintenance was
heretofore reserved for the Vicar, as has been before declared, which
maintenance was to be made good unto him from time to time, by the Abbat or
other Proprietarie, and that out of the very fruits and revenues of the
Parsonage: It is manifest, That the Parsonage, in whose hands soever it be
found, remains still chargeable with the same burden. For Res tranfit cum
sua onere, and whosoever now holds it, is to hold it in the same and like
manner, form, state, and condition, as the Prior did. But the Prior held those
Appropriations with the charge of a competent maintenance to the Vicar, at the
discretion of the Ordinary, therefore the Proprietarie that now is, is
chargeable with the same, and is to be impleaded for it, as the Prior was.

But the Statute is yet more plain for the poor Vicars profit: For be it
that the Appropriation had been passed to the King, and from him to his
Grantee, without mention of such manner, form, state, and condition, as is
before recited: yet afterward the Statute adds a full and perfect clause of
Saving and Reserving his right unto him in these words; Saving to all person
and persons, Bodies politic and their Successors, all such right, claim,
title, interest, possession, Rent-Charges, Annuities, Leases, Farms, offices,
Fees, Liueries and Livings, Portions, Pensions, Commons, Synodies, Proxies, and
other profits, which any of them have, claim, ought, may, or might have had in
or to the premises, or to any part or parcel thereof, in such like manner,
form, and condition, to all intents, respects, and purposes, as if this Act
had never been had, ne made, etc.

These words Saluo Iure (as one says) Bartol. ad l. si debtor. ff. Quibus
modis pigh. vel Hypols. sol.
verba sunt magnae efficaciae; and the reason is given by Bartolus, because
Protestatio conseruat ius protestanti. And as they are words of great
efficacy; so likewise are they of very large extent: For this word Ius, Ad
personas, ad Res, ad actiones pertinet, says the Emperor Justinian. Iustit.
lib. 4.
And therefore when all right is saved and reserved by the Act, it is manifest,
That the Right of Action and Recovery is reserved as well as any other; For it
were a vain thing for the law, to give a man Right to a thing, and not a Right
of Action, to recover it. Well then, the Statute says unto every person,
Bodies politic and their Successors; All right and claim to any part or
parcel of any lands, Parsonages appropriate, or other Hereditaments, Livings,
or profits coming to the King, by the dissolution of the Manasteries. A Vicar
is a body politic, and had at the time of the Dissolution, Right, Claim, and
Action to so much of the Appropriate Parsonage, as would make a congruous and
competent portion for his maintenance, as has been before declared. Therefore
this right is reserved and saved to him and his successors still: And so saved
to all intents and purposes, as if this Act had never been made. Had this
Statute never been made, the Monasteries had never finally bin dissolved, had
they continued, this Action had been good against them: and therefore is still
good against the Proprietary who now succeeds in the Abbats place.

Likewise the Bishop of the Diocese at the time of the Dissolution had a right
of power and Jurisdiction in himself whenever the Abbat presented a Clerk
unto him for institution, not to admit him, unless the Abbat would first
allot, lay out, and assign a convenient portion for his maintenance. If the
Abbat had not made such allowance within the time limited by the Bishop, the
Bishop had a right in himself to collate the Vicarage upon the Presentee, and
to make a fit allowance for him, at his discretion, out of the fruits and
profits of the Appropriation, by sequestring them unto his uses. If the Abbat
refused to obey, or presumed to violate his sequestration, the Bishop had power
to compel him by Ecclesiastical Censure, and Excommunication, the end whereof
was imprisonment by the Secular arms, without Bail or Mainprise, until the
order be obeyed. If the Abbat presented not at all, the Ordinary had right of
Collation, as in Case of Lapse and Deuolution: and generally he had a right
and power in himself, to tax the Benefices in favor of the Vicars, as has
been formerly proved both by the Laws, and also by the practice of those
times.

This right the Bishops had at the time of the Dissolution; therefore this
right is safe unto him still; and safe to all intents and purposes, as if this
Act had never been had ne made. Had this Act never been made, the Abbats had
still continued, and upon them he might now exercise, as formerly he did, all
that his power, right and Jurisdiction: Therefore he may now proceed in like
manner against the Proprietarie which holds the same in his possession at
this day, and in no other manner, form, state and condition then the Abbat
did: For the words are plain, That what right soever he might claim if this
Statute had not bin made, the same he may claim still notwithstanding it is
made.

And it is to be observed, that the Statute uses as general words as the wit
of man could possibly devise, Saving to all persons, etc. to all Bodies
politic, etc. All right, title, claim, interest, living, or other profits,
etc. thereby to give satisfaction to every man that might fear any prejudice
to himself from this Act. And therefore if the Bishop should say, My
Jurisdiction and my interest of Right in assigning a due portion unto the Vicar
at my discretion, is impeached, because the Parsonage now goes to the King,
and from him to other Laymen. The Statute answers that, No: For all his right
and interest is saved to him as if this Statute had never been made. If the
Vicar should say, That by the law heretofore he had Congruam Portionem by way
of Prouiso saved and due unto him: and that he could sue the Abbat before his
Ordinary for so much of the Parsonage as would serve to maintain him in a more
fit and decent fashion: But that now he has no Action against the King or
any otherman. The Statute answers, That what title soever the Vicar, as a
Body politic, had to any part or parcel of the Parsonage, the same is
preserved and saved to him still, as well against the King, as against his
grantee, in as ample manner as it was heretofore belonging to him against the
Abbat. That whereas he claims allowance out of the Rectorie, under the name
of Portion, be it certain or uncertain: Let him but look the book, and he
shall find, that the Parliament was careful to reserve all Portions in express
terms, to any Body politic, or person which could claim them, in such
manner and form as he might have claimed it if this Satute had never been
made.

For it is manifest, that the meaning of the Parliament was not to hurt, or
hinder any man, but only to suppress the Monks, in that it was tender and
careful to reserve to every man his right, by what name or title soever he
could claim it, Rents-Charges, Annuities, Fees, Pensions, Portions; and to the
Bishops or others claiming Episcopal Jurisdiction, all Synodies, Proxies, and
other profits: So that as the wit of man could not devise more general terms
to comprehend all men's rights; so the gravity of a Parliament could not descend
to more particular words to express every man's right, which it labored to
preserve. And as for the point of Jurisdiction, the Parliament was so far from
deuesting the Bishops of any part thereof, That it submitted all exempt places
of Monasteries, or other privileged houses to their Jurisdiction. Much less
was it their meaning, to deprive the Vicar of that small means which the Law
affoorded him, by quarrelling the Bishop upon this point of Jurisdiction,
rather then upon any other. Neither can I think, but that if any of tha^ high
Court, whereunto nothing uses to be called, nothing is admitted, but the
flower of wit, nobility, and wisdom should now be raised from the dead, and
asked whether their meaning was, when they had saved unto every other man his
right, only to wrong the Bishop? or when they had preserved unto every other
man his Claim to any part or parcel of those Abbey-lands and Parsonages,
only to wring the Vicar, or to debar him, not of that liberal allowance,
which the law of God gives him, but of that small Remainder which the law of
man has left unto him for his maintenance, in regard of his daily service at
the Altar? He would answer, it was not their meaning; That the words of the
Statute can bear no such construction; That no Lawyer can wrest the Statute to
any such sense, unless he first strain his own wit beyond sense and reason.

Neither can it be said, That because there is not in those clauses of
reservation any express mention made, either of the Bishops jurisdiction in
this point, or of the Vicars portion in particular, therefore it ought not now
to be allowed.

For the Statute makes no mention at all of reparation of Chancels: yet
because the Abbats receiving the tithes, were out of them to keep the Chancels
in reparation; therefore the King also taking them into his hands, charge
himself and his Grantee with the same burden; for the leases of old times were
wont to run in this manner; Reddendo and soluendo annuatim omnes and singulas
Procurationes, etc. Ac etiam reparando Cancellos earundem Ecclesiarum. Although
in leases of latter times this clause is (as I take it) commonly left out.
Likewise the Statute makes no mention at all of any Curates wages to be
reserved: yet does the King in all grants of Parsonages where there is no Vicar
endowed, charge the Grantee with finding of a Curate. And the old leases were
wont to run in this manner; Soluendo annuatim omnes procurationes, etc. and
inueniendo Curatorem. But leases of later times, run somewhat more sparingly
in this guise, yielding, paying, and bearing all Proxies, Synodals, and
stipends of Curats. In both these Cases the King charge himself with this
burden, although there be no reservation thereof mentioned expressly in the
Statute. But because every man's right was reserved in the Statute, and the
people of every Parish had a right to have Divine Service said unto them, in
consideration of the tenth part of their yearly profits which they give in
lieue of that, and of none other thing, therefore the King charge himself
with the finding of one that shall perform this duty to them. And because such
a one must have a mainetenance, therefore he charge himself or his Grantee
with paying a stipend also. This he does non ex gratia, sed ex debito: And
because the Abbats, from whom he had those Parsonages, were before the
dissolution charged with the same. Whence it follows, that notwithstanding
there be no express mention made in the Statute, of the jurisdiction of the
Bishop in this point, and of the Vicars portion in particular: yet are they
understood to be reserved, because they are also comprised in the general, as
all others are.

Moreover, the Statutes of either kingdom which concern this matter, bear
this color in the face. That the Priors, Abbats, and other religious
Governors, with the assent, and consent of their several Couents, and in
writing under their Common Seal, gave up all their lands, houses, Parsonages
appropriate, and Vicarages into the Kings hands. Upon which Surrender of
theirs, the King was enabled to have, enjoy, and possess the same in such
manner and form, etc. Now it is manifest, that by virtue of their Surrender,
nothing could come unto the kings hand, but that which was theirs: And it is as
manifest, that the right of the Bishop, and the claim of the Vicar, were not
in the Abbat or Prior; and therefore cannot be intended to pass unto the King
by any Act of theirs. For Quod meum est sine facto meo a me tranferri non
potest: that which is mine cannot pass from me, but by some Act of mine.
Lastly, some men are of opinion, that this course cannot be taken for the
benefit of the Vicar; and that his right and action, if any he had before, is
now extinct and lost, because the Impropriation coming to the Kings hand, the
nature of the thing it self is altered, and made a Lay Fee: But they may be
pleased to be informed, that the nature of those things continues still the
same, and is not changed. For in the Statute of 1. Edw. 6. It is expressly
said, That the King shall hold those lands of Chantries, Colleges, and free
Chapels, in as large and ample manner and form as the Priests hell them, etc.
and in their natures and qualities: So then, though the King now holds them
to a different end and use, yet he holds them in the same nature which they
had before. And what I pray you can the nature of these and such like things,
which consist in Iure be, but the manner, form, state, and condition, wherein
they are possessed? Now it has been formerly declared, that they are still
held in the same manner, form, state, and condition, wherein they were held
before: therefore it follows, that they continue still in the same nature;
and consequently, that their Nature is not altered or changed. Moreover, it is
a Rule in Philosophy, that Formadat nomen and esse, the form of every thing
gives it name and nature; nay, rather it is the very nature and essence of the
thing it self; as for example. The reasonable and intellectual soul of a man
is his form: And therefore the Philosophers say, That Anima est quisque: it is
the soul that makes every man to be what he is, in his proper nature, and is
the man it self: whence it follows, That because the Proprietaries hold the
Benefices in the same form in which the Abbats held them, therefore they hold
them in the same nature also; and consequently, their nature remains, and is
not altered. And why should we think, that the nature of these things is
altered rather then the name, seeing that the form which gives both alike,
continues still the same? Look the statutes, and you shall ever find them
called by the same names which they had before: Benefices, Rectories,
Parsonages, Appropriations, Tithes, Church-duties, and the like. But by the
name of Lay fees or Chattels, you shall never find them mentioned in the
Statutes. And to show yet further, that in the opinion of that very Parliament,
which made the Acts of Dissolution, as also in construction of Law, it was
generally understood, That the nature of these Appropriations, and Tithes
remained still the same, without change or alteration; It may please them to
consider, That when the Monasteries were all dissolved, and laid wast, and the
Impropriations sold away into Laymens hands: yet were the Tithes unto them,
like Nuts cast unto little children, which could not crack them: Neither had
those Lay men any means, or Action to recover them: And therefore by the
Statute of 32. Hen. 8. Lay men were enabled to sue for Tithes in the
Ecclesiastical Court. By which it plainly appears, that these Tithes
retain still the nature of Ecclesiastical duties and goods properly belonging
to the Church; else why should the Ordinary hold plea of them between Lay men
more then of other Chattels? And if they had altered their nature, and of
Tithes had been made Chattels or lay Fees, why should they not have been
recovered by action of debt, or otherwise at the Common Law, without having
recourse at all to the Court Christian? Therefore the nature and quality of
these Appropriations and Tithes is not altered, by coming into lay men's hands,
no more then a piece of Coin is changed, when it passes from one hand to the
other.

From all which I conclude, That what right soever the Bishop had to his
Jurisdiction, the Parish to have a Minister, the Minister to have allowance
before the Dissolution of these Monasteries, and making of the fore recited
Statutes, the same they and every of them have at this day notwithstanding
those Statutes; and the rather for them, because they help to save that Right,
both of Jurisdiction to the one, and of maintenance to the other, which
otherwise might seem to have been lost in both.

This then I take to be clear in Law, That wheresoever a Vicar is to be
ordained, there also a competent maintenance is to be allowed. But then there
remains yet a doubt, whether all Churches in general which heretofore
belonged to the Monks, are necessarily to be served with perpetual Vicars, or
may be supplied with Stipendarie Curates; a doubt of too great difficulty to
be dissembled, and of too great consequence to be neglected in that Kingdom:
because all Proprietaries there, desire to gain this point upon the Bishops,
and some pretend more colorable reason for it, then others do.

For the better clearing of this doubt, it is to be observed, That the
Parsonages were heretofore either granted to the Monks, In proprios Vsus, from
whence they have their name of Impropriations; or else they were united to
their Tables, and are therefore called Mensalia in the Law. Concerning the
nature and quality of the former. Innocentius Inn^cent. ad c. pastoralis:
extra de priuileg. nu. 1.
says, that, Per haec verba (concedimus tibi Ecclesiam in proprios vsus)
intendit concedere, quod administrationem habeat Ecclesiae: Et quod retento
bono statu Ecclesiae superfluos tantum reditus in proprios vsus conuertat:
Debet enim Ecclesiam sibi concessam in primo statu retinere. And Panormitan in
his Commentaries upon the Chapter De Monachis. Tit. de Praebendis, alleging
the same words of Innocentius, adds further, Habent etiam praesentationem Ad
c. de M^nachis extra de Praebend.
Rectoris ex tali concessione. If then the Monks had by virtue of such Grant,
only the presentation, it is manifest, that the Institution was still reserved
to the Bishop. And that in this case the Vicar ought to be perpetual, and to
receive Canonical Institution from the Ordinary, appears by all those
Canons which I have formerly alleged for proof of the Vicars portion. So
does it also, and more plainly, by a certain Decretall of Boniface the 8.
where he says, Presbyteri qui per Monachos in earum Ecclesiis praesentantur
Tit. de capell. monachorum: in s^^^o.
Episcopis, and instituuntur ab ipsis, cum debeant esse perpetui, consuetudine
vel Statuto quouis in contrarium non obstante, etc And the Pope was wont in his
Grants of Appropriatio^, always to add a clause of reservation of
maintenance, Vicarijs Canonice instituendis. By which it is evident, That all
Appropriations made Quoad temporalia, or in proprios vsus, ought to have a
Perpetual Vicar, which is to receive his Canonical Institution in form of
Law, from the Ordinary. Of this sort are almost all the Appropriations of this
Kingdom which have lighted into my hand: and thus they pass. Salua
sustentatione Vicariorum: saluo iure Episcopi: in vsus suos proprios
conuertant. And many times, as namely in an Appropriation which I have seen of
the Rectory of Ballrouthery, made by the Archbishop of Dublin to the Prior and
Covent of Kilbixi, together with the erection of the Vicarage and maintenance
saved to the Vicar, this right of Institution is reserved by express terms to
the Bishop, and the Presentation only left unto the Prior; so that this kind
of Appropriation cannot warrant the Proprietaries to collate the Curateship as
now they do, and send their Curate for a License to the Bishop. But they are
to present, and the Bishop is of right to grant him Institution, as well for
the title of the Benefice, as for the Cure of souls: And no marvel: For
besides that our Savior in the beginning taught us, That an hired shepherd
was never profitable for the sheep; the Canons also of the old Church
ordained in this manner, Praecipimus etiam, ne Conductitijs Presbyteris ^1. q.
2. s. vlt.
Ecclesiae committantur: A precept worthy to be written in letters of gold over
every Church door, as a Charm, to keep out the destroyer. But to let pass
the usage, and customs of former ages in foreign countries, and to make it yet
more plain, That even within this kingdom of Ireland, the Bishops ever
claimed, and ever had this right of Institution to all such Churches as the
Monks held in proprios vsus: and thereupon laid out reasonable allowances for
the Vicar. I have seen an ancient Bull of Pope Alexander the third, whom I
noted before to have been the first that opposed himself against the avarice
of the Monks in this kind. To him certain Monks of this Kingdom of Ireland
made their complaint against the Bishops for troubling them in this point: and
craved a privilege against their authority for the time to come; which he
granted: and concludes his religious Grant in this manner. Nos itaque
vestris supplicationibus inclinati, vt sicut hactenus, sic and in posterum
Registr. Sancti T^^^ne ^n Breminghans (...) Dublin.
possitis in dictis Ecclesiis, per huiusmodi Canonicos and Capellanos vestros
facere deseruiri, nec vobis inuitis taxari valiant Vicariae, seu Vicarij
perpetui institui in ijsae^, auctoritate Apostolica indulgemus, etc. Si quis
autem contra attemptare praesumpserit, indignationem Omnipotentis Dei, and
Beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum eius se nouerit incursurum, etc.

By which it is plain and evident, That as the Proprietaries of these days
do; so did their predecessors and Ancestors the Monks, first in stipendarie
Curates: and make them the least allowance that possibly they could: But when
the Bishops challenged their right, and began to know themselves in their
places, the Monks then fled, not to the sanctuary of the Law, because it was
against them, neither stood they upon their custom, which (because not
grounded upon reason) was not able to protect them: but having no other refuge,
sought to the Pope for a privilege, in stead of a pardon, for such abuses
committed already, and afterward to be committed. A strange Case, That the
Vicar of CHRIST here on earth, should grant so lewd a privilege. But this ever
was, and still is, the practice and policy of that Sea, To make strict, and,
many times, good laws, and then to grant large and lewd Dispensations; thereby
to satiate (if it were possible) her insatiable avarice. But to return unto
our purpose: Neither this, nor any other like privilege could, before the
Dissolution, free the Monks, nor can at this time exempt the Proprietaries
their successors from the Jurisdiction and power of the Bishop in that behalf.
For long after the days of Alexander the third, Clement the fifth, seeing the
desolation which grew daily upon the Church by reason of such abuses of the
Monks, especially in that they served their Cures by their Chapleins and
stipendary Curates, made the Decree which I mentioned before, thereby enioyning
the Monks to present their Clerks unto the Ordinary, from him to receive
Canonical institution. All which he commands to be observed: Non
obstantibus exemptionibus, aut alijs quibuslibet priuilegijs, consuetudinibus
vel Statutis. Quae circa praemissa vel eorum aliquod Religiosis ipsis in nullo
volumus suffragari. This he decreed, not fearing the indignation of S. Peter
and S. Paul, which by the curse of Alexander the third he was to incur: but
persuading himself (as well he might) that God would never be offended with
him for cancelling a privilege which tended so directly to the overthrow of
his worship and service, and to the destruction of his Church here on earth:
wherefore if any Proprietarie would at this day plead the like privilege
granted to Monks from whom he deriues his Title, he must show it granted
since the time of Clement the fifth, and with a Non obstante to that Decree of
his, otherwise the Clementine reaches to them of after date, as well as to the
former: neither can they allege, that they have used so to do time out of
mind, and beyond the memory of man; for so had those Monks, and yet wanted a
privilege to protect them: and the Clementine runs with a Non obstante of
any custom or prescription: whence I conclude, That all Proprietaries which at
this day hold Churches which were anciently given in proprios vsus to the
Monks, may not now, as they do, nominate their Curates, and send them to the
Ordinary for a license: but must as Patrons, present their Clerks unto him,
and he (if they be worthy) must give them Canonical Institution, and make
them perpetual Vicars or Rectors of the Church, with cure of souls: For such
was the state of the Church before the Impropriation made, and such it must
continue.

But the greater doubt is of those Benefices which were given ad Mensam
Monachorum. These Grants were made by way of Union, and pass under diverse
forms: sometime by these words Concedimus pleno iure: sometimes vtroque iure:
sometimes pleno iure, tam in spiritualibus quam in temporalibus. The proper
effect of all which Grants seems to be, That these Benefices need no
perpetual Vicar, but may be served by a Stipendarie Curate. For first these
are excepted from the general, where it is C cum and plantare: extra de
priuilegij. C. in Lateranensi. ^od.
said, In Ecclesiis vero suis, quae ad eos pleno iure non pertinent,
instituendos Presbyteros Episcopis repraesentent. By which it is employed, that
if they held them pleno iure, they could not be compelled to present. And in
another place it is said, Praemissa vero intelligimus de beneficijs (...)
praelato^^ s^xt^.
quae non sunt de mensa Praelatorum ipsorum, sed speciales Rectores habere
consueuerunt: by which it appears, that they had no certain Rector nor
perpetual Vicar; but were served by a Chaplain. And the Clementine, in the
Title De excessu Praelatorum, blames the Bishops for troubling the Monks in
this point, De exess^^ praelato. in Clement.
as if upon the death of their Stipendary Curates the Benefices had fallen
void, Quanquam ipsae per hoc Ecclesiae in veritate non vacent, says the Law.
The ordinary Gloss upon this place is famous, and Gloss. ib.
all after-writers refer themselves unto it: where the question being put,
What were those Churches which might properly be said to be De mensa
Praelatorum? The answer is, Quod illae, quae sunt mensis eorum vnitae, in
tantum quod Rectorem, vell vicarium perpetuum non habeant, alium quam illum cui
facta est annexio. And the Doctors of the Audience in Rome, upon a case
propounded, make this difference between an Appropriation and an union. Cum
Ecclesia conceditur alicui Monasterio pleno iure in temporalibus, tunc Episcopi
Rola in nouis.
debent instituere Vicarium perpetuum: vbi vero vaitur mensae Episcopali, vel
Abbatiali, and spectant ad illam pleno iure tam in spiritualibus, quam in
temporalibus, tunc ponetur in ea Presbyter temporalis, ad nutum remouibilis, ad
exercitium Curae, quae principaliter residet in eo, cuius mensae est vnita And
Rebuffus following the same steps, and speaking of a grant of a Benefice,
made by these words, pleno iure, vel vtroque iure, adds this exposition. Per
hoc intelligitur quod tam its Rebuff. de congrua portio.
temporalibus, quam in spiritualibus iurisdictionem habent, and in ijs Ecclesis
constituuntur, Vicarii temporales ad nutum reuocabiles, quibus non prouidetur
de congrua portione. And lastly Ranchinus, in his annotations upon Guido Papa.
Decisione Ranchinus ad Guide. Papa. 154.
154. says that, Illae Ecclesiae dicuntur de mensa quae sunt ita vnitae, quod
non habeant Vicarium perpetuum. From all which it may be gathered, That those
Proprietaries, who now hold Parsonages, which were heretofore united to the
Tables of the Monks; because they are to hold them in the same manner, form,
and condition, as the Monks did, cannot now be forced to present their Clerks
to the Ordinary for institution, no more then the Monks could heretofore; but
are only to send him for a license as now they do. Notwithstanding all which,
I take the law to be otherwise, as the case now stands: For the Monasteries
might indeed heretofore, serve the Cure in Churches belonging to their Table,
by a temporary Curate, if that Curate were a Monk, as commonly he was: or if
there were no Parish belonging to the Church, but if the Church were
Parochial, and the Curate secular, then he was to receive institution from
the Bishop, as perpetual Vicar, and to have a competent allowance out of the
fruits of the Benefice, as other Vicars had. And therefore Zabarella, having
handled this point, gives this caueate in the end. Sed nota and signa mente
quod Zabarel. ad lit. d^ s^pple^. neglige^. Traeiat
hoc ita procedit si Abbas ibi collocat vnum de suis Monachis, secus si
saecularem; debent enim Beneficia esse perpetua; and hoc non reperitur esse
permissum in saecularibus. Wherefore seeing that now all those Churches are
parochial, and the Curates secular, it follows, That the Proprietaries are
now to present their Clerks, as their Ancestors the Abbats were bound to do
in the like case: for, Res redijt in eum casum, vnde incipere non potuit: There
are at this time with us no Monks in being: therefore the Vicar must now of
necessity be secular; and being secular he must be also presentatiue and
perpetual; for so the law ordains. And it is farther to be observed, That
those very Monks, could not serve the Cure in a Church remote from the Abbey.
For the Lateran Council, forbad Monks to be appointed and placed, as Curates
in Parish Churches about the Country: And Urban the third ordained, that In
Ecclesiis vbi Monachi habitant, populus per monachum non regatur. So that
neither as Curate in Churches remote, neither yet as Rector, in the very Parish
where they dwelt, could a Monk be employed: only in those Churches which were
near adjoining to their Monasteries, where they might sing Mass in the
morning, and return to their Dorter at night, they were permitted to serve;
and these were commonly united to their Table, and none other. And this is the
cause why Archidiaconus, a Father amongst the Canonists, says, that Ecclesia,
si vicina est, regitur per Priorem and capitulum: si vero remota est imponetur
ei census, and ponetur in ea Presbyter perpetuus. For in process of time, the
Monks finding that these unions to Archidiacon. ad C. cum singulis de prebend.
and dignit. in sexto
their Table, were more privileged in this point, then others, procured
Benefices far distant also, to be united to their Tables: And therefore the
Popes of later times, in granting or confirming these unions, were wont to make
the like reservation, as in other ordinary Appropriations, as Rebuffus
testifies. And again, in ordinary Appropriations, if the Benefices lay near
unto the Abbeies, the Bishop was wont to wink at it, and to suffer them to
discharge the Cure by some one of their Monks, or other stipendary Curates, as
if they had been mensall. I mentioned before a certain contention, which fell
between Richard Bishop of Mead and certain Monks; upon whose Appropriated
Benefices, he placed perpetual Vicars of his own authority, and made them
allowances at his own discretion: yet did he not use this right and power on
all, but only upon twelve; yielding this reason of his act, Because those
twelve were far off from the Abbey, and lay near the high way, where it was
necessary that some kept residence for the receiving of Pilgrims and strangers,
that were to pass that way: The rest he forbear to tax, because they lay
near unto some Grange of the Abbey: And therefore if any came thither for
hospitality, they might as well repair unto the Grange it self, there to be
received: which cause of toleration (how good or bad soever it were) now
cease in our Proprietaries, because they will not make their houses Innes for
travelers as the Abbats did: wherefore as they can pretend no better right
then the Abbats had, so they may not in discretion challenge the like
sufferance of the Bishop as they found.

To conclude, the sum of all is this. In Benefices given to the use of the
Monks, which are properly called Appropriations, or Impropriations, the
Ordinary now is, and ever was without distinction to ordain a Perpetual
Vicar with Cure of souls: And to compel the Proprietarie to a competent and
convenient allowance out of the fruits of the Benefice for his maintenance: And
in those Mensall Benefices, which were united to their Tables, the Ordinary is
(as the state of things now stands) to do the like: So that in all, and all
manner of Benefices, as well Mensall as other, heretofore belonging to those
Abbeys or other Religious Houses, and which are now in the hands of the
Proprietaries within this Kingdom, these mercenarie and serving creatures,
these stipendarie Curats are by course of Law to be abolished; and in their
rooms Perpetual Vicars or Rectors, with sufficiency of means to be ordained.

Sufficiency of means I say; For it was long since observed, That beggarly
Poets never made good Verses; for poverty is a heavy burden, and the fear
thereof works as violently upon the wit and spirit of a man, as any terror
does, and is therefore reckoned by the Orator, inter grauissima vitae onera.
Tullie. de senectu.
And it is certain, that there is no one thing which does more depresse and
keep down the mind and rising spirit of a man, from aspiring to any high
invention or conceit of learning, then that does:

Nam si Virgilio puer and tolerabile deesset I^^enalis.
Hospitiu^, caderent omnes a crinib Hydrae: Surda nihil caneret grave buccina:
-- says the Satyrist. His meaning is, that Virgil himself could never have
described the slaughter of Turnus, the combats of Aeneas, the fury of Amata,
and other such like Arguments, with that high conceit and strain of wit, and
with such loftiness of style as he has done, had his mind been troubled and
distracted with want of necessaries for food, raiment, house-rent, and
attendance at home: Neither may we hope for better of a Preacher, if the like
weight of want and poverty lie upon him: and therefore it is requisite, that a
sufficient maintenance be provided for him, for so the law requires.

But then there remains a great and difficult question, What is sufficient
for this Vicars maintenance? For mine own part, I may not presume to prescribe
what is enough or sufficient in this case, because the Law leaves it to the
discretion of the Bishop, who must inform himself of many particulars, and
frame his censure according to the private motions of his own well disposed
mind; nay, I may well say as a learned Canonist has said already, De re ista
non potest certa tradi doctrina. Only we must beware, that whilst we reckon
all too little for our selves, we think not every thing enough for the
Minister of the Church. Zabarella upon this question says, Quod sola
sustentatio non sufficient, potest namque esse talis, quod non periret fame, and
tamen non esset congrua, sicut esse debet in victu and vestitu, and alijs
congruentibus. And as another Writer says, Vicarijs de hac portione congrue
prouidebitur; nec cogentur vesci fabis, and alijs vilibus cibarijs sicut
Rustici. First, therefore in this Assignation of his portion, there must be
care taken, that he may have enough for his food and raiment in a decent and
convenient manner. Secondly, respect is to be had unto his family. Non enim
sufficiens dicitur Beneficium, nisi sufficiens fit habenti, and personis sibi
necessarijs. But who are these? and how many shall he be allowed to keep? No
man I think will allow him less then a servant or two to attend upon him. Non
enim debet sibi coquere, says one. But this is not all: for the law of God
permits, and the Laws of this kingdom have made it free for Ministers to
marry as well as others, considering well, That the estate it self is
honorable in all men alike: and that they consisting of flesh and blood as
others do, have likewise their desires upon them as others have.

It is reason therefore, that since the law permits them to marry, the law
should also provide them a maintenance, for the easier bearing of such a
burden, else is their condition more miserable then any other: for work they
may not, which heretofore they might; and to beg they are ashamed.
Merchandise they cannot, which yet the Civil Law permits; and not to
provide for their family, were a fault worse then Infidelity: and therefore
unless means be allowed for the maintenance of those, as well as of
themselves, it had been better for them if they had still remained as they
were. Thirdly, regard must be had unto hospitality: for it has ever bin
thought fit, that the Minister should be enabled to relieve the poor, to feed
the hungry, and to receive a stranger as he trauaileth on the way: a thing more
considerable in this kingdom then in the other of England, for our want of
Innes; and because the Country is of custom more harborous to passengers, if
need requires. And lastly, to omit all consideration of his person, as
Nobility, degree, desert, age, and such like, which are not forgotten in other
Countries, when the poor Vicars portion comes in question, before the
Ordinary or other Judge, Considerabitur in ijs honestas, vt bonoretur in ijs
officium Sacerdotale, says a Canonist.

But some man will say, that this question is long since answered, and the
doubt determined by Act of Parliament here in Ireland. It is true, that in the
33. year of Henry the eight, there passed here an Act; wherein it was
contained, That whereas diverse Parish Churches of the kingdom of Ireland were
heretofore appropried to Monasteries and other religious houses, now dissolved,
wherein Divine Service was done, maintained, and kept, and the Cure served by
religious persons of the said religious houses, etc. Therefore there should be
an able man appointed for that purpose in every Parish Church. In consideration
whereof, and to the intent aforesaid, it should be enacted, That Sir Anthony
Saintleger, Lord Deputy of Ireland, I. A. Chancellor of the kingdom, W. B.
Vicetreasurer, and S. A. Chief Justice, with sundry others there named, or any
six of them, the four officers above named to be of the Quorum, might and
should erect and incorporate one Vicarage of one Vicar, in every of the said
Parishes, as they should think convenient, which should have succession of the
same for ever, to be presented by the Lord Deputy, be instituted by the
Ordinary, etc. And that the said Sir Anthony and the rest might and should
assign and appoint unto every such Vicar, such convenient portions of Tithes
altarages, and oblations of the possessions coming to the King by reason of
the said dissolution, for the maintenance of Divine service, and keeping of
Hospitality, etc. Provided always, that such Assignation did not exceed the
yearly value of 13. pounds six shillings and eight pence: and reserving to
the King the twentieth part out of every such Vicarage, and the first fruits,
etc.

This Act indeed was made, and remains of record in the Rolls of Ireland,
but it never took effect. But be it that it were still of force, what
proportion has the sum limited, with the ends for which it is appointed? or
what maintenance is ten pounds sterling at the utmost for a Minister, to live
in fashion of a Minister withal? to find himself? to maintain his wife and
children while he is alive, to provide for them after his death, to pay
servants wages; and over and above all this, to keep hospitality, which the
Statute intends and commands to be kept?

It may be, that in those days it was enough: but what is it at this present
time? Had this Statute taken his effect, yet had it been reason, that at this
time the Vicars should have claimed a new taxation, seeing that the rates of
all things are now raised to a higher price: Moreover, it is apparent, that
although Henry the eight took away the Monasteries, and suppressed the
usurped tyranny of the Pope in his Dominions: yet he reformed not Religion,
and therefore their oblations and alterages, mass moneys, and such like fees
(which were no doubt the greatest part of the poor Vicars maintenance, and yet
was never reckoned in his portion) remained all his days: Seeing therefore
that these are now grow^n into disusance, reason good that their allowance be
made good again, and increased some other way. In the same Parliament, there
was order taken for the hire of Slaters and other workmen by the day: and it
is ordained that their wages should be increased from time to time, according
to the prices of corn and other victuals: there is now no Carpenter or Slater
here, which will take less then sixteen pence per diem, for himself, and
twelve pence for his man, which amounts to upwards of thirty pounds per ann.
What reason therefore that the poor Minister, who ought to be honorabilis in
populo, should be held to the old taxation of twenty Marks Irish by the year
at the uttermost, which comes not to eight pence per diem, for the
maintenance of himself and all his family? But the poor Vicars lot is not so
good as to have the allowance the Statute speaks of. Our horse-boies wages
are not great; would God our Vicars were no worse. Our horse-boies have
commonly forty shillings wages, besides meat, drink and lodging, and four
pair of Broagues per ann. How lamentable then is that which has of late been
discovered, That throughout the whole Province of Connaught, and in sundry
other Diocesses of this Kingdom, the Vicarages, for the most part, are under
forty, and many of them not above fifteen shillings sterling, toward all
charges, by the year? But to conclude this point: If any man think that
twenty nobles or ten pounds sterling, according to this Statute, be at this
day a sufficient and reasonable maintenance for a learned Minister of the
Church, and Preacher of Gods word, to maintain himself, his wife, children,
and family, and to keep hospitality withal; and no reason will persuade him
to the contrary, I for my part will not be contentious, nor use farther
argument against him; only I wish him more experience; and that (saving my
charity) he himself, his wife, children, and family, might live but one
month according to that rate, and afterward he be asked what he thought of
the sufficie^cy of such allowance. Neither yet is this the nihil vltra, of our
misery, for even unto this day, as if the ghosts of those Monks did still
walk and haunt us, Ecclesiastical livings of all sorts are continually taken
from the Church, under color of concelements, and as if in old time, they had
belonged to their houses; In so much, that in one small Dioces, namely of
Elfin, twenty five Vicarages, five Rectories, and two Prebends, are found to
have been reft from the Church by this occasion; all which did anciently stand
charged in the Kings books, with first fruits and twentieth part: An
infallible argument, that since the dissolution, they have been in the proper
use, and lawful possession of the Church; neither do other Diocese want
their part in this calamity. And to add to our grief, his sacred Name is
herein ever used; who of all men mortal would most abhor it. For he that
of his Princely bounty, and Christian devotion, has of his own, given
wellnigh three hundred thousand acres of principal good land, to the reverend
Bishops, dignitaries, and Parish Churches, of the North of that Kingdom, would
not he much more restore the tithes to the poor Vicars of other parts, if it
may appear that of right they belong unto them? does King James rule his
subjects by one law, and himself by another? or have we not yet proof enough
of his well willing to the Church? This then is an evil, which cannot be
healed, but by that mysterious and medicinable hand of the King himself: A
hand, which often has wrought, and daily does work greater miracles, and cure
more running sores then this, in the body of the Church and Common wealth; and
will not leave this untouched, if ever it happen to be brought unto him.

But to leave what we have not, and to return to what we have; I have often
said, and endeavored to prove, that the Bishop is the man authorized by law,
to assign the Vicars portion: wherein, I am not ignorant, that many men may
happily draw my discretion into question, and condemn my judgment, in
laboring thus earnestly to revive the memory of an old discontinued, and
almost forgotten point of law; for what if all were granted to be law that has
been said? what profit is the Church like to reap thereby, seeing that the
execution thereof belongs only to the Bishops? weak men God wot, some will
say, for the most part, in this Kingdom, to hold that they have, but
altogether unable to recover what they had: Medice cura teipsum. Their
Lordships should do well to recover their own rights first; and then we
should have some hope that they would be able to prevail for the Vicars also.

True indeed: the execution of this law belongs peculiarly to the Bishops:
but it is as true, that in this their long default, it does now as properly
belong to the King: For there is no doubt, but that before those Acts of
Dissolution, the Pope as supreme Ordinary pretended, made all those
Constitutions and Canons which before are mentioned for the erection of
Vicarages, and maintenance of the Vicars; many of which were directed to sundry
of our own Bishops in England: and they, by the toleration of the King, put
them in execution from time to time, and were ever justified in their doings,
by the Reverend Judges of the land. If then the Sovereign power in these
Cases, and both the making and execution of these laws did heretofore belong
unto the Pope; then is it manifest, that the same at this day does immediately
belong unto the King, upon whom by way of Restitution, the Parliament has
seated all the power which the Pope then usurped, in laws not repugnant to the
word of God, and Statutes of the Kingdom. Wherefore if the Bishop cannot, yet
the King can do them right; I say not by the power of his prerogative; but by
a due course and form of Law, which no man may repine at: and therefore, if
the right may appear to be on their side, means of recovering that right
cannot be wanting to them. But be it, that they could seek no higher then
the Consistory of the Bishop; yet is not their case so desperate as some
conceive the same to be: For I have showed before, that not only the high Court
of Parliament, but also the reverend Judges of former times, which many times
thwarted with Bishops in other matters, yet ever assisted them in assigning,
increasing and restoring the poor Vicars portion; yea and pressed them often
times to this duty, when they were remiss and negligent of themselves: why
then should not we hope the like from the Reverend Judges of these days,
whose piety, zeal and feruencie in Religion, is by so much greater then was
that of their predecessors, by how much the Religion it self which these
profess is better, and more worthy of defense and maintenance then the others
was.

This then is the Maine and capital point to be considered of, because as a
canker it has most spread it self over the whole body of this kingdom: yet
is there one Case more, which because it is cosin-german to the other, and
wherein the Reverend Bishops have right as well as in the other, ought not to
be neglected. And it is the Case of those Parsonages which are annexed unto
the Prebends, or dignities of Cathedral Churches: For these, long since
learned this evil custom of the Monks, to procure the Benefices of other
Parishes to be annexed unto them, for the better support and maintenance of
their state; although ab initio non fuit ita. For it is to be noted, That after
the time of Constantine the Great, every greater City had a Bishop resident
therein, and every Bishop a company of learned men always conversant about
him. These served for Colleges of Reverend Divines, to whom al controversies
of Religion were referred, and by whom they were under the Bishop decided:
These were called Presbyteri which imports as much as The Elders or Senators
of the Church, by whom the Church was ordered and advised. In which sense it is
that Tertullian says in his Apologeticon; Nobis praesident probati quique
Seniores: honorem istum non pretio sed testimonio adepti. Now it is apparent by
the Constitutions of the Christian Emrours, reported both in the old Code, and
also in the Authentiques of Justinian; That these were all maintained by
Temporal revenues, which were in great abundance cast upon them, partly by the
devotion of the people, partly by the munificence, and largess of the
Emperors; also there were Salaria de publico in diuersis speciebus
Sacro-sanctis Ecclesijs ministrata, though afterward taken from them by Julian
the Apostata. Moreover, these had their several houses wherein they lived with
their children and mothers and sisters if need required. Illas etiam non
relinqui castitatis hortatur affectus, quae ante Sacerdotium maritorum
legitimum meruere coniugium, says the Law. And these lands the Clergy held
free from Taxes and Impositions; and not only they, but also their children
held their own patrimonial lands with like freedom in honor of their fathers
Priesthood. The which I do the rather allege, to let some men know how
far they are destitute of example of former times in their opinions, while
they think it a matter unreasonable, That Cathedral Churches should have any
Temporal lands belonging to them, talking of Clergiemen as of some foreign
Nation or Aliens, which ought not inherit within the land. As for their
children they talk of them as of unlawful persons, and scantly worth the
fostering, whereas yet the law of God makes their marriages as lawful as ours:
and in their children is oftentimes better blood to be found, then in those
which speak against them. But to return unto our purpose. These Colleges of
learned men in the chief Cities of the Empire, were (as I said before)
maintained by Temporal revenues: But not long after when these means failed
them, whether through the peoples indeuotion, or whether through their own ill
husbandry (for Clergie-mens hands could never be tied nor kept from aliening
the revenues of their Churches) then began they to cast abroad their eyes, and
to reach out their hands upon the poor Ministers of the Country; who having
their Tithes, were therewithal content; and in recompense thereof held up pure
hands thrice a day unto their Maker, praying instantly for the prosperity of
the people, while they were travailing abroad in their several vocations. This
abuse grew so great and so hurtful to the Church, that the Council of Lateran
thought fit to provide against it; forbidding any Canon of a Church to meddle
with a Parsonage of the Country.

Whereupon a certain Bishop wrote unto Honorius the third Pope of Rome,
complaining, that the Canons of his Church, since the Laterane Council, were
unable to live of the revenues of their Prebends (which were, no doubt, that
which was left of their Temporal lands) being debarred by the decree of the
Council for taking Parsonages as they did in former times. And thereupon the
Pope wrote back in this manner: Si euidens necessitas, vel vtilitas exigat,
Prebendas Ecclefijs tuis pateris de Capellis in perpetuum annectendis ijsdem,
ficut discretione praeuia expedire videris, augmentare. Reseruata tamen congrua
Capellarum Presbyteris portione.

Who could have done this? Who could have devised such a trick to elude the
letter, and frustrate the meaning of a wholesome law, but he which is the Vicar
of Christ, by a patent of his own making? The law forbids a Prebend to take
a Parsonage of the Country; because they being two Livings, and each of them
requiring the personal residence of the party, were incompatible in one and
the self same man. The Pope teaches them how to avoid this inconvenience, by
making the Canonry and the Parsonage (though never so far distant in place)
to become one Benefice, by union: as if the personal residence, which the Law
requires upon each of them, were any ways procured, or the law fulfilled by
this device: yet it is said by a certain Canonist, that this was Optimus
modus, and Prouisio augmentandi reditus Canonicorum: and I confess as much:
But could there have been a more Cutthroat course devised for the destruction
of the Parish Churches? It is fit there should be such Colleges in Cathedral
Churches for the uses above mentioned. True, but let them have their proper
maintenance, as they had in former times out of Temporal lands; not out of
Tithes which properly belong to the particular Ministers of the Parish
Churches. For as Panormitan very well says, Institutio Beneficiorum
fundamentum suscepit finaliter propter cultum diuinum, Implicantem Diuinorum
ministerium deseruientium in diuinis eo loco vbi instituuntur.

Worthy therefore of everlasting memory, is the late Action of our Sovereign,
who having liberally endowed many Bishopprickes, and the several dignities and
Prebends of their Cathedral Churches, with a large and ample proportion of
lands in the North of this kingdom, took from them all their Parsonages
annexed or united, and made them presentatiue to the use of particular
Incumbents in time to come, which shall thereby be enabled to reside continually
in their several Parishes, for the instruction of the people.

But we must now take things as they are. Parsonages therefore are united or
annexed to the dignities of Cathedral Churches; yet with a Reservation of a
convenient allowance for the Vicar, as is before declared. There was ever
little difference between the Monks of Abbeyes, and the Canons of Cathedral
Churches: The difference that was, was this, quod Canonici regulae inseruiebant
laxiori; and therefore they are oftentimes paralleled in the law, and what was
ordained in the one, was commonly propter paritatem rationis extended to the
other. They are like in other cases: they are twins in this: yet as the state
of things now stands, the case in hand is less doubtful in these Canons
then in the Successors of the Monks; and the Bishops power in this kind is (if
not greater) yet more apparent over them, then over the other: Because there is
no Act of Parliament pretended to defend them from his Jurisdiction: no
Surrender, no Title of the King, no imaginary alteration of their quality and
nature: but they continue the same they were from the beginning. The law then
requires, that every such Dignitarie should have a perpetual Vicar instituted
by the Bishop, to serve in the Church, united or annexed to his dignity. For
so says the Decretall of Innocent the third. In ipsa Ecclesia parochiali
idoneum and perpetuum hab^at vicarium canonice institutum, qui congruentem
habeat de prouentibus ipsius Ecclesiae portionem.

And hitherto the Case of these men is all one with the Case of the Monks: but
there follows a Clause which makes the Case harder with them then with the
Monks. Alioquin illa se sciat authoritate huius Decreti priuatum, libere alij
conferenda.

By occasion of which words the Canonists fall into a fell contention among
themselves: Whether in default of presenting a Vicar for Institution, the
Prebendarie be ipso iure deprived, and the Parsonage ipso facto made void: Or
whether the Parsonage only be voidable, and he to be deprived by the sentence
of his Superior. And the more common received opinion is, That it is ipso
facto void: but one of the two is certain; and which soever it be, the case
of the Prebendarie is harder then of the Monk: for out of the Monks Benefice,
the Bishop can only take a sufficient maintenance for the Vicar, and must
leave the rest to the Monk: but to the Canon or Prebendarie he leaves nothing
at all. If there be any thing left above the Vicars maintenance, the Bishop
bestows it in other uses; and that not only pro illa vice, but also so often
as the Parsonage shall fall void, during the Prebendaries life, to the end he
may never reap profit thereof, after neglect once committed in this kind.
Again other Patrons have six months leisure to present: but if the
Prebendarie or Canon shall not present so soon as with opportunity he may, the
Ordinary takes his advantage, and presents as in case of lapse. If
afterward the Canon shall come and allege an impediment, the proof shall
also lie upon himself; wherein if he fail, he shall never be relieved. Poena
enim eo ipso committitur quod facultatem habuit Vicarium instituendi, and non
instituit: which yet is to be understood if the neglect be apparent and
notorious: Otherwise it is fit he should be summoned, to show cause why not:
and if he appear not, the Bishop may inform himself summarily, and so
proceed. For it beseems not a reverend ouerseer of the Church, to do any
thing but with good advice and deliberation; but above all things, he must take
heed that he seem not to lie at catch for an advantage against his inferior
fellow Minister. The reasons given of the rigor of the Law in this point are,
First, because he deserves no favor which may be discharged by another, and
yet is negligent in that also. And secondly, because Divine worship is herein
tendered; for Immunitas Clericis concessa propter diuinu^ cultum, eo ipso
definit, quod cultui diuino non incendunt.

But the question may be made: What if the Prebend should present a Vicar in
due time, but yet shall not make him such allowance as the Law requires?
Whether in this case the Bishop may proceed to privation as in the former; or
only proceed by Ecclesiastical censure, as in the case of the Monks? For
mine own part, I would not at all be an Author, nor willingly a follower of
rigorous opinions in the Law. But the words are these; Idoneum and perpetuum
habeat Vicarium canonice institutum, qui (vt praedictum est) congruentem habeat
de prouentibus Ecclesiae portionem: alioquin illa se sciat auctoritate huius
Decreti priuatum, which clause as Panormitan affirms, is referred ad omne id
quod est supradictum, and therefore must of necessity touch that which stands
next unto it.

Peradventure some man may think, that a Vicar is not necessary upon a
Benefice annexed to a dignity, if the Dignitarie himself will reside upon it.
But we must remember, that from the beginning they were not ordained, but for
the cause above mentioned: namely to reside always in the greater Cities, for
the better instruction of the people, and daily assistance of the Bishops in
the government of the Church, and therefore in law and reason ought to reside
upon the Prebend in the City, and not upon the Benefice in the country. And
this is the resolution of Panormitan upon this Question. My study is not at
this time to put all the Cases, and to dispute all the Questions which are made
and moved by the Expositors of the Canon Law anent this matter: only I would
show, That the Bishop has as great a right, and as absolute a power over the
Cathedral Churches, as he has over the successors of the Monks: and that
therefore he may and must see, that their Churches be furnished with
Perpetual Vicars, and the Vicars competently and sufficiently provided for by
these as well as by the other.

A point of law not to be neglected in this Kingdom of Ireland, where there are
many Prebendaries which have no perpetual Vicars at all upon their annexed
Benefices: and more, which make their Curats so small allowance, as the Monks,
were they living, could not in conscience make them less. I can answer for
some of them, that they cannot make them much better, and reserve any thing for
themselves. But in this case the Law is clear. Quod primo subueniendum est
seruitio Ecclesiae, secundo indulgendum necessitatibus Canonicorum.
Tolerabilius enim est, says Bowichius, vt Canonicus egeat qui habet Curam
annexam, quam Vicarius qui illam exercet. To conclude therefore: if the question
be made, a quo haec congrua portio peti possit, we may answer as Petrus
Rebuffus does, i. Tam a Patrono exempto quam non exempto, Ecclesiastico, vel
religioso, vel seculari, sieve sint Monachi sieve Canonici: and sic etiam a
Capitulo: and generaliter ab ijs qui Ecclesiae prouentus recipient.

For all have robbed, and all must make restitution. The Vicar or daily
Minister of the Church must have sufficient allowance out of the Tithes of his
own Parish, or else God our Father is dishonored, and our mother the Church
wronged. As for those allowances which are now made, as good none at al, as
they.

For the mischief which comes of these small Vicarages and Curateships is
still the same: namely the vnlearnednesse of the Ministry: for (as
Panormitane well observes) Ad tenuitatem Beneficiorum necessario sequitur
ignorantia Sacerdotum. This inconvenience was long since discoured: and thence
it was that Alexander the third blaming the horrible couetise and abuse of the
Monks, which allowed not above the sixteenth part of the revenues of the
Benefice, for the maintenance of the Vicar, adds this as the cursed fruit of
so vile a stock, that thence it came to pass; Vt in illis Regionibus pene
nullus inueniretur Sacerdos parochialis qui vllam vel modicam habere^ peritiam
literarum. And Clement the third upon the same occasion says, That the exempt
Monks, left so small a portion to the Vicars, that they were not able to live
thereon, propter quod s^pe contingit, quod non inueniuntur personae idoneae,
quae huiusmodi Ecclesias velint recipere; sicque frequenter minus idoneis
conferuntur, ex quo pericula imminent animarum. The reason is plain, for Honos
alit arts. We may flatter our selves, and say, That men ought to take this
Calling upon them, not for any worldly respect, but only for devotion unto God:
But experience has ever proved, that if there be no maintenance, there will be
no Ministry. The saying of Demosthenes to the Athenians, is sure and true.
Never look for a man (says (...).
he) who to do you service will undo himself; for you shall never find any
such. And therefore we may not hope that any man will set his son to school,
and train him up in the study of Divinity, unless there be hope of wealth
and honor in their age. Now from want of learning in the Minister, proceeds
a general decay of all Religion. Whence it was, that (as the learned Chief
Justice that late was, has observed Le sieur Ed. Coke, en Euesque de
^inchesters case
out of the Ecclesiastical History) Julian the Apostata having a purpose
wholly to ruin the profession of Christianity, from which himself was by
transgression fallen; used not the sword (as Dioclesian and others did) but
took away the means of the Clergy; knowing well that if those once failed,
the number of the Preachers would not long continue. And that Prophecy of his
will no doubt one day befulfilled, where he says, That le decaie des revenues
de saint Eglise, en le fine sera subversion del service de Dieu, and de son
Religion. i. That the decay of the revenues of holy Church, will one day be the
subversion of the service of God, and of his Religion. For Plowden in his
Commentaries shows, That the reverend Judges of England, long since observed,
that by the abuse of the Monks, in applying all to their own bellies, and
leaving nothing to the Vicars, which yet (as he says) were devised and
ordained of purpose, to supply the defects of the Monks, and others in the
ministry and service of the Church, there crept in many abuses: and he
adds, that, As the reuenew of the Parish Church decayed, so likewise did
Preaching. And this was the cause why the Emperor Justinian was so careful,
that the number of his Clergy should not exceed the proportion of means which
was laid out for their entertainment. For the end he saw would be the beggary
of the Ministry, whence could not choose but follow the ruin of that holy
Order, and consequently, a final decay of true Religion. We need not pass
the Seas to seek for proof of this assertion. What is so poor as our Clergy
here in Ireland? I speak not of our Prelates, God increase it to them, and make
it ten times more then now it is: But what is so deformed a sight as the face
of our Ministry, which consists of Curats and Vicars, is? But withal, what
can be more unlearned then they are? and what can be more irreligious, or less
understanding of what belongs to God and godliness then the people is? which
could not be, if there were men among them to teach and to instruct them: For
the people is as capable of instruction as any other: and where they come to be
informed of the truth, are as zealous thereof, as any Nation in the world. This
mischief is great, and the injury and injustice whence it proceeds, is no
less. For wherefore are Tithes given, but in consideration and recompense of
preaching the word, and ministering the Sacraments to those which give them? Is
it a great thing (says Saint Paul) if when we sow spiritual things, we
reap carnal things? Preaching therefore, and other divine service, is the
thing in lieu whereof the Tithes are paid unto the Minister. And our Lawyers
affirm, that Beneficium non debetur nisi propter officium. What Justice
therefore, that a man should part with a Tenth of all that God has given him,
in bargain to have the word of God truly preached to him, and yet be
defrauded of that also? And the worse is, that the greater the Parish was, and
the greater the charge which it was at, in this regard, the worse were they
served, and the less respect was ever had unto them: for even as heretofore,
the whiter the Cow, the sooner she came unto the Altar; so the fairer the
Benefice, the more in danger was it ever of Appropriation. And as in the sack
of a city, the fairest of every kind is soonest made a spoil unto the
soldier: so in that Invasion which the Regular Clergy made upon the Churches,
the greatest and richest Benefices were the first made a pray unto the Monks:
and the poor Parishioners, in stead of a man of learning and wisdom, by whom
they might be taught and advised in things belonging to this life, and the life
to come; were turned over to be served by them, which were scarce worthy to
serve horses. This saddle was put upon the peoples backs by persuading them
that the Pope was CHRIST'S Vicar here on earth, and by virtue of that office,
had power in himself to dispose of all things belonging to the Church. The
Jesuits go further, and teach, that he is Lord and master of all together.
But the Sorbonists at Paris, as well in their late action against them, as
heretofore in the year 1429 in the case of John Sarrazin a Friar predicant; and
at sundry other times have opposed themselves against this unbridled and
unlimited power of the Popes. And the Churches of France by their example
animate their Kings and Courts of Parliament to do the like; and to withstand
their usurpation, which never tended but to the establishing of a Monarchy in
that See, with the ruin of other Churches.

The ends which the Popes pretended in these Appropriations, were, Increase of
Religion, and Hospitality: what good Religion has reaped by them has been
already showed: and as for Hospitality, Plowden says, That Impropriations
were the decay thereof, especially in those places where it ought principally
to have been kept, that is, in the Parishes themselves. Had we lived in those
days, no doubt we would not have done as our Predecessors did: but hereby are
we witnesses against our selves, that we are the Successors of them which did
such things: we have indeed divided the sin with them: they were the
robbers, and we are the receivers: they took from the Church, and we enjoy
it, And I wonder, that following their example, we do not fear their end.

To conclude: If this course be legal, and may be taken for the better
maintenance of the poor Clergy in this miserable kingdom, well and good. If
not: God grant some other may; for if none be, farewell Religion: and what can
then ensue but the abomination of desolation in the highest places of this
kingdom? Which GOD forbid.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by JOHN BILL. ANNO DOM. M. DC. XX.


