THE Fissher-mans Tale: Of the famous Acts, Life and love of CASSANDER a
Grecian Knight.

Written by FRANCIS SABIE.

Cedant arma togis, concedant laurea linguis. Imprinted at London by Richard
Iohnes, at the Rose and Crown, near S. Andrews Church in Holburne, 1595.

To the right Worshipful, his very good friend and Benefactor, M. Henry
Mordant, son and sole heir to the right Honorable the Lord Mordant, Francis
Sabie wishes full fruition of external and internal felicity.
ABashed (right Worshipful) at the excellency of your greatness, astonished
at the report of your prudence: comforted notwithstanding, at the remembrance
of your acustomed clmencie: animated at the consideration of your excellent
virtue: more confidentlie do I present unto your Worship these few vntutord
lines, the travel of my rude Mule, and untimely fruits of my first spring.
The ground where they grew, as it needed much manuring, and diligent tillage,
even so the Gardener to make amends, was none of the skilfullest, but lacked
that cunning which riper years and longer experience might peradventure have
supplied, whereby the fruit, which otherwise would have been delicate, be
changed and turned to mere wildings. Yet considering that the stomach
ouercloyd with dainty and sweet iunkets, is often times very much recreated
with meaner and harsher meats: So your Worship sometime wearied with high and
serious affairs, may at length vouchsafe to cast a glaunce upon these my
unlettered poemes, which will perhaps bring no lesser content than delectation
unto your grave and stayed mind, unto whom, and unto whose noble
predecessors, I do acknowledge me and my weak parents so much to be and
have been indebted, that should the gods allot unto the term of my life,
Nestors years, bestow upon me Croesus wealth, and endue me with Tullies
elequence, yet were I neunr able with long endeavor, incessiue gifts, or
finenesse of Oratorie, to make satisfaction, requite, or set forth half that
praise and duty, which is of me, to you to be performed, for so great and so
many inestimable benefits: should I go about to rehearse them, I should
undertake a matter as hard to be compassed, as is Aetna to be removed. These
rude lines, penned at vacant hours, partly to shun the intolerable crime of
ingratitude, partly to make known in some measure, my bounden duty, I have
presented to your Worship, praying you to vouchsafe them your acceptance', as
Alexander did of a cup of cold water, offered unto him of a simple man, which
not doubting of, I hope hereafter I shall be better able to present your
Worship with some polisht and profitable piece of my travel.

Your Worships ever at commandment FRANCIS SABIE.

The Fissher-mans TALE.
THE darksome shade of cloudy night was past,
Bright Lucifer brought in the cheerful day,
With fire-breathing steeds light Titan drawn,
Into his chariot newly mounted was.
Rose-cheekt Aurora with a sanguine hue,
Her friendly Phoebus lovingly did greet,
Now weary corpse which quietly enjoyed,
The pleasing sleep of close and silent night,
Rousde up themselves, awakened with the notes
And dulcet tunes of little singing birds:
Which on green boughs amid the shadie fields,
With many colloured blossoms decked did sit.
Calm was the air, sweet-breathing Zephirus
Did greet fair Ver, with mild and gentle blastes,
Each god seemde now on mortal wightes to smile,
Nothing did lack to solace pensive minds,
I shakt of sleep, and took in hand a reed,
A reed whereto was bound a slender line,
And crooked hook, wherewith for my disport,
Walking along the banks of silver lakes,
Often times I used with false deceiving baytes,
To pluck bright-sealed fish from Crystal waves,
Forthwith I bended steps unto the streams,
And pleasant meares, not far from mine abode,
Needless it were here to rehearse what joys
Each thing brought then unto my doleful mind.
The little Menowes leapt above the waves,
And sportiue Fish* like wanton Lambs did play.
I thrust my self into a Wherrie boat,
Or little bark, my self was sails and oars,
One while I rowde with rudder as I could,
Guiding the boat, which went of own accord,
One while assayde the greedy Fish to take,
And twitcht them up which nibled at my bayt.
Auroras beauty now began vade away,
Titan had run just half his woonted race,
I with Agenors daughter carried was,
All unawares unto the foming sea:
So mindful was I of these fond delights,
And so unmindful of return to shore.
But see what chanced a, sudden storm arose,
Skies looked black, clouds ouerwhelmd the skies,
Mysts rose, wind blew, ship-shaking Boreas.
Storm-bringing Auster, sayl-hoysting Adria
Raged all at once as once when angry Juno
Sude to the wind-god for Aeneas bane,
Seas sweld, ropes cracked, sails ren^, shipmen cride out,
Ay me, poor wretch, my little fleeting bark,
Leapt like a feather, tossed with blastes of wind:
One while it seemde the lofty skies to touch,
Straightwaies I thought it went to Plutoes lake,
No hope of life at all I did expect,
I which even now laid baits for greedy fish,
Thought now my body should feed greedy Fish.
But winds and fortune long together strove,
Winds seeking to subvert me in the deep,
Fate to preserve and keep me from distress,
Fortune preuailde long time, thus being tossed,
Fearing each blast should have me ouerwhelmd,
My little bark skipt on a rock at length,
A rock whereon a cabin small was built,
Built all of stone, so firmlie and so sure;
That neither force of winds, nor beating waves,
Was able any whit to make it yield.
Here was I cast, here did my Wherry rest,
Half drowned with waves, half rent with raging winds
Which making sure, I higher did ascend,
Unto the bower which there seated was,
Which on the East side had a little door,
And looking in, engraven there I saw
God Neptune with a threetinde mace in hand,
There Triton stood with trumpet made of shells,
And Tethis dect with rich Smaragds and gems,
There Proteus picturde was, and Nayades fair,
With all such water-nymphes as used those lakes,
On the one side in a stony seat there fate,
(for seats there were in stone most finely made)
An aged man, his head more white than milk,
Or new fallen snow, which lies on Scythian hills:
His beard excelled the Alablaster fair,
Or Dove, whereon no blackish spot is seen:
A God he seemde, not like a mortal wight:
His countenance me thought presaged no less.
Forthwith saluting him in seemly sort,
I pardon craved for my rash enterprise,
So boldly which presumed to come near,
Mollest and vex his censured Deity,
Sometimes excusing my presumption,
With force of storm which thither did me drive,
Affirming fear and safeguard of my life,
Did make me look into his sacred cell,
Straitway I craved his aid in such distress:
Whose trembling joints might move him unto ruth.
And if he were some God, as I suppos'de,
That he would cause the tempest then to cease,
And I with sweet perfumes would oftentimes,
His sacred Altars pollish and bedecke:
He lifting up his grave and senile head,
Where at his hoarie locks and hair did shake.
My son, he said, fear not, lay fear aside,
My self such homage I do not vouchsafe,
I am as thou, a mottall man, no god.
I have abode my self no small mishaps,
I which sometimes have also been distressed,
Do learn to rue such men as be oppressed.
Fear not I say, these waves and blustering winds
Will not last long, they cannot long endure:
Come near my son, some god has made request
To Eolus, to send abroad his blastes
For some intent: or else they be by force
Burst out of caves, but how so ere it is,
Be sure they will not thus conttinue long:
For (men say) nothing violent is permant.
Come near, sit down, sit down here in this seat,
I sat: he took a twinkling Lute in hand,
This (saiih he) my wealth, my breath and food,
The only joy of my long-hated life.
Father I said, how shall I now requite
Half part of this your undeserved good will,
Whilst streams do run into the frothy seas,
While fish in lakes, while birds abide in woods,
Of this your kindness shall my Muse recite:
A joyful Ditty where so ere I live.
And since you have such honor me vouchsaft,
In your grave presence as to give me place,
Might I not seem too bold if I should ask
Your name, your lineage, and the great mishaps
You have abode, for surely you be sprung
Of noble lineage, and no small events
You suffered have, which be the eausers of
This pensive, sad, and solitary life.
Thrice shoke this aged Grandsire his white head,
And frost-white locks, wherewith a shower of tears
Like Crystal drops from Myrra^s tree which fall,
Bedewde his withered cheeks and ashie face;
Endeavoring thrice to speak, in steed of words
Came naught but sighs, and grief-bewraying sobs:
And when the cloud of dolor began remove,
He brast at length into these doleful terms,
A woeful tale thou bids me to rehearse,
Whereon to think mine inward senses bleed,
Ah how my soul with dolor is surprisde.
When I record those illes which I have borne,
Stay, stay a little, yet I cannot speak.
Hereat he staid, and thus again began.
A Grecian am I borne, sprung by descent
Of stout Achilles noble line and race.
A Champion once invincible I was,
A lover once, and blyth Arcadian swain,
Ay me what shall I say, that now I am?
A Fisherman now will I say I am.
Noble by birth, a Champion in feats,
A lover fond I was by fortunes spite,
A shepherd to obtain my wished for love,
A fisherman to convict cruel fate.
So many times which altered mine estate.
Herewith he staid, and thus again began:
I was (quoth he Menalchus son, an Earl,
Of Prince and people, king and commons loved,
I was his sole and only son, in whom
More treasure he reposde, than ever did
Aeneas in Asca^ius his delight.
I called was Cassander then by name,
In chivalry and valiant feats of Arms,
Even from my childhood was I trained up,
Ioying in nothing but in fight and war:
I named was a Grecian Conqueror,
Thought of Achilles worthily to spring:
But not contented with that great renown,
Which in my native soil I had atchiu'd,
I farther went, and with revenging sword,
Thought for to purchase neuer-dying fame:
Mine aged Sire, both void of son and heir,
As careless of his life and wealth I left,
He like a Turtle-doue, when I was gone,
Alas, how does mine heart to tell it bleed?
Pyning away, did end his days with grief.
Upon a Steed, like huge Bucephalus,
I took my way unto the holy land,
And what exployts, what noble feats in Arms,
What warlike deeds among the Pagan folk,
Arch-enemies to the holy land I wrought.
I need not here recite, they cannot die,
Fames trump has sounded the^ throughout the world
Fame has them scrowled in her register:
There was I calde Knight of the holy Camp,
From thence I went to Philip Macedon,
O there what laud, what love of Virgins fair,
What euer-during fame and praise I wan,
What credit? makes me joy, and grieve to think.
Yet not herewith content, to Thessalie
I went, from thence unto the barbarous Getes,
The flinty Getes for chivalry, the Getes
For mine exploytes, renowned me likewise
Returning thence, to Boheme land I came,
There found I that I chiefly wished for,
Mathias who ware their imperial crown,
With all his subjects clad in armor bright,
Full forty thousand fighting men he had:
With magnanimious Captains many one,
Intended to wage war against the Turk.
And to besiege a walled Pagan town,
For that his daughter therein was detaind,
Betrayed, and falsely stolen away from him:
Whom Amurah, Lord of the Turkish band,
Was minded for his Paramour to keep.
Aged Mathias whose white hoarie hairs,
Were fitter for the bed than direful war,
Even like a Tiger moved unto wrath,
Bearing a Lance corragiously in hand,
Did martch on foremost like a valiant Knight,
Soon came these tidings to the Pagans ears,
Who made provision for to stop his host.
A mighty army they did also raise,
Great Amurah himself there present was,
He near the city did his host encampe,
Where fair Lucina was in prison kept.
Mathias martched on, and at the length
Nere to the Pagans army did he come:
Ruddi^ Aurora had even now remoou'd
The canapie of cryme-concealing night,
Both armies met, I did my self intrude,
Unknown of all into the Christians host,
On both sides then war-moouing drums did sound,
Shril Trumpets blew, then Lances went to wrack:
Spears brake, guns cracked, armor flew in sunder,
Then might you see some hale with both their hands
Shafts from their lims, which wrought their fatal bane.
I like a Lion foremost of them rode,
And entrance made into the pagans host.
The Christians followed, and in midst of them
Old King Mathias like a Giant wroth,
He wondered what I was that so them help,
Some said I was an Angel come from heaven,
Some of their heads, some of their legs and arms,
I did bereave, I slew whom ere I met,
None durst withstand my force, you might have seen
Turks fly as thick as Doves do from an Hawk,
Me thinks I hear them still to cry and say,
He is a Devil, no man, which thus does fight,
Some said, it is the Knight of the holy Camp,
Who lately so endammaged our men.
Some said, I know not whom he is, but sure
Whom ere he meets he sends to Plutoes lake.
When Amurah, chieftaine of the Turkish host
Saw this, he waxed full of wrath and fear,
Flee, flee, he cried, lets flee, else shall we die,
This devil amongst them will us all destroy.
Then began the Turks to flee as fast as lambs.
From greedy wolves as Deer from Lions jaws
Oh then what massacres of them we made,
Full thirty thousand Turks we slew before
They entered in the ports of Belo town,
We rushed in before they shut the gates.
Then cride Mathias, Priams famous town,
Nere bought so dear the rapture of fair Hellen,
As Belo shall now my Lucinas rape.
Then might you see a lamentable sight,
Young infants sprawling on the points of spears,
Fair Virgins drawled by their yellow hair,
Old bedred men began rise up now for fear:
And seemd with us to gripple, but in vain,
No passage was through all the martyrd streets,
Dead bodies lay as thick as Oaks in woods.
The channels ran with cursed Pagans blood,
And naught was heard but howling in the town,
Great Amurah himself fled to an hold:
With brazen walls enclosed round about,
No entrance was, draw-bridges were plucked up,
From us he escapte and saved his life,
Lucina looked out from a window high,
And saw her aged fire in armor bright,
Ay me, poor wretch, she cride, what shall I do,
Help father, help, or else I perish now.
Then all at once we ran against the gates,
Whereat an Eunuch keeper of the Goal,
And Concubines of Amurah his Lord,
Misdoubting what might unto him betide,
Ran to Lucina with an iron blade,
This shall quoth he, dispatch and end thy days,
If for my life thou will not pardon get.
Then skreekt she out requiring present aid,
Or else she should be slain of him outright,
We gave our oaths if he would save her life,
Vnbar the ports, and yield to us the keys,
He should escape, he should his life enjoy,
Then were the doors unlocked, we had the keys,
Among the Turk his concubines we ran,
There found we fair Lucina who with arms
Vplist to heaven, gave God eternal thanks:
Then kneeld she down, and Crystal tears her face
Bedewing, thankt her grave and aged Sire,
Protesting that inuiolate she was,
And yet untouched of Turk or pagan slave,
Old King Mathias with a iowfull heart,
Embraced his daughter, kissing her right often,
O gods (quoth he) I yield you hearty praise,
Who once have granted me to have again
Mine only daughter, solace of my life,
Staff of mine age, prolonger of my days:
Then turning unto me, he kneeled down,
And took his Crown off from his hoaried head,
O Knight he said, what ere thou be, thou have
My life, my fame, and daughters credit fau'd:
Take here my crown, to thee it does belong,
Take here my Mace and Diadem so clear,
I give thee them, thou have them both deserved,
Take here my daughter, thou shall be my son,
Whereat I blushed, and thus reanswered him:
O King, such honor is not to me due,
Keep still thy crown, I do it not desire,
Give only praise unto the immortal gods,
Which have me sent, and prosperd in this war.
As for thy daughter, she no doubt shall have
A Prince more worth, and greater than am I,
I must depart, I may no longer stay,
Fate has not here appointed me a place.
Thus after many thanks and sad farewels,
Left I Mathias with his joyful men,
Rejoicing in the spoils which they had got,
And sorrowful for my departure thence,
I took that way which Fortune did me lead,
Seeking more fame through countries far unknown
By chance I pass the Arcadian fields and plains,
Where many thousands milk-white herds do feed,
Where many troops of loue-bewitched swains
Sit under shades, and leaue-behanged trees,
Resounding ditties to th^^ trulles on pipes,
Or telling ancient histories of love.
Now Titans circle mounted up on high,
The duskish back of Leo began to burn:
Field-tilling slaves which labored all day,
With ardent heat waxt weary now and faint.
Upon a Palfray swifter than the wind,
I roued through the swayn-frequented plains:
And casting up mine head, by chance I saw
A seemlie troop of shepheardesses fair.
I saw them all, oh would I had not seen,
I saw one Less far comelier than the rest,
A peerlesse piece, an heart-delighting gyrle,
An heavenly Nymph, what shall I say I saw,
An hapless fair, a sweet vnlukie Dame,
I saw her, and I know not whether Fate,
Or Cupids stroke this rare event did cause:
My Steed, ere while whom raines could not detain,
But swifter than a shaft he seemde to fly:
Now vawted up, and force to prickling spurs
Could not make run, and post as erst he did:
But still he seemde to gaze upon the maid:
As one enamourd of her comely shape.
Ah how she pleased my loue-new stricken mind,
Ah how her feature did my senses like:
Her cheeks excelled the whitest Scithian snow,
Or Alablaster, finely mixed with red:
Her eyes like pearls, or Diamonds inclosde
In yellow gold, or metal fine and rare?
Her teeth like pegs of Iuorie, her lips
Resembled Cherries of a sanguine hue,
Her hair as yellow as the precious gold:
By these I iudgde of members which were hid,
Alas of them far better did I judge.
She seeing her so vewed on of me,
Began to change her countenance so sweet,
Even like Aurora when her Phoebus fair
She welcommeth, her color went and came.
Then who had seen her, would have doubtless said,
A goddess she, no mortal wight had been,
In beauty she did Venus far surpass:
In modesty Diana she did stain,
Good Lord, how long could I have found in heart,
T'aue gazed on her mind-reioycing shape.
Whole days, whole years, my life I could have spent
In vewing her. But modesty forbad,
I went from thence, but altogether lame,
And wounded with a fire-burning dart,
My senses sad, heart metamorphosed.
Naught thought I on, but on her beauty rare.
Not far from thence I saw an aged heard,
Feeding his flock, I made inquiry of him,
What Imp it was that was so passing fair,
What was her name, and of what lineage come.
She is (quoth he) supposde the daughter of
Old Thirsis, she her self does know no less?
She is not so, I heard him often times say,
(He is my brother) that he found her young
Wrapped in a skarlet mantle, rich in price
As once he passed by the silver stream
Of Humber, lying in a wherrie boat,
He brought her up, full many would her have,
But she rejects all, I muse at it.
I rode on to a little village town.
Not far from thence, where all these shepherds dwelt,
Long would it be to tell what grief I bode,
Impatient was I both of sleep and rest,
My palfray whom so carefully I fed.
And tendered erst more dear than mine owe self,
Now in a little cottage did I shut.
Scarce had he meat my mind was altered quite.
Thus when I saw my senses out of frame,
A thousand contrarieties in my mind,
A storm of sobs, and shoure of tears sent forth.
I brast into these variable terms.
How now Cassander, what new rage is this?
What unacquainted thoughts possess the mind?
What have thou drunk of Sirces poisoned cups?
Or has Medeas charms enchanted thee?
Art thou in love? why what is loue^a toy,
A lustful care, a sence-bereauing wish,
Have thou so long kept chaste Dianas laws?
And now wilt stoup to wanton Venus lure?
Was thou not termd a Grecian Conqueror?
Thought of Achilles worthylie come,
Was thou not called Knight of the holy camp?
And wanst each where even skie-surmounting fame*
Did not the Getes deem thee Mineruas son,
Did thou not once subdue fierce Amurah:
And tookst from him Lucina fair by force:
And shall a woman conquer thee? shall now
A little boy make thee to stoop and yield?
Was thou not lately proferd to thy wife,
Mathi as daughter, diadem and crown,
And now do like a silly country drudge?
A shepherds trulle, come of so base a stock.
What will the Eagle smile upon a wren?
Or will the Lion look upon a mouse?
And shall Cassander, Lord Menalchus son,
Vouchsafe to look upon so base a gyrle?
No fool, be not so ignoble in thought,
Ah, but she is fair, she is passing beautiful,
Her eie-delighting shape has won mine heart,
Love is a god respecting no degree,
Love is a god and will be honored.
Love conquers all things: it has conquered
Apollo once, it made him be a swain.
Yea mighty Mars in arms invincible,
It forced has to lay aside his spear,
Love made the sea-god take a Wesils shape,
Yea mighty Jove, whose rage makes earth to shake,
Love made to take the snow-white shape of Bull:
And shall not then Cassender yield to love,
He mortal, it a conqueror of gods:
Yield? yield he will, Yield? yield he must,
Necessity him urges so to do:
Then in a rage, I rhrew aside my sword,
I brake my spear, impediments to Love.
My Steed, my neuer-tyred Steed I ^olde,
Who had me gaind such far-surpassing fame,
And to my self I smilinglie did say,
Yield Mars to Venus, weapons unto gowns.
I cast aside my warlike vestimentes,
I cut mine hair, in steed of silken robes,
I bought a suit of cuntry ruslet cloth:
A pair of slops I put upon my legs,
A leather scrip I hung about my neck,
And for my palfrey, a cut-taile dog I got.
I bought me sheep, and cotes, I was content
To be a shepherd to obtain my love:
Or that enough, I might but see my love.
But now my self a while I mean to leave
Oppressed with a thousand sundry woes,
A little will I speak of Floras case,
Who having seen me, was incenst with love.
She sighed forthwith, and judged me the fairste,
And beautifulst that ever nature framde,
She left her mates, and thought how she by toil
Extinguish might this new conceived flame:
But it was in vain. For as a sparkle fallen
Among dry straw by chance, or withered leaves
Is not extinguished by and by, but grows
In time into an indelible flame:
Even so my Flora, into whose chaste breast
A little spark of Cupids fire has chanst,
Could not out wear it straight, but grew at length,
Into an huge and inextinguible flame.
What should she do, poor wretch, no hope at all
Had she of getting her desired love.
And sooner might she Aetna hill remove,
Than cancel it out of her settled mind,
I am a base, and flock-attending drudge,
And he (quoth she) an high-conceited Knight,
Thus therefore snarde in Vulcans privy net.
And could with Mars no ways from thence escape.
She wept, she cride, she sobd and all at once,
And fell at last into these woeful terms:
Unlucky Flora, poor distressed gyrle,
Begotten in some hard and haples hour,
Borne when some evil, unlucky Planet ruled,
what greater spite could Fortune have thee wrought?
Could gods have framde thy greater miseries?
Is thy Diana unto Venus turned?
Thy chastity to lewd and fond desires?
Have thou so long been Vestas vowed Nun,
And now to Venus do begin to turn?
Art thou in love, fond fool, whom do thou love?
A straggling Knight, some faithless runaway,
What can thou tell? perhaps he has deceived
A number of such wanton gyrles as thou?
Ah but he is fair. What then? Does not the Moth
Sooner corrupt a fine than naughty cloth?
Has not the fairest fruit the sowrest taste,
And sweetest face often times the foulest heart?
Was not Aeneas fair? yet in the end
Who was more false, who proou'd more treacherous
What then fond wench? will thou forwarne all men
To shun the sea, because it drowned one?
Will thou condemn all men of perjury,
Because Aeneas falsified his faith?
O no, it cannot be that he is false,
Oh would I had him, were he never so false,
This said, she looked up and in the East
Beheld the shepherds star began to shine,
Forthwith she rose, and run unto her flock,
Shut them in fold, and so retired home.
I having now provided for mine art,
All needful things, sheep, hook, and cottages,
A dog, a bottle, and a lether scrip,
By practice learned how to feed my flock,
No sooner had bright Titan lift his head
From Tethis lap, where quietly he slept,
But through a lettice Flora vewing light,
Which came from Ecus, as she lay in bed,
Rose up, and ran unto her greedy flock,
And let them lose, which bleated for their meat,
Now sat she down, now followed she her heard,
But ouer-lookt them with a watchful eye.
Not long had Flora been in pleasant fields,
But I came also not so much to feed
My bleating cattle, as to feed my self,
I put them forth but drive them ever near,
And nearer to the place where Floras fed,
Then leaving them alone, I bended steps
Toward her, she watchful fate upon an hill,
I faind as though I would have passed by,
And praisde her sheep, but so that she might hear,
As free from scab, fine feld, and passing fat,
She seeing me so fair and neat a swain,
Come near, did quite forget her former love,
This is quoth she, some rich and comely heard,
I Will stay no longer, time will breed content,
Returning then, I asked her whose they were,
Where dwelt their owner, and what was his name.
Art 'thou (quoth she) a feeder in these fields,
And do not know who does possess these sheep?
The sheep can tell, behold their owners name
Imprinted is upon their wollie backs.
Pardon (quoth I) fair maid, mine ignorance,
My flock has not long grased in these bounds,
But yet much talk of Thirsis have I heard,
Even on the farther side of these huge downs,
But what? are ye his daughter whose sweet form
Is blased through those sheep-resorted plains,
Alas (poor gyrle) how dare thou sit alone,
Do thou not fear the Lions greedy jaws,
Do thou not fear the ramping Bear, or Woolfe,
Or in thy love fearst thou not one that burns,
Alas poor gyrle, how dare thou sit alone?
How can I choose but needs I must, quoth she.
Fear all these illes, yet must I be content:
I may not contradict the gods behestes,
Withstand I cannot fatal destiny,
The gods and destiny will have it thus:
They have assigned me this poor estate.
I but (quoth I) what fortune does withold
That Nature mild seems on you to bestow,
But will you cause that Fortune also smile,
Then leave this single life* and be my love,
You shall not need to fear fierce winters frosts,
You shall not stand in fear of summers heat,
The Lions jaws, the Woolfe, nor greedy Bear,
Nor any beast, shall then make thee afraid,
Thou shall be free from all these casualties,
So says she, shunning vast Charibd^s gulf,
I should int' Silla fall, as bad or worse.
Then children come, then charge of keeping house,
Then mickle woes, but little joys arise.
My mother often has told me in a rage,
That I live like a Lady unto her,
I (says she) care for all things which be done,
I serve the Swine, I give the Pulhens meat:
I fret, I chide, I never am at rest,
And thou do naught but walk the pleasant fields,
Thy greatest labor is a mere delight.
I but (quoth I) thy mother tells thee so,
When she does chafe and chide with thee, because
She would have thee be pleased with thine estate,
But if she might a Queen or Empress be,
She would not lead a single life again.
Some other talk, would better please my mind,
I am not yet disposde, says she to wed,
Know that thou art not first I have repeld:
Cease therefore, yet I can, nor will not wed,
Then I replyde, if thou will not me love,
A simple swain, love me a noble Knight,
That Knight I am whom lately thou espiedst,
Range through the plains upon a courser brave,
Whose shape divine, whose hart-alluring form,
Has made such brackes in mine unspotted heart,
That hoping to obtain thy wisht-for love,
Setting apart my fame and dignity,
I am content thou see to be a swain,
O would I might be still a Swain, so that
I might once get thy chief desired love.
In faith Sir Knight, (says she) I am not her
You take me for, have you none to delude
And mock, save with this mean attire?
And so easily won with cogging words,
Or do I weigh your valiant chivalry?
I care not for your magnanimity:
I set not by your noble feats in arms:
It Is not your Knighthood, not your high exploytes,
Your honor, birth, nor skie-surmounting fame,
That can make Flora yield to lewd desire:
Although the gods have made us poor and base,
They have not also made us lewd and light,
I daily see and by experience find,
That they which clime the highest, have greatest falls:
You see that shrubs, and little bushes stand,
When stately oaks, with winds ar overthrown,
The little cottage stands, when turrets high
Are subject to the force of every blast.
We Swaynes can sit and play on oaten pipes,
When mighty men are vexed with high afyayres,
We think that we be rich enough, if we
Can but expel a bare and needy life.
We think our clothes are fine enough, if they
Will cover us, and drive away the cold.
Then cease, sir Knight, leave off your feigned suit,
The law of nature seems it to resist.
Two things contrary never can agree,
My birth is mean, yours noble, I am poor,
You rich, alas what kind of match is this?
Here at she staid, and I replied thus.
No Flora, no, it is not your mean estate,
Nor ofpring vile which can detract my love,
Love is a god, regarding no estate:
It strikes where, and when, and whom it list,
It makes rich and poor have all one mind,
It makes prince and people all alike.
It makes swains and high-conceited Knights,
To bear one heart, one mind, and both content,
Then Flora come, thou shall be my true-loue,
Cassanders only comfort and delight,
In steed of sweet and redolent perfumes,
Thy dulcet breath shall recreate my heart,
Thine eyes shall be mine only looking glass:
Thy cheeks shall be my chiefest library:
In steed of sacrifice, upon thy lips
I Will offer up a thousand kisses sweet.
Which I will of more price and value deem,
Than twenty thousand Indies can afford.
Come Flora, come, if we two lovers true,
Into the shadie fields together walk,
Sweet Philomela an hundred sundry notes,
Shall for our welcomes sound in leauie-woods,
If on the banks or Poplar-bearing brims,
Of Crystal Humber we do please to walk,
Great Dolphins shall above the water rise,
And for our solace seem to make great sport,
The Marmaids shall look out from silver lakes,
And greet us with an hundred merry songs,
The Naydes, Nymphs, Nereides and Faunes,
The Satyrs, Fayries, and each rural power,
Abandoning their fragrant fields and springs,
About our lodging shall resort and sing.
Then think not Flora that thy mean estate,
Nor base degree shall alter this my love,
Thou see I have my honor set apart,
And am content to be as thou, an heard,
My concubine I mean thee not to make,
Nor paramour, while beauty does endure.
But take mine hand, mine heart, and faith also,
Ye Gods bear witness, thou shall be my spouse
And loyal wife, till cruel Atrapos
Dissolve the fatal third of this my life.
No longer could she now withstand the brunts,
And hard assaults of Cupids fiery darts:
But casting arms about my tender neck,
Arms whiter than the new-distilled milk,
Sent forth these glad and hart-reuiuing words
What more than Delian music do I hear,
Which ouer-cloyes my soul with sweet content:
Could gods have better pleased Floras mind?
Could Fortune have bestowd a greater gift?
No my Cassander, no my sweetest sweet.
Had all the gold which Indie rich affoords,
Had all the gems which Tagus rich does yield,
Been proferd me, might I have been espousd
Unto the greatest Monarch under heaven
Yet would not I have iudgd them half so much
In value, as the least and smallest part
Of this thy kindness proffered unto me:
Now therefore since the gods and fate have been
So beneficial, as to grant the thing
I chiefly wished, take here mine, hand and heart,
Take here my faith Cassander, that I will
Whilst life does last, whilst breath in me remains,
More faithful be and constant unto thee,
Than was Ulysses spouse unto her love.
These words she spoke and sealed them with a kiss,
A kiss more rich in price than all the gems,
Which Tethis hangs about Apollos neck,
Who then had felt but half the sugared joys
And sweet contentments of us Lovers twain,
Would have supposde no joy, no bliss in heaven,
No sportnor solace like to that had been.
But Phoebus now displaide his fiery beams:
And fields on each side were repleat with herds:
My Flora fearing least it should be told
Her father, that she did'a stranger love,
Wild me depart, and go unto my flock,
I went from thence with speed, but not so far,
But that each might all day the other see:
Good Lord how many day lie did I see,
Sue to my sweetheart to obtain her love,
There came Alexis beautiful in shape,
Amyntas came, and clownish Corridon,
Rich Meliboeus made nol smallest suit,
All these with many more she did repel,
Repelde Alexis shed forth woeful tears:
Poor Coridon brought gifts, she wiegh'd not gifts,
Rich Meleboeus iudgde her made of flint:
Amyntas did, dispayring in his love:
And to be brief, none came but she repeld.
No sooner had the Chamberlain of night
Put out the lamp, and drawn the clowdie vale,
No sooner did Aurora teene the torch,
And open the vale which Vesper lately shut:
But secretly unto her I repairde:
When both our herds where either bare in field,
Or new let out, but although secretly,
Yet at the length, for what man did not note
Her gestes and deeds, it came to Thirsis ^are:
He lik a Giant, all incenst with wrath,
Did call his Daughter, trembling at his looks,
What maid (quoth he) what news be these I hear,
Are you in love with yonder new-come Swain?
Have you repeld so many honest men,
And now will have some unknown cogging slave,
A stranger mere, who whilst your beauty lasts,
Will make of you, and then he will be gone.
And mock some other as he has done you.
Well, I Will prevent these evils, I Will cut you short,
I Will keep my flock, and you shall stay at home.
Dayes-messenger began now to appear,
I rose betimes and waited for my love.
But lo, in steed of her, old Thirsis came,
Ay me, how loathsome was this aged churl
Unto my sight, when I espide him come:
He walked up and down, and in a rage
Looked toward me, as though I had angered him.
Six days past on, and still in steed of her
None came to field, but that old hateful Carle:
What Stix? What Phlegeton? what greater sting
Could have possessed Cassanders restles thoughts,
A mighty mass of dolours vexed mine heart,
A thousand sundry cares oppressed my mind,
Sometimes I thought her father had her vrgde
To break her vow and take another love:
Considering of what force a fathers rage,
And threatenings was unto a silly child:
Sometimes again I thought upon the vows
Her given faith and loyalty, who said.
When Atlas shrinkes under his massy load,
I will be false to thee, and not before.
Thus hoping and dispairing both at once,
A shift I found to put me out of doubt.
I laid aside my country Swains attire,
And baser weeds upon me I did put,
With iags and rags my self I did abase,
A filthy cloth about my head I knit,
One leg I bolstred out with dyrtie clothes:
As though it had been swollen with festred sores,
A crouch in hand and wallet at my back,
So cripple-like I went to Thirsis door,
There first I praid, and made mine orison:
As beggars use before they crave their alms,
Then craved their good will and benenolence,
In doleful wise and lamentable sort,
My Flora, who was always ready pressed,
To aid the poor, whom Fortune frownde upon:
To the ambrie ran, and cut a slunch of bread
And cheese, she thought a charitable deed.
Here (says she) pray that I may have my wish,
Then looked I up, she forthwith fetch a sigh,
And knew I was Cassander her true love.
Help my Cassander, help me now she said.
Or Coridon must me enjoy, thy love:
My father said, I shall to morrow wed,
Love or love not, for time will breed content.
Nay, weel prevent him if thou will (quoth I)
In careless bed when parents lie at night,
Unlock the doors, and secretly come out,
I Will be preparde, I Will carry thee away,
So weel escape and remedy these evils,
This said, she beckned with her hand, as though
That I had said did please her very well,
Then went from me, and ran into the house:
And time it was, her mother came apace,
Then praying for my master and my Dame,
I went away, still leaning on my crutch,
But when I came int' fields out of their sights,
My crutth, my weeds, and scrip I threw away,
Then who had seen me would not have supposde,
I had been he which halted so ere while,
Unto the port I went, two ships there found,
All furnished and ready to lanche out,
With Palin^r^^ there did I agree.
To ship us twain at dead time of the night,
Then hoisting sails without abode or stay,
To carry us into my country Greece:
For thither did the shipmen bend their sails:
Then back again without delay I went,
Preparde an horse, and all things very fit,
Now Phoebus did unyoke his fiery horse,
Now Cinthia gerd her black night ruling steeds,
Old Thirsis came from feeding of his flocks,
And seeing Flora, thus he spoke to her.
Come M^n^on (quoth he) see you be preparde,
You must to morrow go unto the Church,
And marry Corridon: I Will have it so.
Thus shall it be, therefore make no excuse.
I will (says she) sweet father since you bid,
If you command, why should I not obey.
Hereat old Thirsis wondrous glad in mind,
Sent Corridon these heart reviving news.
He came, and gave her many a clownish smack,
Sent for good ale, and joyfully they drank.
But now the Pleyades began to shine on high,
And weary lims expected mortal rest.
Glad Corridon took leave, and went away,
And Thirsis joyful, laid him down in bed,
Half part of drousie night was fully spent,
Naught walked abroad but shades and griesllie Ghosts,
Each thing was silent, all the field was hushed,
No birds in shades, no echoes rang in woods.
Old Thirsis now began snort and soundly sleep,
And crasie Mepsa lying by his side,
But Flora mindful of her promise made,
Lay wakeful still, abandoning all sleep:
And hearing them so soundly snorting both,
Rose up, opt doors, and privily crept out.
I caught her up, and mounting on a horse,
made no delay but hasted to the shore.
But see what hapt, scarce were we on his back,
But suddenly our palfrey neighed out,
Unhappy neighing Thirsis might it call.
Who wakening at the snril and sudden noise,
Called Flora, thinking robbers had been there,
Up Flora, (quoth he look about the house,
Bar fast the doors, false knaves are near at hand.
But Flora was now far enough from him,
He rising up, ran forthwith to her bed.
And missing her, straightway he cried out,
Alas poor wretch, how shall I live henceforth,
The traitor has my Flora stolen away,
O gastfull night, wast dungeon of sin,
Concealing Chaos, hider of all vice,
Nurse of ill acts, companion of woes,
How could thou let me sleep in careless bed,
Whilst my sweet daughter, staff of mine old age,
Joy of my life, prolongresse of my days:
Is by a villain falsely from me stolen.
I Will after him, and if I may but once
The traitor see, then in despite of gods,
And fortune both, these age-shakt bedred lims
Shall either bring my sweetest child again.
Or else I vow unto the highest powers,
I will not stick to spend my dearest blood.
This said, he took an horse, and desperate,
Came posting after us unto the port:
And scarce were we, unhorsed and gone aboard,
But like a Tiger, when her tender ones
He sees on seas, thus raged he on land,
Stay periurde villain, homicide unjust,
Lust-breathing traitor, give me my sweet child;
Come Flora, leave him to revenging seas,
Come my sweet child, it is I thy father call,
Ah cruel Tiger, flinty-hearted flaue,
Can thou thus murder old vnweeldy age,
I fearing least these fierce outrageous terms
Should move the minds of people unto ruth:
Made no delay, but leaping on the shore:
Caught in mine arms the swayne, an irksome load,
And carried him perforce into the ship:
Not moved with these miserable words,
Ah cruel wretch, incester pitiless,
What will thou do? first take from me my child:
Then take me from mine old and aged wife,
What should I do, shall these old age shakt lims,
Be tossed on seas, which rather covet rest:
Shall I now live amongst some barbarous folk,
And in some vicious country lay my bones,
O take my daughter, take her and be gone,
And let me go unto my wife again,
Ah my sweet Mepsa, who shall hug with thee,
And what shall now betide my tender flock,
This done, the shipmen hoisted up their sails:
Plide oars, and quickly lanched into deep:
All hope was gone, now must he needs away,
Sometimes he railde, sometimes he held his peace,
Poor Flora sat upon my loving knee:
And scarslie durst behold her angry Sire:
The scowling even had thrice with dankish mysts,
Obscurde the day, and brought in pitchie night:
The blushing morn thrice with rose-colloured hue,
Expeld the night, and brought in day again:
When cutting through the Caerule salt-sea some,
With flying pines, and plowing Tethis waves,
Envious Fate, prosperities Archfoe,
Minding to show her fickle deity,
That in her forehead as she dimples had,
So she had also wrinckles in her front,
That as she smilde, so she could also frown,
Now turnde her wheel, and wrought our endless woe
Securely now between my folded arms,
Held I my love, the haven of content:
When suddenly a stormy Orion came,
Black hellish mystes the splendent skies obscurde,
Skies taking now the shape that once they did
When princely Jove did work the great deluge?
Winds flewe abroad burst out from craggie hills:
And all Eolia then was up in arms,
Vast surges rose, death-threatning billows raged,
Our flying pinnesse now mounted to and fro,
Now down to Stix, now up to heaven they went:
Ay me poor wretch, thus began I then cry out:
Sin-hating powers, reformers of all vice,
Abandoners of evil and cruel acts,
Cease to pursue with weapons of revenge,
Mine heinous and intolerable fact.
Alas my rigor to old Thirsis shown,
And Floras rape do follow me by seas,
If naught but death can satisfy my crime,
Then take away mine undeserved life.
Spare Floras life, she has deserved no death.
This said, an huge tempestuous blast of wind
Fraught with a mighty garrison of waves,
Laid so hard siege against our fortrest pine,
That cables cracked, and sails in sunder tare.
Out cride the keepers, now are we undone,
Yet fully bent unto our endless wrack,
Fietce Adria remunified his force,
A roaring cannon he again dischargde,
Which rent our ships against the craggie rocks,
Then might you see an heart lamenting hap,
Some hang on boords, some swimming in the deep,
All laboring to save and keep their lives:
I held in arms my true and dearest love:
Thinking with her to end my lothed life:
When suddenly we were by fate disioynd:
I thrown by force all headlong in the seas,
Yet laboring my life still to preserve:
For who so wretched but desires to live,
These twinding arms caught hold upon a board,
Which drew me to this life-preseruing rock,
And as thou did, I found this cottage here:
Which has been some religious house of Gods,
Naught was in it, but bare and naked seats,
And sea-Gods shapes, which thou do now behold,
But in this seat this instrument did lie,
Which was (I think) Apollos Citterne once,
The storm now ceast, I took it in mine hand,
Descending where thy Wherrie now does stand,
There viewed I the qualified waves,
And looked if some ship I could epsy,
Preserved from winds, to aid me in distress:
For here was neither nourishment nor food
To save my life: thus standing on the rock,
I with my fingers touched these twinkling strings,
No dittie fine, but yet a sound it made:
The sportiue fish enchanted with the sound,
Did come to me, and seemde to leap and play.
And suffered me to take them in mine hand,
Admiring at this rare and strange event,
I thankt the Gods which such relief me sent:
And since that Fortune had so cruel been,
As to bereave me of my sweetest joy:

