Be wise and be warned.

SIRACH. V. Make no tarying to turn unto the Lord and put not of from day to
day, for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of vengaunce he shall
destroy thee.

PROVERBIVM. xl^. Give ear unto good council and be content to be reformed.

Per. I.S.

Printed by Thomas East, for Fraunces Coldock, the first day of January. 1573.

The Preface to the Reader.
Forasmuch according to the saying of Saint Paul, as although I spoke with
the tungs of men and Angels: and yet had no love. I were even as a sounding
brass, or a tinkeling Simbal: so that no work without love prevails any
thing, and no man loves God that has not a care for: and diligently looks to
his neighbor or brother, because the gifts of the spirit are given us to do
service to, and to profit the congregation: 1. Cor. 12.
and therefore much does he that loves much, and much does he that does
something well, and well does he that serves the commonwealth, and being
therefore good always to be zealous in a good thing: Galati. 4
and any thing ought willingly to be enterprised for the love of God, even so
of my love and duty to God, and loving care for the continual prosperity of
my country, I have enterprised this little work, beseching you my brethren
lovingly to suffer hearin the words of exhortation, H^
and to have as careful consideration of the same, that we go not to waste,
and be made a jesting stock to all nations: that our wits be not given to
Aleants, and our fields to destroyers. And we made bondslaues of corruption,
but rather taking heed to our selves and keeping well our souls, our life may
be agreeable unto the doctrine which we profess, whereby we may avoid the danger
of the like misery, that of late years we tasted, and thus gentil reader, in
recompense of thy travel, in the reading of this little work, God grant thee
to reap such benifite, as may be for the comfort of thy soul and body.

Give God the praise.
Be wise, and be warned.
S unto A Christian there can be nothing more commodious, more comfortable, nor
more beneficial, ^^n the exercise and know^ (...) of the scripturs, be^^^ (...)
of God, the very food (...) the soul? Even so (...), the great love of god,
(...) ^ower of the same God (...) ^eyther the inestimable (...) by him, can
either be k^ (...) ^n, nor yet man know bi^ (...) ^nce to so gracious and me.
(...) and savior. Whereby to r^ (...) all possible thanks and (...)
apperteineth, and again as (...) scriptures and holy word sheveth him self, a
God of mercy, ready to supporte, aid and assist, help and comfort, and in all
perrils and distress to have a care to defend those yt fear him. So is he
there likewise found a seuear and terrible Judge to punish, destroy, condemn
and bring to death all such, as the which being obstinate and wilfully
ignorant of his word and gospel, must needs be desperately careless of his
will, of which both in the same scriptures are plenty of examples for our
inst^uction and learning. And as by the ^^^es we find the law to condem^
(...)? so find we there the gosp^ (...) ^he promise of mercy: (...) ^epent and
acknowled^ (...) ^e preaching of the law, (...) selves to be scollers, (...)
and fulfill the law, which (...) law, is a fast faith in (...) coupled with our
prose^ (...) ^tyng our selves to lea^ (...), and to learn to believe (...) is
promised them, we fy^^ (...) ^res the stories and lives of (...) ^oth what
chanced them: and by (...) ^^es their scole master taught (...) ^ade them
perfect: and how he try (...) ^rue from the false. Wherefore the scriptures are
by all means so requisite and necessary, as of necessity they are to be ^sed
with all reverence, not alone of the l^arned but also of other sorts and
degrees of people of what estate or calling so ever, be they rich, be they
poor, be they old, be they young, for as Fulgentius says in the scriptures,
there is sufficient and abundance for men to eat, and for children to suck,
yea whatsoever is mete for all ages, which words of Fulgentius as they be
true, so ought all men to give credit to the same and to believe them, specially
and chiefly because he builds upon so substantial, so sure and infallible
foundation, the word of God: for this commandment gave Moses in the name of
the Lord, to the hole congregation of Israel. Deuteronomy. 31.
See that thou read this law before all Israel, in their ears, both men,
women and children, and strangers that are with in thy gates, to what purpose,
it follows, yt they may hear, learn, and fear the Lord their God, and be
diligent to keep his law: lo hear is the cause: but hear is no exception of
person, hear are none exempted, but al must hear, men women and children, for
there is sufficient for all ages. And yet further, Christ says, come unto me
all ye that labor and are laden and I will refreshe you: but hear again none
are forbidden: Wherefore my brethern, even as forth of a well, by gods
providence we do with material buckettes draw water for the necessary use of
our natural bodies, so likewise as good scollers, let us obedyently follow the
sweet and profitable council given us by Christ, pronounced by the mouth of
his beloved Apostel: Search the scriptures says he, John. 5.
for in the^ ye have eternal life: and from thence, even from the scriptures,
we must with the buckettes of willing hearts and minds, draw out of the word of
god, which is the fountain and spring of spiritual felicity, from thence I
say, we must draw the sweet water of life, which plentifully flows from the
rock Christ, to refresh our thursty souls, for the scriptures do cause that
in the mind of man may shine assured knowledge of God, in the soul holiness,
and in all the powers obedience, to be performed according to the presisenes of
the word. The scriptures is as a salve, wherewith our souls are healed. It is
thy word that preserves them that put their trust in thee, Wisdom. 16.
so that in ye scriptures which is the only and holy word of God. We find
the very plat, form, and ready broad beaten pathe way, that leads to the
understanding and knowledge of that inestimable treasure and Iuel Jesus Christ,
whose death, has fully wrought the perfection of eternal salvation, Roma. 10
to as many as believe, as says Saint Paul, if thou knoweledge with thy mouth
and believe with thy heart that God raised Jesus from death: thou shall be safe.
For the believe of the heart justifies, but as justification comes thorough
faith, so comes faith by hearing: so that without the Scriptures of God, there
is no knowledge of him. For the ignorance of the scriptures is the ignorance of
Christ, and not to know Christ, is to be in darkness, for without ye knowledge
of god, there is no salvation, for he that believes on the Son has
everlasting life: and he that believes not the son, shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him. And how shall we believe on him that we know
not? And how shall we know him but by the scriptures? for in them is he
perfectly seen and known. Gods word and the holy ghost are the glass
wherein Christ will be beholden: and with this beholding we must be content
until him self come to judgment, for afterward we shall enjoy the fight of
him for ever.

If by the scriptures then we receive such unspeakable benefit, even the
sauetie of soul and body: if no Christian can comfort him self in God and
Christ without the knowledge of them. And therefore of mere necessity must
needs be acquainted with the^, and know how to use them as a chief sauegarde
and defense for him against the malice of the enemy Satan, who seldom
leaves unassaulted by one means or other the famely of the faithful. What
have we then to think or judge of them that by their policies practice to
disarme us, and to leave as it were naked and weaponle^, to be a pray unto our
so hateful and ancient an enemy satan the Devil, of whose continual
endeavor to anoy us, the stories of all times do enstruct and teach us. For
in likewise as he set him self against our first parents, and that by taking
gods word out of their hearts, so employeth he him self wholly with like endeavor
at all times yt the word being preached, may be taken from gods people: and
being greedely desirous to have our necks under his yoke, as Peter witnesses,
goes about leke a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour. For in like manner
as Iapheth by Ipocrisie and superstition, and Cayne by cruelty persecuted the
true church, usurping unto them selves the title of the church, and changed the
true woorshippinge of God into heathenish Ipocrisie and superstition: and as
the envious Philistines stopped the wells of Abraham, filling the^ with earth,
to put the memorial of them out of mind, that they might challenge the ground.
Even so at all times has been, and daily are like practices by men estranged
from God, and to make him unknown unto us by shadewinge his gospel from us,
hyding and covering the same with monsterous clouds of corrupt doctrine, to
rob and spoil us of the gospel which is the very ground of our faith in
Jesus Christ, alluring and forcing us to set our affections upon the
inventions, deuyces, dreams and traditions of men, to bring us to utter
confusion, but woo unto them (says the Prophet) that call evil good, and
good evil, Esai. v.
which make darkness light, and light darkness, the wrath of the Lord is kindle^
against them, and their karkases shall ly in the open streates like myer: but
thus it will be that Christ his kingdom shall always have enemies, according to
the first promys: The seed of the Serpent shall lie in w^ite for the seed of
the woman: and true this is, the story of the church from thenceforth that the
seed was promised unto this present day, teaches us, for where so ever is an
Abell, there is also some a Cain: where soever is an Isaac there is also an
Ismael: where is a Jacob, there is also some Esau or other: where is a David,
there is also a Saul: where is a Christ, there is also a Judas: and whereas is
a Paul, there is some Nero. And we must not look to have it otherwise, for
Satan lies always in wait for Christ his church, which he endeavors,
either utterly to abolishe, or else to defile it with wicked doctrine and
manners. But now behold I pray you, a pleasant Allegory, for here shall ye have
the state and Image of the church as it were painted out: The sea is the world,
the Ship is the church, the devil is the wind, the Disciples are ye godly
company of believers, Christ is the truth, and the gospel is faith. And
first note, that before Christ with his Disciples entered into the Ship: the
sea was calm, which is to be understand, the world slept soundly in his own
sins: but as soon as Christ entered into the ship, there arose a mighty
tempest, in so much as ye ship seemed to be overwhelmed: but what ensued,
Christ there who could comaund the sea and wyndes: and hear we may learn,
that out of this little ship (that is to say the church) there is no sauegard,
but yet it behooves us to look well about us here, that we take not our
enemies ship for the true ship, for they have subtelly wrought to deceive us.
The enemies Ship is better decked and garnished outwardly and of greater
receyte within, but the trwe ship has her decking inwardly, and has a much
more stately master, namely the holy ghost: all ye maryne^s that it has, are
godly: it has the word of god and the sacraments in right use and obedience
to the ministry, and with these treasures this ship holds it self contented
in so great waves and boisterous billows. For ye must know that this ship
saileth not in the calm sea, but is tossed with ye waves and sourges, which
dryues and tosses it hither and thither: which thing to be most true the
story of the world shows, when god had made the world, he put his ship in
the midst of it. And by and by the devil the enemy of Gods son tossed it
with storms, which from thence forth was miserably turmoyled unto the time of
Noe. And after Noe to Abraham's time, from Abraham's too Moses: and from thence
to Christ his time: who to the intent to save the ship, came into the world,
yet s^aced not the wau^s thereof as then.

But what is the cause that the world cannot abide this little ship? truly
because the church reproves the works of the world, blam^th the worldly ^yse
men of folly, condemns the righteous men as gilty of sin, aduaunceth not
rich men but pronounces them unhappy and wretched, onles true godliness be
the governor and ruler of their riches. And this ye Christ promised when he
said, the holy ghost shall reprove ye world of sin, of righteousness and of
judgment.

But if a question might be now asked, what had Abel offend^d Cain who horribly
murdered him? John answers: Abels works were good and his Brothers evil.
What had Noe done? wherein had Jeremy offended? what and where in had Esai
tra^sgressed? and what Christ in who^ was no sin? to be short, wher-had the
Apostles or all the Martyrs from the beginning of the world to this day
offended? onles because they would have brought the world back from sin, from
darkness to light, that men might live godly, honestly, and uprightly in the
world according to the word: but this is the reward that the world is wont to
requit his benefactors with all, but as the virtues of childr^n have very large
promises of good success in this life. So the vices in children, w^iche fight
against these virtues have threatenings of most grievous and extreme
punishments, which also extend them selves even unto their posterity, for the
ofspringe (for the most part) receive their vices of their auncetry as it were
by inheritance: whose er^ours are to be detested, because their trau^l tends
to dep^iue us of the word of God: wherein they declare and show themselves
manifestlye to be the children of their father the Devil: and therefore
cons^quently, as much as in them is, are his instruments to hinder the
salvation of man: wherefore according to the old proverb, what is bredd in
the bone will never out of the flesh. And what nature has given, is not
easily to be removed: and threfore such father such children: The posterity of
Caine will show the property of their predecessor: it is again nature and
kind for the^ to spare or save that which they can destroy and make hauock of.
The brood of Caine will needs be known by their bloody recognisance, the
devil that king of darkness, and his beloved Antichrist the Pope, continually
per^ecute and bend all their force to this end, that they may extinguish the
true religion of Christ.

Their delight is in blood: They practice to spoil the ship, but al will not
help nor prevail: Esai. i.
for as Jeremy said, they shall fight against thee, but they shall not be able
to overcome thee, for I am with thee says the Lord to defend thee And ye
shall see me in joy when they shall be confounded: be then of good cheer:
pluck up your hearts, and be merry ye mariners that sail in Christ his ship, for
it cannot be destroyed. For God (as he is able to bring to pass that of the
stones there shall rise up children unto Abraham) even so has he by his
wonderful providence appointed the blood of the martyrs to be the seed of the
gospel: yea and of the ashes of those whom through tyranny the fyers have
consumed, God has raised great nombers now living, whom he has ordained and
appointed for the furnature of his ship, to the great glory of our God: the
colo^t of his flock. And whereof to ye great praise of his name be it spoken, we
his people of Ingland, have had the experience, and even at this day, to our
consolation and comfort, the Lord of his mercy so continue it, and make us
thankful to him for the same. For great is the love that God has to his
church, yet nothing do these miracles of our mighty God move the hearts of his
enemies, whose eyes are so blind that they see not, and their hearts so
hardened that they understand not: but even still at those days proceed and go
forward with their Cain like charity, according to the rule of the romish
Antechristian church: the Sucksessors of Cain: For how rage the Heathen now?
how fret they? how fume they? how lay they their heads together to conspyre
against the Lord and his anointed. Alas, who sees not how cruelly they even
now persecute Christ in his members: only to suppress and tred under foot
the glorious gospel of Christ Jesus. What beseeging of holds and fortes: What
racyng of walls: What destruction and sackyng of Cities and towns: What
spoiling of Countries: What drowning: what hanging: what burning and outrageous
and horyble dealing with gods deadlyngs: What blooddy and monsterous murderyng
of the poor innocents: sparyng no degree, nor age: but from the no^lest to the
meanest: Man, Woman, Child. From the gray headded to the tenderest of years:
yea, even to the very babe sucking at his mothers breast, Psalm. 76
giving the dead bodies of gods servants to the fowls of the air, to be
deuowred: and the flesh of gods saints, to the beasts of the land: she^^ng
their blood as water on every side. They go beyond Herod, who went but to far:
but these their works declare them, and show of what spirit they are, and that
they be even of that brood of turmagawnts and hell hounds that the prophet in
the person of Christ speaks of: Micheas. 3.
ye hate the good and love the evil: ye pluck of men's skins and flesh from
their bones, ye eat the flesh of my people, and fley of their skins: ye
break their bones: ye chop them in pieces as it were into a Cauldron. Is this
according to the commandment, (thou shall not kill) how agrees this dealinge
with the ex^resse will and commandment of god: love thy n^ighbor as thy self:
Romans 13
love huryteth not his neighbor, and therefore is love the fulfylling of the
law. But oh ye bloody brood, how fulfill you the law: wha^ is love become with
you: for they that love, be merciful: and they that be merciful, do love: so
the fountain sh^weth the water, and the water the fountaie: for love and merry
are inseparable: Does love consist in cutting of throtes, and murdering of
innocents? does love consyst in m^king spoil and hauock of the^ people of God?
Oh gredy deuowring wolves: Oh blood thersty tyrants: O^ bottomless bellyes, who
daily em^^^yng your selves with, and go^lpyng in the blood of gods saints,
Psalm. 7^
a^e never full nor satesfyed but the right hand of the most highest shall
change all. Wherefore oh thou chosen flock of thy shepherd Christ Jesus, dismay
not, discourage not, faint not, murmor not, grudge not, repyne not, neither
refuse to bear a little piece of afflyction with thy master Christ, who of love
to ease thee, did himself ^ear the great and heavy burden, think no^ much that
thou being gyltie by means of thy manyfolde sins and forgetfulness of thy
duty to thy master Christ Jesus, do suffer some loving correction. And feel the
favorable hand of thy heavenly father: when he being gyltlesse did bear the
burden of thy sin, and of the sins of the hole world in his body upon the
cross: but pluck up thy heart oh Israel, thou chosen generation and peculyer
people beloved of God: and comfort thy self in him, knowing that the cross
which is affliction of the body, grefe of mind, loss of goods and friends,
hunger, thyrst, nakedness, imprisonment and death, is naturally incident unto
the church of God and members of Jesus Christ.

3. Reg.
For had not Jacob great gref of mind, for the loss of his son Joseph: and
Joseph likewise suffered affliction of the body in prison: Luke. 16
Lazarus felt hunger and the pain of his byles, at the rich man's gates:
Micheas was buffeted, and fed with bread and water: Iobe lost his goods, his
children, Job. 1.
his house: the Profet Esaias was cut in pieces with a saw: Ieremi was stoned
to death: John Baptist was cast into prison and beheaded: James the brother of
John was slain with ye sword: and did not Christ him self Suffer the most
shameful death of the Cross: the servant therefore is not greater then his
master: if they have persecuted me, John. 15. John. 16
so will they persecute you. The time will come that whosoever kills you,
will think he does God good seruis. In the world ye shall have tribulation:
and he that takes not up his Cross and follows after me, is not meet for
me, for we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of god: Act.
14.
ye shall be hated of al men for my names sake, but he that indureth to the end,
shall be saved. Now seeing that great are the benefits that bearing of the
Cross brings, doubt not, neither fear thou to take up thy Cross by the
which thou go to a kingdom, for suffering of affliction for Christ his sake,
makes aptnes to comprehend heavenly things. Math. 5.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution, for righteousness, for theyrs is the
kingdom of heaven. Gala. 6
Wherefore be even of Paul's mind, and say, God forbid that I should rejoice
but in the Cross of our lord Jesus Christ, for surely no man feleth, ye
Passion of Christ so much in his law, as he unto whom it chances to suffer
the like things, for in the Cross is aid against the enemy, in the Cross is
strength of mind, in ye Cross is joy of spirit, and the Cross and affliction
of the Godly, proceeds of the fatherly love, of the heavenly father toward
his children, whom he chastises (in this world only) thereby putting us in
remembrance of our sins, yet not that by our Cross we make satisfaction
therefore: for that has Christ him self done upon the Cross once for all. But
that we should thereby mortify our selves, our fleshlye members, and being
gentely corrected for our sins, should turn unto our God and repent and not be
damned with the world, but become pure vessels, being therefore exercised, with
the Cross. Let us seek comfort at the fatherly mercy of our God through
Jesus Christ who grant us grace to glorify him with true patience under the
Cross: and this order is in the Cross salvation, whereof to make us partakers,
and thereby to try our patience, Math. 10
behold says he, I send you forth as sheep amongst wolves, and yet not that
he therefore leaves you destitute of help. For the Lord has such care for
you, Psalm. 62 Psalm. 91.
that he preserves the souls of such as be in adversity, yea, I am with him
in his trouble says he. And I deliver him and bring him to honor. Strive
therefore for the truth unto the death, Sirac. 4
and God shall fight for thee against thine enemies: yea as a father pittieth
his own children, Psalm 103
even so the Lord is merciful to those that fear him* he loses the prisoners,
Psa. 146
gives sight to the blind, helps them that are fallen, and defends the
fatherless and widow. And Joseph being in Egypt, Act. 7.
did not God deliver him out of all his trobles: Peter likewise being in
prison, Act. 12.
his chains by the providence of God fell from him and he was gyded forth by
the Angel of the Lord. Act. 5.
The Apostles of the Lord being imprisoned were delivered by night by ye Angel
of god, who opened the doors and brought them forth: Peter and other Apostles
being in danger of death were delivered by the power of god, through the words
of Gamaliel: Luke. 12
for to those that seek after the kingdom of God, al things needful shall be
ministered, cast therefore your care upon him for he cares for you. 1. Pe. 5.
And let them that be trobled according to the will of God, commit their souls
unto him with weldoi^g, as unto a faithful creator. For while we live: the
Lord protecteth us and if we die with him, we shall also live with him. 2. Ti. 2.
Let patience therefore in all extremities take place, for patience enioieth
peace of mind, patience in adversity makes friendship with Christ: the patient
man, every man prayseth and worthily, for he is like unto Christ, whose life
was ye true pattern of patience, the more adversity suffered with patience,
the greater peace is enjoyed: patience is a token of wisdom, and a patiente man
is better then one strong. Pro. 14. Pro. 16.
And he that can rule him self, is more worthy then he that wins a City.
Psalm. 27 Heb. 10.
Tarry the Lords leisure, be strong and he shall comfort thine heart, ye have
need of patience, that after ye have don the will of God, ye might receive ye
promise, Phi. 4. Heb. 12.
and because he that is patient has much understanding, let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, for whether poverty or banishment,
imprisonment or shame, sickness or loss of parents, or children, or any
other like do move us, we must think that none of these things do happen but
by the will and providence of God. And that he does nothing but by most just
order (for why) our innumerable and daily offenses deserve to be chastised more
sharplye and with more greuouse correction, the^ such as the merciful goodness
of the Lord lays upon us: wherefore seeing patience is so profitable, and
brings so singular commodities, and being so great a virtue when a man's mind
is not moved nor broken in adversity. God grant us therefore to be so moved to
ye study of patience, and that by the authority of Gods word, that being
exercysed and tried thereby, we may constantly perceuer and continue in ye
course of Godly life, throughout all kind of adversities, and after our long
continuance be saved.

But now a little to return again to the words that went before: I send you
forth as sheep among wolves: whereby is easily deserved, who be the sheep, who
be the wolus. The sheep devour not, but are devoured: the wolves are not
devoured, but they devour the sheep. So the Church of Christ is known from
the Church of Antechrist by this difference, the church of God is persecuted,
and the church of ye Devil persecuteth: of which church of the Devil, that
Antichrist the Pope is the chief Champion: the ringleader of false Profets, ye
ouerthrower of true godliness, who neither teaches, nor reproves by the word,
but fears the godly with cruelty: not only by striking, but also imprisoning
them that withstand him. And persecuteth to the death ye Profets of the Lord,
for their preaching of the truth and constancy, so that we may see that the
cross of the godly proceeds of the love of God toward them, and is to their
comfort in Christ Jesus, even to life everlasting.

But the enemies of Christ his Cross and rabble of reprobates void of their
cross? Nay truly: for the Scriptures make mention that God leaves not his
enemies untouched, as for example. Caine for his bloody fact, was not leaft
unpunished, but Abels blood crying vengance in the ears of God. Cain was
banished out of gods fight and made a vagabond and a renegate upon the earth.
The Amorites being enemies to Joshua the chosen Servant of God, Joshua 10
were in the feeld destroyed by the mighty power of God with stones from
heaven, and f^ue of their Kings delivered into ye hands of Joshua and were
hanged. Iudi. 13.
Holofernus a mighty Prince and enemy to God, was by the providence of God
conquered by the hands of women. Pharo pursuing Israel, Exo. 14.
the sea being to them a sauegard, was to Pharo and his hole army an overthrow
and present destruction. Herod an enemy to the people of God, being in his
chief pomp, Act. 12.
was for his arrogancye eaten with woormes, and gave up ye ghost, with infinite
numbers of like stories which I might aledge, but for breuety I let them pass.
But now if God have thus showed him self so mighty and righteous a Judge: if
he have thus bent his irefull countenance against his enemies, and so terribly
poured down his wrath upon them, in those days: suppose you he has forgotten
him self, or think you that he will leave you untouched, oh you Arch enemies
of our time: do you imagen that he is either blind and sees not your
tirannie and bloodye butcherly behavior: or that he is death and hears not
the lamentable gronings and outcryes of them that innocently have yielded their
lives to the slaughter: oh no? deceive not your selves, for if the blood of
Abel cried vengance in the ears of God, for the cruel dealing of his brother
Cain, and was herd. Think you that the abundance of blood of so many
thousands of gods children which ye have spilt, will not by God be required at
your hands: ^es, be assured, the Lord him self will be revenged upon you. The
pour and force of our God is not decayed, neither his arm shortened, but he
is even now the same God that he the^ was. Wherefore let this be known unto you,
and whereof be you most well assured, yt the longer that the mighty God
withholdeth and deferreth his coming, so with the more vehemence and fury, and
the whotter shall his wrath be kindled against you: and with the more greuouse
plagues shall he vex and punish you, when he shall appoint the time of his
coming. And as the affliction and cross of the godly, proceeds from God to
the^ of love, to their comfort and consolation? So shall your punishment
proceed of gods wrath and sore displeasure to punish you as his enemies and
adversaries, to your confusion and utter destruction. The quarrel is his own,
and he himself will revenge it, when the burden wil-bee to heavy, Luke.
for you to bear, that now glory and tryumphe in your gredy desire of blood.
Shall not God avenge his elect: which cry day and night unto him: Yes he will
avenge them, and when he comes, he comes speedely. And who may abide in his
sight when he is angry, says David. Psalm. 76
For even as upon the sudden he sent down fire from Heaven: 4. Reg. 1
which consumed the Captains and their bends, so has he his plagues prepared
for you, and shall crushe you and break in pieces with an Iron Rod, or Septer,
even like an earthen vessel, and make you as duste to trample on. His wrath
shall be shortly kyndled against you: Esai. 3.
How well has the Prophet of God found you out. For both your words and
councels says he, are against the lord, ye provoke the majesty of god to
anger. Woe be unto your souls, for they shall be heauely rewarded, Esai. 14
and because ye have wasted your land and destroyed your people, ye shall be
swept out with the beesom of destruction, says the lord of hosts. For the
generation of the wicked shall be without honor. Esai. 26
The malicious Tirantes when they die are neither in life, nor in the
resurrection: For thou visitest them and rootest them out, and destroiest all
the memorial of them. I will stretch out my hand and destroy the destroier
says ye Lord: A great vengance will I take upon them, and punish them cruelly
that they may know how that I am the Lord which have au^nged me of them.
Behold I come shortly, Reave. 22
and my reward with me, to give every man according as his deeds shall be. And to
conclude, Reave. 21
the abominable murderers shall have their part in the lake that burns with
fire and Brimstone: And the Author of this saying is worthy of credit.

But now my dear brethren of England, as none of us are worthy to be
accounted of the slocke of Christ his fold, that has not with compassion in his
heart, ye perfect feeling of the misery of our persecuted brethren our
neighbors, and with a willing heart relieve them to our pour and with grief
of mind in their behalf, do humbly call upon God to strengthen them with
patience and constancy of faith, that they may mekely and humbly submit them
selves under the cross, which it has pleased God for their trial to lay upon
them. And whereof at his good pleasure he will again discharge them and
unburden them: So let us again well know that all crosses and calamityes are
as Sermondes from heaven for sin: and are laid upon our neighbors for us to
take exsample and warning by: And preach as it were unto us, that we shoold
faul^ to the amendmente of our life betime, least God cast us of in his
aunger. For although it has pleased god to give unto us the use of his gospel,
offering unto us thereby soul health, which is received by faith through
hearing: yet is it not enough yt the same be taught and hard, unless it be
also kept, and to keep ye word, is to learn what is herd, to hold it, to
bebeleue it, and to perform true obedyence to God through faith, as did our
father Abraham. He hard the word, he held it, he believed it, yea and yielded
such obedience to it by faith, yt he would at gods apoyntmente rather slaye his
only begotten son, then break gods commandment. But where is he among us,
that yeldeth this obedience unto god, we will be called Abraham's children, but we
will not tread in our fathers foot steps, would to God we had consideration of
his promise to them that hear and obey it. For they are blessed says he,
which is to say, Psalm. 81.
set free from wretchedness. Oh that my people would obey me, for if Israel
would walk in my ways, I should soon put down their enemies, and turn mine
hand against their adversaries. Let us not now so much trust to our prosperity,
that according to the old proverb, we set cock on hoope and be overmuch
careless, but in our prosperity let us be afrai^ to offend the majesty of our
loving Lord and God. Who as (thanks to him) has hitherto? So he may
henseforth carefully keep us from adversity and danger of our enemies, for as
no man better understands the commodities of liberty and health, then he
that has some times felt the hardness of imprisonment, and pains of sickness? So
have we good cause to be myndfull of our late lamentable state, wherein we then
lacking ye liberty of our consience: did taste of the like misery that our
brethren and neighbors about us are now partakers of, which may now give us
due consideration, to think with our selves how perilous and dangerous a
thing it would be for us that have professed our selves Christians, to bring
our selves again under the Devils yoke, and into the trappes of Tirantes that
thyrst after our blood, and which as they vndoubttedly think long for: so does
our wicked life and conuersatyon, even hasten the performaunce of their greedy
desire: but least that our God being the sooner displeased, let loose the
raynes to Tirantes, and our enemies, that he may thereby revenge our
unthankfulness, let us accordind to our profession as becomes christians,
abandon ye causes that justly procure his heavy and importable displeasure,
and wrath against us, let us put aaway our evil thoughts out of Gods sight:
ceace from doing ill and violence, Esai. 1.
learn to do right, apply our selves to equity, deliver the oppressed, help
the fatherless, to his right, hear the widows complaynt, detest our
monstrous and lucifer like pride, our detestable and horrible whordom, our
greedy covetousness, our bribery and extortion, our glottony and dronkennes, our
lack of truth between man and man, in bying and selling: Sirach. 10.
for through unrighteous dealing, wrong blasphemy and deceyt, a Realm shall be
translated from one kingdom to an other, and with these vices are we
dangerously infected: And the church of god never being with out her certain
wounds for our Lord to power his wine and oil into. So let us use the means
yt god has appointed us to stay his deserved wrath and plagues prepared for us.
Let us dyligently, spedely, and continually with all possible reverence and
humblenes of heart, invoke and call upon ye name of our god, making unto him
our hearty supplication and prayers. The lack and dangerous necklecting whereof,
as it is ye chief and only cause of al loosenes and uncleanness of life and
conversation. So by continual and earnest repentance and often lifting up our
hearts unto God through prayer being fervently made and faithfully used, is the
life to be obtained that pleases god, for prayer is a salve for sin, and a
preseruatyue for them ye prepare them selves to it: prayer is a quietness and
sauegard of the^ which are molested, prayer is a comfort to them who with
greefes are afflicted: prayer is a heaven to them that suffer shipwark: prayer
in war is an arming sword, and in peace a gardeyn of delights: prayer is to
men in bondage liberty, and in poverty a treasure. To conclude, prayer is the
ready path to the pleasant pasture of Paradise: when Pharo, did persecute the
children of Israel by prayer, from his rage they were preserved: when David had
grievously offended God, by humble prayer and penitent heart, gods wrath was
appeased: by Moses prayer, the fyry flyntes gave water, the driry air gave
meat, ye courageous enemies gave place to weakling Israelites when as they
were oppressed, and almost surprised with fear of pynching thyrst and want of
dail^ food, and force of dreadful arms, by Elyas prayer the drought marde
fruitful grounds, and by the same man's prayer the barren soil did fructify,
by David's prayer great Golyaths courage was stoutly daunted, by Iudithes
prayer, fyrce Holofernus was by her beheaded: By prayer Daniel in Lions den,
from Lions Jaws was preserved: Now seeing then that prayer is of such force as
that it perceth the Heavens, and is a pouring out of a faithful heart unto God,
wherein we crave and desire with earnest affection, either to be preserved from
danger of discomoditie, spiritual or temporal: Either else to enjoy some
desired benifite, at Gods hands, belonging to body or soul: Or else a yelding
of most hearty thanks, for some benefit already received. Let us continue in
prayer and watch in the same with thanks giving, that through our prayer our
most noble gracious and merciful Princes Elizabeth, to whom God of his great
goodness, contrary to the hye and expectation of her enemies, has hitherto
given a joyful and prosperous Reign: so he may likewise heap upon her ye
continuance of many years to be an old mother in Israel, that as she has
well begoon so she may zelously proceed in the setting forth and advancing the
gospel, of God to his glory, the comfort and preservation of her Realm and
people, and the discomforting of gods and her enemies: And that by prayer our
god may still give good sucksesse to the travels of ye Queen her majesty's
most honorable Councelors, illuminating their hearts with the spirit of
wisdom, to force, prevent, and bring to naught, the subtle secret deuyces,
and privy conspyracies of Satan, of Antechrist, and of all gods enemies,
pretended against the verity of his word, as also that by our prayers, the
Bishops and Pastors of gods Church, may have a continual care to feed his
flock committed to their chardge, with the bread of life: and that Christ may be
known to them to whom he is yet a stranger, which is no rare matter in some
places in England, the greater is the pity: for there must sin needs
reign, because yt they being ignorant of Christ, unbelief does possess their
hearts. Moreover that Judges and Maiestrates through hatred of couetousenes may
maintain cinceritie, and upright dealing in iudgmente, that the case rather
then ^he parson be considered, for whosoever bearing office is led with
rewards, he cannot see what is rightful, for rewards blind the eyes of the
wise. Also that good laws being in force may be executed, that offenders may
be punished and the gyl^l^sse defended, for where good laws be made and not
executed, their the common weal goes to ruin. And moreover, that by our
prayer every subject of what degree or calling so ever, may dutifully show their
obedyence unto, and reuerencing our Prince as the minister and Liuetenant of
God, that the Lord our God at the contemplation of our faithful prayer, whose
mercy exceeds the hugeness of sin, and whose grace abounds above
misdeede, may by the abundance of his spirit by grace so work in our hearts, yt
we taking head and being obedient to the same our heavenly father, and having a
chief regard to the performing of our duties in the observation of his law
and commandments, may by the good blessing of the same our God, quietly
consent and rest in his truth, and have the continuance of inward peace of
contience, that we may wear out our days in prosperity, and our years in
ples^er and joy in this world, being a waste wilderness, from which must pass
into an other country, that we th^s having this care to accomplish gods will,
and with this old year, to sh^ke and cast of and strip our selves of old
Adams rags, and with the new year to apparel our selves with the flourishing
and glittering garment of Jesus Christ, even newnes of life, and keep it
still on. Then shall we continue in prosperity, and be beloved of god our only
stay and refuge who shall mightily protect and d^fend us from the danger of his
and our enemies: Then the Lord our god which gives victory unto kings, and
which delivered David from the perrill of the sword, Psa. 144
shall save and deliver us from the hands of strange children, whose right hand
is a hand of iniquity. So yt the^ let the devil roar, and all the deuels in
hell break loose: let Pope rage: let all the College of Cardenalls and
Councels conspyer, let the blooddy Bishops breath out their traiterous mallyce,
and hatefulnes of their hearts. Yea let the hole fraternetie of that fylthie
generation and brood of Antechrist, devise and imagine what they can or may:
And all shall be in vayn^, for the works of wickedness do flourish to be
destroyed for ever: And the enemies of the Lord shall perish. Psa. 92.
And all the workers of wickedness shall be scattered abroad, for there is no
wisdom against the Lord our God, the creator of Heaven and Earth. To whom
with his Christ and the holy Spirit, three persons and one God, be all praise,
pour, and majesty for ever, and ever. Amen.

Give God the praise.
The petition of the penitent.
AS those that wrapped are in woe,
think long to have relefe:
So Lord to swage our sorows great,
to thee we show our grefe.
In whom only consysts the help,
of each poor sinful slaves:
And in whose choice, body and Soul,
are both to spill or save.
Oh let our spirits which feign would yield
such fruit as faith requires:
Su^^ue the deuel and flesh,
which still against our soul conspires.
For lo, alas what we would not,
in us still takes place:
And what we would is left undone,
for want Lord of thy grace.
Feeling therefore the burden of
our sins, which is so great:
With humble spirit, with contrite heart,
with teeres we thee entreat.
Us to behold poor wretched worms,
which do our falts confess:
And eke unfeignedly bewail,
our woeful wickedness.
Which daily does abound in us,
to our reproach and shame:
Let mercy yet prevent thy wrath,
for honor of thy name.
And as our secret sighs for si^ne,
to thee are not unknown:
So cra^ing mercy at thy hands,
accept us for thy own.
That we being new buylt by grace,
may loathe this lump of sin:
And clad in verteous godly life,
may still proceed therein.
Perfourming our profession,
till finished are our days:
That then in passing joy with thee,
we may remayn always.
Grant Lord this our petition,
which art the god of might:
That through the Jesus Christ we may
be righteous in thy sight.
FINIS.

