THE SEA FIGHT IN the Road of Gibraltar the 25. of April last, betwixt the K.
of Spaines Carackts and Gallions, and the Hollandish men of War, reported by
a letter written a-bourd the Hollands Fleet, by a commander in the same, and
faithfully translated into English,

depiction of ship

London printed for John Hardy, and are to be sold by Robert Jackson, at the
shop under the Royal Exchange 1607.

A COPY OF A LETter written out of the Hollandors Fleet at sea, the fourth of
May. 1607. Stilo Nouo translated.
BEing under the hight of 36. degrees, or before the river of Lisbone upon the
tenth of April. our Admiral Jacob Van Hemsterk and his counsel determined
and fully resolved, to enter into the said river withal our ships to assail
and spoil the Caracts and Gallyons lying there, but being certainly
advertised that the Carackts were gone and that the Gallyons being 8. or 9. were
wholly vnrigged and their ordinance on shore, so as it would be two months
before they could be ready, the aforesaid resolution was for that time stayed;
and the rather for that diverse English and French ships coming out of Saint
Lucar and Cales, brought us certain news that not long before their coming
forth, fifteen Spanish ships of war of Saint Lucar and Cales, had put to
sea and were gone to the straights of Gibraltar, being eleven Gallions and the
rest smaller merchants ships as then made men of war: Whereupon we resolved to
follow and find the^ out, but the wind being at East, we met a Floshinger
called Loy Sailemaker that came out of the straights the 22. of April and
showed us that the night before he had been in company with the Spanish
fleet, and that in the morning finding himself alone without company, he
supposed they had taken their course for Cales for with an easterlie wind they
might come out of the straights. Upon the 24. of April the wind coming
westerly we past close by the bar of Saint Lucar and Bay of Cales, but could
not hear that the Gallions had put in there, for we were resolved to set upon
those Gallyons that lay within that Bay: But the same day having otherwise
determined we sailed forwards to the straights of Gibraltar intending to
find out those Gallions or Spanish Navy and to assail them. Upon the 25 of
April coming before the town of Tangier upon the coast of Barbary lying in
the mouth of the straights, and finding the Gallions not there, the Admiral
sent for his Counsel abourd his ship, where it was resolutely determined,
that if the Spanish Navy were in the Bay of Gibraltar they would set upon
them, although it were in their own haven and under shot both of the town and
Castle, and to end we took order in what sort to assail them, which was
first our Admiral with Captain Lambert Hindrickson of Rotterdam being
Rereadmirall should set upon and bourd the Spanish Admiral and our Vice
Admiral and Captain Bras of Horn should fight with the Spanish Vice Admiral
and so every one in order: At last coming to the Bay of Gibralter and finding
the Spanish army there, presently we began with Gods help to proceed in our
resolution in such order as time and place required, where we found 21.
ships amongst which were some Frenchmen Emdeners and other Merchants ships,
upon our approach the Spanish Admira'l wayed Anchor and went nearer the town
and lay by four other Gallions but the Vice admiral lay still having a bourd
450. men, as the prisoners after certified us, the Admiral had 100. Caueliers
out of the town that voluntarily came abourd to help him although he was well
provided of men before, all this notwithstanding and although he had
the advantage of th'ordnance of the town and castles yet our Admiral and
Captain Lambert of Roterdam valiantly bourded him, and the rest of our ships
as well as they could set upon the rest of the Gallions, and also upon the
Spanish Vice Admiral; And after we had fought in that most furious assault
both with ordinance and forceable bourding their Ships 4 hours or thereabouts
by Gods help we got the victory, all the Gallions being spoiled batterd and
burnt were driven on ground and amongst the rest the Admiral of 800 tonns,
called S. Augustine wherein the general called Don John Alveres Dauila borne in
Astorga was slain, being an old experienced Soldier that had served at Sea
in Don John de Austria his time, also the Vice Admiral was slain and the
Coronell of the Soldiers and all the Captains of their Navy, the Gallions
and the rest of the Spanish ships were presently burnt down to the water,
whereof two did drive on shore but so spoiled that they were altogether
unserviceable, thi'n signs, streamers and pendants of the Admiral, Vice
Admiral and other Gallions we took with us and some other pillage, but by
reason of the terrible fire in the Spanish Vice Admiral and other Gallions
that were on fire and ran on ground we could not bring any Ships or Ordnance
away, for we were in great danger of fire our selves, and diverse of us had
work enough to do to quench the fire that had gotten into the^, but God of his
mercy preserved us. Of all the men in the Spanish army but few escaped, for
the Bond of Gibralter showed as if it had bin sowed with Spaniards that leapt
ouer-boord, and those that we took confessed that they were 4000. men in the
Navy. We took 50. prisoners, one whereof was the Generals son called John
Alueres Dauila Captain of the Gallion called S Augustine. In this fight we
lost our valiant General Jacob Van Hemsterk, who with an honorable and brave
resolution undertook this fight and with the aid of the Vice Admiral
Captain Lambert of Rotterdam, and Captain Peter Williamson bravely overcame
and by gods help vanquished there enemy. The 26. of April we brought our
ships from before the town and castle, for with their continual shooting they
did us much hurt, and being without their reach we manned out some of our
boats and sent, them to the burnt ships which lay upon the shore, which the
spaniards on land perceiving went themselves to set thadmiralls ship on fire,
which lay all shot and torn upon the strande, and so they did that which we
meant to have done. In this fight there was at least 8000. great shot
discharged and was hardily and furiously fought, being fearful and terrible
to behold when the spanish gallions began to burn, especially when fire came
to their powder, it showed as if new clouds and lightning had risen out of the
sea and mounted into the sky by a sailer called Gouert an English man but gave
himself out for one of Embden, that was taken prisoner by the Spanish general
and set at liberty upon our approach to be advised and counseled by him what
were best to be don: we were advertised that the Admiral would not believe
we durst be so bold to bourd him in the Kings Bay or haven, and especially
under the shot of the town and Castle of Gibraltar, which contrary to their
expectation we made them feel. The Spanish General had certain advice
before of our coming how many ships of war we had and with prouant
ships and Soldiers. Amongst other things that we took we found the
Kings secret instructions signed with the King of Spaines own hand Joel Rey
whereby we perceive what unaccustomed tyranny the said King had commanded him
to execute and to torment the natural borne inhabitants of the nether lands
especially the Hollanders and Zelanders and all their adherents, so that other
nations by this comm^ssion were not altogether exempted. The 27. of April we
set sail and put out of the bay of Gibraltar, and made toward the coast of
Barbary, first going to Chuta and entered so far into that bay that they shot
at us both from the town and other places of the shore, there the Portugalles
in great numbers got upon their horses, fearing to be dealt withal as they
were at Gibraltar: but because of the unfitness and bad security of the place,
we sailed further to the bay of Titnan five Miles from Chuta to rigge our ships
for that many of them were unfurnished of Boresprits, Masts, Sails, Cordage
and other things, and had been shot through and fired in bourding the
Spanish Gallions: and coming before Titnan (a place under the Turks and
Moors command) we were very welcome unto them; and upon the 28. of April the
governor with many Turkish ge^tlemen came abourd our ships bidding us welcome
offering us all favor and friendship he could aforde us, and to aid us
withal we stood in need off for our wounded men or otherwise: he and all
his company and country seeming to be glad of the victory which (by Gods
help) we had obtained against the Spaniards. The fourth of May at Titnan six
miles from Chuta upon the coast of Barbary we new rigged and prepared our
ships (which were sore battred) of all necessaries, staying Gods pleasure for
an Easterly wind to pass the straights, and once again to seek after our
enemies, dividing our Fleet into four squadrons, the Admiral being
accompanied with seven other ships of war and the like in every squadron.
The Admiral Mounsieur Hemsterk that was slain was a very wise and well
experienced man, who with great pain, labor and industry had been twice in
the could Streights of Weygattes, and at the East Indies, where in his last
voyage he overcame and took the great rich Carackts coming from Malacho in
China, with whom of good will and affection toward him many men ventured their
lives in this voyage, as amongst others Ioris Van Spilberg that has been both
in the East and West Indies and employed in this Fleet as Commisary, and one
of the Counsel of war, general captain of the Zeland Soldiers, and
diverse other captains.

THE Names of the spanish Gallions that were spoiled and burnt with many
others, whereof the names are not known.
The Admiral S Augustine The vice admiral nostra Seniora dela vera The rear
admiral nostra Seniora madre de dios The S Anna Nostra Seniora de la Regla
Nostra Seniora de conception The S Christopher Nostra Seniora de los dolores
The S Michael Nostra Seniora del Rosario Nostra Seniora de lo O The S Peter
Yours to command. I.V.S.


