A Brief resolution of a right Religion.

TOUCHING THE Controversies, that are now in England.

Written by C. S.

PRO. 15.32. He that refuses to be reformed despises his own soul: but he
that submits himself to correction is wise.

LONDON. Printed by Roger Ward, for John Proctor, and are to be sold at his
shop upon Holborne Bridge. 1590.

TO THE READER.
THou have (courteous Reader) here offered unto thy view, a small book
containing the resolution of a true Religion. It is garnished with no great
eloquence or rhetorical florishe, as manifesting my intent therein to be more
to delight the inward heart, with matter of substance, then the outwaed care,
with words of trifling daliance. The positions I hope will prove true, the
question not doubtful, though dangerous to my self, in that I shall hazard my
person in running upon the cragged Rocks of the pestilent toonged Papists: I
trust, notwithstanding the ship of my safety will be strong enough, if not
to break the rocks, yet to bear the bruntes of all such stormy and
tempestuous accidents as wind and weather shall throw upon me sailing in so
troublesome seas. howbeit I mean well even to the Romish Catholics
themselves, whom earnestly I would request to read this small work with a
single eye, and with an indifferent mind, not carried away with enraged rancor,
or woonted obstinacy: for I will not fear to make themselves Judges of the
cause, if they have their eyes to see, or wills to judge with indifferency. I
have not run over all matters of both sides, for neither could I in so small a
room, only and especially I have leuelled at the very foundation: Read it
through therefore (gentle Reader) with no less good mind then I wrote it, and
then I doubt not but thou will in fine be resolved with me of a right Religion:
If my work want learning, in recompense thereof I pray thee accept my good
will, wherein is no defect. Thus not doubting of thy humanity, hoping well also
of thy divinity, I commend this my book to thy grateful courtesy, and bid
thee most heartely farewell.

Vale in Christo. C. S.

R. Armin in praise and commendation of this brief Resolution of a right
Religion.
THere are many that have took upon them to set down the points of true
Religion, and have aptly argued of particular parts, yea and rightly
disciphered the ample Rules of truth, amongst whom as chief, this learned
student, C.S. has sufficiently plainly and profoundly placed it before our
eyes, and having quite suppressed false doctrine has presented to our view,
this right resolution and I in this behalf will say, that the papist may well
knock himself on the breast, saying a Confiteor, making vain signs of
repentance of his sins, but if he look narrowly unto it, he shall find it
nothing but mockery and hypocrisy.

The other vicious and detestable sect, are Martinesses, who see so far into
matters, that they ouersee themselves, wresting things from the right sense to
the wrong, making show of zeal when it is mere folly, therefore let them
know here is the right religion, though a brief resolution, short and sweet,
and therefore you that will be heirs of heaven, and you zealous protestants
wish him well whose employed study was, and is to conduct you to the truth,
and therefore hold every sect false, whose rules he does contradict, and withal
patience wait for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, and labor so that you
may be found of him without spot and blameless.

Surely that day ought to be fearful to the wicked, but of us that should be
most desired, knowing assuredly that there is no condemnation to those which
are in Christ Jesus, and his great kindness and meekenes when he comes to
make us live with him for ever in heaven. Amen.

R. A.

A BRIEF RESOLVTION OF a right Religion.
GReat controversy has long bin between the Papists and Protestants (as
they are commonly termed) whether of them be the true church, for it is agreed
of both sides, that Extra Ecclesiam non est salus. but surely me thinks it is a
question, scarce questionable: for, the papistical Romish Church arrogateth,
that they are the true church: and our Religion, grounded out of the word of
God, persuades us to be of the true church, for we are builded upon the sacred
writings of the Prophets and Apostles Christ Jesus himself being the Ephesians.
2.20.
corner stone: their church, or rather synagogue of Satan is builded upon
unwritten verities and depraved sacred truth, the pope of Rome, a man, nay
Reave. 13.1
a beast, with seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten
crowns, and upon his heads the names of blasphemy, being the head thereof.
We embrace Paul, we embrace Peter, and yet we renounce the Pope, who vainly
boasts himself to be Peter's successor, in as much as the Pope is neither
like to Peter, in doctrine, manners, nor religion, and in vain shall the pope
boast to have his place, when he comes nothing near unto, in the qualities
of his person, nor in the doctrine of the Apostles, for in this respect there
is as much difference between them, as betwixt black and white, light and
darkness, heaven and hell, as afterward shall be manifested, Christ has
forewarned us that there shall arise Mat. 24.24.
false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs, and wonders
to deceive (if it were possible) the very elect. Paul has given us a good
caveat, let no man (says he) deceive himself: and again, let every man take
heed how he builds: And he adds this rule, to know 1. Cor. 3.18.
assuredly the true and right foundation: for (says he) other foundation can
no man lay, but that which is laid already, which (says he) is Jesus Christ.
The same Paul in his Epistle to the Galathians, says, Gal. 1.8.
if we, or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you any other Gospel then that
we have preached, Anathema esto, let him be accursed: And this sentence he
iterateth, a second time. If we are bidden not to believe Angels from heaven, if
they teach doctrine contrary to Paul's, will aine man then be so foolish as to
believe the pope upon his word and unwritten verities, teaching matters
contrary, not only to Paul, but to Peter and to all the whole body of the
sacred scriptures? When Luke 16.
Dives was in hell, and cast up his eyes and saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom,
and being in torments could not obtain of Abraham, that Lazarus might dip his
finger in water and cool his toonge, because he was tormented in that flame,
He did then beseech Abraham, that he would send Lazarus to his fathers house
(for he had five brethren) that he might testify to them, least they also came
in that place of torment: But whether did he refer them? They have (says
Abraham) Moses, and the Prophets, let them hear them? for if they will not
hear them, neither will they believe, though one rise from the dead.

Thus we are referred to build our belief upon Moses, and the prophets. Christ
himself says, and commands us John. 5 39
to search the scriptures: for (says he) they are they that testify of me. So
that the people are bold to hear Christ, Moses, and the prophets and
apostles, with this clause also added, that if any, though an Angel from
heaven, teach doctrine contrary unto them, Anathema sit, we must hold him
accursed: so that we are not to believe the Pope, nor his unwritten verities,
nor general Counsels, nor yet ancient Fathers, no not Angels themselves,
though coming from heaven, if they teach matter contrary to the sacred
scriptures: and as the people are to hear such kind of Teachers so are also all
that take upon them the office of teaching, or of Apostleship, not to teach
doctrines of men, or their own fantasies, or blind dreams, but only such
stuff as they receive from God. Moses, he gave the law to the Israelits, but
he did it by commandment from the Lord, and spoke as from his mouth. What
manner power the prophets generally had, is very well described in Ezechiell.
Thou Ezekiel. 3.18
son of man (says the Lord) I have given thee to be a Watchman to the house
of Israel, therefore thou shall hear the word out of my mouth, and thou
shall declare it to them from me.

Look to the Apostles, and see what commission they had: Go (says Christ)
Mat. 27.19
and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the father, the son,
and the holy Ghost, teaching them to keep all things whatsoever I have
commanded you: so the apostles commission was to teach that, which they had
received from Christ. Christ himself the son of the everliving God, in
respect that he was an apostle or messenger sent from God his Father,
answers the Jews in the seventh of John, saying: My John. 16.
doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: So Christ himself taught no other
doctrine, but that which he had from his father. And S. Paul, as a faithful
Apostle affyrmeth to the Corinhians, that he 1 Cor. 11
received that of the Lord, which he delivered unto them. Thus we see that the
apostles spoke from the mouth of Christ, Christ from the mouth of his Father,
and all both Christ and the Apostles, Moses and the prophets, spoke as from
the mouth of God, which is also verified by that one saying of the Author to
the Hebrews: God Heb. 1, 1
in times past diverse ways spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets, but in
these last days he has spoken to us by his son. And Paul tells Timothy,
that all scripture 2 Timothy 3, 16
is given by divine inspiration, and written as with the finger of God, who is
all truth, and therefore it is impossible, should either lie or err.

Therefore touching matters of religion, let God alone be heard, and the sacred
Scriptures produced for the establishing of that religion which shall be
acceptable in his eyes. For a man's faith is to be builded upon the surest
anchor and 2 Timothy 3, 16
rock, and in such sort that neither winds nor waves be able to remove it:
and that must be as Christ teaches, upon his word, which is infallible and
never fails. And all, both reason and divinity so persuades: for that
saying of Paul is true: Let Mat. 7.14
God be true, and every man a lier. It is well known, and daily experience
can tell us, that men may err and go awrie, but he 1 Ioh, 5.10
that believes not God, makes him a lier, as S. John says, which cannot be
without horrible blasphemy.

Let us therefore not build our faith and religion upon any man, be he
Augustine, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome or whosoever, nor upon general Councels,
for they were also compounded of men, and Humanum est errare, Men may err:
therefore no question but they might err. And if in any any thing they do not
err, it is because they have the word of truth, and of sacred Scripture for
their confirmation, or else they must needs err. So that all those ancient
Fathers and general Counsels, they must all draw water from the pure
fountain, the sacred word of truth, or else they do nothing else but preach
the puddle of their own inventions: which if they should do, though they were
Angels from heaven, we must not believe them, nay, Anathema sit, we must hold
him accursed, by the rule of Paul aforesaid.

The word of God delivered as from the mouth and hand of God, being laid as
a foundation, we are not to doubt but that our religion builded thereupon is
most sure and certain, never able utterly to be overthrown with all the
power and policy of Antichrist and his adherents, be they never so subtle in
the one, or full of fortitude in the other: For why? Christ the head of his
Church is the defender thereof, and the confounder of Antichrist.

The Papists and enemies of the true Church of God, they call us Heretics by
a metaphorical speech borrowed from themselves, and give railing sentence upon
bs, when they are no longer able to convince our reasons, showing therein their
malignant tongues and malicious hearts: but we answer with Paul, that with
that which they call heresy, we serve the living God. They call our religion a
condemned doctrine, attainted long ago by general, Councels: If they show me
the revealed counsel from God, I will believe them: and of general Counsels,
some are mere repugnant and contrary one to another, so that they are of
little credit But what if it be condemned by men, if it be allowed of God, what
need we care? We know that at Jerusalem they held a council together to put
Math. 26.4
Christ to death as a malefactor, yea, and condemned him. Was therefore his
doctrine ever the worse, or was it therefore so, because they condemned him?
Did they not hold a council against Stephen, and stone him to death? and yet
Stephen is recorded to be a man full of Act. 6.12
faith, and of power.

What will the deceitful Papists say of Peter, their Popes predecessor? (as
they vainly boast) There was a general council held against him also, and
condemning his doctrine, scourged him and the rest of the Apostles, with an
inhibition that they should not teach any more in the name of Jesus.

If their general councels be of force to condemn us and our religion, I see
no reason, but that their religion should be also condemned by the former
council against Peter: but Peter's doctrine was true, notwithstanding the
Counsel: and so may ours, notwithstanding their Councels against us: For we
(as I have often said) build our religion upon Christ, upon Peter, the
apostles, and prophets.

The Papists therefore do both foolishlie and ignorantly paint out the beauty
of their Church, by the title of universality, and thereupon (as I suppose)
they glory to call themselves Catholics.

The Pope (say they) holds the Apostolical Sea, and the Bishops that be
anointed and consecrated by him (so that they be trimmed with fillets and
Myters) do represent the Church, and ought to be taken for the Church, and
therefore they cannot er, because they are consecrated to the Lord: which
consequent also follows not. For Aaron and other rulers of Israel also were
consecrate to the Lord: but Aaron and his sons after they were made Priests,
did yet err when they Exo. 31.4
made the calfe.

But let us examine the premises. Will thou (simple papist) have universality
a contiuall badge of the church? will thou have the true Church to consist in
such outward glorious show? Then was the chief Priests, the Scribes and
Pharisees, who were assembled to kill Christ the true church: and then shall
Christ and his apostles, (few in number, and dispearsed abroad) be the false
church. For the glory of the outward Church remained in the chief priests,
Scribes, and Pharisees, and yet who be so blasphemous as to dare say, that they
were the true Church, who crucified the Lord of life? So that (silly papists)
never deceive the world with this gloss: for your outward pomp of your church
is rather (you see) an argument of a false church, than of a true Church.

By this reason of the papists, the four 1. King 22.1^.
hundredth Prophets which lied to Achab, should have represented the true
Church: but the Church was indeed on Micheas side, being indeed but one man
alone, and unregarded, but out of whose mouth came truth. Did not the false
prophets in resemblance bear both the face and name of the Church, when they
did with one violent assault rise up against Jeremy, and with threatening
boasted, that it was not possible that the Iere. 18.18.
law, should perish from the priest, counsel from the wise, and the word from
the Prophet? Jeremy alone was sent against the whole company of the Prophets,
to declare from the Lord, that it should come to pass that the law should
perish from the priest, counsel from the wise man, and the word from the
Proophet: and yet all men know that Jeremy was in the right and of the true
Church, and all the rest against him, in a marvelous error.

Thus you see, that truth is not tied to the multitude of men, or to the title
of universality, nor to the outward glistring pomp, but rather contra.

In the old world, did not Noah and his family (being very few in number in
respect of all the world beside) did not they (I say) represent the Church of
God at that time? Does not Christ often call his, a little flock? Does not
Christ say that Math. 7.13.
wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be that enter that way? Does he not also add that straight is the gate,
and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it?
What does all this prove, but that the fewest usually are the Church of God,
and universalities and multitudes, they are so far from being marks of the
true Church, that they rather evidently bewray the synagogue of Satan?

The Papists are still busy with us, and they think they drive us to a hard
straight, when they demand of us where our church was many hundred years ago;
for they say that the Church must consist of an always appearing form,
visible to the eye and that it may be always poynted out with the finger in
apparent show. Truly this answer is easy to dissolve this which they make
so knotted an argument: for though papists like carnal and sensual men can
judge of noth^ng but that which they see with outward eyes, yet Protestants
(as they term them) God has endued them with better understanding. Let them
answer me what form of the Church shined in outward show, when Helias
complained and bewailed that he 1. King. 19.11.
alone was left. No question there was then, and has been since, and ever will
be a Church of God, so long as Christ shall reign at the right hand of the
father, and yet it was not then seen in outward visible pomp, but rather
seemed as desolate, (as the Prophet Helias himself supposed,) and as no
Church indeed: but it was said to Helias that there were reserved seven
thousand men that had not bowed their knees to Baall. So that there was even
then a church, which yet was not seen with outward shining pomp, and when the
Prophet himself began therewith also to be dismayed.

Where was the Church in the time of Christ and his Apostles, when the
shepherd was taken, and the sheep was scattered and dispersed? When the
glistring outward show was in the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees? And
yet the Church obscured, was the true Church, and not the synagoue of the
Scribes, Pharisees, and high priests that excelled in outward gorgeous show.

Thus there is no question but that the true Church may be, and yet not appear
in outward pomp of show and glorious to the eye. For where was our church in
Queen Mary's days, as in all other times of persecutions in all places of the
world besides: Is there not a Church though it be not seen, nor showed in
outward and eminent brightness, but lies as it were hid, darkened, and
scattered abroad? The Church was then persecuted, and many then like constant
Martirs of the true Church indeed induced the tyranny of that romish
religion, so that some were bannished, and other fled into other nations for
succor, and some endured martyrdom at home, some other hid themselves, but
the whole Church generally was vexed and oppressed. And therefore when our
Church was persecuted it is a good argument I think to say there was a Church
overwhelmed with tyrannical malice. Is any man so buzzard like, or so
blockishly blind, that will say there is no sin at al, because it is sometime
covered with a cloud? or that there is no fire at all because it is sometime
raked up in imbers? our Church may be, and yet not seen, not known to be, by
reason of darkness, and palpable blindness, and ignorance that over shadowed
the light thereof: so that by reason of clowdie darkness that grew, the
Church could not shine to the view of others, though in it self it were
enlightened from God with a secret hidden and vnapparent light many ages
together.

Thus by express testimony of scripture thou see that a Church may be, yea
a true Church may be, though it be not eminent in apparent show: for God does
show the bright beams thereof in time, and causes it to shine in perfect
beauty: for, it is neither devil nor pope, nor prelate, nor potentate, no
power, nor policy that is able utterly to root it out from the earth, for
the God of heaven is the strong defender and most puissant preserver thereof
against all the devilish brains, that do nothing else but devise the utter
ruin and destruction thereof, if they could tell which way. To these men
therefore me thinks Gameliel, a doctor of the law, should satisfy answering
in the like case to the rulers, who took counsel to put Peter and the rest of
the Apostles to death, for their preaching in the name of Jesus. Let them alone
says he, for if this Act. 5, 28
work be of men, it will surely come to naught, if of God, you cannot dissolve
it least you be found to fight against God. As long therefore as our religion
is builded, not upon men, but upon God, in vain do papists look for the
overthrow of that whereof God himself purposes to uphold.

They object as contrary unto us the ancient fathers by whose consenting
voice, if the debate were to be ended, the better part of the victory to
speak most modestly, would bend to our side: but whereas many things have
bin well and wisely written of those fathers, and something has happened to
them which is wont to happen to men, these kind natured children according to
the rightnesse they have both of wit and judgment, do worship only their
faults and errors, and those things which are well spoken, they either
utterly reject, or else mischieuousle corrupt with their bastard glozes and
interpretations. And no marvel though they thus deal with the fathers who
were but men, when they dare be bold to add to, to take from, to curtoll and
corrupt in like sort the sacred scriptures of God himself, as afterward shall be
declared. But the papists are so drowned in their own sensual blindness,
they are so addicted only to the outward eye that they can see no true token
of the true church: they show themselves to be men in that rather then they
will have no Church they will build it upon men when they want the word of God
for their foundation: whereupon in truth the true Church is builded: but of the
same fountain of ignorance is it that they call our religion new because it
appeared not in outward show along time together as their painted Church has
done, to whom we answer that it is, new to them to whom the Gospel is new:
And whereas it has long lien hid unknown, and as it were buried, that was the
fault of the ungodliness of the world, but now since it is by the
bountifulness of God restored again, it ought by right of full restitution to
receive again the due title of antiquity: And herein the papists do manifest
injury unto us: who convey our religion (far before theirs) namely from the
mouth of God, and the prophets, of Christ, and his apostles by a lawful
conueyance written with the finger of God, sealed with the blood of his son,
and delivered unto us by the hands of the prophets, and apostles, so that we
have the writings of God, lawfully sealed and delivered, to give in evidence
for the truth of that faith that we profess, the truth whereof is confirmed
by the miracles that are extant in scriptures, wrought by Christ and his
apostles, for the establishing of his doctrine forever. So that I trust the
Papists will not drive us to other miracles: for all the miracles that ever
were done before, either in the time of Moses and the Prophets, or Christ and
his apostles, for confirming of the doctrine that they should teach, upon which
doctrine already confirmed by innumerable miracles, signs, and wonders, We
rest and stay our selves as upon a most sure anchor and infallible foundation,
which can never fail nor fall.

They have charged our doctrine, as the welspring of troubles, vprores, and
contentions, and termed it most slanderously, a Doctrine of Libertines, and
licentious liberty. But who knows not that these are evident and apparent
badges of their Romish religion? Does not daily experience teach us that the
Roman Jesuits, and Seminaries of Rome, do disquiet not only England, but
all Europe, with erecting vprores, and monstrous treacheries and treasons in
peaceable commonweals, with seeking to shead innocent blood, to pull crowns
from lawful anointed Princes, and setting subjects (if they could) in
rebellious troops to bid battle against their lawful Sovereigns?

But it is an hard matter to take Hercules club out of his hand: and to wreath
from Princes their crowns is more impossible: but in raising war against
God, the annointer of Princes, and preserver of their regal Scepters, is far
less hope to get a victory.

Therefore to the turbulent spirited Papists Elias has taught us to answer,
that it is not we that have 1. King 18
troubled Israel, but themselves that wrestle against the power of God. And
whereas they urge upon us a doctrine of liberties, and licentiousness, they
throw that upon us which is appropriated and peculier unto themselves only:
For our religion teaches a true faith toward God, and good and godly
conversation among men: but all the Romish Catholics if they be once
reconciled to the Sea of Rome, there is no truth in their mouths, nor
faithfulness in their hearts, they may swear and forswear: for Fides non
est seruanda cum haereticis, as they with as much rage, as little reason term
us: yea, what villainy may they not commit? They may sin all monstrous sins
of the world, and justify it when they have done: so that they may sin, and
that with authority. They may have a pardon from the pope, and a dispensation
also for money, to commit all filthiness and kinds of naughtiness,
adultery, robbery, murder, treasons, rebellions: And what villainy is there
that they may not commit with boldness, by virtue of their vicious and most
pestilent religion. For a popes pardon will salve all.

Do we not see it evident that the pope sends his Legates hither to
persuade the people to a wrong faith, to whisper in their ears treachery and
treason against a most natural prince and Sovereign. And to such fellows as
like hereof, they grant pardons, and take it a matter meritorious in heaven:
But who is so blind that does not see the perverseness, and sensual beastinesse
of their Romish religion: who, when they are able no longer to stand upright,
and to maintain the pomp of the Pope, but that his kingdom begins to fall,
being already shaken, when by the power of the word of God, the glory of their
church begins to decay and fade away: then they are driven to devise new
subtilties, and because their doctrine cannot please God, they endeavor another
while to see if they can please men withal,

Wherein (good reader) I beseech thee consider with me, upon what good
foundation the Church of Rome is builded, and how well the pope (that vainly
bosteth himself to be Peter's successor, discharges the office of a true
apostle. The papists and Romanistes they contend with stretched out voice, and
fight with all the violence they can, to erect and uphold the vanishing, and
all tottering glory of the pope. This they cannot do (they think) unless
they have the peoples hearts: and they persuade themselves, that the people of
the other side will never be reconciled to their Romish Church, unless their
religion be easy, plausible, and pleasant to the outward sight, and delight of
the flesh.

Hereupon have they granted their Bulls, their dispensations, and all other
their licentious doctrines, which give free leave and authority to commit any
sin or sins, for as long or as short a time as they listed, so that they
might take their choice of pleasant sins, to sport themselves at their
pleasure and convenient leisure: which to atchieue, notwithstanding they must
pay good current coin for.

Behold gentle Reader, the two pillars of the church of Rome: viz. The glory
and riches of their proud Pope, and prelates was one: and the liberty
preached to the people, was the other. So that the pope (I think) went about
to build a kingdom for himself on earth, rather then to build a church for
God in heaven.

Hereupon is he magnified with so many titles: Hereupon, after he began to
grow in ambition, he usurped the title of Supremacy over all kings, princes,
and Emperors of the world. And when the pope had all this jurisdiction and
pre-eminence, what was it else but to say with the Whore of Babylon Reave. 18.8
Sit as Queen. I wonder that all the Papists of the world are not ashamed of
their unholy father, whose kingdom, whose Church, whose religion is only to
preach liberty and licentious kind of living to the people, seeking his own
only glory and renown, and not the glory of God.

This is that the Jesuits fight for, that the Seminaries persuade and contend
for, that the papists boast of, that they dare challenge al ye world in
disputation for the defense thereof, namely the erecting of the downfalling
pride of the Pope, in their subtle persuasions to reconcile silly and
unstable souls unto their Romish Sea. They can paint out the honor of Rome
with most princely building, in the authority of their Pope, with more then
kingly tytles, and the glory of their splendant Church with no less
eloquence: insomuch as they have made their tongues as sweet as music to
enchant, and their reason nothing but sophistry to deceive: of whom I wish all
men to take heed, as of ravening wolves, and to fly them as venomous
serpents. For the true Church of God does not stand in such outward
glystering pomp, as these men would make believe, but in truth of the word of
God delivered in sacred scriptures, as heretofore has been declared. But all
the pomp wherewith the Roman Jesuits, Seminaries and papists do so advance
their proud Pope withal, and calling their Church the mother Church, What
does it else represent unto us, but the glorious state of the Whore of Babylon,
which was clothed with Reave. 17.4
purple, and decked with gold, with precious stones, and pearls, having a
cup of gold in her hand full of th'abhominations and uncleanness of
filthiness, and in her forhead was written, not the mother Church, but great
Babylon, the mother of fornications, and of abominations of the earth?

O, but I do the Pope great injury: for, he calls himself Seruus seruorum,
the servant of servants: but what matter is it to call himself so in name, when
in deed he shows himself Rex regu^, a king of kings, and a Lord above all
nations, as his title of supremacy, his usurped authority of-excommunication
of princes, his putting down of kings, and giving their kingdoms away to
whom he list does manifestly bewray. So that this is but a mist cast over men's
eyes, to blind fold men from beholding the usurped princelinesse of the Pope.

In truth the Church of Rome sauoureth of too much earthly pomp to have any
part in the true church of God, though it boast never so much and trust in
lying words, saying, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple
of the Lord, The papists can say that concerning Rome they have the testimony
of Paul, who in his Epistle to the Romans writes to all that be in Rome and
calls the^ Romans 1.7.
beloved of God, called saints: but what profits it the^ that in times past
there was a true spouse of Christ in Rome, since now and many years since it
is become an adultresse and has forsaken her first love and her first faith?
But all this is outcountenanced with ye authority of the pope being Peter's
successor as he glories. And the pope he chalengeth the Apostolic Sea, so
that he will be Peter's successor: and yet vicarius dei: what is this else but
to assure us that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple These 24.
of God, as God, boasting himself to be God. The Pharisees in Christ's days
could say who can forgive sins but God: and yet the Pope, he will arrogate
unto himself that authority to wreath from kings their crowns and scepters:
what is this but to sit in the temple of God as God, and boasting himself to be
God. Now how well he discharges the office of an Apostle, I think al men
understand he braggeth to be Peter's successor: but what glory is it to be
Peter's successor in place and not to retain the doctrine and perform the
office of the Apostle Peter. It is the manner of papists altogether to glory
of names, persons and places, and such outward titles, and they never look to
the truth of inward purity, so that al there religion is nothing else, but a
painted schulchre, fair to the eye, but within full of rotten bones: because
the pope was successor to a good Apostle: It follows not no more then an
usurper of a kingdom shall be said a lawful king, because he is a successor to
a lawful king: Though Peter were a true apostle, yet the pope may be a false
Apostle, and that the Pope is a false Apostle appears by the notes of a true
and false Apostle: Peter had his calling from Christ to be an Apostle, and so
entered Peter into the Apostleship: For Christ is the Ioh. 10.1
door, and whosoever enters not in by the door, but climeth up some other
way, the same is a thief and a robber: therefore let the Pope show that he
entered in by the door, or else he is not like Peter, a lawful Apostle: In
doctrine, how the Pope and Peter agree is soon seen.

Peter says if 1. Pet. 4.1^
any man speak, let him speak as the words of God: the pope he blotteerth
out his own traditions, his unwritten verities, and vomiteth out the puddle of
his own brain: yea he, will preach matter contrary to the word of God, and
pervert the word of God: as when Paul says, and the whole Scripture agreeing
with him, that by the Romans 3.20
works of the law no flesh shall be justified before God, the Pope and Papists
hold and teach, that good works are meritorious: yea, and that there be
works of superogation able to save both themselves and others also they may
so abou^d with such superfluity of good works. Yea worse then all this, they
hold and teach, and teach other to practice (which is most horrible
blasphemy) that bad works are also meritorious, namely that treason in
subjects, and murdering of their lawful Christian Sovereign, is not only
lawful but alowable: yea, commendable: nay, more than so, meritorious in
heaven, which doctrine as it is most blasphemous, so the practice thereof is
most damnable and dangerous, abhorring from nature, which teaches every
subject to fear and honor his prince, as nature binds the son to fear
and honor his father, for princeps est patriae parens: degenerating from the
law of all nations for it is lawful and meritorious for a papisticall Romanist
treacherously to murder his holy father the pope: yea rather more, if of evils
the least be to be chosen, then it is for a sworn subject to be false and
traitorous to so christian a prince, Mere repugnant to all Scripture, yea
contrary to the doctrine of Peter himself, whose doctrine the pope must obey
and teach, if in succession he will be accounted a lawful Apostle of Christ.
harken O ye Papists, and listen what Peter teaches you, follow his doctrine
and let not the popes bare name of holy father deceive you any more, nor the
name of the Apostolic Sea, for they are but lying words to deceive you:
Compare the Apostleship of Peter with the Apostleship of the Pope, and then if
you find him contrary, though he be Peter's successor, reject him and tread
his doctrine under feet.

The words of Peter are thus: be 1. Pet. 2 13.
subject therefore, (says he) to every humain creature whether it be to the
king as to the chief: or to relers, as to them yt be set in authority, for
the punishment of them that do ill, and the praise of them that do good:
again in the same chapter he says, honor all men, love brotherly charity,
fear God, honor the king: again, he commands servants to submit
themselves in all fear unto their masters, not only (says he) if they be
good, but also though they be froward.

If a froward master be to be honored and feared of his servant, much more
ought the person of a kind and virtuous Sovereign be had in most reverent
estimation of all subjects: considering that the person of a Prince on earth
is the image of God in heaven: that she is a person of mighty majesty, of
puissant magnificence, and of most glistring princely royalty, who being
placed in her throne by God, by whom Reges regnant, and principes dominantur,
is impossible to be thrust out by the power or policy of men, no not of the
devil himself, nor all his adherentes: for that must needs stand, which God
has stablished, but that may easily fall which men only have erected: heaven
and earth may pass, but not one jot of the word of God shall perish but
shall be fulfilled: They therefore may as well think it as possible to pull God
out of heaven, as it is to remove a lawful anointed prince from beside the
seat, wherein God himself stablified her: The vain hope of the papists
therefore dismayed, and the false Apostleship of the pope confuted by the
faithful Apostle Peter, let us proceed further to compare them together. 1.
Pet. 2.11
Beloved says Peter, I exhort you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from
fleshly lusts which fight against the soul: And again he says, 1. Pet. 1.15
As he which called you is holy, so be ye also sanctified in all conversation,
because says he, it is written Leuit. 11 4 4
be ye holy as I am holy: So that Peter admits no uncleanness, nor
dispenses with any sin, but reproves all and only allows sanctimonie of
life and conversation, and he brings in scriptum est also for the warrant of
his doctrine, I would all that pretend themselves to be his successors would
do the like: and give the like wholesome sound admonitions and precepts then
should not men either for love, or money have pardons, dispensations,
commissions, with authority to commit most devilish murder: accompting that
for meritorious, which is most monstrous, and meriteth in truth a most
bloody revenge for the body, and eternal torments for the soul, if it
should be but so much as conceived in the imagination: What the office of a
true Apostle is, Peter describes in his fifth Chapter. 1. Pet. 5.1.
The elders that be amongst you, I which am also an elder exhort, feed, as
much as in yours, the flock of Christ, not compelledly but willingly, not
covetous of filthy gain, but of a ready mind, not as exercising lordship
over the clergy, but that ye may be 2. Cor, 4, 24
examples of the flock: If Peter showing himself that he is an elder, do
claim no Lordship in his Apostleship, how comes it to pass then that the
pope his pretended successor, claymeth not only a lordship and dominion in
Rome, but a little of supremacy over all nations. The Papists answers at
christ said unto Peter, Thou Mat, i6, 18
art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it: and I will give to thee ye keys of the kingdom of
heaven. And whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou loosest on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. But can these
words of binding and loosing give a supremacy and kingdom unto the Pope, and
not to Peter, whose successor he is? For we heard before from Peter's own
mouth, that he claymeth nor allows, but disclaimeth and disswadeth such
exercised lordship over the Clergy. So that neither did, he affect such proud
titles of honor Lordship, and superiority, but sought rather, as he wished
all other, to be examples of mildness and good conversation.

How can we think that Christ should give such Lord-like authority, when
Christ tells his disciples contending among themselves who should seem to
be the geeatest: The Luke, 22, 25 Mat, 20.25 Mark, 15.24
Kings of nations (says he) bear Lordship, but it shall not be so with you:
but he that will be the greatest among you, let him be as the least, or as a
servant.

Now if neither Peter had the superiority but forbids it, as teaching al
humility, being taught by Christ his master, ye kings of nations are to bear
the lordship: and his apostles should be so far from contending for primacy on
earth, that they should rather be as servants appointed to minister to the
Church of Christ, to build a kingdom for God in heaven: If neither Peter had
it, and if Christ also forbad it: showing, ye kingdoms belong to the kings of
the nations: how can any man gather, that Christ's meaning was to give that to
Peter, which he forbids Peter and all the rest of the apostles? If Peter
never had this authority, I marvel much how the papists can possibly conueigh
that to ye pope which his predecessor never had: for they affirm the popes
authority to be above al kings of the earth, supreme head of the Church, and
universal bishop of the whole world; but how far these usurped tytles were
from the affection of the true apostle Peter, the humility of Peter, the
divine exhortation of Peter. And the former commandment of Christ to all the
Apostles does sufficiently declare: for neither could Christ give that
authority of Primacie which himself forbad, nor Peter take that which was not
given him, and which he neither used, nor so much as desired in affection:
neither consequently can the Pope, his pretended successor derive that unto
him, which never belonged to his Ancestor.

It cannot therefore be, that the power of binding and loosing, should signify
the supremacy of earthly kingdoms, to set up and pull down whom he list: for
(as has been already proved) Peter is so far from that arrogance, that
himself gives a double charge to the contrary: namely to fear God, and to
honor the king, as one that is worthy to have the chiefest room: for Christ
had taught Peter, and Peter no doubt learned it, that Lordship and dominion
belonged unto the kings of Nations.

The power therefore of binding and loosing is not committed to Peter alone,
but to all the Apostles, and seems to be expounded in the xx. of John, where
Christ, after he had breathed upon his apostles, and said, Receive John. 20.22
ye the holy Ghost, he had said before, As my Father sent me, so send I you.
He adds furthermore, that Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted: and
whose sins ye retain, they are retained. And this power of binding and
loosing, of remitting and retaining, was not appropriate unto their persons or
unto their places, but unto the office of their Apostleship, and unto their
preaching of the Gospel. For Saint Paul says that the Romans 1 16 1. Cor. 1.21.
Gospel of Jesus Christ is the power of God unto salvation to every on that
believes.

The Jailer demanded of Paul and Silas, what he should do, that he might be
saved, they answered, Act. 16.31,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy household.
When Peter had preached unto the people, they began to be pricked in their
hearts, they demanded of him, and of the other Apostles: Men and brethren, what
shall we do? Peter answered, Act 2 38
Repent, and be baptized every man in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, and receive ye the gift of holy Ghost. Be it known unto you
b men and brethren (says Paul) that through this man (speaking of Christ) is
preached unto you the remission of sins, and that every one that believes,
shall through him be justified from all things, from which he could not be
justified by the law of Moses.

So that we see, that remission of sins is by the preaching of the Gospel to
the faithful: and that contra, Their c sins are retained and bound with
chains thereof, that are Infidels, obstinate, and unrepentant, that have no
faith to take hold of salvation preached by the Apostles and pastors of the
Church.

But (say they) When Christ gave unto Peter by special name, the keys of
binding and loosing, he thereby made Peter the Prince of the whole church. The
answer is easy sie, for it is proved before, that Christ gave the power of
binding and loosing to all the Apostles, and why at this time Christ said unto
Peter that he would give to him ye keys by special name, the reason was, as
appears by the circumstance of the text, because when Christ demanded of
his Apostles, Whom say ye that I am, Simon Peter answered, thou art Christ the
son of the living God: For Peter answered in the name of all the apostles,
and Christ likewise gave him the keys in the name of all. And so Cyprian and
Augustine, two of the Fathers expound it, that Christ did it not for this
purpose, to prefer one man before an other, but so to set forth the unity
of the Church: for so says Cyprian, that God in the person of one, gave the
keys to all, to signify the unity of the Church. Augustine says, When the
Apostles were all asked, only Peter answered, Thou art Christ: and it is said
to him, I will give thee the keys, as though he alone had received the power
of binding and loosing, whereas he being one stands one, for all, And he
received the other with all, as bearing the person of unity: therefore one for
all, because there is unity in all.

I trust these Fathers will satisfy the Papists, if they be not obstinately
malicious, and froward children that in the power of the keys of Peter gained
no superiority over the rest of the Apostles.

Act, 15, 5 1, pe^, 5, 1 Act, 11, 3 Acts, 8, 24 Gal, 1 and 2, cap,
Run over all that remains written, and you shall find nothing else but that
he was one of the twelve, equal with the rest, and their fellow, but not
their Lord. I wonder therefore that the Pope and Papists will force that
upon Peter, which Peter never had, nor meant to take upon himself, which
Christ never meant to give him, nor to any other, viz. to be the Prince and
head of the Church: for he has left this title to no other but himself.

This that Christ says, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church, imprehendeth no other thing of Peter, but that which Paul, and Peter
himself speaks to al Christians: for Paul makes Christ the chief and
Ephesians, c, 20
corner stone, upon which they are builded together, that grow into an holy
temple to the Lord. And Peter bids us to be lively 1, Pet, 2.3
stones, builded upon that lively, chosen and precious stone, Christ Jesus. So
when Peter had answered to the demand, that he was Christ the son of the
living God: then said Christ, Blessed art thou Mat, 16, 7
Simon Bar-Iona, for flesh and blood has reualed this to thee, but my father
which is in heaven. And I say unto thee that thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. So that still the Church is builded upon that confession and answer that
Peter made: viz. Upon Christ the son of the living God: also the g rock is
said to be Christ by especial words in the epistle to the Corinthians.

And Christ himself says by special words also, that he that hears his
words and does them, has like a wise man builded his house upon a rock, so
that Christ and his word be Mat, 7, 24, 25
the rock whereupon the Church of Christ is builded: For the Church is not
builded super Petrum, but super petram: that is Jesus Christ the son of the
living God, whom Peter confessed.

If Peter then be not the head of the Church, down must fall the title of the
universal Bishop of all the Church, which title the pope proudly has usurped,
as derived from Peter, who was content to be a member of the Church, and not
the head thereof, but the swelling ambition of the Pope is so monstrous, that
he neither cares to commit treason against christian princes, but most
proudly he will intrude himself into the seat and throne of God himself,
and he will be head of the Church to dye for it: but I believe in the end he
will scarce be so much as the foot, or one of the toes of the Church, his
blasphemy is so monstrous and so intolerable.

If then (silly Pope) thou will be head of the whole Church, show which way
thou make title, for Peter from whom thou claymest was content to be a
member of the Church: And thou because thou can not be a member of the
church, most proudly claymest to be the head: and because thou can not be the
head, thou will be no part of the church at all. I believe the consequent:
dare thou proud pope without all authority derogate so much from the glory
and majesty of Christ, as to take from Christ his crown, and to set it upon
thy head most traitorously, and think thou that he will not trample thee
under his feet? does not Paul to the Ephesians speak in plain t^armes that
God raised Christ from ye dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenly
places above all principalities, and powers, and lordships, and every name that
is named not only in this world, but in the world to come, and has submitted
all things under his feet, and has made him head above all things to the
Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all. If
Christ be the head of the Church, as this text does most plainly prove, then
cannot the pope be the head of the church in earth, as he proudly usurps:
for there can be but one head of the Church, and that head is Christ: so that
it is the sole appropriated title of Christ to be the head of his church on
earth, and every where, for God has given this title to neither man nor
angel, nor archangell, but to Christ only, whom he raised from the dead.
Look through the whole life of Peter, look through all his Epistles and
doctrine, and thou shall find in him all the marks of a true and worthy
Apostle: his mind humble, not elevated with pride: his doctrine sound, which
he had received from Christ: his counsel good: his admonitions wholesome: his
Epistles most divine.

The pope his boasting successor cannot abide the charge of preaching sincerely
the word of God: but yet will he be an Apostle, as touching the place, and
retain the name of an Apostle, and when a man is no more an Apostle, and
reuera wants both the doctrine and sincere mind of an Apostle, what is this
else but to be a false Apostle, and an intruder into the Church of God? What
his doctrine is perticularly, to recite al were to tedious, and almost infinite:
their idolatrous mass, their invented purgatory devised only to purge men's
pursses, not their souls, their bowing to idols, their intercession of
saints, their freewill, their justification by works, nay their works of
superogation and infinite more: what do all these but make void ye cross of
Christ, and disanull the grace of God, repugnant plainly against the law of
Moses and the sacred scriptures? But who may speak against him in any thing?
who may tell him that God commands we should not Exodus 20.
bow down nor worship carved Images, and if he leave out this second
commandment clean out of the book because it makes against him, who can
reprove him? In his absurd doctrne of transubstantion after the words of
consecration uttered who can persuade him but that the bread is the very body
of Christ? and the wine is ye very blood, though Christ call it plainly the l
fruit of the vine in plain terms? Who may tell him yt he should only teach
the godly doctrine of Christ as a faithful Apostle, and not his unwritten
verities nor curtoll the scriptures of God, nor yet dispense with any thing
therein contained? who may tell him of his charters of pardons, his
dispensations to commit cruel and unnatural murders against Christian
Princes, rebellions, robberies, adulteries and all the villainies of the world,
and all this under a pretensed color of the supremacy (which Peter never had)
over the Church of God over all Princes and Emperors, yea and I think above
God, himself? for what is this else, but to chop and change, and to use at his
pleasure the sacred word of God, and to abuse it to all ungodliness and
wickedness.

Their answer is short, that the Scriptures are to be expounded by general
counsels, and they and the pope make the Church, and the Church cannot err.
And whatsoever therefore they shall say or decree, that is the word of God,
and to be reverenced as an oracle from heaven whatsoever it be: And hereupon is
builded ye implicita fides of the Roman papists, to believe as the Church
believes, is faith good enough for a papist: This argument is very
pithagorium, Ipse dixit: ergo verum est: O subtle papists, O simple and
deceived people, O most diuelishe and pestilent religion, thus to bewitch men's
hearts, and to cast a mist before their eyes, to blindfolde them in such
polluted doctrine: And the more to color this their fraud and apparent deceit
they have established ignorance, for the mother of devotion, and images they
have made lay men's books, and as for the Bible, that shall be read to the people
in an unknown tongue, as in Latin: O devilish devise of Satan, O hellish
darkness: Not the devil himself could have invented a more subtle and yet a
most pernicious religion.

Is ignorance the mother of devotion, when Christ calls it the mother of
error, saying, to the Saduces, you Mat. 22 29.
err not knowing the scriptures? Can an unlearned man says Paul, say Amen to
thy service uttered in an unknown toonge, when he knows not what thou say?
and he says plainly that there is no Romans 14.
edification in such unknown language, how can these men boast that they
edify the people then when the people say Amen they know not to what, and
their implicita fides believes they know not what: they tell them the church
cannot err, and this is sufficient for them, if you will go any further the
Church must answer. O silly Romanistes, so much seduced by that deluding
Antichrist, whereupon is your Church builded? upon the pope as the head of the
church, and the general counselles. Peter never claymed to be the head of the
Church, he never had that authority given him, nay it was denied him to seek
after it: And Christ only is the head of ye church as has bin proved before,
Ergo the pope has no such pre-eminence. As touching their general counsels
wherewith they bind men's consciences, as with cords, how can they prove those
counsels to be autentically true? for whatsoever it be, that is decreed by
them, they make them as oracles and necessary conclusions of the truth,
though they disagree never so much from the Scriptures: for such matters must
not be called into question, for they hold it as a principle, yt from the
determination of a counsel there can be no appellation: but what if they err?
They say they cannot err: why? Because they be the Church: who allows it?
Will they prove themselves to be the Church, who in their blind and
deuelishe doctrine and conversation, show themselves to be the Synagogue of
Satan? I know not, and I am sure themselves will never be able to prove: For
the word of God is that which must try out the truth of the religion, and
Church of God. For as for building faith upon general Councels, it is a very
feeble foundation, and (no question) they might err, and did err: yea, they
are sometimes contrary one to an other: as the Synod of Constantinople gathered
together under Leo the Emperor, judged, that images set up in Churches should
be overthrown and broken in pieces. A little afterward the Council of Nyce
which the Empress assembled in spite of him, decreed that they should be
restored: both these Councels could not c true: and whether of these should a
man take to be true, or how can he tell which is true, but by that Scripture
which is given by divine inspiration, which is the rule of the Church, and the
square of truth, whereupon the church must be builded? else we shall never
know what, or which is the truth.

Augustine says, that the latter Council can not stand without present
perrill of idolatry. Epiphanius says, it is a wickedness and abomination to
have Images seen in the Church of Christians. The Council of Constance forbad
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be given to the lay people, but willed
that the Priest only should drink thereof, which I think the Romanistes
themselves will not agree unto.

Thus because Councels may easily err, there is no faith to be built upon them:
but all faith, all religion, and the true Church is only to be built upon the
Ephe. 2.20
Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the head corner stone, the rock
that never falls nor fades: For this is a mark incident to the Church, My
John, 10.3
sheep (says Christ) will hear my voice Again, Christ says, He that is of
John 3.47
God hears Gods words, you therefore hear them not (says he) because you
are not of God. The sheep will follow their good shepherd, for they know
his john. 10.3
voice: A stranger they will not follow. Therefore the church and true spouse of
Christ must be subject to her head and husband, enclining to his will, and
governed by his word: For the Church which is not builded upon the word of
Christ is built upon the Mat. 7.26.
Sand, and so subject to a continual ruin and overthrow, as Christ himself
preached in his sermon: But that which stands upon Christ the rock, the Math
16, 18,
gates of hell shall never prevail a-against it, as Christ told Peter. Try
the spirits (says S. John) whether they be of v God or no: John. 4, 1,
for many false prophets are come into the world. Again, he that knows God
hears us (says S. John) he that is not of God, hears not us: by this we
know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. The false prophets
(says he) speak of the world, and the world hears them, because they are
of the world: but we are of God (says he) So that both John and Christ show
this to be a mark to know the spirit of error, if they hear not the words
of Christ's apostles.

Let not the pope therefore deceive thee (gentle Reader) as though he could not
err: neither let his general counsel so bind thy conscience, without
appellation, but that thou be free to try the spirits by the word of truth:
For many false prophets are come into the world. Try the gold by the touch
stone: For be he Pope, be they general councels: yea, be they Angels from
heaven, if they preach matter contrary to the doctrine of Christ, believe him
not: nay, Anathema esto, hold him accursed, as Paul commands thee.

The Scribes and Pharisees demanded of Christ, why his disciples transgressed
the traditions of the elders. Christ answered them, Why do ye Math, 15, 2
transgress the precepts of God thorough your tradition, for God commanded,
saying, Honor father and mother. etc. Hypocrites (says he) well prophesied
Esayas of you: saying, This people comes near unto me with their mouths,
and honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me: but in
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine, the precepts of men.

And is not the religion of Rome as vain a worship, when they teach for
doctrine, the precepts of men, viz. of general Councels, and that we must
hold them as undoubted oracles of the holy Ghost: and that none must mutter
against them, or gainsay them, upon pain of a condemned heretik. Yea, they
hold, that the word of God is subject to the censure of the Church, which (say
they) is their Pope and general councels, and whatsoever sense they set upon
the scriptures, is to be received for true, without questioning against it:
what is this else but to make the head subject to the foot? the sheep to rule
their shephearde? and the Spouse which should be subject, to bear authority
over her husband that should be sovereign, her Lord and master to govern
her after his will? But herein the Church of Rome shows her self to play the
harlot plainly, when she renounceth her head: when she forsakes her husband,
and runs a whoring after her own ymagmations. Judge then (gentle reader)
whether thou think to be the true church, ours that is builded upon the
foundation of Christ, the prophets, and apostles, or the church of Rome, that
is builded upon the Pope, his Cardinals, and his general councels: Ours that
acknowledges Christ to be the only head thereof, or theirs, who (most
dishonourably to christ) acknowledge the Pope the head thereof: Ours that is
builded upon God, ortheirs that is builded upon slippery men: Ours that
admits no impuritie, or theirs, who for money, and to serve their turn,
will dispense with most monstrous and heinous cruelties: Their religion which
seeks and thirsts after blood, being therein like to the Devil their
father, who was a John. 8, 44
murderer from the beginning, or ours which seeks peace of conscience in a
godly conversation: Ours seeks the glory of God: theirs seeks their own
pomp, and the glory of the world: Ours gives free liberty to all to try the
truth thereof out of the sacred scriptures: they bind men's consciences with the
decrees of their own councels without apellation

We say with the Prophet Esaias, That all our righteousness is like a defiled
cloth: and with Paul, that Christ is made unto us 1. Co. 1.3 ct
righteousness by the bountifulnes of God, and wisdom, and redemption, that
as it is written, He that Iere 9, 23
reioiceth, should rejoice in the Lord. We say with Christ, that no man can
come unto him, unless it be John. 6, 65
given him from his father. We say also with Paul in plain terms, that it is
Phil. z 3
God that works both the will, and thee deed. They say they have free will
of themselves to good, acceptable to God, by I know not what blind light of
nature: they have good works, yea works of superogation, meritorious for
themselves and others also: wherein they may boast and brag, but not before
Romans 4 2
God: So we ascribe all all glory to God, and they rob God of his glory and
take it to themselves.

Peter was commanded to feed the ohn 21,
flock of Christ, and he did according: The Pope he starueth the flock of
Christ without any food, and yet he takes the fleece: for ignorance (says
he) is the mother of devotion: and heathen Idols be the books that Laymen
must look on, and this is the food he ministers, and the knowledge and
truth.

Christ bids the people, Search the John, 5.39
Scriptures: the papisticall church says no: It breeds sects and schisms,
as though they were wiser then christ. The religion of God is sincere, holy and
pure: for money a man may have a pardon and dispensation of the Pope for all
kinds of beastly vilanies, what does this show but that their bellye is
their God, their kitchen is their roligion? yea, they are not ashamed to
publish murder of christian princes to be a matter meritorious: and wherefore
contend they for this? but that they may reign themselves in earthly pomp,
and sit above kings, adorned with large exte^ded authority. This last point is
such a blur to their religion, that he is wilfully blind that sees not the
falsehood thereof: yea it is such a spot to their religion, to give a commission
to commit murder and that by ye name of meritorious: that it bewraieth all the
rest of their religion to be full of fraud and deceit and open treachery. For
what man of sound wit can be persuaded that he yt is a true and faithful
apostle indeed, can dispe^ce in any sort with such open and gross faults
which are even odious to the law of nature, and ready footpath to bring the
body into bondage, and ye soul to hellish torments? I would wish therefore no
man's im plicita fides to be so entangled with his open sleightes as to believe
him in any thing, for he shows himself reuera to be very Antichrist in such
perspicuous manner, that no man can doubt thereof, for what does he else but sit
in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.
temple of God and boast himself to be God, when claiming the Apostolic sea,
he calls himself the vicar of Christ in earth? the head of the church? that
he cannot err? that he can forgive sins? matters that belong peculiarly to
God alone: and yet that proud Antichrist will be extolled with those titles:
what is this but to sit in the seat of God as God? Also that he claims to be
Dux ducum, Rex regum, imperator imperatorum, that he has authority to depose
and set up princes at his pleasure, to build and overthrow kingdoms, what is
this but malepertly and most blasphemously to thrust himself into the seat of
God boasting himself to be God? for it is God per quem Reges regnant ac
principes dominantur. But let all the Romanistes know this, that is also
written in the same Chapter concerning their Antichrist the pope, that for the
decite wherewith he has deceived the inhabitants of the earth, and for his
treasons and blasphemies against the mighty God, the Lord from heaven shall
consume him with the 2 Thessalonians. 28.
spirit of his mouth, and confound him in the brightness of his coming:
Babylon must Reul, 18, 2
fall, yea great Babylon must fall, and must become an habitation of devils and
a prison of alvnclean spirits. Now let him boast that he is Peter's successor?
that makes him never a jot the more lawful apostle unless he perform the
office of a sincere Apostle as Peter did: John, 10, 1
for otherwise he is a l thief, a robber and a Woolfe that appears in
sheep clothing, of whom Christ bad us beware. And therein he does nothing
else but like the devils impe transform himself into an angel of light to
deceive simple souls. Let them glory in the name of the church, crying that
Rome is the mother church, the mother church, what benefit is it to have the
name and to want the thing? for in truth all their pre-eminence is only in
names of the church, of Peter's place in the stateliness of their Hierarchy of
goodly order, of their carnal cardinals and in such outward pomp and glory.
But (alas) these painted clothes bewray the raggedness of their religion: for
the church of God is not builded upon such outward shows, but upon
sincerity of doctrine and conversation. Therefore leaving the Lion to be
known by his claws, whom times and seasons have so manifestly disclosed, I
counsel thee to forsake the pope and to learn of Peter: build thy faith not
upon the pope who of himself wants a foundation, but upon Paul and Peter
and the rest of the Apostles Christ Jesus himself being the corner stone. Take
heed of implicita fides, and learn thy self out of the word of God what thou
beleeuest and whereupon thy faith is builded: for if it be builded generally
upon men, thy faith is wavering and doubtful, but if upon God, then is it
built upon a rock, against which the gates of hell shall never prevail.
Follow the advice of Christ, John, 5, 39
Search the scriptures diligently, read them with reverence in all humility,
and pray to God earnestly, so shall his word be a light unto thy feet, Psalm,
i19, 105
and a lantern to thy paths to direct thee in the way of truth to keep thy
mind sincere and thy eye clear to see and discern the truth from falshoode,
a shepherd from a woolfe, a true Apostle from a false, and Christ from
Antichrist.

FINIS.
(...)
