A DESCRIPTION Of the King and Queen of Fayries, their habit, fare, their
abode, pomp, and state.

Being very delightful to the sense, and full of mirth.

depiction of King Charles I and his Queen Consort, Henrietta Maria

LONDON, Printed for Richard Harper, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Hospital gate. 1635.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Present thee here with the Description of the King of the Fayries, of his
Attendants, Apparel, Gesture, and Victuals, which though comprehended in the
brevity of so short a volume, yet as the Proverb truly averres, it has as
mellifluous and pleasing discourse, as that whose amplitude contains the
fullness of a bigger composition: yet not so much presuming on the contentment
that it will bring to thee, as partly relying upon thy connivence at the faults
therein contained, which being innocent and harmless, can give no great
disturbance to thy patience, but please thy palate with variety of mirth, and
not doubting but my labor will be remunerable with your good approbation, I
shall think my pains well taken, and my self really satisfied with your
contentment, emboldning me to subscribe my self

Yours hereafter, If now approved on, R. S



Deep skild Geographers, whose art a^^ s^^^^
Do traverse all the world, and with their (...)
Declare the strangenes of each several clim^
The nature, situation, and the time
Of being inhabited, yet all their art
And deep informed skill could not imp^^^
In what set climate of this Orb or I Will,
The king of Fayries kept, whose honored s^
Is here enclosed, with the sincere descript^^^
Of his abode, his nature, and the region
In which he rules: read, and thou shall fin^
Delightful mirth, fit to content thy min^
May the contents thereof thy palate suit,
With its mellifluous and pleasing fruit:
For naught can more be sweetn'd to my mi^^
Than that this Pamphlet thy contentm^^^ fin^
Which if it shall, my labor is sufficed,
In being by your liking highly prized.
Yours to his power, R. S.

A Description of the King of Fayries Clothes, brought to him on New-yeares day
in the morning, 1626. by his Queens Chamber-maids.
FIrst a Cobweb-shirt, more thinn
Than ever Spider since cou^^ spin.
Changed to the whiteness of the snow,
By the stormy winds that blow
In the vast and frozen air,
No shirt half so fine, so fair.
A rich Wastcoat they did bring,
Made of the Trout-flies gilded wing;
^t which his Elveship began to fret,
^wearing it would make him sweat
^ven with it weight: he need would wear
(...) wascoat made of downy hair,
^ew shaven of an Eunuchs chin,
That pleased him well, it was wondrous thin.
The outside of his doublet was
Made of the four leaved true loved grass,
Changed into so fine a gloss,
With the oil of Crispie moss:
^t made a Rainbow in the night
Which gave a luster passing light.
On every seame there was a lace
Drawn by the unctious Snails slow pace.
To which the fin'st pur'st silver thread
Compared, did look like dull pale lead.
His breeches of the Fleece was wrought,
Which from Chlochos Jason brought:
Spun into so fine a yarne,
No mortal wight might it discern.
Weaved by Arachne on her loome,
Just before she had her doom.
A rich Mantle he did wear,
Made of Tinsell Gosameare.
Beflowred over with a few
Diamond stars of morning dew:
Died Crimson in a maidens blush,
Lined with humble Bees soft plush.
His Cap was all of Ladies love,
So wondrous light, that it did move,
If any humming gnat or fly
Buzzed the air in passing by.
About his neck a wreath of pearl
Dropped from the eyes of some poor girl.
Pinched, because she had forgot
To leave clean water in the pot.
A Description of his Diet.
NOw they the Elves within a trice,
Prepared a feast less great than nice.
Where you may imagine first,
The Elves prepare to quench his thirst,
In pure seed Pearl of Infant dew
Brought and sweetened with a blew
And pregnant Violet; which done,
His killing eyes begin to run
Quite ore the table, where he spies
The horns of watered Butter-flies.
Of which he eats, but with a little
Neat cool allay of Cuckows spittle.
Next this the red cap worm that's shut
Within the concave of a nut.
Moles eyes he tastes, then Adders ears;
To these for sauce the slain stagges tears
A bloted earewig, and the pith
Of sugared rush he glads him with.
Then he takes a little Mothe,
Late fatted in a scarlet cloth,
A Spinners ham, the beards of mice,
Nits carbonado'd, a device
Before unknown; the blood of fleas
Which gave his Elveships stomach ease.
The unctious dew tops of a Snaile,
The broake heart of a Nightingale,
Overcome in music, with the sagge
And well bestrowted Bees sweet bag.
Conserves of Atoms, and the mites,
The stike worms sperme, and the delights
Of all that ever yet has blessed
^ayrie land: so ends his feast.
Orpheus. Thrice exc^lling, for the finishment of this Feast, thou must music
it so, that the Dieties may descend to grace it.

THE FAIRIES FEGARIES. OR,
Singing and dancing b^ing all their pleasure,
They Will please you m^st nicely, if y^ule be at leisure,
To hear their sweet chanting, it will you delight,
To cure melancholy at morning and night.
Sung like to the Spanish Gypsy.
COme follow, follow me,
You Fairie Elves that be:
And circle round this green,
Come follow me your Queen.
Hand in hand lets dance a round,
For this place is Fayrie ground.
When Mortals are at rest.
And snorting in their nest,
^nheard, or unespy'd,
through key-holes we do glide:
^ver tables, stools, and shelves,
^e trip it with our Fairie Elves.
and if the house be foul,
^r platter, dish, or bowl,
^p stairs we nimbly creep,
and find the Sluts asleep:
^hen we pinch their arms and thighs,
^one escapes, nor none espies.
^ut if the house be swept,
^^d from uncleanness kept,
^e praise the house and maid,
and surely she is paid:
^or we do use before we go
^o drop a Tester in her shoe.
upon the mushroomes head,
^ur table cloth we spread,
(...) grain o'th finest wheat
^s manchet that we eat:
^he pearlie drops of dew we drink
^n Akorne-cups filled to the brinke.
The tongues of Nightingales,
With unctious juice of Snailes,
Betwixt two nut-shels stewde
Is meat that's easily chewde:
The brains of Rrnnes, the beards of mice
Will make a feast of wondrous price.
Over the tender grass,
So lightly we can pass,
The young and tender stalk,
Nere bows whereon we walk,
Nor in the morning dew is seen,
Over night where we have been.
The grasse-hopper, gnat, and fly,
Serves for our Minstrels three,
And sweetly dance a while,
Till we the time beguile:
And when the Moone-calfe hides her head.
The glow-worme lights us unto bed.
FINIS.
depiction of Adam and Eve cast out of Paradise

The Melancholy Lovers Song.
HEnce all you vain delights,
As short as are the nights
Wherein you spend your folly,
There Is naught in this life sweet,
If men were wise to see it,
But only melancholy.
Welcome folded hands, and fixed eyes,
A sigh that's piercing, mortifies,
A look that is fastened on the ground,
A tongue chained up without a sound:
Fountain heads, and pathlesse groves,
Are places where pale passion loves.
Moone-light walks, when all the fowls
Are warmely housed, save Bats and owls;
A midnight bell, a parting groan,
These are the sighs I feed upon:
Then stretched out bones in a still gloomy valley
There Is nothing dainty, sweet to melancholy
FINIS.



