CERTAIN WORTHY MANVscript Poems of great Antiquity Reserved long in the
Study of a Northfolke Gentleman. And now first published By J. S.

1 The statly tragedy of Guistard and Sismond.

2 The Northren Mothers Blessing.

3 The way to Thrifte.

DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS.



Imprinted at London for R. D. 1597.

To the worthiest Poet Master Ed. Spenser.

THE STATELY Tragedy of Guistard and Sismond in two Books.
The first Book.
TANCREDE the noble Prince of Salurne*
Flower of Knighthood, and myrrour of prowess,
The which long time his people did govern
Wittily by benignity and gentleness,
Iche man rejoiced of his great noblesse:
Discreet in all thing that was judicial,
And evermore Prince-like in things imperial.
His law he kept justly through his Province,
Rigorous to vice, yet bounteous to all,
And merciful als as ever was any Prince,
And shortly as my Doctor makis rehearsal,
His fame had never spot in all his gouernall,
Til hasty cruelnesse procured in great ire
The fatal death of tweyne that love had set on fire.
A wife he took, which come of blood Royal,
But of what prince or yet of what lineage,
What was her name, or what men did her call,
Naught says mine Author* But of high parage
Men may well know, that thus in marryage
Was joined with so high a Prince as was Tancrede:
Therefore I pass over and take there of none heed.
This noble Prince Tancrede had never issue
In time of all his life to be his heir
Save only a daughter whom Nature and virtue
Excellently endued, so was she good and fair.
But ocruel destiny that mirth does often appeyre,
And after great gladness makes men to morn!
Better had Tancrede been that child had never be borne.
But all that was full far fro his mind,
He red not in the book of her Destinye,
Her fatal chance was to him derke and blind;
Let all this pass: This child was put to noiye,
Daily she increased in favor and beauty
So that when her nonage passed and her youth
Her noble fame and beauty was in ich man's mouth.
If I should discriue this beauteous creature*
Nature had her specially in remembrance*
For she was well fetured and seemly of stature,
Her chere was ruddy according to pleasaunce,
Aspere it was to lovers her goodly countenance,
Her beauty not made be signement ne other gere
But of her kind as Nature gave to her.
She excellid in beauty Vlixes Lady fair
Penelope of Greece, and eke fair Helene:
Hypolita also, and Emely her sister
Might not compare with her, nor Polixyne:
Instedfast love she passed Dido the Queen;
Faithful and true without dangerous disdain,
Curteys and deboneyre, she was not sullein.
As for to speak of her pregnant wit,
Her perfect mind, and her intelligence,
No thing was so heard, but she conceived it;
In far sottell casting she had experience:
What should I say more but shortly in sentence,
She knew more happily than was expedient
Unto any woman, or ellis convenient.
Like as the unhappy fader ofyssue had no more,
But this child only, so loved he her truly:
His heart, his mind, his love was set on her so sore,
That if she were abse^t him thought he should die;
So that in his mind he is determind utterly
Ever to keep his daughter with him in his sight,
And never to grant her in marriage to no wight:
Tho Princys royal, to whom of high favor
Fortune had grauntit great inheritance,
Desyren this feyre Lady to their Paramour
Ever to be true withouten variance
And so by matrimony to make Aliance.
But tho Cupid hit them with his fiery dart
Yet nolde her fader suffer her to depart.
So shortly for to tell, this maid fro her desire
Was also needly compellit to abstain:
Tho lusty youth and courage brent her as fire,
Yet might she never pleasure of her love attain,
But ever contemned, still living in pain
Till many of her lusty yeris were agoo,
Her own cruel fader did her all this woo*
It fortund in a time I wot not in what wise
Wheder that her fader had compassion
Upon her great woe, or ellis for some promise
Of good riches, or of possession,
But shortly to Champayn the Dukes son
He granted his daughter to have in marriage;
A man of blood royal and of high parage.
It needith not rehers the rich Apparel
Of those two lovers the day of their wedding:
Or to my purpose what may hit avail
To tell of the curious feast, and the guyding?
All this I pass over, and make notarying:
I speak not of the mirth and melody that was there,
But for a conclusion, thus wedded they were.
Of sorrowful morning now is the clowdie night
By the fire of love driven far away,
The fervent sun of plesance shines now fulbright,
His fresh lusty beams has turned night to day,
Now may she da^ce and sing now has she lust to play*
For ever after mourning the mirth is the sweter,
And after great sorrow the joy shall be the greater.
But as lusty Phoebus with his fiery beams
When his golden Carrehath raught into the west,
Anon he withdrawes his hot brenning streams
And then aperith Phoebe out of her cloudynest,
Then comes the night when al men drawn to rest,
Until on the morrow that Lucifer appear
Called the Day Star, the days messengere.
Right so the fervent Sun of her lusty pleasance.
Was wrapped with weeping of the cloudy rain:
For within little space of continuance
After their wedding, Death parted hem tweyne,
I wot not by what mean: her Lord her sovereign
By sickness or by battle I can no knowlech have,
But shortly this Duke-is son is deed in his grave.
Alas departure ground of all heaviness,
Causing the dark night of cloudie divorce!
O cruel Death, I mean destruction of gladness
Disdaining the pleasure of this woeful corse!
Why would thou thus with thy malicious force
Eclipse the cleerenesse of this her joyful day
Bringing forth the night, and care, and wele-away?
Falsely thou robbest her of her hearts pleasure
Taking from her him that she loved best.
Alas thou art the common thief of Nature
That have take from her all ease and herts rest.
Would God on thee she might call a Quest
Of Lovers* and then for all thine art
Thou shouldyst be do to death with thin own dart.
What needith it to speak of thine Envy?
When this woeful woman shall never be the better
For that has be the cause of all her Malady
If it be rehearsed, it makys her woe the greater,
Wherefore my pen shall write thereof no letter*
But thus this woman wepith, and can none otherrede,
It helps her nothing, for her make is deed.
How shall she now be ruled, she takis her council
Deuoide of comfort, for her lacks her guide:
Anon she has co^clud within her mind right well
At home with her fader she thinkith to abide,
And there to leave her sorrow if it would betide
Whereas all her penance first of all was take;
So wedow to her fader she comith in clothis blake.
Things artificial that be violent
Wrought or ellis made by cause accidental
May not ever endure* for when the cause is shent
The effect thereof shall sone faide and fall.
Why should this woman then longer, feynt, or pall,
Sith the cause of her mourning is fro her mind ycast
The death of her Husband is so fer-since past?
If still she bide, and dwell ever still
In woeful care to continue and endure,
Within short time she should her self spill:
For sorrow is a poison which no man may cure,
It brings hearts proud full low unto the lure,
It makes strength to faide and also Beauty,
It is the greatest malady that to man may be.
So she still bided in her faders house,
Young and coragious also in high degree,
With affluence of all thing that was delicious*
But when at last she began perceive and see
That for love, her Fader intends not that she
Should never more none other husband have,
But still to dwell with him to he be dead in grave:
Thus then has her Fader determind utterly
Never to procure for her no marriage,
And her self to axe it her seemed velonye,
She thought therefore to take her best advantage,
Gife she might espy a man of good lineage,
So that he gentil were, to take her own choice,
And in the election her Fader should have novoice.
Now this noble Tancrede had in his household,
As in a Princes Court is wont for to be,
Both Lords and Knights courageous to behold,
Some gentlemen, some yemen, some of low degree,
Among these she began to look and see
If she can any find that were to her pleasure,
Whom she would evermore love while she might endure.
So daily in her mind she was full diligent,
For to note each man in his demeanance:
But Guistard to love is only her intent,
And he right well knew by the apearance
Of her chere and her changed countenance
That of brennyng love she daunced in the trace,
Which has bound her heart with his goldin lace.
But where she set her love he wist in no case,
Till ones he fortuned to stond before this Lady,
And she beholding him with deadly pale face
Not speaking o word, she sighed greatly
And anon with that she can withdraw her eye
Casting down her look far unto the ground,
So womanly shamfast she sat a great stound.
And when this young lover now brought in loves dance
Of her intent had such experience
He was not dull of wit, but gave attendance,
Her to serve and please he did his diligence,
Cupid has smitten him with so great feruence
Of love, that their hearts be together bound,
Both perished with one dart, two lovers with one wound*
Right joyful he was that he stood in such grace
Of this fair Lady But ever he drad fortune:
Alas he seyth thy where turns in little space
Thy double chere unstable never will continue,
More variant then is the flitting Lune:
I fear that thou will cause my Lady sovereign
Upon my simple birth of danger to disdain.
Yet know I her heart so true and so steadfast
And she began also to proffer love,
Why should I then fear or ellis be aghast
Or put default in her? O mercy god above!
For all treasure in earth it would not me behoue
That my hearts joy, my lady hereof wist
That I should put in her any such mistrist.
And percase that if she loved me not,
Yet would I in her service still persevere:
Me nead not by reason argue, for I wot
Love has her heart imbrast me to love ever,
What should I shortly say? for they had lever
Ych of hem die than to part fro other,
More fervently they loved than sister or brother.
So between hem both that loved on this wise
They desired only for their great pleasaunce
By some sottle mean how they might devise
For to speak togeder and have their dalliaunce,
They will not put noe trist ne noe affiaunce
To any on live their matter for to tell,
But ever to hemselues they kept it counsel:
Till it fell on a time of a sudden advise
The Lady found a mean that was a great cautell,
As often it faris that women bin sone wise
And in a sudden case they be right suttell:
She tells him her intent by wrighting every deal
And the letter closed in a reed-spyre
She took it to Guistard for to stur the fire.
Guistard remembered well that for some privy cause
The reed was take to him, he did it sone on close,
And when he saw the letter, made a little pause
Sitting in a study and anon he rose
And to read this letter can himself dispose,
The which the Lady made of her own inditing
She was her own secretary, it was her own writing.
The tenor of this letter was this and all the effect:
I send you greting with heart and love entere
Not bold by rehersall my counsel to detect
For dredful shamfastnes. Wherefore this messe^gere
Shall do this enterprise whose countenance and chere
Changes for no sham; therefore these letters blake
I pray you disdain not to read them for my sake.
Certefying you all my herts pleasaunce
All my worlds rest, my joy and comforture,
That my life, my death, as in a balance
Dependith and hangith only in your cure,
In you alone is put mine Adventure:
Wherefore I require you that you be not strange,
For I ensure you verily my heart shall never change.
And I trow certain that your gentill heart
Disdeineth not my love, nor is not dangerous
Considering your birth, and your great poverty,
And I a Lady both young and beauteous:
For Cupid knows right well and his mother Venus
That only for your virtue and your gentilnes
I set my love on you and for no great riches.
But because also my Fader has made an oath
That I shall never wed while he is living,
To suffer me depart from him he is loath:
Yet lusty youth like as the fire brenning
Has chose you for my souereyn all my life enduring,
And also fortune of her high favor
Has showed me the mean to save all our honor.
Remember there is fast by my faders place
A dungeon deep and strong far under ground
The which at his entry has no more space
But an hole above that little is and round,
And because it is not used ne is found,
With bushes and briers it is ouergrow
So that the dungeon deep there may no man know.
Out from thilke pit is there a secret way
By a posterne door that stands full preuely
Strong bars, and posts, both with lock and key
That leadith to the Chamber where as I
Am wont of custom in sleping for to lie,
And by great dis-use this way is out of mind,
This little door this posterne can no man find.
Till at the last love to whom naught is hid,
The which for every sore can find a remedy,
This way into my mind sone has reducid:
But shortly I tarried not but hastly did me hie
To vnbarre and unlock I can look and spy,
And at the last with great pain and beesy labor
I have found all the craft for to undo this door.
Be my self alone I went into the cave,
I saw the little hole where is the entering
How and in what wise ye may your self save
Agein all manner perils in theder coming,
The hight and the depenes I send you be writing
So that you need not dread for no misauenture,
Ye know where and when you may have your pleasure.
And after this in her inditing
There was a little clause for a conclusion
As is the common usage in each writing
Whose name should be callid Subscription;
She wrote there By your own, and made no mention
Of her name: till after a great stound
With sighing sore she added to, Sismond.
What marvel now if he be not pensive?
Now he has rad this letter of comfort
And from his deedly sorrow turns again to live,
Since he has almost raught the lusty port
Of pleasance, lust* solace and of all disport:
Wherefore he hastes full besely and hieth
To meet his Lady as the letter specifieth.
Who now but this Guistard with his diligence
To this pleasant Journey spedith him apace:
Every hour that he is out of her presence,
Him seems for to be a thousand year of space:
But tho the sluggish carcass be far fro her face
Yet with the flighty wings of amorous desire
He is ever in her service brenning as the fire.
A cord he let adoun anon of great length,
And fast unto a Bough above he did it tie
Fret all full of knots sufficient of strength
By which into the pit he might himself co^uey,
To close himself in ledder also he did puruey
Fro bushes and fro briers to keep him sewre:
And thus toward the pit he went in this armor.
The bright eye of the world when that the shining day
Withdrawith, and also Titan with his sparkling light,
Then this young lover takith his journey
Toward the foresaid pit: abiding there al night
Till on the morrow Aurora shone full bright;
When some haukith, some huntith, some to their labor,
Then gins this Lady to com out from her tower.
Remembering her well, when the night was gone,
Of their covenants made by just appointment,
All her gentyl-men and maidens euerychone
To her gardent to sport and play she sent
Feyning her to be sick, and for that intent
She said to her chamber ageyn she would forth right
To taken rest and sleep if she might.
The doors and the windows she closed anon full sure,
Then toward the dungeon took she the right way
Where she found Guistard her herts pleasure:
Joyfully they kissed, Then she began to say,
Gramercy fortune that I may see this day
To speak with him that is my worldly pleasaunce,
In whom is all my trust and affiaunce.
She brought him to her chamber this Lady beauteous,
Her fresh apparel full Lusty was and gay,
Her surcote of gold furryd with Ermin precious,
A fair mirror of Love her beauty and ary:
So shortly* for to tell, I can no more say;
But construe if ye can, lovers, what they did,
For I can no more, but long they there abid.
And when them seemed best they parted in sondre,
Not long they tarry, ne daily their sports use,
For daily coming makes men to wonder,
And eke long taryaunce makith men to muze,
But cheifely women's shrewd tongues will accuse
Your noble fame, and sey your life is naught,
Tho never ye do offend in word ne thought.
Wisely they provided to eschew infamy,
And for all thing secret might be kept
Into the garden went she full hastily,
Where that her maidens pleyd thinking she slept,
And at night Guistard out of the pit crept:
So coming thus, and by night parting away,
Continued they their pleasure till after many a day,
That fortune alas by treason falsely compast,
Bewrayed all their counsel of misauenture,
All their lusty pleasance turned at the last
Into cruel death at their departing:
O thou false fortune that ever is on sure,
Bringing herts light to woe when they be well,
It seem is thou art not able for to rule thy whele!
It is next in our process to speak of Tancrede
The noble Prince her fader, which of great freque^ce
Of tender love and Ielousy more then need,
So he delyted in her speech and eloquence,
That he used of custom under cares pretense
To come unto the Chamber of his daughter feyre,
And after they had talkyd, again home to repeyre.
Explicit Liber primus.
THE SECOND book of Guistard and Sismond.
IN the merry season of Summer feyre and hot,
When every thing renewith by course of nature,
And winter with his frosty beard and f^iesed cote
Is put into exile and may no longer dure,
Then Summer geuith his livery with besy cure,
New clothing all the Earth in a lusty green
All browderid full of flouers right freshly to seen.
Sterring hearts light in gardens to walk,
So did this Lady Sismond for her pleasaunce
In this fresh season, plucking flowers fro their stall*
She made her garlo^d wherewith she thought to dau^ce:
But in the mean while, alas the unhappy chance,
Her Fader, of a Custom as he was wont to do,
Only to talk with her is to her garden go.
But when he perceiuit she was in her disport,
Right loath he was to let her recreation,
He would for nothing his daughter discomfort,
Neither disquiet her till she had all done,
Forth into the chamber entered he full sone
The curteyns were draw by the bed side,
He sat behind the curtein his daughter to abide.
And as he sat still, sleep did him encumbre,
He waxed all vnlisty and also somnolent,
Then to the bed lened he began to slumbre.
O thou vntristie fortune what is thine intent?
To distroy this Lady it seemith thou have meant.
Where thou may bewray, it is not kept counsel;
That should be counsel kept, thou tellist every deal.
O princis daughter Sismond unfortunate by birth,
O hour unhappy when thou began to so iourne
With Love in his Palace: The pleasant Sun of mirth
Is comin to his hiest, and beginnith to turn.
O slow malicious meeuer, thou cursed Saturn,
I trow by some envy or malicious aspect
Of all this fervent love thou have broken the affect.
Poor Sismond thinking no deceyt ne guile
Partid fro her maidens and to her chamber went,
And so forth to the pit: where in a little while
She found her Guistard all ready present,
For a little before (alas) for him she sent:
And when they were in comin, they put no mistrist,
They know no body there, they did what they list.
Now when her fader see the abominable Crime
After he was out of his sleep awake
He thought have cried: but for a little time
It seemed him best to let his anger slake
And easily within himself this pain to take:
He made no stirring, but sat ever still
Till they had done their pleasure at their own will.
And after that departed as before,
Guistard to the pit, and she to her women*
Her woeful fader would tarry there no more,
But home he went in have, and called for his men,
Of which he sent a certain to the den
For to take Guistard when he should go hence,
And so to present him to the Kings presence.
When this man come up, anon they him arrest,
With dread and pale visage for dread he shook,
All they had ruth on him both most and least,
But forth in that Array they there him took,
They brought him to the Prince, and he did on him look,
For great wrath and anger very pale of chere,
Seying unto Guistard as ye shullen after hear:
Guistard, he said, my love and tender favor,
The mekenes and gentle heart that I have showed to you
Has nothing deserved so great a dishonor
To me and mine as ye have do right now,
Seeing my self all thing, what ye did and how:
That truly so I might my worship keep and save,
I would I were deed and beryed in my grave.
This great rebuke and contum ele went even to the heart
Of Guistard that for shame cannot speak o word,
Till at the last with courage forth he stert,
Saying no more but this* Reme^breth well my Lord,
Experience I trow will to my sentence accord:
The mighty power of Love is a stronger bond
Then other ye or I am able to withstond.
But all his excuse was euin samfayll,
So was his mind with malice and Ire obumbrate.
Alas where malice reigns may non excuse auail,
A great abusion is a ruler to be passionate.
O ye princis therefore to whom of high estate,
The guiding is committed of noble nations,
Well ought ye take heed to rule your passions.
Permit not your wilful Sensualite,
Geinst wisdoms council for to put restreant:
Be not ruld only by your volunte,
Oppressing by power him that is weak and feynt,
Whereby your noble fame is hurt and attaynt:
It causes your people also in time of your distress
To withdraw their favor and herty faithfullnes.
To every glosing tale give no credence,
Let not hasty cruelnes guide your judgment:
Remember well or ye define your sentence,
What shall be the end and what the hole intent:
Rule your self discretly by good auisement:
Remember the prouerbiall seying long agoo,
A cruel hasty man shall never lack of woo:
Preeued wellby Tancredes cruel hastiness,
Committing Guistard anon to close preson,
Putting him in Irons and in great distress,
As a traitor guilty of false prodicion,
And afterward alas agein all reason
This innocent was do to death so cruelly,
That each man abhorrith to here that tyranny.
What man of his wit is so dull and herd,
That cannot think herby of sorrow augmentatio^?
The great thought this Lady had for her Guistard
Sore trobled in her sleep by fearful vision,
Her mind was set on him with such oppression,
That both of well and woe all his adventure
Was showed her in sleep by a feyned figure.
I trow she see full dreadful visions and dreamis
When her love was presoned in that woeful night,
In weeping her eyne waterid like two streemis,
And ever she thought Guistard stood in her sight
Holding a cup of gold, with an heart al blody dight,
Himself eke sprent with blood did her salve,
Seying: Farewell Sismond, this is my last adieu.
She thought her answer was to him anon,
Alas will ye so sone make a departure,
And void of comfort leave me thus alone?
Ye shall not so dear heart: For certain I ensure,
I shall but once drink and do my besy cure
To go with you ever: how so your Journey turn
Mine heart and yours shall ay togeder soiourne.
And suddenly with that out of her sleep she stert
As a woman from her self, she was so sore dismayed,
She thought of very death the sword went to her heart,
And thus weeping by her self she prayed:
O myrror of all women Mary she said,
From all shame and velony my love and me defend,
And help that my dreme to me none pretend.
All these and many mo thing is conuenturall
May well be ymagined by persuation*
But all this is feyning as dreme fantastical,
And thereof mine Author makith no mention,
So that I think to make no manner digression,
Increasing any thing that is not pertinent
To my first purpose or to mine intent.
Wherefore I will proceed to speak of Sismond,
Which of Guistards duresse had no notice
Save only by her dreams, till after a great stound
Tancrede to her chamber com as was his old guise,
And she anon with reverence did again him rise
Welcoming her fader with obeysant lowlines,
The which said unto her as I shall express:
Daughter Sysmond, he seys, your womanly Ap port,
Your virtuous talk and careful demenaunce,
Your steadfast heart and guidance gave me such comfort
Trusting in your heart with hole affiaunce,
That ye of voluptuous Venus the lusty pleasance
Without assent given, I mean of marriage,
Would not have take your self leave for all your courage.
But well I see my wit was dull and blind,
For sure I would have demid the great occasion
Should sooner have dried flaming agein kind,
The^ ye would ever have thought to be a mis-woma^*
For had I not seen the deed in what place and wha^,
Should never man have causit me have supposaill
E re that you would so done but in your spousaill.
Remember well what hurt therefore and damage
Ye did unto your birth and blood royal,
When ye like women of brothel and prostrage
Took what com to hond as the chance would fall:
It seem is ye put no difference twixt Get and Crystal:
All one to you a flint and a Diamond,
Peasin as good as Perles orient and round.
From all womanhode you be degeneraunt,
Which of worshipps souerance is ever desperous;
But ye pervert all this, ye be so variaunt,
Taking in steed of worship, lust voluptuous,
And sike^ly the offense were not so grievous
Hadye taken such as had be commendable,
To your noble birth or elis conuenable.
But in all this region yt seemith by your choice,
Lord, knight, ne squire was none to your pleasure
Of royal blood, in whom ye couth rejoice,
Save only poor Guistard, whose birth and aue^ture
Fortune of disdain has take no thing in cure:
Which for great pouert in time of misery,
Without my releife had dyed for penury.
So that my creuell death daily does renew,
Death? nay more then death I may call it truly
Percing my breast ay fresh, new and new,
By the shamefast sword rebuke and velony,
Which you have do Sismond to all our Ancetry,
Choosing such one to be my Londs inheritaunt
As is by birth ignoble and poor mendicant.
Wherefore I verily purpose to repress
His great inhaunced pride and great presumtion
Condemning for his ^yot in pain and duresse,
Intending the law shall have due execution,
Shortly shall he die, this is the conclusion
Utterly I am determined for his great offense:
But of you Sismond I give yet no sentence.
For I may resemble as in my ragious mind,
A ship without anckre, lacking stern also
In stormy rage of every furious wind,
It is a thing unstable waning to and fro,
Semblable now am I one of thoo*
My doubtful mind is brought in perplexite,
And cast fro side to side twixt justice and pite
Furst justice meueth me to do correction,
Rewarding every wight to their desert,
Some love, some pain with great affliction,
But faderly pity so stirrith my tender heart
That it sufferith me not see nor aduert
Your criminal offense, but rather does it excuse;
So that twixt both I stand a man confuse.
And forth with anon he fell to weping,
As a young infant sore scourged and bett,
In all worldly pleasaunce rejoiced he nothing
Sorrow and shame so by the heart him fret,
Seying nothing thus sat he still and muet:
Daughter he said gif ye will axe mercy,
To pardon your offense forsooth I am ready.
But when Sismond saw how her love Guistard
In preson was intreted kept in iron strong,
That fortune to her also was so cruel and hard
To publish her council that secret was so long,
With gentilles and rurals it was a commen song,
That every man within the country round
Spoke of the unhappy Guistard and Sismond.
Wherefore she plunged so far in pit of sorrow deep,
That I trow each heart that gentill is and tender
If I should tell her pain wuld also moan and weep:
Full often she wrung her fingers long and slender,
Seying; all wordly pleasaunce here I surrendre:
For sithence my love Guistard is iudgid for to die,
I will do the same, I think not to abye.
Wherefore o cursed Fortune with thy double chere
All thy great malice wholly I defy,
Setting no thing by thy deynous daungere,
Thou shall us not depart for all thine envy,
For our love togeder shall dwell perseuerantly*
And turnid to her fader with courage and boldness,
Seying as in this book mine Author does witness:
Tancrede, she said, Fader if I should ye call,
Another will I deny it, nor prey you of favor*
The furst it will help me nothing at all,
Since ye have full knowledge of my Paramour*
But for the second, to axe grace or succor,
I will not axe no grace for that in no wise,
Nor of your grace and favor ask no benefice.
So that I knowlich plainly all mine intent,
My love is set on Guistard, and has be many a day*
And shall be when my spirit and soul is went
From the brotle mansion of this bodies clay:
If nature would me help mean to puruey
That I might execute mine affection and will,
Yet would I after my death ever love him still.
And if ye think this Love so great a crime,
Forsooth the cause thereof was your negligence
When in youth and courage my lusty prime
The brenning fire of love with so great feruence,
Persid mine heart: And yet your cruel insolence
Would not me suffer for all my great pain
After mine husbands death be married again.
Hadye well learned the doctrine of prudence,
Ye would remember your substance material,
I trow it should be imprinted in your aduertence,
That you been made of matter freale and carnal,
Right so am I your daughter by virtue seminall;
I am another of stone iron ne brass,
But of flesh and blood more brekill than the glass.
Although your head be white snowid for age,
Your frosty lims eke be unwieldy and cold,
The hete ny extinct of your lusty courage,
Right well ought ye forsooth consider and behold
How hot is youth with brenning pricking manifold
Assayling each man be he never so haute
With many a fyry dart and hot brenning assaut.
Above all thing ye should have memory,
Tho ye have spent most of your lusty season
In arms of knighthoode and of cheualrye,
Yet should ye not foryet, as seemis by reason,
Ease, rest, and dilicates what great incheason
They give to sterre a man to courage hot fervent,
As well in crooked age as lusty Iuuent.
All these occasions I had and many moo
By which I meuid was so greatly desirous,
Borne by Natures course of flesh and blood also,
Of courage lusty young and amorous,
Fosterid also in pleasaunce and metes delicious:
And that that stirred most, and was my chief motife,
The experience thereof since I was a wife.
But all this is far fro your remembrance,
Ye think not your youth which is past and goo,
Ye may well resemble him in your demeanaunce
Which fell into the water with others one or two,
But after he was deliuerid of his care and woe
Thought nothing at all where he had bin beforne,
His fellows he rebukith, laughing them to scorn.
And if ye happily couth rule your passions
Nor set naught by their force and violence,
Yet might not my frailte geinst such occasions
Make no champarty nor no great defense,
My heart was not so big to make resistance:
So at last woundid, at last with loves fiery lance
I was subdued as prisoner to Castle of Pleasaunce.
Nathelesse with devour I put my diligence
All sklaunders and infamy to avoid and eschew,
And fortune of her favor gave us assistence
Our lusty sport often times for to renew*
We thought her promise had be steadfast and true,
Blandeshing us ever with countnaunce and chere
As tho the sun of pleasaunce should shine ever clear.
But now I see right well she ginneth for to change,
Since ye of all our counsel have plainly notice,
Such is false fortune, ay variant and strange:
But how ye come to knowledge or in what wise
My wit is rude and dull, I can it not devise;
Whether by experience or by information,
By force prestigious, or some superstition.
And would God your knowlech were certain and true
Not meued ne made by false suggestion,
Ye would not then your daughter thus pursue
Seeing that I err in mine election
Taking no sad guiding or direction*
But let my revel ren at the hole chance,
I nas not so foolhardy without deliberance.
For I set not my love ne my fatal intent
Of sudden hap as a comen velayne,
But with deliberation and auisement
I gave my love to Guistard as my Souerayn,
And truly to no mo, this is, certain:
Wherefore ye be to blame fader, yt semith me,
To sey my love was to ych in like free.
As to the great repreeue also contrived,
Which alder first again me ye object*
Seeing of pleasaunce my ship was arrived
In a port that was ignoble and despect,
I mean that Guistard was pore and deiect
Having no part of noblesse by descent,
Which makes my fault greater after judgment:
But as in this ye follow the unstable vulge
Clacking and blasting, variant as the wind
As fame the flying messenger can diuulge
Their rude opinions ignorant and blind,
Seeing it is a proverb sufficient and kind
He that is not borne to habundance of good
But needy for pouert, is not of gentle blood.
Thus by fond reasons daily talking they err
Not thinking how fortune fro her unstable center
Plongeth down Estats fro her wheel aferre
When she list of danger to frown and repent her*
But would they first weigh the original enter
Of our common birth in all our first beginning
Brought forth into this world poor naked and weping,
Then should they remember who were of noblesse,
Who might entitle him to the blood royal*
They should see how Nature whith her besinesse,
Brings forth her effect and wondrous gifts all,
Being as in her birth to every man egall:
For as naked is a King borne as I understand
As is the lowist borne that never had house ne land.
For when our mother Eve brought forth A bell and Caine,
Who couth prefer himself for birth or lineage,
Or of these two infants who couth the title clame
Of gentle blood of noblesse or parage?
That time no difference was twixt gentle and page,
But every one was fayn to endeavor
His living to get with sweat and with labor.
Of all this time was none bond in seruage,
Was none by service under subjection,
Till that the people began to rule and rage
Guiding hemselfe by will and not by reason
Offending their laws by their transgression*
Then of right and Justice they must be correct
Of one their sovereign, and they to him subject.
But he that should be ruler and have regency
May not of right be such as a transgressour:
Again all due order of nature is it trewly
That vice should sit above as governor:
But when that virtue gentleness does honor
He is of right provided sovereign,
Although his birth is poor, this is certain.
Of this wife was Moses and Gedeon also,
The noble duke Iosuah of God himself elect,
And scripture reherseth eke of many more,
Which though for their birth were poor and deiect,
Yet were they for their virtue chosed to direct
And guide the people. So shortly it is true,
There is no gentleman save only by virtue.
Then fader Tancrede in all your great household
Remember well your gentles in their gesture,
The guidance eke of Guistard if you list behold,
His lowly demeanance with all his hauiour,
I trow ye affirm that madam nature
Has granted more to him than many of tho
Which ye call gentlemen, tho all they be not so.
And truly I heard never such relation
In praise and laud of Guistards noblesse,
As I have often heard by your assertion
Commending his Virtues and his gentleness,
Yet was his virtue more than the name doubtless:
He that says Guistard is no gentleman,
Forsooth he says untrue and little good can.
Had ye him called poor ye had not greatly erred;
And yet forsooth it is great velony
To be with you a gentleman vnpreferred,
Such one as tends on your service daly,
A gentle master bids not his man needy,
And though needy pouert take fro a man riches
Yet reues it not nurture nor gentleness.
As for your doubtful ambiguity
What doom to give of me, or what sentence,
Be not in doubt thus nor perplexity,
Dye he, I dye with cruel violence:
For I was root and cause of this offense.
For thy, if you will not my death complish,
These cruel honds my life shall soon finish.
For justice knows with her egall ballaunce,
Which rightwise judge is unto every wight,
My fault is more than his in ponderaunce:
Why then should not her sword me sharply smite
Since that in my person is all the wite?
Reason would that I should have correction,
Which was the very cause and the occasion.
And if your pleasure be at my request
To change his mortal fait with merciful pardon,
I for your finaunce give that ye love best,
Mine own life I mean I give you to guerdon:
For sley ye Guistard, this is the conclusion,
Let your foolish hastines your daughter sley also:
For if ye do it not, my self sone shall it do.
The prince her fader anon perceived well
Her cheer naught abashed, her heart not feminine:
Yet thought her not so tigrous and cruel
To procure her own death, and her mortal fine:
He thought her loves feruence world decline,
If the fire were not kindled ay new and new
By the sight of Guistard comfort of her hew.
Wherefore Tancrede meaning his ire to complish,
Sent forth his men by night so privily
To sley Guistard. Oh Tancrede thou might wish
Sismond had not be borne: for her noble glory
Is macculate by this thy tirrany,
Commanding the bloody heart with violent force
Furiously be rent from his dead murdered corse.
Tancred has closd this heart spre^t with blood round
In a cupe of gold in stead of sepulture,
And by a messenger sent it to Sismond,
Which does her diligence with busy cure
Intending her own death for to procure,
Of herbs and roots to make a potion
Mixed in a viole with venomous poison.
And what the bearer said shortly to express,
Madam, he said, your father has you sent
This woeful donatiue to your nobleness,
The thing you loved best he sends you to present,
Telling you that it is his whole intent
To give you of Guistard such joy and comforture,
As ye gave him of Sysmond. This was his pleasure.
When Sismond saw the heart closed in gold,
She understood her sovereign was deed:
Alas now been deaths Kalenders so cold
Entered this Lady, now can she no read,
Now is she wan the flower of woman head
That sometime was the mirror of fayrenes,
The orient margarite of all gentleness.
Void of all comfort sat she still dismayed,
Till at the last with bold hardy courage
Beholding the messenger, thus to him she said,
It were again reason to put you in damage
Only for the doing of your message:
But for my fader I give you in witting,
Ye shall on my behalf be are him no greeting.
For he resembles more in his wood rage
A tyrant than a prince ay thirsting for vengau^ce,
Which no whit couth his passion assuage,
Nor all his life himself culd auaunce
To such worship, as when his violence
Let this heart be shrined in a tomb of gold,
And in this only his goodness may be told.
And when she list no longer talk continue,
Viewing the bloody heart in woeful sepulture,
She began his Exequy with pitious intune,
Saying with faint Spright; o piece so pure,
Hostage of lowly lust, very port of pleasure,
Cursed might he be and waried eternally
Which causes the be seen with mortalleye.
Sufficient was to me and eke more pleasant.
To view the with my mind with thy lusty sight,
Of true love ay steadfast and not variant,
It is too much to see thee thus in light:
But now thy course is done, thy counts are quite,
Thus Fortune has complished thy fatal fine
Buried in gold instead of Lybitine.
I trow no lack was of what should behoue
To deadly faite and service funeral,
Save teerling tears of her that was thy love,
For weeping should be at departing mortal:
Wherefore I trow my fader at thy bane fatal
Has sent thee to my chamber of full remembrance
That I should bewail thy dethper soluing al obserua^c.
And I shall fulfill with my power and might
All thing requisite to thy mortuarye:
And after all is done by custom and right
I shall yield my self to death tributarie,
Suing thy fearful trace: for sooth I shall not tarry,
But among other in deaths woeful dance,
Following next thy hond as is my fatal chance.
In whose fellowship, or whose comitiue,
Might I better pass that painful journey,
Than in his whom I loved most on live?
And also he tarryeth for me I dare well say:
Wherefore since his partner was always
Of pleasure; I shall take part of his pain,
Death shall not us disseuer thus in twain.
And anon with that her chere she began to turn,
Her eyne in weping ran like showrs ofrayne,
Till she had washed the heart filling the vrne
By the stilling water of her eyne twain:
And after she had ceased weeping again
Beholding the heart again with deadly chere,
With sobbing voice she said as ye shall here.
O joyful heart, o amiable mirror!
Now lacks there naught required of duty
Unto deadly fine and funeral honor
Save only this that I might follow thee.
But for it seemith that death disdaineth me,
I shall therefore my self with violent force
Disseuer my spirit fro his woeful corse.
Alas my woeful pen sorroweth to write,
That lamentable end of this Tragedy,
Who couth without weeping this matter indite,
To se so fair a creature die so wretchedly,
Of beauty surmounting and well of curtesy?
She took alas the viole with the potion,
That she had made before, and drank up the poison.
After she had drunk that pestiferous drought.

Desunt nonnulla.
So came he in with pale affrighted chere,
Saying sweet Sismond be of good sembland,
If ye thus mourn it will bring me to despair:
Thus he supposed to loose her of her band
With his words of comfort, but death was at hand
Crampesing her limes, and gone was her sight,
Yet she answered again her fader as she might,
And said, Tancrede bestow better, if thou can,
Thy tears, for they stand me in no effect:
Thou resemblest him that first slew the man,
And after him repenting sore bewept:
Had it not be better him to have kept
Thy sorrowful daughter with joy then living
At her own pleasure secretly a man loving,
Than to see by thy cruel execution
Her hard death to thine endless languor?
The which death shall be a direction,
Giving open knowledge of this error
The which was secret, but now the rumor
Shall make the thing which was not fully known
Through all the wide world to be over sown.
And in so much she might no longer speak
Nor throws of death no longer would delay,
She holds the cup till her heart began to break,
Yelding up her spirit to God ever and aye*
There was but Alas, Alas and welaway,
Some wept and cried and some fell in sownd,
It was a piteous sight and a piteous sound.
The woeful fader so sorry in that stound
Seeing his most joy in this world ygon
He made a great shrike falling to the ground,
No more words spoke he, but dead as any stone;
Thus was there grief on grief, and moan upon moan.
Wherefore it has be spoken long ago
That an hasty creature wanted never woe.
Upon this Prince thus may be verifyed,
Which was too hasty and furious certain,
Without judgment causing the man that he dyed,
Whose cruel death has his daughter slain,
And for her death he took such sudden pain,
He dawed never good day, but he was dead,
And all the world wondreth at his folyhede.
Ensample of this every wise man take
What it is to be cruel in violence,
And of a secret thing a wonder to make
Through hasty ire wanting of providence:
Every man remember his own negligence,
And vice into virtue to plant or to root:
For truly against love there is no manner boot.
For certes it is of true lovers the guise,
When their vexation is most sharp and sore
Then love they each other in most hearty wise
An hundred fold more then they did before:
Youth will to youth, love will to love evermore,
And shortly in my mind this process to conclude,
Each thing will draw to his similitude.
As betwixt these lovers plainly did appear,
Which were both young and in flowring age*
For their great trouble they loved better yfeare,
And passed of death the dreadful viage:
Alas the letting of their marriage
Was cause of this mischief and their fall:
Lo what it is to be again spousall!
Wherefore that prince stands in great peril,
That to the law of wedlock nold incline*
But as a tirant over feirce and fell
Caused Guistard be put in mortal fine:
Of whose soul if I should determine,
I trust to God his faithful intention
Has furtherd him to his salvation.
For why? he thought none harm of earthly wight,
But to the will of Sismond did assent,
Notwithstonding that I trust to God almight
Shall be to his soul none impediment;
For to have be married was their intent:
Then reckon the sorrow she had withal
And great contrition to her end final.
That as I trust she is in bless celestial,
As of faith and troth all lovers surmounting,
See was a mirror unto women all,
Example of true and steadfast love giving:
Wherefore I beseech him that is of all thing*
Lord and governor, and comfort again bale,
Grant all lovers joy. And thus ends my tale*
Explicit Guistard and Sismond.
FINIS.
THE NORTHREN MOTHERS BLESSING. The way of Thrift.

Written nine years before the death of G. Chaucer.

DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS.



LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson for Robert Dexter. 1597.

The Northren Mothers Blessing.
GOD would that every wife that wonnyth in this land
Would teach her daughter as ye shall understand,
As a good wife did of the North country
How her daughter should lere a good wife to be:
For lack of the moders reaching
Makes the daughter of evil living,
My leave dear child.
My daughter gif thou be a wife, wisely thou work,
Look ever thou love God and the holy Kirk,
Go to Kirk when thou may, and let for no rain,
And then shall thou fare the bet, when thou God has sayn:
Full well may they thrive
That seruen God in their live,
My leave dear child.
Gladly give thou thy tithes and thine offerings both
To the poor at thy gate, be thou never loath;
Gif hem of thy good, and be not over hard;
Seldom is that house poor there God is steward:
For that is best I spend,
That for Gods love I lend.
My leeue dear child.
When thou sits in the Kirk thy Bedes shall thou bid,
Therein make no iangling with friend ne sib,
Laugh not to scorn no dir old ne young,
Be of good bering and have a good tongue:
For after thy bering,
So shall thy name spring,
My leeue dear child.
Gif any man with worship desire to wed thee,
Wisely him answer, scorn him not what he be,
And tell it to thy friends and hide thou it naught,
Sit not by him nor stand not that sin mow be wrought:
For gif a slander be once raised,
It is not so sone stilled,
My leeue dear child.
What man that shall wed the fore God with a ring,
Look thou love him best of any earthly thing,
And meekly him answer and not too snatching;
So may thou slake his ire and be his darling:
Fair Words slaken ire,
Suffer and have thy desire,
My leave dear child.
Sweet of spech be thou and of mild mood,
True in word and deed, so bids our Lord God,
And keep the ever daughter fro velony and shame
That men for thy doing speak the no blame:
Good life ends well,
Be true ever as the stele,
My leave dear child.
Be of fair sembland and of good manner,
Change not thy cou^tnance for ought thou can here,
Ne fare not as a giglot what ever thee betyde,
Laugh not too loud ne gape not too wide*
Maidens should laugh softlye
That men here not they be.
My leave dear child.
When thou goes by the gate go not too fast,
Ne bridle not with thy head, ne thy shoulders cast,
Be not of money words ne swear not to great,
All evil vices my daughter thou foryet:
For gif thou have an evil name,
It will turn the to grame.
My leave dear child.
Go not often to the town as it were a gaze
Fro one house to odir for to seek the maze,
Ne go not to market thy barrel to fill,
Ne use not the Tauern thy worship to spill:
For who the Tavern vsis
His thrift he refusis,
My leave dear child:
Gif thou be in place where good drink is on loft,
Wheder that thou serve or thou sit soft,
Mesurely take thou, and get the no blame;
Gif thou be drunken it turns the to shame.
Who so loves measure and skill,
He shall often have his will,
My leeue dear child.
Go not to the wrestling, ne shoting the cock,
As it were a strumpet or a giglot:
Be at home daughter and thy things tend,
For thine own profit at the latter end:
Merry is own thing to see,
My dear daughter I tell it thee,
My leave dear child.
Acquaint the not with every man goes by the street,
When folks thee bespeaken curtesly hem great,
Let hem not by the wey, nor by hem do not stond,
That they with velony make not thine heart bond:
For all men are not tristy,
Gif they speak to thee gayly,
My leave dear child.
Of lefe men daughter gift thou none take,
But thou wot well how sone it forsake:
Men with their gifts women oregone
Gif* they of herts be herd as stone:
Bounden is he or she
That gifts takis securely,
My leave dear child*
In odur men's housen make thee no mastrye,
Ne blame thou nothing thou sees with thine eye,
Daughter I the prey bear thee so well
That all men may sey thou art true as steel:
For wise men and old
Said good name is worth gold,
My leave etc.
Be thou no chider ne of wordis bold,
To missay thy neighburs neder young ne old,
Be thou not too proud ne too envious*
For thing that may betyde in odir men's house:
For an envious heart
Procures mickle smert,
My leave etc.
Gifthy neighburs have rich instore or tire
Therefore make thou no strife ne bren not as fire,
But thank God of goods he has thee yeuen,
And so shall thou daughter good life liuen.
For often at ease he is
That loves peace I wis,
My leave etc.
Huswifely shall thou go on the werk-day,
Pride, rest, and idleness put hem clean away,
And after on the holyday well clad shall thou be
The haliday to worship, God will love the,
More for worship of our lord
Than for pride of the world.
My leave etc.
Mekill shame daughter shall that wife tide
That maken poor their husbond with their great pride:
Therefore daughter be huswife good,
After the wren has veins men may let blood.
For their thrift wexis thin
That spend more than they win,
My leave dear child.
Wisely look thy household thy meynye,
To bitter ne to boner with hem ne be,
And look what need is best to be done
And thereto set thy meiney sone:
Before done deed
Another may speed
My leave etc.
Look to thy meyny and let them not be ydell,
Thy husband out, look who does much or litell
And he that does well quite him his meede
And gifhe do amiss amend thou him bid,
And gifthe work be great and the time strait
Set to thy hond, and make a huswifes brayd
For they will do better gifthou by them stond,
The work is sooner done there as is many hond
My leave etc.
And look what thy men done, and about hem we^d,
At every deed done be at the tone end
And gifthou find any fault soon it amend,
Eft will they do the better and thou be nere hand
Mikell him behoues to do
A good house that will look to.
My leave etc.
Look all thing be well when they work leaven,
And take thy keys to the when it is even
Look all thing be well, and let for no shame
And gifthou so do, thou gets thee the less blame.
Trust no man bett than thy self
Whilst thou art in thy health:
My leave etc.
Borrow not too gladly, ne take not to trest
But the more need it make or the more breast
Make the not rich of oder men's thing
The bolder to spend the worse thriuing
For at the ending
Home will the borrowed thing
My leave etc.
Give thy meiney their hire at the terme-day
Wheder they abiden, or else gone away
Be wise ever daughter of their doing
That thy friend may have joy of thy proving
Loose not the love of thy frind,
For a little that thou mighst spend.
My leave etc.
Now have I taught the daughter, so did my mother me
And therefore do thereafter gifthou think to the
Look or thou wed any man, that he have agood name
True of hand and tongue without any blame:
For better it is a child to be unborn,
Than for vnteaching to be forlorn.
My leave etc.
Sit not at even too long at gaze with the cup
For to wassell and drink all up,
So to bed betimes, at morn rise beliue
And so may thou better learn to thrive:
He that woll a good house keep
Must ofte-times break asleep.
My leave etc.
Gif it betide daughter thy friend fro the fall
And god send the children that for bread will call,
And thou have mickle need, help little or none,
Thou must then care and spare hard as the stone:
For evil that may betide,
A man before should dread,
My leave etc.
Of all thing daughter look thou think,
Gif men would for worship set thee on the benk
Be not too statly daughter noder young ne old,
Forsome folk are now pore that sometime ware gold*
Many folk for pride
After weren a naked side.
My leave etc.
Gifthou be a rich wife be not over hard
Welcome thy neighbors that come the toward,
Give hem meat and drink, the more is thy meed
Each body to his state should give the pore at need:
For thing that may thee betide
Love well thy neighbor thee beside
My leave etc.
Take heed to thy children which thou have born
And wait well to thy daughters that they be not forlorn
And put hem betime to their marriage
And give them of thy good when they be of age.
For maidens been lovely,
But they bin untrusty.
My leave etc.
Gif thou love thy children hold thou hem low
And gif any of hem misdo banne hem not ne blow
But take a good smart rod and beat hem arowe
Till they cry mercy and their gilts be know.
For gif thou love thy children well
Spare not the yard never a deal.
My leave etc.
Now look thou do daughter as I have taught thee
And thou shall have my blessing the better may thou the
And every maiden that good wife would be
Do as I have taught you for saint charity:
And all that so will do God give hem his blessing
And send hem all heaven at her last ending.
Explicit.
AMEN.
THE WAY TO Thrift.
LOrd God what is this worlds well,
Riches, revel and great array?
Nothing to spare, and all day to spill,
Full sone it wastes and wears awey.
When plenty may no longer pay
What wight with him would then abide?
A careful man both night and day
With heavy heart his head must hide,
And all is for default of grace,
That God grutches against our governance
When measure may not meddle in place*
What is it to a man more grieuance,
Than suddenly fro manhood for to fall
In pride his simple purueyance
There poverty is stewardin hall:
But he that can in some season
Gedder and keep or that he grynde
In winter time by way of reason
He shall not be far behind.
For there as measure is in mind
Good rule may not long fail,
Yet beware to be over kind
For skoring in the comiter tail;
But well and worship with welfare
Mickle wastes with little win
Full soon brings a householder bare,
With large spending both out and in,
Then be advised or thou begin
That thou have none need to plain
Think what a state thou stand in
For Poverty is a privy pain,
And if thou have hope of help and trist
Of lords and ladies with her pleasance
And yet beware of Had I wist
For old envy makes new distaunce
In pride and poverty is great penance
And yet is danger most disease
Here is a cumberrouse acquaintance
When noder of hem oder please
For Had I wist comes ever too late
When there lackes both lock and key,
What need is then to spare the yat
When nothing is leaued in the way
With a pennylesse purse for to pay
How can he then his people please
Many a man had a leave dye,
As long to live in such disease,
A bare beard may soon be shaven
There as is none heir about
It faireth as a man that mickle would haven
And is not else but pore and proud,
But ever ready in ilke rout
And lay to wed both pot and pan
When the fire clean is blown out
Where shall we go dyne than?
What need is it to delue deep,
There as is no seed to sow?
The pot is easy for to keep
When all the fat is ouerblowe,
Noder for the kyte ne for the crow.
Incumber not thine own nest
Too mickle bend will break thy bow
When the game is alder best
Ensample men may see all day.
Yet keep I no man to defend
Hie household and great array
Is Lords life and Ladies game,
When gladshippe grows into grame
And for need must beg and borrowe,
First comes pride and after shame,
And from solace turns to sudden sorrow.
FINIS.

