The Pitiful estate of the Time present.

A Christian consideration of the miseries of this time, with an exhortation to
amendment of Life: compiled by one zealous in the Law of God, And set forth
by Public Authority, being perused and allowed by the same.

Wisdom. 6. Give ear ye that rule the multitudes, for power is given you of
the Lord, and strength from the highest, which shall try your works and
search out your ymaginations, how that ye being Officers of his Kingdom
have not executed true Judgment, wherefore ye shall have the sorer punishment.

Imprinted at London in Whitecrosse street, by Henry Denham.

The Preface to the Reader.
AS ACCORDING to the saying of Saint Paul, Romans 15.
all that is written is written for our instruction and learning, that we
might fashion our selves to the good will and pleasure of GOD, in following of
virtue and embracing that is good, forsaking vice and detesting that which is
evil. I therefore hereby moved and occasioned, did peruse of late a book of
small volume which has to name, the Trial of truth, set forth a year passed
and more, in the which book, as the Auctor zealouslie made a brief discourse
of the sundry visitations and punishments of God for our forgetfulness of him
through our sinful wickedness, so did he likewise brotherly warn and
admonish us to leave, forsake, and abhor our accustomed evil, and
Christianlike exhort us to live in newness of life, putting us in
remembrance that the Fire which fell from heaven, so quickly defacing the
buge Temple of Paul's, the strange and monstrous shape as well of Children as
of beasts, (whereof there were diverse and sundry,) with also the unseasonable
time then through the dailye dropping showers, were altogether plain
declarations and tokens of Gods vengeance and heavy wrath to come upon us and
more sharply to punnishe us than ever he did before, where of we might assure
our selves, unless with hearty repentance and specty amendment of our wicked
life we turned unto the Lord our God. And this in manner was the effect of
that little work, wherein it appears that the Auctor was more careful for
us than we are for our selves. For notwithstanding that he, with also many
others, have not ceased through their continual, daily and painful travail
in writing and setting forth of Godly Books, whereof never since Christ's time
more plentye than of late years has been, teaching, instructing, persuading,
exhorting, admonishing, and in Gods behalf threatening us, and by all means
possible seeking to draw us from evil to good, from worse to better, from
sin to godly life, that we might learn to do the will of our heavenly Father:
yet are we for all this so unmindful of GOD and of his good gifts in his
creatures, and our minds so set and busied in the vain and transitory things
of this world, that we are not at laysure to know God, nor by hearing and
reading to learn how to attain unto the world that is permanent and
everlasting: but either the works so set forth for our instruction are so long
that we cannot intend to read them through (although in the mean we be
neither idle nor yet well occupied) or else if they be short, then sooner red
over than well considered and followed, as the crooked conditions and
wickedness of us wretched people of England, does to evidently declare, whose
abominations are so vile and detestable in the sight of God, as that I cannot
but marvel how either we dare presume to ask or hope to have any thing at
the hands of our Heavenly Father, that might be beneficial or necessary for us,
but rather look for present destruction, and to be roted from the face of the
Earth, nothing regarding the many and often warnings of God by his ministers,
neither yet his loving correction, which with favor hitherto we have had* alas
how often has he called us ho^e so carefully, so lovingly, so fatherly,
tendering us even as the Father his children, and yet we will not come but
still so much neglect his merciful goodness, that needs he must of his
justice, being a gelous god that has pmised to visit the sins of the fathers
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him,
even punnish with sorrow to us our sins, and lay upon us the heavy
burdens that our wickedness has worthilye deserved, for where the shaking of
the rod will not help or prevail, there must needs sharp strokes follow,
and we shall have them, let us assure our selves thereof, except spedie
amendment of our wicked life and carnest reformation of our monstrous manners,
which as I heartilye wish, and because I would (as much as in me is) be a
means to provoke and stir up my brethren thereto* (whose forgetfulness of
their duties toward God I heartelye lamente and bewail) have therefore
thought it my part, though with eloquence unacquainted by pleasantness of
style to please the Reader, yet (...) this simple sort plainly to declare my
good will, tendering (as nature forces me) the welfare of the whole body of
this Realm of England, whereof although I be but a weak, yet through the
grace of God, a well willing member.

Read and discern.
The Pitiful estate of the Time present.
OH WRETCHED AND graceless people, why do we so long tempt the Lord our God,
and through our devilish doings deny him? we deny him I say in that we
being a people void of all Godly sear, still continue careless and neglecte
the keeping of the holy precepts and commandments of our eternal and
everliving GOD, whom we through the lewdness of our life do so shamfully abuse
and offend. For (alas) how does all kind of vice rather increase than
diminish? Vice florisheth in England.
For who hears not the horrible vice of blasphemy and swearing so brimme and
rife in the mouth of young and old of all degrees as well in court as in
country, Otheo common in old and young.
that almost every tongue is embrued we bloody oaths, which though it highly
offend the Majesty of God, and worthily deserves sharp correction and
punnishment, yet not all so considered, but every one still suffered to swear
and forswear, sincking in their sin.

Filthy whoredom likewise, The whor dome of England stinketh be fore ye face
of God.
which in all degrees and places, as it is to be hated as most shameful in
the sight of the Almighty, so would God that houses of fame and estimation
were not as well spotted therewith as are the brothell houses, whose graceless
inhabitaunts are limbs of the devil. And lamentable is it to see in England
at this day, from ye Courtyer to the Carter that stinking sin is so common,
that it is rather accounted an ordinary pastime than an odible offense,
whordom accounted no Sin
which as it stincketh before the face of God, so is it left unpunished, saving
now and then in Bridewell, (a place so necessary for the redress of such
vice, as I know not how it might have been put to a better use to have
benefited the common wealth) or sometime likewise in London with a little
carting it is remembered, though to many that discrue it come not to the
promotion. And therefore according to the old proverb, better is sometime a
friend in court than a penny in purse. But take heed I say ye Magistrates,
beware of parcialitie. Yet to say truth, whether carting or a flappe with a
Fore tail, all is to one purpose, and therefore even as good never a whit as
never the better, for carting does but make them careless and shameless and
rather to continue in their beastliness than bring them to honesty and
repentance of their evil. Wherefore if it be not the sooner otherwise looked
to and a sharper sause provided for such filthye whores and whoremongers, ye
shall shortly in place of honest modest Matrones and undefiled virgins have
the Realm replenished with a company of cankered, corrupt, and loathsome
whores, whereof the filthy flock increases a pace and to fast. And here may
ye see and bcholde how vice abounds for lack of ye just reward that
thereunto belongs, which should be severe justice, for neglecting whereof as
the Magistrates incur ye displeasure of God, so are the wicked that still
sleep in their sin encouraged to become and continue the members of the
devil. But oh ye Magistrates look to your charge, and oh ye loathsome whores
and whoremongers let Sodom and Gommorra be your looking glasses, wherein
without your repentance and amendment of your beastlye life, ye may most
plainly behold your utter destruction.

But now to proceed, The abuse of the Saboth day.
as concerning the Sabbath day or rather the Lords day, how well it is
observed: I report me to those delicate feeders, whose servant even just
upon that day, when they should be at Church to hear the divine service and
have their duties taught them, must then forsooth run a gadding from market
to market to make provision for a dishe of needenot for the latter course, when
there is alredye to much for the first, which wasteful money were better
bestowed in the works of Faith, helping by charity thy needful brethren that
have not so well to fyl their hu^grie bellies, (but ye is forgotten, or scant
thought on.) Also other some there be, who when they should congregate
themselves in the Temple or Church, which is a place appointed to invoke the
name of GOD and to praise him for his manifold benefits, then are they packed
up together in Tauernes and Alehouses, yelling for vittailes to fill their
filthy paunche.

But oh beastlye belly, whether is the Lord thy God or thou first to be
served? Iwys I remember there was not long a go a godly order made in London
by the Lord Mayor and the worshipful the Aldermen, that the doors of
tauernes and vittailing houses should be kept shut in service time, which order
is comme^dable, if it were observed according to the good meaning, that the
doors should I say, be kept shut in service time, to keep out such belly
bibbers, but now they first fill and furnishe their houses we gestes and then
they shut the doors.

But (alas) what mockery is this with God and the Magistrates? God and the
Magistrates mocked by the typplers which are but harborers of unthrifts.
for the which, unless they may feel the smarte, it will be the longer the
worse, before it be better. For in vain are good laws made unless they be
thorowlye executed: and therefore I wish that there were certain in each
parrishe appointed that on the Saboth day might visit the vitailing houses,
and as well to make report of those that are the receyuers of such gestes (that
they might for so receiving of them be considered according to their
deserving,) as also to drive from thence those gredie glutto^s that mind so
much their bellies, and bring them to Gods banketting house that he might have
more store of gests to feed Faithfullye with hungrye spirits upon his holy
word which is the comfortable food that nourishes the soul of man, and that
the Children and servant by the godly and virtuous life of those their
Parents and Masters, might both learn to know their duties to God, praising
his holy name, as also their due obedience to their elders, The want of good
ensample of Elders is the destruction of Youth.
for want of whose good examples and their to much liberty giving, the riotous
youth (the more is the pity) run to fast hedlong to destruction. But no
marvel, for neither ca^ an evil tree bring forth good fruit, nor thorns
can bring forth Grapes, and therefore such carpenters such tools, and such
masters such servants.

But yet a little more concerning the abusing of the Lords day, upon the which
almost even as though of necessity, the bears at Parris garden must be
bayted, Beatbayting on ye Sabbath abominable.
but so vglye are not ye bears as the idle lookers on are beastly. God for his
mercy defend that the devil bait not the souls of such as delight so
beastly to spend the day of ye Lord God of Saboth.

But to proceed, on that day the masters and scholars of Fence must show
themselves and their cunning, whereas after often meeting with foynes and
florishes and dealing of desperate and bosterous blows, they part with broken
heads, maimed arms and hands, and bloody faces, finishing up the matter with
such swearing and terrible tearing of GOD, that it is great wonder that God we
the sword of his displeasure lays not on load amongst them beating their
weapons to their heads and them into the earth. Lo, thus is the day of the
Lord turned to the day of bloudsheading and blasphemy through the schole
houses of Fence, nay rather of mischief, Schoolehouses of Fence, bread
thieves to feed ye gallows
for thereby are to many loitering scholars and vacabundes encouraged to
mischief, bearing themselves so bold of their Fence that they are as ready to
keep a standing in the hye ways as the strongest thief in England, and so in
the end to many (the more is the pity,) for all their cunning, are to seek
of Fence to keep their necks from the halter. Lo, what folly Fence bredeth.
And thus with these and many other abuses is ye Lords day polluted. But let
us not think that the Lord our God who punished with Death the man for
gathering sticks only on the Saboth day, Numeri. 15
will leave us unpunished that so shamefully abuse the same which so expressly
he has commanded to be kept holy and appointed to worship him on. Let us be
assured we shall know the price thereof as well, as also for the wonderful
wickedness ye otherwise reigns amongst us that are void of all Godliness
and full of abomination and sin: For truly there is amongst us no pureness
in heart, no truth in mouth, no uprightness in dealing, but doubleness,
fraud, deceit and guile. Brotherly love is clean banished. For who can
almost speak well of an other? and charity is become so cold that the
fruits of Faith faint through cankered covetousness, who is so deeply crept
into the corrupt consciences of men so generally, The Canker of covetousness
has eaten away the good consciences of ye people of England.
that who almost is not therewyth infected? and to whom as the term goes,
all is not fish that comes to net, and so they have that they would have,
they care not how they come by it? which as it is to manifest and apparent, so
likewise to lamentable to behold that amongst those that take upon them the
name of Christians such crooked conditions should be used as hereafter shall
be declared.

And first concerning covetousness, which whether it be to co^uersant with us,
let those of reason judge, who seeing and well noting the great and gracious
blessing of God upon the earth, which has so plentifullye brought forth and
yielded her increase of all things necessary for the food of man (thanks to
God therefore,) yet notwithstanding, a dearth to remain, and upon no occasion
save only through the cursed covetousness of ravening Cormorauntes, that (so
they may fill their bottomless bags) care not what nor whom they devour. I
would to god the Graziours, who through their greedye joining of pasture to
pasture for to much lukers sake, Graziours and great sheep masters
cormoraunts in ye common weal.
filling faster their coffers tha^ they fat their cattle: and also the
insatiable sheepemaisters, that to increase and augment such needelesse and not
necessary number of sheep as now there are, having spoiled thereby whole
villages and towns, (to the great decay of tillage,) were not I say the
chiefest occasions of this present mischievous misery: through the deuilish
dealing of which two kinds of people, we have been and to lately were forced
to seek in foreign countries our breadcorne, whereas before such gredye
covetousness reigned, we had plenty and enough at home to serve our selves and
to spare for others our neighbors, till now that the sheep which God had
ordained for man, are by covetous men increased to such noisome numbers, that
they have devoured men and driven them from their dwellings, Many sheep and
few ploughes makes England swarm with beggars.
who with their wives and children beg about the countries, their houses
being overthrown: but better were therefore more ploughes and fewer sheep,
than so many sheep to ye increase of beggars. But, oh meruellous brutishenesse
of those people that for the excessive gain of pasture money, prefer the
brute beasts before their poor brethren, and that to feed beasts sterue
Christians. But why do yet so oppress my people and mar the faces of the
pore says the Lord by the mouth of his servant and Prophet Esaye, Esaias. 3.
that so join one house to another and bring one land so to another ye the
poor can get no ground, but that they may dwell upon the earth alone? and for
such does Hell open hy^ mouth and gape for says the Prophet, who threatens
the wrath of God upon such. And Abacuc likewise in his second chapter, Abacuc.
2.
I refer thee to the place the reading whereof God grant may be a warning.
But are the farmers in this point altogether clean and blameless? nay would to
God there were not to many in England whose barnes God has well replenished
with store, The covetous Farmers abuse the good gifts of God.
that both say and do, as not long since I heard a rich and wealthy farmer
say and bound it with an oath, that he would sell his Corn at such a price, or
keep it till the myce eat it. But (as I fear me) there be to many farmers of
that charity. So no marvel though so great a scarcitye of breadecorne as of
late, has been, which would have been further out of course but for the
gracious provision of the worthy Marchanntes and Cityzens of London that fed
thereby as well the City as a great part of the Country about them. The
wo^thy provision of the marchantes and Citizens of London.
The Lord prosper, bless and hold his holy hand over that Cyty and
inhabitants that are so careful for their Country. But again to my matter
wherewyth I was in hand. As those words and deeds of such Farmers are not
Christianlyke, so are they not the best members in the common weal of England,
as they use themselves in so shamefully abusing the good gifts of GOD,
enhauncing the price of Corn of mere covetousness to enryche them selves to
the great detrimente and harm of their neighbors and brethren, whose
wealth thereby how much it is of late increased, the sumpteousnesse and
bravery of their children does well declare, who in many places in england are
at these days grown to such a finenesse that they are more redier for houses
of the court, The folly of parents makes unthrifty children.
than the plough, and so given to idleness yt they hold great scorn to
tread the furrows and follow their fathers steps, But now the father to
Cart, the son to Court. Well, well, prouender pricketh, and wealth I say
makes wantons, which God grant of the getters to be truly come by and with
upright conscience, for according to the old proverb, well gotten well spent,
God send ye plough more friends and followers. But yet a little further
concerning covetousness. How lamentable is it to see and behold the number of
men that dailye sail in the payement of their dettes, and as they term it
play bankroute? I mean not those (neither deserve they the name) whose
substance by casualtie of fire, by spoiling of Pirottes, or through force of
stormy and tempestious weather, by shypwracke with the sourges of the deep
seas are peryshed, unto which and many other perils the merchants
adventurers through the sufferance of god are oftentimes subject and by such
means overthrown, their wealth plucked from them and they empouerished, who
as they gladly and willingly would, but have not wherewith to satisfye their
creditours, so are they yet in this respect to be helped, considered and borne
withal, (and God forbid that otherwise it should be.) But of those
shameless ones I mean, of which number of late there has been to many, that
when through their credit they have heaped together a mass of treasure in
money and commodities, they suddenly absent and hyde themselves and play
bankroute, an unchristianlike play and to a deuilishe and wicked end and
purpose, for having wherewith to satisfye and content all their creditours,
they will either pay nothing at all or as little as they list, and thus they
reap the corn that is not their own, Job. 24*
and spoil sometime thereby the sucking fatherless child. And by this wicked
means is many an honest man brought to an after deal and oftentimes undone,
with whose goods those thieves enryche themselves: A wylfull bancktout and a
thief all one.
Thieves I say, for theft it is and no better, and yet is it now a days made
an ordinarye occupation. And where is the redress, or which of them (as
before I said,) does not what him lists? Well, woeful is it to see that among
Christians such parts should be played, and more lamentable is it that still
it is suffered. Covetousness is a perilous poison, and yet though loath I am to
write it, I know no estate or vocation in England that is not infected
therewyth even from the mountains to the valleys. And therefore to conclude
where the rage of corrupt covetousness raygneth, ye right of justice must needs
be minished, I would it were not so, but (alas) it is to manifest. But must not
God needs punnish us in whom there is no truth nor knoweledge of him, Oseas.
4.
but untruth, lying, swearing, adultry theft, and all manner of such
fylthynesse? Are these things a declaration of brotherly love amongst us?
Gallat. 5.
do we as we would be done unto? love we our neighbors as our selves, that
thus byte and devour one an other? Oh intolerable wickedness and oh
mischievous and pestilent people. But has our Heavenly Father revealed ye
light of his Gospel unto us that we in such shameful wise should abuse his
great mercy? no, no, wherefore to the Carnal Gospellers as well as to the
Impudent Papists, I say: be no longer careless, but learn to know the
will of the Lord, and do it. Let word and deed be one. Profess and follow
or else we are but slaunderers and enemies of the Gospel, and the blessing and
great good gifts of God (the light of his Gospel) is evil bestowed upon us,
showing our selves to be the enemies of Jesus Christ and of his truth the
spoilers. Counterfaytes are we and plain dissemblers with God and the World,
yea, even a people in whom scant one spark or propertye appears that unto
Christians appertains: for if we were Christians we would follow Christ's
lore, who being the Way, John. 14.
the Truth and life, we renounce and go from the Way, decline from Truth, and
forsaking Life do through our wicked means seek to our selves Death and
destruction. The Lord be merciful unto us, for we are grown to this point,
that we neither fear the Lord our God nor stand in awe of the Magistrates.
And what is ye cause, but for that the good laws made by them for the
punishment of offenders are no better executed but in a manner each one left
to himself to do what he lists? But truly even as much do the Magistrates
offend GOD in not punishing the offenders, as they that commit the offense.
For all this evil comes of sufferaunce, Sufferaunce breeds inconvenience.
but to much sufferaunce causes care and to much sufferaunce breeds
disobedience. And is it not sufferaunce that tickeleth the talketiue tongues of
the wicked and evil dysposed, so shamefullye and sclaunderouslye to report
and speak evil of the blessed word of GOD and doctrine of Jesus Christ, and
of the Preachers and Teachers of the same, irreverently jesting and scoffing
at them, as dailye they do, even like unto Diotrephes that of arrogancye
exalted himself, John. 3. Ep^
despised the doctrine of the Apostles, jesting at them with malicious words?
And what is it else but sufferaunce that so animateth the obstinate
Archpapistes so stoutely to continue in their Romish heretical error,
contrary to the will of God and their due obedience to their Prince? But no
marvel therefore, though the common sort so carelessly continue in their evil,
The Archpapistes Ringleaders to mischief.
when ye Ringleaders to mischief, (the Archpapistes,) being the maintayners of
Idolatrye, breakers of Wedlock, thieves, murderers, and rebels against ye
Prince in Gods and her procedings, are thus suffered to wallowe still in the
poisoned puddell of their wicked will, and yet remain vnpunnished. But yet as
it is not enough but a perilous matter for one man to call another thief,
unless he be able to prove it, So I likewise to try ye to be true which here
I have written of them, will therefore make due proof thereof, as well for
mine own discharge as also to satisfye the reader.

And first that they are maintainers of Idolatrye, Archpapistes maintayners of
Idolatry.
the great number of people whom God has yet spared alive, witness with me,
how they when they were in authority, or rather when God suffered them to be
as whippes and scourges to us for our forgetfulness of God: how they then I
say, through their violent co^pulsion, forced ye people (to the great
derogation and dishonor of God,) to erect Idols and garnish the Church and
House of God with Mahomets, which (as in the book of Wisdom is specified)
neither have been from the beginning nor shall continue to the end, Wisdom. 14.
but have only been invented through the wealthy Idleness of men: but wherewith
yet they I say then so charmed and enchaunted the minds of many of the simple
ignorant people, with their Idolatrous infection, as that I would to GOD
there were not now in these days to many that worshipping in hugger mugger
in Coffers and Corners their senseless Babilonicall blockbabes, think they
please God better than to come to be instructed by the hearing of the word of
GOD preached. Thus have they I say seduced the people from the true and living
Lord to worship strange and unknown Gods and honoring of abominable
Images, which is the beginning and end of all evil, Wisdom. 14^
showing themselves thereby to be the manifest enemies of the Almighty,
Deutro. 13.
and as Moises does note and name them, false Prophets, dreamers and
maintainers of wicked Idolatrye, which being a spiritual whoredom and an
abomination so grievous and haynons in the sight of God, as that he has
always abhorred and extremely punnished it: yet are they with tooth and nail
supporters of the same. Wherefore as God by the mouth of Moses plainly
expresses that they ought not to be pitied nor reserved and kept as they yet
are, Deuteronomy. 13.16.
so does he also appoint them their reward, Jeremy. 26.
which is that they should be destroyed without compassion. Zachar. 13.
And accordingly did Elia with 450. false Prophets of Baal at ye broke Kison.
3. Kings. 16 2. Chro. 34.
Also Iosia who burned the bones of the Priests upon the altares of the
Idols. But now to go forward with my proof: Breakers of wedlock I said
they were, as most true it is they be. For although that Christ as by the
authority of the scriptures, does permit unto every man without exception that
cannot live chaste, 1. Cor. 7.9. Timoth. 3.
as well spiritual as temporal, his wife, to live together in that holy and
blessed state of matrimony ordained by God for the avoiding of hateful
whordome who being once coupled according to the laws of God no man ought to
separate or put asu^der yet notwithstanding that, Leuitic. 17.
Math. 19. Mark. 10.
how did they (I say) abuse and shamefullye separate diverse and sundry of the
ministry then matched in matrimony, Papists breakers of wedlock
dealing as cruelly with them therefore as if they had committed some notorious
offense, disallowing in the ministry then, that to be necessary, which Christ
in his time for his Apostels did see to be convenient and necessary? And Paul
witnessing the same, says: 2. Corin. 7.
It is better to marrye than to burn, but he says not, It is better to take a
whore than to marrye, as a great many of their beastly brood of lecherous
Massepriestes did, who as they would not marry, so lived they not Cast, but
Caute played the whoremongers, and some Palam defiled their neighbors wives,
committed daily incest and were even fellow companions to the Sodomites, whose
beastliness these Mitered men often wincked at and would not see the
wickedness of their God Bells belly gods, but looked through the fyngers at
them, as some of the^ to well know to their shame though they say nay and lie as
their generation has always been accustomed, who never will do other. But
though for their wicked whoredom they have in this world escaped the
punishment due for the same, Hebru. 13.
yet shall God shut them out of his Kingdom into everlasting fire, unless
they repent, which God grant they may. But now to proceed, thieves also I
said they were, Papists are thieves John. 10.
and so S. John calls them that come not but to steal and destroy, of which
number they are and so showed themselves to be when they not only did break
into Gods orchard, stealing from us the fruit of life, but also lopped and
destroyed the flourishing branches that plenteouslye yielded forth the fruit
thereof, Jeremy. 12.
Treading down the Vineyard and pleasant portion of the Lord, of malicious
purpose to leave it waste and to make it a wilderness, stealing away the
heavenly treasure of Gods Sanctuary, and with consciences most filthily
defiled filling and replenishing the Lords house with robbery and falshed, and
therefore again I say thieves and also enemies to God, that love him not: For
how can they 2 John. 4.
love God whom they have not seen, when they loved not their brethren with
whom they were daily conuersaunt? For it is not so long ago to be yet
forgotten, how unmercifully they dealte with the seely faithful flock of Jesus
Christ, who by the divine inspiration and good gift of the holy Ghost, setting
forth the glory of God and plentifully preserving the wholesome and dilectable
doctrine of Jesus Christ, wherewith almighty god had richly replenished them, and
wherwyth they daily taught and trained us to know the will of our heavenly
father. They did I say forbid to teach the truth, and would not suffer them to
preach Christ unto the people, but, notwithstanding the express commandment
of God almighty who straytly charged them that they should not touch his
anointed, Psalm. 105.
nor do his Prophets any harm, yet did they rigorously recompense them,
turmoyling and tossing them from post to pillar, mocked them, buffeted them,
with rods beat them, imprisoned them, hungersterned them, 1. John. 3.
and even as Cain to his brother Abell, so did these Tiraunts most cruelly
murder their innocent brethren, Papists at murderers
and with fire consumed to ashes the flesh of Jesus Christ in his members,
whose beautiful feet brought us tidings of good things, Roma. 10.
even the peace of the Gospel of Christ our Savior. And why did they thus to
them? because their works were good and their own evil, 1. John. 3.
they being of the offpring of those that killed the Lord Jesus and the
Prophets and now likewise thirsted for the blood of these innocent martirs,
and therefore murderers from the beginning. 1. Regu^. 15.
But now I call to remembrance how Samuel the zealous Prophet of the Lord
calling for King Agag the enemy of God and murderer of his people, to whom
after he had said these words (as thy sword has made women childelesse, so
shall thy mother be childelesse,) did then in the zeal of God he we King Agag
in pieces, Oh cruel murderer and sheader of innocent blood, The reward of a
murderer.
worthily rewarded. But if Agag being a King was not spared, how well have
these then deserved to have ye same curresye, being continual committers of
shameful things, merciless oppressors, cruel persecutours of Fatherless and
Wyddowes, shedders of innocente blood, insatiable murderers wylfully working
the mercylesse motions of their hateful hearts, through whose terrible
tyranny many mothers were left child clesse, and many children fatherless
and motherlesse, that were of the familye of the faithful in Jesus Christ? of
which most terrible tragedye though the whole world can witness yet remain
those murderers unrecompensed with Agags just reward. But last of all that I
said they were rebellious, Papists a^ rebellious.
let their stubborn and disobedient behavior toward their Prince be
witness, in that they so arrogantlye contend with their Sovereign, despising
and resisting the word of GOD, which by the Princes most Gracious
proceedings, to the unspeakable comfort of all her graces true faithful and
loving Subjects, is (thanked be God therefore) most entierly and truly set
forth and taught, which they utterly detest, and follow the imaginations of
their own hearts and still continue in their evil. Lo, these be of them that
had so blinded the world with their counterfeit holiness, that they were
counted and thought to be without spot, and yet most grievous transgressors
and full of all iniquitye and poison, refusing to do that which by Gods law
they are commanded, and regarding rather the usurping monstrous Pope that
Romish beast and Antichrist, than fearing God and respecting their due
obedience to their Sovereign and most gracious Prince and liege Lady, who as
Solomon says, Prouer. 16.
ought to be feared as a Lion, and whose displeasure is a messanger of death:
who therefore although they fear not I say for the love that saythfull
Subjects bear to their Prince of duty, 1. Peter. 2.
yet I think they should fear, love and humbly obey her for the love and
fear of him that shall call the heavens from above and the earth, Roman. 13.
Psalm. 50.
that he may judge his people, against which day of vengeance when shall be
opened the ryghteous judgment of GOD, 2. Thessal. 1. Romans 2.13.
such stubburn-hearted contencious rebels that follow iniquitye, disobeye
and resist the truth and the higher powers which is the ordinance of GOD,
and that eythers cannot or will not repent, do but heap unto themselves the
wrath of God who will reward them with trouble and anguish of soul to
everlasting damnation. Esaias. 46.
A charitable exhortation to ye Papists.
Wherefore O ye presumpteous priests that are of an hye stomach but far from
righteousness, as ye have been terrible tyrauntes and your hands full of
blood, so now put from you the violence and myschiefe of your minds: and as ye
have not ignorantlye but arrogantly fought against the God of glory, so call
now to him for the assistaunce of his holy spirit that it may please him
therewith to strengthen you against your adversary the devil, that he no
longer bewitche you nor wythdraw your minds from God: for now ye sail and
stumble in your judgment, being ignorant as young children, Esaias. 28.
and because ye will not hearken unto the voice of God pronounced by his
chosen vessels, he suffers you to be tangled, snared, and to fall backwardes
in your wylfulnesse. 1. Peter. 1.
Lean therefore no longer upon ye weak staff of antiquity which both you and
many men ground themselves upon, doing as their fathers did, for as well our
Forefathers as also our selves have done vnrighteouslye and have not kept ye
way which the highest commanded us, and therefore custom without truth is not
alloweable, but is an old error. Pray thefore unto the Lord God to open your
eyes that ye may spy out the wondrous things in the law of God, Psalm. 119
Seek him with your whole hearts unfeignedly that ye may walk in his ways,
leaving the wicked and wylfull blindness wherein you have so long been
nouseled, and be no longer as Fools that make good sport of Sin, but foresee
your wickedness which as the Lord according as the Scriptures make mention,
has punnished in Princes being ye highest, and to whom he has given the
government of his people, so will he not surely leave it vnreco^penced in
popish priests, but as well in priests as in all people generally of what
vocation or calling soever, that repining the truth of Jesus Christ and
wilfully wallowing in wickedness and sin careleslye continue in the same, he
will hisite and for their reward give them to drink of his displeasure and
heavy wrath. Wherefore I as much as in me is, exhort you in the Lord to become
obedient children and to return with the prodigal child from your gross
feeding on swinecods and with hearty repentance meekely and humbly to turn
to your heavenly Father, Luke. 25.
feeding on his heavenly word, that we your brethren might rejoice of the
finding of you that were lost and reviving of you that were dead. 1. Peter. 5.
Submit therefore your selves in lo^^linesse of heart under the mighty hand of
God and show your due obedience and be subject to your most gracious and
merciful Prince, be no more diuelishe wilful but godly willing, arm your
selves I say with singleness of heart as ministers to work the will of our
heavenly Father, not compelled but willinglye, not with proud and lordely
stomachs but meekely, giving good example to the flock of Jesus Christ, of which
as ye have been merciless sposlers, destroyers and famishers, so now through
the most gracious operation of the Almightye ye may become repairers, feeders
and nourishers of the same, that when the chief shepehearde shall appear he
may exalt you when the time is come, 1. Peter. 5.
that then ye may receive an incorruptible crown of glory, which I beseech God
for his great mercy sake to grant unto you, ye is may I say become his
servants and with joy in him possess the earth during his good pleasure, and
after this life to have the fruitio^ of the life everlasting. Be therefore no
longer the masters of error pussed up with pride, but the Disciples of truth,
and show your selves no longer as brute beasts naturallye made to be
destroyed, whose hearts God has so hardened for that ye should not hearken
unto his word, because he would have you rooted from the earth. But leave in
time your disobedience, for disobedient children shall find no rest, wherefore
if ye still presumptuouslye proceed as ye have begone know that
presumptuousnesse goes before destruction and after a proud stomach there
follows a fall, Prouer. 16. Deutro. 17. Esaias. 5.
for the Lord abhors all such as are of a proud stomach and will not
suffer them to escape vnpunnished but will recompense them their wickedness
and destroy them in their own malice hycause they rebel against him.
Psalm. 94
Psalm. 107.
Therefore I say once again as one that from the bottom of my heart wyshe
your conversion to GOD, take heed and tempt the Lord God no longer, neither
presume to much of the mercy of your Prince, for if ye do, surely God will
in the end put in her Graces heart, as most excellent even sent of and by him,
Romans 13. Wisdom. 6
for the punnishement of the wicked and to the praise of the good (to consider)
that as a Mother, who being tender over her Children with overmuch cockering
them, does but make them so wanton and careless that they regard her not, and
so sparing the rod hurts her Children and harmeth her self, so likewise
that her grace through her great lenity and mercy in to long suffering you
does but make you the more forgetful of your duties to your so gracious a
Prince, and move you the rather to work your selves woe, with practicing of
that that might be hurtful to her highness, which the almighty god of Israel
defend. But yet is it to be feared and just cause has her Majesty to be out
of hope of your conversion to God and to have you her faithful and true
Subjects hereafter, that in so long a time of respect have not had the grace
to learn to fear God and to know your duties to him and your so gracious
and merciful a Prince. Job says that if a tree be cut down, Job. 14.
there is some hope says he that it will sproute out and shoot forth the
branches again, and a root being waxen old and dead in the ground, yet
when the stock gets the cente of the water it will budde a new and bring
forth bows: but how long has the Queens Majesty even as a mother of
mercy, through her gracious goodness and great lenitye made the trial hereof
in you, reserving and watering you all this while with her mercy, to try
thereby if she could cause you to bring forth the flourishing branches and
beautiful buddes of repentaunte hearts, thereby as well to benefit your
selves as also others through the good example of your humbleness, who
notwithstanding stubbornely continue the longer the worse, showing your selves
therefore not to be of those trees or root that Job speaks of, but rather
playnelye painting forth yourselues in your perfect colors and showing your
selves to be the same that certaynely ye are, A graceles papist and a rotten
root one in effect.
even rotten roots void of Godly sap and into whom no inoysture of godly
understanding or knowledge can enter. Wherefore according to the saying of our
Savior Christ by the mouth of Mathewe, Ye must be plucked up, hewn down
and cast into the fire and wholly rejected as wylfull Heretics against whom
no admonition will prevail. Math. 7.
But now my think I hear some parciall Papiste say: behold I pray you the
charity of this Gospeller, this Protestante is in his extremities, what? my
think he would have the poor men worse handled than they are already,
being meetely well trounced and hampered I trow, as the Tower, Fleet,
Marshalsee and such other places can witness. In deed sir ye say true, they
have been so ill bestead, so sore hurt and so extremely dealt with, as that
those that be in worse lyking have no cause to complain. So some of them are
so foul fallen away that they are grown from a horseloade to a cartloade,
which betokens no want of victuals and good cherishing, but rather of to much
pampering. Well I say the Devil is not without friends as now right well
appears, by whose means these terrible tirants that rather rebel with peril
as traitors to God and their Prince, than obey with rest as obedient
subjects, who rather may be said to have been to long preserved in places of
pleasure, than accounted as prisoners, considering how well they were used and
provided for, who having then but to much liberty are now fette further at
large to have more Elbowe rome and scope, to take their pleasure on progress
about the countreye to refreshe them selves as though before they had been
misused or had received to much injury, whereas if they had their just desert,
Death, Death should and ought to be their reward. But lo, the filthy fowls
are flowen, the bloody birds are vncaged who flickering abroad are making
wings for a new pray, which God disapoynt them of. But as it is most requisite
and needful that the Prince (whom God long preserve) have good regard by her
taster appointed, to avoid the purposed mischief from her body by poisoning
of meats, (which wicked and crayterous Subjects both have and may attempt
that seek to advance and establyshe themselves and the wickedness ye they
embrace,) so is it most necessary and convenient that a regard be had by the
Prince to her people committed to her charge, least the venomous priuye
persuasion and deuilishe counsel of this Antichristian rabble do slaye and
poison the souls of the simple Subjects, whereby might ensue as well peril to
the Prince as destruction of the common wealth, which ye almighty God defend
for his mercy sake, and grant that through this to long sufferaunce the like
furious flame flashe not again suddenly abroad as once it did before any spark
was feared to have been kindeled, for according to the old proverb, ye which
is bredde in the bone will never out of the flesh, and so will the viperous
brood never leave enge^dering of poiso^, The property of papists is to work
mischief.
whose study as it has evermore been to devise and imagine how to work
mischief, so cannot I say the bitter branches of that traiterous and
tyrannous tree yield better fruit, and therefore are to be considered
according, for secret and perilous has their privy poisoned practice and
packing ever ben from the beginning, A Papiste enuimy to God and traitout to
his prince.
as experience has taught, to the destruction (the more was the pitye) both of
Prince and people, whereof let ancient stories and Cronicles be witness. And
I would that now the same bloudye and murdering brood were not in hand to
brewe that mischief which God grant them never to tonne but that they may be
scalded in their own lycker. Well, well, they that will may see the
wickedness of that generation, but therefore are such scabbed sheep no longer
to be suffered which do but infecte the sound flock. And (alas) that
sufferaunce through to much lenitys should only cause such careless wicked
men so wilfullye to work their own destruction, whereas the law (if it were
justly executed) being ordained for the unrighteous, disobedient, murderes of
Fathers and Mothers, manslayers, whoremongers. etc, might bring them to God and
be a terror to other evil disposed, who now through their being borne wythall
are rather encouraged and boldened in their evil. Wherefore as the corn does
better grow up where no cockle is to cumber it, Prouer. 25.
so take the dross from the silver and there shall be a clean vessel
thereof, and as the common wealth is the better mayntayned and flourishes where
the law is worthily executed upon the offenders, so would the Gospel of our
savior Christ be more willinglier embraced in the hearts of the simple
ignorant ones, if the Archerimies were cut of from the face of the earth, whose
stubborn and presumpteous resistaunce of Gods and the Queens procedings, is
now the only let, which as it highlye offends the Majesty of God, so is it
an occasion of the increase of evil to the further prouocatio^ of his wrath.
Therefore as it is good by all means possible to cure an infected member,
Necessary and present remedy in extremity.
so is it much better if it be found incurable to cut it of, than that it
should infect the whole and sound body. And whereas cankered corsies in
currish patiences are so festered ye the precious medicine of mercy may not
cure them, the^ must of necessity, justice, a medicine more sharp and apt for
such a Nunq sanus, be ministered. Luke. 3.
Wherefore let the crooked ones be made straight and the rough ones made plain.
And hye time it is, for they do now but lie like dombe dogs or as ravening
and devouring woolues lurking for their pray, their bellies not yet full enough
of blood. These be those froward ungodly ones, ye from their mothers womb
have strayed and spoken lies, Psalm. 58.
whose venom is as the poison of Serpents, who still ymagine mischief in their
hearts, refusing to hear the voice of the charmer (charm he never so wisely)
but wilfullye stop their cares because they will not hear nor learn ye will of
their heavenly Father. Roman. 9.
These I say be of them whom God has stirred up even as he did Pharas, to be
as they have been, persecutors of his Children, to show his power on them ye
the name of God might be declared, who as he has mercy on whom he will, so
likewise those whom he will he makes hard hearted, even as he does these (if
they repent not) on whom he will show his wrath, though he suffer them with long
patience, being ye vessels of wrath ordained to dampnation, yet in ye end he
will cut them from the earth and with Pharao ouerwhelme and drown them in the
sorrowful Sea of perpetual destruction. The mercy showed to them is but in
vain, and ye doctrine of Jesus Christ whereof they are wyshed to be
partakers, is but cast away upon them, being as they are, plain contemners
thereof, showing themselves forsaken of God and left to themselves, and
therefore ought not that which is holy to be given to such dogs, Math. 7.
for it is but as Pearls strawed before swine ye tread them under their feet
and turn again to rent the giuers thereof, as they already have done and
again would do if power and beastly will were according. What otherwise
therefore shall be done unto these wilful stubborn ones who being ignorant of
Gods righteousness and going about to stablish their own, Roma. 10.
and being disobedient unto the righteousness of God, if they will still so
continue in their unfaithfulness and be by no means converted unto godwards,
but even according to the sentence of God Almighty pronounced by Esdras, dye in
their unfaithfulness? 4. Esdr. 15.
For the ungodly and transgressors and such as become unfaithful and obstinate
unto the Lord, Esaye. 1.
must altogether be utterly destroyed, yea devoured with the sword. 1.
Esdra^. 7.
Again Esdras wylleth ye those which know not the law of God should be
taught, which much disagreeth with ignorance to be ye mother of devotion, as
some of their affinitye have taught, and those (says he) that will not then
fulfill the law of God and the kings law; shall have this judgment without
delay, loss of goods, emprisonment and death, 1. Esdras. 6.
then there shall be a beam taken from his house and set up, and he shall be
hanged thereon. 4. Regu^. 10
And if Iehu did cause all the priests of Baall to be slain and destroyed
because they were the enemies of GOD, why then are these vile Vypers and
Romish bloudsuckers, 1. Regu^. 28.
these intolerable Diuils, utter enemies both to God and their Prince, thus
suffered to persiste in their evil, escaping so long the death which they so
worthily have deserved, and seeing God will have his fierce wrath executed upon
his enemies? Why are they still suffered thus to triumph and proudly to make
their vaunt and boast that the Prince has no power to harm them? The bragges
of the Papists. Abacuc. 1.
why are they I say thus suffered to mock their King and laugh their Prince
to scorn? Well, well, if God be herewith pleased, then let it be still as it
is. But as certainly as God was offended with king Saul forsparing of king
Agag enemy to the children of God, 1. Regu^. 15.
and for reserving the Cattaile and beasts which he commanded to be slain,
and Saul notwithstanding doing therein as seemed best to himself, neglecting
the commandment of the highest: even so undoubtedly is God now not pleased
with the reserving of these so manifest enemies, who although they have the
shape of men, yet in their manners more monstrous and beastly than brute beasts
in deed, who should not thus long have been unrewarded if there were not some
either draw backs or claw backs, or both, ye look smothe with their heads
and sting with their tail, bearing two faces in a hoode, whose power
ouergoeth right and by whose means the law is torn in pieces so that right
judgment cannot proceed nor go forth, Abacuc. 1.
but flattering Ipocrites are enemies to ye Gospel. Would God that such as are
infected and sick of that disease were dispatched both from court and
country, Three chief points to be noted.
for never shall truth tellers, be thoroughly welcome in England till such
false flatterers be out of credit and estimation, neither shall that vggly Whore
and shameless strompet of Babylon be clean overthrown, till such her
loitering lovers be brought to confusion, nor yet the proud hearts of the
arrogant Papists the utter enemies to God and their Prince, be mollified,
meekened, and made humble and lowlye, till Judgment with justice be joined
together, the neglecting whereof is cause presently that the boy presumes
against the elder, and the vile person against the honorable. Wherefore me
think although there were no word of God at all to instruct or move us, yet
our consciences would move us to consider condign punishment for such so
notorious grievous detestable tra^sgressours and offe^dours as these stubborn
rebels art, who although they declare their own sins themselves and hyde
them not, and that their words, works and counsels are against the Lord our
God and our Prince and Sovereign, yet are they wincked at and suffered. Yet
notwithstanding, as I doubt not but ye the Queens most excellent Majesty (to
whom God grant a long and prosperous reign to advance his truth to the
glory of his holy name, and the unspeakable comfort of his people committed to
hit charge) is mindful and well considers the terrible threatening of God
upon Princes for not executing justice, who having but deferred the same,
hoping through her cleme^cy and great mercy to bring them to ye knowledge of God
and their due obedience to her Grace, yet lo, being but for this cause
prolonged, 4. Esdr. 1^.
the innocent blood of the troubled has so long cried vengeance unto the Lord
upon his enimyes, Apocal. 6.
and the souls of the righteous still continually complaining, and the Lord
our God himself having so long suffered, and holden back his hand, looking
when the sword of justice should be drawn by the Prince to whom he has
committed it for ye executing of offenders, as well Idolatrers, murderers,
maintainers of whoredom, rebellious and envious enemies of his truth, and
sees notwithstanding his quarrel not maintained, but the worthy extreme
deserved punishment deferred, and justice in his cause neglected, 4. Esdr. 15.
The deferring of justice has provoked the wrath of God.
cannot, because he will no longer suffer such iniurye, but as a righteous
judge to revenge his own cause does now in his wrathful indignation
plentifully pour his perrillous plague of pestilence upon us, in such terrible
wise, as that we are glad to fly from our cities, mislike our lodgings,
forsake our houses, dispersing our selves abroad in sundry places, because ye
the messanger of God (death) dailye climing in at our windows, is come into
our houses to destroy us. Yea the Lord as we see consumes us with the breath
of his wrath even as the wythered grass, Esaias. 40.
and as he not long since, when we were greater in number, took then from us
the fruit of the earth, or gave so small increase thereof, as that we had not
wherwyth sufficiently to feed upon: so now he having plentifully blessed the
earth with store, destroys now by death the people for whose sakes he
provided and appointed it. Two chief causes of ye plague in London.
And the causes why that London specially is more sharplyer visited than any
one place of England besides (is) for that ye word of God being there most
purelye and plentifullye preached and taught, is there least followed. The
second cause why, is, for that the enemies of God that have been such
shameless shedders of innocent blood and pitilesse persecutors of him in his
members, have been there so long reserved, where with ye Lord (as well
appears) is grievously offended and therefore has laid the greater burden
upon us. Wherefore we see ye to much mercy is as well hurtful to the
offenders, as condign punishment for the^ is necessary, Jeremy. 28. Deute.
13.18.
who if they were cut away from us, we should be void of evil, wherefore I
would those stumbling blocks were removed, and according to ye saying of S.
Paul, Gallath. 5.
I would God they were cut of from us, which do disquiet us. And with Job I
say: Job. 24.
oh that all compassion upon them were forgotten, 1. Thessal. ^.
for they displease God and hinder men from their salvation, God therefore for
his great mercysake grant that the sword of Justice no longer ruste in the
scabberde but that it may be put to the use that God has appointed it, that
such may justly receive that which unjustly they have done unto the clect
servants of God, and that as well the obstinate Papists as also the carnal
Gospellers may feel the wayght thereof, or else it will be still the longer
the worse, To much mercy mar^eth good manners.
for to manifest it is at this day in England, that the overmuch mercy and
pitifulness makes a presumpteous and careless people, which if it be not the
sooner redressed, let us assure our selves ye this plague of pestilence
(wherewith we have lately perished so fast) is but a beginning of sorrows and
a declaration of a more heavy and grievous vengeance of God to come upon us,
which, if for ye neglecting the punnishing of sin and for not maintaining of
Gods quarrel be wilfully purchased, the^ woe, woe, woe will be upon us, for God
will then so handle us as he never did before, Ezechiel. 5.
who has plentye of plagues in store, yea, Leuitic. 2^
even ready hangyng over our heads. Wherefore good brethren let every one of
us enter into himself and well behold the monstrousness of our beastly
behavior that so shamefully abounds, considering that where the vineyarde
brings forth the best wine the Lord does keep it and in due time water it
and preserves it day and night from the enemy that he do it no harm, Esaias.
27.
but where the vineyarde yeldeth and brings forth briars and thorns the
Lord will run through it by wars and will make the strong cities desolate
and the habitation forsaken, and God who made and created the people, will not
favor them. Beware I say therefore oh England, be warned, be not tolong
careless, for it is manifest enough unless we will be wilful blind, Esaias.
26.
that the hand of the Lord is lifted up against us, and we have felt the heavy
burden thereof upon us. The Lord grant us therefore grace and speedy amendment
of our life, least ye Lord in his wrath make of our Cities and blessed famous
and fruitful country an heap of broken stones, Esaias. 17.
as he did with Damascus or with the walled City of Aroer whereof he
threatened to make soldes of cattaill, and so we purchase to ourselves sorrow
without hope of comfort, from the which misery that ye Lord our God, in whose
hands we are as the claye in the potters, may defend us, let us speedely and
continually in all humbleness of heart, in weeping, fasting and praying in
manner and form following, invoke the name of God our heavenly father, to
whom with the son and the holy Ghost be all praise and glory, world without
end. Amen.

(*)

The Prayer.
OH most puissant and mighty king, ye god of our forefathers and of thy people
Israel, who turnest man to destruction and then again art gracious and
merciful, deliver now from peril us poor wretches that with unfeigned
hearts call upon thee, and although our wickedness past has most highly
offended thee (oh Lord our God) and has been most grievous in thy sight, who
therefore have laid thy heavy hand upon us, the smart whereof we have felt to
our great discomfort, although not so sharply as our wickedness well deserved,
yet now Lord at the humble suit of us sorrowful sinners, cease thy anger,
withdraw thy dreadful hand, and let thy mercy quench the flame of thy
furye, look down upon us, behold the miserye of thy feeble flock that are
almost drowned in the dungeon of dolor, stop not thine ears at the crying of
our lamentable and mourning voices, but comfort us, relieve us, and suffer not
the sourges of sorrow to ouerwhelme us, but raise thou us up that are
fallen, give us a Godly consideration of the wonderful work of thy late
wrathful indignation upon us by the overthrow and destruction of the great
number of our Brethren, whom in thy ireful desetued displeasure by death
through Plague thou have taken from us, that thereby we being warned may
henceforth eschew and avoid the importable burdens of thy heavy vengeance
that thou reseruest in store for Sinners. Preserve good Lord the Queens most
excellent Majesty, and grant her to our comfort, a long and prosperous
reign, make her zealous and seruent in the trial of thy truth and proving of
thy will and testament, and oh lord forgive our enemies that have been
persecuters of thy people and selaunderers of thy truth and Gospel, turn
their hearts if so it be thy heavenly will, if not, (but that they be of the
number of those whose hearts thou have hardened because they should not
understand the mysteries contained in thy holy word, nor the unspeakable
comfort contained in the same) then suffer theyn^ Lord no longer to shadow
themselves in secret corners priuyly to work their perilous pretense,
poisoning thy people with the pestilent persuasion of damnable doctrine, but
according to thy promise, which is that the generation of ye wicked shall be
without honor, so stand now up Lord of hosts and be no longer mercyful unto
thy enemies that of malicious wickedness resisting thy truth, Psaline. 59.
do grenne as dogs at thy people, but through thy Godly motion, so move the
heart of our most gracious Queen, as Iehu, in the defense of thy Gospel and
people to draw the sword committed to her by thee, to cut away from the face
of the earth those rebellious ennimies and sworn adversaries against thee
and thy Gospel, to weed and root out the rotten members that infect and poy
son the body of the commonwealth, that then the noisome number and remnant of
the wicked being swept out with the beesom of destruction, the flock of thy
fold through thy mighty assistance and gracious help and furtheraunce may all
the days of our life be at defiaunce with Satan, utterly forsake, abhor and
cast of the patched lothesome wicked weed of our old Adam, and being
apparelled and adorned with the gladsome garment and rich attire of
righteousness, we may shine in all virtue, and be pleasant and acceptable in
thy sight, to the praise and glory of thy holy name and our eternal comfort.
To thee oh God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one
immortal, invisible and everliving God, be all praise and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

Give God the praise. I. S.

Imprinted at London, in Whitecrosse street, by Henry Denham.

Anno Domini. 1564.


