A FUNERAL Elegye Jn memory of the late Virtuous Master William Peter of
Whipton near Excester.

By W.S.

Imprinted at London by G. Eld. 1612.

TO MASTER John Peter of Boohaye in Deuon. Esquire.
THe love I bore to your brother, and will do to his memory, has craved from
me this last duty of a friend; I am herein but a second to the privilege of
Truth who can warrant more in his behalf, then I undertook to deliver.
Exercise in this kind I will little affect, and am less adicted to, but there
must be miracle in that labor, which to witness my remembrance to this
departed Gentleman, I would not willingly undergo: yet what-soeuer is here
done, is done to him, and to him only. For whom, and whose sake, I will not
forget to remember any friendly respects to you, or to any of those that have
loved him for himself; and himself for his deserts.

W.S.

A Funeral Elegy.
SInce Time, and his predestined end,
Abridg'd the circuit of his hope-full days;
Whiles both his Youth and Virtue did intend,
The good indeuor's, of deserving praise:
What memorable monument can last,
Whereon to build his never blemished name?
But his own worth, wherein his life was graced?
Since as it ever he maintained the same.
Oblivion in the darkest day to come,
When sin shall tread on merit in the dust;
Cannot raze out the lamentable tomb
Of his Short-liu'd desert's: but still they must
Even in the hearts and memories of men,
Claim fit Respect; that they, in every lim,
Remembering what he was, with comfort then
May pattern out, One truly good by him.
For he was truly good; if honest care,
Of harmless conversation, may commend
A life free from such stains, as follyes are;
Ill recompensed only in his end.
Nor can the tongue of him who loved him least,
(If there can be minority of love,
To one superlatiue above the rest,
Of many men in steady faith) reprove
His constant temper, in the equal weight
Of thankfulness, and kindness: Truth does leave
Sufficient proof, he was in every right,
As kind to give, as thankful to receive.
The curious eye, of a quick brained survey,
Could scantly find a mote amidst the fun,
Of his too-shortned days: or make a prey
Of any faulty error he had done.
Not that he was above the spleenfull sense
And spite of malice; but for that he had
Warrant enough in his own innocence,
Against the sting of some in nature bad.
Yet who is he so absolutely blessed,
That lives incompast in a mortal frame?
Some-time in reputation not oppressed?
By some in nothing famous but defame?
Such in the By-path and the Ridg-way lurk
That leads to ruin; in a smooth pretense
Of what they do, to be a special work,
Of singleness, not tending to offense.
Whose very virtues are not to detract,
Whiles hope remains of gain (base fee of slaves)
Despising chiefly, men in fortunes wrackt,
But death to such gives unremembered graves.
Now therein lived he happy, if to be
Free from detraction, happiness it be,
His younger years, gave comfortable hope
To hope for comfort, in his riper youth;
Which (haruest-like) did yield again the crop
Of Education; betterd, in his truth:
Those noble twins of heaven infused races,
Learning and Wit, refined in their kind:
Did jointly both, in their peculiar graces,
Enrich the curious temple of his mind.
Indeed a temple, in whose precious white,
Sot Reason by Religion over swayd:
Teaching his other senses, with delight,
How Piety and Zeal should be obeyed.
Not fruitlesly in prodigal expense,
Wasting his best of time: but so content
With Reasons golden Mean to make defense,
Against the assault of youth's encouragement:
As not the tide of this surrounding age,
(When now his Fathers death had freed his will)
Could make him subject to the drunken rage,
Of such whose only glory is their ill.
He from the happy knowledge of the wise,
Draws virtue to reprove secured fools;
And shuns the glad sleights of insnaring vice,
To spend his spring of days in sacred schools.
Here gave he diet to the sick desires,
That day by day, assault the weaker man;
And with fit moderation still retires,
From what does batter Virtue now and than.
But that I not intend in full discourse,
To progress out his life; I could display,
A Good man in each part exact; and force
The common voice to warrant what I say.
For it his fate and heaven had decreed,
That full of days he might have lived to see
The grave in peace; the times that should succeed
Had been best-speaking witnesses with me.
Whose conversation so untouched, did move
Respect most in it self, as who would scan
His Honesty and Worth, by them might prove,
He was a kind, true, perfect, gentleman.
Not in the outside of disgraceful folly
Courting Opinion, with unfit disguise;
Affecting fashions; nor addicted wholly
To unbeseeming blushlesse vanities:
"But suting so his habit and desire,
"As that his Virtue was his best Attire.
Not in the wast of many idle words
Cared he to be heard talk; nor in the flote
Of fond conceit (such as this age affordes)
By vain discourse upon himself to dote.
For his becoming silence, gave such grace
To his judicious parts; as what he spoke
Seemed rather answers (which the wise embrace)
Then busy questions, such as talkers make.
And though his qualities might well deserve
Just commendation, yet his furnished mind
Such harmony of goodness did preserve,
As Nature never built in better kind.
Knowing the best, and therefore not presuming
In knowing, but for that it was the best:
Ever within himself free choice resuming
Of true perfection, in a perfect breast.
So that his Mind and Body made an In,
The one to lodge the other, both like framed
For fair conditions; guests that soonest win
Applause, in generality well-fam'd,
If trim behavior, gestures mild, discreet
Endeavors; modest speech; beseeming mirth;
True friendship; active grace; persuasion sweet;
Delightful love, innated from his birth;
Acquaintance vnfamiliar; carriage just;
Offencelesse resolution; wished sobriety;
Cleane-temper'd Moderation; steady Trust;
Vnburthen'd conscience; unfeigned Piety;
If these, or all of these, knit fast in one
Can merit praise: then justly may we say,
Not any from this frailer stage is gone,
Whose name is like to live a longer day.
Though not in eminent courts, or places great,
For popular concourse; yet in that soil
Where he inioy'd his birth, life, death, and seat,
Which now sits mourning his untimely spoil.
And as much glory is it to be good;
For private persons, in their private home;
As those descended from illustrious blood,
In public view of greatness: whence they come.
Though I rewarded with some sadder taste,
Of knowing shame; by feeling it have proved
My countries thanklessse misconstruction; cast
Upon my name and credit, both vnlou'd
By some, whose fortunes sunck into the wane
Of Plenty and Desert, have strove to win
Justice by wrong; and sifted to imbane
My reputation, with a witless sin,
Yet Time, the Father of vnblushing Truth,
May one day lay open malice which has crossed it:
And right the hopes of my endangered youth,
Purchasing credit in the place I lost it.
Even in which place, the subject of the verse
(Unhappy matter of a mourning style)
Which now that subjects merits does rehearse,
Had education, and new being: while
By fair demeanor, he had won repute
Amongst the All of all that lived there:
For that his actions did so wholly suit
With worthynesse, still memorable here.
The many hours till the day of doom,
Will not consume his life and hapless end:
For should he lie obscured without a toombe,
Time would to time his honesty commend.
Whiles Parents to their children will make known,
And they to their posterity impart,
How such a man was sadly overthrown,
By a hand guided by a cruel heart.
"Whereof as many as shall hear that sadness,
"Will blame ye or es hard fate, the others madness.
Whiles such as do recount that tale of woe,
Told by remembrance of the wisest heads,
Will in the end conclude the matter so,
As they will all go weeping to their bedds.
For when the world lies winterd in the storms
Of fearful consummation; and lays down,
The vnsteddie change of his fantastic forms,
Expecting ever to be ouer-throwne:
When the proud height of much affected sin
Shall ripen to a head, and in that pride,
End in the miseries it did begin,
And fall amidst the glory of his tide:
Then in a book where every work is writ,
Shall this man's actions be revealed; to show
The gainful fruit of well-imployed wit,
Which paid to heaven the debt that it did owe:
Here shall be reckoned up the constant faith,
Never untrue, where once he love professed;
Which is a miracle in men (one faith)
Long sought, though rarely found: and he is best
"who ca^ make freindship, in those times of change,
"Admired more, for being firm then strange.
When those weak houses of our brittle flesh,
Shall ruined be by death; our grace, and strength,
Youth, memory and shape, that made us fresh,
Cast down, and utterly decayed at length:
When all shall turn to dust from whence we came,
And we low leueld in a narrow grave,
What can we leave behind us but a name?
Which by a life well led may honor have?
Such honor, o thou youth untimely lost,
Thou did deserve and have; for though thy soul
Has took her flight to a diuiner coast,
Yet here on earth thy fame lives ever whole.
In every heart sealed up, in every tongue
Fit matter to discourse; no day prevented,
That pitties not thy sad and sudden wrong,
Of all alike beloved and lamented.
And I here to thy memorable worth,
In this last act of friendship, sacrifice
My love to Thee; which I could not set forth
In any other habit of disguise.
Although I could not learn (whiles yet thou were)
To speak the language of a servile breath:
My truth stole from my tongue into my heart,
Which shall not thence be sundred, but in death.
And I confess my love was too remisle,
That had not made thee know, how much I pris'd thee:
But that mine error was, as yet it is,
To think love best in silence: for I sized thee
By what I would have been; not only ready
In telling I was thine; but being so,
By some effect to show it: He is steady
Who seems less then he is, in open show.
Since then I still reserved to try the worst,
Which hardest sat and time thus can lay on me.
Tinlarge my thoughts, was hindered at first,
While thou had life: I took this task upon me,
To register with mine unhappy Pen,
Such duties as it owes to thy desert;
And set thee as a President to Men,
And Limne thee to the world but as thou were.
Not hired, as heaven can witness in my soul,
By vain conceit, to please such ones as know it;
Nor servile to be liked; free from control;
Which pain to many men I do not owe it.
But here I trust, I have discharged now
(Fair lovely branch too soon cut off) to Thee,
My constant and irrefragable vow,
As had it chanced thou might have done to me.
But that no merit strong enough of mine,
Had yielded store to thy well-abled quill:
Whereby t'enrole my name, as this of thine,
How s'ere inritched by thy plenteous skill.
Here then I offer up to Memory,
The value of my tallent (precious man)
Whereby if thou live to Posterity,
Though It be not as I would, it is as I can:
"In minds from whence endeavor does proceed,
"A ready will is taken for the deed.
Yet ere I take my longest last farewell,
From thee, fair mark of sorrow; let me frame
Some ampler work of thank, wherein to tell
What more thou did deserve, then in thy name,
And free thee from the scandal of such senses,
As in the rancour of unhappy spleen,
Measure thy course of life (with false pretenses)
Comparing by thy death, what thou have been.
"So in his mischiefs is the world accursed,
"It picks out matter to inform the worst.
The wilful blindness that hood-winkes the eyes
Of men in-wrapped in an earthy veil,
Makes them most ignorantly exercise,
And yield to humor, when it does assail;
Whereby the candle, and the bodies light
Darken's the inward eyesight of the mind:
Presuming still it sees, even in the night
Of that same ignorance which makes them blind.
Hence conster they with corrupt Commentaries,
Proceeding from a nature as corrupt,
The text of malice; which so often varies,
As it is by seeming reason vnder-propt.
O! whether tends the lamentable spite
Of this worlds teen-full apprehension?
Which understands all things amiss; whose light
Shines not amidst the dark of their dissension?
True it is, this man (whiles yet he was a man)
Soothed not the current of besotted fashion:
Nor could digest as some loose Mimicks can,
An empty sound of ouer-weening passion:
So much to be made servant to the base,
And sensual aptness of dis-vnion'd vices:
To purchase commendation by disgrace,
Whereto the world and heat of sin intices.
But in a safer contemplation,
Secure in what he knew, he ever chose
The ready way to commendation,
By shunning all inuitemens strange, of those
Whose illness is the necessary praise,
Must wait upon their actions: only rare
In being rare in shame, which strives to raise
Their name by doing what they do not care.
As if the free commission of their ill,
Were even as boundless as their prompt desires:
Only like Lords, like subjects to their will,
Which their fond dotage euer-more admires.
He was not so; but in a serious awe,
Ruling the little ordered commonwealth,
Of his own self with honor to the law,
That gave peace to his bread, bread to his health.
Which ever he maintaind in sweet content,
And pleasurable rest; wherein he ioyd
A Monarchy of comforts government,
Never until his last to be destroyed.
For in the Vineyard of heauen-fauoured learning,
(Where he was double honored in degree)
His observation and discreet discerning,
Had taught him in both fortunes to be free.
Whence now retired home; to a home indeed;
The home of his condition and estate;
He well provided against the hand of need,
Whence yong-men some time grow unfortunate.
His disposition, by the bonds of unity,
So fastened to his reason; that it strove,
With understandings grave immunity,
To purchase from all hearts a steady love.
Wherein not any one thing comprehends,
Proportionable note of what he was,
Then that he was so constant to his friends,
As he would no occasion ouer-passe,
Which might make known his unaffected care,
In all respects of trial, to unlock
His bosom and his store which did declare,
That Christ was his, and he was Frendships Rock:
A Rock of Friendship figured in his name,
Fore-shewing what he was, and what should be,
Most true presage, and he dischargd the same,
In every act of perfect amitye:
Though in the complementall phrase of words,
He never was addicted to the vain
Of boast, such as the common breath affoords,
He was in use most fast in tongue most plain,
Nor amongst all those virtues, that for ever,
Adorned his reputation, will be found
One greater then his Faith: which did persevere,
Where once it was protested always sound.
Hence sprung the deadly fuel that revived
The rage which wrought his end; for had he been
Slacker in love, he had been longer lived,
And not oppressed by wraths unhappy sin.
By wrathes unhappy sin, which vnaduis'd
Gave death for free good will and wounds for love
Pity it was that blood had not been pris'd
At higher rate, and reason set above
Most unjust choler, which untimely Drew
Destruction on it self: and most vniunst,
Robbed virtue of a follower so true,
As time can boast of both for love and trust,
"So henceforth all (great glory to his blood)
"Shall be but Seconds to him being good.
"The wicked end their honor with their sin,
"In death, which only then the good begin.
Lo here a lesson by experience taught,
For men whose pure simplicity has drawn,
Their trust to be betrayed by being caught
Within the snares of making truth a pawn.
Whiles it not doubting whereinto it enters,
Without true proof and knowledge of a friend,
Sincere in singleness of heart, aduenters
To give fit cause, ere love begin, to end.
"His unfeigned frienship where it least was sought,
"Him to a fatal time-lesse ruin brought.
Whereby the life that purity adorned
With real merit, by this sudaine end,
Is in the mouth of some in manners scorned,
Made questionable, for they do intend,
(According to the tenor of the Saw
Mistook, if not observed, writ long ago)
When men were only led by Reasons law,
That such as is the end, the life proves so.
Thus He, who to the universal lapse
Gave sweet redemption, offering up his blood,
To conquer death by death; and loose the traps
Of Hell, even in the triumph that it stood:
He thus, for that his guiltless life was spilt
By death, which was made subject to the curse;
Might in like manner be reprou'd of guilt,
In his pure life, for that his end was worse.
But o far be it, our unholy lips
Should so profane the Deity above:
As theerby to ordain revenging whips,
Against the day of Judgment and of Love:
The hand that lends us honor in our days,
May shorten when it please; and justly take
Our honor from us, many sundry ways,
As best becomes that wisdom did us make.
The second brother who was next begot,
Of all that ever were begotten yet;
Was by a hand in vengeance rude and hot,
Sent innocent to be in heaven set.
Whose fame the Angels in melodious quiers,
Still witness to the world; then why should he,
Well-profited in excellent desires,
Be more rebuked, who had like destiny?
Those Saints before the euer-lasting throne,
Who sit with crowns of glory on their heads,
Washed white in blood, from earth hence have not gone,
All to their joys, in quiet on their beds;
But tasted of the sower-bitter scourge,
Of torture and affliction, ere they gained,
Those blessings which their sufferance did urge.
Whereby the grace fore-promis'd they attained.
Let then the false suggestions of the froward
Building large Castles in the empty air,
By suppositions fond and thoughts untoward,
(Issues of discontent and sick despair)
Rebound gross arguments, upon their heart;
That may disprove their malice: and confound
Uncivil loose opinions, which insert
Their souls into the roll, that does unsound
Betraying policies: and show their brains
Unto their shame ridiculous: whose scope
Is envy, whose endeavors fruitless pains,
In nothing surely prosperous, but hope.
And that same hope, so lame, so vnpreuailing,
It buries self conceit in weak opinion;
Which being crossed, gives matter of bewayling
Their vain designs, on whom want has dominion.
Such, and of such condition may devise,
Which way to wound with defamations spirit,
(Close lurking whispers hidden forgeries)
His taintlesse goodness, his desertfull merit.
But whiles the minds of men can judge sincerely,
Upon assured knowledge: his repute
And estimation, shall be rumor clearly,
In equal worth, Time shall to time renew't.
The Grave, that in his ever empty womb,
For ever closes up the unrespected,
Who when they dye, dye all; shall not intombe
His pleading best perfections as neglected.
They to his notice in succeeding years*
Shall speak for him, when He shall lie below;
When nothing but his memory appears,
Of what he was; then shall his virtues grow.
His being but a private man in rank,
(And yet not rank't beneath a Gentleman)
Shall not abridge the commendable thank,
Which wise posterity shall give him than:
For Nature, and his therein happy Fate,
Ordained that by his quality of mind,
Tennoble that best part, although his state
Were to a lower blessedness confined,
Blood, pomp, state, honor, glory and command,
Without fit ornaments of disposition,
Are in themselves but heathnish and profane,
And much more peaceful is a mean condition,
Which underneath the roof of sa^e content,
Feeds on the bread of rest: and takes delight,
To look upon the labors it has spent,
For it is own sustenance, both day and night.
Whiles others plotting which way to be great,
How to augment their portion and ambition,
Do toil their giddie brains, and ever sweat,
For popular applause, and power's commission.
But one in honor's like a seeled Dove,
Whose inward eyes are dimmed with dignity;
Does think most safety does remain above.
And seeks to be secure, by mounting high:
"Whence when he falz, who did ere while aspire,
"Fal's deeper down, for that he climed higher.
Now men who in a lower region live,
Exempt from danger of authority,
Have fittest times in Reasons rules to thrive,
Not vexed with envy of prioritie.
"And those are much more noble in the mind,
"Then many that have nobleness by kind.
Birth, blood, and ancesters, are none of ours,
Nor can we make a proper challenge to them:
But virtues and perfections in our powers,
Proceed most truly from us, if we do them.
Respective titles or a gracious style,
With all what men in eminence possess,
Are, without ornaments to praise them, vile:
The beauty of the mind, is nobleness.
And such as have that beauty, well deserve
Eternal characters, that after death
Remembrance of their worth, we may preserve,
So that their glory die not with their breath.
Else what availes it in a goodly strife,
Upon this face of earth here to contend,
The goood t'exceed the wicked in their life,
Should both be like obscured in their end?
Until which end, there is none rightly can
Be termed happy, since the happiness
Depends upon the goodness of the man,
Which afterward his praises will express.
Look hither then, you that enjoy the youth
Of your best days; and see how unexpected
Death can betray your iollity to ruth?
When death you think is least to be respected?
The person of this model here set out,
Had all that youth and happy days could give him:
Yet could not all encompasse him about,
Against the assault of death, who to relieve him
Struck home but to the frail and mortal parts,
Of his humanity: but could not touch
His flourishing and fair long-liu'd deserts,
Above fates reach, his singleness was such.
So that he dies but once, but doubly lives,
Once in his proper self, then in his name:
Predestined Time, who all depriues,
Could never yet deprive him of the same.
And had the Genius which attended on him,
Been possibilited to keep him safe,
Against the rigor that has ouer-gone him,
He had been to the public use a staff:
Leading by his example in the path,
Which guides to doing well, wherein so few
The pronesse of this age, to error has
Informed rightly in the courses true.
As then the loss of one, whose inclination
Strove to win love in general, is sad,
So specially his friends, in soft compassion
Do feel the greatest loss they could have had.
Amongst them all she who those nine of years
Lived fellow to his counsels, and his bed;
Has the most share in loss: for I in hers,
Feel what distemperature this chance has bred.
The chaste imbracements of conjugal love,
Who in a mutual harmony consent;
Are so impatient of a strange remove,
As meager Death it self seems to lament.
And weep upon those cheeks, which nature framed
To be delightful orbs, in whom the force
Of lively sweetness plays, so that ashamed
Death often pitties his unkind divorce.
Such was the separation here constraind,
(Well-worthy to be termed a rudeness rather)
For in his life his love was so unfeigned,
As he was both an husband and a father.
The one in firm affection, and the other
In careful providence, which ever strove
With joint assistance to grace one another,
With every helpful furtherance of love.
But since the sum of all that can be said
Can be but said that He was good: which wholly
Includes all excellence can be displaide,
In praise of Virtue and reproach of Folly:
His due deserts, this sentence on him gives,
He died in life, yet in his death he lives:
Now run's the method of this doleful song,
In accents brief to thee, O thou deceast!
To whom those pains do only all belong,
As witnesles I did not love thee least.
For could my worthless brain find out but how,
To raise thee from the Sepulcher of dust;
Undoubtedly thou should have partage now,
Of life with me; and heaven be counted just:
If to a supplicating soul, it would
Give life a new, by giving life again
Where life is mist: whereby discomfort should
Right his old griefs, and former joys retain.
Which now with thee are leapt into thy toombe,
And buried in that hollow vault of woe:
Expecting yet a more seuerer doom,
Then times strickt slinty hand will let 'm know.
And now if I leuel'd mine account,
And reckoned up in a true measured score,
Those perfect graces which were ever wont
To wait on thee alive, I ask no more.
But shall hereafter in a poor content,
Immure those imputations I sustain,
Learning my days of youth so to prevent,
As not to be cast down by them again:
Only those hopes, which fate denies to grant,
In full possession to a captive heart:
Who if it were in plenty, still would want,
Before it may enjoy his better part:
From which detained, and banished in the exile
Of dim misfortune, has none other prop,
Whereon to lean and rest it self the while,
But the weak comfort of the hapless Hope.
And Hope must in despite of fearful change,
Play in the strongest closet of my breast:
Although perhaps I ignorantly range,
And court opinion in my deep'st unrest.
But whether does the stream of my mischance
Drive me beyond my self: fast friend, soon lost,
Long may thy worthiness thy name advance,
Amongst the virtuous, and deserving most.
Who herein have for ever happy proved,
In life thou liu'dst, in death thou dyed'st beloved.
FINIS.

