THE TOVCH-STONE of Prayer.

Or A true and profitable exposition of the Lords Prayer, according to the holy
Hebrew of S. Mathews gospel: to which is prefixed certain necessary
circumstances to be observed in Prayer.

Also thereunto is annexed a Table showing the agreement between the Lords
prayer, and the ten commandments of Almighty God.

By T. S.

Whatsoever ye shall ask, if ye believe, ye shall receive it. Mat. 21. 22.
Oration pia penetrat coelum. Imprinted at London for Arthur Johnson, dwelling in
Paul's Church-yarde, at the sign of the Flower de Luce and Crown. 1602.

To the religious gentlemen Master Robert Bate, and Master Edmund Sleigh: T.
S. wishes in this life the fear of God, and in the life to come everlasting
rest with Jesus Christ.
Having compiled this little Treatise, at the motion of a private friend, most
especially for his benefit and mine own comfort, once an entrance being made
into the matter: I found so many good and profitable lessons, naturally to
arise from this so excellent a subject, being a most absolute form of prayer,
delivered by the blessed mouth of Christ our Savior, unto his disciples, at
his instant request, I thought it could not, but be very profitable to others,
as I finding the meditation hereof so sweet unto my self. Now this serious
cogitation was a strong motive unto me, to publish that abroad, which I thought
to keep private to my self and to my friend; who first moved me to take in
hand this task, to which so much the rather I condiscended: being instantly
urged thereunto, by some of my very friends, to whom I imparted the sight of
this small work: affirming that our knowledge should not be enclosed within
the narrow bounds of our own breast, but to be extended, as much as is
possible, to the benefit of others. And although many vigilant watchmen over
Christ's flock, and industrious laborers in his great harvest: have taken
great pains in the unfolding the mysteries of this most perfect platform of
prayer, without doubt to the benefit of the church) yet I know, it is not a
thing superfluous (as it may seem to some) but most necessary in these times,
to refresh the memory of their learned labors. For although prayer be a daily
exercise amongst us, yet the number is very small that know to perform this
holy action with true sincerity. So that indeedo, that which should be a shield
unto them to defend from the assaults of our old enemy: is a just cause to
make the Lord to vnsneath his two-edged sword against them. Some are so nousled
in security, that they offer up the calves of their lips, as Caine did his
sacrifice, that is by hands of others, and think all is well, if they give a
consent with their voice to a general prayer, although God knows, their
hearts are wandering abroad at that instant; others have a zeal, but it is
without understanding, so that they know not how to pray aright, nor to whom to
pray as they ought; but like the Athenians, worship an unknown God, and others
are so besotted with a blind devotion, that they think their prayers cannot
be sanctified, unless they be holyed with Popish relics. All these things
with many more duly considered, it is as clear as the light, that it behooves
every true Christian, (so far as it shall please God to enhable him) to labor
to remove these impediments. And albeit I humbly acknowledge my self to be one
of the meanest among my brethren to undergo this labor, yet seeing it
pleases the Lord, by weak means, to bring mighty things to pass, whereby
his glory shines the brighter. I was not discouraged to employ my small
talent, which it has pleased him to bestow on me, to the benefit of others, (I
hope,) as well as of my self. And as I wish it may be to the glory of God, and
the universal good of all, so more perticulerly, to the comfort of you my very
good friends and loving countrymen, whom I have chosen, as patrons of my small
work, as well to testify my grateful mind toward you, as that by your
protection it might the better be secured, from the malicious tongues of such
as shall carpe against it: being fully resolved of your favorable acceptance,
because I know you are religious obseruers of this divine exercise, and well
instructed in the word of God, which is our true Pylot to direct our course
aright. In the exposition of this short, but most absolute and sweet prayer,
of which our Savior Christ Jesus, is the author, and therefore is usually
named the Lords prayer: I have followed the Hebrew text, especially for three
respects. First, because it is the native tongue of the Gospel, wherein this
prayer was first penned: secondly, because more necessary, more significant,
and heavenly lessons are naturally to be learned from the holy Hebrew words,
being considered by themselves, then from any other language. Thirdly, I was
instigated to take this course by the examples of diverse famous and learned
doctors, namely that learned and reverend Doctor Saint Jerome, divine
Theophilact, Simon Grineus, and Sebastian Munster, and many others, both old
and new writers, who follow the Hebrew text of this Gospel, and may be unto me
as strong defensive Bulwarks, against such as might happily impeach this manner
of proceeding. But if it shall please God to reveal to any other a more
expedite course, let him in Gods name, with a good conscience use his own
liberty; It shall suffice me amongst the rest to bring somewhat to the
building of the Lords spiritual Temple, be it never so mean, so it do serve
for the edification thereof. But to avoid tediousness, fearing least I have
offended already in this respect, I commit you and all the rest of my loving
friends and Countrymen to the protection of the omnipotent, and only wise
God, and my labors whatsoever, to his good blessing.

Your Countryman most humbly to command T. S.

To the godly and Christian Reader.
FOr as much (gentle Reader) as nothing is more necessary and profitable to all
Christians, yea more pleasing to God: then is the faithful prayers of his
elect. And because all in the church, have not like measure of knowledge: to
know either for what: or after what manner to pray, I have thought it good for
the benefit of such weak ones, to set forth this exposition of the Lords
prayer: which is the absolute for me of all holy prayers, the doctrines I have
drawn from the natural meaning of the words, as they are set down in the
holy Hebrew of S. Mathewes gospel, using no curiosity in method: but handling
every word as it lies in order in the text, which is the plainest, and
easiest, for the capacity of the simpler sort, that can be: And for their
better understanding how to pray, I have prefixed certain circumstances of
prayer, which are seriously to be considered of every one that will pray
aright. Lastly to the end of the Lords prayer, I have added a table, showing
thee the agreement of the Lords prayer with the ten commandments. And
whereas in reading, thou shall see this mark *. At the beginning of any
sentence, look on the margent, and it shows thee the writer, from whence
that sentence was borrowed: and because that some may think my enterprise
bold, yea and this my doing to be altogether needelesse, in as much as I have
but busied my self, with that which my betters have both learnedly taught, and
writ: the which notwithstanding, we still continuing in our security, and
carelessness, thinking in our prosperity, we shall never be cast down: putting
far from us the evil day, which amongst many, is the most desperate disease
to the soul, that can be. Also considering with my self, the duty I owe to
God, remembering, how every one must give an account how he has used his
talent: yea religion binds me to have a loving care of the salvation of my
brethren, and the duty and love I bear to the church, wherein I live, and of
which I am a member: these and many more such like reasons, cause me to say,
the love of God in Christ Jesus constraines me to speak that I do: and with
the Apostles in the Acts, I cannot choose but speak the things I have heard and
seen. Neither gentle reader, let this work seem to thee superfluous, because
some learned have entreated of the same matter before, we see by lamentable
experience how soon their learned labors are forgot, and how seldom put in
practice, therefore we cannot hear a good thing too often, nor learn it too
well. And I beseech God for his sons sake to take the scales from our eyes,
that our affections may be illuminated, and we being strengthened in the inner
man: may the better discharge so weighty a duty as prayer is. Read this book,
(christian brother) with a single eye, not only so much to know, as to
practice: and to be penitent for that which has been amiss: and that
humility, and meeknes, dwelling in thy soul, God may guide thy judgment, and
teach thee in his way* and that thou Psalm. 25
use this book, no otherwise then it was meant, to thy good and comfort, which
God grant unto thee, Amen.

Thy loving brother in Christ Jesus Tho. S.

QVisquis amas Christum, sancte componere vota,
Discas, Diabolum sic superare potes.
Ipse licet nobis minitetur vulnera Demon,
Saepe precare Deum, vulnera nulla feres.
Contra nos tumidae minitantur praelia Gentes
Exitiumque parant, Perdere nemo potest.
Nam Dius, exaudit iustorum tempore duro
Cum clamant, gemitus, auxilium que feret.
Corda leuate Deo, mundanas spernite curas,
Impediunt votum, pondere corda premunt,
Sanctificet que fides semper pia dicta precantis,
Haec mentem sanctam redere sola solet.
Hac iter ad vitam, hac magnitecta Tonantis
Scandimus eloqvio, Pax vbi sola manet.
Sintque manus purae nobis, sint pectora pura,
Sic Dominus precibus cuncta petita dabit.
Christus discipulos docuit pia verba refer,
Hoc docet exemplo, nos quo que verba pia.
Quis poterit Christi magnae praeconia laudis
Dicere pro meritis? dicere nemo queat.
Qui monstrare viam voluit, qua culmina coeli
Scandimus, atque patri sacra refer suo.
Non pudeat sanctos sanctam didicisse loquelam,
Omnia nam sanctis obuia sunt precibus
Vt docuisti tuos olim mitissime Christ
Discipulos, verbo nos quoque pasce tuo.
Tempora, concedas vitae faelicia nobis,
Sit tibi, sitque patri gloria lausque tuo.
Oration absque fide, est quasi corpus sine anima. W. P.

To the secure and careless says S. James.

Ye lust and have not: because ye ask not. Iam. 4. verse. 2. To the
lascivious and carnal.

Ye ask and receive not: because ye ask amiss. verse 3. To the regenerate
Christian says S. John.

This is the assurance that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us. John. 5. verse 14. 15. Before we cry will he
answer: and whilst we speak will he hear us. Jsa. 65. verse. 24.
Observations to pray aright.
Eight lessons, or necessary observations, to be learned of all, that will pray
aright.
AS no exercises can be well performed, without some circumstances and
observations necessarylie thereto belonging: whether we respect exercises of
the body, or of the mind. So prayer being an exercise ordained of God: then
the which nothing is more profitable, can in no good measure on our part be
performed: without some necessary circumstances thereto belonging. The
consideration whereof, has caused me, to place before the Lords prayer, these
eight necessary circumstances, belonging to To whom we must pray.
prayer. The first whereof is, to whom we must pray.

For as it is ridiculous to utter Papists in so doing like the Athenians.
seeing we may justly doubt, whether they hear, or can give us what we want.
And if any so do, he is as blind as the Athenians, to pray to an unknown
God. Therefore we must pray to him, that is willing to help us, which also is
incomprehensible in all places to hear us, and alsufficient able to give us,
else cannot our prayers be made in faith. And if they be not in faith, the
Apostle says, whatsoever is not of faith is sin. But prayer to Saints cannot
be of faith: therefore such prayers are sin: Again we can pray to none, but
to them we believe in. But we must believe only in God: Therefore pray to him
only.

Our saviors words, which ought to be without contradiction, teach us that
plainly.

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God: Mat. 4.
and him only shall thou serve.

And that this is a part of Gods worship, and honor to be prayed unto: hear
what the Prophet says in the person of God. Call upon me Psa. 50.
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me: and look into the verse
before, and thou shall find: he that gives this commandment, is the most high
and blessed Trinity.

The second Circumstance.
THe second observation is, to We must pray in the name of Christ.
know through whom, or in whose name, to offer up our prayers: and that is, in
Christ's name: so does 1. Tim. 2. 3.
the Apostle Paul teach us. There is one God, and one mediator: between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus. And the Apostle John says, if any 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
And Christ him self has witnessed, whatsoever we shall ask the father Ioh.
16.
in his name, we shall receive it. Therefore sath the blessed Apostle, we have
boldness, and entrance, with confidence, through faith in him, that is in
Christ, and not in any Angel or Saint.

The third circumstance.
IN the third place, observe for what For what to pray. Mat. 6
to pray, of this does Christ teach us, in Matthew the sixth. Even in the Lords
prayer, which is a true pattern for all holy prayers: whereof shall be spoken
more at large in his place, In the mean time observe this lesson of S. Paul.
I exhort (says 1. Tim. 2. 1.
he) that prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and giving of Why we
must pray for Kings.
thanks be made for all men: for kings, and all that be in authority; that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty for this is
good, and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Wherefore with
Theophilact I conclude Theo: on Luke cha. 11.
this point: that he which asks that which is not profitable for the soul,
nor necessary for the body, shall not be hard. For says that holy father with
God, such are no petitions, if they ask, Quae non expediunt, such things, as
are neither necessary nor fit.

The fourth Circumstance.
THe fourth point to be considered, is the causes that move us to prayer, and
amongst many I will only name four.

First, because God has commanded it. Call upon me, says JEHOVAH. Psalm. 50
Ask, says CHRIST.

Secondly, the promise of God: Mat. 7.
And I will deliver thee, and ye shall receive it. Here is the promise of God,
therefore said a writer well. I Deus Guliadus on Mat. 6. pa. 132.
simul iussit or are, et promisit exaudire. God at once commanded to pray, and
he has promised to hear perfectly or lovingly.

Thirdly, the feeling of our own David of Job, of Jonah, also the Hebrew word
set down by Saint Matthew. Psa. 4. 2 Job. 6.
VEATTEM KEN TITHPALLELV. Ye shall pray thus, the root of which Jonah. 2 Mat.
6.
word is PALAL, which in the first sense, or to speak according to the
Grammar, it is in the first, or light conjugation, to judge, and as here it is,
in the fourth conjugation, called with Grammarians HITHPALL, it signifies, to
judge a man's self, for actio eiusdem in seipsum, is an action of the same man
upon himself; so it signifies here in this place, as if he should have said,
For our Savior has left us a prayer whereby we may judge our selves, our
prayers, and all our actions.
And ye shall judge your selves thus, etc. For indeed, no man can pray aright,
except he first judge himself: and if he do so, the Apostle tells him he
shall not be judged of the Lord. And here we may consider, the very end of
prayer, vt obediamus Deo et impetremus Guliadus on Mat. 6. pa. 132.
a deo: even that we may obey God, and obtain by our requests from God, 4.
Motive to prayer.
and this may well be considered in the last motive to prayer: which is the
benefits we receive by prayer. The benefits are exceeding great, and he most
faithful which has promised the same, which is Christ; whatsoever you shall
ask the father Ioh. 16.
in my name, ye shall receive it (says Mar. 9.
our Savior) what need I to recite Mat. 15 28.
here, how all the godly have been delivered by prayer, in their greatest
dangers: how fathers have had their sons healed, the mothers their daughters,
Yea Cornelius had Peter to cure his soul, a just reproof is this his example
to all secure and lukewarm Christians, for he delighted in prayer, before his
Acts. 10
conversion.

Abraham by prayer received a son: an Isaac a son of laughter, Of to laugh.
for God turned his mourning into joy. For he meaned because he was childelesse
as appears. Genesis 15. 2.

Anna prayed and had not only a Son, but even a Prophet of the highest: for
she begged him of God and therefore she called his name Of to ask. 1. Sam. 1.
20. Luke 1
Shemuel also Zachary by his prayers obtained a son in his old age, for by
his prayers he found grace with God. Therefore he called his name Of to show
mercy.
John. To conclude there is no end of Gods mercy to a man replenished with
prayer.

The fifth Circumstance.
THe fifth lesson to be observed is the place where to pray, the The place where.
Predicament vbi, as Logicians call it, makes much for the praise or dispraise
of any thing, and therefore the Pharisees loved to stand in the market place
and pray. But Christians Ma. 6. 5
have another lesson, for Christbiddeth thee, enter into thy secret chamber,
(not but that it is lawful to pray any where.) For says Christ to the Ioh. 4.
21. 23.
Samaritane woman. The true worshippers, shall neither worship in Jerusalem,
nor in this mount: but in spirit and truth, and the Apostle 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Paul says, pray every where, lifting up pure hands with out wrath or
doubting. For public prayers, we have Christ's promise: when two or three are
gathered together Mat. 18
in my name, there am I in the midst of them; and from this an ancient father
says very well, et propterea Theo.
saepe precantes non accipimus, eo quod mutua concordia caremus. And therefore
often times praying, we receive not, because we have not brotherly fellowship:
for where there is love, consolation, piety, and religion: there Christ does
not say, I will be, but Iam in the midst of them: but for our private prayers,
Christ told us, our secret chamber was the fittest, and he confirmed it unto
us, by his own examples: as when he said to his disciples, sit you here,
whilst I Mat. 26
go and pray yonder. Also whereas he went up in to the Mountain to pray: from
whence that reverend Archshop Theophilact, notes thus much, oportet nos
solitariosesse, et nullis rebus terrenis intendere orando: it behooves us to
be solitary, and to apply our minds to no earthly matter, whilst we are in
praying.

The sixth Observation from the predic ament of time, when and how long to pray.
Our savior says it must be continually, Jacob did, till we have Hos. 3
a blessing, which must be obtained by the same manner, that this was, by
weeping and praying, neither with Luke 18
the widow must we give over, till our cause be heard; Anna continued Luke 1
in prayers night and day. And Daniell three times a day. How often has Dan. 5
Christ prayed all night? and was it not for our sakes miserable sinners.
Therefore let us watch one hour Mat. 26
and not sleep as Peter did, least we fall into temptation.

Seauenthly with what affections we must pray.
WIth zeal and feruencie, so Paul, be fervent in prayer. Also the Apostle
James, the prayer To. 12.
of a righteous man avails much if it be fervent. With the Publican we Iam. 5
must knock our breast, and with David say Lord enter not into Judgment Psalm.
133. 2.
with thy servant. With Abraham pray vehemently, to cry with Ier. 14. 7.
Jeremy our iniquities testify against us: with Daniel, O Lord hear, O Lord
Dan. 9.
help, O Lord consider: and howsoever our affections are maruelously dulled,
by reason of the frailenesse Romans 7.
of the flesh, yet to will is present, and the spirit will be willing though
Mat. 26
the flesh be weak, and this is our comfort, the spirit does not only teach
us what to ask, but makes intercessions for us, with sighs and Romans 8. 26.
groans, which cannot be expressed.

The eight and last lesson, to learn to pray aright is the necessity of The
necessity of prayer.
prayer.
FOr although this be the last, yet it is not the least: for this well
considered place wherein we live, being the We have 3. continual enemies, the
world, the flesh, and the devil.
place where our enemy has many and great partakers: the flesh and the devil
are two maine captains, the world I mean the wicked of the world
are the soldiers, which are servant to both. If therefore we consider the
policy of our arche enemy Satan: his rage, his watchfulness, his strength,
yea the world, which are at his command: and on the other side, behold the
flesh, which ever gives us battle at home, as also the frailenesse of our
own flesh, and weakness of our own nature: how unable it is to withstand
him, if these things were considered, they would keep us, not only from
sleeping in so great a ieopardy, but to be watchful, and call by prayer to
God for mercy: (the which if we do) we shall make him and his great army to
fly. So says James the blessed Apostle, Resist the Devil, and he will fly
from thee. God give us faith, and love in him: so shall we be more then
conquerors.

Thus loving brother thou see.

First, who to pray unto, not to 1. Heathens.
false Gods, as Heathens do.

Secondly, by whom and through whom, to offer up our yrayers, neither 2.
Papists.
by the virgin Mary, or any saint as the Papists do.

Thirdly, what to pray for, not 3. Balamists and worldlings.
with Balaam, altogether to set our minds on money, nor with carnalists for
worldly pleasure.

Fourthly, the causes that move 4. We must learn this lesson before our
prayers can be heard.
us to prayer, which is the very foundation of prayer. From which motive
causes, we learn these lessons.

First to pray in obedience to Gods commandment.

Secondly, with faith in his promises.

Thirdly, in humility of spirit: then shall we be sure to receive a reward.

Fifthly, where to pray, not like 5. Jews, Brownists.
Jews, no where but in the temple: nor like Brownists never in the temple, but
pray thou without any superstitious conceit of the place, lifting up pure hands
to God.

Sixthly, when, and how long to 6. Temporisers.
pray, continually, not with temporisers to use holy exercises, only when
religion brings gain and pleasure.

Seventhly, with what affection to 7. Laodicean like professors.
pray, not like our Laodician professors, who pray with such zeal, that they
can say nothing, if you take their book from them: else, when they read their
prayer, they be half a sleep before it be ended.

8. Not to live idly as David did. 8. Secure Christians.
2. Sam. 11. 12. 3. nor to sleep as Jonah and Peter did, Math. 26. 40. for
Satan is watchful, and goes about seeking continually whom he may devour.

These observations I thought good to set down for thy better understanding of
the Lords prayer, because therein; I purpose to be very brief, setting down
such doctrins, as naturally arise from the true signification of the words in
the text: the holy and ancient Fathers have Forma est per qua^ res est quod
est, inquit Ra^: in dial:
called it, formula precationum, the form of prayers: and Logitians say, forma
dat esse.

And surely this holy Prayer is the pattern, whereby we may frame our
prayers: and if they be not agreeable to this prayer, they be no lawful
prayers.

The holy prayer of our Savior.
Matthew 6. Chap. verse, 9. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done as in heaven so also in earth. Give us this
day our daily, or continual bread. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive
our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil for
thine is that kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.
Which prayer I divide into four parts: into a preface, in these words, Our
Father which art in heaven.

Secondly, into six petitions, whereof three belong unto God, and three unto us.

The three that belong unto God, are in these words.

1. Hallowed be thy name.

2. Thy kingdom come.

3. Thy will be done, as in heaven so also in earth.

The latter 3. which concern us are, 1. Give us this day our daily or
continual bread. 2. And forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. 3. Part into a
conclusion, for thine is that kingdom, the power and the glory. 4. Part the
seal of faith, Amen.

The first part of the prayer, which is the preface, I divide into 4. Branches.

First, that God is a father.

Secondly, that he is our father.

Thirdly, that he is.

Fourthly, the place which is heaven.

For the first, that God is a father, it needs no proof, the scriptures are
so manifest, and we are bound by our Christian faith, to believe that God is a
father almighty, in this general sense he is the father of good, and bad. But
in a more peculiar sense, he is our father, both by creation and adoption, and
this does the Prophet tell the Jews, and in them us: that we ought not to
repaie God, for so high and marvelous works, with ingratitude. Do Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
ye so reward the Lord, O ye foolish people and unwise? is not he thy father
that bought thee, and that made thee: also Isai. 63. 16.
Isaijah says, doubtless, thou art our father though Abraham know us not, and
Israel be ignorant of us: yet thou art our father, and our redeemer, thy name
is for ever.

Objection.
CHrist calls God, father: is he therefore his father, as he is ours?

Answer.
NO: For he is our father by his creating, and adopting us in Christ. But he is
Christ's father, Nota.
by eternal generation, he the natural son of God: but we by grace.
Therefore well did he ever make this distinction. I thank thee o my father,
for so he is in the most peculier manner. Also, where he says, I go to my
father and your father, and my God, and your God. What does he teach, but that
God is his father by eternal generation, and ours by adoption?

Now from this word Father, let us learn five lessons.

First, let us learn to pray in faith. For says Theophilact, faith is the
very foundation of prayer, and he 1. Of stedfastnes in his promises.
goes further, and says. Nisi enim crediderit homo, quod hoc quod petet
accepturus est, in suam vtilitatem, vanaest oration, quam facit. Except a 2. Of
our love.
man believe he shall receive that 3. Of our honoring him.
which he shall ask for his profit, that prayer which he does make is
vain. The very word in 4. Of fear to his majesty.
the original which is The word Father, puts us in mind.
AB of ABAH to will, it shows, that God wills our good. And what will a
father deny his son, 5. Of obedience and duty. Mat. 7. 7
that is for his good, says our Savior: yea says the Lord, can a woman
forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though it
could be, yet, will I not forget thee, says the Eternal.

Secondly, it teaches us to have a loving affection, when we come to appear
before a merciful Father, and not as a severe Judge, therefore says David,
(and with him let us say,) My soul thirsts Psa. 42.
after the living God: when shall I come to appear before the presence of God?

Thirdly the name Father, teaches us honor. If I be your Father, Mal. 1.
(says God,) where is my honor?

Fourthly, Fear, If ye call him 1. Pet. 1 13.
Father, which without respect of persons, judges every man according to his
works: pass the time of your dwelling in fear.

Fifthly, obedience. As obedient children fashion not your selves, to the 1.
Pet. 1. 4.
former lusts of ignorance.

Lastly, this word Father: tells our consciences, that God is apeased for our
sins: and that Christ has fully satisfied his fathers wrath for us, and so
we are not only friends, but also coheires with Christ: and therefore the
spirit boldneth us to call God, (ABBA) father: herein is the great love, of our
merciful father, maruelously set forth even in this, that when we were Romans 5.
8. 9.
yet sinners, he sent his son to die for us. How much more being justified by
his blood, we shall be saved, and seeing he has given us Christ, how shall he
not give us all things?

(O Christian) remember thy duty,
God has been twice a father to thee: but thou not once worthy the name of a
son.

Thus much of the first word Father: now for the AFFIX, [our] I have showed
before how God is our Father, both by creation and adoption. It follows to
set down, what lessons we may learn from this word [our,] which are in
number four.

First, it teaches us charity: for Our Father, not my Father.

Secondly, it does teach us, to agree

Thirdly, it teaches us humility, to say with Peter, there is no respect Paul,
there is neither Jew, nor Grecian, bond, nor free, male, nor female, but we
are all one in Christ. Therefore said Job, If I contemned the judgment of my
servant, Job. 31. 13.
when he contended with me: what then shall I do, when God stands up and
visits me? what then shall I answer?

Lastly, it teaches us to beware Babell, saying, I am holyer then thee, stand
from me: or with the proud Pharisie, I thank thee Lord, I am not like this
Publican.

The third part of the Preface.
Which art.
FOr the first word, Which (SHE) an abstract of ASHER, the relative, of the
root of the verb ASHAR, of which comes also ASHRE: Blessed, or blessings,
giving us to understand thus much, that God is the fountain whence all
blessings come. And if we be blessed, it is by receiving it from God, for when
God and we are relatiues. I mean when we are his sons in Christ, then does
he impart of his blessings unto us, as ASHRE NES VI Psalm. 32. 1.
PESHANG, Blessed is he whose sin is forgiven.

Art.
THis word (Art) is not in the original, but is necessarily
understood, and this adiunct of Future. Preterp. Present.
time in the Present-tense, yea in all tenses, agrees to God evermore, as the
learned well know. The letters in the name Theo. Beza in Apoc. 1.
Jehovah do Revel. 1. 14.
note to us, as much, as S. John in the Apocalips: Which is, which was, and
which is to come. The Present, Preter-perfect, and the Future tense.

The consideration of this eternity Yea, and Amen. With God there is no
shadow, nor variance of change: for whom he loves, he loves to the end.
Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same is for ever.

The use of this is, that we should not waver in faith, nor be inconstant be
faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life.

In Heaven.
AS, in the first word of this preface, (heaven) we are put in mind of his
might, that he is able to help us. Psalm. 99. 2.
(David says) the Lord is great in Sion, he is high above all people.

Christ says, My father is greater Ioh. 10.
then I, and none is able to take my sheep out of his hands: therefore fear
not Satan's subtlety, nor his childrens tirranie.

Secondly, we must not admit Isaijah says, Gods thoughts are not our thoughts:
neither are his ways our ways. But as the heavens, are higher then the earth:
so are his ways, higher then our ways.

Thirdly, the place heaven, must thunder to be at his command, and his voice
breaks the Ceders of Libanus. Therefore with Moses let us Exo. 34. 8. Psalm.
95. Kneeling seemly in prayer.
bow down to the earth when we worship, also with David bow down and kneel,
and with great reverence to God, let us say, with the Publican. I am not worthy
to look up to heaven. With David let us cry, I will lift up my soul unto thee.

Whereas it is said (Which art in heaven) that does not contradict the other
place of scripture: where God says, the heaven of heavens cannot contain me,
how then will ye build a house for me to dwell in? for Gods omnipotency is
every where: so says David, Psa. 139
whether shall I go from thy presence, if I take the wings of the morning, and
fly to the uttermost part of the world: yea in the deep, and in hell, also
there art thou. But as the soul is said to be in the head and heart: so Gods
seat is in heaven, and that is as it were his Austin.
temple, says an ancient father, yet is he resident in all places: even as
the soul is in all the parts of man's body, but has chiefest seat in the head
and heart: so God is in all places, but has his temple, and does most manifest
his glory in heaven.

Lastly, it comfort the children The last consideration of the word heaven.
that they shall be inheritours of so glorious a place, which Christ has
purchased for them. This made all the fathers to behave themselves like
strangers here, it made Paul Heb. 11
say, he had fought a good fight (though bitter to the flesh) because says he,
is laid up for me a crown of glory. Also in another place he says, I suppose
that all the afflictions of this life, are not worthy the joys, that shall be
revealed.

Now follow the petitions.
Hallowed be thy name.
Which Petition has two

First, what is meant by the name of God, in this place.

Secondly, what it is to halow

For the first, the glorious name of God, who can fully express What is his
name, or what is his sons name, says Agur the son Pro. 30. 4.
of Iakeh. But it has pleased the Holy and Highest, to condescend to our weak
capacities, and in mercy to call himself, by such means: as either note to us
his essence, as 1. Jehovah, 2. Ehieh, 3. Iah, or his presence and power, as, 4.
El, 5. Eloah, 6. Elohim.

Jehovah, denotes unto us the
essence of God, even, that one divine Essence, which has been from all
Eternity: is, and shall be, without any change, for ever, and for ever, the
use of this, is handled before in the word Art.

Ehieh, is of the same root that
Jehovah is, it signifies, I will be, The son of God being Jehovah, equal
to the father: appearing to Exodus 3. 14.
Moses, said unto him, thou shall go and tell the children of Israel, I will
be has sent me unto you. Signifying indeed Says Doctor Forster.
that he it was, that was to be come man, who was promised to Adam, and their
father Abraham: even God, stronger then all the sons of Adam, who should
break the head of the serpent, and destroy him of his might.

This true JEHOVAH called himself EHIEH to Moses, but when he had taken our
nature unto him, and was constituted in the ministry, and work of our
redemption, then he that before said to the children of Israel, I will be,
said I am, Ihon 8. 17. Before Abraham John. 8. 17.
was, I am. Yea as soon as he had said to Judas and his company, I am he.)
They fell backward. John. 8. 58.
Therefore let me conclude this, with this exhortation of our savior Ioh. 18.
5.
to his Apostles, believe ye in GOD, believe also in Jesus Ioh. 14. 1. 2.
Christ.

The third name, which declares the essence of God, is
IAH, an abstract of JEHOVAH: signyfying Christ humbled and abased in the flesh.

And as E^ shows the presence of God, in his might and government with
ELOAH. So does IAH denote to us the essence of God, as well as JEHOVAH.

As you may read in the 146. Psalm. In which the office of Christ is very
plainelye set forth: to be the Creator of the world, and faithful in his
promises, who feeds the hungrye, releaseth prisoners, gives sight to the
blind, raises the crooked, loves the righteous, keeps them that are
destitute of worldly succor, releeues fatherless and widows: and
overthrows the way of the wicked. For he came to destroy sin, and therefore
David in this place says further, blessed is he, that has the God of Jacob
for his help: and shuts up this Psalm with HALLELV-IAH.

And that this is spoken of Christ: will more plainly appear, when the new
testament is compared with this Psalm. Even the works of Christ, which he did
amongst the Jews, as he himself said, if ye will not believe me, because the
Prophets bear witness of me: yet believe for the very works sake.

Also he says, if I had not done works amongst them, that no man could do,
then had they not sin, but now are they without excuse.

Therefore when John Baptist, sent his disciples to Christ: for the instructing
of them in the faith of the true Messiah. Our savior had recourse to this,
146. psalm. and said, go tell John: the blind see, the lame are made whole, the
dead are raised up, the deaf hear, the poor Luke 7. 22.
receive the gospel, and blessed is he that is not offended in me. And the
children of God, which were delivered from the bondage For he was Satan's
instrument to afflict the church.
of sin, the tyranny of Satan and the Pope, by Christ: sing HALLELV-IAH,
which is in English, praise ye the eternal.

Let us therefore in our prayers, Babell: God giving us free liberty, to praise
him in the congregation: yea to pay the praises of God with the Prophet David
in psalm. 56. 12.
Because he has delivered our life from death, and our feet from falling,
praised be IAH, Amen. ab esse.


The three names of God, that put us in mind of his presence and power be
these, EL, ELOAH and ELOHIM, which are all of one signification: declaring to
us, that our God is strong, against whom, there is no resistance.

Consolation to the children of God.
Therefore what greater comfort Fortis victor.
can a Christian have then this: The Lord is on my side, I willnot fear what
man can do unto me. For the mighty God is my refuge, even the God of Jacob,
is my defense.

God is terrible to the wicked.
And what a terror is it to the wicked, that God even the strong one, is
against them, ready to send them to utter confusion when it pleases him: be
they never so strong and mighty here?

Therefore a little, is better to the Godly: then much spoils, and the great
wealth of the wicked. For they stand in slipperye places.

ELOHIM, also imports the trinity, Elohim the plural of Eloah:
when it is either joined with a verb of the singular number, as Genesis 1. In
the beginning, Gods, he When it imports the Trinity.
made heaven and earth. And ELOHIM he said, Let there be light. And again,
ELOHIM said, Let us make man: with many such like places, as Deuter. 10. Exodus
8. and when this Nowne Plural is joined with a Relative singular, as Iosu. 24.
but most lively does the 35. Chapter and 7. verse of Genesis, express the
Trinity. And Jacob built there an Alter, and called the name of the place
ELDETHEL, because, (says he) KI SHAM NIGLV ELAV HA ELOHIM. Quia reuclati sunt
ad eum dij, because Gods were there revealed unto him: where it imports the
Trinity, and most lively shows the three persons in the Deity.

First, ELOHIM imports the In how many diverse senses this word is used in
the scriptures.
Trinity, as Genesis 1. Iosu. 24. Genesis 35. 7.

Secondly, this name is given to false Gods, as Deuteronomy. 5. 7.

Thirdly, to men in office, as Deuteronomy 1. Also where God says to Moses, I have
made thee Pharaohs God.

Fourthly, to Angels, as Psalm. 8.

GOD, also calls himself God uses this name for the stre^gthning of his
children in faith and obedience as, Genesis 17.
SHADDI, which signifies Omnipotent, All-sufficient. Some learned derive this
word of SHAEL, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies a woman's Breast, or Pap:
teaching us thus much: that as the mother does nourish and cherish, her young
child, by the milk of her breasts: Even so does the Lord his children, with
his grace and loving kindness. Genesis 28


S. Ierom.
Other learned say, it is a compound word of SHE, the Relative, and DAI, which
signifies aboundancy, sufficiency, and plenty, for he not only abounds
with all good things himself: but John. 1. 14. 16.
also gives abundantly to all. For of his fullness we receive Tim: 6. 17.
grace for grace. And therefore the Apostle Paul, wills men not to trust in
uncertain riches: but in God that gives abundantly to all. Yea, this word
SHADDAI does not only signify, that God is Almighty and All-sufficient, but
that he affects all things in all creatures, to which sense, Saint Paul
alludes, when he says, God Act. 17 24. 5. 6. 7.
that made the world, and all things that are therein, seeing that he is Lord
of Heaven and Earth: dwells not in temples made with hands, 1. Cor. 6.
neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any things, seeing
he gives to all, breath, and life, and all things. And has made of one blood,
all mankind, to dwell on all the face of the earth. And has assigned the
times, which were ordained before: and bonds of their habitations, that they
should seeeke the Lord: if so be they might have groped after him, and found
him, though doubtless he is not far from every one of us. For in him we
live, and move, and have our being.

Also the Apostle says to the Church of Corinth, there are diversities of
operations: But God is the same that works all in all.

And in the same chapter, having repeated diverse and sundry gifts, he
says, all these things works even the self same spirit distributing to
every man, severally as he will: for of his providence, wisdom and bounty,
all men and creatures in the world, have their being, moving, and living,
receiving all from his eternal treasury. These and such like names, bring most
heavenly contemplation, yea and consolation, to the children of God, who are
desirous to know their fathers name: so far forth as he is willing it shall
be known, and as he has revealed it unto us, in his word. Many and most
singular (for heavenly comfort,) are the attributes of God, in the scriptures:
as Just, merciful, prudent, wise, true, and holy: these and many such like,
show the properties that be in God. Which does not only comfort us in
affliction, but also lead forward, our affections toward perfection.
Therefore, these names are not to be used of us at our pleasure: but with all
reverence, least in stead of halowing, we prophaine the name of God; But alas,
we stay not in this sin: but even many times, blaspheme the name of God.
Surely, such as remain in this desperate sin, cannot have any assurance,
that, that which they pray for, shall be granted.

For Godly his Prophets has said, he will not here the prayers of such. Yea,
those that be scorners Ier. 17. 16.
of God, and his word, has God said, they shall call upon me, Ezekiel. 8. 18.
when affliction, and anguish shall Prou. 1. 28.
fall on them: but I will not answer. Also against vain bablers, Pro. 15. 29.
has the Lord said, that when they cry he will be a far of. Pro. 15. 29.
How much more then, when the blasphemers cries: for blasphemers are far from
a blessing, when they call to God, because they delighte in cursing, and
indeed that is their portion from the Lord, Zach. 5. 13. 4. even curses and
woes a whole book full, and the Wise man says thus, Eccl. 23. 9.

Accustom not thy self to swearing: Eccl. 23. 9.
(for therein is many falls,) neither take for accustom the naming Also Exo.
20. 7.
of the holy one: (for thou shall not be unpunished for such things.) cha. 27.
15.


For as a servant which is often Math. 5. 33.
punished cannot be without some scar, so he that swears, and names God
continually, shall not be faultlesse, and a man that uses much swearing, shall
be filled with wickedness, and the plague shall never go from his house: when
he shall offend, his fault shall be upon him, and if he knowledge not his
sin, he makes a double offense: Yea, if he swear in vain, he shall not be
innocent, but his house shall befull of plagues. Think upon this, ye that use
swearing: and learn to halow Gods name, else ye but mock God, in saying
(hallowed be thy name) and yet profane his sacred name: bind not two sins
togather for even in one shall thou not go unpunished.

And here in this petition by What is here understood, by name.
name, I understand the power of God, as to cast out devils in the name of
Christ: it was to do it in the power and virtue of Christ. Also, where the
Apostle says, At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, etc. is meant that
every creature shall be subject to the power of Christ. Therefore we will
conclude that man blessed, whose strength is Jehovah Prou: 18. 20.
For the name of the Lord, is a strong tower, the righteous run to it and are
exalted.

Secondly, note whereas we say What is meant by halowing the name of God in
this place
hallowed be thy name. We do not mean that God, or his name, is unholy in it
self: but as it is said of wisdom which is most just, that she is justified
of her children: (because they so account Sebus: Mun.
his, and acknowledge her:) so here mean we that by the halowing of Gods
name, that he would grant us to confess, acknowledge, honor, and obey this
holy name of his, and this is the halowing of the name of God.

First therefore we learn from

Also, with soul and body, in word and thought, whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, do all to the glory of God, says Paul.

Secondly, let us take heed, that whatsoever we ask, it may be to Gods
glory, and that we prefer the glory of God, before any other thing in the
world whatsoever, and then have we promise to be heard.

The 2. petition,
Let thy Kingdom come. THe kingdom of God is threefold.

1. His kingdom of power. 2. His kingdom of grace. 3. His kingdom of glory.
For the first, that is his kingdom of power, whereby he causes all his
creatures to serve him: as well bad as good, that is not meant in this place,
for God will never lessen and take away this his authority: Therefore says the
Psalmist, whatsoever it pleased the Lord, that did he in heaven, in earth, in
the sea, and in all deepes. But in this place we mean the kingdom of grace,
that God would reign in our hearts, and that he would put to flight, all our
old sins, both original, and actual: that our bodies might be prepared fit
temples for the holy ghost, for this kingdom is neither meat, nor drink: but
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy ghost. For this kingdom, comes not
by observation; but it must be considered within. And says that godly Father
Theophilact. Nam si quempiam videris, quasi absque carne viuere vitam
Euangelicam, an non diceres, quod regnum coelorum iam habet? for if thou shall
see any man to live an Evangelical life, as being not in the flesh, will thou
not say, that he has already the kingdom of God?

And in another place he says, to believe aright, and to walk accordingly, is
called to be worthy our vocation, which is indeed to be subjects of this
kingdom. And the same author says, on Mat. chap. 23. upon these words, the
Scribes and the Pharisees would neither enter into the kingdom of God nor suffer
other, It is, says he, they would neither believe in Christ, nor yet suffer
others that would. In this petition therefore we pray, that God would reign
in our hearts, by a true and a lively faith. And if we unfeignedly believe, we
have the promises of this life, and of that, which is to come. For says
Christ: Seek first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and
all other things shall be cast unto you. Also note, that in this petition, we
pray for the means to beget faith, which is preaching, also for the right use
of the Sacraments, which is a means to strengthen our faith: and godly
Magistrates, for to keep the Which is the Church.
body in order: and how can any good Christian, but remember our good Prince in
his prayers. Praising God for her, and praying him to prolong her days, to
reign long amongst us here, and after this life, with God for ever.

The third kingdom, is the kingdom of glory, the state of happiness after
this life, which we in deed pray for in this petition, but it is mediatly, as
being first, members of the kingdom of grace: for whom God rules, Romans 8.
them he sanctifies, and whom he sanctifies, them also he justifies, and
whom he justifies, them also he will glorify.

Application.
But alas, what shall we say, by such as have such wavering and unsteadfastness
in religion: can they pray in hope to be heard? Surely no, for seeing they have
delighted to wander, says the Lord, and have not refrained their seete:
therefore when they fast, I will not hear Ier. 14. 10. 11.
their cry: and when they offer burnt offerings, and oblations, I will not
accept them. Therefore purge your hearts, ye wavering minded men, else are ye
not subjects of this kingdom: the admission whereunto is by faith: and if ye
be not subjects, God takes you for his enemies, against whom he will execute
a heavy judgment. Luke 19. 2. 7. Bring hither those mine enemies, that would
not I should Luke 19. 27.
reign over them, and slaye them before me.

Oh consider this, ye that forget God,) Least I tear you in pieces, and there
be none that can deliver you, says the Eternal. But he that offers praises,
shall glorify me, and to Psa. 50. 32.
him that disposes his way aright: will I show the salvation of God.

The 3. petition.
Thy will be done, as in heaven, so also in earth. THis petition rightly, and
fitly, agrees with the former: for in the other, we pray that GOD may rule our
hearts to believe, which cannot be, if we be unwilling to do the will of God
our heavenly Father. Therefore aptly we pray in the next place, for the
effects of faith, obedience to Gods laws, in these words, Thy will be done.

Which petition has two principal parts, that is:

First, what the will of God is.

Secondly, that is not enough to know the same, but to do it.

For the first, the will of God we pray may be done, is his revealed will in
his word. This teaches us how precious knowledge is, and that it is a great
means to make us able: in some good measure to do Gods will, for first we
must know, what is to be done, before we can do it.

Secondly, it teaches, that we must not do our own wills, either in prayer,
or in any matter of religion. For God will be prayed unto, and served, as he
has commanded in his word, and therefore he says, obedience is better then
sacrifice. Wherefore, let us look to our feet, before we come to pray: least
we offer the sacrifice of fools: and let us learn the will of God. This says
Christ, is the will of God, to believe in him, whom he has sent, and the
Apostle Paul says.

This is the will of God, even our sanctification. So that here we see, that
faith and a holy life, are joined together, God requiring the one, of him that
has the other: for indeed they be Relatiues, and S. James says, faith that is
without works, is dead. Yea our savior says, not every one, that says Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will of my
father, which is in heaven. Therefore, whosoever is truly justified, is in
some good measure sanctified: and indeed, faith can no more be without good
works, then fire can be without heat.

The use.
FIrst, we learn to ask nothing in our prayers, which is not agreeable to
Gods word.

Secondly, we learn to take all crosses patiently: that with Christ we may
say, not my will, but thine (o father) be fulfilled.

Lastly, we are here taught, to strive toward perfection, for Gods children
have an earnest desire to do his will. And with David to say, it is written,
(O Lord) in the volume of thy book, that I shall do thy will, O God, and lo
I come.

Application.
SVch therefore, as despise knowledge, and set light by the word of God: their
prayers will God despise, for says the Prophet Zachary Zach. 7. 13.
as God cried to them: and they would not here, so when they cry he will not
here them.

But where the word of the Lord is imbrased: there the Lord is nigh to us in
all that we call upon him for. Yea they that Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
keep Gods commandments, receive whatsoever they ask, but as for such, as
have no care to do 1. Ioh. 3 22.
Gods will, the Lord is far from them.

Therefore (o man,) if thou would that God should here thy prayer, Pro. 15.
29.
when thou call upon him: hear thou the Lord, and amend thy ways: when by
his good spirit he calls unto thee, else thy prayer is vain babbling. Pro. 35.
13.


The second part of this petition:
As in heaven so also in earth. THis says one, is no otherwise, but as the
Angels serve thee in heaven: even so should we serve thee in earth, with all
alacrity and willingness, in all humility and faithfulness. And howsoever no
Christian can perform such obedience in this life: yet this petition teaches,
that we ought to have a desire so to do.

From the consideration of these things we learn three profitable lessons.

First that God ought to reign here in our hearts on earth, as well as he
does in heaven, but seeing it is not so: how ought we to be humbled, and cast
down in our selves, when we consider how disobedient we have been, to the
will of our heavenly father.

Secondly, it ought to move us, to all possible thankfulness, for our
redemption, when we consider this example of the Angels, who were but once
created, but we miserable sinners put God to a new work, to redeem us by the
blood of his own son.

Lastly it teaches us that we ought to love God, more then the Angels: in as
much as we have put him to a greater business, and have received greater
mercies then they: and they which have much forgiven them, ought to Luke. 7.
love much.

Application.
BEhold thy duty (o man) consider but the Angels: the scriptures describe them
to have six wings, two to cover their face, by which they signify to us, that
they are not able to look into the depth of Gods counsels, they have two
also to cover their feet, showing their own insufficiency, and
unworthiness, to serve so glorious a God, yet have they two wings also about
their heart, to signify unto us, that with hearty obedience, they do the will
of God. Therefore, o sinful man, look to the heavens, and behold the Angels,
look into the firmament, behold the Sun, the Moon, and the stars, yea in
the earth also behold, times and seasons, all these obey Gods will. Therefore o
mankind for whose sake these were created, and for whose sake God, equal to
the father, thought it no scorn to take unto him our nature, and to be our
brother according to the flesh, that he might condemn sin in the flesh:
let us not therefore walk after the flesh, but let our conversation be in
heaven: whether our eldest brother is gone before us, that in his time we may
be with our head Christ Jesus, Amen.

The 4. petition.
Give us this day our daily or continual Bread. O praise the Lord of Lords,
for his mercy endures for ever, which gives food to all flesh, for his
mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136. 2. 25. Bread.

THis word Bread, is took in diverse senses in the Scriptures: whereof there
are five principal.

1. First, it is taken for bread properly, as Genesis 14. 18. Exodus 25. 30. Prou.
28. 19.

2. Secondly, for bread corn, as Genesis 47. 15. Job. 28. 5.

3. Thirdly, it is neither took for bread nor corn, but for Manna Exo. 16.
15. Behold I will rain to you bread from heaven. Also Psalm. 105. 40. he
satisfied them with bread from heaven:) which Manna was a figure of Christ, who
is the true bread of heaven, and many of the ancient fathers understand by
Bread in this petition, Christ, who is the true bread of life: whom we are to
desire, and pray for, before all other things.

4. Fourthly, it is took for sacrifices Leuit. 3. 11. Mal. 1. 7. What is meant
by bread in this petition.


5. Lastly, it is taken generally, for all things necessary for this life, as
Gen 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face, shall thou eat thy bread: That is thou
shall get thy living. Also in Psalm. 38. 25. Which gives food to all flesh.
Also Pro. 30. 8. So does Tremelius understand it in his Hebrew catechism.
Feed me with food convenient for me.

So likewise in this petition, we understand says Bucer, Victum quibuscunque
Bucer in Mat. 6. page 62.
vita praesens opus habet: all things that be necessary for this life, from
which word we may consider, the bountiful liberallitie of God, toward all
his creatures, but more especially toward man: for whom he both cares and
provides. And therefore the Apostle in the 1. Tim. 6. says. Trust not
invncertaine riches, but in God that gives to all abundantly.

Secondly, this word Our bread, does not import that it is ours by Riches are
not ours properly, but lent us, and we are stewards of them, and must give
account for them.
desert, but being got with a good conscience: not by defrauding of our brother
any way, that so we may eat our own bread. The which cannot be, except we
live in a lawful calling. Oh thou that have no calling, or an unlawful
calling, how can thou say this petition? Let gamesters, and such as have no
lawful calling, consider, in what state they stand in, and let them (says the
Apostle,) rather labor with their hands, for he that will not labor, let him
not eat.

Our continual or daily Bread.
BY this word continual or daily Bread, I gather these lessons.

1. First, that none must ask riches, or any other thing to satisfy the flesh
withal, for because Solomon did neither ask riches, honor, not long life but
wisdom: therefore the Lord gave them al to him. So that the like was not unto
Solomon, 2. Chro. 1. 12.
before nor since, for wisdom, riches, and honor.

2. Secondly, it teaches us, that every day we must come to God by prayer.

3. Thirdly, these words (daily bread) or as in Luke 11. (Bread for the day.)
It teaches us this lesson, not to have any mistrustfulnesse of Gods promises,
nor use no unlawful means to get our living, seeing the Lord is faithful,
that has said, I will not leave thee, nor forsake Heb. 11
thee. Yea the scriptures say; cast your care upon God, for he cares for you:
Math. 6.
and knows whereof ye have need before ye ask. Neither will he that
clotheth the Lillies, and feeds Ravens, suffer any of his to want their food.
For if God cloth the grass of the field, which to day flourishes, and to
morrow is cut down. Then much more will he man: whom he has so dearly
loved, and so dearly bought. And this made David say: The Lions shall Psalm. 34.
be hunger bit: but those that fear God, shall lack nothing. Believe we not
this (O we of little faith,) are we like the Israelites in the wilderness, to
tempte God? or are we as incredulous, as the Prince that told the Prophet,
though God should 2. Kings 7. 17.
make wonders in heaven, yet that great dearth could not be turned into such a
plenty, as God by his Prophet told it should be? And surely infidelity and
unthankfulness, is the cause of all want. Therefore if we would want nothing,
let us trust God (o we of little faith,) then, fides Famem non timet: Faith
fears not Dearth.

Give.
So the word in the original, signifies Genesis 3. 20.
to give, or bestow freely. Psa. 4. 7.


From which, we learn these lessons. Pro. 23. 26.


First, that all we have, comes Ps. 104.
from God, and therefore whether Genesis 43 14.
we have little or much: we must give him praise for the same. Isa. 9. 6.


Secondly, that man may toil and labor, and if God give not a blessing all is
in vain, for says David, promotion is neither from the east nor from the
west: but of the Lord. Therefore (o rich man,) seeing thou have nothing of thy
self: but all that thou have, thou have received, boast not of it, as if thou
had not received it, neither be thou proud, of that which is not thine own.

To us.
BY this, we learn every one, to seek another good, and every man to pray
for the good of his brother. Not like Ahab, never to be at rest, till we have
got Naboths Job. 31. 19.
vineyarde. But with Job, not to eat our morselles alone, but the fatherless
to eat with us: neither to see any perish for want of clothing, but to cover
them, that when the Lord shall call us to account for these earthly riches: we
may be found faithful stewards* and having been faithful in small matters,
he The old Proverb every man for himself, but true divinity teaches, one
for another, and God for us all.
may make us rulers over greater: saying well done, faithful servants and true,
enter into your masters joy.

Application.
But what shall a man say to these last days, wherein charity is waxed cold,
and men do not relieve, but revile the poor members of Christ, shall such men
be heard, when they pray? or do they understand what they pray when they say
(Give us) and yet are for no man but themselves? Surely these men are no
better, then mockers of this heavenly prayer, and therefore, bootelesse is it
for them to call upon the Lord: For Solomon has told them, they shall not be
Pro. 21. 13.
hard yea and he that iniureth the poor, does as one, that sacrifiseth Eccle.
34. 21.
the son before the fathers eyes. Therefore, if any would have his prayers
hard of God, to whom he is a beggar: let him show mercy here to his brother.
That with heart, as well as with tongue, he may say this petition, least there
be judgment merciless, to him that shows no mercy: otherwise Iam. 2. 13.
make they never so fair a show of religion, all is hypocrisy. And God will
not here the prayers of hipocrites, Job. 27. 9. Wherefore (o rich men) here the
counsel of Daniel: Break of your sins by righteousness, Dan. 4. 24.
and your iniquities, by mercy toward the poor: and let there be a healing
of this error.

The 5. petition.
And forgive us our debts, even as we forgive our debtors. LEt us consider,
that this follows the other petition very fitly, for in the former we beg
food of God, to the end our life might be preserved: in this we beg remission
of sins, that we may live in God. In the former we ask those things which
concern this life: but in these two latter, those things which concern us
here-after. These petitions as all the former, are grounded on Gods promises,
if we have a repenting heart. Their iniquities (says GOD) I will Ier. 31. 34.
forgive, and remember their sins no more.

Forgive. Selach signifies freely to forgive, as 1. Ki. 8. 36.

THe First word of this petition which is forgive, teaches us, that we are
saved and imputed righteous through faith in Christ only, Psa. 103 2.
and without any of our own good Psalm. 86. and 130. 4
works, for says Paul, we are justified freely by faith, not of works,
also, Romans 3. 14.
we have the forgiveness of our sins through his rich grace: for by grace Romans
9. 11.
are we saved through says, not of our selves, it is the gift of god. Thus was
Romans 11. 6.
Mary, Peter, and the publican saved, yea, all are saved by grace. This must
teach us humility, and not to say, I thank thee, o Lord I am not like this
publican: but to say with Paul, But papists that say they ca^ merit heaven are
the successors of the proud Pharisees, and Publicans shall be justified before
them.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: of whom I am chief, and
then if we humble our selves, God will exalt us.

Secondly, the word, (forgive) teaches us, that we ought to confess our
sins to God: that so we may find mercy, for David said whilst I held my
tongue my bones consumed. Therefore he confessed Psalm. 32.
to the Lord his own wickedness against himself, and he forgave the wickedness
of his sins: and Job says, though God should kill me, yet will I trust in
him, and I will reprove my Job. 13. 15.
ways in his sight. Also wise Solomon gives us this lesson, he that hides his
sins, shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them, he shall
have mercy. Just Job, confessed his sins, so did David and the prodigal
son, also the Publican and the theife on the cross.

Thus by these examples we see that confession of sins, must go before
remission. If thy sin be private, then confession to God, may be private, but
if it be public, then must there be public confession, that the Church may
take notice of thy true contrition.

Thirdly, it teaches us the great Saint Peter, should lead us to repentance,
and not to say with the fool, tush God sees it not. The Prophet David says,
the Lord is full of mercy, and of great goodness, but he also says, if a man
will not turn, he will bend his bow and whet his sword. And the longer he
deferreth his punishment, the higher he heaueth his hand, the greater will the
blow be.

Therefore though God have but a leaden heel: yet has he Psalm. 2.
an Iron scepter. Thus much of the first word forgive.

Us, or to us.
BY this word (us,) we are taught to pray for the salvation of our brethren,
yea of all, if it were Gods will, by the example of Saint Paul, who could have
wished to have been separate from God, for his country men's sake the Jews.
But few go so far with Paul, for if they wish their friends any thing, it
is rather worldly wealth, honor, and dignity, then the forgiveness of sins,
and increase of spiritual graces, forgetting Christ his words, what will it
profit a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own soul? but this is
the frailenes of our flesh, and sinful nature, to be more prone to earthly
profi^s, then fervently to desire, heavenly blessings.

Our debts. Breach of the law is debt, which is our sins.

Indeed sins are rightly our debtes. Which make us indebted unto God by
transgression of his divine law. Alas, goodness was once ours, but we in our
first parents lost the very will of doing well, how much more the power to do
well. So that God now says, Genesis 6.
the thoughts of man's heart are altogether evil. Therefore sins are rightly
ours now indeed. The blessed Apostle Saint James, shows this, where he
proved that God tempts none to do evil, but all such temptations are of
our selves, and Romans 8.
he says further, whence are wars, sedition and enuyings, are they not even of
your selves? yea the Apostle Paul, The confession of Paul differs from the
pretended Catholic.
that chosen vessel, could say, I know in me, (that is in my self) dwells
no good thing, and howsoever to will is present with me, yet I find by the law
of God, that I do that which I should not do.

Debts.
Well may our sins, the breach of the law, be called Debts: telling us of our
neglect of duty, and of our playing the bankrupts, with the graces of the good
spirit of God, as also to bind us to the judgment seat of God, laying before
us the haynousnesse of our sins, and the rich mercy of God in Christ, who
when we had nothing to pay, forgave us all.

The second part of the fifth Petition.
As we forgive our debtors. This forgiveness of our brethren, it is a sure
testimony, that God in the first place has forgiven us, and so says Saint
John, by this we know, we are translated from death to life, because we love
the brethren, and Christ his commandment is, be ye merciful, as your
heavenly father is merciful O how can they look for mercy which continue in
malice, for Christ has said it, (therefore it is true) With what measure you
meat to others, it shall be measured to you again. Therefore let not the
sun go down on thy wrath: for what know thou (o man) whether thou shall
live till to morrow, and if thou should dye in malice, thou dyest not in God,
for God is love: In the fear of God consider this, and first be reconciled
unto thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, for if (says the Wiseman)
one pray, and another curse, which will God hear. Nay such as be full of
cruelty and reuengement, what in this Petition do they pray for? but this, that
Gods curse and vengeance might light on them, therefore, whosoever thou art,
that cariest malicious mind to thy brother: thou art altogether unfit to say
this prayer, or any holy prayer. Yea, and God will not hear thee, when thou
call unto him, when thou stretchest forth thy hands, he will hide his eyes.
And though Isai. 1. 15.
thou make many prayers, yet will he not hear thee: because thy Mic. 3. 1
hands are full of blood. Therefore take the advice of Christ; First be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. But here may arise
a doubt, whether that God will hear me or no, seeing I confess my self to
be a sinner: 1. Pet. 4. 17.
and Solomon says, God hears not sinners. How therefore will He is a sinner
that believes not the gospel
this stand with this petition? very well: for by sinners in that place, is
meant such as be not incorporate into Christ: and such as delight and continue
in their sin, 1. Ioh. 2
and such men indeed God will Romans 4. 25.
not hear. But they that have put on the righteousness of Christ, by Heb. 9.
26.
a true and a lively faith, them will God hear: and for their sins, was
Christ the reconciliatio^. Therefore, Iere. 50. 20.
with Jeremy, let us say, and believe, That Gods mercy makes sinners pure:
for God imputes not sin to his faithful children, Psalm. 32. 2.

Objection.
Yea, but how says S. John: that they which are borne of God, sin not, and,
That he that commits sin is of the devil, but every man sins, and
every one commits sin?

Answer.
That is true: But if you well observe the words before, and consider the drift
of S. John, you shall plainly see, that he means, such as are of the devil,
as persevere with willingness in sin: even such, as in whom sin reigns in
their mortal bodies. But under that power of sinning, cannot the children of
God be, because the spirit of God, checketh and corrects, their evil and
corrupt affections. For this victory over sin, and death, has Christ given
us that believe. Giving us both a will, and a fervent 1. Cor. 15. 57.
desire, to do his commandments. And this is his commandment, that we
believe in Jesus Christ, and love one another: for he tbat keeps this
commandment, 1. Ioh. 3 23. 24.
dwells in him, and he in him, and hereby know we that he abidetb in us, even
by the spirit which he has given us.

The 6. petition.
And lead us not into temptation, but The word Temptation, is of a verb that
signifies to lift up, showing that God sometimes proves ^is children further
and higher by degrees, as he did Abraham, Genesis (...) also Heb. 11. For first he
tempted but in commanding him to go out of his own country. Secondly by
Sarahs co^ception, who being past age, and was as dead in regard of strength
of nature: and thirdly God tempted him in offering up his only son Isaac, of
whom it was said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called, therefore is Abram
called the Father of the faithful.
deliver us from evil. IN the former petitions, we begged pardon for sins
past, and here we crave Gods grace, to resist sins to come. And surely if we
look into our selves, how prone we be to fall, we shall see that we had need
to crave of God, that we come not into temptation, for that Satan intends
evil toward us, and surely, as S. James says, God temteth none to evil, but
man is either tempted by his lusts, as the Apostle observes, which is a
voluntary temptation, as drunkenness, whoredom, theft, and such like, are
voluntary temptations, or else by cruel tyrants, to do that which is against
religion and conscience, and this is called vnuoluntary temptation, when we
are compelled by force, to do against Gods laws, these temptations we are not
to desire. But if any such happen, the Apostle James wills us, to account it
exceeding joy, and shows the benefits that follow to them that fear God,
and if God tempt or prove his children, it is to manifest their faith to the
world, and for example to others: so he tempted Abraham in offering his son
Isaac: also the Israelites and Job; yea indeed he tempted all his children
so, and his only Son also, that we might not think much, nor faint in our
temptations. And therefore said Moses to the children of Israel: Ye shall not
fear, because the Lord comes to tempt you, for he comes to tempt you, to
manifest what is in thy heart: But Satan he does it to an evil end, Yea ever
when he tempts, it is not for conversion, but subversion of the party he
tempts, and this is evident through all the Bible.

But what shall we say of those which are dead in sin, and have no feeling of
temptation, nor remorse of conscience, (O God deliver us from that evil.)

The second part of the sixth petition.
But deliver us from evil. THerefore in the next place we pray, that God would
Deliver us from evil: that is says old and new writers from the Devil,
which is indeed the very fountain of evil. Thus we pray not simply against
temptation, but against the evil of temptation, for we see our savior was
tempted with three capital and great temptations, such as few of the best
members do withstand, and what were they? Theophilact tells thee, they were
auaritia, Gula, etinanis gloria, covetousness, gluttony, and vain glory.
Consider therefore him that was equal to God, yea thought it no robbery to be
so: yet for thy sake he took to him the shape of a servant, and even was
buffeted of Satan, that he might the better strengthen those, that are tempted
(was not all for thy sake o unthankful Heb. 2.
mankind;) learn therefore to take up his yoke, for it is easy, and the
burden light, and God is faithful that will not suffer thee to be tempted
above that thou art able, but in all our temptations he will give us a happy
issue, which God grant unto us, Amen.

The Conclusion.
For thine is that kindome, the power and the glory for ever, and ever Amen.
The first part
FOr thine is that kingdom, this shows Reave. 21
us a reason, why we should pray, to God only, because he only is King, and to
him we owe this duty, therefore the Angel told John in the revelation, that he
must worship Reu. 21.
God, for he was but his fellow servant.

Objection.
Why, David says, the earth is the Lords, with the fulness thereof, the round
world and they that dwell therein, why therefore say you (that Kingdom?)

Answer.
Surely God rules all Kingdoms indeed, and preserves bad to, from outward
dangers, as you may read in Dan. chapter 5. also Ester chapter 16. 16. but here we
speak of the Kingdom of grace: by which God rules in the hearts of his
children after a more peculiar manner, and therefore well may we say (that
kingdom,) for he shows (Mysteria regni) the misteryes of that kingdom to
his chosen, but he has not dealt so with every nation.

The second part of the conclusion.
The power. THe Lord our God, is a God of Gods and Lord of Lords, a great
God, mighty and terrible, which accepts no persons, nor takes rewards, and
this is the second reason, why we ought to pray to God, because all power is
his, and he only able to help us. In the first place, as he is, our king, he
wills our good, and as he is of power, he is able to perform, what himself
pleases.

Therefore are we to pray to him, that he would preserve us, and keep us, read
Number. cha. 6. 24. But alas, how often has God manyfested his power to every one
of us, so that we may say with Moses, there is neither God in heaven nor in
earth, that could do like thy works and like thy power. How did the Lord
manifest his power against the cruel and bloody spaniards in 1588. yea and how
has he diverse and sundry times overthrown our enemies since, has not this
father of ours, preserved our gracious Queen most miraculously? from secret
conspiracy and most vile treachery? (oh) that we would therefore, praise the
Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders he does for us in this little
Island. Have thou remembered Gods power, in delivering thee from Satan and sin,
and for preserving thee all thy life: (oh thou redeemed Christian) thou subject
of the realm of England? say thou with David, Psalm. 106. 2. who can express
the noble acts of the Lord, or show forth all his power.

The third part of the conclusion.
And the glory. THou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, honor and power, for
thou Reave. 4. 11.
have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and have been
created. And the blessed Apostle S. Paul says, whatsoever we do, it must be
to Gods glory, for that is his due, and our duty. Therefore well said a learned
writer on this place, Habes hic etiam causam, cur nullae omnino creaturae sint
inuocandae, quia ipsarum non est regnum, non habent omnipotentiam, nec debetur
illis ea gloria. (that is to say) thou have here also the cause why no
creatures are to be called upon at all because (says he) the kingdom is not
of them, neither have they the power, neither Illiricus pa. 325.
may that glory be due unto them. Wherefore, let us say, with the Prophet
David in Psa. 108. 5. my heart is prepared, O God, so is my tongue, I will sing
and give praise. (And) exalt thy self O God above the heavens: and thy glory
above all the earth: and let us as (Jeremy exhorts) give Ier. 13. 16.
glory to the Lord our God, for he is the king of glory. Yea, and he only is
Psalm. 24. 8.
to have glory, for he will not give his glory to another. And for this end are
Isai. 48. 11.
we saved, even to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made
us accepted in his beloved son, by whom, we have redemption through his Ephesians.
1. 6. 7.
blood, even the forgiveness of our sins through his rich grace.

The last reason of the conclusion, why we must pray to God.
For ever, and ever. THat is, thou must not pray so, this year, and that, for
thy Gods name is JEHOVAH, (that is the eternal,) and his time cannot be
diminished. Isai. 50.
Therefore is he called the ancient of days, and David says, the heavens wax
old, but thou art the same for ever: for his power is not diminished, nor his
hand shortened; Therefore continue thy prayers only to him, and rob him not of
his glory, do thy duty betimes and God will reward thee in his time Eccle.
51. 30.
(says the Wiseman) for the Lord is near to all them that call upon him, to
all that call upon him in truth, he will fulfill the desires of them that fear
him, he will hear their cry, and Psa. 145 18. 19.
will save them.

Amen.
Our Christ is Amen, the faithful and true witness, who has The seal of
faith.
commanded us to begin and end our prayers in faith. And he told his
Apostles, and in them us, that whatsoever we ask, believe we shall receive it,
and we shall receive it. Thus Amen, is diversely taken in the scriptures, and
many profitable significations, arise from the root in the holy Hebrew, I will
but only name some of them, leaving them to thy consideration, and so I commit
thee to God.

First, it signifies truth, secondly, faith, thirdly, steadfastness, and
perseueraunce, and surely most profitable lessons may we learn from these.

First, to come before God in (Amen) to himself.

Secondly, it teaches us faith, all the promises of God in Christ are yea, and
Amen.

Thirdly, that we must not be Iam. 1.
S. James tells us that we shall receive Luke 18. 4.
nothing.

Fourthly, it teaches us perseueraunce,

Fifthly, Amen is truly, which is a kind of oath, showing that we must Pagnine
says, it is Constitutum, a matter thoroughly determined that so our prayers be
not a sacrifice of Fools. And lastly in this place it is an earnest wishing,
that, that we have prayed for, may come so to pass, and so is it used at the
end of all prayers, through the Bible, in this sense, (so be it.) As Deuteronomy. 27.
1. Kin. 1. Nom. 5. Ier. 28. Psalm. 95. Revel. 1.

Here follows a table, showing the agreement between the Lords prayer, and
the ten commandments of Almighty God.
The Preface to the Reader.
NOw I remember the saying of the Greek Father Theophilact, that if the Law
and the Gospel, were compared together, there is Christ revealed in the midst
of both. And surely, at the mouth of two or three witnesses, is every word
established. Seeing therefore, Christ has taught us a prayer, agreeing to the
commandments: let us not think the son of God came to give liberty to sin,
but indeed to deliver us from sin: yea Zachary says in Luke, though we serve
him with Luke. 1.
out fear, yet it is, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our
life. Therefore said a godly father, upon Luke 9. where it is said, that Moses
and Elias were with Christ, when he prayed in the Mount: this shows (says
he) that he was no adversary, nor contrary, either to the law, or Prophets.
And that this may more plainly appear, behold the table, I have here set down,
for thy further instruction; and chiefly for their instruction who talk so
much of Christian liberty, that their life is nothing, but licencialitie.

Now follows the Table.
Psalm 119. verse. 130. The entrance into thy words shows light, and gives
understanding to the simple. The Preface of the Law.
I Am JEHOVAH thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Aegipt, and out of
the house of bondage.



Jehovah thy God, a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of them that hate me:
and showing mercy unto thousands, to the^ that love me and keep my
commandments.

The Preface of the Lords prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven. THis preface of the Lords prayer very aptlye
agrees with these two first commandments: For it teaches us that our Father
is Jehovah Elohim, the blessed Trinity, as that reverend Father Bishop
Babington, has well observed on this place.

The word Father teaches us, that we are sons of God, and that is, by grace
and adoption in Christ, and tells our conscience, that he has delivered us
from Egypt, that is, from the power of Satan, and from the cursed Pope. And
therefore the godly in the Revelation are bid to come out of Egypt, of bondmen
he has made us free, and therefore him we ought to serve, and none else, yea
alone to pray to him, to honor, obey, and serve him, and fervently to love him,
as a child does his father. Neither ought we to pray to saint or picture of
any: but to him that is almighty. The word Heaven, shows he only ought to
be feared, and that he alone is holy, to whom belongs all holy worship,
neither must any be worshipped but he, least the all seeing God look down from
heaven and punish us.

Thou shall not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain, for Jehovah will not
hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor and do
all thy work, but the seventh day, is the Sabbath of Jehovah thy God, in it
thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man
servant, nor thy maid, nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that is within thy
gates: for in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh day: Therefore Jehovah blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

Hallowed be thy name: answers

Thy kingdom come.

Thy will be done, as in heaven, agrees with the fourth commandment. This
kingdom is in righteousness, and peace, and joy, in the holy Ghost. The only
means to attain this, is by believing in Christ, and seeing faith is by
hearing the word preached, therefore has God ordained one day of seven for
that purpose. For surely he that keeps not the Sabbath day, which was
ordained to meditate on Gods works, and to hear Gods word preached, can
neither be skillful rightly to know, the use of creation and redemption: and if
he be ignorant in this, neither is God his King, nor he any way fit to do
Gods will, for that is far more hard to attain to, then but barelie to know
it: and surely if any should ask me the cause, of so much losenesse in our
conversation, and so great blindness in this glorious time of the Gospel, I
should say, it was the neglect of the Saboth day. Therefore I would desire all
Christians, to remember when God bids us remember, and especially the
Magistrate in his place, that where no conscience of this duty is, there may
be correction duly administered. For the neglect of this commandment, is the
cause of breaking all the rest, and it is the very gate either to knowledge, or
an entrance for all the works of darkness. (Consider Christian reader) if the
Lords day were kept of every one, and spent in reading and hearing Gods word
preached, what delight and knowledge, would it bring thee to, in a very short
space. Therefore says God remember to do my will, not thine own. Neither can
we pray thy kingdom come, and let us do thy will: when in deed Gods will is,
we should spend the day in hearing, reading, and meditating, of his marvelous
works, both of creation, and redemption,

Thus we see the three petitions Sab. Mun. on the 5. of Mat.
answer to the four first commandments: both, lively showing our duty to God,
for from the first table, I understand the whole worship of God, namely faith
in God, fear of God, confidence and love of God, even as it is said, thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and in thy
whole endeavor, for love, trust, faith, and fear, are in the heart, and in them
consists the true worship of God.

The second table of the law.
Honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be prolonged upon the land
which Jehovah thy God gives thee. This says Paul was the first commandment
with promise. Thou shall not kill.

Christ expounds this in Mat. 5.

The second part of the Lords prayer.
Give us this day our daily bread. Solomon says, his light shall be put out in
obscure darkness. This was the first commandment with the promise of Canaan
annexed to it, which was the land that had abundance of earthly riches and was
a figure of heaven.

Forgive us our debtes as we forgive our debtors, which teaches Matthew.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall not bear false witness again thy neighbor.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
neither any thing that is thy neighbors.

Lead us not into temptation

But deliver us from evil, shows, we are to desire that God would grant us
his assistance, to walk in obedience to his holy comma^dements: and this ought
ever to be the desire of all Christians, in their prayers to God, as is showed
before.

Thus beloved brethren we see that the law is holy and good, also that Christ
came not to destroy the law, or to give men liberty to sin, but to establish
the same, and to fulfill the same, which none but he could do: therefore in a
word, know the use and end of the law.

The use is, that we should strive toward perfection: and bring Christ did,
for he turned the water into wine, (says Theophilact) and that, that was not
able to norish us, he has made good to us, and profitable for us. And whereas
before, we were bond men under the law, that is the curse: we are now made free
men, by him which became a curse for us, yea he has made us a chosen
generation a royal priesthood Titus. 2. 14.
a holy nation, a pecultar people: let us not now therefore sin, that grace 1.
Pet. 2. 9.
may abound, God forbid that we should do so, for if we be his chosen, we have
crucified the flesh, and with Paul we must be crucified to the world, and the
world to us, so we may be the more able to resist satan, when he shall tempt
us in our prayers, or otherwise, and let us that profess Christ, walk as
Christ has walked; and above all things, let us not faint in our prayers: for
if we be faithful, God is loving and merciful, and he will give whatsoeur we
have need of, for as the Psalmist says, there is no good thing; that he
withholdeth from them that fear him.

Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, Heb.
13 20.
the great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make us perfect in all good works, to do his will: working in us that
which is pleasant in his sight through Jesus Christ: to whom be praise for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

