To the most irreuerend Pope-holy Fathers of the two Seminaries at Rheimes and
Rome. A Confirmation of thexposition of the former Emblemes, containing a mess
of spiritual Sonnets, or two pair of pastoral Eclogues, in rural meeter:
for the Kings Crown and Dignity, against the Popes Miter and Rochet.
The first pair of Pastoral Eclogues.
The first spiritual sonnet, containing an exhortation to true subjects, for
due obedience to their lawful Magistrates, upon diverse weighty reasons.
The Preface.
TO every lawefull Magistrate, and Ruler in pre-eminence,
and to their lawefull officers, all people yield obedience:
Love, honor, tribute thankefulnes and every kind of loyalty,
for conscience sake, and not for fear, nor by constraint, but willingly.
The Sonnet.
1
WHo bear Gods Image and his name, and represent his Majesty,
And occupy his room on earth (though subject to mortality.)
Like sun that shines full bright in sky, and dazells mortal eye,
To show blind folks the Lord of life much more to magnify.
2
Who are Gods cunning worke-maisters, directed by his hand,
With power and skill, rude things to cause in order fair to stand:
Like soap and water, scowring white, and washing very clean,
So as no spot in countenance, nor wrincle may be seen.
3
Who weelde Gods Scepter and his Sword to purpose, with effect
Hard things to soften, wrong to right, and hidden to detect:
Like fire and flame, with parching heat, which by a secret influence,
In hardening clay, and softning wax, declares a wondrous difference.
4
Who execute Gods holywill, and are a living law,
With pain and price, from ill to good, a number to withdraw:
Like Adamant stone, vplifting iron, or Frankensence to smell,
The sense to please, the a^^e to purge, ill savors to expel.
5
Who by Gods plenty peace procure, and commonwealth maintain,
With stately port, in careful sort, more then for hope of game:
Like fertile soil, bespred with flowers in comfortable spring,
For man's relief, without reward, great store of fruit to bring.
6
Who Nurses are of Christ his Church, religion to defend,
Lost souls to save, and safe conduct, and bounty to extend:
Like goodly Armies, furnished with shields of beaten gold,
The walls of brass, the gates of pearl, in sure defenced hold.
Conclusion,
Behold the happy progeny of Peers that never die,
Each after other ministering, by course successively,
Who sway that civil government, which God alone does bear,
Proud spirits to daunt in lewd attempts, meek spirits in good to rear.
A short instruction or auouchment with some notice given to the greatest
gainsaiers thereof.
THus every seemly property imports in full effect,
That every lawful magistrate is one of Gods elect:
To rule his subjects orderly, in honest conversation,
And so to further common wealth with godly reformation.
Which point, no wise man dare deny, nor beasts (if they could speak)
Who in their kind are very loath, Gods ordinance to break:
Since nature teaches, law requires, the King of kings does say,
Superiors ought to rule aright, inferiors must obey.
Howbeit the romish Anabaptists, for the popish Monarchy,
Have labourd long all gouernements to bring into an anarchie:
That they, and theirs, may rule the roast, who have to do the least,
Unless it be to heal the wounds of that seven headed beast.
The second spiritual sonet containing an encouragement of all lawful
Magistrates to suppress the Pope of Rome, and his romish Accomplices, for sundry
good considerations.
The Preface.
All Christian Princes of the earth, pull down the Popes estate,
who made you horns to wrecke his wrath, and fury, (till of late,)
And drunken with the poysny cup of spiritual fornication,
to bring you, and your subjects all, to utter desolation.
The Sonnet.
1
WHose ordination is but pomp and pride, full of confusion,
Like errand thieves, that break the fence, and enter by intrusion:
Not rightly callde, (as Aron was, anoint with sacred oil,)
But startvps stout, with revel rout, to live upon the spoil.
2
Whose insolent supremacy to reign above the rest,
As though he had all holiness and wisdom in his breast,
No less then Christ, the son of God, and th'oly Ghost his deputy,
Is like Goliahs blasphemy, against the blessed Trinity.
3
Whose Jurisdiction is too large, for mortal man to teach.
Like Babells Tower, which Bablers thought beyond the clouds to reach:
Or Nimrod hunting lustily for pray in every ground,
Or scornful Ismaell quarrelling with every one he found.
4
Whose Canons serve to starve the Saints, and bellie-gods to feed,
Pretensedly to build the Church, and help the poor at need:
Like Judas, who to spare his purse, inquired, what waste is this?
And did for thirty pence betraye his Master with a kiss.
5
Whose Officialls are hirelings all, which on his seige depend,
The cursed courts of wrangling wights to bolster and attend:
Like Pilates, Pirates, Jews, and Turks, who naughty shifts do use,
Or, bawdes and harlotes impudent, who live upon the stews.
6
Whose merchandise is not the mark of any Pastor pure,
But fleshly, worldly, devilish prancks to forge and put in ure,
Like hammer, nails, spear, sponge, and whip, of Annas Caiphas brood,
Who cried, away with Christ to th cross, and shed his precious blood.
Conclusion.
Behold the Chair of pestilence, and throne of gross iniquity,
Ordaining mischief, for a law, and exercising cruelty:
Here wisdom is, and patience, this mystery to spell,
How Lucifer climde up in heaven, and was thrown down to hell.
A brief recapitulation, or rehearsal, with a certain challenge to the
gainsaiers thereof.
THus every vicious quality, the substance does disgrace,
Of popish Pseudo-hierarchie, and put it out of place,
And prove it no such Bishopric, as scripture sets down.
Much less to be so catholic, and wear a triple crown.
No Writer ever could declare by any demonstration,
With all his labor and his wit, such Lordly domination,
To come from Christ by Peter's kayes, or other argument,
Directly, or, by consequence, in either testament.
Howeuer Ecchius, Pigghius, and the rest of that fraternity,
By hook or crook, with bell and book, support the Popes authority:
And Verstegan-Bochi-skenkely, brag Champions on a row,
With scutchions blaze the Popish arms, and cast the King too low.
The second pair of Pastoral Eclogues.
The third spiritual sonnet, containing an admonition of all states and
degrees, in their several places and callings, to provide for their own
safties and welfares, by rooting out the romish Monster, with his brutish
Companions.
1
IN just defense of Magistrates, All people hie and low,
As on your country Fathers dear, both limme and life bestow,
Whom God has railed up to rule their subjects in his place,
All Traitors false, especially proud Papists to deface.
2
Surmounting high, deep searching wits, sound politic, Noble Sates
Preserve your royal dignities from Antichristian mates.
3
Brave ancient stocks, right famous bloods, whom worth has set aloft
Let not Italian Hipocrites your Honors bring to naught.
4
Grave Judges wise, and Council learnde, to tell the truth be bold,
That Soueraintie from shaven crowns, al Princes may withholde.
5
Good neighbors near, Confederats kind, and Bordrers round about,
Suppress sedition every where, cast Romish rebels out.
6
True subjects all, with loyal minds, fast feeding on the hill
Of safe defense, in fruitful ground, by watchful Shepherds skill,
Pluck up your hearts, address your selves, with deadly foes to fight:
Namely that monstrous Babylon, who works most despite.
The fourth spiritual Sonnet, containing an alarm to all the creatures of God,
in their kind, and especially his faithful servants, in their vocation, to
resist and abandon that savage tyrant of Rome, with his bloody Colleagures.
1
AGainst that purpled Whore of Rome, hark all Gods creatures, hark,
Who murdereth all his servants dear, that do refuse her mark,
Come, and revenge their blood on her, and feed upon the beast,
Whose hour is come, whose fall is near, God bids you to the feast.
2
Come, all his Saints, withdraw your selves from her abomination,
And double pay her for her hire, and work her desolation.
3
Come, ye her false friends, flattring fair, and take again the glory,
Which she from you took, of your lands and livings transitory.
4
Come, ye her wretched wi^es and prancks, forepast from age to age,
Out of records, and testify against her on the stage.
5
Come, thou Gods word, the breath of life, that triest raines and hearts,
Set forth and mar her ugly shape, and all her filthy parts.
6
Come last of all, dear Savior Christ, once more, and quite consume
The remnant of her forgeries, with fire for aye to fume,
In furnace of thy Fathers wrath, where breed those monsters fell,
Who persecute thy chosen flock, and mangle thy Gospel.
Four principal properties of a Christian Magistrate.
1 To know the virtuous, 2 to cherish them. 3 To find out offenders. 4 to
punish them.
Such as honor me, I will honor the^; says the Lord Four evil favored
qualities of that usurping Antichrist.
1 To exalt himself in the temple of God. 2 to despise government. 3 To
counterfaite the truth. 4 to dene the virtue of it.
Such as honor etc

A fit Prayer.
Lord save thy Church, our Queen, and realm, and grant they may prevail,
Against that hideous Antichrist, his body, head and tail:
And that we still thy blessed will may seek sincere and pure
Till we shall be all one with thee, for ever to endure.
By G. W. P. S. one of the meanest Ministers of the Gospel in England.

