* A goodly dysputacion between a Christen Shomaker / and a Popysshe Parson
with two other parsones more, done within the famous City of Norembourgh.

Translated out of ye Germayne tongue into English. By Anthony Scoloker.

Imprynted at London by Anthony Scoloker. And Viyllyam Seres. Dwelling without
Aldersgate. Anno. 1548.

Cum Gratia et Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.

The Shomaker co^ming^ to the parsones house, speaks to the parsons servant.
Shomaker. Good morrow good fellow


Servant. ye are welco^ master Ioa^


Shomaker I thank you with all my heart, Where is your master?


Servant. He is in the gallery, O tarry a little I will go and call him, master
master your shomaker is here.


Parson. Been veneritis magister Hans.


Shomaker. Deo gratias.


Parson What bring you there / do you bring my slyppers?


Shomaker. Yea forsooth Sir, I thought you had been in the Church.


Parson. No mary. I was yonder behind in ye gallery and there have I mumbled.


Shomaker. What say you master Parson? have ye mumbled?


Parson. Yea I have said my divine seru^ce ^^ besides ^^at I have now and then
fedd^ my nyghtyngale.


Shomaker. Sir Johan I pray you tell me what nyghtingale is it, syngeth he yet?


Parson. No forsooth, it draws to nygh winter.


Shomaker I know a shomaker who has a nightyngale that begi^neth now first to
sing.


Parson. Yea, the deuell of hell take that shomaker with all his nyghtyngales,
he has so rayled on our most holiest Father the pope the most highest
Father and reverend lord. yea, he has so cried and called him abroad, even
as though he had been the most vylest and vngrationst wretch or knave of the
whole world.


Shomaker. What soft and fair Sir I pray the, he has partly declared your
manner of lyuinge, and your divine service to the common people, and now I
perceive you do nothing but rail on hi^, but what shall I say? is your
behavior and lyuinge according to christ's Gospel / or is it apesplaye?


Parson. What the deuell of hell have these dulheaded shomakers to do with our
behaueour and living?


Shomaker. It is written. When thou see thine Exodus 2^.
Ennemies ass fallen under his Burden / thou shall not go by but help hi^ up.
How much more is a christen Man bound to help his neighbor / who he sees
lyinge in an heavy conscience?


Parson. That horeson assched ought not to have meaned spyrituall and relygious
men / for they know well enough before hand what sin is.


Shomaker. But Ezechyell speaks if thou see Ezechi. ^^
thy brother sin, reprehend him, or else I will require his blood, at thy
hands Therefore a Christen man ought to reprehend his brother, be he anointed
or no.


Parson. Art thou a Gospeller?


Shomaker. Yea forsothe Sir.


Parson. Have thou not read the gospel of S. Matthew in the vij. Chapter. Thou
shalt not Judge to chynte^te thou be not Math. 7.
judged? But ye Luthery as pass^ nothing at all upon such Sayings / neither
do ye seek for them / for they are plain against you.


Shomaker. To judge and reprehend, is to be understand two manner of ways, we
take not upon us to judge that thing which only aperteineth to god. As Paul
says No man shall Judge the servant of an other man, Roma. 14.
but ought, to reprehend and exhort him. As the prophet Esaye says Call
without Ceasynge, and exalte your Esaias. 58.
voice like a trompett to declare my people their offenses. et cetera.


Parson. There is also written. Thou shalt not make the chefest of the people
ashamed. Exodus 22.



Shomaker. Who is the chefeste, among the people / is it not the Emperor,
kings / princes, Dukes / Earls, with their knygtes esquires and worldly power?


Parson. Nay, nay. The pope is Christ's vicare, and next under him, Cardynals,
Bishops with all the spiritualte / as it is written. Solite de maioritate et
obediencia. These spirytuall men represent the sun and the worldly powers
represe^t only the moon. Wherout does follow that the pope must needs be of
greater power then the Emperor, who is feign to kiss his fete.


Shomaker. Is the pope such a puyssau^t lord? truly Johan. 18.
then is he not Christ's vicare. For Christ says, my kingdom is not of this
world. And John. 6. Christ (when he saw Johan. 6.
that men would make him king) went Luke. 2^.
his ways. Christ also said unto his dysciples. Worldely princes have dominion
and bear Rule, and the Myghtyr of the earth are called Lords / but let it
not be so among you. For who of you will be the greatest shall be the least,
and the chefest as a Servant, and therefore the pope and ye spyrytuall men are
but mynysters unto the Christians (in case ye be of God) and therefore men
may^ re^^ehende you well Inoughe.


parson. The pope with his, is nor bound to obey the commandment of God. As
it is written in the spiritual law. C. Solite de maioritate et obediencia out
of the which we do conclude that the pope is no sins but the most holiest and
in all thing inreprehensible.


Shomaker. It is written, who so ever says that he is without sin, is a
liar, out of the Johan. 1.
which follows that the Pope must needs be a si^ner or a lier (if he be not
both) and not the most holiest / but is greatly to be reprehended.


Parson. What I say / although the pope were so wicked, that he did bring a
great multitude of people into hell, yet may no man reprehende him. For it is
written in our laws dyst. xi. Sipapa. How does that distinct. 40
please the?


Shomaker. It is written in the gospel of Math. Math. 18.
if thy brother do sin reprehend him between him and the / and if he hear
the* then have thou won him. Does the pope use such Godly acres?


Parson. Do thou call this to reprehe^de after a brotherly sort, to cry and
call it out so openly?


Shomaker. It is further written in the same text, in case thy brother hear
the not / then take one or two with you / and if he hear you not then, then
tell it to the congregation, and let him go like a heathen and infidel, even
as thou art sir domine*


Parson. I pray the what preuayleth it that thou do call us thus a broad
like greshoppers, consyderyng we pass nothing for it. For we hold us by our
decrees?


Shomaker. Therefore says Christ, in case men do not hear you, then shake the
dust from your fete for a wytnes that the Kingdom of God has been nygh unto
them. For their Judgment shall be greater at the day of dome, then to Sodoma
and Gomorra. In what case shall thou be then; seeing thou wylt not be
reprehended?


Parson. I would grant it to be so / in case they were learned men, but it
becomes not the lay people to reprehe^d the spiritualte


Shomaker. An ass reprehended Balaain the prophet. Wherefore then is it not
lawful. For a lay man to reprehende a spiritual man?


Parson. I shomaker ought to meddle with greasing of his lether and clouting of
his shows, and not with holy scripture.


Shomaker. How can ye prove that by scripture / that a Christen man may not
read, write and search in the scriptures? For Christ says, search the
Scriptures for she bears witness of me. And the psalmograph says also.
Blessed is the man that studyeth night and day in the laws of the lord, And
Peter says also Prepare your 1. Petri. 3.
selves to answer every man / the ground requires the hope which is in you,
and in like manner Paul teaches the Ephesians to fight against the assaults
of the deuell, with the sword of Gods word. Ephesi. 6.
Oh lord how were it possible for us to resyst, if we knew nothing of the
scripture?


Parson. Even like a heap of gise in the water.


Shomaker. Mock at your pleasure. The Jews know their law by root or
without the book, shall not we that are Christians know the gospel of Jesus
Christ? which is the power of God to as many as shall be saved / as Paul
says. 1. Corin. 1.



Parson. Yea, thou shall know it as Christ has told. The scribes and
pharizees have set the^ upon Moses seat. What so ever they Math. 22.
teach you, ^oke you do the same which signifies the daily preachi^ges / does
not this suffice the lay people?


Shomaker. There is also written in the same chap. They lay heavy and
vnbearable burdens upon men's necks, and such sygnifye the tradicions and
commandments of men whereby ye drive and oppress us lay people, bryngyng us
in heavy conscience / wherefore should we then follow you?


parson. How can thou prove that by scripture?


Shomaker. Christ says in the be fore named chapter. Woe be unto you ye
hipocrites and pharizees, that shut up the kingdom of heaven for the people /
thou will not enter into it thy self, nor yet suffer any other to enter.


parson. Yea that was spoken to the priests of the Jews, and not to our
priests.


Shomaker. Mary. Sir ye have first taken the name of pharizees upon you Which
sytte upon moses seat etc. Although it be spoken of the Priests of the Jews
(as the ^^ueth is) even so it also spoken of you. For your works bear witness
/ thou eatest the widows houses / as ye text further does declare, in good
faith six domine you have taken your self by the nose.


Parson. Fie on the. How do these horeson lutherians rejoice and laughe in
their fyst, when they can find some sayings out of the scripture / they
trouble and vex one therewith, without ceasyng.


Shomaker. Sir I pray the be not discontented for in good faith I speak of a
good zeal.


Parson. I am not angry, but I am bound to tell it the, it becomes not the
lay People to meddle with the scripture.


Shomaker. Christ says. Beware of false prophets Math. 7.
and Paul to the Philippi. iij. take heed. Philipi. 3.
If we might not be suffered to read the scriptures, how should we the^ know
these things.


Parson. The same apperteyneth to the papistry as Paul says to Timoth. 1. ye
shall correct the seducers with all extremity.


Shomaker. Yea they do it not, but do manifestly against it as it daily does
apere.


parson Let them care for that.


Shomaker. No sir not so / we will not esteem it so light / it they will not,
then must we take heed that we follow not them / for no man shall bear an
others burden.


parson. Say what ye list, it apperteyneth not to the lay people to meddel
with the scripture as Paul says. 1. Cor. 7. Let every 1. Cor. ^.
man walk according to the lords calling. How say thou now? thou
would have scripture, and now I have scriptured the I trow.


Shomaker Yea paul speaks that of the outward conversation and lyuinge, of
boundemen and Fremen / as in the same Chapter it is clearley specifyed. But
here does he forbid no man to search the word of God.


Parson. Do thou not here? ye mi^ste first be called through the holy
ointment / and after that / be chosen of the higher powers other wise is it not
laufull for any man to meddell with the scripture.


Shomaker. Christ says. The harvest is great, but Luke. 10.
there are very few laborers, pray to the lord of the harvest to send
laborers into his harvest ^^erby the calling must needs be inwardlye of God /
and not outwardely. For outwardly are all preachers called, as well ye false as
the true.


Parson. ^ush. It is but folyshnes to reason with such pratlers.


Shomaker It is even so with you, as it was with Luke. 9.
the discyples / which were offended that othermen castoute deuelles in
Christ's name, as well as they. But Christ said for bydde them not. For who
soever is not a gaynste you is with you. And if ye were true Chrystyans / ye
should even rejoice that the lay people do understand and know the word of God.


Parson. What grefe is it to you?


Sho. Because we have forsaken the deuell in our baptym, therefore are we thus
dilygent to fight with Gods word against him and his kingdom, yea and to
adventure and Ieoparde both body and goods.


Parson. It were better for ye lay people to study how to get the living of
your wives and children,


Sho. Christ forbids and says, take no thought what ye shall eat and
drink or Math. ^.
what clothes ye shall put on, for such things do the heathen seek, but seek
first the kingdom of God. etc. And it shall be given you aboundauntly. The man
lives not only by bread, but of every word with Math. 4.
proceeds out of the mouth of God.


Parson. Satisfye and content your self therewith / and bake never a whitte.


Shomaker. We must labor, as it was commanded Gene. 3. and Job. 5.
to Ada^. The me^ are borne to labor like the birds to fly.


Parson. Where should you and other lay people have learned it? some of them
know neither A nor B.


Shomaker. Christ says. They shall all be taught of God.


Parson. But there needs also learni^g, wherefore are the universities else
ordained?


Shomaker. In what university (I pray the) did Joan study? Who wrote so
profoundly In the beginning was the word and the word was God. and ^ete. For
he was bu^ a fyssher as it is written.


Parson. What man / he was illuminate with the holy ghost.


Shomaker. It is written. And it shall happen in the later days, says God, I
will power out my spyrite upon all flesh. What mean ye? think ye that this
is not spoken of us? Acts. 2.



Parson. No, it is spoken of the Apostles, as peter witnesses. Therefore hold
thy peace and speak no more of the spyrite.


Shomaker. Christ says who so believes on me^ out of his body shall flow
streams of Johan. 7.
living water. Which is expou^ned by the Evangelist, that he speaks the same
of the holygost which all they should receive that believe in him.


Parson. What I say my think that thou smellest after Ma^tuanus that heretyke
/ with thy holyghost.


Shomaker. Paul speaks. Do ye not know ^. Cor. 3.
that ye are the temple of God; and yt ye spyryte of God dwells in you? And
to the Gallath. 4. Seeing ye are now become children, God has sent his
spirit in to Gallat. ^.
your hearts, who calls. Abba, that is, be loved father. He makes us
ryghtuous according to his mercy, through the bath of renouacion / and the
renewyng of the holyghost / which he has powered habou^dauntly Timo^. 4.
in us. And to the Romans in the. 5. chapter. As the spirit now dwells
Roman. ^.
in you, who has raised Jesus Christ from death.


parson. I find no holy spirit in me, you nor I are not noble enough thereto.


Shomaker. Wherefore are ye then called spiritual seeing you have not the spyrite
of God? ye ought with good right to be called spyry^elease.


parson. They be other manner of people then either you or I am which have the
spirit of God.


Shomaker. Ye ought not to have respect unto the^. For God is no accepter of
parsons. It is Acts. 10.
also written. The spirit of God shall rest Esaias. 66.
upon a broken or weak heart.


Parson. show me one, I pray the.


Shomaker. Paull speaks openly. Who soever y^. has not the spyrite of
Christ, perteyneth Romans an 8.
not to him.


Parson. Oh / truly it is a very poor and miserable spirit / which ye
Lutherians have, I think he is as black as a cole. I pray the tell me what
make ye with your holy ghost? I believe verily that he slepeth both night and
day by you, for men can not so much as ones spy him.


Shomaker. Christ says, Give not that which is Math. 7.
holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swyne, least they tread
them under their fete.


Parson. What, are ye not ashamed to speak such* Rude and Vncommelye words
before me?


Shomaker. I pray the sir domine be not displeased for it is the saying of holy
scripture.


parson. yea, yea, yea, ye Lutherians speak much, of Gods word, and it
waxes the ^enger the worse / I can not spy any amendment in none of you all.


Shomaker. Christ say the Luke 19. The kingdom of God comes not outwardly*
or with Luke. 19.
lokyng up / that men might point it with fyngers, to sale here in this or in
that place is it / but it is inwardly in you. that is, it stands not in
outward works.


Parson. Men may perceive that by your divine service. Ye pray not, nether go
ye to the Church nor to the daily service, nor in a manner to nothing at all
that good is Is then such kingdom Gods kingdom, amongst you Lutherians? I
believe it is the great deuell of helles kingdom.


Shomaker. Christ speaks, The time shall come / Math. ^.
and is even now, that men shall pray no more upon this mou^tain nor at
Jerusalem, but shall pray only in spyryte and veryte This casts down and
condem^neth your daily service with also your numbered prayers. For Christ
wholly and all abhors your nombred prayers with your outward mumblyng.
Where as he says Math. xv. This people worship Math. 1^.
^e with their lyppes, but their heart is ^a^re from me*


parson. And Christ says, ye shall pray without Luke. 18.
ceasyng.


shomaker. yea, he means, to pray without ceasynge in the spyrite, but
Christ dispyseth your prayer: saying, ye shall not make many words.


parson. Gentle friend what is that for a prayer, Math. 6.
to pray in spirit and verity? teach me that same I pray the, then shall I
need no more to say my matte^s nor mine other service.


shomaker. Read that little book of Marten Luther, entitled of the Christen
lybertye wc he dedicated to Pope Leo, and there shall ye find it brefely
declared.


parson. I would rather that Luther with al his books were burnt, I never in
all my life did read none of them, nor yet will as I am aduysed.


shomaker. What, why do thou judge then?


parson. Mary because he worshippeth not the saints.


shomaker. Christ says. Thou shall only worship thy lord God, and serve him
only. Math. 4.



Parson. Yea, we must have intercessours to god


Shomaker. John says, If any man have sinned we have a mediator by God /
which is 1. John. ^
Jesus Christ, who is ryghtuous, who is also the peacemaker for our sins.


Parson. Yea thou speak fair words good fellow, but need compels a man
to beg if thy leg were broken / would thou not go to saint Wolfgange? or
if thou had the tothache would thou not pray to saint Aposonia?


shomaker. No truly. Christ says, come unto me al Math. 11.
ye that labor and are laden, and I will case you. Where then will we seek
better help, ye have made Idols of the saints and so ye have seduced and
brought us from Christ.


Parson. Yea, I have heard well Enough of you Lutheria^s that ye do never fast
/ does Luthers holy ghost teach you that?


shomaker. We are not commanded of God to fast, but God has left it free.
Christ says when thou wylt fast, anoint thy head Math. 6.
and wasshe thy Face, he says not, thowe shall or tho^ must fast, like our
Romysh stepfather does.


Parson. Yea, but ye never do fast.


Shomaker I believe that he handycraftes men do fast better (yea although
they eat. 4. times in a day) then all the pryestes and shauelyngs of the
realm. It is manyfeste Enough. I need not to speak any more thereof.


Parson. Hold thy peace then, and let me speak, as concerning fasting that
is the least fault, but ye Lutherians eat fletshe on ye friday, that the
deuell of hell might bliss you.


Shomaker. It is not forbidden of God to eat flesh, and therefore is it not
si^ne / so far fourth as the weak people are not thereby offended. Math. 15.
Christ says. That which goes into the Mouth, defyleth not the Manne / but
that which comes out of the mouth defyleth the Manne / as whooredome,
murder, aduoutye, theft, false witness bearing, bacbyting. etc. And Paul: 1
Corinthi. What soever is sold in the market 1. Corinthians.
that eat.


Parson. yea, say what ye list, but good old customs which have been kept
and observed above four hondreth years / are not to be despised.


Shomaker. Christ says John in. 14. I am the Johan. 14.
way, verytie / and the everlasting Life / but he says not I am the custom.
Their fore must we stick and cleave to the verytie which is Gods word, and
even god him self, which endures for ever more / But custom comes of men,
which are Math. 25.
all liars / as the. 115. psalm. says, which Psalm. 115
saying does whole and all overthrow your customs.


Parson. Sir I pray the tell me, the Lutherians do never shryue nor confess
them, which is the greatest heresy of all.


Shomaker. Nether is that commanded of God, nor yet pronounced, nether in the
old nor ^n the new Testament.


Parson. Did not Christ say Go and show thy Math, 22.
self unto the priests.


shomaker. Do thou call showing shryuing, that is a wonders strange
English, ye must declare it better unto me by scripture. If the same shryuing
in the ear were such a great bond and holy thing, it should truly be clerer
declared in the scripture.


Parson. What I say / will ye do nothing else but that which is commanded you
of GOD in the scripture? that is a pitious case.


shomaker. I can not fulfill the same, as it is declared Acts. 15.
/ what need I to lay any more burden upon me?


parson. Such things have the holy fathers ordained in their councels.


shomaker. Who gave them Authority?


parson. Christ says I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye can not
bear it awey Johan. 16.
now: How say thou? Are not than the councels instituted of God?


parson. But Christ speaks before that, I shall send the comforter (which is
the spyrite of truth which proceeds of the father) and Johan. 15.
he shall declare you all things which I have told you. Mark, he says not,
he shall teach you new things, which I have not told you, but the same
things wc I have told you, even the same shall he declare unto you: And says
further hereafter / he shall lead you in all treuth


Parson. Thus hold thou nothing of the councels I perceive well Enough.


shomaker. yes verelye of that counsel which the Apostles kept at Jerusalem.


Parson. Have the apostles also kept a counsel?


shomaker. yea if you have a bible.


parson. yea I have one, O Katherin / bring he there that same great old book
Katherin the parso^s handmayd



Katherin. Sir is that same it?


parson. What no / that same is the decrees, look ye make it not soul. what
elses.



Katheryn. Sir is this it?


Parson. Yea, make it clean, and swepe of the So much did he regard the bible.
dust and cobwebbes now master shomaker where is it?


shomaker. Seek in the Acts of the Apostles in Acts. 13.
the. 15. chapter.


Parson. Seek your self / I am not much used Now he tells truth.
in the same book I know other things wc are proffytabler unto me, the^ that.


shomaker. There it is / behold Sir.


Parson. Katherin, read Actum 15. nay let alone, I will read it my self, and I
will know what the same old fellows have made.


Shomaker. Yea, Read, and ye shall find that me^ may not say the burdens of
the old Testament upon the Christians, therefore are we not bound to hear
you in the old, much less in the new testament.


Parson. But Christ says. Whosoever hears Luke. 10.
you, hears me, and he that despyseth you, despyseth me, is that same not
clear Enough?


shomaker. Yea, when you do syncerlye and purelye teach Gods word, the^ are
men bound to hear you even as Christ him self. But when ye preach your
own Imaginacyons and inuencyons, the^ ought no man to give care unto you. For
all that is not planted of God my heavenly father shall be plucked up by the
rotes.


Parson. Are the councelles then also the learning of men?


Shomaker. If a man should say the truth, the cou^celles have done great
damage in Chryhendome by two manner of ways.


Parson. What hurt or damage? declare them I pray the hartelye.


Syomaker. First the commandments which are innumerable and unmeasurable as
you your self know / and that which is worst of all have been by
exco^munycacyons co^fyrmed, and above that most part are not grounded in the
scripture, and such your co^maundeme^ts men have highly esteemed and therewith
greatly charged men's co^scyences / and have been reputed like the
commaundmentes of God / yea, set before the^ whereby the commandments of God
have been set back and made unknown to the people. Such people has Paul
declared with their commandments.

That in the latter times should depart 1. Timo. 4
from the faith, and give head unto spirits of error / and deuelyshe doctrine
of them which speak false through ypocrysy and have their consciences marked
with an hot iron, forbyddyng to marry, and commaundyng to absteyne from meats
which God has created to be received with thanks geuyng of them which believe
and know the truth.


Parson. How is that come to pass, with what commandments I pray the?


Shomaker. To eat flesh on the friday, has been taken for a greater sin,
then to keep a whore or two.


parson. I understand you very well, what damages are there more?


Shomaker. Secondarely they have brought forth many strange Gods seruises /
and called them good works, which is nothing else (if a man should say so
the) but very apesplay and outward folysshnes / Whereof God never spoke one
word / whereby both we and they / have neglected, and not regarded the good
works which God has commanded us.


parson. what are then the right true works of a christen man?


shomaker. Christ says. All what thou would ye Math. 7.
men should do to the, do even the same unto them / and that is the fulfilling
of the whole law and prophets. And he does teach Math. 15.
us to feed the hungry / to give drink to ye thyrstye / to harbarrowe the
harbarroules to clothe the naked, to visit the sick, and to comfort the
prisonner.


parson. Are that only the works of a Christian man, and the wholl so^me of a
Christen life?


shomaker. Yea / a true and faithful christen man Johan. 3.
which is borne a new out of the water and the Spyrite (as it is written
Johan. iij. chapter) serves God only in spyrite and Verity, and serves also
his Neighbor, with the works of charity / that is the whole sum of a
Christen life / but these papists mean that such a Christen life is nothing
at all, because the same works have not such an outward shine as their works
do.


Parson. Think ye then that our syngyng and Readyng is of no worth?


shomaker. Christ shall require nothing else of Math. 15.
us at the day of judgment / then the works Gene. 3. and
of mercy / then shall ye priests and monks Job. 5.
stand like foles which have left their ears at the pylory.


Parson. Thou have hy^ it wonders well / get you to the furnace and warm you
a little, Luke. 10.
does Luther teach you such things?


shomaker. No.


parson. What hold thou of Luther? I pray the tell me.


Shomaker. I hold him for a Chryste^ Doctor and I thynk there has not bee^ a
better sens the Apostles time.


Parson. What proffyt has he done in the christen faith?


Shomaker. Mary, first, he has discovered and brought to light your false
doctrine, commandments, tradicions and Imagynacyons, and admonysshed and
warned us thereof. Secondarely / he has declared us by scripture / that we
should confess that we are all the bondmen of sin. Thyrdely / that Christ
alone is our savior and redemer, of which two points the Romans 5.
whole scripture is full, whereby we learn 1. Cor. 1.
to putt our trust / hope and says only in Christ, which is a true and
godly work to salvation, as Christ says Joan. 6 And Christ says. Mat. 5. Let
your light Johan. 11.
braste out / and so shine before the people / Math. 5.
that they (seeing your good works) may praise the father which is in heaven.


Parson. Needs no work thereto?


Shomaker. Paul says* ad Romans 5. we hold it therefore, Roma. 5.
that man is only made right was through faith, without the works, and to
the Romans in the last chapter. The Romans vlt.
tyghtuous shall live by faith.


Parson. James says in his. 2. chap. Faith with out Jacob. 2
^ood works is dead.


Shomaker. A true Christen faith can never be Idell but brings always good
works and fruits forth. For Christ says / A good tree an bring forth no
evil fruit, Math. 7.
but such good works ought not to be done for to merit or deserve heaven
thereby / for Christ has merited and deserved it for us, neither for fear, and
to a void the pains of hell, for Christ has delyueryd us thereof, neither for
honor, for all honor sh^lbe given only unto God, as it is written. But ye
shall do them for Math. 4.
love, for a thanks geuyng to God, and to the help and profyt of your
neighbor.


parson. If Luther be so ryghtuous and so good a doctor as you name hi^ to be,
how cha^tet^ it then that so few great lords do cleave and styck unto his
doctrine: Save only a heap of rude and unlearned people?


Shomaker. Pylate, Herod, Cayphas nor Annas, ^leued not to Christ nor yet the
pharizees, but the common people. Therefore Christ rejoiced in spirit, and
said. Father I thank you, that ye have hydden these Luke. 10.
things from the wise of the world, and have opened it to the little flock.


Parson. What I say the common people clean least of all to Luther and his
doctrine.


Shomaker. Your dulheaded and folyshe preachers are cause of that / which
without any scripture, cry and call, he is an heretyke / he is an heretic.
But Christ has declared Math. 4.
to the litell flock. Go thoroughe the narrow gate, for the gate is wide and
ye way is broad which leads to dampnation, and there are many which walk in
it, And there are many called and few elect. Math. 22.



Parson. Men do use to speak such words in tauernes, upon the market, and
else where like fools, which ought not to be spoken in such places.


Shomaker. Christ says / what I say to you in secret, that shall ye preach
upon the house Math. 10:
tops.


parson. If I should say truth. I hold Luther for the greateste heretyke,
that ever was sense Arrius Time, and thou art his follower, and there is no good
in you, nether comes their any good from you / vnderstandeste thou that? The
same tytell do I give both to Luther and to the^


Shomaker. Verily you have hitte the prycke / for their is no man good but God
only. For our nature is whole and all corrupt ^^ Math. 14.
us, as it is written. Genes. 8. The hart^ of man is inclyned to evil / even
from hy^ Gene. 8.
youth / which daily must be mortifyed with the cross, least it might
hinder the spirit. For nature cease not to seek that thing whereunto it is
inclined, all though the spyryte be made ryghtuous through^ faith. For it is
written Prouer. 24.

The ryghtuous falls seven times ^^ the day. Therefore do we daily pray.
Forgive Prou. 24.
us our trespaces Math. 6. and paul to the Romans 7. The good which I would
Math. 6.
I do not / and the evil which I hate, I Romans 7.
do, and after that speaks he. O miserable man / who shall deliver me from
the body of death? Therwyth declares he that w^ are sinners even unto death.
But sir Do ruin / if thou art with out Sin, cast the first stone upon us.


Parson. Ye are all un proffitable people, ye can prate very well / I trust ye
shall shortly be Johan. 8.
knocked upon your boanes, for I perceive there is none other remedy.


shomaker. What would you be in hand with the sword? that apperteyneth not to
the spyritual^^e.


Parson Has not Christ Luce. 22. ordained two swerdes, one spiritual and an
other temporal.


shomaker. Christ did forbydde Peter. Math. 26 and said he that strikes with
the swerd^ Math. 26.
shall perysh with the sword.


parson. It helps not by other means, therefore must it be helped / with a
quick punishment, for heresy has in a manner taken ye vpperhande, therefore it
is high time to stryke in the flock.


Shomaker. Oh, do not so, but rather follow the co^sell of Gamaliel / Actum in
the 5. chapter. If the ddctryne be of God, ye can not for Acts. 5.
bydde nor defend it, and if it be of men, then shall it fall without any
sword / to the intent ye he not taken as one that will fight against God.


parson. There shall come nothing else thereof for this shall be the end.


Shomaker. Now, O lord of heaven, thy will be fulfilled. Math 6. The Discyple
is not above his master. H^ve the^^ persecuted Johan. 15.
me. they shall persecute you also / and h^ppy Luke. 6.
are is, when ye are hated / dysdayned and dispysed for my names sake.


parson. Some shall then hold their peace, which now do call and roar a
loud.


Shomaker. He that confesses me before the world him will I knowledge and
confess before my heavenly father.


Parson. Ye shall be handeled and served like as heretics ought to be served.


shomaker. Christ says fear not the^ which may Math. 10.
destroy the body only, but fear him which may destroy both body and soul. O
lord God, how good is it to dye for thy names sake?


parson. It were even your just reward / an heretyke (after the third
admonicion and warning) ought to be put to death.


shomaker. But you ought first to prove or defyne us to be heretics, with the
holy scripture.


parson. That may we full easily ^o.


Shomaker. Then shall God require our blood at your hands / because you have
suffered us, and the pore sheep of Christ to have been thus long seduced and
led outof the right way. And that you have not resysted and disputed with so
many preachers of this learning.


Parson. It shall shortly come to pass, we have taken our advise and counsel
upon the matter.


Shomaker. Yea, is that true indede? I perceive ye do fulfill the saying of
Mat. And the Phariz^es went and held a council how Math. 22.
they might trippe him in his words, and did send officers unto him / with the
officers of Herod.


parson. What else? Thus ought the heretykes to be served.


Shomaker. Oh, lord. These true preachers would feign bring us all to Christ,
no man excepted* And thou woldeste bring both us and thy self to the deuell.
Thou would feign that the Fire of Heaven should fall on us Luke 9. Hear what
Christ fayeth. Luke. 9.
Do ye not know what chylderen of spyrite ye are? The son of man is not come
to destroy the souls of men, but to save them. 2. Cori. 13. He has given me
power (says he) not to destroy, but to amend. 2. Cori. 13.



Parson. What, I say, I will even the same also.


shomaker. Fire and sword serves not thereto, but the word of God Hebr. 4.
Which is Hebre. 4.
sherper then a two edged sword. Therefore if thou art of God, defend thy
doctrine and laws with Gods word, which 1. Cor. 1.
is the power of God. 1. Corinthi. 1.


Parson. All this helps you never a whytte.


Shomaker. Ye bring not Gods word / ye seek not the honor of God, but your
own power honor, and Riches, against which the word of God speaks, and
therefore do ye persecute it.


Parson. Yea, thou pratest nothing else, but to here a man, when the heart
is full, then ^^nneth the mouth over. Luke. ^.


Shomaker. I may well lyken you / like as Christ lykeneth the chylderen
syttyng in the markett place / criyng one to an other and saying. We have pypes
unto you and ye have Luke 7.
not daunsed. We have mourned to you and ye have not wept. Even so is it with
you, If a man speak unto you confortablye of the word of God, then do ye
deryde it. If a man do tell it you earnestlye / then are ye angry.


parson. Although thou dyddest sing like ^ Lark / thowe shall not make me
otherwise then I am.


Shomaker. Your heart is waxen hard and stony as king Pharao, Exodi. Read
from ye. 7. Chapter to the. 15. who n^ther regarded no wonder nor places. etc.


Parson. Thou had almost hit the prycke.


Shomaker. Me thinks that thou art like the false off year Luke 6. What
shall I do? the lord will take the office from me, I can not dygge, and I am a
shamed to beg. Even that same fear ye spyrituall men also no exhortacion
nor admonishing can help.


parson. No man comes to me unless my father draw him, will you then
convert a man?


Shomaker. Oh sir I love to hear the same words with all my heart. It is
written Job 15. without me can thou do nothing / and further thou haste not
chosen me, but I have chose the, therefore lies it not in our power, but it is
God which must convert us. Which I do wysshe you all from the botome of my
heart.


Parson. When do they ryng in the church Katherin give me my sirplys and tippet.


Katherin. Well beloved master / go in pease, I hope all things shall be well.


shomaker. With the help of God, now peace be with you, beloved sir take no
displeasure with me, but pardon me if I have offended you.


Parson. God pardon and forgive us all our sins.


shomaker. Amen.


Parson. Behold how quick these lay men are in tellyng of their tale to us
which are ^noynted. I think that the deuel of hell be patched and clouted in
the sho. Skin, he has so stricken me upon my breast pla^e / that if. I had
not been so depely learned, he should have made me a^ ass, therefore he shall
make no more shoes for me / but Hans zobell shall be my shomaker, for he ^s a
very simple man, and one that does not much reason of the scripture / nor of
^he Lutheryans heresy, which apperteyneth not to the lay people, nether
becomes it them to dyspute with their soulekepers, for Solomon says who
soever walks symply, walks well. Ah, the same saying ought I to have laid
to that dulheaded shomaker, peradventure, he ^huld have had nothing to say
thereupon / ^ut have been stark dome.


Katherin Ah master, I feared greatly (when I saw you coud not overcome him
with scripture) that you should have strycken hi^ upon his pate with the
slyppers.


Parson. If I had not feared that an oproare ^nyght have risen among the comens
/ I should verily have laid the slippers in his face, so that neither Paul no
nor Christ him self should have swepte it from him in three days, for all that
he trusts so much in them.


Katheryn. I marvel greatly how it comes that the say people are so learned.


Parson. If thou will know it, I shall tell i^ the. The cause is that the
spiritualty is no more regarded. Here before times did our holy father the pope
of Rome with his by^shops forbydde such heretics as Luther is, according to
the spiritual law and compelled them to recant, like Joan hus was served at
constance. If men did now compel these preachers of the Gospel to hold their
Peace, then should i^ be as good as ever it was, and then should the
spiritualty be honored, but when we go about to cause them to hold their
peace, then will they inmediatly dyspute with the pope and Bishops, which is a
thing that never was heard in the world before, that such vile parsonnes
should dyspute with the most holiest father which are not worthy to speak to
his holmes, but it shall shortly take an end. Although these preachers will
not hold their peace, they shall be compelled to hold their peace, for all
that they lay Saynes Paulles writing before them / and though they had Paul's
sword also, yet must they lie down and not so much as ones kycke, when it
pleases ones the Holy Father of Rome, then must the lay people hold their
peace also, and then shall we come to our former worthynes and prystyne honor.


Katheryn. Verily Sir It were very good, for every man dispiseth and mocketh
with you like the shomaker did even now.


parson. Hertofore should such one have been excommunicate, but now must we
both hear and learn of the lay People* like the pharisees did of Christ,
good katherin I pray the call Johan our coke, he uses much to read in the
Bible, perchance he shall declare the scripture better then I^ he must seek me
some sentences out of the scripture.


Katheryn. Johan Johan / come to my master.


Johan. Honorable sir what is your pleasure?


Parson. Our shomaker has vexed me very long and has showed me much^ out of
the bible, like the manner of the Lutherians is / ye must seek me out some
Chapter that I may know if he have said right or no, that I might conui^^^
him ^y scripture.


The coke. Ye ought with right to know it your self, for you have long
helped to examine the anointed.

To that we use but the doctrine of scoles / and that which has been written
and made by men and very lyttel the spirytual law, which the holy fathers have
concluded in the councelles.


The coke. It makes no matter of that which the ancient fathers have
concluded in the co^^ell and what men (which are comme in afterward) have
written, when the same law doctrine and writtyng is not out of y^ word and
spirit of God. For the Prophets. Apostles and Euangelystes were men also.


Parson. Ergo they might also err, but the Lutheryans will not believe it.


The coke. No, for Peter says. 2. Petri in the first 2. Petri. 1.
Chapter. That to prophet in the scripture has any ^^y^ate interpre^acion. For
the scripture came never by will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by ^he holygost. The false prophets, which bring many evil sects
in that sign^fieth ^^en your spiritual estate, order, rule, and all the
muincyons of men (without any ^^^rde of God) where with you daly go about.


Parson. That is not spoken of us, but of our ancient old predecessors ano
sorego^rs.


The coke. O ye foles and sloth in heart to believe Luke. 24.
all that the prophets have spoken.


Katheryn. Hark Master, does the cock bydde you Crow? ye would not suffer me
to tell it you.


Parson. O thou lowsy vyllayn, will thou now teach me? thou art also one of
Luthers knaves, get the out of the doors, and come no more into my house, thou
unshamefast beast I counsel it the for best.


Shomaker. Ha ha ha / I perceive it greueth yo^ yet / that the shomaker has
stopped so well your mouth, left it not be so great wonder unto you, for God
suffered (in the old Testament) sheapardes to declare his word, even so now
must ye pharezees, and shauelynges be taught of shomakers and robblers / yea
the very stones shall call it in to your ears: fareye well sir domine.


Katheryn. I maruayle that you can take the pain to speak to such Rude
beasts, they neither regard you nor yet your holy ointment.


Parso^. I shall keep me from him well enough, thou wicked and excommunycate
knave take heed of thy fire / now I will go to the Church, and go you ^o the
Market and buy us a dosen of good quayles / for the chapleyn of my most
reverend Lord the bishop shall dyne here with more other gentlemen, we
will keep a banquet, now Carye the bible out of the parlour, and look if the
dyse are in the tables* and provide us of a fair pair of cards or two.


Katherin. It shall be done, Sir, will ye come home anon after the procession be
done*


Parson. Yea, look the meat be ready.


Katheryn. yea forsothe Sir


Amen.

