RESVRGENDVM.

A NOTABLE SERMON CONCERNING THE RESVRrection, preached not long since at the
Court, by L. S.

We have here no continuing City; but we seek one to come. Hebr. chap. 13.
verse 14.

Resurget iustus, vt iudicet: peccator, vt iudicetur: impius, vt sine iudicio
puniatur. IW
printer's device of John Wolf

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1593.

The Printer to the Reader.
I Send thee here (gentle Reader) a Sermon, for style eloquent, for order
methodicall, and for substance of matter, right heavenly: heartily praying thee
(even for thine own souls health) to vouchsafe the reading thereof. Taken it
was not from the Preachers mouth by any fond or new found Characterisme
(which to the great prejudice of some vvorthie and learned men, has of late
very pitifully blemished some part of their labors this way, with
intolerable mutilations): but set down at their desire, who might herein
command, by the Authors own pen: and indicted (as I verily persuade my self)
by special instinct of the holy Ghost. And surely the doctrine of this Sermon
is such, as I make no doubt at all, but it vvil be held to be most needful and
necessary, especially for these desperate times of ours: wherein amongst other
most erroneous sects which rent in pieces the coat of Christ, and the unity
of his Church, that one of the Saduces (who say there is no resurrection) is
not perhaps of all other the least embraced. With this sort of hel-hounds this
godly Sermon (though not of purpose) does chiefly encounter, and with
invincible arguments beats them down flat to the ground: assuring all flesh
of that great and general Resurrection, which every true Christian is bound
both in heart to believe, and with his mouth to confess: howsoever the
profane Atheist in the greatness of his vain and wicked imaginations may
otherwise fancy to himself, not without his own remediless damnation,
unless in time he do repent him of his sin. And would to God many such
alarums as this, might daily be rong and sounded into our ears: that (if it
were possible) every Christian might have as deep an impression, and be no
less affected with the continual cogitation and remembrance of our
resurrection at the last day, then that godly father S. Jerome seemed to be,
who said, Whether I eat or drink, whether I sleep or wake, or what thing
else so ever I do: me thinks I hear a trumpet always sounding thus in mine
ears: Arise you dead, and come unto judgment. And so (gentle Reader) I leave
thee to the grace of God.

A NOTABLE SERMON CONCERNING THE RESVRrection, preached not long since at the
Court by L. S.
Philip. 3.20.21. 20 But our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we
look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ.

21 Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the vvorking whereby he is able even to subdue
all things unto him self.


THose teachers of Gods truth, whose works be not answerable to the word, are
fitly compared to Mercuries, the images in the streets, which point the right
way to other men, but stand still and walk not the^ selves: or to the stage
player, who speaking of the earth, pointed to heaven, and meaning the heaven,
pointed to the earth, and manu commisit soloecismum. Such have the voice of
Jacob but the hands of Esau: of such the Apostle with tears exhorts the
Philippians to beware: in the 18. verse of the third chapter. And that they may
the better be known, he sets down their properties, and painteth them out
in their colors: as that they be enemies to the cross of Christ, their belly
is their God, they glory in their shame, they are earthly minded.

But such as build with both hands the church of God, that is, by sound
doctrine and holy life: such as have Vrim and Thummim, brightness of knowledge
and integrity of conversation: such as go armed before their brethren, as
Ruben and Gad, and half Manasses did, not to be touched with error in faith
or deformity in life: these be good guides to follow, and sure load stars to
direct our course. Amongst which Paul with a good conscience places him self
and such as be like him: setting down in this place their conversation to be
heavenly. And good cause why: for that there is their Savior, and that thence
they long for him: whose coming shall not be frutelesse to them: for he shall
change their bodies from such base infirmity as now they are in, to such
glory as his body is clothed withal. Which may not be thought incredible,
because his will and power which subdueth all things, shall bring this to pass.

In the farther unfolding of which words the Apostle puts in my hands these
two principal things to deliver unto you. First, the change that is in the
souls of the godly in this life. Secondly the change that shall be in their
bodies after this life.

In the former there be these points to be handled, That their conversation is
not earthly but in heaven. The cause that draws them thither, the Lord Jesus
Christ. A longing and expectation of his coming.


In the change that shall be of the body we are to consider What our bodies are
now. They are vile. What they shall be then. Like the glorious body of
Christ. The causes which bring this to pass. The will of God, and his mighty
power.


These be the joints and parts of this present Scripture, whereof I will speak
as the time shall permit me: your Honorable patience hear me: the Apostle
direct me; and God shall assist me with his grace.

Saint Augustine parts all the people in the world into two companies: the
synagogue of Satan, and the Church of God: into Babylon and Jerusalem: into
the sons of the earth, and the Citizens of heaven. In which now are all the
godly having their conversation in heaven: that is, behauing them selves as
free Burgesses of Jerusalem which is above.

Many Cities in the world have laws and customs differing one from another,
yet not so contrary, but one may enjoy freedom of diverse at once. But heaven
and earth have so continual and so unreconcilable variance as no peace can be
compounded between them. For he that is free to the one, must be disfranchized
in the other: he that is friend to the one, must be foe to the other: he that
has given his faith to the one, must swear against the other. It is as
possible for light to agree with darkness, for life to be friends with death,
for the Ark of God and the idol Dagon to lodge quietly in one place, as for a
man to serve God and Mammon: to be true to the Lord and the world: to be free
Denison beneath and above, to have an earthly and a heavenly conversation.

Therefore Elias does sharply reprove the people of Israel for halting
between two opinions, in following the Lord, and going after Baall. 3. Reg.
18.21.

The Samaritans for fear of Lions which devoured them, had a Priest sent unto
them to teach them the true service of God, yet withal they retained their old
superstition and affection to their native Idolles, and so became Mungrelles in
religion, neither faithful worshippers of the true God, nor kind followers of
their false gods. 4. Reg. 17.33.

Naman the Syrian, after he was cleansed of his leprosy, made a vow to offer
incense or sacrifice to none but unto the Lord: yet he will needs go with his
Master into the house of Rimmon, whereby he may keep the kings favor, keep
his authority, continue his honor, enjoy his wealth, and this is to seek to
reconcile heaven and earth together. 4. Reg. 5.18.

Nicodemus his case was much like, who would gladly be a Disciple of Christ,
yet comes to him by night, that he might not loose his credit of the world.
Ioh. 3.2.

Matthew. 19.10. There came a young man to Christ, very desirous to know what
conversation to use in earth, that he might obtain eternal life in heaven.
Our Savior lets him see the way to obedience of the commandments: Thou
shall not steal: thou shall not kill, etc. Says the young man, If this be all
I am in good case: all these have I observed from my youth. Christ meaning to
sift him, and to shake him out of the rags of hypocrisy, wills him to sell
all, and to give to the poor, etc. When he heard this, the case was altered,
and he went away sorry that he could not hold his possessions and Christ
together. This young man is now become old and a grandfather of many children
in these days, who will be thought to be Egles in affection to soar aloft,
and yet are snailes with their houses upon their backs, and creep upon the
earth.

These have squinting eyes, with the one looking at the heavens: with the other
beholding the earth: these be outlawes who are faithful to no common wealth,
indifferent men in factions, who favor no side: these be such cakes as the
Prophet Oseas speaks of, baked up upon the one side, and raw upon the other,
neither hot nor cold, and therefore to be spued out of the mouth of God.

In deed they are earthly minded, but in show heavenly affected: their
tongues and countenance, their words and looks are holy: but their hearts
and hands, their affections and actions are worldly. The mark and brand of the
flesh can not more fitly be set upon any, then upon many who carry a zeal of
holy profession. Let many ask their own hearts whether I say truth, and they
shall receive answer, I lie not. They must confess, that they are trees full
of leaves, but void of fruit: dunghilles covered with snow, white without and
foul within.

The case of the fox is more worth then his carcass, and the profession of
these men something to be esteemed: but the body of their behavior is vile and
nothing worth. They are painted graves: in truth they be citizens of the world,
though in show they pretend this (...), this heavenly conversation.

But the true servants of God, although in infirmity without perfection, yet
in sincerity without dissimulation, in mind and affection are heavenly, and
have their conversation as citizens of Jerusalem which is above: they
acknowledge them selves to be pilgrims and strangers, having here no abiding
city, but look for one, whose maker and builder is God. They are in the
world, but not of the world: they use the world as though they used it not:
they do esteem their houses as Innes to rest in, not as mansions to dwell in
for ever: they know that all the manifold graces of God in the mind, in the
body, without the body, are taken of their Master, and they but stewards
thereof.

They use all worldly commodities as staves in their hands, which they will set
down at the last step of their journey: or as oars to row with, which
readily they will leave when they come to the haven where they would be. Their
understanding is lightened with Gods truth: their affections are strengthened
by his will: their actions are reformed by his word. They look not back with
delight to their old sins, as Lots wife to Sodom, nor return with their
hearts to Egypt again with the murmuring Israelites, neither wish they to
tarry on this side Iordane without the land of promise, as Ruben and Gad, and
half Manasses did: but as Daniel opened his windows toward Jerusalem, so they
lift up their eyes to heaven, and send thither their sighs and groans in
adversity, testifying that all their refuge is there: and lift up their voices
with praise when matters go well with them, confessing that all good gifts come
from above.

As the Egle casts her bil and renueth her youth, and as the snake strippeth
of her skin and becomes smooth; so they leave the rotten rags of Adams
corruption, and put on the innocence of Christ, which is the wedding garment
wherewith unless we be clothed, we shall be shut out from the marriage feast.
If God threaten, they tremble, if he show forth his loving countenance, they
are cheered at the heart: if he teach, they give diligent attendance: if he
correct, they humble them selves. They labor in worldly causes, but not with
worldly affections: they give obedience to lawful rulers, not as to men, but
as to the lieutenants of God: they walk upon the earth with the feet of their
bodies, but in their desires, which are the feet or rather the wings of the
mind, they are conversant in heaven.

The works of darkness are wearisome unto them, because they are children of
the light: the fruits of the flesh are loathsome to them, because God has
renewed the^ by his spirit: the freedom of Gods adoption is most sweet unto
them, having escaped the slavery of Satan.

Whatsoever is purely good, they desire it with their whole heart: what is
merely evil, they hate it with perfect hatred: things indifferent, which are
good or evil as they are used or abused, in them they are careful to make
profit, and heedfull not to offend: in all things they first seek the glory
of God, and next their own salvation.

This is the narrow way that leads to life: this is the delight of Gods
Saints in earth: this is to have a heavenly conversation: which may not be
thought a matter of device or imagination, as if no such were to be found, like
Platoes common wealth, or Zenophons king, some (...) of a heavenly conversation.

I said at the first, that none have it in perfection, but every one less or
more must have it without dissimulation. For none are perfect in this life: the
brightest fire has some smoke, the cleerest water some mudde.

The face of Venus had a mole: the most heavenly affection has some infection
of the earth. Noah the seed of the second world and the relic of the first,
was yet overtaken with wine: Lot was a righteous man, yet foully defiled with
incest: David a man after Gods own heart, yet had he not small slips but
gross falls: Solomon a wise king, yet bewitched with women: Peter a great
Apostle yet an Apostata for a time.

But why do I upbraid the naked infirmities of the fathers, seeing all flesh
has corrupted his ways, and none can say, my heart is clean or my hands
innocent. And yet God has his flock, although it be but a little one: and
Christ has his Church, his family, although they be few in it. God has his
number in earth which in sincerity without hypocrisy have their conversation
in heaven. Every man may be a witness to himself, to whether number he
belongs, by that rule which S. Augustine has set down in Psalm. 64. Duas
civitates duo faciunt amores: Jerusalem facit amor Dei: Babiloniam amor
saeculi. Interroget ergo se quisque quid amet, and inueniet vnde sit ciuis. Two
loves make two Cities: the love of God, makes Jerusalem; the love of the
world, Babylon.

Therefore let every man deal truly with his own heart, and in even
balances lay all his doings, putting thereto such love as he has. If it be
the love of God, it will lift them up, and show them to be heavenly: if the love
of the world set them a work, it will bewray their conversation to be of the
earth. To execute justice with a straight hand, to cherish virtue, to root up
vice, to foster religion, to banish superstition, to do any good, to eschew any
evil, for any other cause but in love and obedience unto God, is not to have
an heavenly but an earthly conversation.

The spider of a dry slime which comes off her body, weaueth her web, and
sets her nets to take the fly which is her food: and many times when
curiously she has finished her work, a blast of wind takes her and it away:
so the love of the world causes many to weary their bodies, trouble their
wits, break their sleep, to set nets for commodities which are but small,
and by the last breath of our life carried away. The love of the world which
rules in us by corruption of nature, and custom of life, withdraws us from
such conversation as is heavenly: whereas the love of God if it be but as a
grain of mustard seed, does season all our doings, and clears them from
earthly corruption.

Therefore let every man as he grows in years, so go forward in goodness,
increase in faith, in knowledge, in virtue, in the love of God: decrease in
ignorance, in infidelity, in vice, in the love of the world. As our age and
gray hairs come on, so let our old conversation vanish away, putting on the
new man in holiness of behavior: the nearer we come to our heavenly country,
to wish and desire it the more. For as the child in the womb is more quick and
strong the nearer the time of birth comes: so it should be with us. For as
Chrysostom says, Nos sumus in mundo vt puellus in vtero: and happy are they
that are daily more quick and strong in godliness of life, that may with a
good conscience say as Paul does here, Our conversation or city like
behavior is in heaven.

The cause which draws up men's hearts in desire and affection to heaven, is
the savior the Lord Jesus Christ. The brazen serpent was lift up in the
wilderness, that the people being stong might be healed and live: the son of
man is lifted upon the cross, lifted up and set in the view of all men by the
preaching of the Gospel: and by his glorious ascension into heaven, draws
all their hearts to him that look for salvation in him: they fear him as
their Lord, love him as their Jesus, reverence him as their Christ: they kiss
him as their Savior, that find and feel by the seal of Gods spirit, that God
has made him Christ, appointed him and anointed him to be a Lord and king to
govern them, a Priest to sacrifice him self for them, a Prophet to teach and
instruct them.

What greater danger then to have our cogitations and affections as traitors
and rebels to work treason within us, and to conspire our destruction? and
what happier benefit, then to have them tamed, changed, and made pliable in
obedience to an heavenly government? This profit Christ works in his people,
being their Lord to rule them, and this kingdom we pray for daily to come unto
us.

What greater discomfort then to lie in darkness, and to live in ignorance?
and what sweeter mercy, then to have our eyes opened, and the brightness of
heavenly knowledge to shine about us? This commodity our Savior bestows
upon us, and is made Christ our Prophet for this end.

No peril is so fearful as to be out of Gods favor, nor blessing so
cheerful as to be at peace with him. Our Savior in love has given him self
for us a sweet smelling sacrifice, and in him the Father is pleased with us.

Daniel was in great danger among the Lions: yet his body could but be hurt,
for his soul was comforted in that he suffered for the Lord: but mankind was
in miserable plight being justly condemned body and soul into hell. Christ
has reached forth his hand, and drawn us out of the jaws of the Lion, and is
become a Jesus, a Savior unto us.

Therefore seeing as Christ is the mine where all these treasures lie hid, the
jewel house where all these pearls are heavenly government, he is the Lord:
heavenly instruction, he is Christ a Prophet: heavenly reconciliation, he is
Christ a Priest: heavenly redemption, he is Jesus a Savior. It is no marvel
though the hearts of Gods children be with him, who has in store all these
treasures for them. The merchant has his mind in those places where his goods
are, and whence he hops for commodity. The husbandmans heart is in the
harvest, which is the end of his labor and the hope of his pain. Profit will
carry men's desires very far, even through the world, yea to heaven: and
happy are they which venture the farthest, for in this life there is no true
treasure to be found.

The mind of man is wider then the world, and nothing in the world can fill
it. Nay the mo worldly things that are heaped into it, the more it retcheth as
whitleather, and is more void and empty. Few things will suffice the body:
but all is not enough to satisfy the mind, as Philip the king of Macedonia
confesses of himself: who in wrestling took a fall upon the sand, and
rising, looked upon the place, where he might see the print which his body had
made to be compassed in a small piece of earth: where the whole world was too
little for his covetous mind. For so he speaks of him self.

The ambitious man which climeth to honor, the higher he is, the higher he
would be, he still builds upwards. Nemrods tower is too low for him, and yet
it was high 1174. paces. The pride of Lucifer which was amongst the falling
Angels in heaven, is now found among the sons of men in the earth.

The voluptuous man is like him who has the dropsy: the more he drinks, the
more he desires: he would lie deeper and longer with the swine in the mire.

The covetous man (as the grave) never says there is enough. Gods good gifts
are without use buried in him. His arc and his chest may be filled, but his
heart in the chest of his body can never be satisfied. Honor, profit,
pleasure, no earthly thing can content the heart of man. It is only this Lord,
this Savior, this Christ, which draws men's hearts to heaven, and there fully
satisfies them.

The Israelites in the wilderness did eat Manna and drank of the water out
of the rock, but hungered and thirsted, and died in the end. But they which are
fed with the true bread that came down from heaven, and drink of the water of
life, they shall never be more a thirst, but shall have eternal life. Christ
Jesus is the euerflowing and ouerflowing well. Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst for him, for they shall be satisfied in him: he is the pearl for which
we must sell all and buy him. He is our head, and with the serpent we must be
wise to suffer loss in our bodies, in our goods, in our fame, in our
liberties, in our lives, so that we keep our head safe.

Aeneas when Troy was won, having a grant (as all the citizens had) to carry
away some one chief thing, which he made best account of, chose, and took
away Patrios Poenates, the gods of his country: preferring them before his
father, his goods, or any other thing which might be of price with him. Which
action of his, may teach us in our desires and affections, to make choice of
Christ, and lift up our hearts to him. He requires in the Gospel, to be
preferred before those things, which otherwise be of most value with us. He
that does not forsake father and mother is not worthy of me. He would not
suffer one whom he called, to take his leave of his friends at home, nor permit
another to bury his father, a work of humanity and piety.

Hieronimus ad Heliodorum has a worthy judgment agreeable to this: licet a
collo paruulus pendeat infans: licet vbera quibus te nutrierat, ostendat matter:
licet in limine iaceat pater, vt te a Christo retardent: abijciatur infans,
contemn matrem, calcandus est pater: solum est pietatis genus in his fuisse
crudelem. If thy young child hang about thy neck: if thy mother show her
breasts wherewith she nursed thee, if thy father lie in the door to stay thee
from following of Christ: cast from thee thy child, contemn thy mother, tread
upon thy father: ad Christi vexillum vola, fly to the banner of Christ to be
his soldier and servant: it is piety to be cruel in this case.

Glaucus carries the bell among all fools for changing his golden armor for
brazen harness. The Israelites lothed Manna, and wished the onions and
garlic, the gross diet of Egypt. The Gergesens were more grieved for the
loss of their swine, then glad of the presence of Christ: nay they desire him
to depart out of their coasts. And all the sons of the earth these Terrigenae
fratres may with the Athenians give for their badge the grasshopper, which is
bred, lives and dies in the same ground: so their whole desire both in life
and death is in earth: and as the grasshopper has wings, but flies not,
sometimes she hoppeth upward a little, but presently falls to the earth
again: so they have some light, and short motions to goodness, but they
return to their old affections of the world, their portion is only in this
life: for they love vanity more then truth, dross then gold, earth then
heaven, the world then him that made and redeemed the world, riches that
rusteth, before treasure that lasts, trash and pelf, not true wealth which
makes happy, any earthly uncertainty before this Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ, the only author of all felicity.

Those fowls that feed grossly never fly high: and they which feed their
hearts with things below, can not have their affections in heaven. The Sun
draws out of the sea the clearest water, leaving the gross and dregs behind,
which some think is the cause of the saltness of the sea: so the son of God
draws up the hearts of them that are pure, but leaves below the earthly
minded.

If Christ be dear unto us, if the day star be risen in our hearts, if we
find in our souls that Christ is a Lord, a Jesus, a Savior; if the power of
these offices take place in our consciences, it cannot be but our hearts shall be
with him. Gods spirit works this confession in us, that with feeling we may
say the Lord is Jesus, as Paul writes, 1. Cor. 12.3. To speak the words
without sense thereof is to no use. The parrot utters words, but knows no
meaning: but the godly do find with joy, that Christ is the way by truth to
life: the ladder by which they ascend to heaven: the good shepherd by whom
they are safe: the hen under whose wings they rest quietly. In him is their
health, wealth, joy, rest, felicity: he is their treasure, and therefore their
hearts are with him: whereby it comes to pass, that they long for and desire
his coming.

The first coming of Christ was long wished and most desired. The holy fathers
who with the eye of faith a far off saw that day, rejoiced, as Christ
speaks of Abraham: and when he was come, there was great gladness thereof.
The Angel tells the shepherds, that he brought tidings of great joy to all
people. The same night that he was borne there was great light, in token of
comfort: but at his death there was darkness upon the day, in sign of sorrow.
The Sun put on his mourning garment, and was ashamed to look upon that
cruelty, which the sons of men were not afraid to commit. If that first
coming of Christ was so joyful, which was but mean and simple, alone and
solitary: when he came to stand at the bar to be judged: when he gave us but
the earnest of our salvation: thrice more comfortable shall his second coming
be, which shall be in glory, attended upon with ten thousand of Saints and
Angels: when he shall sit him down to judge the wicked, and give full
possession of his kingdom to the elect.

Then shall the sheep be gathered into the fold, never to be in danger of
wandering, or of the wolf: then shall the corn be inned into the barn, never
to be shaken with the wind or weather again: then shall there be a Saboth,
after which no work-day shall follow: then shall be an everlasting Jubilee, when
all bondage shall cease, and the chosen shall enter to their inheritance, which
never shall be taken from them.

The hope of this day holds up the heads of Gods children in the midst of
infinite miseries of this life, and sweeteneth the bitter taste of sundry
afflictions in this world, and breeds a sound joy in the hearts of them that
have eyes to see so far. August. Psalm. 147. Quare non gaudes cum venerit
iudicare te, qui venerit iudicari propter te? Why art thou not joyful of his
coming to judge thee, who came to be judged for thee?

The careless carnal man has no sense or sight of this day: but as the ox
is fatted in the pasture, and the bird sings sweetly, and feeds without
fear: and suddenly the one is carried to the slaughter, the other taken in the
snare: So the worldlings are drowned in security, and seldom think of, much
less wish for the coming of this Savior.

Some few who are stong with sin, and force the wrath of God against them,
do tremble and fear at the remembrance of this day, and wish it might either
not be at all, or else be deferred: and some foolishly persuade themselves that
it is far, and say as the evil servant does in the Gospel, my master will
defer his coming.

But the godly cry, Lord Jesus come quickly: now they are wards, then shall
they come to their own: now they are in the skirmish, then shall they be in
the victory: now they are in the tempestuous sea, then shall they be in the
quiet haven: now in the heat of the day, then shall they be in the rest of the
evening: now in place they are absent from Christ, though in affection they be
present with him: then shall they follow him whither soever he goes: now
their life is hid with Christ, but when Christ shall appear, they also shall
appear with him in glory.

In the eight chapter to the Romans and nineteenth verse, Paul says, that
all the creatures of God have a fervent desire for the revealing of the sons
of God: much more should the sons of God them selves desire that day.

In the fourteenth of the Revelation, the word of God is likened to the sound
of many waters, to the thunder, to harping with harpes, because in the hearers
it has diverse effects, as this particular point which now I have in hand.
For when the coming of Christ to judgment is spoken of, to carnal men it is
an idle sound, as if Neptune were moving the sea: to other it is terrible and
fearful, as if Jupiter threw his thunderbolt amongst them: these be wounded,
but want the medicine. But to the elect it is sweet music, as if Apollo
played upon his harp. I will judge none, but the word which I speak will
touch every one: our own consciences will accuse us as careless, and fearful
of Christ's coming, or excuse us, as joyful thereof. Let every one make choice
of his company, and sit him down with his own fellows: either with the
careless, who never think of it, and their case is dangerous, unless God
revive them: or among the fearful, of whom there is no hope, unless God heal
and cure them: or with the faithful, who are in blessed state, because their
redemption draws near.

This is the change in the souls of the godly, which must go before that
other of the body, as Augustine says, Anima debet prius resurgere per gratiam
quam corpus resurgat ad gloria^: the soul must rise again in newness of life
by the grace of God before the body shall rise to glory. Of the which change
of the body I will now entreat in the same order as I first pointed it out.

Our bodies they are vile, base, full of infirmities: and therefore in the
Scriptures compared to weak and mean things, to grass, to the flower of the
field, Esa. 40. to dust and ashes, Genesis 18.27. to houses of clay, Job. 4.19 to
earthly houses of this tabernacle, 2. Cor. 5.1. Our bodies when they are young,
are weak twigges, when they are old, are doting trees, in the best age as
vessels of glass, yea more brittle as Augustine says: for by careful looking
unto, glasses are kept a long time after their death who made them and used
them. Every creature lives of his own: but man for the maintenance of his
vile body, has a license to beg, and craves the help of every creature.
The Sun lends him light: the air breath: the water drink: the beasts,
birds and fishes, and fowls feed him with their flesh, and cloth him with
their hair, wool and skin. The rich man in the Gospel, who was clothed in
purple, whence had he it but of the sheep fleece for the matter, and of the
shell fish for the color? His fine linen, which now bears all the view
for bands like windmill sails, which may not unfitly be so termed, because
men's heads are carried about with every wind and blast of vanity: whence and
what is it but the bark and as it were the skin of the line and flax. The
silk wherein even mean persons do ruffle, is but the excrements of the
worms. The gold and pearls wherewith this body is attyred, are the guts and
bowels of the earth: yea some do borrow the hair of the dead.

We came naked into this world, and should so continue if we had not help of
the creatures, who lend us their feathers to cover us, as in the end naked we
must return to the earth. They that be come of noble houses, borne of
honorable parents, descended of the kings stock and blood royal, yet have
their bodies vile, as Paul here means, as subject to diseases, as needing all
helps for health, as unable to endure labor, heat, cold, to abide hunger,
thirst, as unable to want sleep, rest, as other men. Therefore if they that be
great have their bodies vile, much more we that be worms and no men.

Alexander was persuaded by flatterers, that he was the son of Jupiter, a god
and no man: but by want of sleep when he was weary, and by smart of body when
he was wounded, confessed that he was mortal as others be.

The same Alexander with a proud mind sailing up Nilus, intending to find the
spring thereof, which yet never could be known, was persuaded by an old man to
return, who gave him a pearl of this property, that being laid in balance
with any metal, it was to heavy, but covering it with dust, a feather was
heavier then it. By which was meant, that Alexander him self, who in his life
time was too strong and mighty for all the world, being dead was as weak as
other men. So that sickness and death, are incident to the greatest of all:
whereby is plain, how vile and base our bodies are.

This cutteth down the pride of all the world, where every man kisseth his
own hands, and thinks too well of him self for his birth, strength, youth,
beauty. We must remember that we were made of the slime of the earth, and must
return to the dust: even the best and highest of us all must confess as Job.
17.13. The grave shall be my house: I shall make my bed in the dark: I shall
say to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worms, you are my sister and
mother.

There is an old riddle, what should be both the mother and the daughter: the
answer is of the ise: but it may as well be said of the bodies of men which are
made of the dust, and shall thither return again.

The consideration that our bodies are vile, should take away that too much
curiosity to attire and pamper the body: which commonly is in them that
think too well of them selves, deeming their bodies to be too good to be fed
but with dainties, or clothed but with costly apparel. The wind may not
blow upon them, nor the sun shine upon them. Our beginning is base of the
earth: our abode here is full of uncertain prosperity or sundry miseries:
our end is most vile. We must die like the beasts as David says Psalm. 49.12.
This is the state of our bodies before they be changed and made like to the
glorious body of Christ.

Some sight of this glory Peter saw when Christ was transfigured, Mat. 17.2.
His face did shine as the sun, and his clothes were white as the light.

Of this Daniell speaks in the twelfe chapter and third verse. They that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that turn many
to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

1. Cor. 15.43. the Apostle says, they rise in incorruption, in glory, in
power, a spiritual body. He that looked upon Jerusalem, as it is described in
the Scriptures, shall see the houses, gates, walls, strong and fair: yet made
of timber, stone, and ordinary matter. But the new Jerusalem in the Revelation
is most glorious, the walls of Iaspir, the foundations of precious stones, the
gates of pearls, the pauement of pure gold. For our capacity the spirit of
God does thus set forth the difference betwixt things in this life, and things
in that better life. And the like difference there is in our bodies.

Now they are but shadows, but then they shall be as the sun: now they are
simplemen, then they shall be as the Angels of God: now they are as clouds,
some higher some lower, some brighter some darker, as men's places differ in the
world, but all hanging uncertainly in the air, then shall they be as the
stars in the heavens: now they are as gold in the mine mingled with the
earth, then they shall be purified seven times in the fire: now our bodies are
vile, then made like the glorious body of Christ.

Then all tears shall be wiped away, all infirmity shall cease, all
deformity shall have an end. There shall be health without sickness, strength
without weakness, pleasure without pain, youth without old age. Rest shall
not be needful, for there shall be no labor, there shall be felicity with
certainty, and life without the reach and gunshot of death: now our bodies are
vile, then like the glorious body of Christ.

Let us not therefore be dismayed in the sundry dangers: nor let not our
hearts fail and fall in the most grievous sickness of the body, which can
but last for a time, neither can it bring destruction. It may overthrow the
body into the grave, and there death shall have dominion for a season: but at
the last our bodies shall be taken out of the power of death, and made like to
Christ's glorious body.

This account the Martyrs of God have made: Quid si tyrannus sit interfector
corporis mei cum Deus sit susceptor animae, and erit restitutor corporis mei?
Quid si membra laceret inimicus cum capillos annumeret Deus? What if the tyrant
kill my body seeing that God will receive my soul, and will also restore my
body? What if the enemy tear in pieces my members, seeing God has numbered
the hairs of my head? The bloody hand of cruel tyrants may wast and rend a
sunder the bodies of Gods people: but they shall be gathered together again by
the will and power of God: which two causes working together, will perform a
harder matter then this. For if God were willing and not able, or of power but
not willing, then some doubt might be made of this change. But he is both
willing and able to make this change of our vile bodies, to make them like to
the glorious body of Christ.

That God is willing, both authority of Scriptures and reason agreeing
thereunto does warrant unto us. Esa. 26.19. Thy dead men shall live, even with
my body shall they arise: awake and sing ye that sleep in the dust: for thy
deaw is as the deaw of herbs, and the earth shall cast out her dead.

Ezech. 37.14. I will open your graves, and bring you forth of your sepulchers.

Ioh. 5.28. The hour shall come when all they that are in the graves, shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and shall come forth.

1 Thessalonians. 4.14. If we believe that Jesus is dead and risen: even so they that
believe in Jesus will God bring with him.

1. Corinthians. 15. There is a just treatise of this matter, and many reasons
alleged why the dead should rise again. Many mischievous inconveniences and
inconvenient mischiefs do follow the denying or doubting hereof: as that
Christ is not risen: that Paul had preached an untruth: that the people had
believed an untruth: that the Apostles had been false witnesses. Again, that
their sins were not taken away: that the dead are utterly perished: that to
hope in Christ is most miserable. For fiducia Christianorum est resurrectio
mortuorum: the trust of Christians is the resurrection of the dead, as
Tertullian says.

Besides Christ is primitiae resurgentium, the first fruits of them that rise
again: and by his resurrection has sanctified all the elect thereunto.
Whatsoever Adam has lost, Christ has restored: but Adam lost life, and by his
sin brought in death, which Christ has vanquished in his death. Farther, the
beginners in religion, when their death approached, made have to be baptized:
not that their bodies might be washed clean for the grave, but rather cleansed
against the happy day of the resurrection; as Epiphanius in Corinthianos
expounds that point. Lastly, the godly endure persecution to no purpose if
there be no rising again.

The name and nature of death does prove the resurrection. For it is a sleep,
and so named many times in the Scriptures: as 1. Thessal. 4.13. Brethren I
would not have you ignorant concerning them that sleep, that you sorrow not as
they which have no hope. August. epist. 120. cap. 32. Quinque virgins fatuae
and quinque sapientes dormierunt, id est, moriebantur: mors enim in Scripturis
dicitur somnus propter resurrectionem velut euigilationem. The five foolish
virgins and the five wise slept: that is, died: for death in the Scriptures is
called sleep, and in respect of the resurrection, as it were an awaking
again. Death is a sweet sleep without dreams as Socrates named it: not an
everlasting sleep as Secundus the Philosopher said to Adrianus the Emperor. It
may be called a brazen sleep, a strong and a long sleep, for so Homer thinks
of it.

That which Christ spoke of the rulers daughter, may be truly affirmed of all
them that be departed out of this life; that they are not dead, but fallen a
sleep, and at the last day shall rise again. The places of burial for this
cause are called caemeteria, of which men would not have such care if there
should be no resurrection.

Old father Jacob upon his death bed in Egypt, makes his son to bury him
in the holy land: and Joseph at his death gives commandment to his brethren
to carry away his bones. Which desire of theirs was partly to be free from
that idolatrous nation even when they were dead: but chiefly it showed the hope
of this change. Tobias is commended for burying the dead: and Christ said, that
the woman who anointed his body to burial, should be spoken off in all the
world. The men of Iabes Gilead showed mercy upon Saul and Jonathan, in burying
their bodies. Talia pietatis officia ad mortuorum corpora pertinent propter
fidem resurrectionis astruendam. Aug. 1. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 13. Such duties of
godliness do appertain to the dead, in token that we believe the resurrection.

The justice of God requires this, that the bodies of men, having been
partners in well or evil doing with the soul in this life, should be partners
in reward or punishment after this life. The hand which is open to receive
bribes, the foot which is swift to shed blood, the tongue that speaks proud
things, the eyes that behold vanity, the ears that are open doors to let in
unchaste talk, the mind a nest of wicked imaginations, the head that deuiseth
mischief and evil, the heart which boyleth in lust and malicious revenge:
every part with the whole which is a fellow with the soul in sinning, shall
bear company in the punishment. Contrariwise, those bodies which have borne
the heat and burden of the day: shall have part of the penie and wages.

The Hebrew Doctors have made plain this by a parable devised in this sort: A
man planted a vineyard, and having cause to go from home, was careful to leave
such watchmen as might keep it safe from strangers, and such as should not
deceive him them selves: therefore he appointed two, the one was blind, but
strong of his limbs, the other had his sight but was a creeple. In the absence
of their master, they conferred how to deceive him: and craftily the blind
took the lame man upon his back, and got of the fruit. At the return of
their Master, he found out their subtilty, that they had joined their labor
together, and so he punished them both together.

Man stands of two parts: the body is blind, but strong to commit sin: the
soul has his sight and knowledge, but unable to work outward wickedness:
but both help forward to sin, and therefore in justice must abide the
punishment. 2. Cor. 4.18. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
God, that every man may receive the things which he has done in his body
whether they be good or evil.

The infinite goodness of God to his people, nor the up heaped measure of his
severity against the ungodly, could not be showed, if this change should not
be. For now the joy of the elect and pain of the wicked, is but as a dream to
that which shall be. Esa. 61.7. For your shame you shall receive double;
everlasting joy shall be unto you. Which place Lyra and the enterlined gloss
expound of joy of soul and body.

The truth of God cannot stand if this change should not be. For he has
promised to raise us up at the last day, and that not one hair of our head
shall perish: Luke 14. When thou make a feast call the poor, lame, etc. who
cannot reward thee, but it shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. 1. Cor. 15. And lest death
might allege prescription, God has in all times of the world hindered his
possession, and taken from him the body of some, to show that he had title and
right unto them. As in the time of nature he took Enoch: in the time of the
Law, he took away Helias: in the time of Christ, he took our Savior. To
conclude this point, the authority of the Scriptures, the reasons of the
Apostle, the name of death to be sleep, the manner of burial, the justice,
mercy and truth of God: are strong chains to bind us to believe: and are
sure proppes to uphold this maine pillar of our faith, that our bodies shall be
changed. By these it is evident that God is willing as his power is answerable
thereunto.

God has given to his creatures some portion of his power, whereby things are
brought to pass which shadow out this change, which by his own arm he will
bring to pass.

The Lion being long absent from his whelps, because in due time he could not
find his pray, finding them dead, roareth in his cave, and reuiueth them
again. The Pellicane by her blood quickens her young ones. Lactantius
worthily describes the manner of the Phoenix death and birth again out of her
own ashes.

The fire lies hid in the flint stone, yet a small force will make it appear.
The sun sets and rises again: the moon waineth, and renueth her light:
trees are cut down, yet they spring afresh: the herbs wither in the winter
season, but are green again in the summer time. The whole course of nature
tells us that we shall die, and puts us in hope of our rising again. Our
nails being pared, our hair being cut off, yet they increase and grow
again. If the dead part of our body be restored by the ordinary power of God
in nature: much more shall the bodies of men be restored by the mighty power
of God.

What if our bodies be consumed to ashes in the fire, dried in show to nothing
in the air, rotten to dust in the earth, swallowed up of fishes in the sea,
those fishes taken and eaten of men, those men devoured of wild beasts, those
beasts made a pray to ravenous fowls: Disperse as far as may be by
imagination, the parts of man's body: yet shall this mighty power of God call
them together again. Aug. de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 22. cap. 20. Absit vt aliquis
sinus naturae ita recipiat aliquid subtractum a sensibus nostris, vt omnino
creatoris aut lateat scientiam, aut effugiat potestatem. God forbid that any
secret place should be thought so to hide any thing removed from our senses,
that it can either be kept from the knowledge of the creator, or avoid his
power. For this cause the sea is said to give up her dead, Apoc. 20.13. because
the bodies that perish there, are least like to be restored.

But look how easy it is for the husbandman by his servants to gather the
wheat into his barn: so easy it is for God by his Angels, to bring all
people before him.

The potter can make a new vessel of the same lump of clay if the first
fashion dislike him: much more is God able, out of their dust to raise again
our dead bodies. As the Captain by the sound of his trumpet does awake his
soldiers: so the trumpe shall blow, and the dead shall rise: for all shall
hear that great voice, whereof Chrysostom thus speaks: Vere vox magna est
quae petras scindit, monumenta frangit, vniuersos mortuos resurgere facit, and
ad iudicium ire compellit. It is surely a great or strong voice, that cleaves
the rocks, that breaks tombs, that raises the dead, and that draws men to
judgment.

Shall napkins be brought from Paul's body to the sick, and diseases depart
from them: shall the shadow of Peter help the weak and sick: shall Elizeus
think by sending his staff to revive the Sunamites son: shall the said
Elizeus bones give life to a dead corpse cast into his grave? And shall not the
mighty power of God change these vile bodies, and make them like the glorious
body of Christ?

Aarons rod had leaves, bloomes and almonds: Moses staff was made a living
serpent: Sara her dead womb was mother to a son. These says Epiphanius lib.
1. haeres. 9. are some tokens of the resurrection. The grave may be the mother
of the sons of the resurrection, having this great power of God to strengthen
it.

The Behemoth is a huge beast upon the land: his bones are like staves of
brass, and his little bones are like staves of iron: the trees and reeds are
too low to cover him: the river Jordan seems not enough for him to drink.
The Leuiathan is a monstrous fish in the sea: out of his mouth go sparks and
lamps of fire: his heart is as strong as the stone, and as hard as the nether
millstone: he esteems brass as straw, and iron as rotten wood. Job. 40.

If there be such power in the creatures, far more in the creator. Christ
commands the winds and the sea, and they obey him: he charge a legion of
unclean spirits, and they depart at his word: he wrastleth with death and
takes a fall, and is carried prisoner into the grave, which is the strongest
hold and castle of death: but he bursteth his bands, and breaks open the
gates, and takes away the power of death, and will in the end utterly vanquish
it.

Christ raised the rulers daughter in the house, and the widows son carried
out to be buried, and Lazarus which had lain four days in the grave. For with
him it is all one to restore to life, them that have been lately or long dead.
For as the beam of the eye discerns in like space, things that be near and
things far off: so does the power of God in this case. August. Epist. 49.
uses this comparison.

The garments of the Israelites waxed not old, neither were their shoes worn
in 40. years. This was done by the providence of God for that people: neither
shall the bodies of men by death and corruption be so wasted, but the Lord by
his power shall renew them. God can of the stones raise up children unto
Abraham: far more easy is it to raise our bodies again out of their own
dust.

It is possible with God that a cammell or a cable be drawn through the eye of
a needle: therefore death can not shut up the grave so close, but God will and
can draw out thence these our vile bodies, and make them like the glorious
body of Christ.

If one Angel in one night can bring down to death 185000. of the greatest
men in Senacheribs army: shall not infinite thousands of Angels call from
death all the world, having this vanquishing power working with them?

To wind up all: it was harder for God to make woman of the ribbe of man, to
make man of the slime of the earth, to make the earth, the heaven, and all in
them both and between them both of nothing, then to raise up man out of his
own dust: which if our eyes cannot see, nor our understanding conceive, nor
our reason reach unto: yet our faith will apprehend it, being founded upon the
will of God declared in his word, and grounded upon his power showed in his
works. The want of these two foundations was the cause of this error in the
Sadducees: for so Christ reproves them. Do ye not err, not knowing the
Scriptures nor the power of God?

The wise Athenians mocked at Paul when they heard him preach the resurrection:
and Festus said he had over studied him self, and by too much learning was
become mad, when he disputed before him of the same matter. But the godly are
not faithless but believe, as Job confesses: I know that my redeemer lives,
etc. and Martha says of her brother: I know he shall rise at the last day.
For they build their belief upon these two pillars, the will and power of God:
not calling flesh and reason to counsel. For as Augustine ad Volusianum says:
Si ratio quaeritur non erit mirabile: si exemplum poscitur non erit singular.
Demus aliquid posse Deum quod fateamur nos non posse inuestigare: tota ratio
facti in talibus est potentia facientis: If reason be sought, it will not be
strange: if an example be asked, it will not be singular. Let us grant that
God can do some thing the reason whereof we cannot find out: In such things the
whole reason of the deed, is the power of the doer.

The foresight of this change should make us wary to keep clean our bodies:
seeing they must be changed and made like to Christ's glorious body.

The husbandman has great care of that corn which is for his seed: our
bodies are the seed of the resurrection. The huswife will keep sweet and
fair those vessels which are for the table: our bodies are vessels or should
be vessels of sanctification. The Church and temple of God should be kept
clean and comely: our bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost: therefore
should be heedfully looked unto.

This is little thought of, of the oppressor, who is become a Lions den full
of pray and rauine: or of the drunkard, who makes him self a swill-tub: or of
the proud man, who makes his body a painted puppet: or of the luxurious man,
who is a cage of unclean birds, or rather a stable or a stye. We dishonor God
as much by abusing our bodies, as Iehu did the temple of Baal, who made it an
house of the vilest use. God never took pleasure with his Temple of Jerusalem
after it was defiled by the Babylonians, but burnt it down with fire: and he
has in store a more fearful fire if we abuse our bodies.

Therefore let us be careful to use well these cracked and brittle vessels, for
that they must be in better case: now vile, but shall be changed, and made like
the glorious body of Christ: and shall be united to the souls, and receive
that blessed inheritance which God the Father of old has prepared, God the
Son of late has purchased, God the holy Ghost does daily seal in the hearts
of Gods children. To which three persons, one true and everliving God, be all
honor, glory and praise both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

