SACRAE HEPTADES, OR SEVEN PROBLEMS concerning ANTICHRIST.

1. Of his Place. 2. Of his State. 3. Of his Names. 4. Of his Rising. 5. Of his
Reign. 6. Of his words and actions. 7. Of his times.
Necessary to be read and known of all men, who profess Christ Jesus, and
hope to be saved by no other Name.

By G. S.

Mal. 4, 5, 6. Behold I will send you Elias the Prophet, before the coming of
the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And he shall turn the heart of the
fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, least
I come and smite the earth with a curse.

2 These. 2, 3, 4. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not
come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition. Who opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God, and that is worshipped: so that he as God, sits in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

Printed in the year M.D C. XXV.

To all Kings, Princes, and Potentates, especially to King Charles Defendor of
the Faith, and to the King and Queen of Bohemia professing the Faith, and
therefore persecuted. Also to all other Christians, whether Reformed, or Romish.
AMongst all those controversies, which like clouds overcast the Church of
Christ at this present, so that many stumble at noone day as at night, and but
a few are truly resolved of their own aright walking with God, according to
knowledge, there is none more necessary to be generally understood, then that
of Antichrist: both because this Egiptian darkness, which is in the land of
Goshen, proceeds from his enchantments, to hold Pharoh still in the hardness
of heart: and also because the external splendour and glory of his seat,
supported with the countenance of Magical science, bellish unity, carnal
succession, corrupt custom, ragged antiquity, Idolatrous universalitie.
Counterfeit miracles, hypocritical sanctity, stupenduous amplitude, blind
devotion, formidable tyranny, Catholic power, and worldly felicity (as
Salomons throne was with lions cunningly carved) do much dazzle vulgar
judgments, 1 Kings 10, 19, 20.
and amaze the silly Lambs of Christ. But if this Magitian were fully
discovered to be but an Impostor, and only to bumbast his reputation with
lies, forgeries and usurpations (like a spiritual Quack-salver) then the more
that Princes and people had doted upon him, and deified him, the more they
would hate him, Rev. 17, 16, 17.
as those Kings shall, who out of godly indignation, hate, strip, eat the
flesh of the whore, and burn her with fire.

This the learned Limbs of Antichrist understand very well, and therefore
either terrify all men from looking into the book of God, where Antichrist is
described (at least from looking into the Revelation, where he is set out to
the life) or else, as the Scribes and Pharisees did with their corrupt glosses
and Comments made upon the Prophets, darken the coming of Christ, and deny
him being come, putting off the time of their Messiah hitherto, deferring, and
dallying, as the Turks do with their Mahomet, yea fayning his person to be
human only, and his Office temporal, thereby to hold the Jews still in
spiritual Captivity, by causing them to deny the Son of God their Savior:
so do these wave the coming of Antichrist, and with their corrupt glosses,
and misapplications turn the truth of God into a lie, causing the world to
embrace the Son of perdition; by telling them of an Antichrist, that must be
a singular person, and not a succession (as if we designed such a succession,
This they would prove, by the names given him in the singular number, 2 These.
2, 3. As also by the article ^, or ille, being demonstratiue particles. But
Gramarians say that not only proper names, and words that signify individual
things, but names that signify a multitude or succession, nownes appellatiue,
collectiue, and successiue, are both in Greek and Latin expressed in the
singular number, and joined with that demonstratiue particle. As hic populus,
ille rex, in aggregation, succession, or collection. 1 Pet. 2, 17. (...).

Philosopher; say that ^num one, may be taken not only singulatim, but
congregatim, and summatim. And that a thing may be idem numero, not only as
the sun, but as a heap of corn, a flock of sheep, a river, whose parts it
may be may increase or diminish, and be in continual motion and alteration,
some going away, and others coming in place, and yet continue one and the same
singular, heap, flock, river, to which both the singular number, and
demonstratiue particle are joined.

Divinity says, that Antichrist is not only opposed to Christ the Head, who
is one, but to Christians, the body, the members, who are a succession of
kings and priests anointed, or a royal priesthood. 1 Pet. 2, 9. And for the
use of a demonstratiue particle, or the singular number or name they referr us
to 1 Pet. 2, 17. Dan. 2, 38. Thou, O King, art this head of gould. Thou and thy
predecessors, thou and thy successors; though per excellentiam, thou above all
before or after. So 1 Pet. 5, 8. ho Antidicos, not one adversary or one devil
only, but all. Rev. 13, 2. and 2 These. 2, 7. with diverse other places.

Thus neither Grammar, Philosophy, nor Divinity will teach me, what these new
Roman Pithagorians would force me to believe. But ipse dixit is sufficient in
the schole of Antichrist, to silence not only his scholars, but Grammar
rules, and the Logical rules of reason, and the Scripture, yea Christ himself.
But he that will not hear Christ, Christ will not hear him, though he cry
Lord, Lord never so loud.


as did not admit and contain singulars) a Jew, and perhaps, of the Tribe
of Dan, the son of a Devil, or of an Incubus, of a virgin or of a Whore, or
of some body: that he shall reign three years and an half, sit in the
Temple of God in Jerusalem, kill Enoch and Elias, with much other strange
legionarie stuff, concerning Antichrist, his person, office, Reign, war,
and overthrow.

And least men should examine, and so find their falsehood, they obtrude these
opinions aforehand upon the Church, to be believed as Articles of Faith, by all
their members, viz. That the Church is for the Head, or principal part,
Romish, and so particular: for the body, Catholic. That the Pope is the Head
of the Church, and so as Head of the Church, Judge of the Scripture: and the
only true expounder of it: having that infallible and universal spirit, which
directs the whole in all truth. That his seat is the Rock immovable, to which
in all storms the shipwrackt soul should resort for safeguard. That Salvation
is no where else to be found. And that his Decrees are to be believed, and
obeyed, not to be questioned, or examined in the least.

Lo, thus he has made sure not to be discovered, except, out of good nature,
he will confess himself to be the thief, and restore the stolen goods to
the right owner. But as the acknowledgement of error, and of injury, is not to
be expected from him or his, who love the world, the pomp, glory, and power
thereof, a little too well, to resign their Soveraigntie: So in all these
courses, whilst he thinks cunningly to hide himself, he bewrayes himself the
more to be ANTICHRIST unto such as have spiritual eyes, illuminated by grace
from above, to discern truth from falsehood.

Thus you see their Egiptian wisdom, and what pains they take with those
Magical Iuglers, Iannes and Iambres, 2 Timothy 3, 8.
to conceal themselves, and how much it concerns them so to do.

On the other side, it concerns us, with Moses to rely upon the Hebrew
simplicity and sincerity for our salvation, but withal to be learned in all
the Egiptian wisdom, Act. 7, 22.
the better to discover Antichrist his clowdie walking, that so diverse
Controversies may be at an end. For were he fully discovered, then all that
believe in Christ, and love him, and desire his glorious coming, would hate
this Monster, who is like Judas amongst the twelve a counterfeit Apostle,
carrying the bag, an Hypocrite, playing the part of a Vicar, a Deputy, a
Substitute; but from the stage appearing a naked, ragged, beggarly vacabond.
And doubtless, his person being thus discovered, his laws and decrees would
be rejected, and Kings, Princes and people, would cast the Egiptian yoke from
their overgalled necks: Yea such as think, they do now God good service, in
murdering the poor Lambs of Christ in all places for him, would leave him,
come out of his Babylonish profession, and not so much as trade or trucke with
him in the least exchange of those doubtful commodities, or touch any of those
garments spotted with the flesh.

It cannot be denied, but Iesabell was once young, and Chaste and fair: But
this proves not, that she is so now. It cannot now be denied, but that she is
full of wrinckles, and a royal whore; the Mother of fornication; Rev. 2, 20.
fit for all comers; and withal painted, to uphold her rotten reputation.
And we doubt not, but God will stir up some Iehu (zealous perhaps for his
own interest, if not for Gods) to cause her own Eunuchs, those Friars, Monks,
and other Votaries, 2 King. 9, 30
to throw her out of the window, that he may tread her under his horses
feet. And doubtless, as this shall in time come to pass by the powerful
preaching of the word, which shall wast him by degrees; 2 These. 2.
so, as an effect of the word preached, first, the usurped authority of the
Papacy, and Roman Clergy over Kings and Princes, shall be broken, and
reformation shall begin, where deformation came first into the Church. So that
Antichrist shall say, as Hanniball once did: Eadem art qua prius cepimus,
Tarentum amisimus. And this is with Iehu to tread Iesabel under foot.

Bellarmine confesses, that Constantine the Great gave the Palace of
Laterane, Bellarm. li. 2, cap. 17. de Romans Pontif.
and multa alia temporalia, to the Pope, Ditionem tamen spiritualem neque dedit
ullam, neque dare potuit.

So the spiritual dition, made way for the temporal donation, and then was
poison powered into the Church, when the bounty of Princes sought to satisfy
the ambition of Priests. The Priests then grew downwards toward the earth, and
Princes then began to climb upwards, toward heaven: And the coveteous Clergy
finding the faith of few (for the faithful are but few, a very little
flock, and oftentimes not very rich in wool) not to be so fruitful as the
superstition of many, they nourished that profitable and liberal humor by
their uttermost art, and from hence got S. Peter a rich patrimony being dead,
who when he lived, had scarce a house, wherein to hide his head. This temporal
patrimony graced with so holy a patronage, as the reverenced name of S. Peter,
did speedily and mightily increase in all places, especially where superstition
was interteyned in the name and stead of true Religion, and where Clergy men
knew how cunningly to raise questions and quarrels under hand, and then to
intrude themselves as equal arbitrators, and impartial umpires; but ever to
manage and determine all for the advantage of the Catholic cause, as they
called it, and for the ruin of particulars: as it is reported of that Lawyer,
who decided the difference betwixt the lame man and the blind, concerning
their oyster, that each of them should have a shell, and he the meat. Thus
dealing for the Church by pretense (themselves being mostly single and
unmarried, and so unsuspected to trade for the world, and posterity) they had
opportunity to enrich themselves, and their particular fraternities, and to
perform such acts with commendation, because they pretended S. Peter, and the
Church, not themselves, as would have been counted cousenage, treachery,
exaction, oppression, injustice, and perhaps forgerie and Robbery, if
perpetrated by any other persons, or to any other ends. But the general
opinion of their Cause and Persons (supposed and styled sacred) made all pass
current without question or control. Thus in a short time, where they were
lately glad to be graced by Kings; Kings were now glad to be graced by them:
And where Kings had persecuted their predecessors for the truth, they now
persecuted Kings for falsehood; and challenged the investiture of such Princes
by right, upon whom their predecessors, out of the opinion of their piety, and
the superstitious desire to be inaugurated by so blessed an omen, had been
sometimes formerly invited or admitted, to lay their holy hands. Now therefore
they began to cut out large cantles of the earth for their own share, and
made so many sanctuaries, and Cities of refuge, that they encouraged
malefactors, who ought to have represt them, and got well by the bargain
too. For they so mightily grew by this means, that the world, and the wealth
of it was found with Priests; and piety was only found with the poor: the
secular was only regular according to Christ, and the Regular was master of
misrule in all secular affairs: Merchandise, foreign negotiations, and the
Government civil and ecclesiastical, first, by the civil and imperial
laws, after by the Cannon Law, a Law of their own) was wholly moderated, and
managed by them: Kings were made their wards, and deposed for Heretics, as
soon as they once thought themselves of age to rule themselves and their
people aright, without their help: Yea Mars himself was interteyned into
their service, and the Cross of tribulation, faith and patience, which was at
first but a staff in the hand of the Clergy, to support them in their
constant sufferings, was now perverted in the use, and turned upwards, in
prosperity and spiritual pride, and so became a sword in every Clergy man's
hand, to invade and disturb the peace of Christendom: and Confession served,
as a secret rack or torture of Conscience, a kind of holy inquisition, to
find out that sweet sin, and to pardon it, which might be most profitable
to the Church, as having command over the purse of the party peccant. Thus it
grew in time to be rightly called the Sacrament of penance indeed: for if it
had not contrition at the first, yet it ever ended in repentance, though ever a
little too late, and therefore to small purpose for the pennilesse penitent.

The Clergy having by these arts and infinite others (as Idolatry is full
of invention, for he that can once make his Creator can make all other things)
ingrost almost all into their own hands, they made divisions of Kingdoms, and
cut them out into Bishoprics, as all Countries, especially Germany can well
witness. Where the Emperor was shackled with Ecclesiastical Officers of the
Sea of Rome, as with fetters of gold; till the necessity of the papacy, about
the rising up of Luther, forced the Pope, to permit the house of Austria to
grow a little too great, to the lessening of Antichrists immediate authority.
In so much, as now the Papacy is made a servant to the House of Austria, under
a Catholic title: as the Papacy before made both that House, and all others
servants, to increase and support the excessive greatness of that Sea, under
the like Catholic title and pretense. But this was then, and is now a violent
motion, and therefore not perpetual: then permitted and practiced, to prevent
the loss of all, which was justly feared upon probable grounds; and now to
hold what that Sea still possesses, but fears to loose: and to regaine (if
it be possible) what she has lost already. Which if ever she could regaine by
this means, she could then be content to burn the rod of her wrath, or to
wear it out in her work, with whipping others. In the mean time she is
content to make the Spanish kingdom the Catholic sword: so that the Roman
Church may still be the Catholic scabberd to that sword, and draw it, or
sheath it at the Popes pleasure. But I believe, that as by these arts that
Antichristian Sea has ascended up to that superlatiue height, wherein it now
sitts; so it shall loose all, by the same or the like means. For whenever
the world shall be so happy, as to have an understanding Emperor, who knows
his own, and is able to discover, and recover Antichristian usurpations, that
such a man, taking Henry the VIII. of England for a pattern, shall and may
easily do that in Germany, and so consequently in other places, which that
Resolute King, by the advice of the Lord Cromwell, and the example of Cardinal
Wolsey, did in his own dominions. viz.

That King intending to dissolve all Monasteries, made a division of part to
the Nobles and Commons, from whence it first came, and so met no opposition;
The pattern was the Popes own, who made Churchmen Princes, and changed the
title and name of those Lands, which were often by them acquired, and possessed
by ill arts, as if he could have changed the nature thereof, and made them,
what he called them spiritual. The King therefore did but reduce things back
to their right and former order. Here only was the error of that work; that
the King did not restore the Tenths to the constant maintenance of the
ministry; which portion, whether it now belong to the Church or no, jure
divino, I intend not to dispute pro or con: But I dare say, Gods own order
has manifested it to be both competent and convenient for that purpose, beyond
all old exceptions or new inventions, and so proves it to agree with the law of
nature, if not to flow immediately from thence, deserving therefore to live
after the honorable burial of the ceremonial Law, as it breathed long before
it.

Had these things been better ordered, and some Bishoprics broken into lesser
pieces, so that they might have been sit for honorable burdens, but not too
great for the portage of one person, who laden with too much temporal honor
and revenue, as men overgrowne with flesh and fat, become unwealdie and
dishonorable burdens themselves to the Church; then the undertaking had been
absolute. For whether it be fit, that one who will not preach the Gospel,
should have power to silence such as would; that one should have power to
silence a whole Diocese of learned ministers, and a whole Diocese of these,
should not have power to open the mouth of one? That one should have double
honor for the single work; Nay for his wilful idleness, and obstinate
hindering the conscionable work of others: and others no honor, but
conzumelie, and scorn for doing the double work diligently? That one should
have the provender belonging to many laboring oxen for lying in the manger,
and hindering the poor asses from meat: whilst diverse oxen that would tread
out the corn, want come to eat, or corn to tread out, or are muzzeled
whilst they tread? That one should rule a place many miles from his person,
as if he had both an infallible, and infinite spirit: and many should not be
able to rule a petty parish, or to catechize a household without help?
whether this thing be according to the pattern of the Apostolical Hierarchy,
are problemes, which some think fit to be published amongst those of
Antichrist. because it may be doubted, that he who would do thus, would not
perhaps startle at a Cardinals cappe, or the triple Crown, it they were
proffered, or could be compassed easily: and therefore such a man is no fit
instrument to be used against Antichrist, in the pulling down of Babylon, or
to sit for Christ and rule, Object.
upon the top of Sion. Object. But kings and Princes govern by substitutes
far off. Answ. True: But it shall not be so amongst you. Ans. Mat, 20, 26.
Matthew. 20, 25, 26. Take these words of Christ as a Precept to show Bishops
what they should do; or as a prophecy, to show all men the estate of the true
Church what it shall be, it is all one. And doubtless such Princes as shall
hereafter reform, will learn to mend what is amiss, by the sight of other
men's errors: and so whenever God shall bless Germany with an able and
religious Emperor, and shall put it in his heart to reform the Church, it is
but changing those great Bishoprics of Mentz, Tryers, Collen, Munster, and
the rest into absolute Principallities, and making them Hereditarie, where now
they are Elective, and the work is at an end; they will join to uphold their
own interestes, and soon exclude the Papacy, and mince the Prelacie somewhat
finer.

A speedy and certain preparation for this, is the discovery of Antichrist:
and it is the duty of all men therefore that can, to do their best,
according to their talents, in this subject; and amongst others, this learned
Author has done much, and deserves much in this respect of the Church. The
Course he takes by Problemes to handle this controversy, is not as if he
doubted, or any other man need to doubt of the truth; but as it should seem,
being no professed Churchman, he modestly disputes the point, as a man that would
learn himself and others, by asking questions wisely; and withal inquiring,
whether it can be imagined, that any man can be more like Antichrist then the
Pope is; he concludes negatiuely, that none can; and plainly lays down in
every Problem the obstinate absurdities of such, as look for Antichrist, and
believe he shall come, yet cannot now see him to be come; because either he
stands too near them, as a beam in their eyes, and they are part of him;
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; or, they expect him, when he comes,
to be so qualified for public observation, as the Church of Rome has
cunningly, and poetically described him: But such an Antichrist they shall
never see; for the church of Rome did so paint him in policy; not for the
disclosing, but for the concealing, and clowding of his proper and personal
appearance, and diverting the eyes of all men from beholding the right object.
For my part, meeting with this Book in a manuscript, and seeing the profit it
may bring to all, I could do no less, then be a midwife for the edition of
this, since I am not able to be parent, for procreation of the like. And I have
taken the boldness upon me, to dedicate it to no less persons, then to the
Kings and Potentates of the Earth, for it concerns them all especially, above
and more then others, to read, and to understand this Controversy, least they
should be made drunk, or kept drunk; with the dregs of that abominable
cup of Enchantments, wherewith diverse of their forefathers have been
intoxicated, and slept to death; and least they should under the appearance of
Christianitse, countenance and support Antichristianisme, and so thinking to
do Christ good service, persecute his poor members ignorantly. Besides many
of them have suffered much from the hand of Antichrist, and his members. The
Kings of France have been butchered by their instruments, and the kingdom put
in Combustion, by their incendiaries of the Roman Catholic league or party.
Our Queens Father Henry IIII. of renowned memory, must not be forgotten: his
blood is yet too fresh upon their fingers, to be hidden from her Majesty's
eyes; except they force her weak sex (as they have done many of the
masculine gender) to wink; by threatening to dippe their fingers, as deep in
her blood, (which the Lord forefend) if she cast an eye toward her Fathers
Funeral, or so much as inquire whether or no, he dyed by age, or by some
injurious and traitorous hand. Our Kings have been, and are still,
excommunicated, cursed, exposed to slaughter, and deposition by them. The King
and Queen of Bohemia, have been pursued from place to place; and all
Christendom imbroyled with bloody wars for the upholding of Papal
usurpation, against regal Jurisdiction. Other Princes have formerly felt, and
may hereafter feel the strength of his Imperial and Catholic Arms; and
therefore it concerns these also, to know the man of sin, for their own
comfort, that they may the better bear their Crosses, considering from what
head, and hand they come; and that they may with more courage and assurance,
look up toward deliverance, Luke 21, 28.
as Christ has willed them, who at the length will be too hard for Antichrist,
and give a happy issue to all their afflictions.

And as it concerns Princes especially, so it concerns others also, as much as
their salvation may concern them, to know Christ their Savior, and Antichrist
the chief enemy of their Savior, and of their Salvation, from each other;
and therefore I have dedicated it to all Christians. But if any wonder, why in
the Title of the Dedication, I use these words: To all Christians Reformed and
Romish, as if I contradicted my self, in calling the Romish professors
Christians, which in other places I term Antichristians: I answer that the
Pope himself could not be the Antichrist, except he were a Christian, and
took upon him also to be the chief Christian, in external profession. A man
may in diverse respects be a Christian, and an Antichristian at once. The Pope
is baptized, professes the faith in general terms, as Peter did; and thus he
is a Christian, and one of S. Peter's successors, as all other Bishops are; but
as he chalengeth to be head of the Church, universal Bishop, of an infallible
spirit, Judge of the Scripture, etc, he is Antichrist, that is, Rev. 18. Rome,
as head of the church is Babylon, and such as so dwell in it, mystically by
adhering to it, are in Babylon whether they be in Rome or no, and such as
renounce this Babylonish doctrine of Romish supremacy and suprelacie, holding
the true head, which is Christ Jesus alone, those are with out Babylon, though
they dwell in Rome*
for Christ* in show, but against him in truth. So those of the church of
Rome, are Christians in outward profession, but as they adhere to the Pope, as
to the Vicar of Christ, and head of the Church, they are Antichristians: and
such of them as belong to Gods election, are called out of Babylon by the holy
spirit, and may come out from thence, by renouncing the Babylonish doctrine of
the Church of Rome, though for their persons and dwellings they continue in the
same place and city still. And that these Romish Christians may be informed,
and all other Reformed Christians established in the truth, is the end which
the Author proposed to himself in the collection and composition, and I in the
publication of this treatise.

All that I fear is, that both this work, and my own endeavor shall meet
the greatest discouragements from some of those, that should protect and
countenance us: who either from error of judgment, deny the Pope to be
Antichrist, and yet separate from him (at which I wonder) or else out of humane
wisdom and policy, seem still to be in doubt, and will not be resolved, as
fearing a diminution of their worldly greatness and glory, if this truth
should be generally acknowledged. Because they suppose much of their authority
would be found to be built upon the sandy foundation of Antichristian
usurpations. But shall we loose heaven for earth? or look so low, as to bring
temporal respects into the balance with eternal? Can there be no provision
for upholding the honor and countenance of the Clergy, from common contempt,
and for the encouraging and rewarding of learning, but what Antichrist invents
to uphold himself withal? Then let me rather be still poor and despised with
Christ, and accounted ignorant with his Apostles, then rich and respected and
learned with those of Rome: Truth and simplicity are the chief ornaments of
Churchmen, and should be inseparable. Their serpentine wisdom should not be
used for this world: for that natural subtlety, which has no mixture of
doue-like simplicity infused by grace, Christ did not teach to his Apostles:
but Adam and Evah learned it of the old serpent, and having therewith lost
Paradise, left it then, with the wide world to boot, as a Legacy for all
their posterity. I would feign therefore find that simple Christian Policy,
which looks directly forward, to the price of the high calling, Phi. 3, 13, 14
and contents it self with that respect, which follows the work, Romans 2, 29.
whose praise is of God and not of men. If the worlds wages comes with it, I
shall take it as the faithful performance of his gracious promise, who has
wild us, first to seek the kingdom of God; Matthew. 6.32.
and his righteousness, and all needful things for this life, shall be added
unto us.

This is my resolution, and I am resolved besides, that he, who upon those
earthly respects, before mentioned, or any the like humane grounds, and
motives, opposes this book, or the like, does therein sufficiently declare
himself to be Antichristian, and shall need no further eviction or
confutation, then the evidence of his own actions. Kings and Princes therefore
must cast an eye upon such, and they shall soon see all their Council is to
uphold their own earthly commands, for personal respects: a watchword
sufficient for him that is wise, to beware of such, for they are wolves in
sheeps clothing.

And now to conclude, how much are we to magnify the Lord for our King,
Nobles, Clergy, and Commons, met together lately in the high Court of
Parliament, and there so well according, for matter of Religion, that the
Subject no sooner showed his grievance with complaint, but the Sovereign
applied the remedy with compassion. Such a Head shows it self sensible of
the suffering of the feet: and such members will never forget (as they have
protested) thankfulness to such a Head. Thus they are happy in knowing each
other; So that the king having any attempt against Antichrist, need not doubt
the body: And the people fearing the encroachments of Antichrist, need not
doubt to acquaint the Head with their fears. How happy a thing is it to hear
that ecclesiastical corruptions had no backs in either house, nor no son of
Belial there to plead for Baal. It is the belly, and not the conscience, that
speaks in such cases; Whether they be greater friends to scholars and
learning, who provide for a few covetous and ambitious persons; or they that
provide for the general number of careful and con^cionable persons, blind
men may see and judge: what portion had Fulke, Fox, Whitaker, Reynolds,
Perkins, with many others in the Church. Or were not these men learned? Or who
was more learned, painful, and profitable to the Church of Christ, then these?
He that thinks me an enemy to the Bishops for this, is deceived. Nay rather I
wish, that where there is but one Bishop now, there were twenty, so far am I
from schism, or from being Antiepiscopall.
and howsoever of old, such penny-wise Fathers have been applauded, as the
only pillars of the Church, and friends (forsooth) to scholars: yet now the
world knows better, that, as a man cannot fill his mouth, and speak, both at
one time; so they who are most greedy and unsatiable in seeking after offices,
have least leisure and desire to perform the Duties of them. And that both
the Parliament that desired, and his Majesty who granted, and the Clergy
who never opposed the reimployment of silenced Ministers, (who were not
turbulent) did well understand. For these men will be contented with little, and
yet withal will labor to give much contentment in the works of their
vocation: so that if they may have free and peaceable passage, we shall see
Superstition and Idolatry have a greater blow in a few years by their
labors, then in many years before by the unfruitful and unprofitable war
stird up against them, as betwixt Fathers and their children, which gave way to
the contrary humor to increase. And were some of these men well provided for,
and protected in Ireland, I doubt not to say, we should soon see the happy
effect thereof, and that an Army of Priests would do more perhaps, then an
army of secular soldiers; and so settle that kingdom in obedience to Christ,
that we should not fear any invasion or inward motion by Antichrist, or his
instruments in those parts. He that doubts this may look into Scotland, a
place sixt^e years since, as obstinately averse from the faith, as Ireland is
now; where in a few years Popery was wholly rooted up, and scarce a man to be
found, that would profess himself to be a Papist; till these late days, when
the unhappie division betwixt the Clergy gave them opportunity and
encouragement to increase and multiply. It is our charge to conquer the Irish
souls to Christ, as well as the Irish lands and bodies to our selves; and I am
persuaded, God has not prospered our work for our part, because we have had
no greater care to compass his part: If they were Christ's, they would be ours
too, in spite of Rome and Spain: but being Antichrists in affection, their
able bodies are employed as instruments against us in all places, and their
Country used now by Spain, as Scotland of old by France, to divert and
distract our warlike attempts, and to hold us busied at home. Their conversion
would have been the glory of our church government, showing that our Clergy
did not seek themselves, but Christ; as now it is our shame, that whilst the
Romish Clergy have conquered many Countries for Antichrist, in the East and
West Indies, we should neglect a neighbor country, long in our possession,
suffering them still to live in spiritual captivity, under the hands of
ignorance, Idolatry, darkness, and death. But now we have better hope, seeing
the reconcilement of the Fathers to their brethren, and doubt not, but that
will be effected there, which has been performed in England and Scotland
heretofore, by the conscionable, plain, painful, and powerful preaching of
the Gospel; whilst men are not distracted, nor their hearts alienated from
each other, by domestic controversies. For these Church quarrels about
Ceremonies, besides the distraction, do by the scandal hinder the progress of
Religion, causing the enemy to insult in their unity, against our truth,
because they see us divided, and in our divisions pursuing each other more
bitterly, for those things, which we profess to be circumstanciall and
indifferent; then we do them in fundamental controversies: And so they say
truly, we show little charity, and therefore can have no true faith.

The Lord therefore join the hearts of our King, Peers, Clergy, and Commons
in one, to finish this good work which they have begun, to the overthrow of
Antichrist: and bless this work to his full discovery; that Kings, Princes,
Priests and People, may learn to leave him. And so craving pardon for that
capital crime of plaine-speaking, which I have herein used, I end with the
Authors own Epistle, or Preface to the Reader.

Quod a suis olim Lectoribus, petiit, pater doctissimus, id te oratum volo (pie
Lector) ut sicubi me errasse animadvertes, me corrigas: siteipsum, mecum
redeas; ubi pariter cerius es, pergas mecum; ubi pariter haesitas, ores mecum;
ut sic Christianae unitatis and pietatis leges inviolatas teneamus.

THE SVMME OF THE FOLLOWING Discourse: containing Seven Problems concerning
Antichrist, every one resolved into seven Questions, necessary in these times
to be considered.
I. Problem. Concerning the Place of Antichrist, whether it be Rome Christian.
1. Whether Rome be that great city described in the 17. chapter Apoc. 2. Whether
it be the great city where the beast shall make war against the witnesses
of God: which city is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt etc. Apoc. 11. 3.
Whether Rome be Babylon the great, which is mentioned Apoc. 14. 4. Whether it
be the great city spoken of Apoc. 18. 5. Whether it may be understood to be
the place called Armageddon. Apoc. 16. 6. Whether it be the place. noted by the
Apostle to be the Temple of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. Whether it be the mountain of
holiness between the seas. Dan. 11 Summa. If these prophecies do all concur in
Rome Christian, and cannot be understood of any other place. then is Rome
Christian the seat of Antichrist.
II. Problem. Of the State or body Politic of Antichrist whether it be the
state or dominion of Rome.
1. Of the prophecies of Daniel concerning the fourth Beast, and the Prophecies
in the Revelation how they differ, and how they may be reconciled. 2. Whether
the fourth Beast in Daniel do signify the Roman state under Consuls,
Decemvirs, etc. or what else. 3. Whether the first Beast rising out of the Sea
Apoc. 13. do signify the Roman state under Caesar's, or what else. 4. Whether
the Beast in the 17 of the Apoc. do signify the Roman state under Antichrist.
or what else. 5. Whether the little Horn in Daniel do signify Antichrist, or
what else. 6. Whether the second Beast in the 13 of the Apoc. do signify
Antichrist. 7. Whether the woman in the 17 Apoc. do signify Antichrist. Summa.
If these prophecies do concur and be all fulfilled in the Roman state, and the
Governors thereof, and cannot be fulfilled in any other, then is that the
state of Antichrist.
III. Problem. Of the Names of Antichrist.
1. Whether the name of Pontifex Maximus do agree to Antichrist. 2. Whether the
name of Servue servorum do agree to Antichrist. 3. Whether the name of that
Antichrist may be given to the Pope, and to all the succession of Popes, since
the year of our L. 700. 4. Whether the name of Anomos.i. the Lawless, or the
man of sin, may be applied to that succession. 5. Whether the name of the
Son of Perdition may be given to that succession. 6. Whether the name Abaddon
may be given to that succession. 7. Of the numerall names of 666. and how they
are applied to the Pope. Summa. If these names and prophecies do all concur
in the Popes and their succession, and can be truly verified of none other,
then is the Pope ( collective, as it is said, Nomen successionis) That
Antichrist.
IIII. Problem. Of the Rising of Antichrist.
1. How the Monarchy of Antichrist must begin to rise, whether all at once,
or by degrees in tract of time. 2. When it must begin, and whether it must
not begin, before the power of the Emperor be fully removed out of Rome. 3.
When the power of the Emperor began to be removed, and how long it was in
removing. 4. Whether it may stand with the scripture to say, that Antich. must
be a singular person, or whether he must be a monarch successiue. 5. By what
means the Popes did rise to their height of power and supremacy, whether it
was not by sedition and schism. 6. Whether they did not contend and war
against the holy Bishops and Saints of God to get their supremacy. 7. Whether
they did obtein their dominions and supremacy by rebellion and perjurie.
Summa. If all the prophecies concerning the Rising of Antich. be fulfilled in
the Pope successive, and cannot be fulfilled in any other, then is the Pope
successive Antich. and none else can be.
V. Probl. Of the Reign of Antichrist.
1. Whether the Great Whore described Apoc. 17. do signify the state of the
Antichrist regnant. 2. Whether al parts of that description may be applied to
the popes successiue since the year of our Lord 700. 3. Whether the Beast that
was, and is not, and yet is, Apoc. 17. do signify the Pontifex Max. that is,
the Pope of Rome. 4. whether any Jew, Turk, or other person whatsoever has
been supported by so many Nations, Peoples and tongues as the Pope has been
during his supremacy since the said year. 5. whether it be possible, or
likely, that any Jew Turk or other person whatsoever should obtain such
great and inestimable riches, as the Popes have gotten in that time. 6.
whether any Jew, Turk or Pagan ever had or claymed such absolute and
supereminent power to deprive and depose kings and princes by their sentences,
to absolve their subjects from their alledgeance, and to dispense with oaths,
as the Popes have done, and whether it be possible that any Jew, Turk, or
Pagan can obtain such power. 7. whether ever any Turk or Jew pretended or
claymed such absolute supremacy and authority, that if he lead multitudes of
souls caetervatim into hell, yet he was not to be reproved, nor called to
account for it, as the Popes have arrogated: and whether it be probable that
any shall be able to attain to such power hereafter. Summa. If all the
prophecies concerning the Reign of Antich. be fulfilled in the Pope, and
cannot be otherwise, then he is Antich.
VI. Probl. Of the words and actions of Antichrist.
1. Whether any Jew or Turk, or other whatsoever have so much and in so high
degree, blaspheamed God, and our Lord Christ Jesus, as the Pope and his Church
have done since the said year 700: namely, in affirming, that the old and new
Testament have their authority from the Popes decree, and such like. etc. 2.
whether any have caused or procured so many rebellions, Treasons and murders to
be committed, as they have done: and whether it be possible for any in time to
come to do the like. 3. whether any have changed laws so much as the Pope
has done, by his decrees, decretals, pardons, dispensations, Faculties,
Indulgences, etc. and whether any Jew, Turk, or Infidel ever took upon him
such authority, to dispense with sins before hand, and to give indulgence
for sins to be committed, as the Popes have done more then God himself. 4.
whether any have changed times so much as the Popes have done and whether it be
possible for any in time to come to make such changes. viz. by feasts and
fasts, Lents and Jubilees, decretals, dispensations and Calenders. 5. whether
any Jew, Turk or Infidel has erected, or maintained such open and notorious
Fornication, adultery, and Sodomie as the pope has done, and whether it be
possible for any in time to come to do the like. 6. whether any Jew, Turk or
Infidel have so wilfully and obstinately erected and mainteyned so manifold
Idolatry, and so many several Idols as the popes have done: and whether it be
possible for any in time to come to do the like. 7. whether any Jew or Turk
did ever sit in the Temple of God, boasting himself to be God, as the Popes
has done: and whether it be possible for any to do the like, and to be
believed therein, as the Pope has been. Summa. If all the prophecies concerning
the words and actions of Antich. be fulfilled in the Pope, and cannot be
fulfilled in any other, then he is Antichrist.
VII. Probl. Of the times of Antich. how they be fulfilled, and to what Period
they are come.
1. Of the first working of the Mystery of iniquity, how long it continued.
2. Of the time of the rising of Antich. and when it was fulfilled. 3. Of the
Revelation of Antichrist, and how that is fulfilled. 4. Of the signs of the
times of Antich. and how they are fulfilled. 5. Of the times of the reign of
Antich. how long it continued. 6. Of the Consumption of Antich. and to what
point that is come. 7. Of the end and abolition of Antich. which must be by the
brightness of the coming of our L. Christ, who is God blessed for ever. Summa
tot. Si probatur propositum, and non probatur contrarium, quid amplius
desideramus? If all the prophecies of Antich. be fulfilled in the pope, and
cannot be fulfilled otherwise, then the Pope is Antichrist.
Caeli faciem nostis discernere: signa temporum non novistis?

Matt. 16. SACRAE HEPTADES, OR SEVEN PROBLEMS concerning ANTICHRIST.
That the Apocalypse is to be searched.
THose that are taken to be masters of learning, teach us in every subject and
matter proposed, first to ask the question An sit? whether it be, and whether
it be possible to be known, and attained unto; least spending our time in
things impossible or imperceptible, we both loose our labor, and become
ridiculous. The same is taught us by our greatest master, in the parables of
the man intending to build, and the king going to war.

Desiring therefore to find out and discover that great enemy of the Church
of Christ, Antichrist, who it is, Luke 14.
and whether he be come or not, (after the grace and mercy of our Lord and
master Christ Jesus most humbly and devoutly implored, without whom we can do
nothing) I think it not amiss to consider first of the difficulty and
obscurity of the Book of the Apocalypse or Revelation, wherein by the consent
of all learned Christians, Antichrist is understood to be most spoken of, and
his Place, State, Actions, and other circumstances most largely described and
discovered unto us: Seeing there can be no doubt made, but there must be such a
person, as the Scripture speaks of by that name, and he must be such a one as
is there intimated, and howsoever obscurely, yet by him that knows all things
truly and sufficiently described: not intending nevertheless to make any
exposition of the said book, which being but a simple Laick I dare not
enterprise of any part of Scripture, but only to examine some parts thereof,
which may seem pertinent to the matter in hand, thereupon to propose some
questions wherein I desire to be resolved.

And first to speak somewhat of this book of the Apocalypse in general:
Iunius.
which is by all men confessed to be full of mysteries, and that it is by
reason thereof very dark and obscure, is by many affirmed: yet I see this
has neither dissuaded the minds, nor discouraged the industry of godly men
in all ages from searching to find out the true sense and meaning thereof,
amongst which Justinius Philosophus and Irenaeus godly Martyrs, S. Ierom and S.
Austin excellent Fathers, Haimo, Johannes de Rupescissa, Ioachimus Abbas, and
others of the former age, Luther, Balaeus, Fox and Iunius, in our fathers time,
the learned Abbat bishop of Salesburie, Paraeus, Napier, and others of our own
time, Alcasir and Ribera Romanists, and above all, our most Gracious and
learned Sovereign King James, deserves to be remembered. Upon great reason and
judgment surely have all these entered into this weighty work, well knowing,
that being sent unto us by God and our Lord Jesus Christ, we as duetifull
servants ought to search out the understanding thereof, Deuteronomy. 6, 7.
and to talk of them, as of a message sent unto us from our chief Lord and
master, who has given it to be showed to his servants, and has annexed a
blessing unto it: For blessed is he that reads, and hears, Apoc. 1, 3.
and keeps the words of this Prophecy. That therefore which God will have to
be opened, Math. 25.
no man ought to shut: that which he will have to be showed forth, no man ought
to conceal: that which he will have to be known, none ought to neglect. For
he gives not his gifts to be buried in the earth, nor his talents to be tied
up in a napkin, Luke 8.
neither do men (says he) light a candle, and put it under a bed or a
busshell. Wherefore neither I (howsoever unworthie) durst altogether suppress
these my poor meditations concerning Antichrist, much spoken of in this book:
but having obtained grace of God, adventured to put them in writing, thereby to
give occasion (the questions being thus opened) to the learned that shall
vouchsafe to read them, the better to consider of them, and instruct others,
and to the unlearned the better to inquire and learn; beseeching the great
Bishop of our souls, and Illuminator of all men, Christ Jesus, to instruct and
inlighten us all. And for the same cause I thought it best to propose them
under the name and form of Problems, or Questions; reduced to the number of
seven, in a due observation of that mystical number, so many times observed
in this heavenly book: which by the opinion of some learned men, ought to be
used as the key to open these divine mysteries. But before I come to the main
question, I think it necessary to say somewhat, touching the difficulty of
this book, and of the end and subject of it, for a further declaration whereof
I have conceived these seven Problems ensuing, upon the two first verses of
that Book, which are as follows: The Revelation of Jesus Christ, etc.

1. Upon these two verses, standing like the two-leaved gates of the Temple,
which must be opened before we can go any further, with fear and reverence, 1
Reg. 6.
as at the gates of Gods own house, Ez^ch. 41.
I demand whether they do not present seven things to our consideration? 1.
first the name given to this book by the Author, Apocalypsis, A Revelation, or
Discovery, not Apocrypsis, a Concealment, or covering. 2. The first original
Author, God, who gave both the book it self to be showed to the Church, and
the name to the book.

3. The most true, immediate and rightful owner by the gift of his Father,
Christ Jesus, who sent and showed it to his servants.

4. The end wherefore it was given, to be showed.

5. The persons to whom it must be showed, his servants.

6. A touch of the subject, Things which must shortly come to pass.

7. The means and Instruments employed by our Savior in this service of
Revelation, an Angel, and an Apostle, even that Apostle who before had been
tried and found faithful, in bearing witness of the word of God, and of Christ
Jesus, and of all things that he saw: his servant John: the same who by the H.
Ghost was authorized above all others, to entitle himself, Ioh. 21, 24. and 19,
35.
A witness of the things which he saw, and therefore of credit above all
exception, and that as well in his Gospel and Epistles, 1 Ioh. 1, 1.
as in this Revelation.

Now upon these seven grounds touched in the entrance, I propose this Question:
How this book can be reputed dark and obscure, which God himself has
entitled a Revelation, Ephesians. 5. E^ai. 5.
or Manifestation? Light makes all things manifest says the Apostle. And does
the spirit of Truth call darkness light, or light darkness?

2. God the Author is light and in him is no darkness. 1 Ioh. 1.
He makes light to shine out of darkness, 2 Cor. 4.
not darkness to come of light, 2 The. 2, 10.
unless it be to the children of darkness that love not the light. Also our
Savior Christ is the true light, that lighteneth every one, yea the Brightness
of Light. He is the Truth, Ioh. 1. Hebr. 1.
and protests of himself in these words, whatsoever I have heard of my
father, I have made known unto you. How then can it be said, Ioh. 15.
that he has not made this also known, which God gave him to be showed?

3. Our Savior Christ the true and rightful owner, 1 Cor. 12.
as in his mystical body is one with his Church, Ephesians. 5.
and we are all members of that body, how then can that be said to be
concealed from the body, that is revealed to the head?

4. The same inference will follow upon all the other four points above noted;
as upon the 4, Seeing God gave it to be showed; upon the 5, Ps. 119, 125
seeing it is directed to be showed to his servants, who must labor to know
their Masters will. Upon the 6, Luke 12.
seeing it concerns things that must shortly come to pass, and therefore
inconvenient to be hid and kept secret. And upon the 7, seeing it was committed
to two most faithful ministers of purpose to be signified to the church, and
thereupon most godly men have labored from time to time to search it out and
expound it: why should we despair to speak of it, as the Heathen man does in
Minutius, that neither it is given to us to know it, nor permitted to search
it, nor lawful to require it? And not raither say, as it is there by the
Christian Orator replied, that to us, whose faces God has lifted up to
Heaven, and whom he has endued with speech and reason, whereby to know and
speak of him, yea more to whom he has directed it to be showed; It is not
lawful to reject this heavenly brightness, which not only offreth, but
intrudeth itself into our eyes and senses. The obscurity of this Book is not
to terrify us from it, Aug. de civ. d^i. l, 20, 17
but to exercise our minds in it, says the learned Father. Let this therefore
suffice concerning the obscurity, that it is not invincible, but we ought to
search it out.

2. Let us now therefore (Christo Duce) for a second Problem inquire of the
means whereby we may attain to the understanding of this book. For it cannot
be denied, but there are in it many mysteries, which it is not given to all
men to understand, but it is given to some, of whom our Savior says, vobis
datum est, it is given to you, Marc. 4.
and for them he has ordained means. I demand then, what are the means? And
whether are not those the best m^^^es, which God himself and our Lord Jesus
Christ has showed us in the Scriptures. Aug. de civ. dei li. 10, 23. Phocyll.
Nazianz. Aut. nin. in sum. p. 4.1.4 Prove. 8, 13. Wisd 1.
viz. 1. True and serious repentance, which is (as it were) the true purgation
of the soul, so much inquired for by Philosophers, and only revealed to
Christians, to make us fit to behold heavenly mys^^ies. For wisdom (says he)
enters not into a malicious mind, nor dwells in a sinful body.

(...).
2. Constant obedience and care to serve and please God according to our
knowledge. If any will do his will, he shall know the doctrine: And if ye
continue in my words, ye shall know the truth.

Naz. Ioh. 7, 17. and 8, 31. Rev. 5, 4. and 10, 9.
3. Earnest prayer and invocation of God in Christ Jesus, which our Apostle
used, and thereby obtained to see the opening of this book and to have it
delivered unto him according to the manifold promises of our Savior Ask and
ye shall receive, Mat. 7.
seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened. For whosoever asks,
receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. Whereupon, Ask, (says venerable Beda) by prayer, seek by reading and
hearing, and knock by doing and practice.

4. Diligent reading and meditation upon this book, often recommended unto us
by this our Apostle in the Text. Blessed is he that reads, Rev. 1, 3.
and hears, and keeps the words of the prophcie of this book.

5, Diligent reading and perusing other books and prophesies of the Holy
Scripture, and conferring one with the other a special means to understand the
sense and meaning of Prophetical words and Phrases much used in this book,
Dan. 9, 2.
by which means also Daniel confesses that he understood the end of the
Captivity. And some learned men do make no doubt, but the literal sense of
every place of Scripture taken with the consent of other places, and repugnant
to none is the true meaning of the H. Ghost: Consent being the most certain
badge and cognizance of truth. For in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall
every word be confirmed.

6. Methodicall proceeding by the rule of learning, a notioribus ad minus nota:
from things once cleared to that which is more obscure and difficult, or to use
the Apostles Phrase from milk to strong meat.* Hebr. 5.
We must not be always children in understanding, and stick in the rudiments
or principles; nor call that into question, which is once made clear. And here
by the way I would crave a little leave to ask a question or two concerning the
writings of the Fathers and other good Authors: what account we are to make of
them, and whether it be not necessary for us to search and look into them to
the end we may know what is now, or has heretofore ben revealed or made
clear. For the Fathers, it may seem that their consenting testimonies in the
exposition of the Scriptures ought to be held of so great authority as we do
esteem the Communion of Saints, professed in our Creed. For if we hold not a
Communion of faith with the Saints that are now in Heaven, it may prove a
question whether we shall come whither they are gone before us. And therefore
not without cause does the godly and learned Vincentius so earnestly exhort us
to hold fast quod ubique semper, and ab omnibus creditum est, not that which
some few or perhaps some particular Church has conceited, but that which has
been every where and at all times and of all Christians believed, that is (if
I understand him aright) the common Creed and profession of our faith left unto
us by the Fathers. And he makes the consent of the Fathers, though not a rule
of faith equal to the Scriptures, yet a singular good help to the
understanding of them.

Concerning the writings of Heathen men also, I ask how we may safely neglect
them, where they teach us any point of truth or goodness? seeing there is no
truth can be uttered by any man, or Angel but it must proceed from that
Eternal and incommunicable Truth our Lord Christ Jesus, nor any good can be
done or spoken, but it must come from the highest and sovereign Good, which is
God himself. And therefore most truly and divinely speaks that godly Father.
Augustine.
Bonus verusque Christianus Domini sui intelligat esse, ubicunque invenerit
veritatem. A good and true Christian must understand that truteh wheresoever he
finds it is, the word of his master Christ Jesus. And though Abana and
Pharphar the rivers of Damascus were not so sanctified as Jordan to cleanse
Naamans leprosy: yet they were made of God to wash our hands and quench our
thirst. Though common bread be not equal to the sacrament: yet it must be
received with prayer and thanksgiveing, as the gift of God, to satisfy our
hunger. Yea let us well consider whether it be not necessary for us to look
into them: seeing we may be sure that the virtues, moralities, and doctrines of
the Heathen, shall be no less objected unto us at the day of judgment then
the examples of the Queen of Sheba, the King of Nineveh, Tyrus and Sidon,
Sodom and Gomorrha. Is it not needful then to know, what shall be laid to our
charge, and prepare our selves to answer it? God nath provided and preserved
for our use the learned writings of the Heathens, shall we not use them? may we
not in refusing them seem to abridge God of some part of his glory? for let
us a little better consider it. The excellent virtues, wisdom, temperance,
justice and fortitude, and the illustrious examples of these virtues shining in
them, their invincible patience, fidelity inviolable, justice inflexible,
unwearied industry, their profound learning, mellifluous eloquence in
perswadeing men to virtue and temperance, Their heroical magnanimity, ready
to undertake all dangers, to save, succor, and defend those that were unjustly
oppressed, and other such divine virtues: what think you, were they of God? or
of men? If you say of God acknowledge it. If of men; why do not you the like,
that have greater helps? How can the weak and corrupt nature of man inthralled
to sin and Satan bring forth such fruits? But I know what a schooleman may say:
splendida peccata, because not ordinate to Gods glory. True as in men, but are
they not therefore to be acknowledged for a part of Gods administration and
providence, who holds the beginnings ends and middesses of all things, and
without whom no man can do any thing, as the Philosophers also, Plato, Arist.
Cic. Hesiod. Theog. Virgil. Phocyll. etc.
and Poets with open mouths confess? What then shall we say to their excellent
sciences of Geometry, Cosmography, and Arithmetic, which we have received
wholly from them? What to their Historyes and computations of Times? Shall we
not account these a part of Gods dispensation, and therefore good in the
Fountain, from whence they flowed, howsoever corrupt in the vessels, wherein
they were received and conveied? Doubtless if we will be good Christians, that
is of the holy priesthood, we must learn to separate the precious from the
vile, the clean from the unclean, and not cast away the wheat because of the
chaff; 1 Cor. 15.
S. Paul uses the words of Heathen Poets, in a point of manners to the
believing Corinthians, yea to Titus a Bishop: Tit. 1. Act. 17.
and in a point of faith to the unbelieving Athenians which S. Luke makes a
part of Scripture to the believing Christians. So says our Prophet, Revel. 21.
They shall bring the Glory and Honor of the Nations unto it. Esai 60.
And the riches of the Gentiles shall come unto thee says the Lord. Let us
therefore give to God his due, and restore the holy vessels to the Temple,
notwithstanding Belshazzars drunken profanation. Let us I say hold fast that
we have received, and use that to Gods glory, which they abused to their own.
And this have I debated somewhat the more at large, to satisfy the niceness of
some, which in this point seem to be more scrupulous, then is convenient.

To return to our purpose, the seventh mean to attain to the understanding of
prophecies is to exercise our selves in discerning the times, by diligent
comparing of the events with the prophecies, which we may the better do by the
help of the godly and learned writings of former times, whereof I have spoken,
especially Histories and Chronologies, Romans 15.
which the Allforeseeing providence of God (for our learning doubtless) has
caused both to be written and preserved. This help the Fathers of the Primitive
Church had not, and therefore it is no marvel if they could not so well
expound these prophecies, which are best understood by their accomplishment.
This is that which Solomon commends saying, Eccles. 8.
that the wiseman discerns the time and judgment. The men of Issachar, 1 Chronicles. 12.
and the great Princes of Media, and Persia are commended for the same, Esther
1.
and the Scribes and Pharisees sharply reprehended for neglecting it. Matthew. 16.
And so I conclude this Problem that God has given sufficient means to attain
to the understanding of this book.

III.
My third Problem or Question is of the persons to whom it is ordained to be
showed, which may easily be conceived as well by the means, as by the Text. For
it must be such as use these means and they are here noted by the name of the
Servants of Jesus Christ. Ioh. 15.
For it were absurd to think that he would show his secrets to his enemies,
and not to his servants and friends. Concerning whom I desire to be resolved in
7. points.

1 Upon the words long before spoken by our Savior vobis datum est. Matthew. 13.
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; whether by
these words he meant to signify only his Apostles, or all his disciples, and
them also which (as he speaks in another place) should believe in him through
their words? John 17.


2 Why in these words he made no special mention of Peter or his successors,
which do now vindicate to themselves the sole authority of the keys, as well of
science, as of power and jurisdiction.

3 whether those, who by our Savior are there signified by a vobis datum, be
not the same, which are here called the servants of Jesus Christ, and why here
also there was no mention of Peter or his successors, or of the Roman Church,
which was then in the Imperial City, and doubtless had many godly men in
it, Romans 16.
and some of great dignity?

4 When our divine Evangelist writes these things to the seven Churches of
Asia, whether he did not in this according to his direction? and whether he do
not hereby show, who were meant by the name of the servants of God and Christ?

5 what reason the Apostle had to send it to those Churches, and not to the
Roman church either as chief, or as one of the rest; was it perhaps for the
reason of S. Hillarie. Anne ambiguum est Antichristum in his tectis esse
sessurum? Or was he not an Apostle and Prophet to the Romans, as well as to
them of Asia? or for what other reason?

6 Whether in writing to those seven, he did not intend to write to the whole
universal Church of God as well to come as present: as S. Augustine expounds
Numero septenario vniversae Ecclesiae significata est perfectio. De Civ, 17, 4.
And only to the Church, and whether all others be not excluded by a vobis non
est datum?

7. And lastly whether in writing to the seven Churches and their Angels
equally and indifferently, he do not sufficiently show that the state of the
Church upon earth is neither in the nature of a Monarchy, nor of a Democratie,
but of an Aristocratie, where the several Angels preside in their several
Territories, precincts, and congregations, agreeing in the unity of one faith
under one eternal head, the God of Truth, Christ Jesus? Let us not deceive our
selves. Babilonians use to lisp. They cannot speak the language of Canaan with a
true spirit. Neither only this book but all the Scripture is dark and obscure
to them, whose mind the God of this world has blinded, 2 Cor. 4. Hosh. 8, 12.
and so much for the Persons.

IV.
My fourth Problem is concerning the final end and scope of this book in the
verses above briefly touched, to show to his servants things which must shortly
come to pass. And here I must necessarily speak of the Subject which is so
joined with the end, that the consideration of the one cannot be severed from
the other. I demand therefore, what things must be showed to the Church of God?
Surely taking a general view of this divine prophecy, for my part I conceive
that the most here spoken of, is of the enemies and of their persecutions, and
malicious practices against the Church, and of the defense and deliverance of
the Church, and the punishment of her enemies. and so I find S. Hieroms
opinion, In prologo.
Revelat quanta Ecclesia Christi passa et passura sit. And to what end must
these things be showed unto them: if not to the same for which our Evangelist
in his Euangile recites many excellent sermons of our Savior Christ, namely
to comfort and encourage the faithful, and to excite them to repentance,
vigilance, patience, and perseverance against the troubles to come? Repent
says he to the Churches of Ephesus and Pergamus. Fear not to Pergamus, Hold
fast to Thyatira. etc. So in the Gospel. These things have I spoken unto you
that ye should not be offended. So in his Epistle, Let that abide in you, John
16. 1 John 2.
which ye have heard from the beginning. Take heed I have foretold you. Mark 13.
Now if this be the end, namely to arm the faithful with those virtues
against the troubles to come: then what is or can be the subject of this book,
or what matter can it speak of, but 1. it must describe the state of the Church
in her several times. 2. The Head of the Church, who is also her Savior and
Protector in all her troubles. 3 The enemies of the Church, and their
persecutions and practices. 4. The Confusion of those Enemies and the
punishments inflicted upon them in this world. 5 Their Everlasting Damnation. 6
The Deliverance of the Church. And lastly her Everlasting Glory and felicity.
Whether this be not so, I desire to know upon the three Problems ensuing.

My fifth Problem therefore is concerning the Church, V.
whether it be not with sufficient plainness set forth unto us in these seven
places.

1 In the vision of the seven golden Candlesticks, Revel. 1.
in the midst whereof Christ Jesus walks.

2 In the vision of the Beasts, and Elders in the midst of whom is the Throne
of God and of the Lamb. Revel. 4.


3 In the vision of the Temple of God, Revel. 12.
set forth to be measured and opened.

4 In the vision of the woman traveling with Child, which brings forth
Christ Jesus, Revel. 12.
and then is forced to fly into the wilderness, where she must continue for a
long time after.

5 As Mount Sion whereupon the Lamb stands with all his Army. chap. 14.


6 As a Bride trimmed for her husband. chap. 19.


7 As the City of God the new Jerusalem whose walls are founded upon the Twelve
Apostles. chap. 21.


VI.
My sixth Problem is concerning our Savior Christ, the great and mighty Lord
Protector, Prince, and Savior of his Church, whether he also be not as many
ways described unto us. viz.

1 As the great Bishop and Teacher of his Church, in the midest of the seven
golden Candlesticks. R^vel. 1.


2 As the Sacrifice for his Church, chap. 4.
and yet the Defender and Protector in the midst of the Throne. a Lamb and a
Lion.

chap. 10.
3 As the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, Land and Sea, D^u 32, 40
determining the end of Times, which is not revealed to any Angel. Matthew. 24.


4 As the seed of the woman, and yet the Son of God. Revel. 12.


Revel. 14.
5 As the Lamb standing on mount Sion.

6. As a most mighty and valiant captain, chap. 19.
or invincible Prince going forth to war against his enemies, himself in the
forefront, ready to charge them in the face.

7 And lastly as an inevitable Judge both of quick and dead sitting on his
Throne of majesty. chap. 20.


VII.
The seventh and last Problem therefore must needs be concerning the Enemies of
the Church, whether we may not understand that of them, also in this book
there be named Seven. viz.

1 The Devil that old Serpent, the great Red Dragon with seven heads, and ten
horns, Rev. 2, 10. and 12, 9.
and seven crowns upon his heads.

2 False Apostles, Hypocrites. Rev. 2, 2.


3 Nicholaitans. Heretics. chap. 2, 15.


4 The followers of Iezabel and Balaam. chap. 2, 20.
Licentious and Idolatrous Teachers.

5 The first beast rising out of the Sea. chap. 13.
The old heathenish Roman Empire.

6 The second Beast rising out of the Earth, which seems peculiarly to
signify Antichrist unto us, chap. 13.
the proper and principal subject of this our Investigation.

7 Gog and Magog heathenish and open Persecutors joined with secret and
intestine enemies, whereof we have not here to speak

These things seem to me not altogether improper nor inconvenient. yet seeing
I am no Prophet nor the son of a Prophet, I dare not determine of them but
leave them to Theologians to consider. And with favorable permission going
forwards to search and find out this great enemy of the Church of God: I
demand whether he be not fully described unto us in this book of the
Revelation and other parts of Holy Scriptures, by seven notable and notorious
Attributes.

1 His place.

2 His state, or body politic, which must be subject unto him and support him.

3 His Names.

4 His Rising.

5 His Reigning.

6 His words and actions.

7 His Times. Of which Christ Jesus assisting I mean to speak in order.

J. Of the place of Antichrist.
BY the rules of method we are taught to proceed a notioribus ad minus nota,
from things better known to infer and prove things not so well known: and of
things known, they say those are best known, which are visible or sensible,
and that the outward visible and sensible adjuncts and accidents do very much
conduce to find out and discover the nature and essence of every thing. Even
our divine Evangelist and Prophet, being taught by the spirit of God, seems
to approve of these observations, where he begins his Epistle with this
protestation. That which was from the beginning, 1 John 1.
which we have heard, which we have seen with these our eyes, etc. making the
senses a sufficient proof of the humanity conjoined with eternity. This is
the cause wherefore I thought best to begin my inquiry at the Place of
Antichrist. For what is more clear and evident then that every thing which
has an existence, must have a place, and he that seeks for a thing out of
his proper place, or element, as they now speak, does as if he should seek for
a fish in the fire, or a swallow in the Sea. The learned Grecian, Aristotle.
(the riches of whose learning I see no cause but it may be brought into the
Holy city according to the Prophecies) refers place to the Predicament ubi,
which imports a Relation, and defines it very acutely, and I think truly
to be (...). Which I know not how well; but thus I think it may be rendered, The
unmoueable and nearest confine of that which compasses any thing about. He
calls it unmoueable; because in all motions it is not the place that removes
from the thing, nor with the thing, but the thing it self is removed from one
place to another. It must be nearest, and indeed contiguous for else it can not
be the place of one thing, but may contein another; and it must compass it
about: for if it do but touch it in part, it is to be called adjacent, or
contiguous, but not a place. The most learned Roman makes place one of his
four principia. Varro. August.
And the learned also of later age number it among those things which
necessarily concur to the constitution of things Existent. Cajc^an.
By all agreed to be a Relative, which therefore must have a Correlatiue.
Every place is so called, in respect of the body placed in it: Every
Continent in respect of the thing contained: every Principle in respect of the
thing proceeding from it: as a Father cannot be so called without a son, nor
a master without a servant, nor a cause without his effect. Herehence are
derived those rules and observations of the learned: Posito corpore necesse es^
poni locum; posito loco, locatum poni necesse est. That Places must have a due
proportion of quantity and magnitude, great things must have great places,
for else they could not be compassed or comprehended in them. Little things
little places, for else there would be vacuum. Things of long continuance, must
have places of equal duration, and places of long continuance are not
appropriated to things that must soon perish or pass away. Also Places must
have a due temperament of quality, agreeable to the things placed, and the
things placed to the places, for else the one would destroy the other, and
contraries can no more be and continue in one place, then in one subject. These
Observations being discovered unto us by the ordinary light of nature, it has
pleased the God of nature whose majesty is terrible, his wisdom
incomprehensible, and his ways past finding out; who numbereth the drops of
the Sea, and the sand of the shore, who calls the stars by their names, and
fills heaven and earth, to descend into the narrow and poor capacity of
humane intelligence, and by these outward visible and sensible things to teach
us (and who is a Teacher like to him?) to find out things most obscure and
difficult. Let us see therefore what place, of what capacity, quantity and
quality the great Governor and Disposer of all things has appointed for
Antichrist.

And first I demand, whether it be not plainly described to be Rome, and that
Christian, upon the consideration of these seven places of Scripture that
follow? The first in the seventeenth chapter of the Revel. where it is set
forth to be 1. That great city. Revel. 17.
2, which was set upon seven hills. 3. which had seven heads or governors. 4.
And ruled over the kings of the earth. 5, which in a mystery is called
Babylon. And 6. Most abundant in riches and glory. 7, Yet most filthy in all
fornication and uncleannes. Let us examine these words every one by it self. It
is first a great City. A city is by some considered as it consists of howses
and buildings near joining together: so Ninivie, Tyrus the old, Genesis 10.
Babylon, and others in the Scripture are called great cities: So Tully
calls Pergamus and Smirna cities, pro Flacco li. 1, de bell. li.
and Caesar also calls Rome, Civitatem. taking that for a principal cause of
his Parricidial wars, ut Trib. plebis ex civitate expulsos restitueret, that
he might restore the Tribunes of the people that were driven out of the city,
who (as he said before) were fled ex urbe: i. polit.
others, as Aristotle etc. take a city which they call Polis, the word used
here by the Apostle, to consist of a multitude of men gathered together under
the same laws and government; which is also called universitas or respub. de
civ. dei. Cic. in somn. Iusta^. l. 2.
and so S. Augustine in some places. Some others also measure a city by the
extent of her dominion, liberties, and franchises. Now these and other
circumstances being considered, I seek for a city wherein all concur to make
it great, and for the first, I ask whether ever any city have had a
testimony of greatness, like to that which Lucan thus describes? Vrbem populis
victisque frequentem
Gentibus, and generis coeat si turba capacem
Humani. Lucan. 1, 1,
--
A City populous, full of conquered nations, and able to receive all mankind,
if they should come together. I think it cannot be denied, but this was a
very great city, v^bis appellatio muris, Romae contineutibus aedificiis.
finitur. LL. de verb. Sig.
that was able to receive humanum genus, all mankind. And yet that we may see
plainly, that he meant it of the city, as it consisted of walls and
buildings, he names it, first urbem, and then goes forward,

-- Cum pressus ab host
Clauditur externis Romanus miles in oris.
Effugit exiguo nocturna pericula vallo:
Tu tantum audito bellorum nomine Roma
Desereris; nox una tuis non credita muris.
What city in the world, was like to this great city? Rev. 18, 18.
truly therefore says our divine Apostle. But this was poetical and
hyperbolical, may some say, let us hear a testimony historical: Although I
think, that learned poet would never have been so bold, or impudent, to give
such an attribute of greatness to Rome, if it had not been a very great city,
and doubtless the greatest then known in the world; yet let us hear
Historians. Truly Lipsius (out of Martinus Polonus and Pliny) says, the walls
of Rome were first xlij. miles in compass, and out of Vopiscus, de magnitud.
Romans Blondus in Romanist.
that they were afterward enlarged to 50 miles compass, but of the suburbs,
si quis intuens, magnitudinem Romae velit exquirere, frustra eum fore, and
haesurum ubi desinat urbs, ubi incipiat. ex Dionis. So it was a great city
within the walls, Herodot. l. 1.
and a greater without. It seems indeed by Herodotus that the walls of old
Babylon were 160 stadia on every side square: but note, that Babylon was all
within the walls, and so Rome in respect of her suburbs and buildings
adjoining, was much greater, as by this testimony of Lipsius out of Dionis.
appears. Might not this then well be called Babylon the great, in respect of
the other?

But hear what Pliny says both of Babylon and Rome. Of Babylon first he
says, Plin. lib. 3.
Babylon sexaginta millia passuum, amplexa muris. Of Rome; Effecit passuum per
directum xxx. millia DCC. LXV. which xxx miles and three quarters being taken
for the diameter, must make the circumference to be at the least 92 miles.
which is far above the reckning of Lipsius. And yet says Pliny farther: Ad
extrema vero tectorum cum castris praetoriis a Milliario in Capite Romans fori
statuto per vicos omnium viarum mensura colligit, paulo amplius septuaginta
millia pass. And if that be taken for the Diameter of Rome and the suburbs,
then must the compass be almost 200 miles. Quo si quis (says he again)
altitudinem tectorum addat, dignam profecto aestimationem concipiat,
fateaturque nullius urbis magnitudine^ in toto orb potuisse comparari.

And it is also to be observed what the same Pliny writes of Babylon, Plin.
lib. 6.
in the time of Vespatian, that it was then brought to solitude being exhausted
by the vicinitie of Seleucia, which was built for that purpose. And this was
before the exile of John in Pathmos, where he saw the Revelation, and therefore
this great city could not be literal Babylon, or Babylon in Chaldea, which
then was not great; but mystical Babylon, that city Rome, which was then at
the greatest.

Let us go to the next consideration, where a city is said to consist of a
multitude or society of men, gathered together, and we shall find a far
greater cause to ask the question of our Prophet, what city was ever like
it? for what city in the world can we find so famous, for number of Tribes,
and multitude of citizens, as Rome? Livy. Alex. ab Alex. l. 1, c. 17.
The Tribes of Rome were at the least five and thirty, every one consisting
of many thousand citizens, whereas the two kingdoms of Judah and Israel had
but twelve; yea the mighty kingdom of Persia, which afterward grew so
great, had but twelve in the beginning. Herod. 1. Xenoph. Grop. l. 1. Live. l.
10, in five 1. belli Punici lustro undeuicesimo. Tacit. An. 11 Fasc. Temp.
The number of Roman Citizens in their weak estate was found to be above two
hundred and fifty thousand: but in the Emperor Claudius his time, it is said
to have been above threescore and eight hundred thousand, and so in Augustus
time, in which number women, children, servants and forriners not infranchised
(though inhabiting) were not contained. What city therefore was ever like to
this great city? Again if we consider the extent of her franchises, and
liberties, not only the Volsci, Hernici, Lucani, Appuli, Campani, Cic. offi. 1.
Hetrusei and other nations of Italy, but the Transpadani and Transalpini the
Gawles and Spaniards were received into the freedom: nor the Europeans only,
but those of Asia; S. Paul borne at Tarsus in Cilicia averreth himself before a
Roman Judge to be a citizen of Rome free borne. Act. 22.
And for her dominion it seems to be true, that the Poet says, that the
city of Rome was as great as the world:

Gentibus est aliis Tellus data limite certo;
Romana spatium est urbis and orbis idem.
So again:
Roma armis terras, ratibusque subegerat undas:
Atque iidem fines urbis and orbis erant.
So Dionisius Halicarnasseus calls it, Vrbem terrae, marisque dominam.
Claudianus Cuncti gens omnia sumus. and many like other sentences do we meet
with in their books. Neither was this the opinion of the poets, or vulgar
only, but their learned lawiers in the end grew to be of the same judgment,
Panorm.
Vbi Caesar, ibi Roma, wheresoever Caesar is, there is also Rome. What city
therefore was ever in the world in greatness like to this? The use that is
commonly made of this consideration is none other, but to admire and extol,
the majesty of Rome, as Lipsius does in admirandis de magnit. Romana. but the
true and worthy use thereof, is to acknowledge the truth of Gods word,
revealed in this and other prophecies, which (we see) are confirmed by the
testimonies of Heathen men, that never heard of them.

These certain Typographies plain'y also refell the idle opinions of those
that take Babylon or Antichrist for the whole multitude of the ungodly.
2. The second note is that it is seated upon seven hills, and what city was
ever so famous or renowned for seven hills, as Rome has been.

Quae nunc de septem totum circumspicit orbem
Montibus, imperii Roma deumque locus. says Ovid.
and Propert. septem urbs alta jugis.

And the names of these hills are common in their histories, Palatinus,
Caelius, Tarpeius which is also called Capitolinus, Aventinus, Esquilinus,
Viminalis, and Quirinalis.

3. Thirdly, what city was ever so noted for seven kinds of supreme
governors, whereof every one had the power of a king, summum imperium, power
of life and death, from which there was no provocation, or appeal? All of them
are expressly named, both by Livy and Tacitus, their principal Historians;
Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Caesar's, and Pontif. Max.

4. Fourthly, what city did ever so powerfully rule and command over the
kings of the earth, as this has done? All other Empires, and Imperial cities
had their several Emperors, kings or princes, and were subject to them, and
ruled by them; as the Assirian, Persian, Grecian, Tartarian, Turkish, Cathaian,
Abissine, Empires; the Sirian, Egyptian, Ethiopian, Parthian, Median, Indian
and Macedonian kingdoms and all their cities; the great cities of Ninive,
Persepolis, Ecbatana, Constantinople, Traperus, Mexico, Quinzay, Memphis,
Ocmus, and all other cities, that we read of, even Babylon it self was ruled
by kings and Emperors, Dion. Hal.
only Rome was called Terrae marisque domina. Cic. pro prodom^.
Et illa populus est dominus regum, victor atque Imperator omnium gentium,
says Tully. -- Illa inclita Roma

Imperium terris, animos aequavit Olimpo, says Virgil. But what need I seek or
cite foreign testimonies, 1 Match. 8, 13 chap. 15.
The book of Machabees gives us ample proofs of the high and predominant
power of Rome, See also Brightm. in Dan. c. 11.
showing how they commanded the great Kings of Egypt and Asia, Ptolomee,
Demetrius, Arsaces, Attalus, and others, to abstain from war against the
Jews, and that command was obayed. what City ever in the world did the like?

Fifthly for the mystical name of Babylon, See these authors cited by Riberain
Apo. and recited by Paraeus. Aug de civit. dei. lib. 18. Roma velut altera
Babylon. Idem. Occidentalis Babylon, and passim. See M. Downam his treat. of
Antichrist lib. 1, ca 2. Psalm. 137.
I think it needless to dispute to whom it belongs, seeing S. Augustine, S.
Ierom, Tertul. Theophilact. Orosius, Oecumenius, Eusebius and many others, both
old and new have expressly applied it to Rome, and so cleared that point also,
and that upon great reasons: First in regard of the greatness and largenes of
dominion, wherein Rome and Babylon excelled the other two Monarchies. Secondly
for continuance, for these two continued longer, and immediately upon the decay
of Babylon, Rome began to grow. Velut prioris filia, says Augustine. Thirdly
for cruelty against the saints, for of Babylon the first, the Prophets
testify sufficiently. So Rome is by Tertullian called Babylon, Quia sanctorum
debellatrix. Fourthly for promiscuous filthiness beyond others. Fifthly for
Idolatry. Lipsius in Epist.
Sixthly for confusion morum aeris -- linguae says Lipsius. Seventhly for power
and riches, whereof I have now to speak. For her power riches and glory
mentioned in the text, I appeal to them that have recorded, that the wealth of
all the world was in Rome, and called it Mundi compendium, and in this
Inventorie of riches and glory, is to be cast also the account of their
innumerable victories, the greatness of their Empire; their prudence and policy
in government; their providence, fortitude and industry in war, their learning
and eloquence, the justice, temperance and other moral virtues which appeared
in some of them, the riches of their minds, as well as of their outward estate,
De doct. chr. l. 2. cir. sine^.
wherein they excelled all the world: and so does S. Augustine call the
excellent learning, morality etc. of the heathen, Viri pati mulichria mu^ieres
pudicitiam in propatu'o habere. Salust. much more in Tacit. Annal. Sueton. in
vita Virgil. in priap. Ovid. Inv sat 6. Tibul. Catul. Propert. Mar. Hor. s^r.
l. 2, 3 and ^. 1, sat. 2. de civ. l. 3.
the gold and silver of Egypt. And lastly for their fornication and beastlines,
I desire them to speak that have read their best authors* Salust, Tacitus,
Sueton, virgil, Ovid, Iuvenal, and others, Horace confesses of himself Mill
puella^u^, puero^u^ mill furores. Caesar was called omnium virorum mulier, et
omnium mulierum vir, And who has not heard of the beastlines of Tiberius and
Caligula, Claudius and Nero; in a word, it is almost incredible, and most
abominable, what they write in this kind, either of themselves, or one of
another, But if we take fornication in this place for the spiritual adultery,
which is Idolatry. They that read S. Augustine de Civ. Dei, Livy, and others of
their own authors do know, that (besides their Majores deos, and four hundred
and four and twenty Temples, amongst which was the Pantheon or Temple of all
Devils (as Tertullian well calls it) and the Temple of the city it self, 1
ips.^x ^^tit. Imperij. See more i^ Chenu^i exam c^nc. Trident. de magin.
which they worshipped as a Goddess) besides all these, and their Princes whom
they deified after their death, every house had Penates and Minores deos, so
that their Idols were innumerable. Hereupon as some called Rome Epitomen (...).
so some christians called it Epitomen (...). 2 Chronicles. 28, 23.
Religione (says Tully truly, who knew no religion but Idolatry) omnes gentes
nationesque superavimus. And with this kind of fornication they made all
nations drunk, for every one seeing them so prosperous and victorious would
have their gods, and worship them in hope like Achaz to prosper and overcome as
they did. Now therefore laying all these things together, I ask whether they
can be applied to any other Place in the world, but only to Rome? To this also
may be added consuetudo loquendi interpres optima, which amongst the ancient
Jews of the Sanhedrin was, Buxter^. ex cod. Sauhedr.
by the name of the city to understand Rome, as accounting none else worthy or
fit to carry that name, note also that the Holy ghost in the last verse of the
17 chapter of the Apoc. adds an article of emphasis and distinction to every word
(...) etc. Also Magister in princip. glossae epistolae ad Romanos tells us
that, cum dicitur Apostolus intelligitur Paulus, cum dicitur urbs intelligitur
Roma: which common notice may be the cause why our Prophet did so much
ingeminate that article, to show that he spoke of a city well enough known to
be such viz. Great and Imperial. And if this be clear and evident, that by
the name of the Great city, and of Babylon in this Revelation, Rome, and
only Rome is meant this I hope will serve to illustrate other places; As for
example, the second place, Rev. 11.
where it is said that the beast shall make war against the two witnesses of
God, and shall overcome them and kill them. And their dead bodies shall ly in
the streets of the great City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt
where also our Lord was crucified; Although some doubt might be conceived of
the names of Egypt and Sodom in this place, and where our Lord was crucified,
yet the name of the Great city, ought by the reasons and authorities
aforesaid, to hold us fast to Rome. For none else was then great, nor worthy
to be so called, as I have showed before. Let us see then how these names
Sodom and Egypt may be applied to Rome, and therein first what it is to be
spiritually called. There be many spirits mentioned in the scriptures, but here
I think that spirit is meant, which is spoken of by our Lord in the Gospel,
Ioh. 14, 17. and 16, 13.
even the spirit of truth, which shall lead us into all truth, and so to be
spiritually called, is to be truly so called, according to their works,
effects, and fruits, as the spirit of truth teaches us to call things. Whether
does not the Prophet Jeremy explain this, in altering the name of Pashur; Ier.
20, 3.
whether does not our Savior explain it, Matthew. 7.
when he says, Ye shall know them by their fruits, do men gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles? as if he should say, men do not call that a
thorn, of which they gather grapes, nor that a thistle, of which they gather
figs: but that is called a vine, and this a fig tree. For it is not an evil
tree that brings forth good fruits, nor a good tree that brings forth evil
fruits. Luc. 6, 46.
And why do ye call me Master, and do not the things that I speak: if I be a
master, where is my fear, Mal. 1, 6.
says the Lord? If a father, where is my love? And who art thou, John 1.
say the Pharisees to John Baptist, The voice of him that cries in the
wilderness, Make strait the ways of the Lord says S. John; Matthew. 11.
as if he should say, I am the preacher of repentance against the coming of the
Messiah; Art thou he that should come? says he again: go tell him (says our
Savior) The deaf hear, the blind receive sight, the lame walk, the leapers
are cleansed, etc. if I do the works of the Messiah, I am he: and if ye were
Abraham's children, John 8.
ye would do the works of Abraham. Whereupon I ask, what is the meaning of all
these places, but to teach us to judge and speak of men by their works, as we
do of trees by their fruits? So then, where we find the works of Sodom and
Egypt, that must be called Sodom and Egypt spiritually, that is, truly, Esa. 1,
10.
as the spirit of truth has taught us to speak, Ezech 16.
and as the Prophets use to speak. Now the works of Sodom, and Egypt were
beastly filthiness, Genesis 19. and 12, 15. and 39, 13.
and bloody cruelty, as we read in the scripture, and besides, Exodus 1.14.
in Egypt also we find, infinite Idolatry, whereof there are sufficient
testimonies in the scripture, Number. 3, 3.
besides that which heathen men do write to the same purpose, Ier. 43.
namely Herodotus, Iuvenal. Diod. Sic. Anaxandrid. and Plutarch. Esa. 30.
And were not these the works of Rome in S. John's time? Read their own Authors,
Tacitus, Sueton, Virgil. and he rest that I cited before, concerning their
horrible filthiness and Idolatry. Read the Ecclesiastic Histories of their
persecutions, and their best Historians, Tacitus and Suetonius of their
tyrannies and cruelty. Are they not still the works of Rome in these later
times? Read Petrach, Mantuan, Platina, Blesensis. Roma est jam tota lupanar,
says one; It is notorious that almost all the Cardinals of Rome have their
Manfrones Cinaedos, says another, who by authorities and arguments drawn out
of Iacobatius, and other authors of the Romanists, without exception, fully
proves, that there is not now, nor has been for many years past any true
Pope, nor lawful Cardinal, but that they are all Intruders, Simoniakes,
Sodomites, etc. and so have been of long time, and therefore by the sentence of
the Pope himself, Did. 23.
in the Decree, declared to be Antichrist. The abominable acts of Julius the
III, that made his Ganymede a Cardinal, and created Johannes Casa, Archb. of
Beneventum, and Legate a Latere, who set forth a book in commendation of that
crying sin, are not yet forgotten, and that book also passed current a long
time amongst them without control. The bloody actions of Aluisius, Borgia,
Diazius, Minerius, Gardner, Bonner, the murdering Dominican in France, and the
Poudertraitors in England, and many others, were not only not disallowed by
them, but praised and commended, yet Qui non vetat peccare, cum p^ssit, jubet,
says the Pagan, and I desire to know, whether any man ever saw, read or heard
of any nation, Christian, Jew, or Turk, Saracen or Savage, wherein Sodomie
has been so publicly practiced and allowed, as in Rome? Their Idols and
images also, are known to be innumerable, whereof we shall speak more
hereafter. What shall we say then of the fourth note of this place, where also
our Lord was crucified? In Jerusalem, says the Babylonian: but Jerusalem at
the time of the writing of this Apocalypse, was so far from being a great
city, that it was no city at all, for it was utterly destroyed before by
Titus. And if it had been then a city, yet was it far from being great, or
bearing rule over kings, and although Jerusalem be some time called the holy
city, yet is it never called the great city, Hierom.
Jerusalem sanctior locus rupe tarpeia, etc. See more in the Epistle of S.
Hierom to Marcella, inviting her to come to Bethleem, and likewise in his
Epistle written in the name of Paula and Eustochia to the same Marcella, to the
same purpose, wherein he proves, that this name of the great city could not
be given to Jerusalem; etc. but rather to Rome, or to the world etc. the chief
city whereof, is Rome. Neither yet are we directed to the name of Jerusalem,
but to that place, wherein it is spiritually said, that our Lord was crucified.
Jerusalem is not spoken of in the text, neither indeed was our Lord crucified
in Jerusalem, but extra portas, without the gates, as the Apostle speaks.
Hebr. 13, 12.
Let them answer then, who have read the Gospel, John 19.
by whom was our Savior accused? who condemned him? what kind of capital
punishment did he suffer? who crucified him? in what place? for what crime or
offense? or upon what accusation was he brought in question? was he not accused
by them that cried, we have no king but Caesar the Roman Emperor? was not
Pilate the Roman he that condemned him? was not the cause pretended, for that
he spoke against Caesar, in making himself a king? was it not by that kind of
punishment and execution, Vide Scalig in notis ad Ioh. 18, 31.
which by learned men is observed to have been properly used by the Romans?
were they not Roman soldiers by whom he was crucified? was it not extra portas
Jerusalem? and was it not all done by the power of Caesar? and what follows
of all this, Vbi Caesar, ibi Roma, where Caesar is there is Rome, said the old
Lawiers, as the new say now a days, Vbi Papa, ibi Roma, Panorm.
where the Pope is there is Rome. To this add, that all void places, and
places appointed for public execution of justice were by Roman civil Law,
Iuris publici, the proper demeanes of the Empire of Rome. Now it is manifest
that Golgatha was the common place of execution, and therefore de Iure publico
of right belonging to Rome. We must therefore confess, that our Lord was
crucified in Rome, unless we shall think, that S. John, yea the spirit of
God, do not speak properly; And if he had meant the old Jerusalem, what needed
so many words, or circumstances to describe it?

These four points therefore being cleared, it is not hard to apply three
others unto it, which are mentioned in the same place of scripture, to make up
the number of seven, viz. 5. That this is the same great city, where the
beast should make war against the saints: and 6, where he should kill the
witnesses of God: and 7, where their dead bodies should lie in the streets, and
therefore the place of Antichrist.

A third scripture speaking of the place of Antichrist, Rev. 4.
is that where her destruction is briefly denounced, and there it is called
Babylon that great city, the spirit of God giving us thereby to understand,
that he would have that city seven times at least in this book called
Babylon the great, to be sufficiently known unto us, to be Rome, the second
Babylon, which then was great, and not the old Babylon, which neither in her
best estate was able to compare with the greatness of Rome, and in the time of
S. John was in great decay, having been twice or thrice before taken, sacked
and spoiled; namely first by Cyrus, Dan. 5.
drawing and diverting Euphrates, while Belshazzar sat feasting and drinking.
Secondly by Darius with the help of Zopirus, Herod. lib 3. Justin.
who reduced it to an absolute subjection under the Persians, and with the rest
of that Empire, it was conquered by Alexander the Great, Diod. Sic. l. 19.
and after his time, it was spoiled again by Demetrius, and thereupon forsaken
by her inhabitants, and never rose afterward to any greatness, authority or
power. Whereupon S. Augustine observes, that as the Assyrian monarchy
decayed, so Rome the second Babylon, and as it were the daughter of the first
grew, and so it was in S. John's time, the great city, Lady of the world, and
governed only by Caesar's, one of her seven Heads, which ruled over the kings
of the earth.

A fourth scripture is that, Rev. 18.
wherein her destruction is much more largely and particularly described by
seven notable attributes, most agreeable to Rome. 1, She is called again
Babylon. 2, That great city. 3, With whom the kings and nations of the earth
have committed fornication. 4, Most proud and vainglorious, for she says: I
sit as a queen, and am no widow. And so Tully calls her, Vide Lip^. de magn^^
Romans
Princeps omnium terrarum: and Frontinus, regina and domina orbis: and beyond
all these Martial, Terrarum Dea Gentiumque Roma. 5, Therefore in the text she
is truly called mighty. 6, Abounding in all riches and Treasures, Non auro
tectisve modus. And 7, Lucan. lib. 1.
abounding in all delicates and pleasures, abundantes voluptates. Livy in prol.
Of which points I have said somewhat before, and for the two last notes of the
super-aboundance of their riches, and wantonness in pleasures and delicates, I
will cite but two examples more out of Horace. whereof the first shall not be
of any of their Princes, Senators, or Patritii, no nor yet of their Equites or
Gentlemen but of the meanest sort:

Quinti progenies Arri, par nobile fratrum
Nequitia and nugis. -- A couple of knaves: Horat. Sermon.* lib. 2, sat. 3.

Luscinias soliti impenso prandere coemptas.
They were wont to dine upon Nightingales though very dearly bought. A dish
that I think no Prince in Christendom would desire for any good taste, nor
these men, but for their luxurious prodigality. And yet see another not of
Antonius, or Cleopatra, but of a stage players son:

Filius Aesopi detractam ex aure Metellae
(Scilicet ut decies solidum exorberet) aceto
Diluit in signem baccam. --
O brave drinker that dissolved in vinegar a pearl worth five and twenty
thousand Crowns (as the Interpreters expound it* in Eng. coin about 6250
pound, if you take these crowns to be English.
taken from the ear of the Lady Metella, that he might drink it of at a
draught. I would feign know whether these men did more abound in riches or in
Luxury, in wealth or in wantonness, that were so costly luxurious in their
meats and drinks. Joseph, antiq. lb. 18.
Neither do I now marvail at the sum which another Roman gentleman offered to
expugne the chastity of the Lady Paulina being 25 Myriades drachmarum every
100 drachmae, being accounted worth 58 shil. 4 pence, and consequently,
amounting in our English coin to above 7290 pounds. what city was ever like
to this in treasures or filthy pleasures?

But I have to a fifth place of scripture which will deserv both longer stay and
better consideration. And because I shall herein differ not a little from all
other interpreters that I have read, I have the greater reason to continue my
course in Problems. Rev. 16
The text of Scripture is the Prophecy of Armageddon or Armagedon, noted for a
place where the Kings of the earth are gathered together to the battle of the
great day of God almighty. The word is Hebrew, and because the Hebrew names by
reason of the difference of the points are subject to diverse manner of
readings I would first learn whether it may not be taken for Harmegeddon which
signifies the mountain of pleasant and precious fruits? For so the word Meged
imports, Cant. 4, 13.
as it is expounded in other parts of the Scripture, Genesis 24, 53.
to which is added the Hebrew letter Nun, Ezr. 1, 6. Buxtorf.
a termination as well of the Feminine as of the Masculine and common gender, to
note that those precious and pleasant fruits belong to women as well as to men.
Now this does plainly agree with that which in the former place has been
observed of Rome the second Babylon, viz. that she abounds in riches
delicates and wantonness, and it has an Antithesis to the description of mount
Sion, as it is expressed unto us both in the 14. chap. of this Revelation and
in the second Psalm. Psalm. 2.
For there says God I have set my King upon Sion Har-codshi, the mountain of
my holiness. But here the Kings and Princes of the earth are gathered to
Har-megeddon the mountain of the precious and pleasant fruits of the earth. The
company of the Lamb upon Mount Sion, Rev. 14.
are such as have not defiled themselves with women. But these pleasant and
precious fruits belong to women as well as men. And the like Antithesis may be
noted in other places of the scripture, as where the Prophet prays to be
delivered from men of this world, which have their portion in this life, Psalm.
17.
and whose bellies God fills with his secret treasure: But I (says he) will
behold thy face in righteousness. So the Apostle describes certain men, whose
God is their belly, Phil. 3.
and who mind earthly things. But our conversation (says he)is in heaven: so
the true church of Christ is set forth, to be adorned with all heavenly graces.
Faith, hope and charity; Rev 12.
namely, the Sun of righteousness to cloth her in faith, the stars to crown
her with light of truth, and hope of immortality, preached by the twelve
Apostles; and the moon and all mutable earthly things to suppor^ her in works
of charity, or to be despised and trodden under foot in respect of eternity.
But the Antichristian Church sits like a Queen of earthly felicities,
clothed with purple, skarlet, Rev. 17.
pearls, gold, and precious stones, abounding in all pleasures and delights,
and supported by the nations of the world. Neither is the other circumstance to
be neglected, namely the meeting and congregation of Princes and Rulers of the
earth, noted as well in the second Psalm, as here in the Revelation, in regard
whereof, Livy, du^in, Pla^ma in sal. 2.
Rome was in ancient time called Regum urbs, for the multitude and magnificent
state of their Senators: so did the Emperor Constance also call it in the
latter time, and so it may be still called, for the number, pomp, and glory
of their Cardinals, who will be honored, and accounted princes. Another
question would I ask, whether this word may not thus be distinguished,
Arma-geddon, with the first Alpha radical, to signify the palace, or castle
of the Troops of women, as well as men. Now, where that palace or castle is,
where women abounding in treasures and pleasures, are best mainteyned and
defended. I would have them to answer, that have seen Rome of late, or that
have read these verses made for her commendation:

Q^ot cae^^m si elias, Vide Abbat. them. Anti^h. cap. 11.
tot habet tua Roma puellas:
Pascua quotque haedos, tot habet tua Roma Cynaedos.
And many such like, or the faculties dispensations pardons and decrees,
flowing from the castle of S. Angelo, and the palace of Lateran in their
favor. And lastly, upon the same word I would ask, whether that the Hebrew
word, which in the Greek writing is Armageddon, may not by an easy
transposition, So Mo^ines makes it Ha. Romagedah to signify the destruction
of Rome.
only of one letter and a prick in the Hebrew, be read and taken for
Romageddon; and so by name lead us to Rome, that high city; for so the word
Rom, also in Hebrew signifies: and their own Authors call it septem urbs alta
jugis, Hieron.
atque altae maenia Romae, where princely men as the Cardinals and women
abounding in treasures and pleasures, as the Cortesanaes are gathered together.
Which transposition of a letter is very usual in the Hebrew, and warranted by
many examples of the holy Scripture. And upon all these precedent places and
circumstances I demand, Dan. 7, 1. and passim alibi.
whether it be possible to apply these prophecies to any city or place in the
world besides Rome? True says the Babylonian, it is to be understood of Rome,
(for so they confess of late, 1 Pet. 5.
upon the word of S. Peter) but Heathen not Christian. To omit that answer,
which is obvious, that the old Ethnic Empire of Rome was the impediment, and
therefore could not be the seat of Antichrist, and that another Ethnic Empire
should be erected there toward the end of the world is incredible; and if it
should, yet it could not fulfill the Prophecies, for many reasons which may be
produced, and to instance, because Antichrist must be one of the seven heads
of Rome, whereof five were fallen in S. John's time, and the Empire was one, and
the seventh must be reveled, after the impediment removed: yet to pass by all
these, consider of two textes more, which shall not come single, but either of
them fortified with an Authentical contestis.

The sixth scripture then, speaking of the Place of Antichrist, tells us
plainly, 2 These. 2. August. de civ. dei. l. 20 cap. 19. Nulli dubliim est cum
de Antichristo ista dixis^^, etc.

Antichristus in domo domini in sede Christi sedebit. Ambros. in locum. Male
Ecc'esiam Dei in tectis aedificiisque veneramini, Anne ambiguum est
Antichristum in his esse sessurum. Hilar. contra Aux.


that it must be the Temple of God. It is the word of S. Paul, which would
never have called the Ethnike state of Rome, the Temple of God. It must
therefore be understood of the church of God, and so the Fathers take it
without all doubt or question, and that in Rome, for out of Rome it is in vain
to seek, as by the former places may fully appear.

And yet this text goes not single, but seems to be drawn out of an ancient
prophecy of the Evangelical Prophet, where he brings in the prince of the
first Babylon, a tipe of the second, using these words: I will ascend into
heaven, Esa. 14.
and exalt my throne above, beside the stars of God. I will sit also upon the
mount of the Church or Congregation. so far the Prophet. Now lay the words of
the Apostle to them. That man of sin exalts himself above all that is
called God* or that is worshipped, so that he does sit in the Temple of God,
showing himself, that he is God. On the mount of the Church, says the one. In
the Temple of God, says the other. The Temple of God was in Jerusalem says
the Babylonian. Object. Answ.
But that is excluded by all the former places of Scripture, most signal and
significant. I demand then, how this place can be understood, but of the
Church of God in Rome? and who can be said, or ever could be said, to sit in
that Church as God, but the Pope?

But mark the seventh, and see whether yet again Rome, and the Church of God
in Rome, be not precisely described. It is in the Prophecy of Daniel, that
beloved Prophet, as our Evangelist was the beloved disciple. He shall plant
(says he) the Tabernacles of his Palace between the seas, Dan. 11, 45.
In the Glorious mountain of Holiness; Neither goes this place alone, but
comes with a witness; For the like is said of the King of Tyrus, a tipe also
of Antichrist, in that severe Priest and Prophet Ezechiel. Thou have said, I am
a God, Ezekiel. 28.
I sit in the seat of God, in the midest of the seas. That which Daniel
signified by setting his Palace between the seas, in the glorious holy
Mountain; that Ezekiel expresses, by sitting in the seat of God, in the
midst of the seas, and whether both these do not prefigure unto us the Church
of Rome: I desire the Learned to judge. It must be a mountain of Holiness, Esa.
11, 9.
and the seat of God, which are the proper Titles of the Church in the old
Prophets. And this church must not be an obscure, Psa. 2 and 48. Zach 8, 3.
or little, but a glorious church; and this Glorious church must be between two
seas; How this can be applied to Tyrus, Babylon, Jerusalem, Constantinople, or
to any other city in the world beside Rome, I ask of all that know the two
famous seas that embrace Italy, whereof the one is called MarC superum,
Adriaticum, or the Gulf of Venice: the other is Mare Inferum, Tirihenum, or
the Straights? both mentioned by Vergil in one verse, for the glory of Italy.

An mare quod supera memorem, quodque alluit infra? Between these two seas
Rome was, and is seated, which was in the beginning a church truly glorious,
both for the Martyrdom of many godly men, and for their constant profession of
the truth against Heretics (for I will not detract the least thing from them)
and for that it was the Imperial city. For which cause it was called Prima
seeds, which was the greatest title that it had for 400 years. Prosper was
first Pope Leo his secretary.
But after that, Pope Leo the eloquent Orator, and Prosper his familiar friend,
or Secretary, an excellent Poet, began to ascribe higher titles unto it:

-- Peslem subeuntem prima recidit. Archb. of Canterb. in his answer to D.
Hill. Prosper in lib. de ingratis. Mark the statelines of these verses, with
the resonans of his letters S. P. Q. R.

Seeds Roma Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris
Facta caput mundo, quiCquid non possidet armis.
Religione tenet.
After this (I say) and such like, Tacitus li. 1.
by little and little taking upon her (as Augustus did in taking of the Empire)
of a church truly Glorious, she began to be vain glorious, but still glorious,
for none else could be the seat of Antichrist. And it seems, they followed the
wit and policy of their founder Romulus, of whom it is said, that he was,
Livy lib. 1.
Tum f^ctis vir magnificus; tum factorum ostentator haud minor. He would loose
nothing for lack of seting forth. And the like is said of Scipio, and other
Romans. But if any will apply this text to Antiochus, and say, that he placed
the Tabernacles of his Palace in Jerusalem; I will not deny, but Antiochus
might be signified in Daniell, to be the type of Antichrist: but if they will
say, that this place is meant only of Jerusalem and Antiochus, I would desire
them to answer me well to these three questions: First, how the church of God
in Jerusalem could be called a glorious church, or the temple, a glorious
temple in those times, when it appears by the Prophets, Hag. 2.
that the second temple then standing was as nothing to the former, and the
church was not only oppressed, and persecuted by Antiochus and others: Vid.
Aug de civ. dei. l. 18. cap. 45.
but divided into sects in it self, namely the Sadducces, Pharisees, Essees
and others? Secondly between what seas is Jerusalem seated? True it is the
great Midland sea is of the one side, but of the other, there is none, but
either Asph^ltis, or Tiberius, or Euphrates, which are but petty floods to
make a sea. But granting they might be called seas (as they are some times) yet
where do we read, or can we find that ever Antiochus planted his seat in
Jerusalem? If they will needs have a litterall exposition; let them show how
and when this was fulfilled? But in Rome all these things concur, a glorious
church, between two seas, and a place noted by other prophecies, to be that
great, that septimountaine, that Imperial city, whereupon Antichrist should
sit. The same argument will serve to prove, that it cannot be meant of Babylon,
Constantinople, or any other city. For it cannot stand with the Prophecies.
Yet another objection is made; Object.
If the temple of God, and a mountain of holiness, then how Idolatrous? Sodom?
Egypt? etc. as the place of Antichrist must be? if idolatrous, how christian?
This I shall declare more at large, when I come to speak of the times of
Antichrist, Distinguo tempora.
and there it shall appear, how it was Christian, and how it fell to idolatry,
and other sins, still reteyning the name, and outward profession of
christianity. Ans.
But in the mean space the godly, and reverend Bishop Salvianus shall answer
for me, who shows that Rome in his time, in the times of her best bishops and
under Christian Emperors continued still in her heathenish idolatry and
abominable filthiness. It would be too long to recite all his words, although
most worthy, but amongst the rest, after that he had very gravely and
seriously inveyed against the intolerable exactions and oppressions of those
times, he adds these words, which I think fit to recite somewhat the more at
large for the full clearing of this point, and because the book is not common.
Atque hoc videlicet Laici tantummodo, non quidam etiam Clericorum; saeculares
tantummodo, non mulit etiam religiosi. Imo sub specie Religionis, vitiis
saeculatibus mancipati, qui scilicet post veterum flagitiorum probra, and
crimina, titulo sanctitatis sibimet inscripto, non conversatione aliis sed
professione, Whom does he mean by this title of ho^ynes?
nomen tantum denotavere non vitam: and summam divini cultus habitum magis quam
actum existimantes, vestem tantummodo exuere, non mentem* and a little after,
Quomodo igitur tales isti paenitentiam se egisse non penitentes sicut etiam
illi de conversione, ac Deo aliquid cogitasse, qui a conjugibus propriis
abstinentes, a rerum alienarum pervasione non abstinent: and cum profiteantur
continentiam corporum, incontinentia debacchantur animorum. Novum prorsus
conversionis genus. Licita non faciunt: and illicita committunt. Temperant a
conjugio, and non temperant a Rapina. Quid agis stulta persuasio? Peccata
interdixit, Deus, non matrimonia. and a little after. Quid ergo simile apud
barbaros Gothos? quis ecrum amantibus nocet? tu amantes persequeris: tu
offerentibus munera, manus amputas; tu diligentes proximos necas. Non metuis?
non expavescis? with such and many other like words in his first book, with
great authority and severitie (like a worthy Bishop) he reprehendeth their
greivious sins of oppression, which in the Scripture is accounted a kind of
murder, a crying sin according to the verse:

Voces clamorum, vox sanguinis, and Sod^morum;
Vox oppressorum, and merces detenta laborum.
To which we may add,

Turba idolorum, and blasphemia sacrilegorum. For so he goes forward in his
sixth book to show the sins, not only of murder filthiness, and Sodomy, but
of most abominable and Hethenish idolatry, used and continued in Rome, even
in those her best times: whereof he proves, not only particular persons, but
the whole city even the Christians in it, to be guilty. First for murder he
prooveth them to be guilty, by their common shows in theaters, where men were
cast to be devoured of beasts, for the pleasures of the spectators: then for
their idolatry in their plays: and for their filthy beastlines every where.
his words be these. Nihil ferme vel criminum, vel flagitiorum est, quod in
spectaculis non sit: ubi summum delitiarum genus est mori homines, aut quod est
morte gravius acerbiusque lacerari: expleri ferarum alvos humanis carnibus:
comedi homines cum circumstantium laetitia; conspicientium voluptate; hoc est
non minus pene hominum aspectibus, quam bestiarum dentibus devorari. And a
little after: Sed haec (inquis) non semper siunt: Certum est, and praeclara
erroris est excusatio; quia non semper siunt: quasi vero unquam fieri debeant,
quae Deum laedunt; aut ideo quae mala sunt been fiant, quia non jugiter fiant.
Nam and homicidae homines non semper occidunt, and tamen homicidae sunt, etiam
quando non occidunt. Et latrones omnes, non semper latrotinantur: sed latrenes
tamen esse non desinunt. sic utique omnes hi qui spectaculis istiusmodi
delectantur, etiam quando non spectant innoxii tamen a spectaculorum maculis
mente non sunt, quia semper vellent spectare, si possent. So much for murder,
now for Idolatry and sacrilege. It follows, Nec solum hoc, sed sunt alia
majora. Quid enim? nunquid non consulibus and pulli adhuc Gentilium
sacrilegiorum more pascuntur? and volantis pennae auguria quaeruntur? ac pene
omnia fiunt, quae etiam illi quondom Pagani veteres frivola, atque irridenda
duxerunt? Et cum haec omnia ipsi agant* qui annis nomina tribuunt, and a quibus
anni ipsi exordium sumunt, credimus nobis been annos posse procedere, qui a
rebus talibus ordiantur? vel ordinantur.
Atque utinam sicut haec, propter consules tantum fiunt: ita illos tantum
incestarent, propter quos fiunt. Illud est feralissimum and gravissimum, quod
dum consensu publico aguntur, honor paucissimorum fit crimen omnium. And again
speaking of their plays and spectacles, he says: Per turpitudines criminosas
aeterna illic salus Christianae plebis extinguitur, and per sacrilegas
superstitiones maiestas divina violatur. Dubium enim non est quod ledunt Deum,
u^pote Idolis consecratae. Colitur nam que and honoratur Minerva in gymnasiis,
Venus in theatris, Neptunus in cercis, Mars in arenis, Mercurius in palestris,
and ideo pro qualitate auctorum, cultus est superstitionum. So much for their
Idolatry. Now for their detestable and Sodomiticall filthiness. De quotidianis
impuritatibus loquamur (says he) Equidem quia longum est dicere de omnibus,
Amphitheatris, scilicet odaeis lusoriis pompis athletis, petaminariis,
pantomimis caeterisque portentis (quae piget dicere, quia piget malum tale vel
nosse) de solis circorum and theatrorum impuritatibus dico. Talia enim sunt
quae illic siunt, ut ea non solum dicere, sedetiam recordari aliquis sine
pollutione non possit. With many words to that effect, and concludes the place
with an Ecce qualia aut omnes aut pene omnes Romani agunt. and again, Ecce in
numera Christianorum millia in spectaculis rerum turpium commorantur. And
again, Christo ergo (o amen ta monstrosa) Christo Circenses offerimus and
mimos: Christo, pro beneficiis suis theatrorum obscaena reddimus. Christo
ludicrorum turpissimorum hostias immolamus. And again, Vbi christianitas
nostra, qui ad hoc tantummodo sacramentu^ salutis accepimus? ut maiora postea
praevaricationis scelere peccemus? Nos ecclesiis Dei ludiera anteponimus. Nos
altaria spernimus and theatra honoramus. Si quando enim venerit quod scit;
saepe evenit, ut eodem die and festivitas ecclesiastica, and ludi public^
agantur, quaero, ab omnium conscientia quis locus maiores christianoru^ virorum
cepias habeat, caveane ludi publici an atrium dei and templum omnes sectentur
magis an theatrum. Where shall we find greater armies of christians in the
church or theater? And again, Vitiositas and impuritas quasi germanitas quaedam
est Romanorum hominum, and quasi men's atque natura.

And in the seventh book, of their Sodomitrie he says, Quid fieri
prodigiosius potuit? in urbe christiana, in urbe ecclesiastica, quam quondam
doctrinis suis Apostoli instituerant, quam passionibus suis Martyrs
coronarant, viri in semetipsis foeminas profitebantur, and hoc sine pudoris
umbraculo, sine ullo verecundiae amictu: ac quasi parum piaculi esset, si malo
illo malorum tantum inquinarentur authors, per publicam sceleris professionem,
fiebat etiam scelus integrae civitatis. Videbat quippe hoc universa urbs, and
patiebatur: videbant judices, and acquiescebant: populus videbat, and
applaudebat: ac sic diffuso per totam urbem dedecoris scelerisque consortio,
etsi hoc commune omnibus non faciebat actus, commune omnibus faciebat assensus.
And a little after: Vniversa Romani nominis dignitas facinoris prodigiosi
inurebatur infamia. Is not this sufficient to prove Rome, even christian to be
full of Sodomie and Idolatry? A great deal more has he. His whole book is
most worthy to be read over. And this was in his time, which was about the
year of our Lord 460, when there had been at least ten christian Emperors, and
above twenty Martyrs and Saints Bishops in Rome, where then was the excellent
purity of the Roman Church, or golden Commonwealth, which some do so much
boast and admire? where was their christianity, as Salvianus himself
demands? Does not the holy Ghost teach us to speak much more truly, Mark
well the Prophecy of Ezec. 7. where he speaks of the worst of the heathen,
and consider by the circumstances whether it can be understood of any but the
Romans.
when it represents that Empire unto us, under the name of I^on mixed with
dyrt? as the Emperor Tiberius was called Lutum sanguine maceratum, dyrt mixed
with blood? unles you will therefore call it golden, because in filthiness and
Idolatry it was like the old Babylon, which was figured by the head of Gold?
or because it is the seat of the golden Harlot? But of this elsewhere. In the
mean space I demand again, where was the zeal of their Bishops to reform or
correct these enormities, even of the Christians? where were their decrees or
decretals to restrain them? where was the courage of the Priests or Clergy to
reprehend or censure them? was there none amongst them all, but that Tertullian
of Carthage and Salvianus of Massilia must rise up to speak of it? Videbat hoc
universa urbs and patiebatur, videbant Iudices, and acquiescebant: says he: So
here was Babylon, and yet I confess there was Sion also, But Sion dwelling in
Babylon. Whereof the Prophet Zachary, after the return from the first
captivity seems to speak saying: Zach. 2.
Deliver thy self o Sion, Rev. 18.
that dwell with the daughter of Babylon. And our Evangelist repeateth: Come
out of her my people; showing that the prophecy of Esaias and Jeremy concerning
her destruction are not yet fulfilled. I demand then upon all these premises,
whether any place can be found in the world qualified for to be the seat of
Antichrist, according to these Prophesies, besides the Septimontane Rome, and
that Christian: the mountain of holiness, and yet Sodom; the Temple of God and
yet Egypt, Sion and yet Babylon? which even in her best Christianity retained
the Barbarous cruelty, the abominable filthiness, and horrible idolatry of
Egypt, Sodom and Babylon in their public sights and shows, Theaters,
solemnities, ceremonies and common practice. And no sooner did they suppress
those old Pagan Idolatries, but they fell to this new Idolatry of worshipping
of Images, which they still practice and defend, together with their ever
accustomed filthiness and cruelty; whereupon I must propose this Problem:
whether by any possibility or imagination of man, these things can be applied
to any other place, but Rome?

II. Of the state of Antichrist.
THE next thing after the place, which offers it self to our senses and
consideration, seems to be the subject, or body without which no Accident
can consist, and therefore used in the definition of Accidents, especially
Relatiues, which cannot be without their Correlatiues: as a father cannot be so
called, but in respect of his son, nor a Monarch or king, but in respect of
his monarchy, kingdom, or state Politic subject unto him And this also must
be proportionable, as we said before of Relatiues. For as great things must
have great places; so a great and mighty Monarch, must have a great state
under him: And as by the greatness of the place we may measure the body: so by
the greatness of the state subject to any Prince, we judge of the greatness and
power of the Prince himself. We have seen already a great place appointed for
Antichrist; Let us now see the greatness of the state and body politic that
must be subject unto him and support him. And this also has not been neglected
in the H. Scriptures; but is set forth, and described in diverse places,
especially three, as the best Interpreters do observe, which also do concur,
and have good correspondence with the prophecies concerning his place above
specified. First in the seventh chap. of the prophet Daniel. Secondly the 13
chapter of the Rev. And thirdly, the 17 chapter of the Rev. which places agree in some
things, and differ in others, and that agreement and those differences,
together with the reasons thereof deserve to be narrowly sifted.

First in Daniell we find a great and terrible Beast with ten horns, and
amongst the rest a little horn rising up, etc. In the 13 of the Rev. we find
two beasts, one rising e mari out of the Sea, as all the beasts in Daniel, with
ten horns etc. the other rising e Terra. In the 17 chap. of the Rev. we
find a great beast with ten horns, and a whore sitting on his back. Let us
first consider of the description of this great beast rising out of the sea, in
the 13 chapter of the Rev. where he seems to be most fully set forth positiuely,
and after comparatively. Here therefore the great beast rising out of the sea
is described first, in his existence or parts. Secondly, in his power and
actions. For his existence and parts, it is first said to be a beast, rising
out of the sea. Secondly, having seven heads. Thirdly, ten horns crowned.
Fourthly, upon his heads were names of blasphemy. Fifthly, his body like a
Leopard. Sixthly, his feet like a bear. And seventhly, his mouth like a Lion.
For his power and actions it is said. 1, that the dragon gave him his power,
and his throne, and great authority. 2, That one of his heads was wounded, as
it were to death, but his deadly wound was cured. 3, All the world wondered
after the beast, and worshipped the Dragon, which gave power to the beast, and
worshipped the beast, saying, Who is like to the beast? Who is able to make
war with him? 4, There was given him a mouth to speak great things and
blasphemies. 5, Power was given to him to do and continue two and forty
months. 6, He opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheame his
name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. 7, And it was given to
him, to make war with the saints, and to overcome them, and power was given
him over all kindreds tongues and nations. And all that dwell upon earth shall
worship him whose names are not written in the Book of Life, and Lo here a
strange and mighty beast. Now what is meant by the name of a beast rising out
of the sea, the prophet Daniell tells us. For he says plainly, Dan. 7, 23.
that it signifies a kingdom rising upon the earth. And the fourth Beast
(says he) is the fourth kingdom. Which seems to be the same that is here
spoken of. The prophet Ezechiel uses the same phrase, Ezce. 19, and 17.
saying. Wherefore lay thy mother as a Lioness among the Lions? etc. And
again, the great Eagle, etc. Now if this be a kingdom, which is spoken of by
our Evangelist, of necessity it must be some very great and mighty kingdom,
for so it appears by all parts of the description, especially where it is
said, that all the world wo^shipeth it. And in the question that is asked: Who
is able to war with him? parallel to that question asked in another place,
What city is like to this great city? As the description also of this beast
here, is almost the same with that which is expressed in the 17 chap. of this
Book. I ask then, what kingdom or Empire can be understood in this place?
Surely he that will say that this beast here, and the beast in the 17 chap. do
signify any other kingdom beside Rome, must produce some other great Empire,
to whom the seven heads, and the other attributes there given unto it, may be
applied, as well as to the Roman, which no man yet could ever do. Let us
therefore see the description of this mighty Empire comparatiue, and wherein
it does agree or differ from that which is described by the Prophet Daniel, and
by this our Evangelist in the 17 chapter The fourth Beast (says the Prophet)
coming out of the sea, was fearful and terrible, and very strong. It had
great Iron teeth, it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue
under his feet, it was unlike the other beasts, for it had ten horns, and there
came up among them another little horn, before whom three of the first horns
were plucked away, and in this horn were eyes like a man, and a mouth speaking
presumptuous things. And this fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom, and
shall be unlike to all kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and tread
it down, and break it in pieces, and the teene horns out of this kingdom
are ten kings, and another shall arise after them, and he shall be unlike the
first, and shall subdue three kings. And shall speak words against the Most
High, and think that he may change times and laws, and they shall be given
into his hands until a time, times, and half a time. But the judgment shall
sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and destroy it unto the
end.

This is Daniels description of the fourth Monarchy. Let us hear again how
the Evangelist describes it in the 13 chap. I saw a beast rising out of the
sea having seven heads, Rev. 13.
and ten horns (so Daniell) and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his
heads the names of blasphemy. And the Beast which I saw was like a Leopard,
and his feet were as the feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a
lion, and the dragon gave him his throne and great authority: and I saw one of
his heads as wounded to death, but the deadly wound was healed, and all the
world wondered and followed the beast, and they worshipped the dragon, which gave
power to the beast, saying, Who is like to the beast, who is able to make war
with him? (so Daniell) it shall devour the whole earth, etc. And there was
given unto him a mouth that spoke great things and blasphemies, and power was
given him to continue 42 months. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against
God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in heaven.
And it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them,
and power was given him over every kindred, tongue and nation. Therefore all
that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the
book of life, of the lamb which was slain from the beginning of the world.

In the 17 chap. of the Revelation it is thus: The woman sat upon a scarlet
beast, full of names of blasphemy, Rev. 17.
which had seven heads and ten horns. (so in the former prophecies) And the
beast which thou have seen, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit, and shall go into perdition. And they that dwell on the
earth shall wonder, whose names are not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and
yet is. Here is the mind that has wisdom: The seven heads are seven
mountains, they are also seven kings, five are fallen, one is, another is not
yet come, and when he comes he must continue a short space. And the beast that
was and is not, is the eight, and is of the seven, and shall go into
destruction. And the ten horns which thou saw are ten kings, which yet have
not received a kingdom, but shall receive power as kings at one hour with the
beast. These shall have one mind; and shall give their power and athoritie to
the beast. These shall fight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them,
and the ten horns shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and
naked, and shall eat her flesh and shall burn her with fire. They that be of
indifferent Judgment may see in that Prophecy of Daniell many things that
cannot be applied to Antiochus, or to the kingdom of the Seleucidae. Vide
Brightm^. in Dan. 11.
As first the great power of this fourth kingdom, which the Prophet sets
forth in more terrible, and dreadful manner, then any of the former. But was
the kingdom of the Seleucidae more terrible or more powerful then the
Assirian, and Caldean, the Median and Persian? or the Grecian Monarchy? was
Antiochus any way comparable to Nabuchadnezzar, Cyrus or Alexander? Did he
devour the whole earth? Also this fourth kingdom shall think to make changes of
times or laws, Dan. 7.
etc. did Antiochus so? Besides by the words of Daniel, it may seem that the
fourth kingdom shall continue until the final judgment, which cannot agree to
the Seleucidans. Letting therefore that opinion pass as a Jewish conceit
approved by none of the ancient, that I can find, Hieron. in Da^.
but Porphyry, and some few of late, that are too much addicted to the Rabbis,
I think there is little doubt to be made (but although some things may be
applied to Antiochus: Hieron. in Dan 2 and 4. Quartum regu. perspic ue pertinet
ad Romans August. Nich de Lyra. Antoninus, Marsil. Fic. Sleidan. Napier in Apoc.
Abbat. demonstr. Ant^chr. P^raeus Not. Geneven. etc*
yet) this beast here signifies the Roman Monarchy, and the little horn
signifies Antichrist, shadowed in some things by Antiochus. And so I find the
opinion of the ancient and best interpreters. Then to go forward, and see what
points these two excellent and divine Prophets apply to the Roman Empire; and
wherein they agree or differ. And truly to my understanding they seem to agree
in seven points, very material.

1. In the rising of this beast, which both affirm to be out of the sea.

2. In the name, a Beast, that is, a Kingdom, as the Angel expounds it, not
one King individual: although if he did say a King, we may understand well
enough the whole succession: as where he says, Thou (o King) art that head of
Gold.

3. In the attribute which they give unto him. Great strength and power
unmatchable, and unresistable.

4. In his disposition most cruel and bloody.

5. In the instruments of his power, Ten horns, that is, ten Kings.

6. In his War against the saints, and prevailing against them.

7. In his Blasphemy against God. Upon which 7. considerations I demand
whether we may not safely conclude with S. Hierom S. Augustine, and the other
excellent expositors above cited, that this Kingdom perspicue, manifestly does
belong to the Romans. which is also here proved by these seven Attributes.

1. His rising out of the sea of great commotions in the world, like others.

2. A politic state or kingdom like the others.

3. More powerful then any other, for none overcame the whole earth like the
Romans; none had power over all kinreds tongues and nations like to them.

4. None so cruel and bloody.

5. None had so many great Kings at command.

6. None raised so great persecutions against the saints, and true Church of
God.

7. None have been so blasphemous against God as they, whereof hereafter.

These Attributes therefore seem to be applied to the Roman Empire, as one
body.

Now let us see the singularityes wherein every one of these three prophesies
differs from the other, and consider whether they also do not properly belong
to Rome. The singularities in Daniel are such, as being well considered seem
to declare unto us* that it was the intention of the Holy Ghost not only to
represent unto us the Roman Empire and therein Antichrist afar of: But to
show us also a Type of Antichristian impiety in Antiochus, that was then to
come near at hand (both being enemies to the Church, it could not be, but that
one should be like the other in somewhat.) And in the Roman Empire also: to
note that State wherein it stood before the Caesar's, and therefore tempereth
his words sometimes more significantly to express the truth, sometimes more
properly to shadow the Type. A thing not unusual in sacred prophecies: Aug. de
civ. dei lib 17.
For so David speaking of our Savior in his own person: I have sworn once by
my Holiness that I will not fail David, Psalm 89.
his seed shall endure for ever etc. which properly belongs to Christ, yet
adds these words more proper to himself. Thou have broken the Covenant of
thy Servant, Let Theologians consider the p^aces, where David pr^y^th God to
confound o^ destroy his enemies.
thou have broken down all his walls etc. So God in pronouncing his judgment
upon the Serpent uses these words most significantly, to foreshew that our
Savior should overcom the Devil. The Seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head. yet these words in the same place, upon thy belly shall thou
go, and dust shall thou eat, seem more proper to the material serpent.

So it seems in this prophesy, Daniel though he speak principally of the
fourth great kingdom more powerful than any of the rest, which was the Roman;
yet he inter-laceth somewhat concerning Antiochus the Type being though not a
Roman, yet an enemy of the saints: but more applyable to Antichrist the great
enemy, as may appear by these seven particulars or singularities.

1. In that he does not resemble this fourth kingdom to any beast as he did the
first to a Lion. The second to a Bear. The third to a Leopard. but of this he
does not show of what certain form or shape it was, but only that it was
unlike to the fo^mer, and most strong and terrible, whereupon I ask how this
can possibly be applied to Antiochus who had but a piece of Alexanders Empire;
and whether it do not lively express unto us the Roman state, before it was
settled in the Caesar's: when it had got the Monarchy of the world, as Polyb
affirms, and yet had no certain form of government, but was sometimes ruled
by Consuls, sometimes by Dictators, sometimes by the Senate; sometimes by the
People; sometimes by the Opimates and Patritii, and sometimes by the turbulent
Tribunes and seditious multitude? But in the time of S. John this Empire was
grown to a certain, though a monsterous form under the Caesar's: and therefore
we see it by him more certainly described.

The second singularity in Daniel is, that it is said to have ten horns,
which are not here said to be crowned, as they in the Revelations. And this
much more properly signifies the kings subject to the Roman state, who made
kings their ministers and servants, then to the Selucidan Princes, which were
absolute kings, crowned, and acknowledging no Superior. But in the Revelation,
these things signified by the name of horns, are said to have crowns, and by
certain notes distinguished from the other. Whereof hereafter.

The third singularity in Daniel is that among these kings there arose another
unlike the first. And this seems to prefigure Antichrist, whose kingdom is
indeed most unlike to any of the other kings, and can not be applied to
Antiochus.

The fourth note in Daniel is, that before this little Horn or king three other
kings were plucked away, which by some Interpreters is very hardly drawn to
Antiochus, but if we consider the Roman Antichrist, it will appear to be easily
applied, and truly fulfilled. For it is manifest that the Romans drove first
the Grecian Empires, secondly the French, and thirdly the Germans out of Rome,
and Italy, as shall be showed hereafter. So those three kings were plucked
away, to make room for this little horn. As for the Exarch of Ravenna, which
was but the Emperors Viceroy, I cannot afford him the quality or title of a
king; and for the Lombards they never settled their state in Rome.

The fifth singularity in Daniel is, that this king coming up last, spoke
presumptuous words and blasphemies. And this I call a singularity in Daniel.
For although blasphemy is attributed to this beast by S. John also, yet here
it is said only to be in his words, but by S. John in his names. Now this was
fulfilled in Antiochus, and much more it is in Antichrist, as it is noted in
the Revelation.

The sixth singularity is, that this little horn shall destroy the saints, and
faithful servants of God, and this was partly done by Antiochus, but much more
prophesied and performed by Antichrist: of whom it is said, Rev. 13.
that he shall make war with the Saints, and overcome them.

The seventh is, that this little horn shall think to change times and laws,
things which God has specially reserved to himself. Little of this do we read
to be done by Antiochus, and indeed in such things what could one man do?
Laws can very hardly be changed in a short time: but to alter times in a
short time is impossible. But this is verified fully in the Roman Antichrist,
as shall be showed hereafter. Probl. 6.
Having therefore thus observed the singularities of the prophet Daniell, in
describing the Roman beast, especially before the Caesar's. Let us now see the
singularities observed by our Apostle, describing it in the 13 chap. under the
Caesar's, and in the 17 under Antichrist. First in this 13 chapter this Empire is
represented under a certain form, like a Leopard, which Daniel does not say.

2, It has seven heads, expounded to be seven hills, and seven kings. Cap.
17.

3, It has his ten horns crowned.

4, Here is no mention of any little horn arising up after ^he rest, nor of
any of those things, which Daniel speaks of him: but there is a second beast
rising up after the first. Consider now whether the little horn be not now
become this second beast.

5, It is said, that upon his heads were names of blasphemy.

6, One of his heads was wounded to death.

7, His deadly wound was cured.

Let us come to the description of this beast, in the 17 chap. which I mean but
only to touch, leaving the further examination thereof, to a place more
convenient. Probl. ^.


1, In Daniel, there was a ^ittle horn. In the 13 of the Revelation, a second
Beast, whereof in the 17 chap. there is little or no mention.

2, In this chap there is a woman sitting upon the seuen-headed beast, whereof
in Daniel, or in the 13 chap. there is nothing, what is become of the horn, or
second beast, if it be not this woman?

3, In the 13 chapter the beast is not said to be of any color, but in the
seventeenth of a skarlet, or Crimson color.

4, Power is given to the beast over every kindred, tongue and nation, in the
13 chapter but in the 17, the woman is supported by peoples, multitudes, and
nations.

5, Here in the 13 chapter the beast makes war with the saints, but there the
woman is drunken with the blood of the saints, and Martyrs of Christ Jesus.

6, Here the names of blasphemy are only upon the heads of the beast: but
there the whole beast is full ^f (...) ^f ^^^sphemie.

7, Here all the world wondreth at the beast and worsh^p^th the dragon and the
beast. But there the kings of the earth ^^mmit fornication with the woman, and
the Inhabitants ^f the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication. so
both are drunk, she with blood, and they with fornication, and there is no
more speech of worsh^ping the beast. Very notable and remarkable differences.
If I be not much deceaved; whereof to speak shortly my opinion under
correction. I am persuaded to collect, that the state of Rome in Daniel is
signified by the fourth beast, specially before the Caesar's: in the 13 of the
Rev by the first beast Mari, under the Cesars, and in the 17 by the skarlet
colored beast under the whore. Antichrist in Daniel is the little horn; in
the 13 of the Apoc. the second beast terra in the 17 the whore. Which being
well observed the reason of all the Concordances and differences between these
prophecies will easily appear. For the proof whereof, le^ us cast our eye back
again, and consider the several parts of the description of this beast, and
therein see, whether it do not fully agree to the Roman state, in these
several times, and whether it can be applied to any other. And first why it is
called a beast, amongst other things, for which the Romanists of these days do
calumniate the professors of true and sincere religion. One is this, that we
say some places of scripture are to be taken figuratively. This a late Jesuit
objecteth against us, calling it a sh^ft: but whether it be a shift or not, it
is none other then the ancient and best interpreters advise us to look unto,
Aug. de doct. C^r^st lb, 2, and 3.
namely S. Augustine in his books de doct^ina Chrisit^na where he shows, that
not only proper but translated words are used in the scripture, and of some
figures, not only the examples, but the names are there to be found, whereof
one (says he) is allegoria, Con^es l. 11.
which is nothing else but a Met^phore continued. Pauca sunt quae proprie
l^quimur, p^ura non proprie, says he in another place, whereupon learned
divines, Tb. Aquin. in 1 sentent.
both Hebrew and Christian have always confessed, that there is not only a
litterall sense to be admitted in the exposition of the scripture, but an
Allegor^^all and Anag^gicall, 10. Picu^ Mi^. in Apolog.
so it be with consent of other places. So our Savior when his Apostles
doubted what he meant, by the leaven of the Phar^sees, Mat. 16.
and of the hypocrisy of the Pharisee. And when his disciples murmured, for
that he said, Except ye eat my flesh, ye have no life, Luke 12.
etc. He answers, What if ye should see me ascend into heaven. Ioh. 6.
It is the spirit that gives life, the flesh profits nothing. So wheresoever
any absurdity, or (as S. Augustine speaks) facinus or fl^gitium, wickedness or
mischief will follow upon the proper exposition, there it must be understood to
be spoken figuratively, for there is nothing taught in the scripture (says he)
but the love of God and our neighbor, so here not only by the consent of all
interpreters, but by the warrant of the spirit of God expounding it to Daniel,
by his Angel, we are taught to understand, that the name of a beast in
prophetical scriptures. Concurrentibus his, quae requiruntur, other places
either concurring, or not repugning, does signify a kingdom going in
succession from man to man, and we have no warrant to take it for one
particular, or individual person, or in any other sense, then the Angel has
expounded it. And this is no new or uncouth manner of speech, to call great
kingdoms by the names of great beasts, as I have touched before: but why and
for what reason, or upon what ground they are so called, is a consideration,
not unworthie to be searched out, so far forth as the mercy and grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, shall illuminate our understanding, and direct our minds;
wherein, if I be somewhat long, I hope the value of the matter may countervayl
our pains: Assist us therefore in this investigation, ^^es. 4.
O Lord, who art ascended up on high, and give gifts unto men. First then I
demand, whether we may not hold it for a certain and infallible verity, that
the later Prophets did converse and exercise themselves in reading and
meditateing upon the law, Deuteronomy 6, 6.
and the writings of the Prophets, that were before them, (...) 18, 15.
as all are commanded to do by Moses, exhorted by David, ^^l. 1.
and taught by the example of Daniel? Secondly, Dan. 9.
I demand, whether we may not believe, that they did thereby obtain an habit,
or grace of God to use the words and phrases of the former Prophets, and to
make use of them by a kind of progression. As when the prophet David had
recorded that excellent prophecy of our Savior Christ, I have set my King
upon Sion, the Hill of my holiness. Psalm. 2. Psalm. 69.
He himself goes forward saying, An high hill is Gods hill, in which it
pleases him to dwell, he will dwell in it for ever. And in another place, He
will hear me from his holy hill. The prophet Micah goes yet farther, Psalm. 50.
saying that the Mountain of Gods house shall be set in the tops of the
mountains, Mich. 3.
and many nations shall flow to it. Which the Prophet Esaias turns to
exhortation. O house of Jacob, Esaias 2.
come ye also and let us walk in the light of the Lord. And the prophet Daniel
uses it by way of progression to a farther prophecy, calling it first, a
stone, cut out without hands, Dan. 2.
which dasheth the kingdoms of the world in pieces, and grew to a mountain
filling the whole earth. Doubtless this Prophetical progression is most
excellent and observable. But I know not whether in all those heavenly writings
any be so useful, or worthy of contemplation, as that of our Savior Christ,
whom when Moses by the dictate of the H. Ghost, had first styled, the seed of
the woman, and afterward the seed of Abraham. The Prophet Esaias goes forward,
and calls him the root, Gen, 3. Esaias 11.
and then the stem, and then the branch. Hereupon again the prophet Hosea goes
forward, and with most sweet and loving words, to comfort the people of God in
their afflictions, applies this to the mystical body of our Savior. Hosh 14.
I will heal their rebellion (says he) I will l^ue them freely, I will be as
the dew to Israel, and he shall grow as the lilly, and fasten his roots, as
the Caedars of Lebanon, his branches shall spread, and his beutie shall be as
the olive, etc. Lo first, a seed, then a root, then a stem, then a branch, and
now a tree bearing and spreading his branches. Yet no word is all this while
of fruit, it comes anon: but by the way these heavenly Prophets make many
excellent uses of these prophetical metaphors. Esaias thus: He shall grow before
him as a branch, Esa. 53.
and as a root out of a dry ground, noting his humiliation. Jeremy thus: I
will raise to David a righteous branch, Ier. 23.
and a king shall reign and prosper, to note his kingdom and exaltation.
Zachary thus: Zach. 6.
behold the man whose name is the branch, he shall build the temple of the
Lord. to signify his priesthood, intercession and mediation. Our most gracious
and blessed Lord being come in the flesh, to show the fulfilling of all these
prophecies, calls himself now no longer a root, or a branch, but I (says
he) am the true generous and fruitful vine. Ioh. 15.
Yea says S. Paul, not only a vine bearing fruit of it self, Romans 11.
but an olive receaving grafts of others. Whereupon he infers a most loving
and grave admonition to all Christians, Be not high minded. Thou bear not
the root but the root, thee. This example of prophetical progression so
sweet, so excellent, so comfortable and so well followed, I could not, I would
not, I durst not conceal or omit. To return to our purpose. Why should I not
think that the prophet Daniel and our prophetical Evangelist S. John in the
description of these four Monarchies observed some such thing? The prophet
David says, that a man without understanding is like a beast. He says also,
that he that makes an Image, Psalm. 49. Psalm, 115.
and he that trusts in it, is without sense like the Image it self. Jeremy
goes forward, Every man is a beast by his skill, Ier. 10, and 51
every founder is confounded by the graven image. Dan. 7.
Lo, now an Idolater is a beast. The prophet Daniel takes up that, and
resembles great Monarchies unto great beasts. It cannot I think be supposed,
but he does it, upon the same reason, namely because they erected or maintained
Idolatries. For which cause they were all represented before, in one Image of
diverse metals; to show that they all agreed in the worshipping of Idols, though
in diverse manners. Now the Prophet Daniel rests not here, but by the
illumination of Gods spirit goes forward to show the properties of these four
kingdoms under the figures of several beasts, and therefore calls the first
a Lion, the second a Bear, the third a Leopard, and the fourth he says, it
was most strong, terrible, cruel, and powerful, yet he finds no name for
it, nor beast whereunto it is like, but where he leaves, S. John goes
forward, saying that it was like to diverse beasts in his several parts. Rev.
13.
For it has the body of a Leopard, the mouth of a Lion, the feet of a Bear
etc. Thus then have we seen (as I suppose) a probable reason, why these great
Monarchies were resembled to beasts: out of which this consideration may
result, that the last of them all, which must of necessity be that of
Antichrist, must exceed all the rest in Idolatry and tyrannous maintenance of
Idolatry. Let us now consider the several parts of this last kingdom. Rev.
17.
And first of the heads. These are said to be seven, expounded by the Angel to
signify seven kings, and seven mountains, and wheresoever we find the seven
Mountains, there we must find also the seven kings. But (says the Angel) it
is the great city that rules over the kings of the earth, an inseparable and
individual property of Rome. No city but that, was ever called Septicollis
or Septimontium. No mountains better known by their several and distinct
names, then those seven of Rome. None did ever boast of seven Mountains in
one city but the Romans. Here therefore we must look for the seven kings.
and yet we need not to seek far, for Livy and Tacitus have expressly named
every one of them, as I showed before, namely their Kings, Consuls, Dictators,
Decemvirs, Tribunes, Caesar's, and Pontifices Max. But here by the way, there is
a singularity to be observed, Rev. 13.
which is not mentioned in any other place, but in this 13 cha. namely that one
of these seven heads was wounded to death, Napier.
but his deadly wound was healed. This most aptly agrees to the Romans, as it
has been well expounded by others, There be some who (because it is said that
this was the wound of a sword, and there is no sword in the scripture so well
noted, as that of the word, Ephe. 6. do interpret this of the wound given to
the Caesarean idolatry, by the preaching of the gospel, which is healed and
restored by the Pont. max. Let Divines judge.
to signify either the wound that was given to the Caesarean head by the
murder of Julius, which was healed by Augustus, or the wound of the same head
in Nero, and the healing of it by Vespasian, Sueton. in vita Vesp.
of whose restoring the Common wealth, Suetonius professedly makes two whole
chapters. But a most signal singularity of these Heads is noted in the 17 chapter
Five (says he) are fallen, one is, and another is not yet come. This brings
us by the hand into Rome. For it is manifest, that of the seven governments of
Rome, five were fallen before the Revelation: namely, the five first named by
Livy, Livy l. 6.
Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs and Tribunes: One was then in being,
namely the Caesar's: and this not obscure. Rev. 17.
But who that one was, that was to come, and to continue but a short space, and
how the beast is called the eight, and yet one of the seven, seems somewhat
intricate and difficult to explain. But I demand here, what is the word in the
text? I am not ignorant that this differs from some others, whom I reverence:
but, Sit liber judex.
Another is not yet come. What other? Not another Head, but another King or
Caesar. For it is not (...), but (...)* and so the beast is called, not the
eight head, but Ogdoos, the eight king. This in my opinion directs us to
Constantine the Christian Emperor, as to him that continued but a short time,
He that will apply this to the eccles. state of the B B. under the Grecia^
Caesar's, must consider how it can be proved, that those B B. had regal power,
and if they had, then how their power can be distinguished from their
successors.
For he alters the form of the Empire, reducing it from Heathenish to
Christian, and translated the sea of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople,
and therefore may well be called an other, but another Caesar, not another
Head. For he continued Caesar still. But God would not suffer that godly
Christian Emperor, long to continue Head of the Antichristian beast; and
therefore moved him to remove his Imperial seat, that the Impediment might be
removed, according to the Prophecy. 2 These. 2.

Then to the second question, who is the beast, that is the eight king, and yet
the seventh head, and one of the seven; who else can it be, but those that
immediately succeeded the Caesar's in the government of Rome? And who were they,
but the Pontifices maximi, did. 96.
as both by their laws and histories appears, For (says the decree)
Constantine gave to Silvester, who then was Summus Pontifex, his palace of
Lateran and his Imperial ornaments with power and principallitie etc. I know
it is objected, that this is under the title of Palea. And much ado there has been about it to little purpose. For look in another part of the decree, Cause.
12. q. 1.
and there it is registered for authentical, that Constantine left to Silvester
imperialem sedem his Imperial sea. If it be objected that the donation of
Constantine is held by many to be forged, that is nothing to the purpose.
Angelus R^ccha de Bibliot vat. brings diverse authors to prove that Co^st.
cessit Pontisici.
For it is not here said, that he gave it, but that he left it, neither is it
here in question, what Constantine truly gave, but what the Bishop of Rome
truly had. Now their Histories do plentifully testify, that whether by the
gift, or cession of Constantine, or by what other means, See Probl. 4.
pretense or color soever it was, their power after the departure of
Constantine grew daily more and more absolute, until they had by little and
little wrought the Emperors not only out of Rome, but out of all Italy, and
in the end brought them under their feet. Platina seems to affirm the
donation, saying that he gave to Silvester his Diadem, and for his sake built
the palace of Lateran. Howsoever if we believe their own Authors, there is no
Empire now to be found in Rome, in epi. ad These. and vide Tho. Aquin. and Lyr.
in 2 These. 2. and al.
as Stapulensis confesses. Vbi nunc est Romana Monarchia? ubi qui in ea mundum
regat habemus? But of the Pope or Pont. Max. it is no less evident, that he
now has, and for these many hundred years has had, Su^. Pon. Dictator
perpetuus que^ principes orb^s adora^t. And again, Totu^ orbe^ terraru^ To*
the absolute government of that great city, and the state, Territory and
Tribunes, thereto belonging, as witnesses Blondus. Which whosoever has after
the removing of the Empire, must be confessed to be Antichrist, in being the
seventh head of Rome. curia sibi subjectum habet. Blondus in Roma instaurata.
Vbi plura. Vid. Adrian. 4. apud Aventi^ and Tho. Aquin. etc.
I refer me to thine own judgment Christian Reader, whether hereby all the
difficulties of the Text be not clearly discussed. First where it says: The
beast which was and is not, is the eight, and is of the seven. And again, The
beast, which was, is not, and yet is. Whether these words can be understood,
but of this Roman Pontifex. For the Pon. Max. was instituted by Numa Pompilius
the second king of Rome, to be the cheef Judge and decider of all matters
concerning Religion, and this continued still in Rome, in great honor, Livy
lib. 1.
until the time of Julius Caesar, distinct from the Dictator: but he took
that, as an high dignity upon himself. And so did Augustus and other Emperors.
And amongst the rest, Sueton.
it is thus reported of Titus. Pontificatum max. ideo se professus accipere, ut
puras servaret manus, fidem praestitit, nec author posthaec cuiusquam necis nec
conscius. Whereby we may see that the law of that supreme Pontificate, was
that they might not be Judges of capital crimes, nor sentence any man to
death. But I have not yet found it written of Domitian, in whose time our
Evangelist received this Revelation, that he took upon him this Pontifical
dignity. And it seems he did not. For else why does not Sueton. speak of it,
as well in him, as in others, and he is not only noted by the Christians for a
bloody Persecutor, but for a cruel Tyrant amongst the Heathen. From which, if
he had taken upon him the high Pontificate (if nothing else, yet) this their
own law, and the shame of the world, I think, would somewhat have restrained
him. I do not read it I say. Therefore I think he was not Pon. Max. And so
the words of our Prophet are exactly fulfilled, that the Beast, the Pont. was
formerly in Rome instituted by Numa, exercised by Nasica, Scipio, Julius,
Augustus, Titus, and many others: and it is not in Domitian, and yet is, though
not in him de facto: yet in the state of Rome in potentia, when they list to
set it up. And it is the eight king of that state, reckoning Constantine the
Christian to be the seventh, yet it is but the seventh head, and of the
seven, because Constantine had no distinct form of Regal authority from the
other Caesar's, and therefore could not be reckoned to be another head from the
Caesar's: And this Pont. Max. who in the time of the Consuls and Pagan Cesars,
was but like a little horn growing, in time of the Christian Emperors like a
Beast of power ascending, now sits like a queen upon the back of the Roman
state commanding. And it shall ascend (says the Angel, out of the bottomless
pit. It shall ascend to his high exaltation of power and dignity, out of the
same place, from whence the Seven headed Beast was raised, or to speak
plainly, it shall be exalted to the highest by the devil, who gave to the
first Beast his power. For this cannot be meant of his first rising: because it
is expressly said in the text, that this beast was before. And so it seems
that all the difficulties may be cleared touching this seventh Head, which as
it is evident in the Text, is sometimes called the Beast. And now for a
breathing I desire to know, whether any person, monarchy or kingdom can be
found in the world, or whether any can be imagined to come hereafter, to whom
all these Prophesies can be so fitly applied? I come to the next remarkable
circumstance: which is, the ten crowned horns. That the Roman Empire, as well
in the time of their Consuls, as of their Cesars, had many kings at their
command is evident by their Histories, and I have partly proved before. But in
this Revelation, Probl. ^.
and specially in the 17 chap. there are diverse singularities to be observed,
in the description of these horns, whereof in Daniell there is no mention.
First, because it is said, that at the time of this Revelation they had not
received a a kingdom. 2, But they shall receive power, at one hour with the
beast. 3. They are crowned. 4. They have one mind to give their power, and
authority to the Beast. 5. They shall fight against Christ. 6. They shall be
overcome by him. 7. And then they shall hate the whore, and make her desolate
and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Not one of these
things can be truly applied to the kings that were under the ancient Roman
Empire, which are indeed spoken of by Daniel. For they had received their
kingdoms before, and were not to expect it in time to come. 2. They are not
said to be crowned, because perhaps they held their crowns, but as tenants at
sufferance. 3. They did not give their power to the Romans, but were conquered
and subdued. We do not read, that they did professedly fight against Christ,
although they were Pagans, or that they were overcome by him, neither can it be
said, that they did hate the whore, or burn her with fire. Massinissa, Prusias
and Ptolomee gave their kingdoms to Rome, but they had received them long
before S. John's time, and did never hate the whore, nor make her desolate, or
burn her with fire. The Goths and Vandales did burn Rome, but they never gave
their power and authority to the Romans. The like differences may be showed of
all other kings that were in the time of the Roman Empire or before. These ten
horns therefore spoken of in the 17 chap. of the Revelation cannot be
understood of those ten, which were spoken of by Daniel, although they may have
somewhat in common with them. But where now shall we find these kings? Look
over all the world, and see where they may be found. When shall they receive
their kingdom, and how long shall we look for them? The impediment of the
Roman Empire is long since removed, by the testimonies, See Probl. 7.
as well of Divines as Chronologers. If the beast or these kings be not yet
come, when will they come? Out of Rome, I say again, as it is said, or the
Roman Empire, Vide Abb. demonst. Antic. c. 4. and there note the words of the
Synod* cited out of Aventin. ann. 7
it is in vain to seek. And if these kings which shall give their power and
Authority to Rome, have not yet received their kingdom, nor given it to the
beast, when shall they receive it, or give it to him? or when shall we see the
accomplishment of this Prophecy? shall we look for it as the Jews look for
their Messiah? But it is the opinion of the best and soundest Interpreters, Our
most excellent learned Soverain king James holds this opinion in Ep. Admonit.
So Napier in Apo. Rensuer. in Isag. etc.
that these ten horns do signify the ten chief Provinces subject to the Roman
Empire, which at one time with the beast, namely upon removing the power of the
Empire, received their power, and by degrees grew up into kingdoms about the
same time, when also the Pope began to take upon him the title of Pontifex Max.
namely about the year of our Lord 700, or within an hundred years after. As
it may be these Graecia, Germania, Gallia, Brittania, Asturia or Leon.
Whereunto now is joined Spain, Pannonia or Hungaria, Polonia, Suetia, Dania,
and Norvegia. Greece, you may say, was before. True, as a Roman Province, but
upon the translation of the state it became a Monarchy in it self, which was
not absolute as long as the chief title was given to Rome. Now if this be so,
when shall we see this performed, if it be not already? When we see that all
these great Princes of Christendom heretofore did yield their authority and
power to the Roman Pontifex. And now, many of them have forsaken him, as
England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, and others of Germany, A great part of
the Dutch, Swisses, and diverse other, which are fallen away from Rome: France
and Venice wavering, is it to be imagined that they will again, give their
power and authority to Rome, or ever come again to give their power and
authority to any other? Therefore I say, that this prophecy is now fulfilled,
or never to be expected. For if we consider well the times forepast, we may
see, that all the great kingdoms of Europe, which were before subject to the
Roman Empire, did arise and begin to take upon them absolute soveranitie, and
power of the sword, upon the remove and decay of the Roman Empire, which was
the time foreshewed for the revealing of Antichrist. And did all give their
power and authority to the Roman Pontifex, they did all fight against Christ
Jesus in persecuting the professors of his word and Scriptures, by the
incitement and instigation of the Pope.

And all those which are fallen from the Pope, have been overcome by the
scripture and word of God, which is called the sword of Christ Jesus. If these
things be so, then why should we look for any other accomplishment of these
Prophecies? or how should we understand, that they can be fulfilled, if not
already? Can it be denied, but all Christian kings gave their power and
authority, and some gave their lands and territories also to Rome?
Constantine, they say, gave to the Pope his diadem, with the palace of
Lateran, and imperial seat. Arithpertus, otherwise called Herebertus the
Lombard gave the Cottia Alps, wherein stands Genua. Pipin, and Charles of
France, gave the principallitie of Ravenna, with the Duchy of Beneventum, and
Spoletium. Henry the IIII Emperor of Germany, and John king of England gave
up their crowns, to whom, but to the Pope of Rome? Can it be denied? All the
Christian kings of that part of Europe, which was subject heretofore to Rome,
gave him authority, and power to do what he lift in their kingdoms. Was ever
the like done to any Monark, Prince, Potentate or Man heretofore? or may we
expect, or look for the like to be done to any in time to come? True it is, we
see not yet the Whore made naked and desolate, nor burnt with fire, Psalm. 31.
the time is in Gods hands, and he that believes will not be too hasty.
Leaving therefore that which is to come, Hab. 2, 3.
unto the disposition of the great disposer of times. Let us go as far as men
may in the description of this mighty Empire, to see what is fulfilled
already. The next note or circumstance here observed is that upon his heads
were the names of blasphemy: but in the 17 chapter it is said that the Beast is
full of names of Blasphemy: A difference not to be neglected. For the
understanding whereof, it is necessary for us, to see how the word Blasphemy
is taken in scripture, and thereby we shall see, how this also agrees to Rome
the Pontifical. First I demand, whether it be not blasphemy, Vide Thom. 2, 2.
q. 13.
when infinite power, or infinite knowledge, or other inseparable and
incommunicable properties of God, Antonin, sum. par. 2. t. 8, c. 7.
are attributed unto men? In which respect the Jews hearing our Savior say,
Sum. Angel. t. blasphem. Marc 14.
Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days; accused him of
Blasphemy, as claiming infinite and divine power to himself, whom they thought
to be but a man. Him they accused falsely: but such in truth was the Blasphemy
of Sennacharib and Rabsake. Who are they among all Gods, that have delivered
their Lands? 2 Reg. 1^.
that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hands? So that of Holofernes.
Iudit. 6.
But the Blasphemy of Nebuchadnezzar king of the first Babel, seems to go a
step farther, Dan. 3.
who not only asked the same Question, Who is the God that can deliver you
from me? But upon the wicked persuasion of his own power, presumed to make an
Image, and commanded it to be worshipped as a God. And shall a man make Gods
(says the Prophet) is not this a blasphemy beyond all blasphemies? Ier. 16.
in as much as he that says he can make a God, does not only make himself
equal to God, but greater, better, more powerful and mighty, as the
efficient cause is always better, and more powerful then the effect. Now in
this kind of Blasphemy, I demand, who ever went beyond the Romans? who not
only made many Gods, and commanded them to be worshipped, but only such as
were made by them, or received by the public authority of their common wealth
or Senate, by pretense of which Law, they refused our Savior Christ, although
recommended to the Senate by Tiberius, Rival in Hist. Iud. Eusebius Tertull.
with a prerogative of his own voice, as some report. So then by the Laws of
the Romans they would have such Gods, as they made themselves, and would have
none other to be worshipped. And whether this were not most horrible and
abominable blasphemy, I desire to be answered. If it were, let us see how it
was used in the old time, when Rome was Ethnic, and how it has been used
since. In the Ethnike Rome none were made Gods, but by the Senate, as appears
by the Law aforesaid, and none were worshipped as Gods, but public asciti, such
as were publicly accepted. And the Senate made no Gods but their king Romulus,
the murderer of his brother, and the Caesar's, which were the heads of that
fourth beast or Monarchy. But now in the time of Christianity, all degrees
are Canonised, and worshipped by the Popes authority, namely, Munkes and
Friars, Nuns and Priests, as well as kings or princes, popes or patriarchs.
So that now we may see the whole body of this Popish Empire full of names of
blasphemy. Again, do they not hold and affirm, that every priest and friar in
celebrating the Mass, does make God, and that a God to be worshipped, as not
only the real but the carnal body of our Lord, and the very same that was
borne of the virgin Marie? See more of their blaspemies in D. Willet, of the 4
Pillets.
I ask whether this be not Blasphemy? and whether these names of Blasphemy are
not now spread over all the body of the beast? If they be, then whether this
difference between the Beast in the 13 chap. and in the 17 of the Revelation
be not herein most precisely and plainly fulfilled? Having observed this
difference, let us return again to the description of this great beast,
representing the old Roman Empire. It is said, it has the body of a Leopard,
the feet of a Bear, and the mouth of a Lion. This has been very well
expounded by the learned Napier, and others, to signify, that it has all the
Instruments of tyranny of all the former Monarchies: viz. the Leopard in
swiftnes and eagernes of the Macedonians. Polyb. lib. 3.
For within three and fifty years, as Polib. notes, from very small
beginnings it got the Monarchy of the world. The Bearelike paws of the
Persians, that is, innumerable armies, apt to march every where, and to take
hold of every thing, as the Bear does with the paws. And the Lion-like mouth
of the Babylonian, not only to devour men, but to roar out blasphemies
against God: as by the instance aforesaid may appear: Who is that God that can
deliver you out of my hands? said the Babylonian; so the Assirian before him,
and so the Roman after him, by reason whereof, they did not only reject our
Savior Christ (as I said before) but stirred up, nine or ten horrible
persecutions, against Christians, Onuph. in Plat. in vit, Silvest. Vid. Aug. de
civ. dei. l. 8,
the first by Nero. 2, by Domitian. 3, by Trajan. 4, by Antoninus. the 5, by
Severus. the 6, by Maximinus. the 7, by Decius. the 8, by Valerianus. and the
9, by Dioclesian. to which they add, the 10 by the Arrians, which was also by
the power of the Roman Empire. No less cruelties have they exercised, since
Rome was Pontifical. but of these elsewhere. And thus have we seen this beast
in his essence and parts. Whereupon for a pause, let us demand again the
question: whether these things can be verified, of any other person, Monarchy,
or state in the world, but only of the Roman? And so let us proceed, and
consider of the same beast, in his power, and actions, and see, whether they
also do not most aptly agree to the same state. And here again, we find seven
things noted in this Beast. 1, That the Dragon gave to this beast, Rev. 1.
his power, and his throne, and great authority, does not Tully say the same
in effect of Rome, though in other words? Omnis Deorum immortalium potestas aut
translata est ad vos, aut communicata vobiscum. Does not Virgil say as much:
Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. And again,
Jupiter in Caelis, Caesar regit omnia terris.


2, All the world worshipped the dragon and the beast. Is there any man ignorant
of the general idolatry and worship, that all the world offered as well to the
Devil, as to the state of Rome in those times?

All the world wondered and followed after the beast, saying who is able to
war with him? Is not the same question moved by Livie. Where he proposes it
as doubtful. If Alexander the great had come into Italy, whether he could
have conquered it? yea he concludes it, upon many reasons, to be without
doubt, that he could not. Polyb. also seems to affirm the same. Again was it
not verified in the time of Dioclesian, whose victories were so great, that the
Roman Empire was said to have no bounds, but where their soldiers could not
march.

4, There was given to him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, as
that which was recorded of Augustus, that he would have himself be honored in
Temples by Priests, and Flamines, Tacit. ^^n. 1.
with all the Ornaments belonging to the Gods, and although he seemed at the
first to refuse it, (if we believe Sueton) yet it appears, he was afterward
well enough content with it, Suetoni^s.
as the same Sueton witnesses, that diverse Provinces made temples, altars, and
plays to his honor, as they did to other of their Idols. so Virgil.

Hic illum vidi juvenem Melibaee quotannis
Bissenos cui nostra dies altaria fumant. Virgil. Argl. 1

And again -- Illius aram Saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus. which
was followed by his successors, Petr. Crinit. de honesta discip. l. 17.
Neque illud ignoratur more fuisse Romans Imperatoribus suas quoque imagines in
templis adorandas apponere, quod a Tertulliano magnis convitiis accusatur. Such
also are the speeches, which they were content to hear from others, and to
allow and reward them.

En huius (nate) auspiciis illa inclyta Roma,
Imperium terris animos aequavit olympo.
5, Power was given him to do, or to continue two and forty months. Which
reckoning according to prophetical computations every month for 30 days,
make 1260. This may be understood either of the continuance of the power of the
Roman idolatry from the beginning, or of their persecutions of the Christians.
For the first, reckon 1260 years from the first settling of the Roman state;
Livy lib. 1.
after the death of Tatius the Sabin, when Romulus alone held the government
peaceably, and enlarged the city, by taking in the Caelian and Quirinal
hills, and established the divelish worship of Jupiter in the first temple,
that was made in Rome, which was the 25 year of his reign (before which time
it was in continual wars and troubles) reckon I say 1260 years from that 25
year, and we shall come to the year 1285 ab urbe condita, which was the year
from the nativitie of our Lord 533, the very next year after which, (that is
to say) in the year 534 a Christo nato, the Christian Emperor Justinian the
first perfected his learned and excellent books of the civil laws, In co^.
wherein beginning with a most christian and pious confession of his faith and
confidence in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, he first purges and
suppresseth all the ancient Idolatrous and superstitious laws, and then
enacteth special laws for the confirmation of the true Christian faith, as
appears in the beginning of the Code. And this was in the year of our Lord
534. as the best Chronologers do agree, Marianus, ^ibhander, Helvins, Onuphr.
Rensuer.
and in this book reciting the former godly constitutions of Constantius,
Gratianus, Arcadius, and other christian Emperors for the shutting up of
Idolatrous Temples, and abolishing of divelish sacrifices and auguries, he gave
such vigor and force thereunto by his authority and confirmation that shortly
after the Roman Consuls, which (as Salvianus testifies, even in Christian
times were wont to be inaugured with heathenish and idolatrous rites) utterly
ceased, and were left off, and so may you see the 1260 years of the
continuance of this Roman beast, or Monarchy of idolatry in Rome fulfilled to
a day. Although if any man think better to follow the computation of the Godly
learned M. Fox, I will not speak against it. He makes of this two and forty
months the number of 294 years, by taking every month for a sabbath of
years: and so interprets this prophecy, to signify the continuance and
determination of the great persecutions of the primitive Church, beginning the
account of those years, from the first persecution of our Savior Christ,
under the Jews and Herod, unto the end of the last persecution under Licinius.
I will not (I say) speak against it. For I must needs with open arms accept
and embrace the judgment of that Godly Father. Who says, de civ. dei. li. 11.
that the obscurity of the word of God is profitable in this respect, that it
brings forth often times in one word, many sentences of truth, and shows
them to the light of our understanding, whiles that one man apprehends it in
one sense, another in another: so that always (says he) that which is
collected in one obscure place, be confirmed either by the attestation of other
manifest things, or by other places not doubtful; for the same Author (says
he in another place) in the same words which we labor to understand
peradventure did see, de doctr. chri. lib. 3.
and think upon this same other sentence, and without all peradventure, the
spirit of God, which used the Author for a penman, did foresee that such a
sense or sentence, also should offer it self to the Readers understanding. Yea,
and did provide and prepare this sentence also to meet with his intelligence,
because this sentence also is true, as well as the other. For out of whose mouth
soever a truth does proceed, it is not to be ascribed to a mutable and mortal
man that spoke it, but to the immutable and eternal God that gave it, Vide
August. in confess. l. 12
and therefore here I will not be afraid most humbly to confess my great
darkness and ignorance in all divine knowledge unto thee, O light of my soul,
and soul of my life. But what hurt is it to me, if I think the meaning of the
Prophet is not as another man thinks it to be: so long as I make no other
sense of his words, then that which thou, the light of all true speaking minds
have approved to be true. But if any be contentious, then O life of the poor,
my God, in whose light, Aug. in conf.
there is no contradiction, and in whose goodness, there is no shadow of change,
rain down meeknes into my heart, that I may patiently bear with such, as do
not so much understand the sense of thy Prophet, as they love their own
prejudicate opinion, not because it is truer, but because it is their own. For
otherwise they would in like manner and measure love and approve the true
sentence of another, as I also love that which they say, when they speak truth*
not because it is their sentence, but because it is truth. Therefore to return
to our purpose: whichsoever of these two interpretations we take, or if we take
a third more unlikely then either, (considering whereof we speak, namely of the
continuance of the power of the Ethnike Roman Monarchy) that these 42 months,
making 1260 days, are to be taken for so many years from the incarnation of
our Lord, it must needs be, that they are long since expired, and consequently,
that the power and time of that first beast and Monarchy is long since ended.
For to take them literally for three years and an half, (as that godly Father,
from whom I do not willingly dissent) does in another place limit the
continuance of Antichrist, upon the words, a time, two times, and a half: To
take them I say literally, that is, for three years and an half, I think to
all that have either read or heard of their actions, will seem to favor of
much mistaking, I might say of much ignorance, but that reverence to that good
Father, who had not then the help and light, which we now have, makes me
forbear other men's affected, and obstinate, and wilful blindness in this
point, which deserves the whipping post. But of this more hereafter.

Let us come therefore to the sixth note, which is of his Blasphemy against
God and his Church. But of this I need not speak any more, having said so much
already.

The seventh is of his wars against the Saints, whereof also I need speak but
little, seeing the said ten horrible persecutions, and many others, stirred up
by the Roman Emperors against the godly christians of the primitive church, are
notorious and known to all men, and never the like to be found in any kingdom
or nation whatsoever, no not under the Turks. But I proceed, this Beast or
Empire had power over all nations. As to give instance, but in one, we may read
of Dioclesian, that within a very short time, he obtained mighty and great
victories in all parts of the world then known, namely in Africa over Egypt, in
Asia over Persia, in Europe over France and Brittanie. Upon all which premises,
I conclude with this Problem, Whether these things can be applied to any
person, kingdom, state or monarchy besides Rome. And whether any other can be
the Antichrist, according to these prophecies, but only he that is the
seventh Head, king, or Commander, of the Roman state? And thus we see the
place of Antichrist, and the state or body politic which he must have. Let
us now come a little nearer to consider of his names.

III. The Names.
No men est per quod, quidque noscitur: The name of every thing is that,
whereby it is known, or as it were not a men, it is that, whereby every thing
is noted or distinguished. The authority to give names belongs primarily to
God, as Genesis 1, Gen 1.
Secondarily to princes and superiors, as Adam Genesis 2. Genesis 2, 19.
Thirdly, to the people, by consent, as Ioh. 13, 13. Ioh. 13.13.
The conditions required in the imposition of names, to make them answerable to
the definition and notation aforesaid, are verity, congruitie, and certainty.
Vide Platon. in Cratyl.
Thus being imposed and approved, they are not to be changed. For they are
notes of our notions, notions of things, limits of distinctions and dignities,
signs of truth, and measures of certainty, which being violated or neglected,
all knowledge turns to error and confusion, all justice to injury, all virtue
to villainy, as Cato in Salust well notes; In Con. Cat.
I am pridem nos vera rerum vocabula amissimus. And Seneca complaining of the
wickedness of times; Prosperum and faelix scelus virtus vocatur. And hereby may
we see the force of the Apostles argument Heb. 1. Hebr. 1, 4.
and the ignorance and presumption of Heretics and Schismatikes, who dare take
to themselves new names, and leave the common name of Christians, given by
oracle from God, and most certainly approved by God. Now if in names given by
men, Acts 11, 26.
certainty ought to be observed, shall we think that the Spirit of God gives
uncertain names, or will call darkness light, or light darkness? Esa. 5.
Questionless he does not give idle or uncertain names: Hebr. 4, 12.
but in this, as in all things else, uses words lively and significant. And
herein is to be noted a difference between the names given by God, and the
names instituted by men. For men give names a posteriori, because things are
so, and men conceive them to be so, therefore they call them so. But the names
given by God are a priori, because God the Almighty, maker of all things, has
ordained that they shall be so, therefore he calls them so, and because he
calls them so, therefore they must be so. Let us see therefore what names are
given to this great enemy of Christ and his Church, and how these names are
used and applied in the Scripture. And first of the name Antichrist. This name
(as all men, though but meanly learned in the Greek tongue do know) is a word
composed of the preposition Anti, and the word Christ: Anti is used in Greek,
sometimes to signify an adversary, sometime a Deputy, or Vicar, as many
learned men have heretofore observed and proved. That it signifies an
adversary is confessed by all, that it signifies a deputy, substitute or
vicar appears by the word Anthupatos, which is expounded by some Proconsull,
Act. 19, 38. and 18, 12.
by others Deputy. Now the names of Christ, So AntiStrategos signifies either
a lieutenant, or the adverse capteyns.
which in Hebrew is Messiah, and in English signifies anointed, is diversely
taken in the holy Scripture. First properly, personally, and Individually, for
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is God blessed for evermore.

Secondly, Aug. de civ. dei l. 17, c. 4.
appellatiuely, for all that have a similitude with him by their unction, as
Kings, Priests and Prophets, in which sense it is used in the Psalm; Psalm,
105, 15
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: and David of king Saul
says, The Lord keep me from doing that unto my master, 1 Samuel 24,
the Lords anointed, to lay mine hand upon him, for he is the anointed of the
Lord. Thirdly, the name of Christ is used mystically, for the mystical body
of our Savior Christ, 1 Cor. 6.
which is his church. In which sense the Apostle speaks Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? 1 Cor. 11.
And again, Christ is the head of every man. for as the body is one, 1 Cor.
12.
and has many members, and all members of one body, so is Christ* for by one
spirit we are all baptized into one body. etc. And this that divine Apostle
himself learned of the words of our Savior Christ from heaven: Saul, Saul,
Act. 9.
why persecutest thou me? Now according to these different acceptions of these
two words, let us consider of the word Antichrist, and to whom it may be
applied. And first for the name of Vicarship. The Pontifex max. of Rome who is
the seventh head or king of the Roman state, and confesses and professes
himself to be head and Governor of Rome, he also confesses, and professes
himself to be the Vicar of Christ, and of God, and in this sense the name
agrees unto him; and so his advocates and followers affirm him to be. But as
the word Antichrist signifies an enemy to Christ, it is by them all stoutly
denied, that the Pope is that Antichrist. Let us come therefore to the touch,
that is the text where Antichrist is named, and thereby learn, how the word is
to be understood. The first place where it is expressly named, is in this our
Apostle S. John: Who is a liar (says he) but he that denies that Jesus is the
Christ, 1 John 2, 22
The same is the Antichrist. And again, 1 John 4.
Every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is
not of God, 2 John 7.
but this is the spirit of the Antichrist. These be all the places where I can
find the very name used in the New Testament. It may percase seem strange to
find it in the old, and yet there it is to be found, and that in a most
excellent prophecy, though not the same in letters, yet the same in sense and
signification, Psalm. 2.
The kings of the earth set themselves (says the Prophet) and the princes
assembled against the Lord, and against his Anointed. This Psalm (if we mark
it well) conteyneth in brief words the sum and effect of all the Prophecies
of Daniel, and the Revelation, concerning the enemies of the Church, and namely
Antichrist; and that appears in seven particulars. First, the rage and fury
of the enemies. 2, their joining together against God and Christ, and their
intention to shake off the yoke of Christ Jesus. 3, the providence of God for
his church, sitting in heaven, as in a watchtower, watching over his enemies,
and laughing them to scorn. 4, the means which God uses to defend them, by
setting Christ to reign in his church. 5, the anointing of our Savior in his
eternal generation, and arming him with regal and sovereign power to
suppress all his enemies. 6, a loving and serious advise to all Princes and
Rulers of the earth, to beware to whom they cleave and adhere, either to
Christ, or to his enemies. And lastly, an assured promise of happiness to all
those that trust in him. Behold then an excellent Prophecy, and the same is
touched again in the 89 Psalm and other places. Psalm. 89, 51.
But to our purpose. Psalm. 2, 2.
The word in this Psalm is Al-Meshico, against his Anointed, wherein Messhiah,
as it is commonly known signifies Anointed or Christ. And the preposition Al,
or Gnal, in Hebrew, is taken as (...) in Greek, not only for adversus, but
for juxta, or secundum, and sometimes super. In the second signification, that
is, juxta or secundum it is accepted by the Pope, neither is it denied by him
or his followers in the third signification, which is super, if we take the
name of Christ, either for his mystical body, (for therein he affirms
himself, to be above the Church, and to be head thereof) of if we take the name
Christ, for all that are anointed, namely, kings, prophets and priests, he
affirms himself to be superior and above them also: which is a special note
of Antichrist, as S. Paul says, He shall exalt himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. Neither do I find, 2 These. 2.
that ever any Emperor, Prince, Prelate, or Potentate, but only the Pope took
upon him the names, either of Vicarius Dei, or Christi Generalis, or Caput
ecclesiae catholicae, or to be super ecclesiam catholicam, not the Emperors of
Rome, not the Turk, nor any other. But the only thing that they stand upon
is, as I said before, that he is not adversarius Christi, personally, and
therefore not Antichrist. But how can this be? For Christ is in heaven, and
Antichrist for all his malice and power cannot touch him there. Let us
therefore examine the places of Scripture aforesaid, where the name of
Antichrist is used, and we shall easily perceive that the name of Christ
cannot, neither ought to be taken for his person. For Christ cannot be found
personally present upon earth: but either spiritually according to his graces,
or sacramentally in the Sacrament, or appellatiuely, as the name is
communicated to others, or mystically, as to the Church. So therefore must the
name of Antichrist be taken for an enemy to the graces, Sacraments or
ministers of Christ, and that not individually in one person, but spiritually
in his works, or appellatiuely in succession. For otherwise it can not express
the true intention, or effect of the thing, for the Emphasis, or principal
force of the sentence in all the places aforesaid, rests upon the word
Christ, that is Anointed: as in the first place, He that denies our Savior is
the Anointed, he is Antichrist: 1 Ioh. 2,
so in the second and third places: 1 Ioh. 4,
He that denies that the Anointed Savior is come into the world, is
Antichrist. So in the Psalm, The kings and princes set themselves against the
Lords Anointed. Now the ointment wherewith our Savior was anointed, was the
fulness of the graces of the H. Ghost, as the scripture testifies. 1, that he
was full of grace. John. 1. Hebr. 1.
2, that he was full of truth. 3, that by himself he purged our sins. 4, that
he is made to us wisdom. 1 Cor. 1.
5, Justification. 6, sanctification. And 7, redemption. and such like. Now he
that denies these graces in our Savior, and fights against those that
ascribe these graces unto him, he or none must be the Antichrist, for other
wars against Christ, who sits in heaven at the right hand of God cannot be
made. Who then are those, that send us to other Mediators and Intercessors,
namely to the virgin Marie, the Apostles, and Saints, to speak and pray for us?
if it be the Pope and his followers, then I ask them, why or for what reason
they will have us so to do? if they do acknowledge our Savior to be full of
grace, why do they send us to others, if our sins make us unworthie to go to
him, that calls us to himself, how many we go to the virgin Marie, or the H.
Apostles who do not call us? Is he not as full of grace that calls us, as
they that call us not? Is he not as easy to be entreated now in heaven, as he
was upon earth, when he did not reject Marie Magdalen, that had seven devils,
the woman of Canaan, whom he rebuked by the name of a dog, nor the man
possessed with a legion. Secondly, how do they acknowledge him to be full of
truth, when they say, that his H. word does not contain all truth, but it must
be pieced out with the traditions, Canons and expositions of their Church? 3.
How do they acknowledge him to be our wisdom, Scriptura seipsam exponit. Chris.
and Aug 2 Timothy 3.
when they will not have his word to be sufficient to interpret it self, and to
instruct us, and make us perfect in all good works, but we must resort to the
Church and receive her judgment from the mouth of their Pope? 4, How do they
acknowledge our Savior Christ, by himself, to have purged all our sins, when
they say, that we must satisfy by good works in our life, and after our death
we must go to Purgatory? 5, How do they acknowledge him to be our
justification, when they say, that we are justified before God by our good
works, and not only by faith in his death and passion, although it be written,
if thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart, Romans
10. Hebr. 10.
that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. 6, How do they
confess him to be our sanctification, or that by one sacrifice, he has
consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, when as they teach, that there
must be offered up daily sacrifices for us in the Mass? And lastly, how do
they accept him for their Redeemer, which affirm that our poenarie works,
Council Trid. ses 14. Bellarm. de paenitent. l. 4.
truly and properly do satisfy God for the guilt of our punishment, which
after the fault forgiven, remains to be expiated? But these points, with many
others which may be produced, to prove that the Pope and his Church, if not
expressly, yet by consequence (which is equivalent) does deny the fulness of all
graces to be in our Savior Christ, I leave to our learned Divines, of whom
some have urged these things already, and others I doubt not, will prosecute
them more at large hereafter. The sum of all this may be reduced to this
Problem: Whether any may more properly be called Antichrist, or may be called
an adversary to Christ, then he that thus denies the graces of our Savior?

Let us come to that which is not only easy to our understanding, but evident
to our senses, which may be seen with our eyes, and felt with our hands. For if
we take the name of Christ here, as he is in the sacrament, who has been a
greater enemy to Christ, the^ the Popes, one of them poisoning it, another
casting it into the fire, all changing, adding or diminishing it? But take the
name as it is communicated to Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and so Antichrist
to be an enemy to them, I demand, who has in secret, (as Antichrist must be
deceivable) been a greater enemy to all christian kings and Princes, then the
Popes, sometimes incensing them to fight with Pagans and Saracens abroad, as de
did Godfry of Bulleyn, and many Princes with him, in the mean space neglecting
their Christian subjects at home: our king Richard the first, and the Emperor
Frederike: sometimes stirring up seditions and rebellions at home, as he did
against the Emperor Henry the IIII. Henry the IIII. king of France, and Queen
Elizabeth, sometimes ministering occasions to make wars betwixt themselves, as
Pope John did by crowning another Emperor while the first was living;
sometimes, by giving away their kingdoms, as Navarre and England, sometimes
leaving them destitute of succor, and open to the universal professed enemy
of all Christians, the Turk, as they did the Grecian Emperors: sometimes
setting secret Traitors to murder them, and sometimes procuring open enemies to
invade them, ever excommunicating, cursing and interdicting one or other of
them. Let the histories of late times be perused, and see whether their end
and drift has not been continually for these 900 years and upwards, to
maintain and advance their own power, riches, jurisdiction and preeminence, by
holding christian princes always obnoxious to them, and to make them
obnoxious, and to keep them under awe, by such means as aforesaid? So
likewise for Priests and Prophets: is he not an adversary to all that will not
submit themselves unto him? as namely to the Greek Church, and all the bishops
and learned pastors of the same, to the godly Valdenses, Albigenses,
Wicklevites and others? Lastly if we take the name of Christ here for his
mystical body, which is the Church, this is also a special note of
Antichrist. For so it is plainly said, that the woman was drunk with the blood
of Saints and Martyrs. And who has shed more blood of godly men, professing
the word of Christ Jesus, then the Popes have done for these last nine hundred
years? I refer my self to the histories and Chronicles of those times. See
Abb^t demonst. antich.
In that one war which they caused Christian Princes to undertake for
Jerusalem, under Godfry of Bollen, it is recorded, that there were slain two
thousand millions of Christians. In Merindall, Cabriers and other places held
by the poor Valdois, they murdered all, men, women, and sucking children. In
the Massacre of France Anno 1572 within eight days were murdered a hundred
thousand, beside many other at other times, in England and else where. So that
howsoever we take the name of Antichrist, either, as Vicar to Christ, or as
adversary, either denying his graces, or suppressing his Liuetenants and
ministers, or persecuting his members; I find this name most agreeable to
Rome: and I demand, Whether it can be so well applied unto any other? But here
will be demanded of me a question, how this name Ho Antichristos that
Antichrist (as they expound the Greek Article, which they would persuade, is
to be understood of one man) can be applied to a succession of men, especially,
seeing some of the Fathers seem to speak of him, but as one man? For the
Fathers (to clear that first) it must be confessed, that quaestionibus non dum
motis, P^^k in Prob.
they spoke sometimes improprie, and incautius, as Bellarm. confesses, or
securius, as S. August. sometimes Rhetorice as S. Ierom. sometimes populariter,
as others do affirm. This question concerning Antichrist, was not appointed for
them, but for us, upon whom it must needs be confessed, that the uttermost ends
of the world are fallen, neither did they much labor in it. And yet we see not
all of them run in one strain. Hilarie seems to speak more largely. He
that refuses the judgment of the Scriptures, Antichristus est. Chrysoft. in
opere imperfecto does not restrain himself to one man: but we (says he)
videmus abominationem desolationis jam stantem in loco sancto, id est, populum
Antichristi in locis ecclesiae. and yet confesses that Antichrist must
continue to the end. Let the whole place be considered. Howsoever it be, it can
not be said, that this question was so well ventilated in those times, as it
has been of late. Then for answer I demand, what, or how much, the question
will be altered if the Pope be acknowledged to be Antichrist, though he be not
proved to be that Antichrist? what difference will it make in the end? Must not
all true Christians beware, avoid, and detest every Antichrist? But to the
point. It is commonly known in Grammar schools, that this particle, Ho, in
Greek, is not always used significantly; nor in a significant use, is it
always taken to signify a particular and individual person; nor yet in
particulars is it always used to note Eminence or singularity. Sometimes, and
that very frequent it is used indefinitely; many times it is joined with a
name of multitude, or with a name of succession. He that has any knowledge in
the Tongues may easily observe, that Ho, in Greek, is not so Emphaticall as
Ha, in Hebrew, or the, in English, which yet is sometimes emphaticall, and
sometimes not. For in the same chapter, where it is said, Ho Antichristos, in
the same it is said (...), 2 Ioh. 2.
he that says he is in light, and hates his brother is in darkness. And again
(...). etc. The lust of the flesh, the pride of life etc. and the very last
word of that Epistle is (...). Keep your selves from Idols. So in other places
it is joined with names indefinite, as (...) in another place with the name of
Christ, Ephesians. 5.
to signify his mystical body consisting of a multitude successiue, under one
head immortal. (...) (says he) so is Christ. Hebr. 9. Abbat. in demonst.
And in another place it is joined expressly with a name of personal
succession, (...), which is ever translated, the High Priest once a year
entered into the holy place, there spoken of. 1 Pet. 2, 17.
So in another place (...), Honor the King. Will any man say it was meant
only of one king? And again (...) by the Highpriest. Hebr. 13, 11*
And the use of Ho in these places, wherein it cannot be meant of one singular
Priest or King, is so like and parallel to the use of it in the name of Ho
Antichristos, that I see not what difference can be made between them. Yet if
any will not take this for a sufficient answer, let him well consider, how he
can answer the problems following, by which I think it will appear, that the
Pope is not only an Antichrist, but even that Antichrist, whereof the
Scripture speaks. Forasmuch as the Prophecies can be verified of none but of
him, and that not of one alone, but of the whole succession. And therefore, to
proceed to the Names, I desire the Reader to examine, whether any of the six
names that I shall now produce, do not fully agree to the Pope, and to all the
Popes that have been in Rome, since the time of Pope Constantine: and if these
names do agree, I must demand, How it can be denied, but that they, and every
one of them, is Ho Antichristos, that Antichrist?

The second name therefore is Pontifex maximus, or summus, the Higest or Great
Priest. This name I am sure they will not deny to their Pope, and likewise I am
sure that, they will deny it to any other, unless it be to our Savior Christ.
To our Lord it belongs of right, and if any other take it upon himself, it
must be by usurpation, and such an usurper of the right and title of our
Savior Christ, must be Antichrist. It was never given to any by God, but to
our Savior Christ. Mel^hisedeck is called a Priest of the High God, Hebr. 6,
20. and 8, 1.
Aaron is called an High Priest, our Savior Christ the High Priest, and the
great Shepherd of our souls, Ecce Pontif. sum. qui non eget alieno ex.
piarisauguine Aug. medit.
and such like titles: but the title of the Highest, or Greatest belongs to
none, but peculiarly to our Savior Christ. I ask then first, whether the Pope
of Rome do not declare himself an enemy to Christ, in that he does exalt
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, in taking a name
upon him higher and greater then was ever given to the sons of men? not to
Aaron the holy, not to Phinehas the zealous, not to Iehojada the worthy, not
to Iehoshua the noble, not to Simeon the glorious, not to John the forerunner,
nor to Melchisedek the royal and singular: every one in his time, the type of
our great and eternal High Priest, far above them all, whose consecration is
eternal, whose Priesthood is eternal, Hebr. 7, 16, 24. and 6, 8. and 9, and
10.
whose entry into the Holy place is eternal, whose oblation is eternal,
whose sacrifice is eternal, whose mediation is eternal, and whose presence in
his Church is eternal. Again, the Apostle proves the excellency and
divinity of our Savior far above all Angels, because he has received a
more excellent name. Does not the same argument prove, that the Pope in taking
an equal name, makes himself equal in dignity? therefore never durst any of
the faithful Martyrs, or Bishops of the primitive Church, take upon him this
name of Summus, or Maximus Pontifex, never any of the Holy Patriarks, or
Prophets, never any of the divine Evangelists, never any of the most blessed
Apostles, for they all knew it belong only to that great High Priest, whose
Priesthood is for ever. And how dare thou (O miserable mortal man) take upon
thee a name so divine, as to be called the Highest or Greatest Priest, whilst
he is living to whom it so inseparably belongs? Why do thou not also
directly call thy self Christ, as well as the Highest Priest, which is
equivalent? I demand again, whether in taking this name, thou do not
proclaim, that thou do deny, that our Lord Christ Jesus is now the Highest or
Greatest Priest? and so profess thy self to be his enemy, and claim to be
above him: seeing it must be confessed, that if the Pope be greatest, then
Christ is not the greatest. For two may be great, but of two each of them
cannot be greatest, no more then two can be infinite, or two principal. But
(say they) Christ is in heaven Head of the Triumphant Church, Panorm,
the pope is only head of the church militant upon earth. (O blaspheamer^ is
not Christ Jesus truly God? in earth, as present by his power, Enter,
praesenter Deus est. and ubique potenter. Ps. 139 Sed familiarius in electis
pergratiam.
to rule the church militant, as in heaven? How then dare thou, sitting only
at Rome, proclaim thy self Head of the universal church, as well, which is in
Brittanie, Germany, France, Spain, Africa, America, and India, parts where
thou art not, as at Rome? and yet confine him to heaven, as if he were wholly
excluded from the earth, who is here, as present as there? But they say again,
the Pope claymeth only as Vicar to Christ, O still blaspheamer! answer again,
what has a Vicar to do, in the presence of his superior? yea of such a
Superior, who fills heaven and earth, and has bound himself by special
promise, Ier 23. Matthew. 28.
to be with his church for ever? Do thou not, in making thy self his Vicar,
deny his presence, and in denying the presence of our Lord and Savior Christ
in his church, deny him to be truly God? Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam?
Again I ask, whether thou do not in this name usurp the rights of our
Savior, and so also declare thy self to be his enemy? When the valiant King
Edward the third, of England, intended war against Phillip the French King, he
proclaimed himself King of France, and that was the beginning of the war, and
so every Prince takes it for a denuntiation of war, when his neighbor Prince
takes his title. And shall not we say, that this is a public proclamation of
war, by the Pope against our Savior Christ, when he takes upon him the style
of Pont. Max. that properly belongs to our Savior, and was never given truly
to any man, but to him? yea does he not exalt himself above Christ? For Christ
did not take it to himself, but received it of his Father. But the Pope takes
it to himself, without the gift of any, unless it were of Phocas the
Murderer, of whom we shall speak hereafter. Neither yet does he only take
this title to himself, but other titles also not inferior, as caput, and
sponsus ecclesiae, and:c. which only belong to our Savior. I demand further,
whom does he follow in this title? Does he follow Melchisedek, or Aaron? They
were both called High Priests, and they were indeed Types of our Savior
Christ, (the only true High Priest) and ordained by God for certain signs
that he should come, and so had a lawful calling. But when the truth was come,
then all types were abolished, yea and they also are abolished from Christ, and
fallen from grace, whosoever do use them. Whereupon the godly Fathers do
affirm, that the Ceremonies of the Law are now not only mortuae, but
mortiferae, not only in use dead, but to be used deadly. And the reason is
apparent, for that whosoever does use them, does deny that our Savior is come
in the flesh, namely, by using those Ceremonies which were Instituted to show
that he was not then come, but to be expected. But the Pope using the title of
High Priest after the order of Melchisedek, or of Aaron does use a Ceremony,
instituted to show that Christ was not come in the flesh, but was to be
expected: Therefore I ask, Whether he does not deny that Christ Jesus is come
in the flesh, and so also declare himself to be Antichrist? But if they will
say, that in taking this title upon him, he follows our Savior Christ: I
ask by what authority, or who calls him to it? No man (says the Apostle)
takes this title upon him, save he that is called of God, as was Aaron. And
again, the Priesthood of Christ cannot pass from one to another. The reason,
because Christ is God eternal, who can have no successor in his offices, and
therefore he that will take upon him to succeed Christ, does deny his
divinity, as he that will be his Vicar, by pretense of his absence. Well, if
the Pope can show no calling, then I ask, by what example or precedent? if it
were a title lawful to be used, why did none of the Apostles nor of the
Disciples use it? not Tuus, not Timothy, not Paul nor Peter, not James the
brother of our Lord, Bishop of Jerusalem, and President of the counsel of the
Apostles, nor yet our Apostle S. John, which outlived all the rest, and
therefore might best do it. In a word, I find none to whom this title of
Summus, or Maximus Pontifex has any ways ben applied, but either Melchisedek,
or Aaron, or to our Savior Christ: nor any that has taken it upon them by
humain authority, but only the Idolatrous Pontifex Maximus that was in Rome,
of whom I have spoken before. And if the Pope cannot justify his highest and
greatest Pontificalitie, by some title from one or other of the three first, it
will fall out inevitable, that he is the true and undoubted successor of the
last. And that is most consonant and agreeable to the words of our prophecy,
that Antichrist should be one of the seven heads of Rome, and namely that head
of whom S. John says, He was, and is not, and yet is, as is before proved.
Probl 2.
The same also may be proved by his name Papa, whereof diverse have made diverse
derivations, but for my part I think none more probable, then to say it comes
from one of the titles, used or usurped by the old Roman Emperors, which upon
their coins were wont to stamp Pa. Pa. for Pater Patriae, and now the Roman
Prelate, as he succeeds them in the name of Pont. Maximus, so he takes that
title of Papa likewise, to prove himself their undoubted Successor. I will not
therefore stand here further to confute their pretense and claim, to be
Vicarius Christi, although I might say. that it cannot stand with the celsitude
of a Pontifex max. to be but a Vicar, neither can a Vicar dispense with the
laws of his superior: nor will I answer to, Tu es Petrus, and such like,
which have been so many times answered by our learned divines, neither do I
think my self bound to refute the immoderate titles given to the Pope by S.
Barnard, or other late Doctors, a point of this weight is not to be carried
away with swelling phrases of Rhetoric, but by evident testimonies of
undoubted truth. Certain it is that he who said Tu es Petrus, never said Tu
eris Pontifex Maximus, nor Tu eris meus vicarius, Chrysostom.
no nor super hunc Petrum aedificabo etc. neither did he give any keys to him,
more then to the rest of the Apostles. But if I may speak my opinion, this name
Pontifex max. is the very name of blasphemy written in the forehead of that
purple whore, even that Antichrist. etc. So much therefore be spoken of this
name of Pontifex Max. which the Pope takes to himself. A third title is Servus
servorum Dei. This attribute the Pope also, and he alone accepts,
acknowledges and uses it. But this title was never given to any, but by the
godly prophet and patriarch Noah, to the cursed Canaan, whose Father was the
scorner of that godly patriarch, and his posterity the mortal enemies of our
Savior Christ in his Church of Israel, and so a type of Antichrist, and
therefore were commanded utterly to be destroyed, rooted out, and abolished, as
Antichrist shall be. It will be said, that the holy man S. Grigorie used this
name. I will not deny but he was an holy man, and although a man subject to
some errors and infimities, yet as I verily believ a Prophet. For he prophesied
of the coming of Antichrist. It is the last hour (says he) the king of pride
is at hand, an army of Priests is prepared to attend him. But I know that the
prophets by the instinct of Gods spirit did and said many things, which were in
them prophetical, but in others would be absurd and inconvenient, as Esaiah
and Hosea, naming their children with strange names. Ezechiel lying many days
upon one side, baking his bread in doung, and creeping out through a wall at
noone, and such like; or if these things be taken to be visions or parables,
yet that cannot be denied, that one of the prophets commanded another to strike
and wound him. Jacob was by an Angel called Israel, and Solomon was named by a
prophet. And who knows whether that prophetical Bishop Gregory did take
that name in humility, foreseeing that his own successors would use it in
pride, and as the king of pride? It might be a title holy in him, and yet
accursed in them, as the name of Judah was blessed in the patriarch, and in one
of the Apostles, but most accursed in the Traitor. These two names therefore
used by the Pope, you see may well be applied to Antichrist. Now will I show
forth three other names given in the Scripture to Antichrist, which may as well
be applied to the Pope, whereof the first is the man of sin, or the Lawless
one: for the word Anomos in Greek does signify so properly, and the word
Belial in the old Testament is near to the same effect. And in this, as in the
rest of the names that follow, it is worthy to be observed, that as the title
of Summus Pontifex, Servus servorum, and others, which the Pope does take unto
himself, and approve, do aptly agree to the types and descriptions of
Antichrist in the scripture, so likewise the titles given to Antichrist in the
scripture do most aptly agree to the actions and practices of the Popes,
recorded in their own Histories. For instance, in this name of the man of
sin, or the Lawless man, what Monarch, prince, prelate, or potentate, did
ever so much practice allow, and maintain open and notorious sins, as the
Popes do and have done now for these many hundred years, by their faculties,
pardons, licenses, and dispensations? Adultery, ^ incest, Sodomie and Treason,
murder and parricide, and wha^ not besides? What enormous, horrible and
abominable practices do we read of Boniface the 7. and 8. Gregory the 7.
otherwise called Hildebrand: Silvester the 2. Stephen the 6. John the
8.9.10.11.12. and all the rest? It may easily be observed in their Histories,
how many of them have been Simoniakes, Idolaters, Adulterers, incestious,
murderers, Traitors, Sacriligious, Sodemites, and Conjurers. Easily do I say,
nay not easily, unless you name all since Pope Constantine. For every one of
them since his time, which was about the year of our Lord 707, exalted
themselus above the Emperors, and took away from them their provinces and
Territories, therein committing open Treason and rebellion. All of them since
that time openly, and stoutly maintained Idolatry, and not one of them but
has been taynted with some other of the crimes aforesaid. For proof whereof
let me ask, which of them has reformed, or disavowed the wicked actions of
their predecessors? namely the Idolatries, Adulteries, Stewhouses, Luciferian
Pride, and such like? And yet; who they are that will be lawless and subject
to no man's censure, Platin^.
let them answer that have read in Platina the life of Pope Leo the 3. who
being accused to the Emperor, Charles the great, for certain offenses, the
Emperor intending to examine the matter, Responsum est ab omnibus (says the
Author) sedem apostolicam omnium ecclesiarum caput, a nemine, Laico praesertim,
judicari debere. It was answered by all the Bishops, Clergy and people of
Rome, that the Sea Apostolic, the Head of all churches, ought to be judged by
none, especially not by a Lay man. Which resolution they have held, and
continued ever since. Let them answer that have read their Decree, Did. 40.
and can. 9, q. 3.
That the Pope though he draw millions of men, catervatim, by heaps into hell,
yet is to be judged by no man. Let them answer that have read their Doctors,
Canonistes, and Casuistes, determining, Sum. Angel, t. Papa.
That the Pope may dispense with some of the Commandments of the first Table,
and all of the second, as (says my Author) Pope Martin did with him that had
taken his own sister to wife. And if consent and approbation do make a man
party, or accessorie to the sins of another, according to the common Rules
of all laws; let them answer, which of them have disadvoued or dissented from
the actions of the said Pope Constantine, who erected and mainteyned Idolatry;
and for that cause, Onuphr. in Plat.
Palam and in os (says the Historian) openly and to his teeth resisted the
Emperor, rebelled against him, and deprived him of the government of all
Italy? See more of this lawlesnes in M. Downh. treaty of Antichrist, lib. 1.
cap. 5, and 6. where he cites Hostiensis and others, with these sentences:
Legi non subjacet ulli. Item, potest dispensare supra jus, contra jus, and
extra jus. And out of Panor. Potest omnia sacere quae Deus. Item, Papa potest
dispensare contra ius Divinum. etc.
Which of them does not acknowledge his succession from Silvester the 2. and
Gregory the 7, the great Necromancers: and from John the 11. and 12. the great
adulterers? which of them disavoweth the actions and decrees of Boniface the 8.
Benet the 12. Julius the 2. and the rest of that rabble, that filled all
Christendom with wars and bloodshed? Let us but cast our eyes upon the
moniments of some of them. Of Boniface the eight it is thus written: Intravit
ut vulpes, regnavit ut leo, mortuus est ut canis. Of Benet the 12. thus:

Hic situs ille Nero, Laicis mors, vipera clero,
Devius a vero, cuppa repleta mero.
Of Pius 2. the learned Cardinal, that would needs take the name of Pius upon
him, when he was made pope.

Vendidit aere polum, terras in morte reliquit,
Styx superest Papae, quam colat una Pio.
Of Paulus the 2. thus:

Pontificis Pauli testes ne Roma requirat
Filia quam genuit sat docet esse marem.
Of Sixtus called the 4. thus:

Dic unde (Alecto) pax ista repulsit, and unde
Tam subito reticent praelia? Sixtus obit.
Of Innocent the 8. thus:

Spurcities, gula, avaritia, atque ignavia deses
Hoc (Octave) jacent, quo tegeris, tumulo.
Of Alexander his next successor, thus:

Vendit Alexander Sacramenta, altaria, Christum
Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest.
Of his daughter Lucretia thus:

Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
Of Julius the 2. thus, that he threw the keys into the river Tibris, saying,
that the sword of S. Paul should help him:

Quandoquidem clavis nil juvat ista Petri. Such kind of excellent Elogia are
given to all the rest, and yet still their successors, Parasites and Sectaries
call them Most holy Fathers, and the Vicars of Christ. But if I should recite
all, it would ask a just volume of it self. See (...) Mist.
Let these be sufficient to show, that these are the men to whom these titles,
The Man of sin, and The lawless man may most rightly be given. And if any
man will yet deny or doubt of it, let him answer upon good advisement, whether
ever he read, or heard of such monsters of men, among the Jews, Turks,
Infidels, or any Pagans in the world: and whether he think it likely, that any
man should go beyond these men in wickedness, and yet withal obtain such a
privilege and prerogative to be lawless. And if not, then whether this be not,
that man of sin, that lawless man, that Antichrist?

I come to the fifth name which is given to Antichrist in the Scripture, which
is, The Son of perdition. A title first given by our Savior Christ to Judas
the Traitor, John 17. 2 These. 2.
and after by S. Paul to Antichrist, showing, as may easily be collected, that
Antichrist should be like to Judas, in profession a Christian, in calling a
Bishop, Of Judas see Act. 1, 20.
in title an Apostle, in practice a Traitor. Now, whether all these things do
not most properly concur in the Pope, let them answer, that have read the
Histories of England, Germany, France and Italy, especially of late days.
For of his profession, Bishoprik, and Apostolate no question is made. And of
his treasons: let them tell me, by whose practices Rome and Italy rebelled
against the Emperors, See more in Fox Monim. in his deserce of the L. Cobham
and heye probl. 7.
by whose practices such rebellions and treasons were set on foot in England
and Ireland, against Queen Elizabeth, and in France against the late Henry IV.
by whose Partisans traitors of late time have been most set a work, approved
and commended, and whether he be not called a Christian, a Bishop, and an
Apostle.

The sixth name is Abaddon, a Destroyer, well agreeing with the former names.
And how many millions of men the Popes have destroyed, by setting Christian
Princes sometimes to destroy their own subjects under the names of Heretics,
sometimes to fight with Pagans and Turks, and sometimes to fight one with
another, they can best tell us, who are conversant in their histories. I will
here instance but in one or two examples, in which I desire them to answer; how
many thousand Christians were slain in the civil wars, stirred up in
Germany by the Popes, in the times of Henry the IV. and Henry the V.
Conradus Frederick, and Adolphus of Nassau, Emperors of Germany? Also in the
wars stirred up between the two Antipapes, Urban and Clement, Fro^ssart.
when each of them sent out Bulls, to stir up Princes to destroy the
adherents one of another? See more Probl. 5.
How many thousand christians were destroyed by the Turks, by occasion of that
woeful discomfiture at Varna, whereunto the King of Hungary was thrust, by the
importunity of the Pope, and his Cardinal Julian, inciteing him to break the
Truce, sworn to, with the Turk? How many in France in the civil wars there
stirred up by the Legue? How many in Germany in these last wars, which are
yet in hand? And yet herein is further to be observed, that whereas the Turk
and other Tyrants do murder and kill only men's bodies, and yet do not profess
that, but desire to be called merciful and gracious Lords: only the Pope
professes, that if he draw millions of men's bodies and souls with him into
Hell, yet he is to be judged of no man, he is to be redargued of no man for it.
I ask then, whom shall we call Abaddon, a destroyer, if this be not he, that
professes he may do it without controulment. Or, what Abaddon shall we look
for besides? But if any man will contend that the title of Abaddon belongs to
the Devil; yet I think he cannot thereupon infer, that it ought not to be
given to Antichrist, at best wise if we consider of the Rule in S. August. De
diabolo and eius corpore. Dedoct. christ.
For it is no more inconvenient, that the name of the Devil should be given to
him, that does the works of the devil, Psalm. 82.
then the name of God to good princes, which do the works of God. John 10, 34.
And so our Savior expressly calls Judas a Devil, yea the Apostle Peter he
calls Satan, John 6, 70. Matthew. 16.
and a scandal, perhaps intimating, that his pretensed successors should
possess the seat of Satan, and be the greatest scandal of all others, when
they should begin to savor the things of men.

The seventh and last name given to Antichrist in Scripture, is that which is
not expressed, but signified by three Greek letters, yielding the number of
666. which to count the H. Ghost commends unto us, as a point of wisdom.
Neither can I easily be drawn to reject the computations of Names of this
number by the Fathers, and other godly Interpreters. Let every man bring forth
his opinion without prejudice to others, and pray to God to inlighten us all.
I, for my part, think it best to follow the ancient opinion so far as it may
stand with the Scriptures. Now it is known that the ancient godly Father
Irenaeus seeking for names answerable to this number, finds none so fit, as
Lateinos. For although he mention other names, as Teitan, etc. yet to the name
of Lateinos he adds his judgment of approbation, saying that it is very like
to be the true name. For (says he) the truest kingdom is called by that name,
and Latini sunt, qui nunc dominantur. They are Latins, which now do reign.
This also suteth with other prophecies of Antichrist, whereof I have spoken
before, and with the interpretation that some do make of the prophecy of
Balaam, where he says, that Ships from Chittim shall afflict Ashur and Eber.
which cannot be verified of any but the Romans, and S. Hierom there
interprets Chittim to be Italy. And the Affliction of Eber, must be also
understood of the Prince of Eber, the Star of Jacob, and that in his
Mystical body as well as his Natural. This also agrees with other names,
which godly learned men have found out representing the same number, all
leading and directing us to the Pope, as the name of Romanus or Romyth, (...)
in Hebrew letters observed by the venerable Divines, Fox and Paraeus. So also
Dux Cleri, by the godly Walter Brute a scholar of Wicleue our Countryman.
Vicarius Dei generalis in terris in Latin, taking only the numerall letters,
and Ecclesia Italica, in Greek letters. And what shall we say to the names of
diverse Popes containing the same letters in effect and sound, which are used to
express the said number of 666 in the Apocalypse. In the name of Calixtus is
there not the perfect sound of all those Greek letters (...)? And may not the
same be easily conceited in the name of Sixtus? And was not Calixtus, whom they
call the second, but indeed the first of that name, that was called Summus
Pontifex, he that forbad marriage to Priests, which S. Paul calls the Doctrine
of Devils. The ancient verse may serve for a sufficient testimony:

O bone Calixte, nunc totus Clerus odit te,
O lim Presbyteri poterant uxoribus uti,
Hoc destruxisti, postquam tu Papa fuisti.
And was not Calixtus the second of that name (that was called Pont. Max.) he
that made such a terrible and solemn vow to persecute the Turks by war,
curses, etc. and by color thereof levied a tenth of the Clergy, and put all
into his purse? And when as afterward the noble Vaivod of Hungary, Hunniades
had obtained a glorious victory, against that public enemy at Belgrade, was
it Calixtus, that ever helped to advance the Christian cause, or to prosecute
such a good beginning? Or did he not rather set his mind upon his own profit,
by drawing to himself not only the chief Bishopriks, but the whole kingdom
of Naples, after the death of Alfonsus, and so labor to disinherit his son
Frederike, if the incomparable Prince Scanderbeg had not assisted him? And what
shall we say of Sixtus? Do not the Latin letters X. and T. being joined
together yield the same sound, as all the said three numerall letters would do,
if they were put in the same place? And was not Sixtus (who by them is called
the fourth, but indeed, the first that was called Pont. Max. for those before
him were called Xisti, and had no greater title then bishop of Rome) was not
that he that raised so many wars in Italy to advance his kindred, and in stead
of a church or Hospital, built the famous Lupanar, the bitcherie house at
Rome, Vtrique Veneri, for which cause Agrippa called him the great bawd? Was
it not he that upon a Petition exhibited unto him, for the use of Sodomie,
Homicus Agrippa.
subscribed, Fiat ut petitur? Let be as is desired? and raised the rents of the
Stews to so high a Rate, that it is now accounted for a principal revennue of
their church? O excellent Father, and chaste Vicar of Christ! The Primitive
Christians were half persuaded that Nero was to come again and be Antichrist.
And have not we reason to believe that this is he, of whom also it is written
for his Elogium.

Gaude Prisce Nero: vincit te crimine Sixtus.
Paedico, insignis praedo, fucosus Adulter
Qui moriens nullos credidit esse Deos.
And was not Sixtus the 2. who is by them called the 5. he that sent out his
blasphemous Bulls against the late King of France Henry the third, who was
shortly after most villanously murdered by one of their breeding? And was not
he the same Sixtus, who most highly commended that wicked Parracide, in a
solemn Panegyric, before his Cardinals? Was not he the same that
excommunicated the noble Henry the fourth of France, when he was but King of
Navarre, who was afterward also murdered by one of their Sectaries. Was not he
the same who animated the Spaniards to invade this kingdom of England, in the
year 1588? In setting forth of which action, it is worth the Observation,
Cicarell in vita Sixti.
how careful the Parasite is to persuade us, that the English and the
Spaniards never came ad justam pagnam, to a just fight, as if the English did
affirm any such matter. No Cicarella. Far be it from us to challenge the
glory of that victory to our selves. That God who gave us the grace, upon the
news of the approach of that navy, to humble our selves before him, with
fasting and prayer: (a thing howsoever neglected or forgotten by some of our
Historians, yet most true and registered by others, and remembered by many yet
living witnesses*) That God, who detected and defeated the Treasons and
Rebellions of Sanders, Parrie, Ballard, Lopas the Powderplot, and many others,
was he that fought for us, as he did sometimes against Sisera. and for
Theodosius. and Sic conjurati venere ad classica venti. Witness our most
excellent Sovereign, a witness above all exception, in his Sonnet worthy to
be remembered: The Nations banded against the Lord of might,
Prepared a force, and set them in the way:
Mars dressed himself in such an awful plight,
The like whereof was never seen they say:
They forward came in such a strange array.
Both sea and land beset us every where,
Their brags did threat our ruin and decay;
What came thereof the issue did declare,
The winds began to toss them here and there;
The sea began in foaming waves to swell,
The number that escapt, it fell them fair:
The rest were swallowed up in gulfes of hell.
But how were all these things so strangely done?
God looked on them from out his heavenly Throne.
This Sonnet published with the consent and applause of all the ancient Britain
Nation, inhabitants of this kingdom, truly even of very ancient time, Polydore
both by a king and a Saint, entitled the kingdom of God, shall be an
everlasting testimony for us, that we never challenged the glory of that
action to our selves. The same also will be confirmed, by the ordinary
remembrances, and thanksgivings which our Preachers usually make thereof, in
their prayers and Sermons. The same also is proved by the Paper lately set
forth, so well accepted and bought up by all sorts of people amongst us,
wherein the defeating of that invincible Armada, and the Powderplot is
represented and expressed. Behold then you Jesuits and Romanists against whom
you fight, and who it is that fights for us. It was God who then pleaded the
cause of Religion against superstition, of Piety against Idolatry, of Christ
against Antichrist. It was he only (for he only searches, rules, and moves
the Hearts) who then put it into the heart of our Zenobia, and of her servants
to send out those Peti-fierbotes, that made the grear Sea-castles to cut their
cables, loose their Anchors and fly away. It was he that stirred up the
courage of our seamen, and inflamed the hearts of our nation with incredible
love and zeal, to defend their Country and religion. Now also our drums and
trumpets sound nothing else against you, but God and Christ Jesus; our Martial
cries are nothing else, but Christ Jesus; our gunnes thunder out nothing, but
Christ Jesus against you. For him we fight, and in this quarrel, that he only
is our High Priest, our Mediator, our Justification and Salvation. This was our
course then, and this must be the course of all that will prevail against
Antichrist and all Antichristian forces, namely prayer to God, and unity
amongst themselves. But to return to my purpose, this may suffice, to show how
this Sixtus not only in name, containing in it the sound of those three
mystical letters, but in his actions represented Antichrist. What shall we say
of Pope Paul the fifth, was not his picture made with the inscription of Paulo
Vo. Vicedeo. comprehending in numerall letters the same number of 666. Neither
yet will I affirm, that either he, or Sixtus, or Calixtus, or Gregory the
seventh, or Boniface the third, or the eight, or any other of them was
individually Antichrist, any more then the rest of that order. No, nor yet Pope
Ioane, whose history though they by all means labor to suppress, yet they
cannot blot out their books that have written of her, being at least six and
twenty, all learned, and all Catholics, amongst which Martinus Polonus,
Archbishop of Consentia, and the Popes own Penitentiarie, Marianus Scotus,
monk of Fulda, Platina and Theodoricus the Popes Secretaries, Antoninus
Archbishop of Florence, Baptista, Mantuanus, and Cornelius Agrippa, Nanclerus
the Cardinal, and Trithemius the Abbat, were men, I think, as well thought of
for learning and fidelity in their times, as any of these our new masters,
Bellarmine, Baronius, Onuphrius or Florimondus, who labor to raze out of
ancient moniments and Records, that which the christian world for five hundred
years or more, most undoubtedly believed. Yet neither she, nor any of the rest
do I affirm to have been individually and exclusiuely Antichrist, but one of
that mystical body, and succession, which is called by our Apostle
Antichrist, as I proved before, that the article Ho in Greek is used and
applied as well to a succession or multitude, as to a singular person. But why
may not we think that in this succession, the All seeing spirit of God in his
secret providence, and divine administration, the better to awake and stir up
his church and children, to beware of this great and yet deceitful enemy,
would have the marks and signs of Antichrist to appear some of them more
evidently in some of them, and some in others, as the name of Pontifex Max. in
Boniface the third, the person of a whore, in Pope Ioane, their filthy
adultery, Sodomie, and incest, in Sergius, John the 11. and 12. Boniface the
eight, and Alexander, the number of his name in those before named? It may be
also demanded, who were the types of Antichrist before the coming of our
Savior? For types are a kind of notation. And so it may seem that the
wisdom of God has ordered the course of times, that in so great varieties
nothing should be new, Eccles. ^.
but that former times should be figures of the future. I dare not say but more
may be found, yet I think in the Scriptures principally seven are to be noted.
1, Cain. 2, Came. 3, Esau. 4, Egypt. 5, Amalek. 6, Antiochus. 7, Babylon. which
have some things in common, and some things proper and peculiar. They were all
persecutors, and for the most part murderers and parricides, and that without
cause, as the Prophet David speaks, They hated me without a cause. And
therefore they were all cursed of God. Yea some of them so detested, that the
people of God were charged to make no peace with them: as for instance, Canaan
the Issue of Cham and Amalek: and God executed his heavy wrath upon them all.
In particular, 1, 1. Genesis 4.
Cain persecuted Christ in semine. 2, 2. Genesis 9.
Cham in radice. 3, 3. Genesis 27.
Esau, in stirpe. 4, 4. Exodus 1.
Egyptus, in Germine. 5, 5. Exodus 17.
Amalek, in frutice. 6, 6. Dan.
Antiochus, in propagine. 7, 7. Ier. 50.
Babylon, in capite. Cain persecuted Christ in the seed. Cham in the root,
Esau in the stock, Egypt in the bud, Amalek in the shrubbe, Antiochus in the
spread, and Babylon in the Top or head. Cain is noted for murdering his only
brother, Cham for scorning his godly Father. Esau for his profanenes. Egypt for
bloudinesse. Amalek for malice. Antiochus for Tyranny. and Babylon for
blasphemy. How these things may be applied to Rome is not hard to be
understood by them who are conversant in their stories. Let me here make but
one instance, that Romulus the first king, being the first head of that
Seauen-headed beast, was a murderer of his brother, like to Cain. Brutus the
first Consul put to death his own Sons and his Brothers. Appius the
Decemvir by his beastly and outrageous lust forced the father to commit a
Paricide upon his chaste daughter Virginia. The Tribunes, Dictators, and
Caesar's the fourth, fifth, and sixth Heads, what were they all, but ambitious
turbulent spirits, incendiaries, and raisers of most bloody intestine wars,
wherein many innocent and quiet citizens were wickedly murdered? And of the
Pontifex Max. the seventh head I have said somewhat before, and more I shall
have occasion to say hereafter. Let this suffice for the Names of Antichrist;
from all which I demand, Whether they do not fully agree to the popes, and
every one of them, since the time of Constantine, that was Pontifex Max. about
the year of our Lord 707? And whether they can be so fitly, and so many ways,
applied to any other Prince, person or state: And whether we may look for any
other in time to come, to whom they may be more truly and fitly applied?

IIII. The Rising of Antichrist.
THose who think that a great and mighty monarch, king or Commander of the
city of Rome, able to subdue other kings, and to raise up a greater and more
terrible persecution against Christians, then any of the old Emperors of Rome,
should rise up like a mushrump in a night, and continue so short a time, as
three years and an half, seem to take little consideration of the manner of
Gods proceedings and administration, who, as he has appointed a time and
season for all things, so he limiteth times and seasons proportionable for the
effecting of such things. A woman cannot conceive and bear in a month or a
day. An Elephant must have at least two years, and some say ten. Quando, when,
is a Relative, as well as ubi, where, and every thing existent must have his
due proportion, as well of the one as of the other.

Let us now then come to the rising of this fifth Beast or monarchy of
Idolatry, and see how that is described in this divine Revelation, and whether
that description also do not most aptly and properly suit the Popes, from the
time that the impediment of the Roman Empire began to be removed by Constantine
the Emperor, until the Pope attained to his Antichristian name in Boniface the
third, to be called Pontifex Maximus, and his superlatiue power to resist the
Emperor in Constantine the Pope. This Rising is described by seven adjuncts.
1, His kind or Existence, Revel. 13.
another beast. 2. The place from whence he came, coming out of the earth. 3,
Having two horns like a lamb. 4, He spoke like the Dragon. 5, His actions,
seven fold, as shall be showed hereafter. 6, His Mark. 7, And lastly his
Name. Whereas he is called another beast, and yet not resembled to any Beast,
working in the presence of the first, seven things are again to be observed.
1, The time of his rising. 2, That this which is here described must be an
Empire or monarchy, which is signified by the name of a Beast, as all the
former were, and as the Angel in Daniel has taught us to interpret. 3, It
must consist, not of one particular man, but of a Succession. For so all the
former did, or else it should not have the name of a Beast, without
distinction, as it has, and as they had. 4, It is not like any of the rest.
For if it were like in any part, it would be so expressed, as it is said that
the first was like a Lion, the second like a bear, the third a Leopard, the
fourth in several parts like every one of them, but this like none of them.
5, It is not only unlike to them, but it is of no certain form. And herein
our Apostle in the description of this last Beast observes the same caution,
Dan. 7.
that was before by the Prophet Daniell, in the Description of the fourth
beast, saying, it was unlike any of the former, and yet not expressing
whereunto it was like. So indeed was the Roman Empire in its Rising, for that
after the kings, who were as the nursing Fathers of that state were expelled,
it held for a long time no certain form of government. So it seems our
Prophetical Apostle intends, that the kingdom of Antichrist in his Rising,
must be of an uncertain form. 6, It must arise in the presence of the first
beast. And this agrees with the words of S. Paul, 2 These. 2.
who says not, that he which withholdeth must be abolished, destroyed,
determined, or ended, but that he must be removed, or set out of the way, in
some other place. So this Beast, or Monarchy must arise after the Roman
Monarchy, not ended, (for says Daniel, that fourth Beast or Monarchy must
continue till the judgment be set) but removed out of the way, from Rome, the
place appointed for Antichrist. 7, It must still be a Beast, that is, a
Monarchy of Idolatry, as all the rest were. Now let us see how, and to whom
these Prophecies may be applied, wherein we must so go forward, that we do not
forget that which went before. By the former Problems I suppose it has
appeared, that the place of Antichrist must be the Great city Rome, and that
in time of Christianity, that the State subject unto him, must be the state of
Rome, and that he must be Summui Pontifex, one of the seven Heads of that
state. In this part of his description we may see not only a further point
revealed unto us, which is the time, and manner of his Rising, but a further
confirmation of those former points. And first, for the time, a most material
circumstance to be considered, I demand, Whether it be not here sufficiently
and plainly expressed in the Text, that this second beast must arise, while the
former is yet in being, and that not altogether, but in tract of time: seeing
it is said, that he does all that the first could do, in the presence of the
first, or before his face, and causes the first Beast to be worshipped? And
seeing it is confessed, that the place of the first Beast was Rome, it must
follow, that the place of the second must be Rome, and seeing the second must
work before the face of the first, and cause the first to be worshipped, it
follows evidently, that both these Beasts, that is to say, the first Beast
departing, and the second arising must be at one time in Rome. This therefore
confirms that which has been said before concerning his place. And this
being compared with the words of the Apostle to the These. 2 These. 2.
that Antichrist must be destroyed by the brightness of our Lords coming, is a
strong proof of his times, viz. that he must arise, before the Emperor be quite
departed out of Rome, and must continue to the end of the world, which clearly
overthrows the opinions of all Demiseptennians, and Ho Antichristians. For if
he began then to work, and must be in Rome in the presence of the first Beast,
that is, of the Old Empire, and must continue till the coming again of our
Lord: How can it be imagined, that he should be but one man, or that he should
continue but three years and a half, or that he is not yet come, or such like
dreams, etc. Or let any man show me with consent of Scriptures, who besides
the old Roman Empire, can be meant by the first Beast, who besides Antichrist
can be meant by the second? For to say, that these two beasts are to be taken
for one thing, is very absurd, and contrary to the Text, which calls the
second Beast, another. To say that by the first is meant Antichrist, can hardly
stand with the Text; for then what is meant by the second? If you say his body
or Clergy, how can that be admitted? when it is said first, that it is
another, therefore no part of the same: Also it rises from another place, viz.
the Earth, whereas the first rose from the sea: Also it does all those things
which the first Beast could do before his face: But that is very absurd to
say, that the Body does as much as the Head, or the Clergy, as the chief
Prelate. By the same, or like reasons are refelled the opinions of those that
take the first beast for the Devil. For how can that stand with the Text, that
the Dragon gave him his Throne, and great power, etc. So the opinion of those
that take Antichrist, or the first beast pro caetu impiorum, for the multitude
of the wicked, may be refelled by the Text. For then, why should it be
distinguished into two several Beasts, the one rising after the other? and why
should there be so many several attributes applied unto it? Therefore not
intending to stand long upon the refutation of other men's opinions, but
following the counsel of the excellent learned Scholar of S. Paul, Dion Ar.
to find out that which may be most agreeable to the Text of the Scripture,
and the Truth of History, I ask whether this Prophecy of the rising of
Antichrist in this second Beast, were not fully performed in the Roman Bishops,
who succeeded Silvester from the year of our Lord, 313. until the time of
Constantine the Pope, in anno 707? Was not the old Empire continued in Rome for
the most part of that time? Were there not in Rome for the most part of that
time, namely, until the year of our Lord 540, Consuls, which represented the
Imperial power, and were elected and created with Heathenish and Idolatrous
rites, and Auguries, See Helviens Rensuerus and other chronologers.
as Salvianus above cited does testify? Were not the Emperors themselves many
times made Consuls of Rome in that time? And yet were not the Idolatrous
Stageplayes, with Bestiall filthiness, still celebrated in Rome, as the same
reverend and Godly Author, and not he alone, but the irrefutable Doctor S.
Augustine witnesses: De civ. Dei lib. 1. ca. 23. See also Blondus.
That pestilent corruption (says he) did infect the souls of miserable men
with so great deformity, that even now, the city of Rome being spoiled, men
possessed with that pestilence, flying from thence to Carthage, daily play the
mad men upon stages. And this wrote he about the year of our Lord 413, fully an
hundred years after Silvester, and after that the city of Rome was governed
by Christian Bishops; agreeable to that which I proved before out of Salvianus.
Besides, did not the Emperor Constantine and his successors, for an hundred
years after him, reteyn the name of Pont Max. Pless. ex Zosum and Baron.
and use the Robes and Ornaments? So then, here was the first Beast, still
continuing both in Idolatry and Majesty. Yet notwithstanding I think no
Papist will deny, but that the Bishops of Rome after Silvester, had the
Imperial sea, and exercised the same principality, and did the same things,
which the Emperors or Consuls were wont to do. For so is their decree. Did.
96.
And what else do they claim or pretend by the Donation of Constantine, which
they so stoutly maintayn, but that they had that power lawfully, which they
exercised apparently? And yet, this was not in any certain form of government,
or resolute manner, but sometimes by schism and faction, and sometimes by
flatteries obteyning the consent or connivence of the Emperors. When they saw
the Emperors able to please or displease, then by and by they were their good
Lords and Masters, and they caused men to worship them. But when they would get
it by faction or otherwise, the Emperor was but a Cipher in Augrim. as
appears by the Histories and records of that time. Sometimes the Consuls
governed, sometimes the Exarches, and sometimes the Roman Bishops were opposed
by other great Bishops. So the Rising of this second beast was not altogether
at once, but by degrees, and this second Beast in his Rising was (as has been
said) of an uncertain form. And this being so, the other points will
consequently be confessed. For what can they deny? Will they deny that this
principally, which the Bishops of Rome held after Silvester, was a Monarchy or
state governed by one only at once? which is the second point. or thirdly,
will they deny that it went in succession? Fourthly, will they say, that it
was like to any of the former Beasts? This being a state Ecclesiastic, and all
the former Saecular? Fifthly, will they affirm that these Bishops had any
settled and absolute form of Soveranitie, during the time aforesaid? Will they
deny that they were at Rome in the presence of the Consular and Imperial
Authority, or that they caused men to adore the Emperors? Seventhly, or
lastly, will they deny the Testimonies of S. Augustine and Salvianus, that the
Idolatrous Rites, Superstitions, Auguries, and Stage Plays were still
exercised at Rome? I will here set down a short, Catalogue of the Bishops of
Rome of those times out of their own Historians, and let it be showed in which
of these things they will differ from me, and whether it were not with great
opposition, contention and schism, that they got their supremacy?

Silvester, who had the Imperial Sea and Principality of Rome by donation, as
some of them affirm, or Cession, Platin. Onuph Ba^^^. etc.
as others.

Marcus, about the year of our Lord 335, took upon him the Title of
universal Bishop. in Epist.

Julius took upon him, by absolute Authority, He warreth against the saints
to restore certain Bishops of the Eastern Churches, deposed by their own
Synods.

Liberius, an Arrian Heretic, Platin. Pautal. etc.
excommunicated the godly Athanasius, and therefore was excommunicated by the
godly S. Hilary.

Faelix the second, a Schismatike and perjured, Onuph. Contention.
and slain by sedition of Liberius, as some say. Schisma 2.

Damasus, a Schismatik, advanced by violence and murder, and that in the
church, in time of divine service, Plessis ex Matcellin. Platin. Pantal. etc.
where there were found in one day 137 bodies slain.

Siricius, about the year of our Lord 396, or as some say 383, Ambition and
Contention.
ambitiously claymed the superiority over the bishops of Spain and Afrik, and
contended with them for it

Anastasius 1. anno Dni. 398, continued but few years.

Innocentius 1. anno Dni. 402 still urges and mainteyneth his superiority,
and the Apostolic honor of his Sea (for so they called it.) In his days Rome
was spoiled by the Gotts and Vandales.

Zosimus anno 417 seeks to draw all causes to Rome Contention. A wisdom
earthly, sensual and divelish James 3.


Bonifacius 1, anno 420, gets the Papacy by contention with Eulatius in a
Schism: which is accounted the third Schism in that Church.

Caelestinus 1. anno Christi 423 contendeth with the bishops of Africa, amongst
whom was S. August, and other godly men.

Xistus 3. anno 432 continues his claym of supremacy.

Leo Magnus anno 440. magnifieth S. Peter, etc. In his days the Roman Empire
was grievously spoiled by Attila the Hunn. Idolatry.
The cause whereof Salvianus imputes to the continuance of their Heathenish
Idolatries, with other sins in Rome.

Hilarious anno 461 continues etc.

Simplicius, anno 467. This man greatly labored to advance his supremacy,
Heresi^
and for that purpose took upon him the Patronage of Eutiches the Heretic.

Faelix anno 483 continues etc.

Gelasius anno 492. Heathen Idolatries still continue in Rome. Anomos. Pantal.
yet, this man, Se and successores a nemine in terris judicandos asserit. he
will be judged by no man.

Anastasius 2. anno 469. An Heretic, and Patron of the Eutichians, Reprobatus.
Did. 19.
and Nestorians. Schisma 4.

Symmachus anno 498. advanced by faction, sedition and murder. Paul. Diac.
Sabel.


Hormisda anno 513. In his time Cassiodorus composed the schism between the
Pontif.

Ioannes I. anno 523.

Faelix 4. anno 526.

Bonifacius 2. anno 530. created by Schism and Sedition Schisma 5.

Ioannes 2. anno 532.

Agapetus anno 534.

Sylverius anno 535. a Magician, put down by schism. Schisma 6.

Vigilius anno 537. A seditious Schismatike, and Eutichian: whom Baron. also
calls Antichrist.

Pelagius 1. anno 555.

Ioannes 3. anno 566. in policy to cross the Constantinopolitan, decreed that
none should be called chief Bishop.

Benedictus 1. anno 576.

Pelagius 2. contended with the Archbishop of Constant. for Primacie and
Supremacy.

Gregorius Magnus, anno 590 condemns the title of Universal Bishop in the
Patriarch of Constant. and yet (if we believe Baron. and some others) was
contented to hold the Supremacy, and for that purpose wrote letters of great
flattery to Phocas the Murderer.

Sabinianus anno 604, did so much malice his Predecessor, and advance Gregory,
that he could hardly conteyne himself from burning his books; Platina.
and after him Boniface the 3, 4, 5, and others all mainteyned their
Supremacy, and the power of that Sea, until Constantine, of whom we shall
have cause to speak hereafter.

Lo, these were the Roman Prelates of those times, whose Histories diligently
collected and laid together, Plessis.
are more at large to be seen in that excellent work De Mysterio Iniquitatis.
Whereupon I demand, Whether they do not fully answer the description made of
this Beast rising out of the earth? Out of earthly desires of Honor, etc.
First here is another Beast or Monarchy, unlike to any of the former, and yet
not of any certain form of Government, always ascending and striving to get
supremacy, sometimes by one means, sometimes by another, stirring up schisms
and seditions, patronising Heretics, contending with other Bishops, yea with
those heavenly Doctors and Lights of the world, whom they could no way
countervaile, Athanasius, Hilarious, Augustine, Aurelius, and two hundred Bishops
of Africa with him. And yet pretending great humulitie and subjection to the
Emperor, as appears by the letters not only of Vigilius to Anthinius, and
other principal Heretics, at the command of the Empress, but of Gregory the
Great also to Phocas the Murderer. Yet by Schism and faction seeking to get
the place, as often as they could, without their consent. See more at large of
these things in that Book of Philip Marnay. Where also you may read what S.
Hierom writes of Rome in his time, expressly calling it Babylon, and the
purple whore. And telling them of their Riches, covetousnes, lewdnes, and
Lupercatia. There are the Trophies of the Apostles and Martyrs, there is the
confession of Jesus Christ (says he:) but there is also ambition and Tyranny,
which keep men back from doing good. Neither he only, but Marcellinus. I do
not (says he) marvail, considering the braverie of that city, that men
ambitious of that place, set up their Rest for the purchasing of it. For having
once aspired thereunto, they are sure to be enriched with the offerings of
Ladies and Noblemen, and to be carried in their coaches sumptuously attyred,
and so magnificent in their feasts, as passes any kings table. Many such
testimonies collected are to be read in the discourse of that Learned Lord. But
especially is to be observed, what he has diligently drawn out of Baronius,
where he says that Constantine in the 24 year of his reign, ordained that the
Bishops of the Christian Law should from that time forward have the same
Privileges, which the Idolatrous Priests had in time past. They had (says he)
their Rex Sacrificulus, and Pontifex Maximus. And who can think, that
Constantine would long endure, that they should exceed the Christians in Pomp
and glory? So Baron. their Cardinal and learned Annalist, yields unto us,
and freely confesses a point of no small moment, that this their Pontifex
Maximus, who now is in Rome, succeeds in privilege, Pomp and glory to the
Heathen Pont. Max. which was before in Rome. Yet the same Baron. shows also,
that Constantine first took the name of Pont. Max. to himself, and gives a
reason for it, namely that the Senate and people of Rome, those that were, yet
of the Heathenish faction, might not so easily be drawn to conspire against
the Christian Emperors ( was it not a very Christian policy think you?) And
yet (says he) the Pope had the power of supreme judge in all causes. So that
this stands most consonant with all Prophecies and histories, that these two
Beasts were at one time, both together in Rome, and that the new Pont. Max. of
Rome has the power of the Pagan Pontif. But that his power appeared very
slowly, and that the Pontifical name in Temporal causes was for a long time
very base and obscure appears by the testimony of the learned Guicciardin,
Guicc. l. 4.
and other Histories. I demand therefore, Whether we may not here see the
manifest performance of this prophecy. I, Another Beast arising after the
first in Rome, and in the presence of the first. 2, Arising by degrees out of
the earth, that is, out of the earthly lusts and desires of riches, luxury,
Pomp and pride, 1 John 2. James 3.
and also by earthly wisdom strife and envy. 3, Having two horns indeed,
that is, a power temporal and spiritual, but short and weak, and (as
Guicciardin says) obscure and almost invisible, as the Horns of a lamb. 4,
Speaking like the Dragon, that is, contrary to the Commandments of God,
Revel. 13.
as the Serpent did to our mother Eve: but equivocally, as Vigilius, whom
Baron. himself calls Antichrist, did equivocate with Sylverius his
Predecessor, and Theodora the Empress. See the History in Platina. And diverse
others of them did flatter and equivocate with the Emperors. The fifth
consideration therefore is of his Actions. The 6, of his works. And the 7, of
his Name. But of his name I have spoken before, and of his mark, I might
refer the Reader to the writings of the Excellent Paraeus, Napier, and Iunius
upon the Apocalypse. But I cannot omit the great and learned Archbishop
Antonin. In summa where he shows that every one that enters into their Holy
Orders receives a Character, p. 3. t. 14. and p. 4. t. 13.
which he interprets, to be principale instrumentum ordinis. But in another
place upon the place of the Apocalypse now in hand, Apoc. 13.
he expounds the Character of the Beast to be cultum Bestiae, the worship of
the Beast in his right hand; that is (says he) in his spiritual works, as
fasting, Alms, prayer, etc. or in his forehead, in outward appearance, at the
least, and in outward conformity. We may also observe, that if we subscribe to
the opinion of Irenaeus, that the name of the beast is Latinus, this is
observed in all their prayers. But considering well, and comparing the opinion
of Napier with Antonin, and both with the Text, I cannot choose but think, the
Character is expressed unto us in the superstitious use of the cross, which
they make upon the forehead, or otherwise, with their right hands. But for his
Actions, they are here somewhat largely set forth in this 13 chap. For first it
is said, that he exercises all the power of the first Beast, before his face.
So did the Popes before the Emperors, as I have showed before. Secondly, he
causes the earth and earthly minded men to worship the first beast. So did the
Popes to the Emperors, while they were in power, and continued Pontifices Max.
Thirdly, he does great wonders making fire to come down from heaven in the
sight of men. So the Popes in fulminating their Excommunications out of the
Church, which is commonly called Heaven in this Apocalypse. Fourthly, he
deceives men with these wonders. So the Popes, for they are but ignes fatui,
Prove. 26.
causeles curses, and so forcelesse. Fifthly, He says to earthly men, that they
should make the image of the first beast. So the Popes in setting up another
Pontificate, with like power to the first. Sixthly, it was permitted to him to
give a spirit to the image of the Beast, that he should speak. So do the Popes
animate this image of the first Pontificate. And seauenthly, to cause that as
many as would not worship the image of the Beast should be killed, Regal power
of life and death. And whether the Popes have not exercised that power, let all
men judge. What part or point then of this description is not fully
accomplished in the actions of the Popes above named? Is it not manifest, that
the popes did exercise all the power and authority of the old Idolatrous Pont.
Max. in Rome, before the Emperors face, who for a while held that title of
Pont. Max. If we should deny it, does not Baronius himself affirm it? The
power of the first Beast is said to have been in making war with the Saints,
and prevayling against them, Rev. 13.
and over every kindred tongue and nation. And did not the Popes most stiffly
contend, both with other Christians, and with the godly Bishops of the Grecian
and Eastern churches for appeals and Supremacy, until they had obtained it?
Did not Julius enter into contention with the Oriental Bishops, and amongst
them S. Athanasius, and reprehend them for holding a Counsel without his leave
to confute the Heresy of Arrius? Did not Liberius excommunicate the same
worthy Father and saint Athanasius, which made the godly Father S. Hilarie so
bitterly to cry out. The Pope in his first rising excommunicated by S. Hillarie.
Anathema to thee O Liberius, and all thy Companions. Anathema again and
again to thee thou false hearted double dealing Liberius. Does not S. Hierom
complain of the senate of Pharisees, saying, that there was not so mean a
scribe of that faction of Ignorance, but did conspire against him, which made
him to forsake Rome, and return to Jerusalem? Did not Celestinus seek with
force and arms to restore Antonius a Bishop of Africa, deposed by the Bishops
of that country, amongst whom were those Excellent bishops, Aurelius, Alipius,
and S. Augustine? which caused that godly and learned Father very earnestly to
put him mind of the words of S. Peter, that he should not domineer over his
Brethren. And did not most of them contend with the Patriarchs of
Constantinople for Supremacy? What was all this but warring against the
Saints? And when did these Contentions cease, but when the Pope had prevailed
against, and gotten the Supremacy over all these Christian Nations? And after
he had subjugated all Bishops, how they have continually made war against
other godly Christians, namely the Valdenses, Albigenses, Wicklevites,
Hussites, Bohemians, and others, every man may read in the Histories of these
later times. Now if these things be so, How can these prophecies be otherwise
fulfilled then they have been in these Roman Bishops? To whom else can they be
applied, and how may we expect any in time to come that may accomplish these
prophecies, if they be not already? It is not amiss here a little to stay our
contemplation, and as far forth, as the Sun of Righteousness, and most pure
light of truth shall illumine our understanding, to search out the cause, why
the same blessed and all seeing spirit, to whom all times are present, would
not only represent the four Monarchies, or Great Beasts of Idolatry by four
several metals: but also, why it pleased him to make choice of those Metals,
viz. Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and none other, save with the last there is
mixed earth or clay. Although the Prophet Daniel has already showed the chief
and principal reason, yet if we find any other reason thereof, which is
agreeable to the truth, and no way repugnant to that holy prophecy, I hope it
will not seem unworthie of our consideration. That the Babylonians, Persians,
Greeks and Romans were all Idolaters, is confessed, and therefore they were
aptly joined together in one Image. But why is this Image made of these
several metals? Surely somewhat may be found if we search into it. He that
has commanded us to seek, has promised that we shall find. Thou O King, art
that Head of Gold, Dan. 2.
says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar: thou and thy Successors kings of Babel. Why?
for you in your Idolatrous services use Gold. Herod. l. 1. Not. Genev. in Esa
46. Dan. 3.
Thou worshippest an image all of gold, the table before him is all of gold,
the Altar is gold, and thou make a Statue of gold, to be worshipped. And we
may well think the Prophet Esaias had some respect to this in calling it the
Golden Babel. The Persian Monarchy is resembled to Silver. Esaias 14.
Why? They, and all the rest of Asia worshipped Diana with silver shrines. The
Grecians are likened to Brass: Act. 19.
Why? They made Statues of Brass, Herod. l. 9.
and dedicated presents of Brass, as the Brazen Triped, Natal. Comes li. 7.
which gave occasion to that great civil and sacred war. The Romans
Idolatry is represented by Iron. Why? They for the most part offered Iron
Armours, as Romulus offered his Opima spolia, being the Armor which, Livy l. 1.
he being General took from the General of his Enemies. Which examples the
Romans did much emulate, as Virgil witnesses of Marcellus. Tertiaque arma
patri suspendit capta Quirino. A^neid. 6.
Yea, so eagerly were his examples followed, that Rome was filled with bloody
armours, Plutarch in Marcell.
making a very horrid spectacle, says Plutarch. Yet they had many Images of
Earth, as Iuvenall makes mention of Fictitis Jupiter. Petr. Crinitus hon. dis.
l. 14.
Non dubium est Romanorum regum temporibus lignea simulachra and fictilia in
urbe fuisse. says another. Their Great goddess Vesta or Cybete, the mother of
their Gods, was nothing but the Earth, or focus urbis, the hearth of the city
says Tully. Matremque Deorum tellurem says Virgill. S. Augustine also shows,
that Jupiter was nothing but the world, Proserpina and Ceres the Earth. And
Arnobius witnesses, that their Images, many of them were of earth, Je^^g 2.
such as perhaps Virgil speaks of in that verse.

Oscilla ex alta suspendunt mollia pinu. And now I demand, whether does not the
Summus Pont. which the Romans have now set up with Pomp and glory, like to
the former Pagan Pontifex, maintain and command such images also to be
worshipped? And whether are not many of their Images now in use made of
Plaster of Paris and such like stuff? And does he not now command them to be
burned as Heretics, which refuse to worship these Images? For what cause (...)
moved Sabinian to burn the books of Gregory? but because he had defaced
Images, howsoever Platina goes about to blanch the matter? What else did they
object against the Emperors of Greece? What else did they urge against the
Valdenses and Wicklevites, but that they refused to worship the Roman Pontifex
and his images? What else did they object to Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper,
Sanders, Bradford and other godly men in Queen Mary's time, that I may speak
of England and not of other countries, but that they refused to acknowledge the
real presence, and so to worship the Sacrament, and other of their images? I
demand also whether the Turk, or any other Idolater do command and compel men
to worship images, under such capital and Tyrannous pains? Whether any
Idolater do compel men to worship so many Images? or set up so many to be
worshipped? And whether any do proceed so cruelly against those that refuse to
worship their Images? The Popes in their laws, declare them to be Heretics,
and excommunicate, which do not worship their images, and consequently deprive
them, not only of lands and goods, but also of their lives: yea if it be a
Prince, they absolve his subjects from obedience and alleagiance, givin his
subjects power and liberty to kill their Native king, and give away his
kingdom to another? Did ever any Jew, Turk, Infidel or Pagan attempt to do
the like? If they should, is it credible, or likely that they should be
believed, and obeyed as the Popes have been? Thus therefore their actions being
so agreeable to the Rising of this second Beast: I demand again, How these
Prophecies can be otherwise performed by any Monarch, Prince, Potentate, State
or person whatsoever, past present, or to come? And if not: then, Whether this
be not that Antichrist, or whether we may expect any other? And so we come to
the description of Antichrist, mounted upon the Roman State, and reigning in
his glory, which is the fifth general part of his description.

V. The Reign of Antichrist.
IT is not unworthie of our observation that the Holy Ghost in setting forth
the kingdom of Antichrist uses no such form of speech, as when he speaks
of particular men, but such as is commonly used and applied in scripture to
signify great kingdoms and Monarchies. When he prophecieth of particular
men, for the most part, he notes them by some proper Adjunct. As of John
Baptist. Esaias 40.
A voice cries in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord. etc. So of our
Savior Christ, My Righteous servant shall justify many. and again, He was
broken for our sins. etc. Sometimes by the name of some other man: as, Mal 4.
Behold I send you the Prophet Elijah. etc. Sometimes he calls them by their
proper names, as that, He says to Cyrus my Shepherd. Esaias 44.
etc. and I will call Eljakim. and so he prophecieth of Josiah and against
Shallum and Coniah, The king of Babel and Tyrus. Esaias 22.
Ier. 22.
But when he speaks of great kingdoms or Monarchies, he figureth them
sometimes under the names of Great Beasts, as all the four Monarchies in
Daniel: sometimes under the names of women, ^zech. 23.
as Ezechiel calls the two kingdoms of Jerusalem and Samaria, Two women.
Nahum calls Niniveh, Esaias. 47.
the beautiful harlot. Esayah and Jeremy resemble Babylon sometimes to a
woman tender and delicate, sometimes to a Queen, Iu. 51.
sometimes to an Harlot, whose words and Phrases our Apostle delights much to
use. It is no marvel therefore, that having here to speak of the state of two
Great kingdoms, namely the Kingdom or Church of Christ, and the kingdom or
Synagogue of Antichrist. He describes one of them, as a Chaste and undefiled
spouse prepared for her husband: and the other, as a sumptuous, glorious,
luxurious, proud and intising Harlot, alluring kings, princes. and all sorts of
people to come unto her. Wherein, although it be true, that Contraries compared
and laid together, do illustrate one the other, yet I will not here prosecute
that glorious and heavenly description of the true Church of our Lord Christ
Jesus, able to take up all my thoughts and meditations, but strictly following
my former course, observe seven Attributes in the Description of the
Antichristian state and power, Revel. 17.
now mounted upon the back of the Roman state. First, it is called the Great
Whore. Secondly, which sits upon many waters. Thirdly, with whom the kings
of the earth have committed fornication, and the Inhabitants of the earth have
been made drunken with the wine of her fornication. Fourthly, most richly, and
gorgeously clothed and adorned with purple and scarlet, gold and pearls,
having a golden cup in her hand, full of her fornications. Fifthly, she has a
name written in her forehead, a Mystery, Babylon, The great Mother of Harlots
and abominations of the earth. Sixthly, She is drunken with the blood of the
Saints and Martyrs of Christ Jesus. And lastly, to make all plain, who this
is, It is (says our Prophet) the Great City that rules over the kings of
the earth. Of some parts of which Description I have spoken before, both in the
first and second Problem. For which cause I shall not need to speak much here,
but only, of such things as have not been touched before. And to speak a word
by the way of that which is most plain and evident, which is last mentioned,
that it is called the Great city, by which name we commonly understand, the
king, Prince, or Prelate thereof, as in the Prophecies against Judah, Israel,
Babell, Ninive, we understand many times their Princes and principal men; and
in our common speech we call Prelates by the names of their Seas: as
Canterbury, London, Magunce, Trever, etc. So here, by the most proper Adjunct
we understand Rome, and by Rome her Prince, Prelate or Governor. It will be in
vain therefore to ask whether this be he, seeing the Holy Ghost says, this
is he. But it will be (I think) worth our labor, to consider, how these
qualities may be applied to the chief Pontifex of Rome, and whether they may be
applied to any other: And if to them alone, then whether to one more then to
another: or to the whole succession. Let us therefore peruse them in order. The
first quality is, The Great Whore. Whoredom in Scripture (as has been said)
is understood sometimes literally, for the corporal filthiness: sometimes
mystically, for the spiritual whoredom, which is Idolatry. Now for this
later it is evident, not only by the Testimony of Salvianus, above recited,
but of their own histories, that the very Heathen Idols continued undefaced in
Rome, and worshipped until the time of Boniface the fourth, who having obtained
the Pantheon of the Emperor Phocas did consecrate that Temple to the honor of
the Virgin Marie, and of all martyrs, Platina. Fasc. Temp.
, ejectis prius Gentium si^ulachris. First casting out of it the Images of the
Heathen. Now if he first cast them out, then consequently they remained unto
his time unremoved. And although S. Gregory is said by some Authors in a zeal
to Christian Religion to have broken and defaced some of these divelish
moniments, and that therefore Sabinian his Deacon, and next Successor, was so
much offended with him, that he was about to burn his books, In vita Sabin.
yet Platina stiffely denies that either Gregory did deface Images, or that,
that was the cause of Sabinians malice against him, although he himself shows
no other cause for it. But howsoever it was, whether Gregory did so, or not
so, yet both by the testimony of Platina, and by the Action of Boniface, we
may see that the Romans still continued those heathen abominations. And no
sooner had Boniface, who succeeded next but one after Sabinian, cast out the
Heathen Idols, but shortly after, they erected the Images of Saints, and
commanded and compelled men to worship them, about the year 625.
and that with such eagernes, and fury of contention, that they deprived the
Grecian Emperors, and took from them all Italy, because they resisted them,
namely Leo, whom they called in scorn Iconomachus, that is, a fighter against
Images. This worshipping of Images was then, and ever since condemned by godly
men, and held to be direct Idolatry, unexcusable, whatsoever distinctions they
pretend, which indeed are but Glosses of their schoolmen, and have no ground
nor evident proof in the Scripture. For what Scripture warranteth us to give
the worship of Doulia to any Image or Saint whatsoever? I am sure the Text in
one place says: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve: where the word is the same that signifies Doulia. What warrant have we
in Scripture to give the same worship to the picture, Image, or Cross of
Christ, that we give to Christ Jesus? What warrant have we to set up Images for
remembrances? Yea, what shall we say, also those gross and Heathenish
superstitions and Rites in observing the Calends of January, the days
Egiptiacall, and the course of the stars, all which S. Augustine held to be
Idolatrous, and yet continued in Rome till the days of Pope Martin, Can. 2^.
qu^ 7.
which was about the year of our Lord 640. yea until the days of pope
Zachary. Where then was the zeal and godliness of the Romish prelates before
to reform these things? And yet no sooner were they condemned by the said pope
Martin, but that shortly after, even by the same pope Martin was commanded both
the adoration of Images, and the vow of Chastity to be observed by Monks and
priests, which was the beginning of the Corporal Fornication also, in that,
that under the name and pretense of chastity they restrained them from lawful
marriage. Which when they had thus taken away from the Monks, shortly after,
that is to say, in the year of our Lord 660 or thereaboutes, the pope with his
Council decreed, that the Cloisters of Nuns should be subject to Monks and
Friars, Conc^l. Hispa contrary to the Synod Agath. Vide Tom. 1. Council. ciroa
ann. 475. Pantal.
then which nothing in the world could be devised more forcible, and opportune
to induce and increase common whoredom betwixt them. And about the year 697.
a king of Spain gave public liberty to priests, that every one of them
might keep as many Concubines, as he would, which either he durst not have
done, or the priests durst not have put in practice, without the popes consent.
And by the counsel of Toledo, about the same time, Priests were licen^ed to
keep every one a Concubine. May we not then here plainly see the power of the
Great Whore begin to show it self, about the year of our Lord 666, when as
these three great things were in that time publicly established: first the
Popedom, or universal Pontificate, in Boniface the fourth, Secondly, the
adoration of Images. And thirdly, this corporal fornication. But of the power
of the pope, how it grew and increased, Problem 7.
I shall speak more hereafter. In the mean space let us take a Review of these
things, and compare them to the first Attribute and Notation here given to
Antichrist by the Holy Ghost, when he represents him and his estate to a
Great Whore. And let us ask the Questions before touched: First, Whether the
Popes for these nine hundred years last past, have not continually mainteyned
these two kinds of Fornications by their laws, faculties, dispensations and
practices? Secondly, Whether all of them have mainteyned them, or whether any
one of them has reformed any of these sins, during that time? Thirdly,
Whether any other Prince, Potentate, State or person have done the like?
Fourthly, And if not, then whether they may not well be comprehended and
understood under the name of one Man, as the whole succession of the princes of
Judah and Israel, is called Judah, Jacob, Israel, Ephraim, etc. And here,
although to any that well considers the places of Scripture above cited, it
may seem idle and impertinent to seek for Antichrist in any place out of
Rome, or to imagine, that he should be any other then the seventh Ruler of
that Septimontane city: yet because there are some which think the Turk to
be Antichrist: others that think Antichrist must be a Jew, and of the Tribe of
Dan, and such like vayn opinions: I demand, Whether ever any Turk or Jew
commanded, mainteyned, or suffered the worshipping of Images, and the public
use of whoredom, so much, and in such open manner, as the Popes have done? And
seeing both the Jews and Turks by the grounds of their Religions do abhor
and detest Images: Whether it be likely, that any Jew or Turk will ever
suffer such Idolatry as is common amongst the Papists? And yet further because
some do think that the Reign of Antichrist must continue but three years and
an half, and some think he must be one particular man; and such like
fantasies: I demand, Whether it be possible, that there should be so much
whoredom and Idolatry committed, within that short space of time, or in the
life of one particular man, though he live an hundred years, as has been
committed within the Popes kingdom and Jurisdiction, during the said nine
hundred years last past? I demand (I say) Whether it be possible, that there
should be so many millions of Fornicators, Whores, and Idolaters, in the life
of one man, as in the time of these Popes? Item, Whether it be possible in so
short a time, for any man or devil to establish, use and practice such
powerful means, for the increase of whoredom and Idolatry? And if the
Sectaries of the Roman Pontif. will not answer, I will ask the Earth, (as Esra
is called to do) Whether within the compass of such a time she be able to
bring forth, or bear so many millions of whores, Fornicators, 2 Ezd^u ^^
and Idolaters, as in the Succession of so many ages she has sustained? And if
she cannot answer, but as the womb of a woman, that it is altogether
impossible to bring forth so many at once, as she does in tract of time, then
will I ask again: Whether any of the Popes be free of this, and whether they
be not all of them as one man, guilty of these great sins, by act,
approbation, consent and imitation, and consequently, fit to be represented
under one person, and called one Man? And if this be so, then will I demand (as
Salvianus does) of the consciences of all men, that have any sense or feeling
of Truth: Whether this be not that great Whore, here described, then whom never
any, no not the Devil himself, if he ruled the Earth, but three years and an
half, or for one man's life only, could practice or cause more fornication or
Idolatry to be committed? And so much of the first note, the Great Whore.

The second is, that she sits upon many waters. Which the Angel
expounds, to signify Peoples, and Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues. Here
first I observe the word of sitting, which is used not only here, but by the
Apostle 2 These. 2. And it is a word ^^metimes applied to Kings, sometimes to
Bishops. Kings are said to sit on their Thrones, Bishops in their Chayres or
Churches. Both are applied to Antichrist. For in the 2 These. 3. it is said, He
sits in the Temple or Church of God: and here upon many Nations. The one
place shows, he must be a Bishop, the other a King: can this be applied to
any but the Pope? Now that the Pope and Church of Rome for these nine hundred
years have been supported by many Peoples, nations and Tongues, I will desire
to have none other witnesses, then their own chief Authors and Advocates, who
make their greatest brags of their Universality: Bellarm. Stapl^ron. ^lendus
etc.
and how the power of their Pontif. extends it self, not only to Europe, but
to all, even the farthest remote parts of the world, America and India: which
the Turk, nor any other Potentate could never yet attain unto. And if this be
evident and undeniable, let us again peruse over the Questions ^boue proposed:
Whether this may be affirmed of any Jew or Turk. And whether it be possible,
that the power of any Jew or Turk, or any one man whatsoever, should within
the space of three years and an half, or of one man's life so far prevail, or
procure to have so many Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues subject unto
it, as the Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, which have served the Popes for
these nine hundred years do amount unto? Or to give a nearer instance: so many
at once, as within that time have come to Rome to their Iubiles and solemnities.

The third note of this Antichristian Harlot is, that the Kings of the Earth
have committed fornication with her, and the Inhabitants of the Earth have been
made drunken with the wine of her fornication. And what king was there in
Europe, for these nine hundred years, which did not committ or permit
fornication both corporal and spiritual with the Church of Rome? Which of
them did not worship the same Images, and use or permit the same uncleanes? And
I demand again, whether this can be verified of any Jew, Turk or other person
whatsoever, past, present or to come?

The fourth note, is her exceeding great riches, pomp and gorgeousnes. Let me
instance, but in one or two particulars. Majora, vel certe paria, etc. says
Blondus. All Europe sends to Rome greater, or surely no less Tributes, In
Roma inst. urata.
then were paid to the Ancient Roman Emperors. Pope John left at his death in
treasure, ducentos quinquaginta Tonellos Ducatorum, Bib^iand. ex Palmerio ad
ann. 1334.
says another. Omnes Reges mundi non possent tantum de Thesauro reddere infra
unum annum, quantum fuit de Papali Palatio asportatum, and de Palatiis trium
Cardinalium and Marchionis. says another, speaking of Pope Boniface the eight,
R. Avesb.
and three Cardinals, and the Marquis his nephew. I demand then, Whether Prince
or Potentate, State or person have had the like testimony of Riches, and
whether it be credible, that any in three years and an half, or one man's life
time should attain to the like?

The fifth note: She has a name written in her forehead, A Mystery, Babylon
the Great, Mother of Harlots and abominations of the earth. First it is called
Great. I demand, Whether ever this title were so much given to any city
besides Rome? The old Babylon was never so many times called great. And I
think, none will make question of any other. And Whether the Bishop of Rome,
the Church of Rome, and the city of Rome, have not every one of them had a
special title of Greatness, I refer me to the consciences of the Romans
themselves, to their Decrees and Canons, who give to their Bishop the Title of
Pontifex Max. or Summus, so Lipsius, that has written a Book, De magnitudine
urbis Romae, and to that other, who writ a Book, De magnitudine Romanae
Ecclesiae. So their Church is great, their city is great, and their Bishop is
greatest of all. Of the name of Babylon I have spoken sufficiently before. And
for the other title of Mother of Harlots or Sodomites (as Scaliger and others
read) and abominations of the earth: I demand of all that know Rome, either
by traveling in those countries and eye witness, or by reading and hearesay:
Whether there be in any place of the world, being of no greater extent so many
Harlots, and Sodomites, and so publicly mainteyned, and allowed, as in Rome,
and the Popes Jurisdiction, and where his power is acknowledged, and whether
any other Prince or Prelate, Church or State, Turk or Jew, have given or made
such, and so many faculties and dispensations, pardons and Laws, for such
things. Let the notable book of the Taxa and the cases reserved to Papal
dispensation be perused. And here is to be noted the Name that the Holy Ghost
gives to her, calling her, The Mother of Harlots or Sodomites and
fornications, which is singularly Emphaticall. For it cannot be denied, but
there are many Harlots and Fornicators in other places, neither can it be
denied, but other Empires and kingdoms are called Whores, as Inda and Israel by
Ezekiel, Ninive by Nahum: Babylon by Jeremy. But no other place is called the
mother of Harlots or Sodomites. This of all the rest seems to be Proprium
quarto modo. A property inseparable, which agrees to the Popes, omni, soli,
and semper, to them only, and every of them ever since the Councels of
Hispal. and Toledo above mentioned. For no^ne but the Popes have forbidden
Marriage, nor made Laws that the Cloisters and Convents of Nuns should be
subject to monks and Friars, and that it should be lawful for Priests to have
Concubines. No other Prince, State or person, has built such Stews and
Brothelhouses for Venerie and Sodomy. Wherein whores, Sodomites and Fornicators
are daily bred, cherished, increased and multiplied. None but they have granted
pardons, faculties and dispensations for such things. And if any had done, or
should do the like, may we think it possible, or credible, that he should
obtain such absolute power and reputation of Holiness, as the Pope has to be
credited and believed in the same? Was there ever any Sodomite, Egyptian,
Babylonian, Jew, Turk, or Infidel so desperately impudent, as the Romans have
been, not only in doing such things, but in boasting of them, and setting
forth books thereof, as of old, Virgil, Ovid, Tibullus, Catullus, Propertius;
and of late Casa, the noble Archbishop of Sodom? Boccate, their Conceits upon
Orlando, Baptista de Albertis, Petrus Haedus and many others. Cornel. Agr. de
van. Sci. cap. 63, 64.
Vidi ego nuper Italica lingua editum Dialogum utriusque Veneris, omnium
flagitiosissimum. And again, Flagitiosissimi Lenones, scelestissimaeque Lenae
saepe sub Religionum pellibus delitescunt. And hereupon again I ask, Whether
this can be applied to any Prince, Potentate, State or person, and whether
these prophecies can be otherwise fulfilled?

The sixth note also is evident. She is drunken with the blood of the Saints,
and Martyrs of Christ Jesus. Peruse the Histories of the Christian Church, and
likewise of all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Pagans, that have been since the
beginning of the world, and show me, whether ever any nation have shed so much
Christian blood, or have caused so much to be shed, as the Romans have done? To
omit those ten Primitive Persecutions, which remain without parallel of any
other: How many millions were slain in those sacred wars, stirred up by the
Popes, to recover Palestina? in the civil wars of Germany and France? How
many were massacred in France in the year 1572, and not long before in
Merindall and Cabrieres? How many Reverend Bishops, and godly Preachers were
burned in England, with Men, women, Children and Infants under pretense of
their fiery zeal? How many thousands, did their great Champion, the Duke of
Alva destroy in few years in the Netherlands, what by his Soldjors, what by
his Hangmen, and executioners? How many have they swallowed up in their bloody
Inquisitions? To speak nothing of those which they count but viles animas, as
the Valdenses, Hugunots, Gewses, Lutherans and Calvinists, how many Princes and
Noblemen have they made away? Egmond, Horn, and the Prince of Orange, in the
Low Countries. The Admiral Chastillon, Count Rochfocault, Teligni, the Queen
of Navarre, and two Kings, in France. In Spain, Prince Charles, besides many
others. But what talk I of particulars. Let all Princes of the world join
together against the Lord and his Christ, as the Jews and Romans did against
our Savior: Yea, let the great Turk and great Devil join with them, and
reign but three years and an half, or but for a man's life, and spend all that
time in murdering the Saints of Christ Jesus, and I will yet ask, Whether any
man can imagine, that in so short a time they be able to kill so many godly
Christians, as have been murdered and slain by the power, practices, and
procurement of these Pontifices Max. since they got that Antichristian title?
And if men will not confess the truth, I will again appeal to the Earth, and
ask, Whether she in so short a time, be able to bring forth so many to be
martired? And if the Consciences of men be not more dull and dead then the
earth, I will demand again of them, Whether all these Pontifices maximi, and
every one of them, be not guilty of all the Bloudsheds of their Predecessors,
by Consent, Approbation, Imitation and prosecution? And whether the like can be
said, of any State, Potentate, prince or person in the world besides? Let us
yet cast our eyes a little more abroad, and consider of the great destructions
of Christian men, by Turks and Saracens. It cannot be denied, but these open
and professed enemies of Christ have shed much Christian blood, yet I think
if Histories be diligently searched, and compared together, it may be proved,
that since the said year of our Lord 700. the Popes and their Sectaries have
been very Great, if not the chiefest means and causes, either by procurement,
Qui non defendit nec obsistit, si potest infuriae, tant est in vitio, quam si
parents, aut patria^ aut sucios deserat. Cic. lf. Offi.
or destitution, of the Effusion of all, or the most part of the Christian
blood, that has been shed by those Miscreants in Europe. For what was the
means, whereby, the Saracens first prevailed in Asia, but the weakness of the
Grecian Empire? And what caused that weakness, but the Revolt of Italy and
other western Countries from the Empire, procured by the Pope? Whereby the
Grecian princes were not only deprived of many mighty Christian kingdoms,
but distracted by Rebels at home, from defending their subjects abroad? And
what then brought the Turk into Europe, but the weakness of the same princes,
when they were neither able to hold their Provinces which they had in Asia, nor
to suppress the factions in Graecia? Who stirred up the Christian Princes of
Britayn, Germany and France, to spend their subjects blood in Syria, where so
many millions of Christians were slain, and then left them succourlesse to
their enemies, and sometimes rewarded them with excommunications and seditions
stirred up against them at home, whereby their subjects rebelled, and their
enemies prevailed? Who moved our noble King Richard the first, to enter into
that Saracenicall war, where he lost so many men, Math. Fari^^
and yet when he was taken Prisoner by a Christian Prince, in his Return, what
means did the Pope make for his liberty, Blesensis.
for all the pitiful letters of his mother, when in the mean space his
kingdom was most greevously oppressed and spoiled? What help had the Grecian
Emperors, In conc. Lugdun. ann. 1275. and in council. Bouon. circa 1439. a'ter
which, within 16 years the Turk took Constantinople.
when with most humble submissions and supplications they solicited the Pope
to assist them, being Christians, against the Turk, being the common enemy of
our faith? Who was the cause of that woeful and never sufficiently deplored
slaughter of Christians at Varna: but the persidious Pope, and his Cardinal
Julian, causing the poor seduced King, to violate his oath and league with the
Turk? What help or succor did the Popes give or procure to those two
Invincible Soldjours of Christ Jesus, Hunniades and Scanderbeg, Historia
Scanderb.
against the Turk, though this later with all humility in person desired it,
offering to drive that public enemy out of Europe, if he might have
assistance? It is said indeed, that Pius the second gathered an army, such as
it was, to help him, but nothing came of it, and perhaps he lost nothing by the
Bargain. And what shall we say of Boniface the eighth, who hired the Saracens
to war against the Christians in Sicilia? What shall we say also to the first
coming of the Turks into Europe? Who transported their armies by Sea, but the
Popes own subjects of Genua, the country that was given to the Pope by
Herebertus the Lombard, and whom he might have easily restrained, if he would.
More of this might be said, but let this suffice; and let me demand upon it,
whether we may not justly think him guilty of all the Christian blood, that
has been shed by the Turks in Europe? I ask again, whether any of these
Pontifices Maximi have amended these things, or showed any repentance or sorrow
for them, or any dislike thereof since their perpetration: yea, whether they
have not by all means extolled and approved of those their Predecessors,
boasting of their Succession from them, and mainteyning that they cannot err,
and that they ought not to be judged by any man? And therefore before I pass
from this point, let me speak one word to thee, (O Lord of Truth Love and
mercy) or let my tears speak to thee, that yet at length, thou would take
pity upon thy rent and torn body, thy poor distressed Church, which by
intestine dissentions, and the malicious practices of this inward and secret
enemy, is become the common stage and Theater of all bloody Massacres, and
doleful Tragedies, while their enemies both forreyn, and domestic prosper,
and triumph in their unity and agreement. O let it please thee at length to
reunite in Truth and Love, that the enemy may no longer say, Where is their
God?

Well, the last note is inseparable and undeniable. It is (says the Holy
Ghost) that Great city, that rules over the Kings of the Earth. Whereof I
have said sufficiently before, and having showed that it cannot be applied to
any other place in the world, and that the Antichrist can be no other then the
seventh Ruler of that High seven hilled City, and namely, that Head which
next succeeded the Emperors, as the best Fathers, and ancient Interpreters with
one mutual consent do agree: I will add to the description of this
Antichristian state, a short survey of the words and actions of Antichrist, as
by the H. Apostles and Prophets they are noted, to show, how all Prophecies are
fulfilled touching the coming of Antichrist, and do all concur in the Roman
State and Prelate, and this is the sixth general part, which I proposed at
first.

VI. Of the words and actions of Antichrist.
THe Prophet Daniel speaking of Antichrist, gives us four notes, Dan. 7, 25.
very notable and remarkable. Whereof the first is, He shall speak words
against the Most High. Secondly, He shall consume the Saints of the Most High.
Thirdly, Apoc. 17.
He shall think to change times. Fourthly, He shall think also to change
Laws. Our Apostle repeating also the two first, adds two more, Adultery and
Idolatry. 2 These. 2.
And the Apostle Paul adds one, namely Luciferian pride, and Exaltation. For
he exalts himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, and
he sits in the Temple of God, boasting himself, that he is God. Of some of
these things I have spoken so much already, that I need not stand long upon
them. First, He shall speak words against the Most High, which is Blasphemy.
Did Antiochus so (for of him some do interpret this place) when he forbade
sacrifices, 1 Mat. 1.
and burnt offerings to be made unto God, when he burnt the books of the Law
and commanded Idols to be worshipped? And have not the Popes of Rome done so,
when they forbid prayers and thanksgiving to God in the vulgar tongue, caused
the Bibles, translated into English and other tongues to be burned, and
commanded Images to be worshipped? Secondly, He shall consume the Saints of the
most High. Did Antiochus so, in commanding godly men to be put to death? And
has not the Pope done much more? Have they not caused many millions of
Christian men to be slain in their great expeditions and Massacres? Hereof
sufficient has been said before, and yet because it comes now to hand, I hope
it will not seem tedious to add one instance more, Do not eccl. cap. 18.
out of the Arch-advocate of Antichrist Bellarmin. who confesses that in
France, in one expedition under Innocent the third, there were slain an
hundred thousand. Thirdly, He shall think to change times and Laws, two
things which God seems to challenge, as reserved, and peculiar to himself.
For of Times David says, My times are in thy hands. and Daniel, Psalm. 31.
God changes times and seasons. And our Savior Christ himself says, Dan. 2.
that God has kept them in his own power. And of Laws, Act. 1.
Solomon says, By me Kings and Princes decree just things. Prove. 8.
Now I ask of those that will have these Prophecies to be applied only to
Antiochus: What did he in this kind? what times did he change, or what Laws?
But of the Pope and all the Popes since Boniface, who is called the fourth, but
indeed the second that took upon him that title, which was about the year of
our Lord 607, I demand, whether they have not all taken upon them this power,
to change times and laws? Did not Boniface himself make a new feast to the
honor of all Saints? Have not his Successors likewise made very many new
Feasts and Fasts? Let their own Kalenders be witness. Have they not ordained
Jubilees, and altered them at their pleasure? Have they not altered the whole
Calendar of the Julian year from the Dionysian account, to the Litian or
Gregorian? and thereby altered all the Feasts, both moveable and unmoueable,
from the times, wherein by the old account they are observed? Have I need to
stand long to prove this point, which is known to all the world? Has this
been done upon any warrant of Gods word? Or has it not been done by
Astronomicall computations of Minutes and Seconds, which are almost insensible
and imperceptible. Will they say it may be done by Art? And what will they
answer to those excellent learned men, who deny their account, and have noted
great defects in men of no mean estimation among the learned, namely Scaliger,
Vid. Thuan. l. 129.
Petavius, and Vieta, to speak nothing of our own Countriman Lidyat. What
will they say to those that hold the Art of Astronomy, not only imperfect,
but impossible to be perfected: and therefore compare the study of it, to the
building of the Tower of Babylon? And that also was the sentence of a man not
of the meanest account, no less then Raimarus Mathematician to the Emperor
Rudolphus? Act. 1.
So that the sentence of our Savior Christ may seem to extend to this also:
Non ad vestrum scire tempora. You must be content sapere ad Sobrietatem: to be
wise, and not too wise, but within the compass of sobriety. Now let me ask,
Whether any Prince, Potentate, State or person ever did the like in the changes
of times, as these Popes have done: and whether any can do the like, especially
that shall continue but three years and a half, or one man's life time? Again,
have not the Popes and every one of them changed laws, by establishing a New
law, which they call the Canon Law? Have they not added to their Decrees,
Decretals, Extravagants, Clementines, and do they not still publish new Bulls,
Faculties, and Dispensations with special words of Non obstante? I hope no man
will put me to prove any of these things; unless it be some that will make a
question, whether that rule of Law be to be held, which says, that Notoria non
sunt probanda? or make a doubt, whether the Popes Bulls, Faculties,
Dispensations, and other public Instruments be Notoria. Anton. sum. part. 3.
t. 22. Sum. Angel. tit. Papa.
Again, do they not teach and mainteyne, that the Pope may make New Religions,
change the ordinances of General Councels, and dispense with all Laws, both
of the Temporal State, and of the Church, yea with all the Laws of the second
Table, and with some of the first? As when God in his Law says, It is not
lawful for thee to have thy Brothers wife. Does not the Pope say, It is
lawful by my dispensation. When God says, Thou shall not kill: does not the
Pope say, thou may kill even thy Prince, when I have declared him to be an
Heretic? Is not this to change laws, (...)
and have not all the Popes, for these many hundred years now last past, with
one consent and voice, all making one Man of sin, or Lawless one, arrogated
this power, and practiced it? Have they not all maynteyned and approved the
Actions of their Predecessors in doing such things? And do they not still
maintain and practice the same? So that I need not to say with Salvianus, Etsi
hoc commune omnibus non faciebat actus, faciebat tamen assensus. For which of
them has not done it? And what else has been the cause of so many millions of
sins committed in the Christian world, for these many hundred years, but the
Bulls, Indulgences, Pardons, absolutions, faculties and dispensations of the
Pope, together with the persuasion that men had of their Holiness,
Infallibility, and power to grant such things, and that by such Bulls,
Indulgences, Pardons and Dispensations their sins were forgiven? Now let any
man show me, Whether ever any Prince, Potentate, State or man have done the
like, or whether it be possible for any, in time to come, to do so much in
this kind, as the Popes have done: namely, to make so many Laws, to break and
change so many Laws, and to grant so many Bulls, faculties and dispensations,
especially within the compass of three years and an half, or one man's life
time? Concerning their Adulteries, which is the fifth, I have said sufficiently
before, only this one question may be added, viz. Where shall we find
Antichrist, and Babylon the Great Whore, and mother of Whoredoms, but in that
church and state, whose chief Bishop publicly allows them, because he has a
great part of his Revennues from them, which as some in former times have
accounted, has been to the value of forty thousand ducats yearly? Concerning
their Idolatries also I have spoken before, and shall say more hereafter. There
rests but the last note, which S. Paul gives, 2 These. 2.
and is principally to be observed, because the Fathers do agree, that it is
without doubt spoken of Antichrist, viz. That he sits in the Temple of God,
as God, boasting that he is God, and exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped, and yet working with all deceiuablenes of
unrighteousnes. If any man yet remain doubtful whether the Pope be that
Antichrist, let him answer me upon these words, Who ever was comparable to the
Pope in these things? Aug. de civ. dei li. 20.
Who ever besides him has sitten in the outward visible Church, or Temple of
God, as chief Bishop, head or Governor thereof, or upon the Church, as
commanding, ruling, and reigning over it. or as the Temple of God, with such a
singular opinion of sanctity and infallabilitie, (for all these ways does the
Father interpret that word) as the Popes have done? And whether it is credible
that any shall do the like in time to come? Whether is there, or was there ever
any Prince, Potentate or person, Christian or Jew, Turk or Pagan so adored as
he has been, and that in the very Temple, and Charch of God, and that by the
chief Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals, Patriarks, and Primates of the Church?
Whether can they give any greater Adoration to God himself outwardly, if he
were corporally present? Or do they give any greater to the Sacrament, in which
they affirm the body of our Lord Jesus Christ to be really present? Again
Whether has any Prince, Potentate or person, Christian, or Jew, Turk or
Pagan, invented, or practiced such a powerful means, to deprive or depose
Emperors, Kings and Princes, as the Popes have done by their Excommunications,
Suspensions, Interdictions and Decrees? Did ever any so practice, to discharge
Subjects of their Allegiance and oaths, to give kingdoms away to others, to
crown and uncrowne Emperors with his foot, to tread upon them, and yet still
reteyne such an opinion of Holiness, See more in the Collect. of M. Fox in the
end of his first Tome.
and have a Clergy singing to him in the mean while, Super Aspidem, and
Basiliscum, etc. Did ever any do the like, and was obeyed in such things, and
thought to do it lawfully and rightfully? And has he not in these things more
then ever any other exalted himself as God, above all kings and Princes, which
are called Gods and worshipped? See much more of this in M. Downhams Treatise of
Antichr. l. 1. cap. 5.
Yea does he not exalt himself above our Lord Jesus Christ, as much as man may
do, when he affirms, that not only he himself, but every one of his
Mass Priests and Friars is able to make the very carnal body of our
Savior, which must be worshipped as God? Does he not cause the Sacrament to be
carried before him by a Pedarie, or Footepriest, when he himself is mounted up
in a Throne of Majesty, and carried upon men's shoulders? Does he not exalt
himself above our Lord, when he wears the Crucifix (which he likewise
commands to be worshipped as God) upon his shoes and pantofles, Possevin^
which even the Rude Moscovite, when he heard of it, utterly abhorred and
detested? Does he not exalt himself above God, when he takes upon him to alter
the Articles of Faith, and add to those which were anciently made, and
declared in the times of the Apostles, or soon after, by the consent of the
Primitive Church? For what is that they have declared so imperiously; subesse
Romano Pontisici, Extra. Com. de Majorit.
omni humanae creaturae declaramus, definimus, etc. esse de necessitate
salutis. and therefore, where the ancient Creed teaches us to believe the
Catholic Church, they will now have us to say the Catholic Roman Church? Does
he not exalt himself above God, when he dispenses with the Laws of God, and
with sins; not only with sins done, but to be done, which God himself
never would do? For proof whereof let the Bulls be reviewed which he has
granted, as to Henry the eight to marry his Brothers wife, and such like; Also
the Bulls which he has sent forth against Queen Elizabeth and King James,
the Kings of France and other princes, exciting their Subjects to Treason,
murder and Rebellion. Yea has he not granted to private men faculties or
pardons for sins to be done? I am sure our Sovereign king James tells us of
two such pardons, His Majesty's Meditaetion upon the Lords prayer.
which he saw himself. Did ever any Jew, Turk, Infidel or pagan take upon him
to do the like? Or is ever any to be expected that may do more? I demand also,
whether ever any other has had, or whether any other may be expected in time
to come, that may have greater, or the like power to deceive men in
unrighteousnes, or to make them believe, that it is lawful for them to commit
sin and wickedness in such manner as the popes have done by their pardons,
Faculties and such like merchandise? And whether this has not been a most
effectual and potent means to induce men into sin and unrighteousnes? And,
Whether it be possible for any other man to do the like in time to come,
especially in the Church of God, and within so short a time, as three years
and a half, or one man's life time? as has been done by the Popes in all these
seven points last before set down. And if it be altogether impossible, let us
at length abandon that, and such like incredible, and impossible opinions, and
not suffer our selves to be deluded any longer, but ingenuously and freely
confess, that this is he; and that it is in vain to look for another. And
thus by the gracious and merciful assistance of our Almighty Lord, Christ
Jesus, I have passed through these six parts of the description of Antichrist;
his Place, his State, his Names, his Rising, his Reign, and his Words and
Actions, every one of them so suitable to the Roman Pontifex, that I for my
part think it imp^ssible to apply them to any other. And so I come to the
seventh and last part, which is his Times.

VII. Of the Times of Antichrist.
ONE of the greatest Arguments, that the Popish Advocates do insist upon, to
prove that their Pope is not Antichrist, is this of the Times: wherein first
they stiffly mainteyne, that Antichrist shall reign but three years and an
half, whereas the Pope has reigned (say they) many hundred years. Mark here
by the way, they confess that he reigns in Rome. Secondly, they hold that
Antichrist shall be but one man, and shall not come, until shortly before the
end of the world. Thirdly, that Enoch and Elias must come before, or in his
time. All which conceits are without any warrant of the Holy Scriptures, and
have been largely refuted by others, especially by the excellent learned Robert
Abbat late Bishop of Salesburie. and for the two first, I have said before
sufficiently. Against the last I will propose but one question, which shall be
drawn out of the very words of the Text. Apoc. 11.
For in the 11 chapter of the Revelation, where there is mention made of the
two Prophets; whom they will have to be Enoch and Elias, it is said, that they
shall be slain by the Beast which comes out of the bottomless pit, and not
by the Beast which comes out of the Earth. Now in the 13 chapter we find two
Beasts, the first ascending out of the Sea, having feauen heads and ten horns.
Which is by the best Interpreters judged to be the Old Roman Empier, and the
Temporal state thereof: The second Beast ascends out of the Earth, and that
(...) properly understood to be Antichrist, as has been said before. And in
the 17 chapter it appears, Rev. 17.
that the first Beast, which has the seven Heads, is that which is said to
ascend out of the Bottomless pit. I ask then upon the Conference of these
Texts together, How it can stand with these Prophecies, to say that these two
Prophets must be Enoch and Elias, and shall be slain by Antichrist, when as
they must be slain by the Roman Empire, and not by the second Beast, nor by
the Whore? and the Roman Empire must be removed before Antichrist be revealed.
Iudicent Theologi. But these and such like conceits of theirs being brought
into the light, and appied to the flames of those holy burning and shining
Candles, the Prophets and Apostles, will easily dissolve and melt away like ice
before the Sun. For whosoever applies himself with any heed and diligence
to read and mark the Scriptures, and compare them together, may soon
perceive that the blessed spirit of Truth, who leads us into all Truth,
very often, and very largely speaks of the Times of Antichrist, describing
them with seven remarkable Considerations, whereof not one of them tells us
of Henoch and Elias, or that Antichrist shall be but one man, or endure but
three years and an half, etc. But contrariwise represents unto us long
Periods and continuance of times. As to the Purpose: First, that which we may
call Praeparationes or Dispositiones Materiae, which by the Apostle I think is
called the working of the Mystery of Iniquity, and began in the Apostles
time, 2 These. 2.
and must continue till the removing of the Roman Empire, which was about three
hundred years. The second is the Removing of the Impediment, and the Rising of
Antichrist, which in reason must follow, for sublato impedimento emergit actio.
And this not at an Instant, but at least in 300 or 400 years more. For so long
it was before the Empire was clean removed out of Rome. The third is his
Revelation not upon a sudden, but by degrees in long time, accompanying his
Rising. The fourth therefore is his Reign more near to a Septingentan, then to
a Demi-Septennian. The fifth is of the Signs of his times, and the manners of
men in those times, not incident to a short time. The sixth is of his decay and
consumption, not hasty: and the seventh of his final end, and utter
destruction; which must be by the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. So
that the working of this mystery, and the progress thereof must be from the
time of the Apostles unto the end of the world. And there is not one of these
seven Considerations but is expressly spoken of in the Scripture most of them
very often, as shall appear by that which follows: Whereupon I ask, Whether
it would not seem very vain and unseemly not only for the majesty of
divine Truth, or dignity of Apostolic writings; but even for the gravitie of
a sober man to speak so often, or make such incuications of things, that
should either come so late, or continue so small a time. Therefore to speak of
the first consideration, I ^ske whether it be not expressly and directly
intimated unto us by the Holy Apostle S. Paul, where he says, 2 These 2.
the Mystery of Iniquity begins to work already. And by S. John, 1 John
2.
Even now there are many Antichrists. And again, 2 John 7.
now already he is in the world. And again, Many deceivers are entered into
the world, which confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, 2 Pet. 2.
such a one is Antichrist. And S. Peter, and S. Jude, with many words and great
diligence warn the Church of God, Jude epist.
that there were then certain men crept in, which defiled the flesh, and
despised government. Is it possible that the Apostles should be so careful to
admonish and advertise the church, that there were such beginnings, and such
workings of Antichrist in those times, and yet that he should not come in 1600
years after? or should continue so short a time? I am not ignorant that it was
the opinion of some learned and godly men, from whom I do not willingly
dissent. But I know that God does not reveal all things, to one man, nor all
things at one time, nor in one manner. John 3.
Every man has his gift and measure. Every thing has his time and season;
and every time his temper and disposition. Eccles. 3.
It was said of a very learned and excellent Doctor of the Church. Non videt
omnia. And he that is non unus e multis, See Io. Pic. Mir. in apolo.
sed inter omnes prope singularis, held some strange opinions. Yea Moses and
David erred in some things. It may be also that the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, having other great Controversies in hand, gave themselves but little to
the study of the Apocalypse, that book being then in question, as it seems,
and not publicly received until the Council of Toledo, which was about the
year of our Lord 630, Vida council. and Pantal.
as if our Lord had provided it against that time. Yet somethings they saw, and
where their opinions are consonant with the Scriptures, they are very much to
be regarded. Leaving therefore the ignorance of those godly Fathers in some
points, to sleep with them in their graves, and covering them with a vail of
just excuse, in that they saw not the success of times, and fulfilling of
diverse prophecies, which have since appeared, and with a Robe of Honorable and
Sacred Memory for the gifts and graces of God, which otherwise shined in them
(as Shem and Iaphet did the nakedness of their Father) Let us follow with
straight steps the light of divine Truth, shining in the Scriptures,
whereunto the Fathers themselves do send us, to guide us out of the mistie
clouds and perplexed Labyrinths of Humane Errors. And let us see what the
Apostles meant by the words above cited, as where one of them says, 2 These. 2.
The Mystery of iniquity works already. And again; His working is with
all deceiuablenes etc. And another, John 3.
Even now there are many Antichrist etc. and there are many deceivers gone out
etc. Did they mean this of Turks, which were then scarce heard of in the
world? or of Jews, which did not then deceitfully, but had long before openly
and professedly showed themselves to be the Enemies of Christ and all
Christians? Or of Heathenish Pagans, that were also open persecutors? or of any
that should openly and professedly deny that Christ was come, as now the Great
Patrons of the Romish cause would persuade us? If so, what needed they to tell
us of a Mystery, Deceiveablenes, Deceivers, etc. What Mystery or deceit could
there be in the direct and professed denying of Christ? 1 John 3.
Or does not S. John teach us plainly that they meant it of perverted and
Heretical Christians, where he says: They went out from us, but they were not
of us. For if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. They went
out from the Church, and they would have continued with the Church: Do not both
these words signify, that they were sometimes of the Church? and not Jews,
Turks, or Pagans that were never of the Church? So in the Epistle to the Elect
Lady, where he says: Such a one is a deceiver. So S. Paul, His coming is
with all deceiueablenes. These admonitions might seem very impertinent, if
they had understood that Antichrist should have been a Jew, Turk, Pagan, or
other professed enemy of Christ. So in another place: They profess that they
know God, but by works they deny him, and are abominable, disobedient, Titus 1.
and to every good work repr^bate. The like may be said of that fatherly and
serious admonition and charge, which the beloved Apostle gives unto us: 1 John
4.
that many false Prophets were gone out into the world, and therefore that we
should try the Spirits. What trial need we make of any Turk, Jew, Pagan,
or professed enemy of Christ? 2 Pet. 2.
And the Apostle Peeter seems also to warn us of such men, whom he calls
False Teachers, which should privily bring in damnable Heresies, denying the
Lord that bought them, etc. He says Heresies: shall we say Iudaisme, Turcisme,
Paganism? He says privily, shall we say openly? What manner of Interpretation
is this to contradict the Text? Surely the Ancient Fathers would not so
interpret it. Tertullian, Qui pseudoprophetae sunt nisi falsi praedicationes?
De praescript.
qui pseudoapostoli nisi adulteri Euangelizatores? qui Antichristi interim and
semper nisi Christi rebels? Ad Magnum.
Cyprian. Indignandum and dolendum est Christianos Antichristis assistere and
praevaricatores fidei, atque proditores Ecclesiae, intus in ipsa ecclesia
contra ecclesiam stare. August. August.
Opera loquuntur and verba requirimus? Magis mendax est Antichristus qui ore
profitetur Christum, and factis negat. In Matthew.
Chrysostom. Exercitus Antichristi sunt omnes Haereses, praecipue ista, Bern.
quae obtinuit Ecclesiae locum. Ministri Christi serviunt Antichristo? Were
these men ignorant of the Catholic verity? Or are not these enough to prove
that which Vincentius requires: Quod ubique semper and ab omnibus creditum
est? Vincent.
Let us return then to the Apostle S. Jude, Jude epist.
who exhorts us earnestly to maintain the faith against such as turn the
grace of God into wantonness, and defile the flesh speaking ill of Magistrates
denying the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ. If we should ask upon
these words, who they be that deny God, would not the Apostle himself answer
us, that they are the same who turn the Grace of God into wantonness, defiling
the flesh, and speak ill of Magistrates? Such perhaps as the Nicholaitans,
Ebion, and Cerinthus were, which at first were Christians and would be called
Christians, and yet fell to teach Heresies in Doctrine and loosenes of life:
Cerinthus did not deny in word that Christ was come in the flesh, but taught
that the works and Ceremonies of the Law were necessary to Salvation.
Whereupon the Apostle infers, Gal. 2.
Then Christ dyed in vain. So by consequent he denied Christ, in denying the
effect of his death and passion to be such as the Apostles teach us. So the
Primitive Fathers teach us to understand the denying of Christ. Hilar. Quisquis
Christum, qualis ab Apostolis praedicatus est negat, Antichristus est. Ambros.
Christum negat, qui non omnia quae Christi sunt confitetur. See more of these
in that learned Demonstration of Antichrist set forth by Doctor Abbat. Ca. 12.
For in Charity indeed we must hold, that He that is not against us is with
us: Lucae 9.
but in Faith, He that is not with us, is against us. Ebion did not deny
Christ to be come, but denied him to be very God: Luc. 11*
and so denied him to be such as the Apostles taught, and therefore against him
S. John wrote his Gospel. The Nicholaitans did not deny the coming of Christ
verbally, but in turning the grace of God into wantonness, holding that wives
ought to be common, and using Promiscuous filthiness and adulteries, they denied
that great and inseparable effect of his coming to call us to repentance and
holiness of life, and to be a Savior to save us from committing sin, as well
as from the punishment of sin committed. So the Simonites and Menandrians,
which were also in the Apostles time, in holding that the graces of God were to
be purchased by money, denied by consequent the effect of Christ's coming,
namely the free giveing of the Grace of God: as it is written: He ascended up
on High, and gave gifts unto men. Nazianz. Ephesians. 4.
And so it may be said of all other Heretics, which professing Christianity,
do affirm and teach any thing contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets. For there are two kinds of denying God, In Tetrast. Tit. 1.
says Nazianzen, out of the Apostle: Verbo and Opere, in Word, or in Works. Or
as David: Ore and Cord. Ps. 53. Naz.
or as by another is proved, Expressly, or by Consequent: Non tantum divinam
Authoritatem habent and fide tenenda, sunt ea quae in sacris Scripturis
express continentur, sed etiam ea omnia, quae ex illis necessaria and evidenti
consequentia deducuntur, says the Father. By all which testimonies laid
together, I think it may easily appear, what the Apostle means, when he
says, that many Antichrists are gone out into the world, which deny that
Christ Jesus is come in the Flesh. And, His coming is with deceitfulnes, etc.
Not any Jew, Turk, Pagan, or other that should expressly, directly and
verbally deny the coming of our Savior, but such as professing Christianity
teach any false Doctrine, and so by consequent, deny him to be such as the
Scripture has taught us. This also agrees with other parts of the
Description, as with his place, in the Temple of God: with his names, to be
Vicarius Christi, as well as Adversarius: to be the Successor of Judas, etc. I
demand then, if the name of Antichrist was so intended by the Apostles and
Primitive Fathers; and if that were then held the denying of Christ, to deny
him by works or by consequent, what warrant have we to hold, that the Great
Antichrist must be a Jew, Turk, Pagan, or any other, that should verbally,
expressly, or directly deny Christ Jesus, as now the Romanists would have us to
believe? And if these Prophesies must be understood of Christians that were
Heretics: and these were the preparations or workings of iniquity, then
surely the Great Antichrist himself must be of like quality, and he that is
held to be the highest, and chiefest of all Christians, if he be an Heretic he
must be That Antichrist. For so says Chrysostom: The greatness of sin is
considered, either by the Magnitude of the offense, or by the Altitude of his
dignity that commits it. So of all Christians, Did. 40.
he that most excels in dignity, and most turns the grace of God into
wantonness; He that is most advanced, and yet most defiles the flesh, and
despises government, speaking ill of them that are in Authority; he must, and
none else can be that Antichrist. And who that is I refer it to thine own
conscience, Christian Reader. Who is it that being in dignity among
Christians, most supereminent, does yet most defile the Flesh, and despise
government? Who is it amongst Christians most High, and yet most preaches
Christ otherwise then the Apostles teach us? as where the Scripture says, that
the Spirit quickens, the flesh profits nothing, I ask whether they which
teach, that the flesh carnally taken does conferr Grace, Ioh. 6.
opere operato, may be said to confess such a Christ to be come, as the
Scripture sets forth? So he that affirms, that the Picture of Christ, or
the Cross, or the Virgin Marie is to be worshipped with divine adoration: I
ask whether he do confess; that such a Christ is come, as the Apostles have
preached? if yea; then where did our Savior Christ or his Apostles teach any
such thing? And so of other points of doctrine and manners, which I leave to
learned Divines to prosecute. And how the Pope has been declared to be an
Heretic, not only by some particular men or congregations, but by the whole
Christian Church in Europe, and that in three great and general Councels shall
be showed hereafter. So much therefore be spoken of the beginnings or
preparations of Antichrist, which the Apostle plainly affirms, was in his
time, adding this. 2 These. 2.
Only he which now withholdeth shall let, till he be taken away, and then
shall that lawless man be revealed. This concerns our second consideration,
Hierom Lact. (...) Theo. Cecum Ambros August. Tertul Abb. in demonst. c. 4 and
alij. Then the ea^ of the Dragon. Rev. 13, 2.
wherein we have first to speak of the Withholder, or Impediment, secondly of
the Remove, and thirdly, of the revelation. Concerning the Impediment. The most
learned and best Interpreters, both old and new do agree it to be the Roman
Empire, which as the Apostle says, shall withhold, donec e medio fiat, until
it be removed out of the way, or out of the midest: he says not, till it be
abolished: Mark. And then (says the Apostle) shall that wicked man be
revealed. But when that was, or how it should be removed it is not so well
explayned: although comparing the Scriptures and times well together, it
seems to me, that we may well understand it, if we mark the steps and
degrees. Nemo repent fuit turpissimus, says the learned Poet, but more
learnedly; ad summum non per saltus, sed per gradus pervenitur, says a
Reverend Bishop, so this Removing of the Empire was not all at once, no more
was the rising of the Pontificate, but by degrees, as by that which follows
may appear. Therefore to observe the proceedings of this remove of the one, and
rising of the other, I demand upon the 13 chap. of the Revelation, whereof we
have spoken before, Whether the time of that Rising be not there precisely
pointed out, when he says, that Antichrist there signified by the second
Beast, shall work before the face of the first Beast, that is, of the Roman
Empire. And I demand also, Whether we may not well say that the Roman Empire
began then sensibly to be removed, when the Emperor Constantine removed the
Imperial Sea from Rome to Constantinople? yet no man can say, but the
Imperial power, and the Majesty of an Empire continued still in Rome, in the
Consuls, which dignity the Emperors also themselves many times took upon
them, as I have noted before. This therefore may be well taken for a beginning
of the Remove of the one, and Rising of the other, which was about the year of
our Lord 327, and but a beginning. For the better assurance whereof let us
first consider the Prophecies of the Scripture, concerning the continuance of
the Roman Empire, and then see by Histories, how they were fulfilled. By the
Evangelist we are taught, that the first Beast, that is, Revel. 13.
the Heathenish Roman Empire should continue and make war against the Saints
two and forty Months. Rev. 12.
So it is said in another place, that the Holy city, (whereby we understand
the Church of Christ) should be trod under foot of the Gentiles two and
forty months, and that the two witnesses of God should prophecy in sackcloth
one thousand, two hundred and sixty days, that these Prophets should be
slain, Rev. 12.
and rise again after three days and an half, and that the woman figuring
the Church, fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God a
thousand, two hundred and sixty days, and that there she should be nourished,
for a time, times, and a half time. All which places do manifestly speak of
the persecutions of the Church: of the Paucitij and Povertij of the Preachers
and Teachers of Christian religion in those times, and of the flight of
Christians into the wilderness, and other secret places, to avoid the fury of
those persecutions. Deuteronomy. 18. 22
Nothing can better expound a prophecy then the event and fulfilling of it.
But it is manifestly and certeynly known that the persecutions of the church
by the Heathenish Roman Empire ended about the year of our Lord 326. about
which time the last Heathen persecuting Emperor Licinius was slain, and
Constantine calling the Church out of the wilderness, as in a Triumph caused
that great and reverend Council of Nice, the first to be held, wherein the
Nicene Creed was publicly proclaimed, to the utter condemnation and
profligation of all Heathen superstitions, and confutation of the great Heresy
of Arius, which then was newly begun. This time falls out so agreeable to
the prophecies, on the one side, and to the events on the other, that it
seems no doubt can be made, but that here begann the Remove. For if we follow
M. Foxes computation in the several times above mentioned, we shall find that
those several Notations of time, as they speak but of one thing, that is, the
persecutions of the Church by the Roman Emperors: so they signify but one
time, namely two hundred, ninety four years, the end of which falling so
certain in the days of Constantine, do show that the beginning must be
accounted from the Ascension of our Lord, in the year of Grace four and
thirty, or there abouts.

For first, a thousand two hundred and threescore days, Note this limitation
of a time, two times, and half a time in several places seems to signify
several times: for in Dan. 7, 25, 26. it seems to intend a continuance of the
time of the Roman state, under the little Horn unto the end of the world. But
in Rev. 12.14. compared with Rev. 12, 6. and Rev. 11.2. and Rev 13, 6. it
seems rather to signify the time of the persecutions of the Church, under
the Heathen Roman Empire. See the places.
make two and forty months, take every month for seven years, as every
one of Daniels weeks were to be counted, it makes two hundred ninety four
years.

Secondly, three days and an half, or a time, two times, and half a time.
Reckon, as our Savior does, twelve hours to every day, and we find two and
forty hours, then account every hour to be a sabbath of years, and it makes
also two hundred ninety and four years, which being added to the years of
our Saviors life upon earth, being four and thirty, makes 328 from his
Nativitie.

Of the other side, if we account the beginning of these years to be certain,
Rev. 12.
the continuance and end also will fall out evident. But by the twelfth chapter
of the Revelation it is manifest, that the Dragon went out to persecute the
Church, when? After that our Savior was taken up into heaven: so then
reckoning these 294 years to begin at the Ascension of our Lord, we must
add the years of our Saviors life upon earth, which was about four and
thirty years, and it comes fully to the year 328, about which time the
said great Nicene Counsel was celebrated. And so taking the beginning of our
computation from the end of the persecutions, in the time of Constantine, about
the year of our Lord 328, and reckoning backwards 294 years, we come to the
same year of grace 34, wherein was the Ascension of our Lord. So that both
ways, whether that we expound the prophecy by the event, or measure the event
by the prophecy, we are brought to the same year of our Lord 328. Now
therefore, no longer was the holy City trodden under foot of the Gentiles, Now
the Martyrs of God, which had so long time prophesied in sackcloth, and were
slain, were again revived in their Doctrine. Now the two Witnesses of God,
the Old and New Testaments, So expounded by his Majesty in Praefat. admonit.
with consent of the best Interpreters.
which were so long time hidden, and as it were laid dead, were brought to
light, and ascended into heaven, that is, in the Church, which is called the
kingdom of Heaven. For now the Church of God returned out of the wilderness,
and now the power of the Heathenish state of Rome, to make war against the
Saints, was ended, though their Idolatry (as Baronius confesses) continued
long after, namely unto the end of another period, whereof we have spoken
partly before, and shall speak somewhat hereafter. Not long before that time
also arose that great Heretic Arius who by the common voice of Godly
christians in those days was called Christomachus and Principium Antichristi,
Arius affirmed that the HGhost was Creatura silij, and si ium non esse ejusdem
cum patte substantiae. Pantal. ex Hilar. Ruf. Epiph. and alijs.
the Holy Ghost (as it seems giueing out that for a watchword, to stir up
the Christians at that time to expect the coming of the great Antichrist.
About the same time rose up Macedonius the Heretic, who affirmed the Holy
Ghost to be a creature, against which Heresies it seems, that not only the
Creedes of Nice and Athanasius, but also the verse Gloria patri, etc. and Veni
Creator Spiritus, and the beginning of the Letanie was instituted. About the
same time also the seat of the Empire was removed from Rome to Constantinople
and shortly after a godly Emperor, making a grave and Christian exhortation to
the Bishops, to agree together in peace and unity, Hilar in libro quem
Consta^tio ipsi tradidit.
and to determine their controversies by the Scriptures; it is answered again
by a learned and godly Father, 1 Ioh. 4 6.
Hoc qui repudiat, Antichristus est. He that refuses this is Antichrist,
therein also giving us another special sign or mark whereby to judge of
Antichristian Doctrine. About the same time also, or shortly after rose up the
Heretic Pelagius, who affirmed freewill and the merits of human works; also
Eutiches, who defended, that the flesh of Christ Jesus was not like ours, and
that he was not truly borne of the Virgin, and many others. So that here we may
see a great concurrence and consent of prophecies, with events, and with the
Judgments of godly Christians upon the corruptions of true Doctrine in those
times, that now Antichrist was beginning to rise. And certain it is, that the
Bishops of Rome from this time forward, sometimes by flattery, sometimes by
sedition, sometimes by patronising Heretics, sometimes by opposing the godly
did incroach to themselves daily more and more authority, until they had
obtained the full and absolute government of the Septimontane city, the seat
of the first Beast, driven the Emperors out of Italy, and so become Heads of
that city, appointed to be the seat of Antichrist. What the Roman Bishops
were from Silvester until Boniface the third, I have showed before. Pantal.
Bibliand. Baron.
About the year of our Lord 333 the Temples of Heathen Idols were commanded to
be shut up by Constantine, yet that Command (as it seems) was not executed,
the Empire was settled in Constantinople, Salviamiss.
and the Romans even then began less to regard it, yet the title of Pontifex
Max. was retained by Constantine, and Consuls were still made in Rome, with
Heathen rites and Ceremonies, and many of the Senators and Nobles continued
still in their Pagan Idolatry. Constantine therefore again commanded the
Heathen Temples to be shut up, about the year of our Lord 348. But the
sacrifices and abominable Auguries by the entrals of Beasts and such like were
forbidden, God. tit. (...) de Pagan.
first by Theodosius and then by Gracian and Valentinian about the year of our
Lord 387. Yet long after this their Idols and Heathenish Auspices and Rites in
the creation of the Consuls remained; Salvianus.
and likewise their Idolatrous and abominable plays and shows, in their
Circis, Gymnasiis, and Theatris, as witnesses Salvianus. But in the year 533,
or thereabouts Consuls began to cease, and were no more made with such
abominable auguries, which brings as fully to the end of another Period of
1260, from the five and twentienth year of Romulus, whereof I spoke before, in
the second Problem. So that we may see, how by many degrees the Heathenish
Idolatry and Roman Empire were removed. In the same times also the seventh
head of Rome arose, Aug. Steuch. de Donat. Constable.
and the kingdoms of Christendom, signified by the ten Horns began to take
their power, namely, in Brittanie, France, Spain, Greece, Germany, Pannonia
Denmark, Polonia, Suetia and Norway. All which in time gave their power to the
Pope, 2 These. 2.
and were subject unto him. About those times also was the great Schism
between Silverius and Vigilius, Platina. Onuphr.
for the Papacy, the one an Heretic, the other a Schismatike, and perjured at
least. And shortly after, about the year 580, Pelagius was made Pope by
Election of the Clergy, without any license from the Emperor, and John
Patriarch of Constantinople took upon him the title of Universal Bishop,
whereby was kindled the great contention for Primacie, which continued until
the time of Boniface, of whom I will speak hereafter. Thus, I say, the old
Idolatry was by degrees suppressed, and the second Beast began to work in
presence of the first. But here by the way a question may be moved, because we
have entered into a consideration of the times limited in the holy Scripture,
for the accomplishing of Prophecies, whether those times are to be always
accounted by an exact Astronomicall Calculation, as some learned men have
labored to do, casting up Minutes and Seconds of time, which are scarce
sensible or apprehensible, with more curiosity then profit, or whether we may
content our selves with a vulgar computation, only observing signa temporum,
the signs of times, the neglect whereof our Savior in many places objecteth
to the Pharisees. For answer whereunto, it must needs be confessed in common
sense and experience, as the Philosopher also notes, that things of great
moment cannot be removed in a minute. Neither can I choose but think, it was
for some cause, that our Savior, when he forewarned his Disciples of the
destruction of Jerusalem (though it were then near at hand) yet did not tell
then of the certain day, month or year, but gave them a sign of it: Luc. 21.
When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed about with armies, then know, that the
destruction thereof is at hand. Luc. 12.
So when he reprehendeth the Scribes and Pharisees, he does not reprehend them,
for not making the precise computation of the seauentie weeks of Daniel, but
for not marking signa temporum: so he teaches his Disciples to judge of
summer, by the greenness of the leaves, and of harvest by the whitenes of the
corn, Matthew. 24.
and of the end of the world by the signs that shall go before it. And what
to call signum temporis, Luc. 2^.
the Apostle teaches us, when he says, that in the last days there shall
come perilous times: For men shall be lovers of themselves, Ioh. 12.
etc. So our Savior, when his Apostles told him, that certain Graecians
desired to see him, answered that the time was come that he should be glorified
amongst the Gentiles: intimating thereby, that the inclinations, dispositions
and works of men, are evident signs of the times. But the ancient oracle
delivered by God unto Abraham is most of all remarkable: Genesis 15.
for (says God) thy seed shall be a stranger in a foreign land four hundred
years, yet Moses coming to reckon those years, upon the departure of the
children of Israel out of Egypt, sets four hundred and thirty years, Read
Matt. 11. what answer and use our Savior makes of the Message of John
Baptist. And what an heavy voe he pronounces against the^ that did not mark
his works.
whereby it seems plainly, that in the prophecies of the holy Scripture,
either propter rotunditatem numeri, or to check our curiosity, that we should
not search after points, and minutes, or for some other reason, the holy Ghost
will have us to conteyn our selves within a sobriety of knowledge, and to rest
our selves upon the observation of the signs, which he has expressed. And
this agrees with the rule de temporibus given by the Fathers, which is the
rather to be observed by us, Aug. de doct. christ. l. 3. and saper. Exo. q. 47.
Isidor. Raimarus.
for that we see these accounts of Astronomy are such, as the best learned men
can hardly agree upon, and the Art it self by a man not unlearned, is compared
to the tower of Babell, and as some say, to the Temple of S. Peter at Rome,
ever in building and never perfected. And what difference there is betwixt
Chronologers, especially of later times, Of these differences Pantalion often
complayneth vid. Pantal. aun. 645. in consi^iis.
whosoever looks upon the Chronologies of Eusebius, S. Jerome, Beda,
Marianus, Martinus, Regino, Hermanus, Bibliander, Scaliger, Baronius, Keplerus,
Suslyga, and others may easily perceive. Who besides many other differences can
hardly agree, how many years our Savior lived upon the earth, I have of late
looked upon Chronologers, and do findetheir differences very great and many,
concerning the account of the years before the coming of our Savior Christ,
and the true Epoch of his incarnation. Rensuerus in Isagoge, reckons up
about eight and twenty several opinions, every one placing it in a several
year of the world; Himself finding it in the year 3970, and therein agreeing
with Io. Picus. Bucholcerus, Dresserus, and Pantaleon. Yet others are not so
contented, whose differences he that desires to see, may peruse the writings
of Baronius, Scaliger, Deckerus, Sus^^ga, Keplerus, Vieta, Patavias, our
Countriman Lidyat, and the last of all Alstadius. Which t^ o last, being as I
think yet alive, I could have wished, to have taken some pains, to have
explayned their opinions more at large; especially M. Lidyat, who seems, not
without reason, to insist upon an era, different from all the rest. And as
their differences of the years before Christ are great, so in the account of
the years since his coming, they differ somewhat, which I leave to the
consideration of the learned.
in what year of the world he was borne, or how many are past since his
Nativitie: the Holy Ghost seeming to reprove such precise accounts, with a non
est vestrum scire, It is not for you to know them. Act. 1.

And yet they do not so much disagree, but that we may follow any one of them,
so long, as we have an eye to the signs, to which, as to a most certain
sea-marke, our Savior directs us. Let us then go forward, and see how the
Prophecies do agree with the signs, and the signs with the times, and both
with the actions of men in those times, recorded by credible Histories, as we
have done in the former consideration of the removing of the Impediment, which
must preceede his Revelation, as the Apostle affirms, and began, as we have
showed, about the year of our Lord 328. Now the next step or degree of time,
that we come to, is the year 666, which is not much more then double to the
former number, and is expressed in the text, Rev. 13.
and by the best Interpreters applied to Antichrist, and figured in the second
Beast, of whose Rising we have showed how it began, from the removing of the
Impediment of the Roman Empire, in the days of Constantine, and increased more
and more, until it grew near to this notable Epoch of 666, whereof both the
precedents and consequents are worthy to be observed. First therefore in the
year 600 that great and vigilant Bishop S. Gregory, observing the immoderate
ambition and contention, that was then for Primacie and Supremacy, between his
Predecessor in Rome, and the Patriarch of Constantinople, out of a prophetical
spirit, moved no doubt with grief of heart, to see such things in the Church of
Christ, made as it were a public Proclamation of the coming of Antichrist.
Filioli novissima hora est, etc. As if he should say, Little children, do you
look for the accomplishment of the times of Antichrist, or of those 666
years? Behold it is the last year of the last times, the last day of the
last year, and the last hour of the last day, The Prophecies are fulfilled,
the king of Pride is at hand, and an army of Priests is ready to attend him.
What shall we say to this notable Proclamation, made by this great and eminent
Bishop? Was it true or false? If false, then that great Bishop was a false
Prophet: if true, then is Antichrist come into the world long agone, and the
Pope must needs be he, for none else has had Armies of Priests to attend him,
neither does S. Gregory go single. For S. Barnard seconds him: Ministri
Christi etc. The servants of Christ now serve Antichrist. And in another place:
The Beast of the Apocalypse, speaking blasphemies, and warring against the
Saints occupies the chair of Peter. But to return to S. Gregory. He writing
to John of Constantinople affirms, that whosoever calls himself Universal
Bishop in his elation is the forerunner of Antichrist. Was this also a true
prophecy, or did the holy man fail in his predictions? if true, then was John
of Constantinople the forerunner; and Sabinian, or Boniface of Rome, who next
called himself by that title, Rensuer.
was Antichrist himself. This first contention for Primacie began about the
year 588, and continued till the Pope had gotten it to himself. But that
great Bishop did not fail in these prophecies. For immediately after his death
Sabinian was made Pope, a man of obscure birth, Platina.
and more obscure in manners, and therefore might well be said, Rev. 13.
to rise out of the earth: And he took upon him this Title of Universal
Bishop, and had armies of Priests ready to attend him. Et invidia exarsit in
Gregorium homo malevolus, says the Author: And the malicious man was so
incensed with envy against Gregory, that he had almost caused his books to
be burned. See at first how he warreth against the Saints. Boniface the third,
and the fourth went forward in the same course, and obtained of Phocas the
Paricide, By Traitors Tyrants, and Murderers and usurper; the Pope is advanced
viz Phocas Arithpertus etc.
the privilege of Primacie, which none of their predecessors had: and
therefore here ought the Catalogue of Popes to begin, and not as they do
with S. Peter or Silvester. For it appears manifestly by Gregory, that none
of the former Bishops of Rome had the title of Universal given to him. I ask
therefore, whether here were not an evident beginning of the Revelation of
Antichrist. The Emperor was removed out of Rome, the making of the Consuls was
discontinued; the ten Kings began to receive their kingdoms. The Pope took
upon him to rule in Rome, and was Summus or Maximus Pontifex, only, the
Exarches remained at Ravenna, with little power. I ask then, Who was now
revealed to be the seventh Head, or Governor of the Roman State, but this
Vniversalis, and Summus Pontifex? Let us see then how by degrees this
Antichrist was daily more and more revealed. Platina Fasc. Temp.
About the year 608 the Pope obtained of Phocas the Pantheon, or Temple of all
Devils, and consecrated the same to the honor of the Virgin Marie, and all
Saints. So says the Carthusian: Vbi impij colebant Daemones, ibi Christiani
colunt omnes Sanctos; sic ars deluditur art. About the same time the Pope
gathered a Synod at Rome, for the confirmation of his primacie. About the year
618 Boniface the fifth succeeded, who ordained, that churches should be
Sanctuaries for thieves and murderers. About the same time began the great
Apostacy and departure of the Greek Church from the Roman, of the East Church
from the west, the Greek church not yielding to the Roman supremacy, and the
Eastern churches receiving the damnable doctrine of Mahomet: so the prophesies
by little and little began to be fulfilled. The Empire it self was now almost
wholly removed, the Kings were risen, that after gave their power to the Pope.
The Apostasy was come, the pope was called Summus Pontifex: one of the seven
dignities, which had long before been of greatest power and authority in Rome,
and which the Heathen Emperors had used, and so the seventh Head of the Roman
state began to appear. Three things yet lacked: One to have their supremacy
fully confirmed and acknowledged by the Emperor (which yet was questioned, as
well by the Exarches, as by the Emperors) for in the year 647 Pope Martin, one
of the best of them that succeeded Gregory, was taken by Theodorus the Exarch,
Pantal. anno 650.
and sent prisoner to Constantinople, and from thence banished into Pontus. A
second thing was after such confirmation obtained to shake of all subjection,
and all signs of subjection to the Emperor. And a third, to make this an
Empire of Idolatry, and as it were the Image of the old Idolatry, used by the
Pagans. All three followed shortly after. For about the year 663, the Emperor
Constans coming to Rome, confirmed their privileges and prerogatives, and
about the year 684 Benet the Pope obtained of the Emperor, that whosoever
should be chosen by the Clergy, Pla^i^. Rensu.
people, and Army of Rome to be Pope, he should be Pope, without any further
confirmation of the Exarch or Emperor. Mark he names the Clergy, People,
and Army of Rome: claiming thereby as well the Temporal, as the spiritual
state, which before he had not. Then came the year 700, which was but 666,
Rev. 12, 5, 6
after the ascension of our Lord, which is properly S. John's era, Ioh. 16, 19,
20.
and so foretold by Christ, that the sorrows of the Church should begin, when
the Bridegroom was taken away: Luke 5, 35.
Therefore about the same time, as Bellarmine collecteth, Pantal. anno 700.
namely in the year 699, Aripertus the usurping Tirant gave to the Pope the
Cottian Alps, where now Genua stands: and soon after, that is to say, in the
year 707, the Emperor Justinian the second falls down before Pope
Constantine, and kisseth his feet, Platin. Na^cl. Bibliand. Rensuer.
thereby acknowledging him to be the absolute Head of Rome. And about the year
712, the Pope now in fullness of power commands of his own authority,
Images to be worshipped, and when the Emperor Philip resisted, the Pope
pronounced him excommunicate, and likewise, when the Emperor Leo, and
Constantine after him, in a zeal of godlynes, and detestation of Idolatry,
commanded Images to be defaced, the Pope, On up in Plat. Paul. Diac. Sigiber.
Rens. Polidor. Paul. anno 710, and 725.
not secretly or under hand, but palam and in os, openly and to their faces
resisted them (says Onuphrius) and forbadde all Italy to pay them Tributes,
discharging the Italians from their oaths and alleagiance: and so in the end
deprived the Grecian Emperors of all the Empire of the west. And soon after,
that is to say, about the year of our Lord 755. the Pope by color of the
gift of King Pipin, usurped the Exarchate of Ravenna, with a great part of
Italy. I ask therefore, what accomplishment of the Prophecy, concerning the
Revelation of Antichrist may we look for, or can we expect, if it be not here
fully accomplished? Whether was there not here in the open sight of the world,
another Head of the Roman city and state? Whether was not the Impediment of
the Empire now fully and wholly removed? And whether had not the second Beast
now given life sufficient to the Image of the first Beast, or Idolatrous
Monarchy? Neither was this by Tumult, but with an orderly proceeding. For the
Pope gathering an Army of Priests, as S. Gregory calls it, namely a
counsel of a thousand Fathers, or rather Stepfathers at Rome, decreed that
Images should be worshipped. Blund. Pal^* Sigiber. Anton Biblian. Reus.
Here therefore both Chronologers and Divines, Hermanus contract. Paul. Diac.
Biblian. Avent. Lyra in 2 These. Staputens. Fasc. Temp*
with great concent, do end the supputation of the Roman Empire. And with great
reason, for now they saw the Summus Pontifex was set upon the back of the Roman
State, Romanorum Imperium (says the Author) circa haec tempora, ubique in orb
terrarum caepit deficere irrecuperabiliter. And a little after: Et sic jam
omnes quatuor Monarchiae defecerunt, and non restat alia, nisi Antichristi. The
Roman Empire began to fail about this time without recoverie. And so all the
four Monarchies are decayed, and none other remains, but that of Antichrist.
The Romans says Baron about this time took a solemn oath, to be obedient in
all points, In anno 726*
and to all purposes to the Pope. And here (says he) was an end of those Dukes
and Governors, which the Emperors were wont to seem to command in Rome, and
the places thereabouts. So also says Sigonius, that Rome, vide Sigon. li. 4.
de regno Italiae.
and the Dukedomes of Rome, the Exarchate of Ravenna, the Duchies of Perusia,
Tuscia and Campania were given to the Pope: and Mornay out of Zonaras and
Cedrenus sets down particularly, Pless. in mist. progress. 27.
what Towns and Territories fell to the Pope, upon this revolt. Also Onuphrius
tells us in plain terms, that Pope Gregory succeeding Constantine, Vide
Pantal. anno 760.
took away from the Grecian Emperor all the Empire of Italy, which was not
possessed by the Lumbards. About the same time also there was another Council
gathered at Rome, wherein was decreed, that whosoever would not do religious
honor unto Images should be cut off from the body and blood of Christ, and
from the unity of the whole Church. So the power of the Pontifex Max. and
Idolatry grew up together. And although many Synods were held, some in the
East, as at Nice, and Constantinople; others in the west, as at Frankford,
wherein these Idolatries were condemned: though both the Emperors, as well
Charlemain of France, as Constantine of Greece, opposed themselves against
these Idolatries, having also the Authority of the Elibertin counsel,
Picturas ad Ecclesiis arcendas, ne quod colitur aut adoratur in parietibus
pingatur. Yet the Popes prevailed. Curavimus Babylonem, and non est sanata,
Ier. 51.
says the Prophet. The zeal of Charlemaine to have this Idolatry suppressed
was excellent, and exemplar, for he not only caused a Synod to be held within
his own Empire for that purpose, but sent the book of the Synod of Nice,
which is called the second, wherein the worship of Images was decreed, into
Great Brittanie, in which Book, Proh dolor (says our Historian) out alas,
many things were found inconvenient, Honed. anno 792.
and contrary to the true faith, especially, that with one consent of the
Oriental Bishops, three hundred or more, it was inacted, that Images should be
worshipped. Quod omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur. Which the Church of God does
hold altogether execrable. And the learned Albinus wrote an Epistle against it
marvelously fortified with authority of the scripture, Almaricus Gall theolog.
imagines, altaria and invocationes sanctori^^ Idololatrians censce.
which he presented to the Emperor. So fully were the Godly of those times
persuaded, that the adoration of Images, then newly thrust upon them by the
Pope, was mere, and inexcusable Idolatry. And yet, when the same Emperor
Charles came to Rome, to reform the abuses of the Pope, and began to inquire
of them, Bern. Lutz. Pantal. anno 1205.
Responsum est ab omnibus, etc. it was answered by all, Platin Blond. dec. 2.
Pant.
that the Apostolic Sea, being the Head of all Churches, ought to be judged of
none, especially not by a Lay man. I ask then upon all these premises, If
Antichrist were not now sufficiently revealed, when will he, or how can he be
revealed? Rome the great city, that ruled over the kings of the Earth, the
city of seven Hills, and that had received seven kings of Sovereign
command; Rome that glorious mountain of holiness, yet full of Sodomiticall
filthiness, and Egyptian Idolatry. Rome and the Roman Empire so many times, and
so significantly described by the holy Apostles and Prophets, had now set up
her Seventh Head, the Summus Pontifex, the prophetical number 666 was
fulfilled, as well in his time, as in his name, the Impediment of the Empire
was removed. This Summus Pontifex was become the absolute Ruler and king of
that State, acknowledging no superior, Controull, or Countermand. And has
done such, and such things according also to the prophecies of Antichrist, as
no Jew, Turk, or devil can do in so short a time, as they would make us
believe is allotted for Antichrist: If by these things he be not sufficiently
revealed, when will he come, or when shall we expect him: or shall we imitate
the Jews, in looking as long for Antichrist, as they do for Christ? To this
may be added an Argument a sufficienti divisione, which I propose in this
manner. First upon the words of Tertullian, that Antichrist must be a rebel to
Christ, and S. Aug. that is Refuga Christi. Now if a Rebel, then either one
professing Christ, or not professing. If you say not professing, S. Augustine is
against you, which says, that he does profess Christ in words. Also S.
Chrysostom. Exercitus Christi sunt omnes Haereses, praecipue ista, quae
obtinuit Ecclesiae locum: If a professor of Christ, then either revealed or not
revealed; if you say not revealed; then how can you answer the Apostle, who
says, that he shall be revealed when the Impediment is removed. And the
Fathers, who with great consent affirm, that by the Impediment there is meant
the Roman Empire. And the great Consent of Divines and Chronologers upon the
same place, affirming that the Roman Empire is long since removed. If revealed,
then either it is the Bishop of Rome, whom many godly men have published and
proclaimed to be Antichrist, or else you must show some other, who is not to
come, but already declared to be Antichrist. And if you can show none, then
must the Pope necessarily be that Antichrist. Rev. 17.
Again, either it must be he to whom the kings of the earth have given their
power, or some other. If you say some other, then how do you answer the text.
If he: then to whom have the Kings of the Earth given their power but to the
Pope? Again upon 2 These. 2. and the exposition of S. Ambrose, and other
Fathers upon that place. Antichrist shall sit in the house of the Lord, in the
seat of Christ; If he shall so sit, it must be either as a king, or as a
Bishop, or as both, or as neither. If not as a King, then how upon many
peoples and Nations? If not as a Bishop, then how in the Temple of the Lord? as
the Apostle says, in the House of the Lord? as S. Ambrose, in the Houses and
walls of the Church? as S. Hilarie, in Ecclesia as Theodoret? in the Holy
places of the church as S. Chrysostom? in the chair of S. Peter, as S. Barnard
says. If as both, then who has done so but the Pope? Neither need we much to
stick at the swelling words of the same S. Barnard in another place, Tu es
Sacerdos magnus, and Pontifex Summus, tu princeps Episcopurum, tu Haeres
Apostolorum. Tu primatu Abel, Cubernatu Noe, Patriarchatu Abraham, Ordine
Melchisedec, Dignitate Aaron, Authoritate Moses, Iudicatu Samuel, Potestate
Petrus, Unction Christus. This sentence of S. Bernard, though it seems he
was somewhat carried away with the overflowing stream of his Eloquence, yet it
appears his purpose was to draw the Pope to a more serious consideration of
his duty. But the Popes and their followers, which ought to have tempered it
with humility, have made it but a step and advantage to their Elation, Anton.
sum. p, 3. c. 22.
as appears in their Decretals and Canonists, where they arrogate and assume
to them selves Plenitudinem potestatis and scientiae, See M. Down ham of Antic.
lib. 1. c. 5.
and that they have one and the same Tribunal with God and Christ Jesus, and
that Christ and the Pope are but one and the same head of the church. Which
titles none but the king of pride durst to take upon him.

Let us yet go forward, and see how he is further revealed in the time of his
Reign, and how the prophecies of that time also were fulfilled, we have before
considered the description of his reigning, and how he sits on the seven
headed Beast. Now of the time: which falls out to be likewise 666 years, or
thereabouts. For that is the number of the Beast, Rev. 13.
says our Evangelist. And if we add this to the former number, we come again
to another strange and wonderful concurrence of prophecies and events, times
and actions, namely the year 1366, and 1400, whereof we will speak hereafter,
when we have taken a view of the actions that fell out in the mean time,
namely, in the end of the said first 666 years, and beginning of the second,
and somewhat considered what manner of men reigned over the Roman state, during
the second term of 666 years. First therefore, as the Apostle prophesied,
that there should be an Apostasy, so there fell out (about those times
especially) diverse great and lamentable Apostasies, such as the like were never
seen, neither can the like be expected in any time to come: namely, first
about the year 760 the great and woeful rent and departure of the East Church
from the West, by reason of that wicked contention between the Patriarchs for
primacie, and that abominable doctrine of Idolatry, which an Historian very
Christianly calls execrable. Secondly, the woeful rent, and departure of the
west Empire from the East, by the Popes setting up of the French kings Pipin
and Charles. Thirdly the rent and division of the greatest part of the East
Empire from their lawful Prince, by the sudden and great victories of the
wicked Saracens in Asia, sent of purpose to plague Christians (I think) for
their Idolatry, as they do object it unto us unto this day. And fourthly the
lamentable spoil and falling away by that means, not only of those seven
excellent churches, whom S. John by his Epistles so strongly fortified and
forewarned: but of all the rest of the flourishing Churches of Asia, which
yielded either by fear or force, to the overflowing Impieties of Mahomet, o
lamentable times! O times never without grief, and shame, and tears of
Christians to be remembered! Within a few years, and as it were with a sudden
flood and inundation of impiety, blasphemy, and filthiness, the great and
mighty kingdoms of Arabia, Syria, Palestina, Phoenicia, Anatolia, Persia and
Media, and many other Countries, the famous churches of Jerusalem, Antioch,
Ephesus, Nice, Galatia, and all the rest of the lesser Asia, which the Apostles
had so diligently planted with their doctrines, which the Martyrs so
plentifully watered with their blood, and crowned with their Confessions,
yielded to the horrible blasphemies and Idolatries of Mahomet, with infinite
effusion of Christian blood, and murder of Souls. What Apostasies were ever
like to these? or how can we look for the like in any time to come? Say that
we should imagine an Antichrist yet to come, can we have the prophecy of the
Apostle S. Paul concerning an Apostasy precedent so fulfilled? Has all the
Christian world now sufficient room or place, wherein the like Apostasies may
fall out? What do these Summi Pontifices, these Universal Bishops, which would
needs be the Head of the Catholic Church in the mean time. Let us take a
short view of their actions also in general and particular, and see whether it
be possible for any Antichrist hereafter to do the like. The first great action
that we meet with of theirs, is the putting down of three kingdoms to advance
themselves; according to the prophecy of Daniell, concerning the Little Horn,
before whom three of the other Horns fell. For first they drove the Grecian
Emperors out of Italy, upon the quarrel concerning Images, by the help of
the Lombards. Secondly, having subdued the Lombards by the help of the French,
they drove out the French by their own dissentions, and the help of the
Germans: and lastly, they expelled the Germans also by raising factions amongst
them selves: the Histories whereof, because they are too long for this place,
and are well collected by the learned Mornay, I think needless here to
prosecute. Is it possible for any Antichrist to come to do the like? Are there
any such three kingdoms in the Christian world, every one of them having
command of Rome and Italy, to be put down hereafter, to make room for
another Antichrist?

And it is to be observed, that this first Action contains in it self,
manifest Treason and rebellion against their lawful Princes the Emperors, whom
Gregory and all the Bishops of Rome before him had acknowledged to be their
gracious Lords. Colimus Imp. ut hominem a Deo secundu^ soloque Deo eminorem.
Terul. ad Scap.
Whom they were bound to obey, as those to whom God had given power over all
men. The second great action, was their ambitious and Luciferian exaltation
above all Bishops, Patriarchs, Princes, and Emperors, in taking the title of
Universal Bishop, and usurping power over them by excommunications,
deprivations, interdictions, and other sentences: encouraging sometimes their
Enemies, and sometimes their subjects against them: as they moved the Lombards
against the Emperors, the French against the Lombards, and cherished factions
and divisions amongst the French, and thereby still increased their own power
and dominion. And in this they advance themselves against God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom only the Supreme and Royal Priesthood after the order
of Melchisedek is confirmed by the oath of God himself: and that individually,
as we noted before: and who has placed Kings and Emperors in their supreme
places. A third action is the lawless pardoning and dispensing with horrible
and crying sins, still to advance their own authority. As namely, their
dispencing with the horrible Parricides, Treasons and Rebellions of Phocas, who
murdered not only the Emperor Maurice, but all his male children; namely
Theodosius then crowned, Plessis.
Tiberius, Paulus, and Justinian, Peeter his brother, Constantine a principal
Senator, and diverse others. And this is that Phocas notwithstanding, whose
actions they all to this day justify, and Baronius will have us to believe
that he was a good Catholic. Although he can show no testimony of his
repentance, but that he sent his own picture and his wives to Rome, which were
presently set up in the palace. And in this point also the Popes advanced
themselves above God himself, who never pardons sins without repentance.
But this Phocas, three years after the murders of Maurice and his sons,
Plessis.
hearing that the Empress Constantia and her daughters were kept secretly
hidden in a Church, sent certain Souldjers to make them away. But Cyriacus the
Patriarch of Constantinople withstood them: and would not deliver them, till he
had taken an oath of the Tyrant, that he would do them no violence. Whereupon
this good Roman Catholic conceived a deep and inplacable hatred against the
Patriarch, and for the present put them in a Monastery, but about a year
after caused them all to be murdered: and so Phocas four or five years
together continues still a murderer, adding to his paricide perjurie, and to
his perjurie parricide, with extreme hatred against the good patriarch
Cyriacus, that would not approve of such hideous actions. But the Roman
Pontifex made good use hereof. For thereupon, and by slattering this Catholic
Phocas, he obtained of him the title of Sovereign, Catholic, or Universal
Bishop, which from that time to this they all maintain. A fourth noble action
was their violent and open usurpations, of the Territories and Lands belonging
to the Emperors, their lawful Souverains: which they got partly by the
Lombards, partly by the French: another act of perfidious Treason and
rebellion. A fifth action was their favoring, exciting and countenancing of
Subjects to rebel against their lawful princes, and to depose them, as they
did the French against the Emperors of Greece: Pipin against Childerick of
France, and Advaldus the Lombard against the king his Brother in law, all to
serve their own turns. And this also the popes to this day do allow and
maintain, still reaping the fruits, and enjoying the Territories and lands,
which they got by these practices. A sixth action is their horrible Idolatry,
in the erecting and worshipping of Images, which howsoever they labor to
blanch, excuse, or defend with subtle or Sophistike distinctions, which cannot
be proved by the Scripture (as they ought to be, for Vbi Scriptura non
distinguit, neque nos distinguere debemus, quia sensus nostri and enarrationes
sine Scripturis testibus non habent sidem:) yet both at the first beginning and
ever since it was still judged to be open and manifest Idolatry, and that not
only by godly Christians, vide Agrip. de van. sci ^. 57 Morton in Apol. cath.
li. 1. cap. 46. lo Pic. Mir. in Apol.
as at the first by the Churches of Graecia and Asia in the East, and of France
and Britain in the West, and by many godly men in particular, but also by
Turks and Jews, which do utterly condemn it, as it is used by the Papists,
for mere Idolatry, and unexcusable: See the place Esai 41, 21, 22, 23, 24. and
such like, and consider how it can be answered by their idle distinctions of
Image and Idolum. lat^ia and donlia, etc
to which we may add the Canonising of Saints, and making them to be publicly
invocated in their solemn Leiturgies, therein taking upon them another
individual property of God, who only makes Saints, and so committing
manifold blasphemy, joined with Idolatry of invocation. And a seventh or
last notable action is the public declaration and proclamation to the world,
that they hold themselves absolutely lawless, and that if the Pope neglect his
own Salvation and others, and thereby draw millions of souls into hell with
him, yet no man may judge of him, no man may reprehend him. These were the
first, and the general actions of this seventh Head of the Septimontan
city. And all of them are justified and mainteyned by the Popes, and by all
of them with one consent, from their first perpetration and beginning, unto
this day. All of them take the benefit, all of them do allow and approve of
these things, magnifying these there Predecessors, justifying their succession
from them, and mainteyning their Decrees and Actions: holding this for a
Principle inviolable, that they will not confess themselves to err in any
thing, as Thuanus has observed. Thua^
Whereupon I demand, Whether they do not all of them thereby declare themselves
to be that Son of Perdition, that exalts himself against, and above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped? And I demand, whether such things
have been done in any other kingdom or nation under heaven, and whether we may
expect such things to be done by any Turk, Jew, Pagan, or any other person
whatsoever, in Rome the place determined, in any time to come? Now let us see
and consider of the particular actors of this Antichristian person during the
time of his Reign, which from the former Period, must continue for 666 years
more, or thereabout, and in every one of them, I desire thee (Good Christian)
to consider, which of them all is not Homo peccati sedens in Templo Dei. that
man of sin that fitteth in the Temple of God, and is worshipped, and exalts
himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped; etc. And also what may
be thought of the whole succession taken together.

Anno Domini 707 Constantine the Pope would have his foot to be kissed, like
another Dioclesian, thereby making evident demonstration, King of pride.
if not in words yet in deed, that he claymed to be his successor. Onuphr.
And it defense of Images he openly resisted Philippicus the Emperor of Greece.
But Justin, and Anastasius tyrants and Murderers submitted themselves unto him,
and approved his Decrees. Idolatry and rebellion.
This adoration, rebellion, and Idolatry the Popes have continued ever since.

Anno 720 or thereabouts, Gregory the second and third continued the same
Idolatry and rebellion, and caused all Italy to withdraw their obedience from
the Emperor Leo. and to deny their Tributes, because he had commanded Images to
be broken and burned, and for the same cause also excommunicated him, and took
to themselves the Cottian Alps, Cursing Princes.
by color of gift from the Lombards.

Anno 749 Zachary incourageth and assisteth Pipin to depose his master
Childerick king of France, and to take upon him the kingdom of France, which
was afterward confirmed by the Popes that followed, for which the said Pipin
gave to the popes the Exarchat of Ravenna, which belonged to the Grecian
Emperor.

Anno 756 Stephen who cofirmed the kingdom of France to Pipin, this man would
be carried upon men's shoulders, which his successors have continued ever since.

Anno 757 a notable Schism, wherein Constantine the second got the papacy by
money and arms. This Schism is reckoned the ninth.

Anno 772 Adrian the first, a valiant defender of Images and ldolatrie.
Changing.
He began to grant privileges and dispensations.

In his time there was held a counsel at Rome, wherein the pope with the
consent of the Counsel, First horn put down.
clearly to cashier the Greek Emperors and thrust them out of all, made
Charlemain prince of the Senate, Did 63 can. Adrian. papa Roman etc. this was
Adrian the first.
giving unto him the power of investing the pope. And as Mornay collecteth out
of Sigonius and others, the pope acknowledged to hold of him Ravenna and other
pieces by fealty and allegiance, adoring him after the manner that was used
to the ancient princes. Yet no sooner was Charlemayn dead, but they wrought
upon the good nature of Lewis his son: and about

Anno 816 Stephen procured himself to be chosen and consecrated without consent
of the French Emperor, Second Horn put down.
and so Paschatis and others after him. Whereupon followed Schisms, Seditions,
and Murders, in the times of Eugenius, Gregory, Sergius and Leo.

Anno 854 pope Ioane. The kingdom of the whore.
Sexum mentita veritatem faemina, -- To whom also it is said that the Devil
answered in verse, Papa, pater patrum, papissae pandito partum.

A story omitted by some for the filthiness of the fact, says Rainulphus: but
averred by so many and so learned authors, that it will never be blotted out.
Polychron.
whereof I have spoken before.

Anno 856 Benet the third, Schisma 12.

Anno 860, vid. did 19. Si Romanor. Blasphemy.
pope Nicholas who admits that the Old and New Testament were to be received
by virtue of the papal decrees. And if any man will say, that this was but by
way of argument, let him consider of some other of his Decrees. As that, that
none presume to reprehend his judgment, nor to judge of it. 9. q. 3. patet.
That the pope may not be bound or loosed by any secular power, Did. 96, satis
evident. He boasts that he is God
because he is called God, and God cannot be bound, or loosed by any man. Did.
19.
That all the popish Decretals be observed, etc. All these Decrees have his
Successors mainteyned, and do mainteyn them to this day.

Anno 868, Adrian the second. This man caused a Counsel to be gathered,
wherein it was decreed, Did. 63, Adrian 2.
that no Lay Prince or Potentate should intermeddle with the election of any
Patriarch, So here the French Emperors were quite cashierd. Rensu. and alij.
Metropolitan, etc. are these pettie-matters, or are these proofs insufficient?

Anno 872, Ioannes, who crowned three several Emperors, all living at one
time, thereby giving occasion to most grievous civil wars, to the infinite
effusion of Christian blood. Exalting himself above God,
And this man granted pardons to them that were dead.

After him Martinus, Adrianus, Stephanus followed in the same steps.

Anno 891, Formosus made Pope by a great schism.

Anno 896 Boniface by tumult and faction. About this time Sanctimonia and
Pietas omnis Pontifices dereliquit. Platina, Respo^de Suares.
Pantal. etc.

Anno 897 Stephen by Schism. He caused the carcass of his Predecessor
Formosus to be taken out of his grave, comdemned of Symonie, and cast into the
river of Tibris. And so they continued in Schisms and tumults between the
Factions of Formosus and Sergius from the year 891 until 907.

Anno 906 Sergius a notable Schismatike. Famous for abominable filthiness with
the Noble Strumpet Marozia, Kingdom of the Whore.
by whom he had issue, John, who afterward obtained the papacy. And about this
time the impudent, and filthy whore Theodora, and her son Albericus, with
her two daughters Marozia and Theodora in filthiness like their Mother, governed
all things in the Church of Rome. Whereupon Baronius beginning the story of
these times, confesses it was an Iron age, barren of all goodness: and a Leaden
age, abounding with all wickedness. For this Theodora got the kingdom of
Rome, See Plessis ex Leithpr. and Pantal.
says the History, by whoredom with Pope Sergius, and continued it to her
posterity, by advancing her Paramours, and her daughters Paramours or Bastards
to the papacy, and prostituting her daughters to the Popes succeeding one
another. Proh dolor! Sic Baronius, Quid ad haee Suares. e^quid pudet.
proh dolor! (says Baron) Here thou may see the abomination of desolation
in the church. So proclaims our great papal Annalist. How then has it been
removed therehence since that time? Yet behold greater abominations.

Anno 932, John, called of some the eleventh, In reckoning of these John's there
is great difference among Chron^l.
of others the twelfth, the Paramour of Theodora, as some say.

Anno 938, Stephen the eighth made Pope by the power of Marozia, and Hugo king
of Arts her husband.

Anno 956 Octavian, otherwise John son of Marozia by Sergius, was made pope
by Aberik, the son of Theodora. This John was made pope, Monstrum ho^minis.
Platin.
being but a child, and after grew to be most beastly in Adultery, making the
palace of Lateran Prostibulum, Au. Incest. Plessis ex Pantal. and la^^th.
a Stye or Brothell house (says the author.) He used adultery with Raineria,
Stephana, and many others, and committed rapes with such violence and outrage,
even in the most holy places, that women durst not come to the Church, for
fear of him. This is he that caroused in wine an health to the Devil: and
playing at dice, used to call Jupiter, Venus, and all the Devils to help him,
and at length was slain by the devil, being taken in adultery, as some write.
And so the Rule of these Harlots and their children, in the open sight of all
the world, continued in Rome almost an hundred years. What pope? what
Cardinals? what succession from Peter was here? and where shall we find the
Whore, where shall we find Antichrist, if this were not he?

Is there any History or record whatsoever, of any prince or Monark, Salvage,
or Barbarous, Jew, Turk, or Pagan, of ancient or later time, that can show
measure of such abominable and horrible practices: and yet see more.

Anno 964, Leo the eigth was made pope, in whose time a Synod was held, Plessis
ex Albert. Crants.
wherein Pope Leo with all the Clergy and people of Rome, to avoid the French
(as they had before the Grecians) granted, and confirmed to Otho, the first
King of the Germans, and his successors, authority to elect, and ordain the
Bishop of Rome, pronouncing Anathema, and banishment, or death to them that
should do the contrary: and confirming by oath to him and his successors, all
that which they held by donation, or otherwise, from Justinian, Charles, Pipin,
or Arithpertus, declaring that whosoever should hinder the effect thereof,
should by the Law Iulia, incur the punishment of high Treason. So now they
were become subjects to the Germane Emperors. How long did they hold it? Otho
was no sooner dead, but that in the year 974, Boniface the seventh, contrary
to the Law, and to their oaths, was made Pope by sedition and murder, having
strangled his predecessor, Benet the eigth; and put out the eyes of John, that
was chosen against him. And so the Popes and Clergy of Rome; who first
rebelled against their Liege Lords the Grecian Emperors, and after against the
French, Third Home put down. Go up against the land of rebels. Ier. 50.1
became now perjured, Traitors, and Rebbels against the Germans; usurping their
Rights, and invading their territories.

Anno 995, Gregory and John Schismatikes. And thus have I run over about
three hundred years of the reign of Antichrist, from the time that the Pope
was become universal Bishop, had set up his kingdom of Idolatry, and
dispossessed the Emperors of all Italy. And if these seem not evil enough,
Behold yet greater abominations.

Anno 998, Silvester the second got the Popedom by the help of the Devil, to
whom he did homage, Kingdom of the Devil. Fasc. Temp. Volat. Plessis ex
Pantal. Quid ais Suares.
which was so well known, that diverse of his Successors made those devilish
Arts their profession. Was this the Chair of S. Peter? are these his
Successors? If these be not, who are their Successors?

Benet the eight, and John the one and twentieth, And of these Necromantick
popes there were 22. says Napier, one of Zegedin.

And this being now the seat of the beast and the devil, how has it been
recovered from them since? Responde.


both Magicians.

Benet the ninth, otherwise called Theophilact, the scholar of Silvester. This
Benet sacrificed to Devils in woods and mountains, and by Magic practiced to
get himself the love of women, (says Cardinal Benno.)

Silvester the third, and Gregory the sixth, also Magicians. And at this time,
being about 1046 the Sea of Rome began to show it self like the Devil, having
three heads like Cerberus: namely, Silvester the third, Benet the ninth, and
Gregory the sixth.

Anno 1048 Damasus got the popedom by poisoning his predecessor, and
intrusion: shortly after whom followed two Schisms more: Yet the kingdom of
the devil.
and so we come to the renoumed Gregory the seventh, otherwise called
Hildebrand, famous for Negromancie, Blasphemy, Sacrilege, He also threw the
holy sacrament into the fire. sic Benno. Responde Suarez.
Perjurie, Simonie, Treason and murder: the Trumpet of Sedition, and firebrand
of Civil wars, who ruled all things at his pleasure, in the times of diverse
of his predecessors, until he had gotten the papacy to himself, which is said
to be in anno 1073.

Anno 1080 followed another notable schism for one and twenty years
together. O abomina^ionem de olatonis. Plessis. ex Lamperto Herveld. Responde
Sua*


Anno 1103, Anselmus Archbishop of Canterbury in a Synod, publicly declared,
that by forbidding Priests to marry Sodomie became frequent amongst them.

Anno 1118 followed another Schism, in number accounted to be the two and
twentieth Schism of that Sea, and that was no sooner ended,

But anno 1124 another Schism being the three and twentieth, and anno 1130 the
four and twentieth schism, and so for many years one schism followed
another, which continued till the year 1138, (...) of cursing Psalm. 10. vid.
H^eron in iocum.
the Popes still curssing and excommunicating one the other, whereby arose
many factions and seditions in Rome, in the time of Innocent the second, which
continued still to 1188.

Anno 1154 Hadrian the fourth thundered out excommmunications against the
Romans, until they had driven their Consuls out of the city, and likewise
against the Emperor Frederick, for holding his left stirrup, and putting his
own name before the Popes, and thereupon sowed the seeds of Rebellion in the
Empire.

Anno 1177 Pope Alexander most insolently treads upon the neck of the
Emperor, Plat^n. Biblian Pless. ex Pant. etc.
when he had submitted himself to him, his Clergy singing in the mean time,
Super aspidem and Basiliscum, etc.

Anno 1181 Lucius the third, of whom that moderate Elogium, which I will recite
for a breathing and recreation to the Reader.

Lucius est piscis, rex atque tyrannus aquarum,
A quo discordat Lucius iste parum.
Devorat hic homines, hic piscibus insidiatur.
Esurit hic semper hic aliquando satur,
Amborum vitam si lanx aequata notaret,
Plus rationis habet, qui ratione caret.
Which may be thus Englished:
Lusy the fish a tyrant is, or king of fish by title,
From him Pope Lucy differs in nature but a little.
The fish hunts fish, men to devour the man does exercise:
The fish is sometimes satisfied, the man will naught suffice.
If both their lives were laid in scale, and weighed with equal hand,
More reason would be found in him that none does understand.
Anno 1188 Clement the third filled all things with robberies and murders,
while he sought to get the kingdom of Sicily by arms, as escheted unto him.

Anno 1198 Innocent the third excommunicated King John of England, Full of
cursing psalm. 10, 7. another spe^^all mark of Antich.
and filled England with Rebellions and murders, till he had forced the poor
King to yield up his crown, and yet so he could not be in quiet. The same pope
also excommunicated the Emperor Phillip, and published the five first books of
the Decretals.

Anno 1215 Transubstantiation was decreed and confirmed in the council of
Lateran, consisting of 1300 Praelates: whereupon insued the Idolatrous worship
of the Sacrament.

Anno 1223 Gregory the ninth excommunicated the Emperor Frederick, He loved
cursing psalm. 109
and sent him to war against the Saracens, and in the mean time took Apulia
from him, absolved the Emperor for a great sum of money, and then
excommunicated him twice again. He canonized Francis and Dominick, whom their
followers compare with our Savior Christ, and are by the Pope allowed.

Anno 1243 Innocent the fourth excommunicated the Emperor Frederick the second
again, and corrupted some of his household servants to poison him. The Popes
succeeding for many years continued in most disloyal and wicked practices
against the Emperors, of whom I will not speak particulerly, because me thinks
I stay too long from the most excellent and renowned pope Boniface the eight,
anno 1290, or 1300.

Who comes in with a pageant of Antichristian pride, fulfilling all the
prophecies concerning the Revelation and Reign of Antichrist, the place Rome,
and the state of Rome, the thousand two hundred and three score days in the
Apocalypse being fulfilled, and the 1290 days of Daniell also being expired,
Dan. 12.
the time*drawing near to the 1335 days of the same Prophet, which conteyneth
fully twice 666. Another great concurrence of prophecies. The actions suitable,
first he renews the Jewish Ceremony of a Iubile, by consequent denying,
Responde Suarez.
that Christ Jesus coming in the flesh had ended all Jewish Ceremonies, and
brought in an eternal Sabbath and Iubile. By the same he makes a change of
times, and by his Indulgences he dispenceth with laws. He shows himself one
day in Pontificalibus, as Pontifex Max. the next day in Imperialibus, with a
naked sword before him as an Emperor, and absolute head of the Roman Empire,
arrogating to himself (in his Decretals, and namely in the Sent, which he
published) fulness of knowledge and power, and so boasting that he is God.
Claiming supreme power and dominion over all princes, Kings and Emperors, and
so advancing himself against, and above all that is called God. Pronouncing
full remission of all sins, not poenitentibus, as our Lord Jesus Christ did,
but visitantibus Apostolorum limina. These things does this man, a Murderer of
his Predecessors, (if we believe Collenucius) a nourisher of intestine wars
amongst Christians (as he did in Greece) a rebel to his Sovereign the
Emperor, forbiding all Clergy men to pay Tribute to Kings and Princes, as he
does in the Sent. a stirrer up of Treason and Rebellions, by excommunicating
princes, and absolving their subjects from their alleagiance, as he did the
French: An Heretic in denying the soul to be immortal, an Incest with two of
his own Neeces, and a confederate with the public and professed enemies of
our Savior Christ, the Saracenes, whom he entertained in pay against the
Christians in Sicilia. Can there be any more in a lawless man, in the man of
sin, in Antichrist? Yet this man's Acts and Decrees all his successors have,
and yet do maintain defend, and imitate, as occasions are offered, so making
themselus one with him.

Then followed Clement the fifth, not only in publishing the Clementine
decretals, as his predecessor did the Sext: but in excommunicating of Princes
and Free states, Cursing nations. Balaam.
namely the Venetians, Florentines, and Luccanes; and after him John the 21,
22, or 23, (for they cannot agree upon the reckoning) an open Heretic, denying
that the souls of good men should see God before the last day. He published
Septimum Clementinarum, he also excommunicated the Emperor, and stired up
rebellions against him. Tell me good Christian, and give me Instance, but in
one of these, which of them was not the man of sin, sitting in the Temple of
God, advancing himself above all that is called God? Which of them was not Rex
superbiae? And if in this Catalogue I have omitted any, it is but some few,
which continued but for short times, and so could not do much; but that they
did was like their predecessors. Now shortly after the time of the said John,
last spoken of, followed that noble schism, which lasted forty or fifty
years together, one pope sitting at Avinion in France, the other at Rome in
Italy, continually cursing and excommunicating one the other: and in this
time, says the Carthusian, I know not who was Pope. Where then was the
Succession? Where was the infallible chair? How can we now know who is pope,
seeing they knew it not themselves? And by this notable schism we are brought
to the fulfilling of many prophecies, and prophetical numbers, accompanied
with so many, and such great actions, as the like are no where again to be
found, but in this Antichristian succession. But if any will object, that these
things were not done by all of them, I answer still with Salvianus: Neque
homicidae semper occidunt. And again, Etsi hoc commune omnibus non faciebat
actus, commune tamen omnibus faciebat assensus. For which of them reformed or
reproved any of these things? Which of them showed any disallowance or dislike
of them? Which of them has refused the adoration given to Constantine? Which
of them has restored the Towns and Provinces Traitorously and rebelliously
gotten from the Emperors, their Liege Lords, to whom they had sworn fealty?
Which of them abrogated the decree de Majoritate? the Idolatrous worship of
Images? or other decrees or decretals made by Innocent, Boniface, Clement, or
John? Which of them I say, has put down the great Baudie house of Sixtus, or
reproved the Incests, Rebellions, Negromancie, Sodomie, unjust
excommunications, or other sins of their predecessors? And I demand, Whether
any man, Jew, Turk, Infidel or devil can be imagined, or any time hereafter
can be expected, wherein such a consent, and concurrence of Prophecies and
events, with the judgments of godly learned men can be imagined to come? For if
we take Daniels era, that is, the ceasing of the daily Sacrifice, by the
destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, which was in the year of our Lord 70,
and add unto 70 that number 1290, limited by the same Prophet, Dan. 12.
it comes to the year of our Lord 1360, about which time the excellent John
Wicklieue in England, and shortly after Johannes de Rupescissa in France, whose
labors upon the Apocalypse are said to be extant, prophesied, or rather,
declared many prophecies out of the Apocalypse, concerning Antichrist, amongst
which that is notable, which the Carthusian records, that there should arise
two Antichrists, etc. And in the very next leaf the same Author shows, that
within few years after there did arise two popes, one at Rome, the other at
Auinion, each of them called Pont. Maximus, and exercising all manner of
Antichristian impieties, having mouths full of cursing, as the Prophet
speaks, and so making that greevous schism, like to the which was never
heard of in any Christian Church, whatsoever. And this schism began about the
year of our Lord 1378, and continued fifty years, as some do account, namely
to the year of our Lord 1428, or thereabouts. Within the compass of which
fifty years, the number of many other prophecies were accomplished, and
accordingly many other things very obserueable, were done in the Church of
Christ; whereof some shall be remembered. For besides that number of 1290 the
number of 1335, to which the Prophet Daniell gives a blessing is also
fulfilled. For account that from the desolation of the Temple, and ceassing of
the daily sacrifice, which happened about the said year of our Lord 70. Add (I
say) to that 70 the number 1335, and it comes fully to the year of our Lord
1405. Again, if we take the Apocalyptik number 666 double it makes 1332, add
that to 70, and it makes 1402, or take the Apocalyptick number of 1260, and
add that to S. John's era, which is the ascension of our Lord, and was in the
year of our Lord 34, or 35, and it makes 1394, or 1395, which is also within
ten years of the former numbers. The like may be said of the number of 42
months, which yields 1620 days, and of three days and a half, which
accounting twelve hours in the day, as our Savior Christ does, yields 42
hours, and every hour to be reckoned according to prophetical accounts, a
sabbath of years, or seven years, arises to l260 years. So a time, two
times, and half a time; every of these reckoned from the Ascension of our Lord
comes to the same year 1394: all concurring within the fifty years above
mentioned, and making a great concurrence and consonance of Prophetical
years. So that here we may boldly say, that seven thunders, namely many
Prophets uttered their voices, that is to say, Psalm. 29.
the voices of God mighty in operation, like to the thunder, as the Psalmne
speaks, in a time doubtless, which the All-seeing spirit of God, to whom all
times are present, would not have so marked out, but for some special purpose.
Let us then consider the actions of these times, and see, whether they also be
not suitable to these prophecies. The actions of the popes we have briefly
touched before, Now let us see the works of God in these times, which truly are
wonderful, Psalm. 111.
and most worthy to be remembered. For shortly upon that year of our Lord
before remembered 1405, God assembled his whole church of Europe, Italy,
Britanie, Germany, France, Spain. In this order they are named Consil. Basil.
Sess. 1.
consisting of five great and worthy Nations, three several times, in three
great and general Councels, and in every one of them, notwithstanding all the
power of the Popes (a thing not a little to be wondered at) it was decreed, that
the general Council was and ought to be above the Pope, and that whosoever
denied that Truth, was an Heretic, Anathema. And thereupon in the Council of
Pisa, being first of the three, the two popes then standing in schism, were
both declared to be Heretics, and unworthie, and compelled to abdicate, and
another was made pope, namely, Alexander the fifth. And to this council there
came learned men out of this our Country of England, as well as out of other
nations, and were entertained by that famous and excellent learned Chancelour
of Paris, Gerson, who declared the consent of the Church of France with the
English church in that matter. Shortly after this the Papal Church had again
three popes together, and so became Triceps, like to Cerberus: and so the great
city (says Luther) was divided into three parts, according to the prophecy
Apoc. 16. Soon after that therefore was assembled the second great council of
the said five Nations at Constance. And therein it was again with great
consent, namely of 900 Bishops and learned men, fully concluded and decreed,
against the Popes Law, that the Council is above the Pope, and has authority
immediately from Christ, unto which all, of whatsoever state or dignity,
etiamsi Papalis, albeit the Papal, is bound to obey. And yet in the same
council, the pope showed himself in his Antichristian pride, riding to Church
on horseback, the Emperor of the one side, and one of the Princes Electors on
the other side, leading his horse: yet in the same Council the godly Bohemians
Iohannos Hus, and Hieronimus Pragensis, openly protested against the Pope:
saying, that if he did not follow Christ in his life, he was not Christ's Vicar:
for which and other like sentences, they were condemned and burned, contrary
to the public faith, and safe conduct of the Emperor, and to the eternal
condemnation of all Popish faith and fidelity. And yet in the same Council
God himself overruled their voices, and caused them to decree against the Popes
canon law, as aforesaid. Thirdly, within the same compass of years, there
followed another great Council at Basil, of the same five Nations; Sess. 38.
Fasc. tem. 88 Carleton of Iurisd. pa. 276.
Wherein after much contention and disputation, it was decreed again contrary
to the Popes common law, and his great Proctor Panormitane, that the Council is
above the Pope, and that the Pope has not power to dissolve, prorogue, or
transfer it to another time or place. And whosoever denied that verity, should
be judged an Heretic. Yet against all these Councels, the popes and all their
Successors ever since have, and to this day do oppose themselves, in
mainteining their Antichristian power, Articulos solvit synodumque facit
gevera^em.
elation, and authority: affirming, That the Pope only may make a general
Council and cannons, and that to him a man may appeal from the general
council, and that the Council can determine nothing without the Pope; and so
that he is above all general councels, still continuing also in their
abominable Idolatry, filthiness, and wicked practices. And so all the Popes
since that Council of Basil stand openly declared Heretics, by the consent of
all the Christian Churches of Europe, in three great Councels. Clemangis.
But to cross these, the Pope gathered another council at Rome, wherein after
a solemn Mass, of Veni Creator Spiritus, If the be denied let them show forth
but one act or dec^ee of that Counc^ll.
there appeared a hideous and dreadful owl, and the Council shortly after,
without any thing done, dissolved. Neither has the Antichristian Sect any
thing to object against the Decrees of those three former Councels, See the
history of this c^u^sell set forth by Pet. Scave and judge whether it were any
thing else but a saction.
unless it be a Conventicle, and conspiracy of their own faction at Trent,
where the five Nations did not meet. What then shall we say to these things?
Were not these extraordinary great actions, or are not these actions suitable
to the Prophecies? or may we ever expect the like again? Whether then may we
not here safely rest and fix the eyes of our attention and contemplation upon
this notable periode, so many times pointed out and defined by God himself,
and accompanied with so great and notable events, as happened within this one
Centure of years, or little more, namely from the time of Boniface the eight,
till the Council of Basil. In the beginning we see the Pope like a God,
proclaiming a Iubile, and thereby changing times and laws, renewing a Jewish
Ceremony, and thereby denying that Christ is come in the flesh, clayming the
absolute Lordship and command of all the world, as well in temporal, as in
spiritual things, excommunicating great and virtuous Princes for small faults,
and yet he himself weltring and wallowing in Egyptian filthiness, and incest
with his own Neeces. Then great schisms in the church, his Successor mounted
on horseback, the Emperor and Prince Elector leading his Palfrey by the bridle,
with many such like notes of more pride and elation, then was ever read or
heard of to be used by any mortal man whatsoever. And in the end the Pope,
notwithstanding all his pride and Luciferian exaltation, by three great and
general Councels gathered out of all Christendom, declared to be an Heretic,
which in respect of the greatness of his Sea, his followers, his long
continuance, and other circumstances, must needs be understood the greatest
Heretic, of all that ever were or can be; and so by undeniable consequence
declared to be Antichrist. Not so, will some Babylonian peradventure say. It is
not any of those circumstances, nor all of them, can make him the greatest
Heretic, no more then Arius in his time was therefore accounted the greatest
Heretic, because the whole world (as it is said) became an Arian; but because
he denied one of the greatest points of our faith, namely, the equality of God
the Son, with his Father, and therefore was called Christomachus. Be it so:
yet I think no man will deny, but caeteris paribus, the circumstances
aforesaid will both augment, and aggravate the Heresy. But let us consider
first, the greatness and extent of that point, which the said three general
Councels condemned for Heresy: secondly, what other Heresies, and how many
and great the Pope does maintain, and if either that point so condemned be
great, yea very great, or that he mainteyneth more or greater, then any other;
then will I leave it to thine own Conscience Christian reader, to judge and
determine, whether the Pope be the greatest Heretic, that ever was or not. And
because it is not my meaning either to build upon weak foundations, or to make
long work, of that which is ready at hand, I desire thee to consider of the
terms of this disputation, ut constet quid sit id qou de agitur: First I say,
I desire to know whether thou do hold, that there is a Rule of the Catholic
faith, whereby to judge of Heresies, which rule ought to be certain and known
to us; as not only the Fathers, De verbo dei, l. 1. c. 2.
but we at this day do all agree, and Bellarmine the great Champion of the
Romish Church affirms; For (says he) if it be not known it connot be a rule
unto us, and if it be not certain, it can be no rule at all. So says the
Scripture. Prove 22, 21
The words of truth are certain, and therefore was the Scripture written,
Luc. 1.4.
that we might know the certainty of that we have learned. Secondly, Summa
provi dentia carere fuco voluit ca quae divina sunt, ut omnes intelligerent,
quae ipse omnibus loquchatur Lailant. De verbo dei. l. 3. c 2. 2 Timothy 2.
I ask how it is known, whether it be not known according to the literal
sense, out of which effectual arguments ought to be drawn, as we also are
agreed. For certain it is (says the same Bellarmine) that that sense which is
immediately gathered of the words, is the sense of the Holy Ghost: which I
think he intends; so as it stand with other plain places: For in the Word
of God no contradiction is to be admitted. God cannot deny himself. But the
senses mystical and spiritual, which may be gathered out of the Scriptures
are various, and therefore cannot be used for arguments to confirm points of
Faith, because we are not certain, that they are intended by the Holy Ghost,
as the said Bellarmine affirms out of S. Augustine. Lastly then, it rests
to know, what that rule is, and where to be found. Of which because thou may
see, that I will not hide, or disguise any thing from thee: I find four
opinions. Whereof none in my understanding can justly be reproved: for they all
agree together in substance. The first is of the most ancient Tertullian, De
praescript.
who goes no further for the rule of faith, then to the Vulgar Creed, The same
as it seems is followed by Diony. Ar.
commonly called the Creed of the Apostles, which (says he) amongst us has
no questions, but such as Heresies bring in and make Heretics: To know nothing
but this, is to know all that we ought to know. And they that do not believe
this, are not faithful, are not Christians, are not to be admitted to dispute
of the Scriptures (says he. In Enchirid. ad Laur.
) The second is that of August, who affirms, this rule to be contained in the
Creed and the Lords prayer: For (says he) therein is the whole sum of all
Christian religion, namely, whatsoever concerns faith, hope, or charity. A
third opinion is that of the common Catechistes, which add to the two before
named, the Decalogue, and the doctrine of the Sacraments. The fourth is that
which is now commonly embraced, which makes the Scripture in general, to be
the rule of faith. And in this Bellarmine also consents. My question
therefore is, whether thou do not approve these rules, or any of them? if thou
do, and do acknowledge, that these Rules, or any of them be certain and known
to us, and to be literally understood, as Bellarmine confesses, it follows
then to consider, who by these Rules shall be said an Heretic, and whether
that be not clearly defined unto us by Moses, S. John, Deuteronomy. 12. Rev. 22.
and S. Paul to be such a one, as does add any thing to the true faith
expressed in these Rules, Tit. 3, 10.
or takes any thing from them, and will not be reformed by due admonition. To
this agrees Vincent. Lirinen. c. 32. Christi Ecclesia sedula depositorium apud
se dogmatum custos, nihil in iis unquam permutat, Haeresis graece Electio
latin, est sententia humano sensu electa, verbo dei contraria, palam docta,
pertinaciter de sensa. Grossetest. Epis^. Lincoln. in Mat. Paris.
nihil minuit, nihil addit. Then to the point: I ask first concerning that
Article, by the councels aforesaid decreed, That the holy Catholic church,
being the body of our Savior Christ, represented in a general Council, is
above the Pope, and has authority immediately from Christ, unto which the
Pope himself, as a member to the whole, ought to obey, and whosoever denies
that verily is an Heretic: Does not the Pope (as I said) and have not all the
Popes since the making of that decree, mainteyned themselves to be above the
general Council, and so denied that verity, and that no decree of a general
Council is able to bind them, neither is lawful, if it be made without the
authority of the Roman Pontifex? Ask Bellarmine their Advocate. Do they not
maintain that he is the head of the Church? that he cannot err in matters of
faith, and that all are bound to obey him, ex necessitate salutis? Are these
things expressly and literally to be found in the Creed, the Lords prayer, the
ten Commandments, the Sacraments, or any part of the Scripture? If they be,
why did all the Christian Churches of Europe so many times determine against
these Prerogatives of the Pope? If not, then whether are not these most great
additions to that Rule, to which none must add, and from which none must
deminish? If we will truly judge of the greatness of this Heresy, let us
consider the greatness of the buildings erected upon it. For great buildings
must have great foundations. First therefore upon this Supremacy over the
Church of Christ, represented in the general Council, they have grounded
their absolute power to call, begin, determine, end, prorogue, and transfer
general Councels at their pleasures, and also to confirm and allow, or to
abrogate and disanull them. Which point if it be granted, they are sure, that
nothing can be determined against them in any such Council. Then an absolute
power over all not only Bishops and Prelates, but kings and princes will
easily be inferred. For it stands with reason, that he who is above the
whole, is above every part, in toto and pars continetur. Then follows their
power to adjudge and condemn that for Heresy, whatsoever he thinks fit. Then
the power to excommunicate Nations and Countries, to deprive and depose kings
and princes, and to give their lands for an Heritage to whom they will. And in
a word, their absolute Anomy and lawlessenes, that no man may judge of him, no
man may dispute of his judgment, or call it in question, though he draw
millions of souls with him into hell; a prerogative which the Scripture never
intimates to be claymed by any but Antichrist, and never claymed by any but
the pope; wherein all the authority, power and states of Christian kings, and
subjects, prelates and general Councels, with their lands and goods, bodies
and souls are given to the Pope, and that without appeal, revocation or
question, whether he go to heaven or hell. Judge then Christian Reader,
whether this Heresy be not greater then that of Arius, Pelagius, Montanus,
Ebion, Cerinthus, Simon Magus, or any other? Who although they raised damnable
Heresies, yet never claimed such prerogatives? Yet you will say, that these
Heresies mainteyned by the Pope do not deny Christ Jesus, as it is said of
Antichrist, that he denies both the Father and the Son. Well, if thou be not
satisfied by that which I have said before, consider what other Heresies are
mainteyned by the Pope, and how great they be. First in the Creed, when we
believe in one God, 1 Timothy 6. 1 Ioh. 4.
the Father almighty, who is a spirit invisible, whom no man has seen at any
time, nor can see; for he dwells in light inaccessible: is it a small
Heresy, to maintain, that that most glorious and invisible spirit may be
represented to us by the picture of an old man, painted upon a wall, or graved
in stone or wood? Is this to be found in the express and literal sense of any
the Rules aforesaid? When we believe in one Lord Jesus Christ, who was borne of
the virgin Marie, as a natural man (though not only man) crucified dead and
buried as a true man, and ascended up into heaven; is it a small addition or
Heresy to say, that this natural and carnal body now contained in heaven, is
in so many thousand millions of consecrated Hosts upon earth, carnally flesh
blood and bones? Must we now have so many millions of Lords, and the Virgin
Marie so many millions of natural sons borne of her body? And our Savior
must have so many millions of bodies, that suffered upon the cross, died and
was buried for us etc. Yea but Hoc est corpus meum, and God is Almighty, and
can do what he will, and so we must believe. It is true he has said, this is
my body, but did he ever say, This is my carnal body, or natural Body: or
this is changed, or shall be changed into my natural body? Is there one word
to that effect produced by Bellarmine out of the Scripture, or out of any the
rules aforesaid? He says, This is my body. So it is said also, that we are
members of his body, Ephesians. 5.
of his bones, and of his flesh. And the head of every man is Christ. 1 Cor.
11.
Must we believe then that we are members of his natural body? If not, then
it appears, Aug. Sent. 340, 341. de doctr. christiana lib. 3. 1 Cor. 15.
that Christ has another body, which is called mystical or mixed, namely his
Church. There is also a spiritual body, as well as a natural, says the
Apostle. And may we not say, that he has a representative or Sacramental
body, 1 Cor. 11, 39.
upon the words of the same Apostle concerning the Sacraments. 1 Cor. 10, 17
Now if there be so many kinds of bodies attributed to our Lord, where is
that known and certain rule of Faith, whereby we are bound to believe that the
words of the Sacrament are meant of his natural body? Of which of his bodies
is it said, that it ascended into heaven? Of which is it said, that the heavens
must conteyne him until the time of restoration? Of which is it said, that
the flesh profits nothing? Of which I say of his bodies are these things
said, if not of his natural? We must believe, that God is Almighty, and can
do all things; but will he have us believe things contrary or contradictorie?
Esa. 40, 26.
We must believe God has ordered all things in number and measure. Wisd. 11, 17
For this is the difference between the Creator, and the Creature. Ioh 28, 25.
And will he have us to believe, that a natural body created, Prove. 8, 29.
should be contained in heaven, and yet dispersed in earth; carnal in
substance, and yet invisible and imperceptible; finite in measure, yet infinite
in places? one in number, and yet innumerable? Do they that affirm such a
Transubstantiation, confess the son to be truly man of the substance of his
mother, as the Creed speaks? or do they agree with Eutiches? Gods word is
true, 1 Ioh. 1, 1.
but would he have it without witnesses? He would have our eyes, ears, and
hands, to be witnesses of the true incarnation of our Savior. Marc. 5, 19, 30.
Luc. 17, 17 Act. 1, 22 and 10, 41,
He would have many witnesses to his miracles, twelve at least to his
Resurrection, and in ore duorum aut trium, etc. In the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall stand: And would he have us to understand the words
of the Sacrament, in absence, which has no witnesses, nor any evident place to
prove it? Look into Bellarmine, and show but one piece, word, or place of
Scripture, that he brings to prove it. Christ works miracles: but will he
have us to believe a miracle, where neither our senses can perceive it, nor he
nor any of his Apostles does say it? still I appeal to the Rule of Faith,
which must be certain and known, as Bellarmine confesses. And if this sense
that they will have of the words of our Savior cannot be known* or certain by
any of the Rules of faith, then says Bellarmine, it is no rule; and then I
ask, whether this be not a great and wicked addition, which they have made in
this point, for which so many godly Christians have been so cruelly martired by
them? Let us pass to another point, where we believe that our Lord Jesus
Christ shall come to judge both quick and dead, that to him the Father has
given all judgment, Ioh. 5, 22.
as to him that is very God of very God. Athan. in Symb.
Is it a small matter or addition, to say that there is an other summus I^dex,
whom that eternal Judge has made (as they would have it) his Vicar general,
Sovereign Judge over all the world, Bellarmine.
both of faith and manners, and that can make laws to bind the Consciences of
all men. Dispense with Gods Laws, give Indulgences for sins, and cannot
err? Does he who mainteyneth such things confess the Son of God to be the
only Judge, or does he deny his Divinity with Arius, To deny in fact is more
then in word.
in saying he has need of a Vicar? For God is every where, if Christ also be
every where, then to what purpose serves a Vicar general. Mat. 2, 31.
And where is this point certainly and literally to be found in any the Rules
aforesaid in such sort as may stand consonant with other parts of the same
Rules? If not, then whether does he that affirms such things, confess the
Father and the Son, Christum negat qui non omnia quae Christi sunt consitet.
Ambros. Quisquis Christum, qualis ab Apostolis predicatum est, negat,
Antichristus est. Hill.
in such manner, as by the said rules we are taught? So when we believe in the
H. ghost, who spoke by the prophets, who is the spirit of truth, that shall
lead us into all truth, whom God promised to pour out upon all flesh, Joel 2.
Act. 2. Acts 10.
and our Savior Christ would have not only his Apostles, but Captains and
Souldjours Jews and Gentiles to be baptized with that spirit, and has
promised to give it to every one that believes, Io. 7, 38, 39 Luc. 11, 13.
and to every one that prays for it: Is it a small addition, to say that
that spirit is now not to be found, neither in any particular believers, nor in
any Christian Church, nor in any National Council, nor in the Prelates, who
are called the Angels of the church, nor in all the Churches gathered together
in a general Council, but only in the Pope of Rome and his Church? Without
whom no Decree of any General council must be held firm or lawful. When we
believe the holy Catholic Church, is it a small addition to say, that this
Catholic Church is now confined to Rome. When we believe the forgiveness of
sins, is it a small addition to say, that we have this forgiveness by the
Popes pardons, and indulgences, either for ever, or for so many thousand
years? Does this agree with that article, wherein we believe, that Christ
shall judge the quick and the dead? shall he judge, when the Pope has
pardoned, or shall he judge according to these pardons? Is it a small
detraction from the commandments to leave out a part of the first? Is it a
small addition to the Sacraments to make seven in stead of two, to add
spittle and other such trash to baptism? Is this literally to be found in the
rules aforesaid? is it known? is it certain? Is it a small addition to give
to the Sacrament of the body of our Lord devine adoration? or is it a small
detraction to make it private, and so to take it away from the common people,
except set and solemn times, and the cup always? Finally, when we are agreed,
that the litterall sense of the Scripture is the most certain and safe rule of
our belief, and that it has in it self an incredible harmony and consent,
and is the sense of the Holy Ghost; is it a small addition to this point, also
to say, that the Pope is the supreme interpreter thereof, and judge of faith
and manners? And that he cannot err? If this be known and certain, then why
did none of the rules aforesaid express and say so? Why is it not expressed in
the Scripture, why did no ancient general Council decree it? yea why did the
three general Councels aforesaid, decree contrary, that the general council
is above the pope? Admit the case to be, that the pope judge contrary to the
litterall sense of the Scripture, must it be no error? Admit that he
maintain, that the Scripture is to be received by virtue of his authority?
that he may dispense with the commandments of God? that he is the general
Commissarie of God, assumed into the plenitude of power, are these small
additions to the rules aforesaid? The like may be said of many other points,
upon all which I thus propose, and refer it to thine own soul and
conscience (good Christian) to judge if these be great additions and
detractions, and more, and greater, then ever any other Heretic made to those
Rules of faith before mentioned, and if they have been oftentimes reproved, and
admonished for them, and yet still maintain the same, then, I say, I leave it
to thine own soul to judge, Whether the Pope be not the greatest Heretic
that ever was? And whether we may not well affirm him to be that Antichrist,
then whom never any was nor can be greater, Dan. 12.
and with the Prophet Daniel say, that they are happy and blessed, that lived
unto these times, to see so great an Enemy of Christ his Church, and yet so
disguised; so holy in name, and yet lawless indeed; so great a Prelate in
show, and yet in deed so great an Heretic: Such a Vicar general of Christ,
and yet indeed Antichrist, to be discovered and declared by three such great
and general assemblies of the Church. It will percase be demanded, how I can
call him an Heretic, that makes the same confession of Faith, as we do. And
I ask, if we confess the same faith, why does he call us Heretics? But I
think it appears sufficiently by that which has been said, that in making
so great additions to the true Catholic and Apostolic faith, he has declared
himself to be the greatest Heretic that ever was, and consequently that
Antichrist. Let us then consider the signs of the times of Antichrist, and
see whether they also do not concur in discribing men fit for such times and
actions, fit to be ministers unto Antichrist, and who those men may be but the
Roman Clergy: First our Savior Christ gives us a short but notable and
notorious sign importing blasphemy, which is such a property of Antichrist,
as no man can doubt of; Many (says he) shall come in my name, and shall say, I
am Christ, or anointed, Mat. 24.
for so the word signifies: is not this literally fulfilled? Have not all the
popish Clergy taken this title upon them? And what: not for any good or godly
purpose, but to defend themselves in their most heinous and flagitious crimes
against the sword of secular justice, by alleging that place of the Psalm,
Nolite tangere Christos meos, Psalm 105.
touch not mine anointed. I appeal to the consciences of all men, that have
been any whit, though meanly conversant in the Histories of late times, or
observed their actions: if any will say, that this text may be used, as it is
in that Psalm, for the defense of godly Prophets, I will not deny it, so it be
not used for their protection in wicked actions: for to use it in the
protection of sin is no less a blasphemy, then to make our Savior Christ
the protector and Author of sin and wickedness. A second notable description
of men of those times is made by S. Paul. For (says he) In the last days
(which S. John calls the times of Antichrist) men shall be lovers of
themselves, 2 Timothy 3.
coveteous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents,
unthankefull, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, intemperate, feirce, dispisers of good men, Traitors, headie, high
minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a show of godlynes,
but have denied the power thereof. So far the Apostle. And these men who they
have been, and who they be, is not hard to be discerned. For who be they that
now for many hundred years have labored, only under the title of the church,
with unmeasurable and unsatiable coveteousnes to enrich themselves? The goulden
Historian Matthew Paris, Aventinus, and all other Histories of Christendom,
proclaim it is the Pope, and Court of Rome, according to the Common verses:
Curia Romana non captat ovem sine Lana. and again: Bursas exhaurit and arcas.
and again: Roma caput mundi est, omnia namque capit,
Ejus avaritiae totus non sufficit orbis:
Ejus luxuriae meritrix non sufsicit omnes.
Paris.

The Romish Clergy have turned the ten commandments into two words, See
more in Abb. demonst. and in M. Domuham.
Da pecuniam, says S. Brigitt. So if we ask, who have boasted themselves, and
in pride exalted themselves above all princes, Kings and Emperors? who has
excommunicated and cursed Christian Princes, Nobles, States, and Nations? Who
have seduced Children and Subjects, to take upon them habits, and vows of
Religion, and so to cast off all obedience to their Parents and Superiors? who
have showed themselves most unthankful to their Benefactors, and specially to
their Liege Sovereigns, under whose gracious and peaceable government they
were borne and bredd, and have enjoyed their goods and Lands, houses and
Inheritance, Wives and children, Lives and livings, and yet have gone about
most wickedly and traitorously to take away their Crowns and kingdoms, yea
their life and breath, by whose only mercy they enjoy their own? Who have
taught men to break their truces, oaths, Leagues and covenants by new tricks
and devices, sometimes of Equivocation, mental reservation in themselves,
sometimes of dispensation from their chief Bishop the Pope, sometimes of false
and malicious calumniations, pretending that they be Heretics and Infidels,
with whom no faith is to be holden, as they have learned of their good
predecessors Atreus, Cie. 3 offic.
in whose name that doctrine was first published, and Laomedon that practiced
it, according to that verse.

Laomedont aeae luincus perjuria Troiae. Virg. Georg. ^
Yet by the way, I will not deny that sentence of a godly Father, vouched in
their Decree: In malis promissis rescinde fidem. Impia est promissio, quae
scelere adimpletur. But it is one thing promittere malum, and another
promittere malo. If we promise an evil thing it is better to break it, then
to keep it, as we learn by the said Sentence, and the example of Herod. But
if we promise to an evil man, yet if the promise be not evil, we are bound to
perform it, Ios. 9. 2 Samuel 21.
as by the example of Ioshuah, and king David. And yet who has given them such
a superlatiue and supereminent prerogative, that whomsoever they call an
Heretic or Infidel he must be so? yea in their own causes, contrary to the
Decree of immutable Justice; that None ought to be a Judge in his own cause.
Who have again by false infamous and seditious Libels accused and slandered
Princes, Nobles and whole nations, as they did Queen Elizabeth, calling her a
Bastard, and flagitiorum servam: the late Prince of Orange, calling him an
Heretic, and all that protest against their impieties, calling them Heretics,
Valdenses, Hussites, Lutherans, Calvinists, Hugonots, and I know not what?
Finally, who have showed themselves most intemperate, fierce, and cruel? who
have most despised good men? Who have been most traitors? who most headie and
obstinate? who most proud and high minded? who have most followed their
pleasures, and yet made most hypocritical shows of godliness? I have neither
read nor seen much, I know little or nothing, and therefore will not take upon
me to say any thing, but I refer it to thine own conscience (good Christian)
and I desire thee to consider in thine own heart, whether thou do know any such
men in the world or not? and if thou do, then whom they serve and follow? A
third note of the times of Antichrist is that which the same Apostle tells us
in another place, 2 These. 2.
that there should come an Apostacy first, and then that man of sin shall be
revealed. Consider with thy self whether in any History of times past, thou
can find any Apostasies in any degree parallel or comparable to those,
whereof we spoke before? or whether in any probability the like may be
expected in any time to come. Or if by the word of Apostasy in that place thou will understand, that whereof the same Apostle speaks elsewhere, that some
shall apostate and fall from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and
doctrines of devils, 1 Timothy 4.
speaking lies in hypocrisy, forbidding marriage and meats. Consider also who
they be that teach such things? And who they be that forbid meats and marriage,
some meats to all men at some times, and all marriage to some persons at all
times. Fourthly S. Peter gives us another none of them, 2 Pet. 2.
saying: They walk after the flesh and despise government, speaking evil of
dignities. I need not ask what these men be: But I ask whether any other of
any Religion, country, nation or profession, either in these, or in any of the
former, have been like to those that profess the Roman Catholic, or Popish
superstition? Fifthly S. Jude following S. Peter, Iud. epist.
describes them thus: They have gone in the way of Cain, and run greedily
after the error of Balaam, and perish in the gainsaying of Core. Who be those
that have most followed Cain in murder and Bloodshed, not only of private
men, but of princes? Who have run after Balaam, to curse, excommunicate, and
interdict* not only particular offenders, but whole nations, towns, cities
and countries? and that for coveteousnes, when they refused to pay their
unreasonable demands? Who also have followed, Core, Dathan, and Abiram, in
opposing themselves against Magistrates and Superiors, James ^.
plotting of conspiracies, and raising insurrections? Sixthly S. James
describes a wisdom which is carnal, sensual, and devilish, consisting in
cursing and bitterness, envy, and strife. Consider of these who they be, that
have been most given to these things, and whether ever any like or comparable
to the Romish Synagogue? Lastly, as we touched before S. John gives us a
special note: He that is not of God hears us not: and hereby we know the
spirit of truth, 1 John 4.
and the spirit of Error. Who be those that fly from the Scriptures, and will
have us with an implicit faith, and blind obedience to submit our selves to
their decrees and decretals, cannons and traditions, Church and Pope, whom they
will have to be accounted of science infallible, power irresistible, and
judgment unquestionable: Neither are these things to be shifted of with that
rotten distinction, that these are vitia hominum, non professionis, the faults
of particular men, and not of the whole profession, rank or order. The Heathen
man will refell that, telling us, that where all run one way, either by act
or consent, the corruption of the singulars, give a denomination to the total.
Heliaca urbs simul est mendax atque ebria, Talis
Tota urbs est, Domus ut quaelibet esse solet.
Yet I cannot choose, but think there were some Infants there, that were
neither liars, nor druckards actually: but ubi mayor pars ibi tota. So the
several kinds of consent expressed by their own confessors:

Consulo, praecipio, consentio, provoco, laudo,
Non retego culpam, non punio, non reprehendo,
Participo, defendo, meum in caput ista redundant.
Salvianus will tell them, Etsi commune omnibus non faciebat actus, Cic. 1 off.
faciebat tamen assensus. Cicero will say, Qui non defendit nec obsistit (si
potest) injuriae, tam est in vitio, quam si parents, aut patriam, aut socios
deserat. Their own Decree will teach them: Quid est immundum tangere, nisi
peccatis consentire? Quid est exire inde, nisi facere quod pertinet ad
correctionem; If they will avoid this charge, let them show, how they have
corrected, punished, reprehended, or disliked these things. If not, then must
we needs say, that all are guilty. Genesis 3, 17. and 6, 12.
And as the earth it self is said to be corrupted and cursed, Psa 107, 34
when the Inhabitants have corrupted themselves with sins; Esa 24, 4.
so, and much more all states professions and degrees of men. To this S.
Augustine will add, that as our Savior Christ has his mystical body, which
is his church: so the Devil has his body, or his Synagogue, comprehending
all the wicked, qui sunt eius quodammodo corpus, says he. And so all the
Reprobates are one in the devil, as all the elect are one in Christ. And as he
that is joined with an Harlot makes himself one body with her, by the
sentence of the Apostle; so he that joyneth himself with Antichrist (the great
whore) especially in the head, becomes one with him, even that Lawlesseman,
that child of perdition. What then shall we say to these things? Places and
Times, Persons and Actions, Names, and things Prophesies and Events, do all
concur in the revelation of this man of wickedness, consisting wholly of most
horrible and enormous sins, by act and consent, in particular and in
general, in singular persons, and in their whole body politic, order and
succession: Such sins, so many, and so great, that the Devil himself can no
way match or parallel. For if one devil should do homage or sacrifice to
another, or commit or give a license to commit Treason, Incest, or murder, yet
that could not be any way so great a sin, as when a Christian, baptized in
the name of Christ, and for whom our Savior Christ the only son of God,
has shed his most precious blood, commits such an offense, or gives such a
License. And by the same rule of proportion: if these heinous Idolatries,
Treasons, Murders, Adulteries and other sins, which have been committed by
the Popes, and their Licenses and dispensations, were done, or licenced,
committed, or permitted by any other then a Christian, and one that takes upon
him to be the head of all Christians, and over all Christian Bishops, yea and
such an Head as cannot err, certainly these sins in any other could not be
judged so great, offensive, or in intolerable. As it is in the ancient Laws
truly defined, Re, persona, loca, tempore atrociores injuriae indicantur. And
so the Prophets every where aggravate the sins and offenses of the people of
God, by the greatness of the benefits which they had received: and our Savior
Christ teaches us, that he to whom much is committed, of him much shall be
required. And he that knows his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. It follows therefore inevitably, that these sins in the
pope are far greater, then if any Christian, Jew, Turk or Heathen did the
like. And now seeing we have observed Antichrist in all these main and
principal circumstances, of his Place, and State, his Name and Rising, his
Reign and Actions, his Times and Manners, what is more to be expected, but his
Consumption and Destruction two times, which the Holy Prophets, and divine
Apostle express in one verse, saying, that the Lord shall consume him with the
breath of his mouth, Dan 7, 26.
and destroy or abolish him with the brightness of his coming. E^a 11, 4.
Whereof I will speak breefly, 2 These. 2.
partly because others have said sufficient, but chiefly because of the times
to come we must not presume too far, either to judge, or to inquire. First
therefore in his Consumption two things are to be considered, the Times and the
Manner. The times are two fold, past and to come. For the time past, it seems
to have been ever since the said year above mentioned 1405, being the time
that Daniel blessed. For if we account those 1335 years noted by Daniel, from
the destruction of the Temple, Dan. 12.
which is Daniels era, and was about the year of our Lord 70, add that 70 to
the numbers 1335, and it falls out fully in the year of our Lord 1405, as I
showed before, which was within four years of the Council of Pisa, the first
general Council, that declared the Pope to be an Heretic; shortly after
which the Noble Zisca, Procopius Magnus and other worthy Bohemians began to
break down the Popish Idolatry, and ever since the Romish Antichrist has
decayed more and more, as every one that is acquainted with the stories of
Christendom may easily perceive. So that we may well say, that the consumption
has now continued about 220 years. For the time to come I would desire all
godly Christians to consider of these particulars: First, whether we may not
expect that the ten Kings shall join together to spoil the whore, Rev. 17*
and burn her with fire?

Secondly, What account or answer Christian Kings can make to their great Lord
and Master, for continuing in their wars against their brethren, and
neglecting that war, whereunto God himself has called them.

Thirdly, whether upon the destruction of the Whore we may not hope for the
conversion of the Jews, in a more gracious manner, then yet we see. And there
by the way must be observed the word which the Holy Ghost uses; Dan. 12, 11.
Abomination of desolation: whereupon I ask, Whether it may not be understood
of Antichrist, to signify, that so long as the Antichristian abominations
shall continue in the Church, so long the Church must continue desolate of one
of her principal parts, namely the ancient people of the Jews, which must
make the other maine wall, to be joined with that of the Gentiles in one
principal and fundamental corner stone, Christ Jesus, which is not to be
expected, as long as the abominable Antichristian Idolatry reigns in the
Church?

Fourthly, What we may think of those froggs in our Apostle, Rev. 16.
who they be that must gather the kings of the earth to the battle? Wherein is
to be observed that the Frogge has his name of his voice, which the Latins
call Ran, Ran, like a trumpet, the Grecians Trac, Trac, like a drum; and so
in the Text it is said, that they go forth to the kings of the earth to gather
them to battle. Concerning the Hebrew name, I would saine learn of the
learned, whether it may not be taken for a word compounded of two words,
whereof the one signifies to make have, the other Defection or destruction,
and so signifies hasting to destruction or defection, which agrees with the
Text. Their nature, as we see by daily experience, ^^nimalia amphibia.
is to leap on the land, and swim in the water, spoiling, polluting and
corrupting in both. And to whom this may be applied, I leave it to learned
Divines to consider.

The fifth thing to be considered is the joining of the Beast, Rev. 19.
and the Kings of the earth, and the gathering of their armies.

The sixth is the gathering of Gog and Magog together: Rev. 20.
and whether this be the same battle, which is spoken of in the former chapter.

The last is the glorious and triumphant victories of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is God blessed for evermore. But of these things I dare not speak, but
only move them; desiring to learn, and not thinking it altogether unlawful
to search, so it be done with Christian modesty and humility, no more then
the ancient Prophets did think it unlawful for them to search, 3 Pet. 1.
what time the sufferings of Christ should be accomplished, and the glory to
follow. But for the manner of the consumption of Antichrist, that also seems
to be two fold: The one by the preaching of the Gospel, the other by the open
falling away of peoples, nations and countries from Antichrist. Of both which
other godly learned men, have sufficiently spoken at large: namely, M. Fox in
his Martirologe, the two learned Bishops Abbat and Downham in their several
books of Antichrist: also Catalogues Testium, the learned Morney, in his book
De Mysterio Iniquitatis, and many others. And concerning the last time which
must be the second coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, because God has reserved
it to himself, Act. 1.
I therefore rest in the prayer, prescribed to the Church by our Apostle: Apoc.
22.
Even so come quickly Lord Jesus.

The Conclusion.
Upon all these premises, for a conclusion, I would desire the Christian
Reader, to consider of these seven short Problems, first concerning these
prophesies before touched, as I have demanded of them every one in particular:
so now of them all in general: If they be not fulfilled already, I demand,
how they can be accomplished, or how long and when we shall expect their
accomplishment? There are now almost 1600 years past, since they were given.
Rev. 1.
And the Holy Ghost testifies, both in the first and last Chapter of his
Revelation, that the time was not long, but shortly to come. Rev, 22.
and by another, that the mystery of Iniquity began even then in the
Apostles time to work. Secondly, 2 These. 2.
if these prophesies be fulfilled, as has been showed, and if the Pope be
indeed that Antichrist, spoken of in the Scriptures, and all the prophesies
concerning Antichrist do concur in him, and can be applied to no other, so
aptly as unto him: then I ask, why should we halte any longer between two
opinions? why should we flatter our selves, 1 Reg. 10.
or dally with idle distinctions of the Antichrist, and an Antichrist, as if
any Antichrist might be admitted to stand in competition with our Sovereign
Lord Christ Jesus: If that distinction must yet still be observed, as well at
this time, as in the days of S. John; unless the distinguisher can show some
other that may be called the Antichrist, besides the Pope: I demand, whether it
may not be inferred: that The Pope is The Antichrist, and that every Papist is
an Antichrist. O dear Christians, let us at length awake, and if God be God
serve him; if Rome be Babylon, let us fly out of her, and if the Pope be
Antichrist, let us utterly forsake him. For to follow both, serve both, cleave
to both, or rely upon both, is absolutely impossible. Thirdly, if these things
be so, I ask in what case they be that take part with Antichrist, or
entertain him either by way of Obedience, conversation, assistance,
permission, connivence, or howsoever: seeing it is written, that if any man
worship the Beast, the same shall drink of the pure wine of the wrath of God.
And what concord can Christ have with Belial? Fourthly, upon the same grounds,
I demand what power this Pontifex Max. which is Antichrist, can have over
Christian Kings, Princes, Magistrates, or other persons whatsoever to
excommunicate, interdict, depose or deprive any of them? Fifthly, I ask what
authority he has to interpret the Scriptures, or what he has to do with
them, or to pardon or dispense with sins, namely incest, murder, treason,
Idolatry, etc. or to make Canons, Decrees or Decretals to bind Christians?
Sixthly, seeing the Monarchy of the Pope is directly holden of the Devil, by
homage actually performed by some of them, and assented unto by all their
Successors, in approving and maintaining their succession from, and by them
which did it: I demand whether all that follow the Pope, or take part with
him, do not thereby submit themselves to the Devil, in approving of that
horrible Act; and withal renounce and forsake our only true and rightful
Lord, and Sovereign Christ Jesus? And lastly, all the premises considered,
whether it may stand with the policy, safety, or peace of any Christian
kingdom state or common wealth, to permit and suffer Antichristian and
devilish practices of filthiness, infidelity, murder, treason, Idolatry,
blasphemy, and superstition to increase amongst them. And whether it be not
high time for all Christians to awake, and betime to fly out of Babylon, least
they be taynted with her sins, and so made partakers of her punishments, and
for Christian Kings to reward her (according to Gods commandments) as she
has rewarded the servants of Jesus Christ.

Save thy self O Sion, that dwell with the Daughter of Babylon.

Zach. 2, 7. Ecclesiae querela. Woe is me, that I sojorne in Meshec, that I
dwell in the tents of Kedar. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates
peace: I am for peace, but when I speak, they are for war.

Psalm. 120. Arise O Lord, let not man prevail: Let the Nations be judged in
thy sight.

Sententia divina. Put your selves in array against Babell, round about. All ye
that bend the bow shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she has sinned against
the Lord. Shoute against her round about, she has given her hand. Her
foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for it is the vengeance of
the Lord. Take vengeance upon her, as she has done, do to her.

Ier. 50. Babylon is fallen it is fallen. Apoc,

A Problem what success is to be expected by Christians in any action, joining
with Antichristians or Idolaters.
Josh. 7.
THus says the Lord God of Israhel, there is an accursed thing in the midest of
thee O Israel. You cannot stand before your enemies, until you have taken
away the cursed thing from among you.

2 Chronicles. 16. 13. Asa made a covenant with Benhadad king of Syria: then Hanani
the Seer came to him and said: Because thou have relied on the King of Syria,
and not relied on the Lord thy God, therefore is the Host of the King of Syria
escaped from thee. Herein thou have done foolishly. Therefore from hence forth
thou shall have war.

2 Chronicles. 19. Iehoshaphat King of Judah, helped Ahab against the King of Syria,
and Iehu the son of Hanani, the Seer, went out to meet him, and said to King
Iehoshaphat: Should thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord,
therefore is wrath upon thee, from before the Lord. And shortly after the
Moabites and Ammonites came against him.

2 Chronicles. 20. Iehoshaphat joined with Ahaziah King of Israel, who did very
wickedly, and he joined with him in making ships to go to Tarshish. Then
Eliezer the son of Dodavah prophesied against King Iehoshaphat, saying:
Because thou have joined thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord thy God has broken
thy works. And the ships were broken.

2 Chro. 21. Iehoshaphat had taken Ahabs daughter for a wife to his son
Iehoram, hoping perhaps to draw back the kingdom of Israel, but it proved the
overthrow of his posterity.

2 Chro. 23. Amazia hired an hundred thousand mighty men out of Israel, for an
hundred tallents of silver. But there came a man of God to him saying, O King,
Let not the army of Israel go with thee. For God is not with Israel. etc.

Esa. 48. Ier. 51. Rev. 18. Fly out of Babylon my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. See more Esa,
20, 5.30, 1, 2. Ier. 17. etc. and consider of all the leagues, and treaties
made by the Kings of Judah with the Syrians, Egyptians, Assirians, Babylonians
etc. what came of them? What good got Solomon by his affinity with the
Egyptians? was not his son spoiled by them? What got Hezekiah by his
courtesy showed to the Babylonian Ambassadors? Esa 39. etc.

It were a work not unworthie the vacation of a learned man, to add unto this
a consideration of all the Leagues, Pacifications, and Treaties, that have been
made by the Romish Catholics with other Christians, as namely with the
Graecians, the Albigenses, Valdois, Bohemians, Lutherans, Calvinists,
Huguenots, Protestants etc. How they have observed their covenants and faith,
and what has been the end and success of every of them. What good the
Grecian Emperors, what good the Albigenses under the E. of Tontons, what the
Valdois, Bohemians, and others got, by submitting or yielding to the
Romanists, and what faith those Romish Catholics have held with them: also
what is come of all the great wars, that Christian Princes have undertaken by
the instigation and procurement of the Pope, as namely those of ancient time
for Jerusalem, and those of late in France. Also what good has come to
Christendom by all the victories gotten by Romish Catholics against the
Turks: have they enlarged or defended Christendom? have they not lost a great
part of it? Yet they hold some part. True, taking Christendom in their sense,
who admit none to be Christians, but those that are subject to the Pope. But
for other Christians it is much worse. For the Grecian Christians, though
grievously oppressed, are suffered in some sort to live under the Turk, but
Protestants in no sort under the Pope. etc.

FINIS.

