A Godly lear ned and fruitful Sermon:

Made upon the fourteenth of John in which is plainly set forth the true
love of Christ, the marks whereby the Children of God are known and the
commodity which that love brings By D. S. 1584.

John, 15. 13. Christ so dearly looued us that he gave his life for us. AT
LONDON Printed for Yarath James, and Thomas Law and, are to be sold in new
gate market over against Christ Chvrch gate.

To the right Woorship full Sir William Pelham Knight, Leiftenant of the
Queens Majesty's Ordenaunce, your servant, John Jordan wishes in this life,
health and prosperity with eternal felicity in Christ Jesus*
AS it pleases the Lord of his unsearchable wisdo^e to plant in you the
glistering beams of his gospel, and so heaped upon you, as well his blessings
for your body in this life, as also endewed you with his fear and love, that
your soul may attain to the euerlasing life. So it has pleased him also to
ordain the means that the same may be continued in you to the end: namely by
his secret gift of grace, by his love poured in your heart, and by the pure
preaching of his word under so gracious a Prince, whose love has a long time
shined, in this realm of peace of plenty, to the terror of the blind
thirsting Papists our daily adversaries. So that you may say with the children
of God. Blessed are that people, which live in his fear: Yea blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord and live in his love: Of which love this Sermon
(here Dedicated to your worship) largely and learnedly entreats, the Author
not known unto me, only the excellency thereof caused me to put it in
print, that all that live in the love of God, might be partakers of so good a
work. Herein is set forth the fruits of true faith, the vanity of worldly
wealth, the corruption of covetousness the greatness of our sins, the
punishment due thereunto, and the means whereby we may be delivered from the
some, being a loadestone to direct our doings, from the rankor of
covetousness, to bring us to godliness. Wherefore Saint Paul, to withdraw us
from it, says, godliness is great riches, we brought nothing into this world,
and certainly we shall carry nothing with us, wherefore while we have food
and raiment let us be content therewith: and Saint Matthew writes that if all
men will seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, they shall not
want, but shall have all things cast unto them from above. For if we have to
maintain us in this life and cast care on heavenly things, we shall posses
heaven, and reign with Christ forever.

Wherefore Master Calvin, upon Paul to Timothy, says. They that measure
their religion by riches are here taught that only religion is the true
riches. Whereby it appears that there is nothing more necessary and needful
unto the Salvation of a Christian then the knowledge, zeal, and love of God
and his religion. This bold attempt I do offer unto your worship as a true
argument of my duetifull mind, and not as a mean to you (now earnest in
religion,) but unto one of whose love and godly zeal, in that behalf I have
all ready had sufficient trial. Beseeching therefore that by your worships well
accepting it at my hand (though out of another man's caske) it may be the
better, lyked, accepted and followed, of them that endeavor themselves to live
in the love of our only Savior. In which love the Lord of his great mercy,
continue your good worship, my very good Lady and your whole famely: and that
all which be partakers of his fear and love may be inheritours of his
everlasting kingdom.

Your worships humble Servant always to command John Jordan.

If any man love me, he vvil keep my John. 14.
word and my Father vvil love him, and we vvil come unto him, and will
dvvell with him. John. 14.
I have in this present text of holy Scripture, three necessary branches to
entreat of offered unto me.

First I mind (God permitting) to entreat of that love which the children of
God dutifully owe unto Jesus Christ, their alone God and Savior.

2 Secondly, my purpose is likewise to show how, and by what means, the said
children of God may be known to love Christ Jesus, as they ought to do namely
in keeping his word.

3 The third sets forth the utility, profit and commodity, which hapeneth
unto that man which rightly loves Christ and keeps his word, namely, not
only, that God the Father will love him, but also that the whole Trinity will
come unto him, and dwell with him.

The Sermon
THe minds of Gods chose^ people, have never any peace or quietness in the
which they may stay them selves until they feel them selves united unto Christ,
by means of a perfect and stayed faith, with a full confidence in him and a
burning love toward him. Augustine therefore has aptly said, Augustine.
that love is a certain coupling of yt lover with the beloved, which saying of
Augustine may be approved true, by the testimony of S. John in his first
Epistle and 1. John 4.
fourth chapter where he says. That God is charity, and he that dwells in
charity dwells in God, and God in him. Between the which words, charity and
love in this place, and many more of the holy scriptures, I take to be no
difference.

Which love of God is powered into the hearts of Gods children, by the holy
spirit of God, by the means of Christ, for the spirit of love was lovingly
given unto Christ unto this end, that he should power it into his members.

And although the same love, in the children of God is imperfect during this
their mortal life (because of sin) yet is it acceptable unto God, for that
they by faith are made members of Christ*

The manner and order of which love, is explicated and set forth, as well by
that servant of God, Moses in ye Book called Deutronomium, and sixth Chapter
in these words: Deu. 6.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy might: as also the very same words, rehearsed or rather confirmed
by our savior Christ, in the 22. Chapter Math. 22
written by S. Mathewe.

To love God with all thine heart, is to take dilligent heed, that thine heart
he not inclined to the love of any thing, more then to the love of thy God:
To love him with all thy soul, is to stay the trust of thy salvation and
safety of thy soul, only on Jesus Christ the son of God To love him with
all thy might, is to apply all thy senses, to the setting forth of his honor
and glory. For seeing we be wholly his, he will have us holy to love him.

I grant there are things in this world that may kindle our minds and
affections to love the^, for there be worldly honors, the glittering gold,
she glistering precious stones; the beuty of ma^kinde, the excellent colors of
Mettalls and cloth, the sweet odors of herbs and perfumes, the delectable
harmony of Instruments and Music, Besides, our wives, children parents and
friends. But if man set his love and affection to any one of these things,
either his mind will quickly be changed to delight in some other thing, either
else the thing which he loved, will soon fade away, and come to nothing. And so
in over much loving of any these things, make himself unfit to be loved of
God: according to the saying of our Savior Christ Qui amat Patrem aut matrem
plusquam Math. 10.
me, non est me dignus: et qui amat: siliu^ aut filiam supra me, non est me
dignus.

He that loves father or mother (says our Savior) more then me, is not
worthy of me. And he that loves Son or daughtermore then me, is not
worthy of me.

If thou will therefore love any of the creatures of GOD, O man love them but as
things subject unto thee, as a gift of thy freende, as a benefit of the
LORD, as a pledge of thy spouse which spouse of thine has the most benty of
all things, thou see not his face, but he sees thee continually and
although he has not presented himself unto thee in visible form, yet has he
sent thee sundry gifts as pledges of his love toward thee he has not only
granted thee thy being, but to be, after this life is ended.

Behold also this whole world, and see if there be any thing in it, that is
not created for thine use and service. The whole course of nature directs it
self to this e^d that thou may have profit thereby. This heaven, this earth,
this air, this sea with all that is therein, bend their force to thy
commodity. Whereof the Prophet David witnessech, confessing unto God what he
has done for man, saying in the eight Psalm. Thou made him to have
dominion Psalm. 8.
of the works of thy hands, and thou have put all things in subjection under
his feet.

If he had done no more for us the^ these things, which I have already spoken
of, it were matter sufficient to moon the stoniest heart amongst us to love
him: but he has done more for us, for when we were his enemies, and wholly
corrupted through sin, yet being immortal, for us became mortal, took upon
him his passion, redeemed us from sin, death and hell 1. Pet. 1.
as testifies S. Peter in his first Epistle, and first Chapter saying. Ye
were not redeemed with corruptible things (as silver and gold) but with the
precious blood of Christ. With his blood we are cleansed as witnesses S. John
in ye first of Thappocalips, Apoc. 1,
saying: He has washed us from our sins, in his own blood. This was it that
moved S. Paul in ye fourth Chapter Hebr. 4.
to the Hebrews to say. We have not an high Priest which cannot have
compassion of our infirmities: But this is he by whom and in whom we are
adopted sons of God, and made heirs together with him of his glorius
kingdom. Heerof S. John speaks in his first Epistle 1. John, 3.
and third Chapter, in these words. Behold what love ye father has showed unto
us, that we should be called and be indeed the sons of God, and of the joys
that are laid up in store for us in his blessed kingdom. S. Paul teatheth in
his 1. Cor. 2.
first Epistle to the Corinthians and second Chapter after this manner. The eye
has not seen, neither the ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man* (...) things which God has prepar^^ (...) that love him.

And surely amongst (...) sundry benefits, which god ha^^ ^ed upon his people,
we for our parts within this little Realm of England, ought deeply to
consider what he has done for us yea in these our days, consider it well
when we were ignorant, blind and not knowing the light, did he not teach us?
and give us the light of his holy word, which as the Prophet David says: Is a
Lantarn to our feet, and a light unto our paths, when we sinned and would
not embrace his word, nor regard his messengers the Preachers thereof, did he
not correct us and sharply scourge us? when we fell from him and committed
wicked Idolatry, did he not raise us up again? when we erred and strayed into
the wilderness of man's doctri^e, did he not reduce us into the plain high way
of his holy Gospel? Now we go on forward therein, does he not lead us?
When we come unto him lamenting our fall, does he not receive us?

And doutles this is also not to be reckoned amongst the least of all Gods
benefits, which plentiously he has poured upon this Realm: that he has
given us such a virtuous and godly Queen, Queen Elizabeth, (...) whose godly
and peaceable government, not only we that are now living have felt and yet
do, but also all those that shall sucseede us, shall be pertakers of this
wonderful mercy of God, God grant her a godly, peaceable, and long life in
this her realm.

Wherefore that saying of God, which he spoke by his Prophet Esaias, and fifth
Chapter, Isai. 5.
may well be applied unto us, what more could I have done for my vi^niard of
England, then I have done? these things well considered, it may be said to
England, as Moses said to the Isralites. Deuteronomy. 10.


And now England, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, to love him, and to serve ye Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, it is to be wished that
each one of us, even from our heart roots, would say with the Prophette
David. Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget Psalm 10.
not his benefits, which forgets al thy sin, and heals all thi^e
infirmities.

Thus much touching the causes that ought to move us to love God, now (God
permitting me) I will speak somewhat of the effect and force of this love,
which is of such effect, that it heals the wounded conscience, it plucketh up
all vice by the root, it lightneth the mind, it ioyeth the heart, it is not
exalted with pride, or wasted with envy, nor overwhelmed. with sorrow, nor
dried up with couetuousnes, nor enfla^ed with excess, nor spotted with
uncleanness: it causes the possessor thereof to be quiet in aduersitye, to be
temperate in prosperity. It passes not for poverty, it makes no great acou^t
of riches it glories not in honor, who so unfeignedly loves God, thinks
when he shall be with God, when he shall leave this wicked world, how he shall
escape sin, when he shall find true and perfect peace, if he walk if he
sit, if he work, if he rest, if he speak, if he held his peace, his heart
goes not from the Lord.

It is no marvel therefore that the ancient writers have so greatly lawded
this love comparing it to gold, because it is tried in the furnace of
adversity: to the Ark of Noah, in the which who so is not found shall perish:
to give, because it joins the heart of man unto God: to a fountain, for that
it refreshed the mind to a precious stone, because it beautifieth the soul:
to fire because it warmeth the affection: to a garment for that it covers the
turpitude of offenses: to ointment for that it supplieth the inward parts.

Experience of this love has been seen in the death of many Marters, they
dyi^g for the zeal and love which they did bear unto God and his truth:
consider what they left, what way they went, and what they looked for, what
they left we see what way they went we have heard, and perfectly seen, what
they attained unto we see not, but beeleue, they left things transitory and
vayn, they passed through torments and pains, they attained no dout unto that
which was promised them of God, namely everlasting joy and endless felicity.

Besides these there be many examples set forth unto us in the holy Scriptures
how ardently the holy men of God, have from time to time looued the Lord.
Abraham showed the zeal of his love toward God, when he was ready to offer
his son Isaac in sacrifice, Joshua being old Joshua. 23.
called the people of Jerusalem unto him: and warning them of many things,
above all other things he said take heed most diligently of this, that you
love your Lord God. It is written of David that Ecclesia. 47.
with his whole heart he did praise the Lord and looued God that made him. The
Appostle Saint Peter, answered our savior earnestly, sayi^g, Lord thou know
I love John. 21.
thee Saint Paul had such love toward God he that accounted all things vile,
that he might win Christ. Philip. 3.
Again how earnestly does he encourage all men, to continue in this love,
saying: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall tribulation, or
anguish, or persecution or famine or nakedness, or peril or sword? Roma. 8.


Thus I will end this first branch, with request which the said Saint Paul
made to the Philippians* saying: Philip. 2.
if therbe therefore any consolation in Christ* if any comfort of love if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and merry, fulfill my joy that ye be
like minded: having the sa^e love, being of one accord and of one judgment,
which thing if we do not, we shall show our selves the vnthankfullest
creatures that ever God created.

The second branch sets forth how and by what means, our love
toward our savior Christ, may be known, chiefly in keeping his word,
for thus he says if any man love me, he will keep my word.

THe word of Christ in this place, is taken as well for ye doctrine which he
himself taught with his own mouth, Viua voce, as also for that which his
ministers have set forth, do or shall teach, not only out of the new: but
also out of the old Testament, as is manifestly showed in ye Luke. 16.
xvi. Chapter, written by Saint Luke, in these words. They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them, again, Christ speaks of the Scripturs of
both Testaments, where he says John. 5. Scru John. 5.
tamini scripturas, search the Scriptures. And the rather to move all people
to credit and embrace his word, he showed yt it is not his word, in respect
that he is man but in respect yt he is God, for thus he says Mea doctrina non
est mea, sed eius qui John, 7.
misit me. My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me, again in the viij.
of John John 8.
he says, I do nothing of my self, but as the father has taught me, even so
I speak these things: which saying of Christ may not only confirm the faith
of the godly knowing that ye doctrine which is taught them is the word of God,
but also it is a lesson unto all Preachers that they teach nothing to the
people, but that which may be confirmed by Gods words: my doctrine is not mine,
but his that sent me, for they are the messengers and Legates of ye most high
God, and of his son Christ Jesus not to teach the people what they list but
that which is spyed within their commission of Gods word, whosoever therefore
cannot rightly say of the doctrine which he teaches, my doctrine is not mine,
but his that sent me, that man seduceth him self and the people which he
teaches. But the Papists and other here tiques, cannot rightly say the said
words, but they teach the doctrine of men, and not the pure word of God, it
follows therefore that they seduce themselves and the people also.

It seemed good to our God and heavenly father, that the holy scripturs should
be set forth to men, chiefly for that cause which is set down in the twenty
Chapter written by S. John where it is said John, 20.
Haec scripta sunt vt creditis quia Jesus est filius Dei et vt crede^tes vitam
habeatis in nomine eius. These things are written that ye might believe, that
Jesus is the son of God, and that in believing you might have life through
his name. Here is plainly set down the end why the holy Scriptures concerning
Jesus was given, namely that we might have faith in the son of God, and the
end of this faith is to have everlasting life.

Sithence then that this word is so profitable unto us, it behooneth us to
keep it not locked up in chests and cloyesters, as the papists keept it, not
in words only as the Pharisees kept it, but in faithfully hearing it,
believing it, and practysing it, in our lives as the holy Vigin Mary kept it.

We have many examples in the book of God, how from time to time the word of
God has been regarded with Gods people, The people said unto Moses, all the
words which the Lord has said: we will do. Exodus 24.
Hely taught Samuel right well, that he should say unto the Lord that spoke un
to him, speak on Lord for thy servant hear reth. Reg. 3.


When Esdras read the book of the law from morning unto midday, Esdra. 8.
it followed that all the people wept for joy, when they heard the words of
the law of their God, when the word of God came from Jonas to ye King of Niniuy
without Jonas. 3.
delay he rose out of his princely seat, did his apparel off, and sat him
down in asijes. After the lame man was healed which is spoken of in the third
Chapter of the Act. 3. 4.
Acts of the Apostles, and Peter's sermon ended, many that heard his sermon
believed, as is showed in the fourth Chapter of the Acts, thus we see how
the word of God has been regarded in times past of Godly people.

And what is the cause that the word of God, is not more regarded and followed
in these our days, sithence it is not so plentifully taught among us, what be
the Bishops and Ministers only in fault? or are the Maiestrates and Rulers
only to be blamed? or be the common multitude alone culpable herein? no
surely in mine opinion, no one society of these are to be blamed alone, (but
each of them in this degree are to be touched in this matter, if therefore the
Eishoppes, Prechers and ministers of the word desire to have the doctrine which
they teach to profit amongst men.

It behooves them to take he de, first yT they take not the office upon them
for ambition, and couetuousnes sake, entering therfo at the window like a
thief and murderer, but in at the door, which door is Christ as he him
self testifies in the tenth of Saint John, saying: I am the door, by me if
any man enter in he shall be saved. john, 10.
He rightly may be said to enter at the door, that faithfully believes in
Christ, that feels in him self an aptnes and hability to teach Christ's
doctrine and is by Christ's Church (which is guided by the holy ghost) lawfully
and orderly elected into that function. For as Saint Paul says, Hebru. 5.
writing to the Hebrews and the fifth Chapter. No man takes this honor to
himself but he that is called of God, as was Aron, would God experie^c had
not taught us in these our days that too too many have rushed into that
spiritual function by sinister means and ways, some by freendship, some for
hired sake, and some for money and gain. The reformation whereof, with the deep
consideration of the inco^ueniences that have, do, and are like to grow unto
the Church of Christ, by means hereof I reserve un to you that be in
authority.

Secondly if they desire to have the word of God to bring forth fruit, they
must not live in the ministry as idle Drones; but execute their office in
laboring and teaching of Gods truth: for as God says by his Prophet Malachie
the second Chapter Malachi. 2.
The Priests lips, should have suer knowledge that the people might understand
the law from their mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, unto
such idle loyterers, wc will not teach Gods word God speaks by his Prophet
Ezechiel the xxxiiij. chapter saying: Woe unto the shepherds of Israel, that
feed themselves, should not the shepherds feed ye flocks? ye eat the fat, and
ye cloth you with wull, Ezechi. 33.
ye kill them that are fed, but you feed not the sheep. Again by his said
Prophet he threatens unpreaching prelates on this manner. When I shall say unto
the wicked, O wicked man thou shall dye ye death if thou do not speak and
admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked man shall dye for his iniquity, but
his blood will I require at thy hands. Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked of
his way, to turn from it, if he do not turn from his way he shall dye for his
iniquity, but thou have de liuered thy soul.

Thirdly, if the Prechers of the word of God be desirous to have word to take
deep root in the hearts of the hearers, they must neither preach the word for
advantage, lucre, or gain, neither to utter their eloquence, neither yet to
obtain the praise Peter. 3.
of men. S, Peter in his first Epistle, and third chapter straightly, exhorts
the^ saying: Feed ye ye flok of Christ, as much as lies in you, taking the
oversight of the^ not as compelled there unto, but willingly after a godly
sort, not for the desire of filthy lucre. but of a good mi^d: not as though
ye were Lords of Gods heritage, but yt ye may be examples unto the flock:
again S. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy, and first Chapter says:
Timothi, 1.
That a Bishop should not be given to filthy lucre and as he would not have
them to be couetuous, so he also would have them in their teachings, to use a
plain and orderly kind of doctrine: In his first Epistle to the Corinthians
and first Chapter 1 Cor. 1.
he says, Christ sent me not to Preach the Gospel with wisdom of words,
least the cross of Christ should have been made of none effect: for God says
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise. Again in the said Epistle and second
Chapter 1. Cor. 2.
he says, my words and my preachinges was not in enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit and of power, that your faith
should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

And as he came not with intycing words of man's wisdom, so did he not preach
to please men, for thus he says in the first Galath. 1.
Chapter to the Galathians, do I seek to please men? If I had hitherto studied
to please men, I were not the servant of Christ.

Fourthly if the Preachers of the word of God desire to have the Doctrine
which they teach to be accepted of men, they must from their lives according
to their doctrine, which thing if they do not, their hearers may say unto the^
as Isaac said unto Jacob. Thy voice is Jacobs voice Genesis. 27.
but thy hands, are the hands of Esau: Of such dissemblers our Savior Christ
speaks in the twenty three Chapter of Saint Matthew: They (says he) say but
do not: Such build the Temple of God with the right hand of good doctrine,
but put it down again with the left hand of their evil lives, well, he
that knows the Fathers will and does it not, is worthy to be beaten with
many stripes*

So if the Ministers and Preachers of the word of God enter into that function
by sinister and corrupt means, as by freendship, kindred or for money, if they
sleep and loyter in their office, if they preach for promotions and livings,
or to utter their eloquence or to please men rather then to edefie the Church
of Christ, or if they teach well and live evil, they hinder the free passage
of the Gospel, and shall make accounte thereof before the Lord God.

Now as it is the office of the Bishops and Ministers to Preach the word: So
it is the ofice of ye Magistrates, Rulers and governors of this Realm to
maintain the same with the sword, and to correct the offender. For they
rightly cannot be said to be rulers, which rule not, which speak of the Law but
use it not. Such may be likened to S. George fighting with the Dragon, but
strikes not, to a man pai^ted on a wall, drawing a bow, with an arrow but
shoots not, such have the work of the Lord in hand but execute it not:
co^sideri^g not what the Lord has said by his Prophet Jeremy, Cursed be he
that does the work of the Lord negligently. Ieremi, 48.


The Rulers therefore ought not only to make good Laws for the setting forth
of gods word, but also diligently to see, that such wholesome Laws be
observed, and kept, as did good Ezechias, Josias and others we have in this
land a law made, that every subject that is able, should come unto the Church
to hear Gods word read and preached, and to have the Sacraments ministered unto
them, but how it is kept of some people in some cutries it is known. You will
peradventure say, that ye bishops be in fault, if this law be not kept, I grant
there may be some fault found in them, touching this matter: but what and ye
party be to mighty, for ye bishop to deal with, it seems that the papists
wexe very bold well it were good that the Magistrate and those ye be in
authority, should co^ma^d such yea, if it were a noble man, upon his alegeance
to the Prince, to come to the Church. Augustine does testify that through the
straight commandment of Theodosius the Emperor, his church of Hippo was
delivered from the Donatists, and were brought unto the truth by ye preching
of the word of God, for as S. Paul says, Roma. 10.
faith comes by hearing: and surely this is not only a great hindrance of the
free passage of ye Gospel, when men see the magistrates negligent in punishing
of such transgressors of Gods laws, and the princes, but also if they see and
understand that the rulers themselves, their family, and household regard little
the word of God.

The third sort of people that are to be blamed, for that ye word of God is
no more regarded in these our days, be the common multitude. In the which
number I may include, even the most excellent sort of men until such time as
they faithfully embrace the word of God, and so be graffed into the body of the
Church.

Of all the creatures that God has created, man against his maker has been
found most unthankful, obstinate, rebellions and disobedient, which has been
seen not only by the disobedience of our first parents, but also in us, so
that we hearing as it were Gods voice by his word, yet harden our hearts,
cast of his yoke, from us, and forget the benefits that he has bestowed upon
us: of the which grievous offense, I mean of ye contempt of his word, the
messe^gers of God Patriarchs, Prophets, Ena^gelists, apostles and ministers
have from time to time complained. Moses the servant of God speking of the
perverse nature of ye people of his time, says unto God. Exodus 4.
Lord they will not believe nor harken to my voice and yt which they did suspect
would come to pass others by experience found most true, for Isai. 25.
Esaias says: Lord who has given crede^ce unto the things that we have hard.
Elyas complains unto God yt the children of Israel had not only forsaken
his covenant but also killed his Prophets, and that he only was left alive*
the Prophet Jeremy Ieremi, 25.
says that he taught the people of Judah the word of the Lord xxiij, years and
that with great pains and travel, for thus he says unto them, I have risen up
early, I have given you warning in season, but you would not hear me. And
again he says though ye Lord has sent his servants al ye prophets unto you:
yet would you not obey, you would not incline your ears to hear. After the
prophets God sent his only so^ in to the world: who was contemned of ye rich
hated of the mighty, and scorned of ye learned notwithstanding he gathered
together ye poor, refused not ye blind, despised not the lame, forsakes not
ye sinners, he abhors not ye penitent thief, rejects not the mourni^g
adulter esse despised not ye humble Cananite, refused not the custo^er, lothed
not the Disciple yt denied him: let therefore the miserable wretch flee unto the
merciful the guilty to the favorable the unclean to the fountain, the wa^derer
to the way ye sick to the phisticio^, the lost sheep to the shepherd the sinner
to Jesus, wc saves people from their sins, wc Jesus although in corporal
presence he is absent from us, yet has he not left us destitute of prechers
and techers which call his people to e^brace, keep, and obey his word, whereby
they may be known in love him as is said in our text, if any man love me, he
will keep my word. But why do not these cormora^ts say to themselves for whom
do I prepare these buildings lands and farms, with ye loss of mine own soul.
I dout whether I shall possess or they enjoy the^ to whom I bequeth them, or
not and the rather may I so think, for that my conscience bears me witness,
that they have been evil gotten and evil kept, and therefore it is very likly
they shall be evil spent. I know not whether mine heir will be awise man for a
fool, whether he will spend that riotously, which I have gotten wickedly Why do
they not acknowledge the^ selves to be but men: and man is as grass, and as a
flower of ye field, the grass shall wither and ye flower decay, to beshort, you
yt be godly minded pray you with the prophet David and say, Incline my heart O
Lord unto thy testimonies and not unto couetuosnes. And surely this vice not
only draws men from the love of Christ, and obedience to his word in these
days, but there is joined with it, carnal pleasure, and fleshly delights,
which is such a snare chat it holds men that (delight theri^) so with
captivity that their hearts are with drawn from all the service of God, and
obedience of his word, and only set there upon. These vices are such hurtful
harms and miserable mischeefes, to those that lewdly love them, and plesantly
practice them, that they draw them into damnation, except both speedely and
earnestly they repent. Will God think you suffer these vices long unpunished?
no, let us think therefore that God speaks unto us after this manner and
faith. O you unthankful sons of Adam, how many things have I to speak and
judge of you? how often would I have helped you and you would not? you have
despised all my counsels and broken all my commandments, I have therefore just
cause to be angry with you, and to condemn you, but I have had compassion upon
you I have seen your misery and decreed to help your I saw you wander in exile
far from your own country, and therefore I came in mine own person from
heaven to guide you into the right way. I saw you scattered in mountains, and
lie in hedges, yet I sent my servants to gather you together who have showed
you that all things are prepared and made ready for you. This my goodness and
love toward you ought to alure you to come unto me and love me But heerin I
have to burden and accuse you namely for your ingratitude, rebelio^ and
contempt of my word, you wey not the benefits that I have bestowed upon you,
you keep not my commandments you regard not my word, nor my Sacraments, how
you receue the^, nor fear not my wrath, you evil entreat my messengers, you
stifnecked and vncircu^sised hearts and ears, ye have always resisted ye holy
ghost, as your fathers did so do you.

Thus we may see that there is nothing that either sooner moves Gods wrath or
draws us into damnation, then contempt of gods grace offered unto us by his
holy word. We find in the holy scripturs, that when the Jews did forsake and
contemn the grace of ye Gospel first offered unto the^ by Christ, God powered
out his indignation upon them, saying unto them* O Serpents, Math. 23.
ye generation of Vipers, how shall ye escape the damnation of hell, again, our
savior bids his Disciples shake their dust of their feet as a witness
against the^ it shall be easier for the^ of ye land of Sodom and Gomora, in the
day of judgment the^ for them. Math. 10.
After the same manner he speaks in other places, threatnig the Jewish people
generally, and other Cities specially for the said offense, The men of Niniuie
says he shall rise in judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they
repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater then Jonas is here.
The Queen of the South shall rise in judgment with this generation and shall
condemn it, for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater then Salamon is here. Again in
another place he says. woe be to thee, Chorasin, woe be to thee Bethsaida,
for if the works which have been done in you, had been done in Tirus and
Sydon, they had repented long ago, in sackcloth and ashes. Nevertheless I say
unto you, it shall be easier for Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment then for
you.

By the which testimonies of holy scriptures and many others, we may not only
perceive Gods wrath against the contemners of his word, but also that he
keeps our sins still in remembrance, if we will not embrace and obey the
same word in due season, which if we embrace worthily, and keep obedie^tly, we
shall declare our selves according to our text, lovers of Christ, if not, we
shall show our selves to be but dissembling Christians, and so move him to take
his precious Jewel of his holy word away from us again, and give it to a
nation which will bring forth fruit. God grant that our sins deserve not any
such plague to fall upon England.

The third branch sets forth the vtility profit and commoditye which
happens unto them that rightly love Christ and keep his word, namely, not
only that God the Father will love him. But also that the whole Trinitye will
come unto him and will dwell with him.

What thing more happy, what thing more pleasant, what thing more beautiful
can happen unto us miserable men then to be so much in the favor of God, yt
we may be beloved of him which thing is not only promised unto us if we love
him and keep his word, but he also further promises, saying: and we will come
unto him, in which words he speaks after the manner of men, he comes unto
us when he declares and offreth his grace and favor unto us, and he may be
said to go from us when he takes his grace and favor from us, so that it may
be rightly said, that God is with his people by power, by grace and by his holy
spirit, by means whereof his people be not only in safety, from their bodily
and ghostely enemies, but also are led daily forward toward his everlasting
kingdom. Lastly he adds these words, and we will dwell with him, in which
words he promises a continuance of his grace, so that those that are
faithful, may rightly be said to be the Temple of God, according that saying
of S. Paul, speaking to the Godly, ye are the temple of the living God, what
good thing can be wanting to them that have God always present with them, and
as it were to be their gift: for as S. Paul says Romans 8.
if God be with us, who shall be against us there we need not fear the new
devises and practices of the Romanists and that rabble which they daily devise
against England. O how do men rejoice when it pleases the prince or governor
of the country to come unto them, to give them good countenance, and to speak
cherefully unto them? And contrariwise, how pensive and sorye are they when the
Prince frowneth on them, then they go like as they were half dead, but what
is this joy of the receiving of a mortal Prince to be compared with the
receiving of the imortall God? Or what is the frownig of such a Prince to be
compared with the anger of the Prince of princes. Let us therefore prepare and
make ready our minds and inward parts with all kind of spiritual furniture
to the receiving of this guest, he is received by faith, he is received and
kept by obedience to his word by mortification of the flesh and by virtuous
living. But where shall we have such to receive and entertai^e such a worthy
presonage, where is that noble man obedient unto Gods word become where is that
Lady mortefication of the flesh to be found? where is that worthy Gentleman
usher, virtuous living to be sought? what, be their none of all these to be
found? yes, or else God forbid, but they are to few God he knows but think
you that this Prince will tarry in that place, or with that people or country
where instead of obedience, he finds dis obedience, instead of mortification
of the flesh he finds carnal concupisence. and instead of virtuous living,
he finds vice and wickedness, no, he will away thence he will not tarry there,
search and examine your selves inwardly, you that fear God, when there your
inward parts be swept and cle^sed from sin and wickedness, fit to receive the
holy ghost, for the spirit is the seal where with God marketh them that be his,
this is the comforter which shall teach us all things that Christ has said
unto us, this is that spirit by the which we are addopted into the inheritance
of the eternal life which certifieth our spirits that we are the sons of God.
This is the joyful comforter of our hearts and minds, whereby we may cry Abba
father, this is he that descended upon Christ in liknes of a dove this is he by
whom our minds are stirred up to holy meditations, our bodies made the Temple
of God, and our tungues fit instruments to set forth his praise, finally this
is that spirit whereby we are moved to love Christ, to forsake this world to
embrace and keep Gods word, and to crave to be in the everlasting kingdom of
god purchased for us by the only blood of christ to the which Jesus Christ with
the father and the said holy spirit, be all love, praise, honor, and glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Virtus spirat in altum.

