MERRY JESTS, Concerning Popes, Monks, and Friars.

Whereby is discovered their Abuses and Errors etc.

Written first in Italian by N. S. and thence translated into French by G. I.
and now out of French into English,

By R. W. Bac. of Arts of H.H. in Oxon.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci.

Printed by G. Eld. 1617.

The Translator to the Reader.
COurteous Reader (for so I hope to find thee) so nefande and execrable, I
confess, have been the practices of the Papists in this exorbitant age of the
world, as late barbarous attempts at home, and a later bloody deed abroad can
well testify: that no man I think has a tongue so Satirically invectiue, that
he can any way make the bitterness of his speech correspondent to the cruelty
of their actions. Wherefore these Apologues long since fitted to their follies,
in comparison with it, may seem unto thee like Domitions pricking of flies, in
regard of managing the astaires of his Empire: yet good use may be made of them
in these our days. For as in former time among the Romans (who were never
almost without wars) there were Ludi Circences, and Naumachiae, plays as
they accounted them, but in nature consonant to their present employments; for
they did both yield recreation for the present, and also exercise them against
any future ocasion; so in these our days of warfare against the trecheries of
the Papists, after thy wiriting against their errors, or reading of grave
controversies, or at least more serious consideration of their irreligious
practices against us; these Apologues may serve unto thee as a recreation, and
yet withal they will afford thee a manifest declaration of some of their
sortish superstitions, and good arguments against them: for under a fabulous
superficies, thou shall find true substance, and in a seeming tale manifests
truth. Wherefore as Virgil on a time having some of old Ennius his works in
his hands, said to one asking him what he did, Ex Ennis stercoro aurum
colligo: so may thou, reading in this book answer any demanding what thou
do, that thou gatherest gold out of the dust of Apologues. But (that I may
come to my self) if the plainenes of the translation be not pleasing to
curious ears, I Apologize for my self two ways; first, that mine Author
shall excuse me, whom I so followed as one intending to translate, and not to
make a new. Secondly, (wherein also I excuse mine Author) that the form of the
Apologues is such, namely, a relation of Dialogues, where inquam and inquit is
often inferred, that it could not be otherwise. Yet as gold is not to be
refused, because it is dug out of the earth, nor pearls, because they are
found in the sands: so I hope these witty conceits, will not be distasteful
to any, although they be not related in curious terms; and that I shall not
deserve dispraise in immitating him in words, of whom I borrowed the subject of
my speech. And so committing my self and my translation to thy censure, I
commit thee and my self to him that will censure us both: wishing thee as thou
likest this first book, so to expect more of me hereafter.

Thine, as thou art mine, Rowland Willet.

To the Reader.
We thought the Tuscans are more strange then true,
Which by the new found Perspective descri'd
Far off smooth-seeming Luna's rougher hue,
Which simple ignorance had long belied:
See here this Glass over Alps and clouds detects
Romes long-maskt Mconelike tumors and defects.
W. R. to R. W.
Would know the vulgar censure of thy book?
Or how the Apists Will thy fables take?
He tell in brief, the first like Boys will brook
Thy wholesome pills but for the gilding sake:
The last will put thee on the tenter book,
And wink at that their sottish selves did make,
Crying as once did the Athenians sad,
Democritus by his laughing sure is mad.
But when Hipocrates that learned sage
Shall feel thy temperate pulse and know whence springs
Thy laughter, he will cry, the Romans rage,
Democritus is wise, the Pope and Popelings
All are mad, who sell the heavenly heritage,
While they themselves float on the Devils wings;
The Cordelier is mad who wears on's coat
The rope, which better would become his throat.
H. I.

H.I. to R.W.
IF painful Merchants who have ventured far
To bring home treasure from a foreign Land
Deserve great praise and justly honored are,
How can thy book but of the public band,
Win general applause, though at the bar
Of envy and her brood thy worth should stand?
With 2*strange tongs thou deckst thy mothers tongue
Merchants but fat the land with foreign dung!
To R. W.
It Is true Italienated English men,
Are by the Proverb still d incarnate devils*
But this Italian English by my pen,
Contains a million of infernal evils,
Of Popes, Monks, Cardinals, and Nuns ye tell.
These are the fiends I mean and bags of hell.
I. S.

To the Papist Reader.
TVsh (will the Popish Reader say) they are lies,
Professed Apologues, slanders, all may see:
I grant it is so; And yet as I surmize,
It Is with a matter of truth ye slandred be.
Your truest Legends are but tales Canonized,
Your serious works ridiculous to view:
His falsest tales are stories but mispriz'd,
And why may not the man which laughes speak true.
Only for this untruth I must him blame,
In that he gives the truth a liars name:
Only in this I needs must say he fails,
And tells a tale in that he calls them tales.
I. H.

The Translator to the Reader.
IF that a Jury do condemn or quit,
Our Judges and our Laws allow of it:
And none is found so peevish and perverse,
To go about their verdicts to reuerse.
A friendly Iuries censure here you see,
Which of reproof does quit my book and me:
Then none I hope deuoid of hereses,
Will either me dispraise, or it despise.
But if the Papists rail, and Pope do curse,
He bless again, not think my self the worse.
Nor let men think these Apologues are lies,
Being grounded on Authenticke histories,
As I m part, the learned well can tell;
Then Reader be a friendly judge; farewell.
R. W.

MERRY IESTES of Popes, Munkes, and Friars: Wherein are discovered the Abuses
of the Pope and his followers.
The first Apologue, in which is showed, not only that the Pope may err in
faith, but also what is the faith of Popes and their Prelates.
A Roman Courtier, in a certain conference, said, that the Pope might err
in faith: for which he was presently apprehended, and sent unto prison. And
because he was a man of great credit, the Pope sent one of his Cardinals to
cramine him; and he not only constantly maintained his former speeches, but
also said again in the Cardinals presence: that the Pope might err in faith;
the Cardinal told him that he was as heretic to believe it. But he
answering, said, what if I have known wherein the Pope did err in faith,
shall I be accounted an heretic for believing the truth? wherein (said the
Cardinal) have you perceived that the Pope did err in faith; Pope Paul (said
he) on a time, as he was at dinner, said in my hearing, to many yet living,
whom I can produce for witnesses, that he believed that he should recover
Placentia before he died, but yet died before he recovered it; therefore I am
persuaded that he did err, and was deceived in faith. Then the Cardinal
answered and said, we thought that you had spoke of the faith in spiritual
things; no (said the Courtier) I spoke only of faith in matters of this world,
for as touching the faith in things which appertain unto God, so far am I
from knowing whether he err or not, that I am altogether ignorant whether the
Popes, or you their Prelates have any belief at all.

The 2. Apologue by which is showed that the Pope cannot deliver souls out of
Purgatory.
IN the time of Bourbon, Pope Clement being afraid, withdrew himself together
with some of the Prelates which were his friends, into the Castle of the Holy
Angel, and being there as it were shut up in prison, a Roman Gentleman said;
until this time I have always believed that the Pope could deliver souls out
of Purgatory, but seeing that at this present he cannot deliver himself, and
his dear friends out of prison, I am constrained to believe, that he is much
less able to deliver souls out of Purgatory,

The 3. Apologue, by which is discovered the folly of Priests and Monks, who
pray unto God singing.
A Certain Priest went unto Rome so beg a Benefice which was void, and such
good friends he had, that he was permitted to enter into the Consistory, the
Pope and Cardinals being there assembled, where devoutly falling down upon
his knees he began to demand the Benefice singing after the same manner he
was went to sing the Letanie: saying with a loud voice: Most holy Father, I
humbly crave such a Benefice, hear me I beseech you: then turning himself
toward the Cardinals, and naming them one after another (singing as he did
before) he said, Most reverent Lord (such a one) pray for me that I may
obtain the Benefice, which I desire of the Pope. They hearing this began all
to laugh, being notwithstanding very angry with him, because they thought that
he had mocked them. Wherefore the master of the Ceremonies went unto him and
reprehended him, saying, that he ought to ask that which he would have with
greater reverence: to whom he answered and said, I know not how to desire a
favor of the Pope and Cardinals with greater reverence and devotion, then with
the same wherewith the Popes (who as we hold cannot err) have taught me to
beg things heedefull for me, of Christ, the Apostles, and other Saints. And
because, when I would have any thing of Christ, or of the Saints, I pray for it
singing (as the Popes have taught us to do in the Letanics) I should never
have imagined that it had been ill to do as I have done. At this they all
laughed, and granted his request.

The 4. Apologue, by which is showed what force the Councils have, as also,
upon what the Popedom is founded.
POpe Paul on a time exhorted some of his Prelates to study the holy
Scriptures, that at the Councils they might be able to overthrow and confound
the reasons and arguments of the Lutherans; and one of them said it is
needless that we should take so much pains in vain, and to no purpose,
seeing that your Holiness may easily, and with a few words annihilate them
all. When the Pope asked him by what means and he answered, in not accepting,
but reproving, and condemning, as heresy all that they shall say contrary to
your profit. The Pope confessed that indeed that was true, but nevertheless
he thought it good that they thence showed some reasons which moved him
thereunto, as also that the Popedom and doctrine thereof had good foundation.
It is not best for us (said the Prelate) to read the Scriptures to that
purpose, for they are contrary unto us; but we must betake our selves to your
and our decrees. Decretals, and extrauagants: then the Pope answered and said,
although nothing may be directly had out of the Scriptures, yet it is, good to
study them, that when need shall require, we may be able to cavil, and wrest
them to our purpose, and fantasy.

The 5. Apologue, whereby is showed that Simonie is a sinful thing, and whose
successors the Popes Prelates are.
A Certain Roman made his confession (of some matters which must not be
spoken of) to a Confessor in the Temple of S. Peter in Rome; but the Confessor
would not absolve him, unless he would give him ten Crowns: wherefore the
Roman said, Gratis accepistis gratis date, freely you have received, freely
give. To this the Confessor answered he lies in his throat, who either says,
or will say these words: for I had not this office gratis, but I bought it, and
it cost me more then an hundred Crowns. Then the Roman said, do you not know
that these are the words of Jesus Christ, will you say that Christ does lie?
To this the Confessor answered, although these words are his, he spoke them
not to us, for we can at no time have of the Pope the least office, Benefice,
or favor that is without money: wherefore you must adresse your selves to the
Apostles, to whom Christ spoke these words. It is true said the Roman, he spoke
to them indeed, but he also meant thereby all that should succeed them: If it
be so (said the Confessor) we are not the Apostles successors, but theirs who
bought and sold in the Temple.

The 6. Apologue, by which is discovered the folly of those who believe in
Relics and worship them.
A Priest of Geneua moved with devotion, traveled to visit certain holy
places, and after a time returned home again, but with much less devotion
then he had before, and with his purse quite empty. And being asked of many
where the Relics were which he had brought to regaine the money which he had
spent in his journey? after a little deliberation he answered, that he had
brought two most excellent and most holy Relics: and began to tell of them
(but secretly) to his friends, entreating them that they would not speak
openly of them, for fear least they should be taken from him by the Signeurie,
withal promising them that if they would be secret, he would impart the sight
of them, so that they would make him some contribution toward his great
expenses in procuring them; finally many being desirous to see them gave him
money: and then he (having before ordered his business) drew forth a piece of
silk, a goodly pair of Dreshornes, and holding them up, said unto the people,
that he had brought them from mount Sina, and that they were the horns
wherewith Moses descended from thence, after he had ended his speeches with
God. Then taking a viol in his hand, he said that therein was contained the
breath of Jesus Christ reserved by his mother when he was a little one; and
that he had now brought it from Bethleem: He had no sooner finished these
things, but all the City was full of the news, so that he was presently
called before the Seigneury and demanded whether it were true that he had
brought with him Moses horns, and the breath of Christ? and he answered that
it was true: then they asked him if he were not ashamed to make men worship a
pair of horns: If you (said the Priest) are not ashamed to make men worship
and fall down before the tail of the Ass on which Christ rode on Palm
Sunday; Dught I to think it a shame to make men worship these glorious horns
of Moses? and do thou believe (said one of the Seigneurie that these are the
very horns of Moses, and that in this viol there is the very breath of Jesus
Christ Then he answered and said I do as verily believe that in this viol is
the breath of Jesus Christ, and that these are the horns of Moses; as I
believe that to be the milka of the Uirgin Mary, which is in your viols, which
you say is hers, making men reverence and worship it as an holy Relic. When
he had: thus said, they let him go.

The 7. Apologue, in which is showed the folly of many, who laugh when they
should weep, and weep when they should laugh.
POpe Julius the third, on the day of his coronation, made a great feast,
especially for the Ladies of S. Peter's Palace; amongst which there was one who
said, we women are the veriest fools in the world, and being asked why? she
answered, because when Jesus Christ went to be crucified, he went to his
sovereign triumph over sin, death, and hell, to the great glory of his
heavenly father, and to our salvation, and perfect happiness, and then we
wept, and made great lamentation: but now on the contrary at this man's
coronation, whence will proceed the great dishonor of God, and the certain
ruin and destruction of many Christian souls, we pass the time in feasts and
merriment,

The 8 Apologue, in which is showed plainly that there is no Purgatory.
THere was in Rome an excellent and learned preacher; of whom Pope Paul the
third (as of one in whom he put great confidence) demanded on a time
secretly, whether he did believe that the Pope had (as men said) so great power
and authority over Purgatory that he could thence set at liberty all the
souls therein, and cause that none should ever come thither again? but the
preacher durst not bouldly speak his mind herein, and would by no means say
any thing against his own conscience, and therefore remained in doubt.
Wherefore the Pope (perceiving it) gave him encouragement, saying that he would
have him speak his mind freely, without fear, or rather respect. Then seeing
that the Pope desired to know the truth, he answered that he had no power at
all over Purgatory. Again (perceiving that the Pope did greatly wonder at his
words) he said thus unto him; Holy Father, had your Predecessors as great power
and authority as you, or had they less? the Pope made answer that it was
equal to his: then (replied the Preacher) if they had as great power as you,
and by the same were able at any time to empty Purgatory, as you suppose your
self able to do, it is fit we believe that among so many Popes, some one was
found so full of charity to free al souls thence for ever. The Pope answered
that he could not tell that. But (said the Preacher) I know this well, that
Jesus Christ the Sovereign Priest, has of himself infinite charity and
power; and seeing that with his own proper blood he has truly and for ever
purged the souls of his elect, what need have they of any other purgation?
wherefore I know not what that power is, whereof you brag and boast so much.

The 9. Apologue, by which is showed the great ambition of the Popes Prelates,
and the means they have to come unto dignity.
POpe Paul the third, being asked of his kinsmen by what means he did ascend
to the Papal dignity? answered and said, we came unto it by showing that by
the course of nature our time in this life could be but short, and that we with
patience had long expected it; by exquisit practices, by liberal promises, by
bragging what great friends we had to terrify the Cardinals if they did not
elect us to be Pope: and finally by subtle sleights, and a large conscience.

The 10. Apologue, by which is in part discovered the avarice and superstition
of the Priests and Monks.
A Rich Seigneur of Paris, being very sick the thief of all the Religious in
the city went at several times to visit him, more indeed respecting the
guiftes and rewards they hoped for at his hands, then his souls safety. And
the Cordeliers exhorted him to call upon and put his trust in S. Francis, the
Iacobins in S. Dominicke: and the other in those Saints of whose order they
were Mo^ks The Priest likewise exhorted him that he would commend himself
into the hands of S. Peter, or of the Saint to whom their Church was didicated.
The Noble man perceiving this diversity * caused them all to be sent for, and
to be assembled into his Chamber, and then said thus unto them. When I first
fell sick, I caused all the Physicians in the City to come unto me: and they
could not agree among themselves to give me a medicine, because that every one
of them, to seem more learned then the rest, reproved all that the other would
have given me, and counseled me to take that which he would administer unto
me. Therefore calling them together, I said unto them, every one of you would
have me take the Physic which he has ordained for me, now if I should take
all, they would bring my body into worse estate then it is already if not kill
me, and if I should resolve to take but one, I know not which to choose:
wherefore you shall go into this next chamber, from whence you shall not come,
until you do agree to give me a medicine approved of you all to be the best;
then the Physicians, knowing that long fasting would bring danger to their own
bodies, did quickly consent and brought me physic; assuring me that it was
far better, and more agreeable to my malady then any they would before have
given me. Now in like manner, you being come to medicine my soul, are
different among your selves; for every one of you does exhort me to call upon
such a Saint, and I, by reason of my great sickness and debelity of body, am not
able to make prayers perticulerly to so many. Therefore go you into the
Physicians Chamber, and assure your selves that ye shall not come forth thence
until you tell me all with one accord, to whom especially and only I ought
to commend my self for my souls safety. Then the Priests, and Monks,
perceiving themselves likely to fall into two inconveniences, that they must
either yield one to another, which they would by no means do, or else be
opressed with hunger, which their gluttonous paunches could not endure, found
out a third way to avoid both; which was, that seeing none of them had made
mention of Jesus Christ, they would exhort the sick man to commend himself to
him aloane. Which when they had done, the noble man demanded of them, whether
they all judged it much better for him to commend himself into the hands of
Jesus Christ, then of any of the Saints? and they all answered that it was
better. If you are so persuaded (said he) why had you not said as much at the
beginning? Is it possible that (when you exhorted me to call upon your Saints)
you should be so ignorant, that you knew, it not more expedient for me that I
commended my self wholly and only to Jesus Christ? Get ye hence, get ye
hence, you are a company of murderers, thieves, and wicked fellows, fraughted
with avarice, lying and hypocrisy: and so with great disgrace, he commanded
them to be thrust out at the doors.

The 11. Apologue, by which is showed that the Pope ought not to be Bishop of
Rome.
POpe Julius the third on a day wrote unto the Emperor, entreating him that
he would be content to make a King of Naples in Italy, a king of Cicelie, and
a Duke of Milan, on this condition that they should do homage and pay trybute
to his Majesty: aleaging this reason, that he was Emperor and King of Kings,
and therefore ought not to be besides a particular King, and Duke also. To this
Caesar answered, that he was content to do so, if that he in like manner
would resign the Bishopric of Rome to another, the which, by his own reason
he ought to do, contenting himself to be Pope, and uniuersal Bishop of
Bishops (as he himself said he was) and not to be the particular Bishop of
Rome also. But he was assured that the Pope would never yield thereto, knowing
well, that if he left off to be Bishop of Room, the world would no more hold
him to be Pope, and Sovereign over them as now it did being abused by his
greatness.

The 12. Apologue, by which is showed the superstition of some of the
commandments of the Pope.
THere was a Bishop of Denmark, who because he dwelt far from Rome, and that
diverse occasions might happen in his Bishopric to cause him to send to the
Pope; did for a thousand crowns buy the Popes whole authority, with this
prouiso, that he should use the farce no farther then the precincts of his
own Dicresse: notwithstanding he so behaved himself: that complaints of him
were brought unto Rome, so that the Pope cited him to make his personal
appearance before him, and the Bishop at the day appointed was present. Now
because that he was a man of great authority, the Pope held the Articles
whereof he was accused in his own hands, and examined him before all the
Prelates, saying, we have understood that you have charged your people with
many new fasts ordained by you, as if ours were not sufficient, but that you
must supply our imperfections: and you (said the Bishop) have grieved the
poeple with fasts ordained by you, as if that the temperance and sobriety given
unto men by God were not sufficient, but imperfect, unless you added something
thereunto. Again said the Pope, we gave you our authority, to the end that
you should make men observe our ordinances, and not to forge a new
Christianity: so (said the Bishop) Jesus Christ has given his authority unto
you * to this end and purpose, that you should cause men to keep his
commandments, and not by adding yours thereunto, to make a new Christian
religion. We should have liked it well (said the Pope) if for the good of your
Church, you had made any statute or ordinance, so that you had not also made
the breach thereof a mortal sin, but you have obliged the people thereunto
upon pain of eternal death, and which is more, have more severely punished
the transgressors of your commandments then the transgressors of ours. In
like manner (said the Bishop) if you had ordained any indifferent thing for the
commodity of your Church, and not tied men to the keeping thereof under pain
of damnation, it had not been displeasing to God: but you on the contrary have
decreed that whosoever will not observe your commandments, shall go to hell;
and do inflict more grievous punnishment on those which transgress your
ordinances, then on those which break the commandments of God; wherefore I
have followed you, as your good and obedient son. Then the Pope said again
unto him, but wherefore have you commanded, that in your fasts the people
shall drink but once? If you (said the Bishop) have ordained, that in your
fasts men shall eat but once; why may not I having all your authority (so that
I can by no means err) command that they drink but once in mine? but were
it not much better (said the Pope) that they drank three or four times,
rather then pour down so much at once to make their eyes stare, and their
bellies crack again? So (said the Bishop) they who eat but once in your
fasts do so gorge themselves that their bellies are even ready to break, and
were it not much more profitable for the health of their bodies, if they made
three or four moderate repasts of that which they gourmundize at once? But
what folly is it of you (said the Pope) that in your fasts you have wholly
denied bread? what would you have them eat? And what I pray you (said the
Bishop) has moved you to forbid the use of flesh, and eggs, and milk in
your fasts? what would you have them eat in those days? Other things (said
the Pope) ordained for their sustenance; men may likewise live without bread
(said the Bishop.) But if need be (said the Pope) I permit the use of flesh,
so they pay me for it. So I (said the Bishop) suffer my people to eat bread if
they will buy a license of me. But bread (said the Pope is a creature ordained
by God for the sustenance of man's life; so (replied the Bishop) is flesh
created of God for the benefit of men, yet you notwithstanding have forbidden
it. The Pope was now at the end of his roll, and for a conclusion added this.
There is one thing more, which indeed has offended us more then all the rest,
which is, that when any of your subjects being grieved by your strange
ordinance, do fly unto us for succor and refuge, you confiscate all their
goods, yea and put them to death also, if they fall into your hands. That also
(said the Bishop) I learned of you Holy Father; for if any one oppressed by
your intolerable imposito^s, have recourse to God, hoping through faith only to
obtain remission of his sins; you cause him to be burned, because he did not
beg absolution of the Priests and Monks by you ordained; accounting him an
heritique, who puts all his trust in God only through Jesus Christ his
well-beloved son, our only savior and aduorate. Well to conclude, the Pope
would have punished him, but that the Bishop showed he could not do it, but
he must much condemn himself thereby, and greatly derogate from his
authority, for (said he) seeing I have done nothing, but I did it as I was
Pope, and by the authority which you have given me, if you punnish me, it
will follow, that the Pope as he is Pope may err, and by consequence the
Popdome will loose much of its credit and reputation. The Pope was advised that
he spoke the truth. Wherefore he commanded him to renounce his presentment to
the Popdome, and to resign his authority, which he would not do, aleadging
that the Popdome was his, for he had well bought it, then the Pope offered to
restore his thousand crowns, which he paid for it: but the Bishop would not
accept of them, both by reason of the great gains he made thereof, as also for
the great honor he received thereby. Finally, the Pope seeing no remedy, did
earnestly entreat him, that he would govern himself so wisely in his
affairs, that no tumult or controversy might thence arise* and so after great
feasting, with many kind and friendly farewels, he sent him back again into
his own country.

The 13. Apologue, wherein is showed the original of the Popedom.
AS some were talking of the controversies betwixt the Lutherans and the Pope:
one said that at the Council of Trent the Lutherans would sure ruinate the
Popedom, for they would show plainly that there was never any Bishop of Rome
rightly Pope, and prove not only by histories, but also by the holy
Scriptures, that S. Peter was never at Rome, and therefore could not leave the
Popedom to the Bishops of Rome, which Jesus Christ (if men will believe it)
left unto him: but another answered him, and said, if they have no other
reasons, they can never bring their enterprise to pass, for to overthrow the
Popdome they must prove, not that S. Peter was never at Rome, but rather that
the great Devil of hell was never there: and then it will necessarily follow,
that no Bishop of Rome was Pope, seeing that, not S. Peter, but the Devil
brought the Popedom thither: now because they shall never be able to prove
that the Devil has not been at Rome, which is the chief and principal
City where the Devil keeps his residence, it follows that by this means,
they cannot ruinate the Popedom.

The 14. Apologue, by which is showed that the Pope as Pope, may err.
IT happened on a time as Pope Clement was at dinner, that certain of the
Monks disputed in his presence, whether the Pope might err or no? and after
long disputations they concluded that he might err as he was man, but not as
Pope; and the Pope giving ear unto them said, you are dissembling flatterers,
for we err daily in many things, and nevertheless we are Pope still. Then one
of them answering said, that when he erred it was as he was man, and not as
Pope; to whom the Pope replied thus: when we bestow Bishoprics, it is
certain that we do it as Pope, and yet therein we often err in conferring
them on wicked persons, esteeming them to be honest men. To this the Monks
knew not what to answer having not only the truth, but also the Pope himself
against them.

The 15. Apologue, by which is showed that the Pope ought not to have dominion
in the temporal estate.
THe Emperor on a time demanded of Pope Paul, whether the same man might
lawfully be both Pope and Emperor? The Pope fearing least that the Emperor (who
was then without a wife) would make himself Pope also, said that it could not
be, alleging many reasons for it, especially this, that a man could not at
the same time well govern things spiritual, and temporal both. Then the
Emperor said, and why then will you be both Pope and Emperor, and in sign
thereof not only use the Miter as Pope, but also the Imperial Diadem as
Emperor? Leave off therefore (as it is fit, the Dominion, and government of the
temporal estate, and let it suffice you to be Pope: this if you will do of
your own accord, I shall take it kindly, and enrich and exalt your kindred to
great dignity; and the succeeding Popes shall be so weak, that they shall not
be able to hurt them; but if you will not do it in kindness, we shall be
constrained to make you do it by force. The Pope understanding this purposed to
give his son Peter Loys all the lands of the Church, and was about to give
him Parma and Placentia, but his enterprise was hindered both by the Council,
as also by the loss of Placentia, and the death of his son, but especially
by his own death, so that he could not revenge himself of the Emperor as he
had determined.

The 16 Apologue, by which is discovered the excessive pride and folly of the
Popes.
Certain men were talking of Princes, Kings and Emperors, and one of them
said, that their greatness did cause that many were found amongst them so proud,
that they did forget themselves to be but men, and so made their folly known
unto the world; but I pray you, said another of the company, was ever any of
them known so proud and deneid of wit, and discretion, that they persuaded
themselves, that they were Gods, as the Popes esteem themselves to be.

The 17. Apologue, in which is showed the vanity and folly of those which place
their Daughters in Monasteries.
THere was a Gentleman of Sienes, who (bring not able to give a great dowry
with his daughter) was determined to place her in a Monastery; and first
communicating his purpose with a friend of his, he said, I would willingly
marry my daughter, but without the utter ruin of my estate, I am not able to
disburse a thousand Florins, and therefore I am determined to place her in a
Monastery. But his friend said unto him, you shall spend much more in making
her a Nun; for first you must pay to the Monastery two hundredth Florins for
her dowry, and afterward you shall spend so much in habites, surplices,
mochouirs, vailes, Images of our Lady, ornaments of her Chamber, with many
other curiosities, and which is more in a sumptuous Banquet first when she is
invested, secondly when she professes, that you shall find no end; wherefore
all being well considered, you shall, find that with much less damage to your
estate, you may marry your Daughter to some honest man, according to the
ordinance of God, then contrary to the same, prostitute and abandon her to
those adultrous Monks, who burn continually with the fire of concupiscence as
they well deserve: because they vow chastity which is not in their power, and
contemme the remedy which God of his grace has given to the humane kind
against this concupiscence, which is the holy marriage instituted of God in
Paradise, and honored by the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ in Cana of
Galilee, where he did his first miracle. This counsel so well pleased the
Gentleman that he resolved to marry his daughter.

The 18. Apologue, by which is showed us what commonly is the pride of the
Pope, and faith of his Prelates.
A Cardinal being sick, and likely to dye, made his confession; and his
Confessor amongst other things demanded of him whether he had worshipped one
God alone? And he answered and said, knowing well that I ought to worship but
one God and one Christ; and seeing that the Pope is God and Christ on earth,
for fear least I should worship two Gods and two Christ's, I have abandoned the
invisible God in heaven, and in his stead have adored the visible God on earth,
and therefore have always worshipped the Pope as my God and Christ, and on him
have grounded all my faith and hope, him have I honored, loved, feared,
praised, magnified and glorified as my God. Then the Confessor said that there
was but one God and one Christ, and that the Pope was neither God nor Christ:
although indeed the abused world did account him as his Vicar. When he had thus
spoken the Cardinal cried out upon him, and said thou art a fool and a very
heretic too, if thou beleeuest that the Pope is Christ's Vicar on earth, for
then it would necessarily follow that Jesus Christ were greater then the Pope;
but on the contrary I would thou should well know, that if Jesus Christ
should come visibly to Rome, the Pope would not entertain him, if he did not
first humble himself before him, acknowledgeing him to be his superior, yea
and also kiss his Pantosle.

The 19. Apologue, by which is showed the great men of the world, what they
ought to do.
A Cerretan, or seller of pardons, arrived at a city, we authority to deliver
souls out of Purgatory, and many went unto him to obtain this deliverance.
Wherefore the Governor of the City communded him to show his bulls, and when
he perceived by them that he had all the power of the Pope, he, demanded of
him how many souls he could deliver out of Purgatory? The Cerretan answered,
that the power of the Pope (which he had) was infinite, and that by the same he
could deliver as many souls as were in Purgatory, although they were in number
infinite: and moreover, that he could preserve all from coming thither, which
should at any time deserve to be tormented there. Then the Governor said unto
him, for how many crowns will thou deliver all the souls of those which
either are dead or shhall hereafter die within my Jurisdiction? And be
demanded two hundred crowns, (contenting himself to gain four hundred by
the bargain, for the odd hundred he had disbursed for the bulls, and authority
which he had bought of the Pope) the Governor was contented with the price and
paid him the money, and caused him to make a public and authentike
acknowledgement of the sale. Then presently he let the Priests and Monks which
were his subjects understand how the matter went: aduertising them that they
should no more take pains to read their Breuiere, nor to say Masses and
prayers for those which either were dead or should at any time dye within his
liberties: but that they should pray only for the living, or if they would
pray for the dead, that they should pray for those only which died out of his
dominions, (but thee knew well enough that they would pray for none but those
they were paid for.) Then he caused the yearly donatiues and gifts which his
Subjects had subjects had bestowed for saying of Masses, and Services for the
dead to be brought unto him, and therwithall (converting it to a good use) he
built an Hospital for the poor and maintained a great number therein for the
revenues were very great.

The 20. Apologue, whereby is showed the folly of them who believe that the
Counsels cannot err.
Certain Judges on a day went and visited their Bishop, and finding him very
busy in the study of the holy Scriptures, they demanded of him why he did so
trouble and weary himself with study? Because said he, I must go to the
Council of Trent, where we must judge not of things which concern the goods,
life, and honor of men, as you do in your judgments, but of things which
concern the safety of men's souls. You are unwise (said the Judges unto him)
to study for that purpose, seeing that when you are at the Council, you cannot
err in your determinations; (for the Counsels cannot err.) If that we
temporal Judges were as sure that we could not err in our judgments, we
would never study the laws, then the Bishop said unto them. Ye say true
indeed, and for that cause many of us Bishops who come to the Councels are very
ignorant and unlearned: but I study that I may be able to confer and talk
with other men of matters which shall be presented unto us, or have bin
heretofore objected by the Lutherans for although we cannot err in our
public determinations, it does not follow that we cannot err in our private
talks, and conference: nay if you were there present, ye should hear not only
differences and dissentions amongst us, but also manifest contradictions. The
Judges said unto him, that for all this he did ill to study, seeing that by how
much the more learnedly and truly he spoke of Jesus Christ, by so much the
more he should be esteemed a Lutheran.

The 21. Apologue, whereby is showed the folly of them who believe in the Pope.
IN the time of Pope Boniface the seventh who was very wicked, as commonly the
rest of the Popes are) there was in Rome a foolish and wicked fellow possessed
with such a frenzy that he thought himself to be the Popes Lieutenant
wherefore going up and down Rome, he would brag that he had all the Popes
authority: so that all laughed at his folly, except one Roman Gentleman who
believed him, and there upon bought of him diverse offices and livings; which
when the Citizens understood they began to mock and laugh at him more then at
the fool, saying unto him that he had less wit then the other, because he
believed him; withal showing him certain reasons why he should not give
credit to the fools words, as first because he showed no warrant, or
authentike testimony from the Pope; secondly, because the Pope was then
present at Room, so that he could well execute his office in his own person,
and therefore it was not likely that he would ordain a Vicar in his place:
Lastly, that if the Pope would make one, he would by no means substitute such
a wicked fool as this fellow was to exercise his authority in his stead. But
the Gent. answered them and said, by your own reasons ye are better fools
then I, in that you believe that this Boniface is the Vicar of Jesus Christ:
for first ye have no warrant or testimony for it from the holy Scriptures,
which are the word of God. Again, ye know well that Jesus Christ in spirit is
always present with his Church, so that he can well rule and govern it
himself. Thirdly, if he would have another govern in his place, without all
doubt to an office and government of such great importance, he would never
have chosen such a foolish and wicked man, as this Pope Boniface is. These
reasons so well pleased them all, and were found so sufficient, that presently
they drove the Pope out of Rome. But indeed men were at that time wiser, then
any that live in these our days.

The 22 Apologue, in which is declared the impiety of them who commit the
charge of souls to unworthy persons.
THere was on a time at Rome a Cardinal of Germany, who entreated a learned
Doctor who then lived at Rome, that he would undertake the charg of
instructing his sons, offering him for his pains five hundred crowns by the
year. And being asked by the Doctor when he would send them to Rome? he
answered that he would not send them thither at all: then (said the Doctor) it
is impossible that I should be their master, for I have determined never to
leave Rome; I care not (said the Cardinal) whether you be present with them or
no, so that you will only bear the name of being their Master. That
condition the Doctor willingly accepted: wherefore the Cardinal, as one very
joyful thereat, went presently and recounted all to the Pope, saying, he now
thought himself well eased of a great charge; but the Pope laughing at him,
said, what profit, I pray you, will arise to your Children from such a Master
who will never be with them, by this you show the small love that you bear
unto them. Then the Cardinal answered and said, you show much less love to
your spirituail Children, in that you appoint Italians and other strangers to
be Pastors over the poor Germans, who notwithstanding never come at us;
insomuch that many of them know not where their Bishoprics lie; and yet
things which concern the soul are of far greater consequence then letters:
moreover I have provided for my children a master who is a learned man, and
well able to teach and instruct them: but you ordain to be Bishops over the
People, those who are not only sinful, and wicked, but also unlearned and
ignorant beasts: wherefore if I in this case have not satisfied my duty,
assure your self that you much less satisfy yours, in placing such Pastors
(or rather Wolves) over the sheep of Jesus Christ: the Pope knew not what to
answer, but being very angry, bad him depart out of his sight.

The 23. Apologue, by which is discovered the foolish presumption of them, who
teach new rules and manners of living like Christians.
POpe Julius the second, having caused the Church of S. Peter to be pulled
down with an intent to reedifie it after a more beautiful and stately manner,
commanded a pourtrait thereof to be drawn by the chiefest Architect and
contriuer of buildings which was then to be found, which he did so exactly that
the Pope liked well of it as soon as he saw it, and gave charge that the
foundation of the building should be laid according thereunto. Now at the same
time, there were certain Master Carpenters, who knew how to make nothing
well, unless it were a Box or a Coffir, or such small matters, yet
notwithstanding did so much presume of themselves, that every one of them did
undertake to draw a several Platform of S. Peter's Church; which being
compared with the former, resembled rather little cottages then any thing else.
Finally every one being desirous yt the Pope should approve his for good, and
build the Church according to it, made such means that the Pope had the sight
of them; but he mocking at their foolish presumption said, unto them, our
purpose is to build but one Church and therefore one platform will suffice,
and already we have procured one, which, we think to be absolute; what
therefore would you have us do with your cabbins? then the Carpenters answered
and said, Holy Father, you know that there is but one Church of God, and Jesus
Christ the Sovereign master and builder thereof, has given it an absolute
and most perfect form, and rule of living as Christians ought to do, approved
even of you Popes to be very good, and nevertheless you receive and approve
other rules and forms of living, made by Basil, Benet, Dominicke, Francis,
and many other, who have presumed so far (at least as the Munkes would have men
believe) as to ad their foolish inventions and humane traditions to the most
perfect rule of the commandments of our Lord and only lawmaker Jesus Christ:
why therefore will not youreceiue and allow of the platformes, and portraites
which we have drawn? But the Pope made answer that theirs was nothing worth,
because they did not serve (as the other did) either to the augmentation, or
preservation of the Popedom.

The 24 Apologue, wherein are condemned humane rules and commandments touching
spiritual living, together with a demonstration of the evil which proceeds
thence.
IN the year of Iubile, two holy men went unto Rome, to see if it were true
(as they had heard) that there were so many hypocrisies, superstitions,
Idolatries, and impieties? And that they might be the better resolved, they
went unto Cardinal Chietie, as to the fountain of all, and demanded of him
what a man ought to do to be saved? and he answered that he ought to enter
into his religion. As, said they, there is but one Christ one Gospel, one law
of God, one Baptism, and one faith: so there is but one true Religion, which
is that of Jesus Christ. Then the Cardinal answered, I would have him enter
into my religion, without departing from that of Christ; that cannot be
(replied the other) for the Conuentual Friars of S. Francis, the Friars of S.
Francis, the Friars of the Observance, and of the love of God, the Friars of S.
Clare, and the Boscaines, and the Cabuchines, have all one same rule of S.
Francis, and yet the same person cannot at the same time be of two of these
religions, and then how can one at the same time be of Christ's religion and
yours. seeing the rule of yours is repugnant to that of Christ? that is as much
to say, as that a Dunke of S. Francis may be at the same time a Chartreuse
also, which is a thing impossible, for as much as their orders are not only
different, but in many things quite contrary. Then the Cardinal said, although
the rule of my religion be different from that of Christ, yet is it not
contrary: but (said they) the rule of Jesus Christ is so perfect, that nothing
can be added thereunto, for we ran do no good work to the glory of God but
we are obliged unto it, by the most perfect law of God, which commands us to
honor him above all things, in all places, at all times, and by all means
possible: wherefore if your religion being (according to your own speeches)
different from that of Christ, do command any thing which you are not tied to
do by the law of God, it follows that it is all naught, seeing that God has
commanded all things which are good. Now that those things which you command
besides the commandments of God are all bad, and wicked, yea and contrary to
those things which God commands, it appears plainly, for you forbid your
sect to preach, and Christ would have the Gospel preached in season and out of
season: you would not have them labor, and take pains, and God commands
that we should get our bread with the sweat of our brows: you exempt them
from their obedience to their Parents, Princes, and other Maiestrates, and God
commands the contrary, that we honor our fathers and mothers, and be
obedient to the higher powers; you forbid them to marry, although they have not
the gift of contineutie, but God on ye contrary inuits men to holy marriage;
you command them to abide always in the Monastery, although they be endued
with good gifts from above to do some good and holy work abroad: and so of
all your ceremonies, where with men being fast bound they are deprived of the
true spiritual Christian liberty, and in nothing subject and obedient to God,
and the holy spirit. The Cardinal knew not what to answer, but said, that
although their words were true, yet the Pope could dispense with all, and so
he bad them farewell.

The 25. Apologue, whereby are showed the sottish frenzies of the Munkes and
Nuns,
THe Ambassador of Soudan being at Florence, demanded on a day of Lawrence de
Medicis, why he could not see fools running up and down the streets of
Florence? as he had seen commonly in other Cities? And he answered and said
because we keep all our fools locked up in diverse places, according to the
adversity of their frenzies: and then leading him forth of Florence, he showed
him diverse Monesteries of Monks, and Nuns, saying unto him, that therein
dweiled all their he and she fools: And after the Ambassador had seen them
and those also which were within the City, he did exceedingly wonder at the
great number of fools: and especially that so many, and so different frenzies
could enter into the brain of man.

The 26. Apologue, where in is discovered the great ignorance of some of the
Popes Prelates.
THe Reverend Fathers of the Council of Trent, disputed among themselves about
Peter's supremacy of the Church; indeauoring to prove by the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ to Peter, when he said, Thou art Cephas, that the Pope was head of
the Church, but some of them said that it could not be thereby proved, because
that Cephas was a Syriacke word and did signify (firm) or a (stone) but there
was one, who bearing great affection to the French Tongue, said unto them, you
know not what you say, for Christ in that place does not speak in the Synacke
but in the French tongue, wherein Chef signifies (a head) and though he said
Cephas, yet is it pronounced Chephas, so that he spoke both French and Latin.

The 27. Apologue, by which is showed the original of the Popedom, and now it
came to be so great.
ONe demanded of his friend, what was the Original of the Popedom, and how it
did increase to such an extraordinary greatness? And the other answered and
said; the Emperor Phoca planted it, the Kings of France did water it, and the
Devil of Hell has given it increase: but little ones shall cut it down, and
simple ones shall make it into Fagots, and Jesus Christ will consume it by the
fire of his holy spirit.

The 28. Apologue, by which is showed the great pride of the Popish Bishops.
THere was a Bishop who had been a diligent and learned Preacher; he being
abroad in his Diocese in the Lent, was entreated by many, that he would give
them a Sermon as he was wont; but he answered and said; these twenty years or
there about I have taken great pains in preaching, only that at length I might
ascend to the dignity of a Bishop: wherefore ye are very simple and foolish
people to think that I will now descend, and debase my self so much, as of a
Bishop to become a Preacher.

The 29. Apologue, where in is discovered the folly of the Pope and Papists.
IN the time of Pope Leo, there were ten notable fools running about the
streets of Rome; all which on a day the Pope sent for to make him pastime as he
was at dinner and as soon as he saw them he laughed exceedingly at the
diversity of their follies; now there was one amongst them who thought himself
to be Emperor of all the world, and as an Emperor did command the other fools
and distributed amongst them the estates and governments of the World; doing it
with such a viuacity and grace, that the beholders judged him to be thoroughly
persuaded that be was an Emperor indeed. Therefore the Pope said unto them
about him, this poor man is marvelous foolish, that in so great poverty, he
does persuade himself to be an Emperor. But the fool hearing it turned
toward him and said: You are more foolish and boyd of understanding then I, in
that (being a sinful man) you are made to believe, that you are a God on
Earth: and your followers are berier fools then my companions, for although I
give them Kingdoms and governments of the world, yet they give no credit to me
at all: but your followers do steadfastly believe that you are able to give them
Indulgences, Benedictions, Jubilees, Absolutions, Remission of sins and also
Paradise it self. Then the Pope said let not a man meddle with fools, if he
would not have the truth told him without flattery: and so he departed from
them.

The 30. Apologue, wherein is discovered and condemned the Superstition of
Bells.
THe Priests and Monks of a certain City on a time when a great tempest was
likely to arise, betook themselves to the Church and rang out the bells, to
turn away the storm and tempest; wherefore the governor of the City (noting
it) on another time when a tempest was likely to ensue, caused all the Canons
and great pieces which were upon the walls to be shot off toward that way,
which he thought the tempest would come: and the Bishop demanded of him why
he did so: and he said, first I pray you tell me why you caused all the Bells
to be rung out at such a time? And the Bishop answered that it was to chase
and drive away the Devils, who were the causers and stirrers up of the tempest
in the Air. Then the Governor said, although I know that the Devils do no
more fear the sound of the bells then the Dawes which sit in the town yet I
commanded these Canons to be shot off to the end that you might plainly
perceive, that if they did not fear the terrible thunbring noise of them, they
would much less be afraid of the sound of your Bells.

The 31. Apologue, by which is showed the great folly of those that believe
that God has given the charge of beasts to Saints.
A Certain noble Lady of France being at ye point of death, was exhorted by
her Confessor to dye willingly; assuring her self, that without all doubt she
should go presently to Paradise, and she answered and said I could be very
well content to go to Paradise were it not for one respect: and being asked by
her Confessor, what could hinder her from going thither willingly? she said,
seeing that God (as you say) has given the charge of hogs to Saint Anthony,
of herses to Saint Elie, and of many other Birds and Beasts to diverse holy Men
and Women, and has not yet given the charge and government of geese, turks,
and hens, to any one: I am afraid, if I go to Paradise that he will give me
that office which will much derogate from the nobility of my stock; wherefore
if it will please God to commit the tuition of any Beasts to me, when I come
thither. I would have you pray that it may be of little dogs: because it is the
custom of Ladies and Gentlewomen to have them always about them.

The 32. Apologue, by which is discovered the sottish superstition of them who
think they can deliver souls out of Purgatory, by saying the Masses of Saint
Gregory.
A Cerretan, (that is a Pardon-monger, or popish Merchant) told the people, as
he traveled about the Country, that he could say a prayer of Saint Gregory,
which was of such force and virtue, that as often as he said it, he freed a
soul out of hell: (always provided, that he had a crown paid him
beforehand) and because many resorted unto to him, to obtain this deliverance
for their friends, The Cordeliers enraged against him, sought him out and
calling him Heretic, and fountain of all billanies, demanded of him who had
told him, that by saying a prayer of Saint Gregory, he might free a Soul out
of Hell? Then the Cerretan said, and who assured you that by saying thirty
Masses you might, deliver Souls out of Purgatory? the Cordeliers answered that
it was reueiled to S. Gregory (as he was saying Masses, to retire a Soul out
of Purgatory) that after the thirtieth the soul, was delivered. In like manner
also, said the Cerretan, at the prayer of the same Saint Gregory the soul of
the Emperor Traian being in Hell, was transported into Paradise, as he
understood by Revelation; Oh (said the Cordeliers) it is no marvel if he
delivered him, because he was Pope, and an holy man, which thou art not; and
moreover, Traian had some fear of God, but thou say, that thou art able to
deliver all Infidells as well as other: so said the Cerretan) when S. Gregory
delivered the soul out of Purgatory he was Pope and an holy man, which you are
not; beside that soul had not been any long time there, but you say you can
deliver all indifferently. Then the Cordeliers said, it was by a singular
privilege that he delivered the soul of Traian, which is not given to thee,
in like manner (said the Cerretan) if he did deliver the soul out of Purgatory
as you say) it was by an espetiall grace granted unto him, and not to you. Last
of all the Cordeliers told him that he knew not what prayer S. Gregory said
when he delivered the soul of Traian out of hell. And do you (said the
Cerretan) know what Masses he said when he delivered the soul out of
Purgatory? Wherefore do ye say nothing against me, and I will say nothing
against you, and let us not discover one another merchandise, but only study
how we may more and more rosen and beguile the simple people, and so they
agreed.

The 33. Apologue, whereby is showed the folly of them that worship Images.
AN old man of the third order of S. Francis, having seen in the Temple Saint
Francis and S. Dominicke? at the feet of the Crucifire, the one on the right
hand and the other on the left, and not knowing what they meant, demanded of
his Confessor why one of them was painted with with wounds and scars and the
other without? and the Confessor said, because that S. Francis had those wounds
imprinted in hint and not Saint Dominicke Is one of them (said the old man)
Saint Francis, and the other Saint Dominicke? yes (said the Confessor.) Then
the old man cried out saying, O wretch that I am! I always thought they had
been the two thieves between whom Christ was crucified; and which is worse,
because that in the temples of Saint Dominicke, he that is without wounds is
painted on the right hand of Christ, and the other on the left, and on the
contrary in your Temples he that has the wounds is on the right hand, and the
other on the left: by reason that I could not discern, which was the good
these, I have held them both for sinners and never worshipped either of them.

The 24. Apologue, wherein is discovered the folly of them who think they may
be justified and saved by their own works.
IT happened that a Citizen of Geneua had so grievously offended the Prince
Dorie, that he condemed him to be a Gallislaue as long as he lived; and when
he was placed in the Galleys, he was counseled by his friends to procure the
savor and mediation of the Lord Ianotin Dorie; for (said they) he is so dear
unto the Prince, that he can easily obtain pardon for you; but he answered
that he did not believe he either would or could profit him therein at all,
and therefore he would not make suit unto him; principally because he did hope
of himself, without any other means to regaine the savor of the Prince;
which that he might bring to pass, he busied himself in making tooth-pickers:
and although by his continual labor he could not get sufficient to furnish
himself with necessaries; yet so foolish he was, that he thought by his
tooth-pickers at length to heap together such a treasure, that by it he might
be able not only to pacify the anger of the Prince, get his favor, and
deliver himself from the Galleys, but also with the surplusage to become a
rich and wealthy Seigneur; and it chanced that two Capuchin Friars on a time,
came to the same Gally to pass there into Naples; and seeing this poor man
have rest neither night nor day (for when he left rowing he betook himself
to his making of toothpickers) they demanded of him, what moved him to do so?
and he answered and said. I hope by the gain which I make by this my labor to
purchase the favor of the Prince, and to become a rich man; then the Capuchins
said unto him, that he was a very fool to think to attain unto that, only
by means of his tooth-pickers, and that they could more prevail in procuring
him favor with the Prince, then the Lord Ianotin: But (said he) if ye well
consider it, see Capuchins are verier fools then I; in that you think and
steadfastly believe, that by your good works you may be able to free your
selves from sin, and servitude of the Devil, wherein you are, pacify the
anger of God toward you, purchase his favor and become his children, and
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven: and which is more, that your said works
can more prevail with God, then Jesus Christ his well-beloved Son, in whom he
is well pleased.

The 35. Apologue, by which is showed what the Popes are and what is their
authority.
THe Pope being dead, the Cardinals could not agree in the creation of a new
Pope: for the Gibellins, would have a Gibellin, and the Guelfes would have a
Guelfe to be Pope; and although they had already been some months in the
Conclaue, yet were they still so obstinate, that every one of both parts had
sworn that he would much rather make the Devil Pope, then one of the
contrary faction. Now the Devil well knowing their minds, appeared to them in
the form of a man, and showed them, that by delaying the creation of a Pope,
they did wrong both their Church and themselves exceeding much; and that
(seeing they could not otherwise agree) they were best to choose him to be
their Pope, saying unto them; If you will elect me I can greatly increase the
Popedom, seeing that none of the Counsels of the great Seigneurs are hid from
me: and moreover being that I have no Children, nor Parents, I will bestow all
the benifices and offices, and distribute all the treasure of the Church; only
amongst you and your friends These conditions so well pleased them all, that
they agreed to elect him, and called him Siluester the second. After this, it
happened on a time that a Cardinal returning from the Popes Palace, was
demanded of a friend of his which met him from whence he came? And he answered
that he came from the Pope, of whom he had obtained plenary indulgence, and
remission of all his sins: but his friend said, what? Do you not know who is
our Pope? Do you believe that the Devil is able to forgive sins? Then the
Cardinal replied and said; other Popes heretofore have been sinners not
only full of vices, but also the very fountains of all impiety, and
oftentimes worse then the Devil himself; and do you think that, being such
they had power to give indulgence, and remission of sins? Yes (said the
other) as they were Popes, though not as sinners. In like manner (said the
Cardinal) he that is now Pope has power to give remission of sins, as he is
Pope, although not as Devil: so that it suffices that they be Popes to save
men; for the rest it is all one, whether they be good or bad, men or Devils;
but I (said the other) believe that only Jesus Christ can forgive sins, and
not the Devil nor his Ministers, and that God has ordained the Devils to be
his executioners and not his Apostles.

The 36. Apologue, by which is showed the folly of the Romans, who yield
themselves to the Pope.
THe Lord Duke of Melphe being sent for by the Emperor to undertake the
government of Sienes took Room in his way and visited Pope Clement* who
dissuaded him from going thither, saying that the Sieniands were madbraind and
furious people, and that if any toy should come into their heads, they would
either kill him, or chase him thence with great disgrace; but the Duke answered
and said, I believe that to be true which your Holiness says, that if they
should become madmen they would either kill me or drive me thence; and yet I
hope I shall speed well enough: for the Romans would do the like to you, if
they should become wise men, and yet you are here at Rome without fear;
without all doubt (then said the Pope) if the Romans were well in their wits
they would not endure me, and therefore we keep them always drunk with the
sweet Maladeies of S. Peter.

The 37. Apologue, by which is in part showed what and how great the authority
of the Popes is.
AN Astrologer went on a time to Pope Paul, and foretold him that in the year
1549* the heavens by reason of some malign influences, would threaten him a
very grievous malady, with great danger of death and the Pope demanded of [him]
whether he knew any remedy? Yes (said the Astrologer) if you will go that
year to Germany, and abide there, you shall avoid the danger; that is true
without doubt (said the Pope) for the Germans will take away my life, and by
that means I shall be delivered from all maladies: but tell me, may not I avoid
the danger, if I continue still at Rome? there is but one way (said the
Astrologer) which is (seeing you have the Keys of Heaven) that you keep them
fast shut all that year, so that the influences may not descend upon you. Is
that sufficient (said the Pope?) Yes (said he) for if the Souls which are
spiritual, cannot pierce the Heavens, and enter into Paradise, unless you
open them with your Keys: the influences which are corporal can much less
come down unto you if you keep them well shut up in the heavens; but (said
the Pope) what means may we use to shut them? the (same said the Astrologer)
which you use in opening them: that is, make a sign of the Cross, and command
them to remain shut. At this the Pope laughed and departed.

The 38. Apologue, wherein is discovered the cruelty and impiety of the Spanish
inquisition.
THe Spanish Inquisitors (or rather Inquinators and defilers of the faith)
being desirous to extort and violently take away the goods of a simple (but
rich Countriman, cited him to appear before them with an intent subtly to
examine him in all the Articles of faith; hoping, that being he was a simple
and ignorant fellow, altogether void of learning, they might easily entangle
him in some of his speeches and so put him to death as an heretic, and lay
hands on his goods. Well the Countryman at the day appointed was present, and
they with seeming grave, and religious countenances demanded of him what he
believed? and he said, I believe that which the holy Church belieues. Tell us,
said they what the holy Church belieues? that which I believe said he. And
though they proposed diverse questions unto him, they could not draw him out of
this answer: for when they said unto him, do thou believe that the Mass is a
sacrifice agreeable to the will of God, and that it profits the dead? and
that the breach of the commandments of the Pope is a mortal sin? he
answered still, I believe that which the holy Church believes. What (said the
Inquisitours) do thou believe nothing else, but that which the holy Church
believes? Is it not sufficient (said the Countryman) that I believe all which
the holy Church believes? what I pray you would you have me believe else? Then
they asked him of whom he had learned to answer in that sort? and he answered
and said, I learned it of our Curate, who visiting me that year I was sick,
said unto me take great care of your self, and give ear to that which I
shall say: when you are at the point of death, the Devils will come to tempt
you, and to examine you subtly concerning your faith, to the end they may
ensnare you in some of your words, and so carry your soul into hell, wherefore
when they say unto you, what do thou believe? do you say, that which the
holy Church believes, and if they reply and ask what the holy Church believes?
do you say that which I believe; and take good heed that you answer nothing
else, and then they cannot hurt you; now since that time I never forgot his
counsel; wherefore when you cited me, fearing I should have to do with
Devils, who would take away my goods and life, I thought good to govern my
self according thereunto; In the end the Inquisitors could him that this
answer was not sufficient, but that he ought in particular to express what
he believed. Then he said, If this answer be sufficient to satisfy all the
Devils in hell, and yet will not content you, it follows that you are worse
then the very devils: and so (they not knowing what to say to him) he left
them.

The 39. Apologue, by which is discovered the avarice of them, who desire to
have the charge of diverse Churches.
THere was a young Jew at Rome, who said on a time to a Bishop of his
acquaintance; I have a wife betroathed unto me, but I will not marry her,
until I can find me out another: for we Jews may have many wives, after
the example of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and many other holy men: then the
Bishop said unto him, you are unwise in that first marry that which you have,
and if she be not sufficient for you then seek for another. By your own
reason (said the Jew) you are far more unwise then I, in that having one
Bishopric, one Church to govern) you are not contented therewith, but abide
here at Rome that you may get a second; first betake your self to that Church
which you have already, and endeavor to discharge your duty therein, and when
that is done, if you find your self able to satisfy another, then procure
it: but if it be so that I having two wives in the same house, cannot please
them both, do you think that you can discharg your duty toward two Churches
when one of them is in France, and the other in Lombardie? do you not
understand that if it be a hard matter to govern one woman well, it is a thing
harder (without comparison) to govern one Church well? And therefore (as it
appears plainly by the words of Saint Paul writing to the Philippians) in
former time one Church had many Bishops, and many husbands, and such as were
holy men, so that one alone could not satisfy it: but now at this day:
ignorant and sinful Bishops and Pastors, burn with an inordinate desire
after many Bishoprics and Churches, whereas they are fit rather to govern an
heard of Swine, then the Sheep of our Lord Jesus Christ, dearly bought by the
effusion of his most precious blood.

The 40. Apologue, by which is showed the rediculous superstition of the three
knots in the Cord of the Friar of S. Francis.
A Certain man demanded of the Cordeliers, whether it were necessary that
their cord should have three knots? and they answered that it was necessary,
by reason of three bows which they had made: for the knot below (said they)
which oftentimes trayleth on the ground, signifies our obedience: that in the
midst (which by reason of of the often handling is filthier commonly then the
rest) does signify our pure and undefiled chastity: and the third knot above,
whereby we tie our selves very straightly (unless it be when we eat and
drink, for then indeed, fearing least our bellies should burst, we untie it)
signifies our strict poverty.

The 41 Apologue by which is showed the superstition of them who repugne and
contradict the Gospel.
ON a time the best learned Jews of the Synagogue of Rome, went to the
Cardinal of England (being then at Rome) and prayed him instantly, that he
would speak to the Pope for them, that without forsaking their Law, Customs
and Ceremonies, they might be made Christians, saying, that on that condition
they would be Christened, or else not: but the Cardinal answered, that they
sought for a thing impossible: why (said the Jews then) a man may well be a
good Jew, and a good Christian, seeing that Moses is not contrary to Jesus
Christ, nor the Law to the Gospel: you say true (said the Cardinal) but
Christ abrogated the Law, and all Ceremonies, because they were verified in
him, so that at this time they are not only annihilated and dead, but also
deadly to all that observe them any longer. To this the Jews answered and
said, we know well, that whosoever would now be circumcised in figure of the
spiritual circumcision, which ought to be made by the Messiah, as if it had
not been done already, should do ill, but we circumcise our selves in
remembrance of the spiritual circumcision already made by Christ: in like
manner we purify our selves in remembrance, that we are already purified by
Christ, also we offer sacrifices for a memorial of that divine Lamb
sacrificed by us an the Cross: and which is more, we use the Sacraments of
Jesus Christ. But (said the Cardinal) you think to be justified and saved by
the observation of the Law, and the Christians believe they shall be justified
and saved by grace: and therefore you cannot be Jews and Christians. The Jews
replied and said, this opinion (as we think) is of the Lutherans, and
conformable to that which of old tune was held by our Olders, who did believe
they should be saved, not by their proper justice, but by the Messiah, and
therefore we willingly agree therrunto: then the Cardinal said, that to be
Christians they must abandon and forsake all Iudaisme: but the Jews replied
saying, amongst you there are many Monks, who think to be justified and saved
not by the observation of the Law of God, but by keeping their own laws, and
ordinances, invented and forged by their own brains: and also there are very
many ceremonies amongst them which are not ionely without reason, foolish and
ridiculous, but also full of impiety, and directly repugnant to the Law and
Gospel of God: as not to be obedient to parents, or Princes, not to marry
although they have not the gift of continence, not to labor, not to preach,
and a rabble of other fantasies almost innumerable: and yet for all this you
hold them for Christians. Now if they may be Augustines, Iacobines,
Cordeliers, of the order of S. Benet, Carmelites, Basilianists, Jesuits,
Chartreuses, Teatines, and Christians also, with all these religions: why may
not we well be Mosaicks and Christians, seeing ye Moses does in nothing repugne
Christ but does foretell him plainly, and the law does comprehend in it the
Gospel? All these reasons so well pleased ye Cardinal that he promised to
speak to the Pope for them, not doubting but he would grant their request, on
this condition ye they would promise obedience to him, and be his followers,
worshipping him as their God on earth.

The 42. Apologue, wherein is showed the authority of the Pope.
TWo Romans on a time, were talking together of the power of the Popes; and one
of them said that they as bicars of Jesus Christ on earth had all the authority
that Jesus Christ had: but the other said unto him, thou art much deceived, for
as here in Rome the deputy of the Pope has authority only to lay hands on
wicked men, to put them into prison, to bind them, torture them, and finally
to lead them to the place of execution: so the Pope, as he is Uicar of Christ,
has authority only as the Tailor, executioner, and very scourge of God, to
apprehend men which are reproved of him, with his external show of probity and
hippocriticall sanctity, to imprison them with vows, to bind them with his
commandments, to torment them with his importable impositions, and in the end
to put them to death eternally with his superstitions, Idolatries, impieties,
false indulgences and absolutions: and moreover he has power as the Taylour,
executioner, and Uicar of the great Devil, to persecute, imprison, torment,
burn and slay the elect of God, to the end that passing through the furnace of
persecutions they may be the more replendent, and glorious in the sight of God.

The 43. Apologue, whereby is discovered the folly of them which place their
daughters into Monasteries.
THere was a German Lady, who having many daughters, and not wherewithal to
marry them according to their degree, bred them up, and instructed them in all
kind of honesty and virtue in her own house, and some of her friends, coming
on a day to see her, said that it was small honor and credit for her, that
she did not use means to place her daughters abroad, and that it were better
to marry them to Carremen and Posters, then to suffer them to spend the flower
of their age in her house: The Lady answered, if my daughters were willing to
marry, I could find honest men to match them unto, although they were not of
so noble an house; but they are contented to remain unmarried. If they will
not marry said her friends, you were best to place them in a Monestery, both to
avoid all inconveniences, as also for the honor of the world: then the Lady
said, I am not in that so unwise as you, who keep your daughters locked up in
your houses, while they be little and young, at which time they might without
any danger go all abroad, and afterward when by age they are marriageable
(which is the tune wherein they ought either to be well married or else most
carefully looked unto) you put them into Monasteries, and suffer them to go
abroad in public. Do you think that strangers, Monks, Priests, and Abbesses
can have greater care of your Daughters then your selves? as for me, I cannot
believe that any one will keep my daughters more carefully and faithfully then
I my self, and mine house is a more holy and honorable Monastery for them
then al these of the Priests and Monks, but if my daughters do change their
minds, and desire to he married, I will provide husbands for them, whereas
yours not having the gift of continence, do commit such things as turn to
their own confusion, and your great dishonor. To this her friends (being
vanquished) with the truth) could not tell what to answer.

The 44. Apologue, whereby is showed the folly of them who would have God
painted.
A Certain Bishop, spoke to a painter to draw the picture of the Trinity in
his Chapel, which the Painter promised to perform, so that he would give
him a hundred Crowns for his pains, and also pay them before hand) alleging
that else he should not be able to buy colors, the Bishop having granted him
that, he also added that being the Trinity was a thing very difficult to be
painted, he must have the key of the Chapel, and have none to see it (that
he might have no hindrance) until he had finished the work: to this also
the Bishop agreed, and caused couerings of boords to be set up against
that place where he would have the Trinity painted, to the end that none might
see what was done there. All things thus ordered, the Painter with his tools
and colors entered every day for a months space, into the said Chapel, and
busied himself secretly in painting, not the Trinity, but other works of his
own, which he brought in with him, and after the end of a month, having
carried forth all his own things, and taken down the bordes, he went and
delivered the key to the Bishop saying that he had finished the work, and
that he had never in all his life made any thing so fair and perfect as that
was; whereat the Bishop rejoiced so much, that he gave him sire crowns more,
and as one full of oftentation and vain glory, invited some of his friends to
go with him to see thee said Chapel, and so accompanied, be entered into it,
but casting his eyrs toward the wall where the trinity should have been
painted, he perceived that there was no painting at all, wherefore in a great
rage turning himself to the Painter, and said, and where I pray thee is the
Trinity which thou did brag thou had made so fair? why ur? (said the
Painter) do you not see it painted in the air? not I (said the Bishop) but
what do thou tell me of in the air, or not in the air, I would have had
thee painted it on the wall, and not in the air. At (said the painter) do not
you know, that a man can paint none but visible things on walls, and that it
is impossible to paint invisible things such as the Trinity is any where but in
the air? the Bishop was constrained to laugh at this answer (although not well
pleased) and to leave the Painter with his hundred and sire crowns which he
had pocketed.

The 45 Apologue, showing hew little the reverence of them is, who believing
that Christ is in the host do keep him as it were in prison.
THere was a certain country Curate, who (being greedy of gain) would serve
now at one Church, and now at another, and leave his own cure void: so that
his parishioners oftentimes could not have him to administres the Sacraments,
nor to perform other necessary duties, in their greatest necessity. Wherefore
after they had often told him of it and saw no token of ament; by the consent
of the whole Parish, they shut him up in a Chamber, and kept him under lock
and key, that he might be present to serve them at their need. But when the
Bishop was certified of it, he was greatly moved thereat, so that he cited
the Churchwardens of the Village to appear before him, and sharply
reprehended them, but they, excusing themselves said that, that which they had
done to their Curate, was not to do him harm, but that they might have him
present when they stood in need of him, what (said the Bishop) are ye not
ashamed to do an act so worthy of blame, as to keep your Curate shut up as it
were in prison? why sir? (said the Churchwardens) you keeps not only a simple
priest, but Jesus Christ the great Pastor and Bishop of our souls, and the
only Son of the living God, shut up (as your selves confess) under lock
and key, in a little chest or bare, to serve you against maladies: and if you
therein do nothing worthy of dispraise, have we done ill in keeping our
Curate in a fair and spacious Chamber? nay which is more, that Jesus Christ
may be present at your need, ye keep him imprisoned not only in a bore,
but also in the host it self, wherein he is so irrately held that he cannot
move, and yet ye can easily (namely with speaking only fine words as our
Curate has told us) make him descend thither, when ye please: but as for us,
the words, admonitions, and entreaties, which we used to our Curate, prevailed
nothing: for though we did call and seek and send for him, yet oftentimes he
would not come at us. To conclude, the Bishop, (seeing they spooke reason)
promised that their Curate should forsake them no more.

The 46. Apologue, wherein is showed on whom the Popes Church is founded.
IN a disputation concerning the foundation of the Ramane Church, it was
concluded that the Pope was the foundation thereof, because that Jesus Christ
had said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church:
but there was one, who dissenting from the rest said, I am not of your opinion,
but I think that it is much rather founded on the King of France, and the
Emperor, for if they should become Lutherans, they would utterly ruinate the
Roman Church, because that all men, following their example would be
Lutherans also: but it would not be so, if the Pope should turn Lutheran, for
in that case it were to be feared, that they which are Lutherans (by reason of
the Antipathie between them and the Pope) would suddenly become Papists.

The 47. Apologue, wherein is showed the foolly of them who give credit to the
Indulgence of the Portioncula.
THe Capuchin Cordeliers, having understood that S. Francis had heretofore
obtained of the Uirgin Mary full remission of sins, for all those who at any
time should go, or cause other to go and enter for them into a certain
Chapel of hers, and knowing that they could not do a work of greater
charity then to deliver souls from their sins, on a day five and twenty of
them went to that Chapel: and did nothing else but go in at one door, and
out at another: so they thought by that means they did every day deliver more
then five and twenty thousand from their sins: therefore after a little time,
supposing that they had deliuere all Christians of their sect, they were
determined to enter also for Turks, Jews Gentiles, and Heritiques: But the
Cordeliers of the Observance, violently set upon them, and brave them thence,
saying that if they had gone foreward with their enterprise, none would have
come to the Portiuncula, because all would think themselves by their means
freed from their sins; which would be a cause of cooling the peoples devotion
and by consequence of withholding their alms from them.

The 48. Apologue, which shows what the Pope and Popish Bishops are.
ON a time there was a new Pope created while a Council was held, and a friend
of his came privately unto him, and said, holy Father use means to dissipate
the Council, and do not you trust the Bishops who are all Traitors; for if
they were so bold to lay hands on Jesus Christ, and cast him out of the Church,
to set the Pope in his place, do not think they will spare you: but the Pope
answered, we are not at all afraid in that respect, for we know certainly
that the Bishops are so wicked that they do not desire that an honester man
then my self should be Pope, and a worse they can by no means find.

The 49. Apologue, by which is showed how great the Popes authority is.
THe Fathers of the Council of Trent, desiring to increase the dignity of the
Popedom, proposed whatsoever they thought fit to accomplish their purpose: and
one of them said thus, I think it fit to be enacted that S. Peter be
hereafter painted with three keys in his hand; and that to those pictures,
which are already made, there be one added, to show and declare unto the world,
that the Pope has not only the key of Paradise, and the key of Purgatory, but
also the key of hell; and I greatly wonder, that the Bishops in precedent
Counsels had so little wisdom and discretion as to neglect a matter of such
great importance. What (said the other Bishops) shall the Pope have authority
also in hell? without doubt (answered he) the Pope has more authority there
then in Paradise; the other replied, that the Pope could not deliver the damned
out of Hell. As more (said he) can he call back those which are saved out of
Paradise, although he have the key thereof; the other Bishops answered that it
was sufficient he could send them thither, so (said the Bishop) he can send
souls to the Devils, and much easier too, then to Paradise: and being asked
by what means, he answered by his commandments, articles of faith,
excommunications, maledictions and bad examples, and principaly, (according to
the Lutherans) by his false doctrine. Of all these things the Pope was
certified, and he was content to do as they should think convenient.

The 50. Apologue, by which is condemned the foolish superstition of Confession.
A Certain Priest demanded of his Bishop, whether he ought not at confession
to cause the sinners to show the members where with they offended? saying that
as it was the part of a good Physician not only to hear of his sick patient
what his disease is, but also to see the soar (if it be possible) and touch
it with his hand, for fear least he fail in the cure; so he thought it his
part being a spiritual Physician, not only to be informed of the sins with
their circumstances, but also to behold the Instruments wherewith they were
committed; then being asked by the Bishop whether he were not ashamed to
behold the secret parts of man? he answered and said, If I ought not to be
ashamed to see with the eyes of my spirit (which are much more precious then
those of my flesh) not only the villainies of men and women, but also their
members wherewith they committed them, and if you have obliged sinners to
reveal all the wickedness they have committed, why should I think it shame to
behold those parts which God has made? It has been ordained (said the
Bishop) that they should do so, to the end that by the shame thereof, they
might merit remission of their sins; and be moved to abstain from the like
afterward: for the same reasons (said the Priest) ought they also to show the
instruments. But where (said the Bishop) do you find in the Gospel that a
man ought so to lay open himself? do you not remember (said the Priest) that
Christ said to the Leper, go and show they self to the Priest? now the Priest
would see him naked that he might judge whether he were clean or not and I
think that I ought to do the like, least I should judge amiss Now I believe
that you cannot find in all the Gospel any place so favorable to your
confession as this is to mine. The Bishop not knowing what to determine in the
matter, carried it with other Articles to the Council of Trent, to yield the
Bishops matter of disputation, and said, that he thought it sit to be made an
Article of faith.

The 51. Apologue, by which is showed how easily the Popes followers deceive
the world.
THere came to Venice a Cerretan or Pardonmonger, who having bought of the Pope
all his authority over the dead, did brag that he could deliver souls out of
hell, and because many fools gave credit to his words, he got great store of
money: but the Popes Legate understanding it, sent for him and asked him where
he got authority to deliver souls out of Hell? and he said, of the Pope, and
withal showed him his Bulls, the Legate (having read them) said, the Pope has
given thee authority over those which are in Purgatory, and not over those
which are in hell. Then the Cerretan said, you are a very heretic, who would
thus limit the power of the Pope: tell me I pray you is not God omnipotent?
may not he do what he will? can any one limit or bound the power of God? And
the Legate answered no: so (replied the Cerretan) in as much as the Pope has
all the power of God, as his Lieutenant on earth, none can bound or restrain
his power. But, said the Legate, we read that out of hell there is no
redemption, but that the pains thereof are eternal. Do not you know (said
the Cerretan that there is no rule so general but has some exception? that
which you say is to be understood thus. That they cannot ordinarily be
delivered thence: as here in the prisons of Venice the malefactors kept
therein cannot come out when there will, notwithstanding the Signiory can set
them at liberty when they please. But (said the Legate) what authority have you
over hell? The same (said he) which the Pope has over Purgatory; but I have
gained more by Hell then by Purgatory, and therefore if the Pope would follow
my council, he might quickly fill his coffers with Treasure: the Legate asked
him how? And he said, If he would say that he would deliver Souls out of
Hell; which might easily be done, if (only) in that place of his Bulls, where
he says, Deliver souls out of Purgatory, he would also add deliver Souls
out of Hell. But the chief and principal matter of the business is, (said
the Legate) not that he only say so in words, but that they be delivered in
deed and effect. What (said the Cerretan) need the Pope care whether they be
delivered or no, so that the world does believe they are delivered? Is it not
sufficient for him, that he may fill his Chests with the gain which he reaps
thereby? But (said the Legate) it is a very hard matter to make the world
believe that he can deliver souls out of Hell: nay (said the Cerretan) so
much has he blinded and besotted the world that it is a very easy matter.
Yea if you well consider it, you shall find that the Pope shall have much less
labor to persuade the poor world that he can deliver Souls out of hell, then
that he can free them from Purgatory. For as touching Purgatory, he has two
labors, the first to make men understand that there is a Purgatory; the second
to make them believe that he can deliver Souls thence: but as touching Hell,
whereas every one is already persuaded that there is one, there remains but
one labor for him, which is to make men believe that he has power to free the
damned from their everlasting torments. These things pleased the Legate so well
that he presently wrote thereof unto the Pope.

The 52. Apologue, whereby is condemned the little reverence of them who
believe that Jesus Christ is in the Host.
THere was a Pope, who had loved his mother dearly, I therefore for a
remembrance of her kept her Picture always hanging in his presence Chamber;
now the Ambassador of Florence understanding of it, as also in what part of the
chamber it was placed, having occasion on a time to go to the Pope, when he
entered into the Chamber he presently kneeled down before the picture, turning
his backside to the Pope, before he had done his duty to him, and the Pope
very much disdaining at it reprehended him for the little manners and reverence
he used toward him; but the Ambassador excusing himself, said, we Florentines
have a custom that when we enter into our great Church of Florence,
incontinently we do reverence to the Image of the mother of Jesus Christ,
turning our backs to her son, who (as they say) is in the host, and the
Monks of that Church say, that it is the will of Christ we should do so:
wherefore I thought it would likewise have pleased your Holiness, that I
should have done reverence to the picture of your Mother, before I did
reverence to you. The Pope laughing at it, said, that indeed he had showed a
good reason for it.

The 53. Apologue, of the Miracles of the Devil.
AS certain Romans were talking of miracles, there was one of them said, when
I think upon Popes, Cardinals, Priests, and Monks, and other of the
irreligious, their lives, their works, their credit, dignity and riches, I am
almost persuaded that the Devil has done more miracles then Jesus Christ.

The 54. Apologue, whereby is discovered, the impiety of them who constrain
men to worship Jesus Christ in the host.
THere was a Gentleman of Venice, who would never worship the host; for the
which being on a time reprehended by the Popes Legate, he answered and said, I
have not this long time worshipped Christ in the Sacrament, neither will I ever
do it; for if he be present there at all (which I will presuppose to ease you
of the labor of proving it) yet as your selves say he is not there until the
Priest has finished the words of consecration, with an intent to consecrate
it. Now because he always speaks the words with a low voice, I am never
certain whether he speaks them or not: again, if I did hear him speak the
words, I am not sure that he does it with an intent to consecrate, especially,
because I find by experience that the Priests are commonly liars and
dissemblers. Therefore being uncertain that he is in the host, and most
certain that he is in heaven, what evil do I, if I worship him in heaven,
and not in the host? for knowing that the Massepriests have very little faith
or none at all; would you have me commit to their credit a matter of such
consequence as to leave off worshipping of Christ where I am assured he is, to
worship him where I altogether doubt of his presence? but put ye case that I
were also sure that he is in the host, as I doubt not that he is in heaven:
what injury should I do to Jesus Christ, if I did worship him only in heaven
and not in the host? I do verily believe that he would not condemme such a
fact; yet you repute me an heretic for worshipping of him where I know
certainly he is, and not worshipping him where I am persuaded he is not. And an
heretic let me be if I leave off worshipping him in heaven, and begin to
worship him where you would have me. And having thus said he went his way.

The 55. Apologue, wherein is discovered the folly and arrogance of the Popes
Prelates.
THe Bishops being assembled at Trent, we a purpose to enact something
beneficial to the Romish Church, one of them said that it was good that every
one proposed his opinion therein, to the end they might add somthinge to the
dignity of the Popedom, as Bishops in precedent Counsels had done; but some
answered ye it was sufficient to vphould and maintain it in that scale of
greatness whereunto it had already attained, especially in these times where many
did endeavor to ruinate and bring it to distructio^; besides being it was
already mounted to that height of dignity, that if they would have it under
heaven they could exalt it no higher. The other answered, that it was their
parts not only to preserve it, but also still to endeavor to augment and
exalt it: for as (said he) we who live in this world, are but travelers and
possengers, never, during this life, attaining to the wished end of sovereign
perfection, but aspiring daily unto it: so in like manner the Popedom is not
yet come to the highest degree thereof. The Lutherans say that the holy spirit
taught the Apostles all things necessary to salvation: but we hold on the
contrary, that the same holy spirit does day by day give greater light unto his
Church, by revealing new things unto it: wherefore we ought to hope that he
will reveal unto us some hidden secret which may serve much to the exaultation
of the Popedom, Then one of the most ancient among them said, at the beginning
they who came to visit the Bishop of Rome did kiss his mouth, as Judas kissed
Jesus Christ; but after he was made Bishop of Bishops, they kissed his hand
in token of greater reverence: after that being made equal to the Emperor,
whereas he was mounted higher, it was fit that they should kiss lower, and
therefore they did kiss his knee: at length when he was ascended above the
Emperors, they began to kiss his foot (as they do at this day) because it
was the lowest and basest member of man: but as yet they kiss the upper part,
and not the sole of the foot, but now seeing that the Pope is exaulted not
only above the Emperor, but also above Jesus Christ himself, I think it fit
that the Cross which he has heretofore worn on the upper part of his shoe,
be hereafter placed on the sole thereof; and that all henceforth who will do
reverence to the Pope, even to the Emperor himself, be compelled to kiss
the bottom of his foot; which will be a very great exaultation of the
Popedom; for we shall thereby plainly show that the Pope is so highly
advanced in glory, that he has troad under his feet the Cross of Jesus
Christ, and all holy things. He had scarcely ended these words, before all
the Bishops (lifting up their hands toward heaven, and giueing praise to God
for the revelation of so great a secret) began to say, that although in that
Council they did determine of nothing else but that, and could profit the
Church by no other means yet they thought that they had well bestowed their
cost and pains in coming together. Wherefore in all have they made it an
article of faith. But they say that Pope Julius was not well pleased with it,
because he was unwilling to take so much pains as to lift up his foot to all
that came unto him, as also because he feared that if he did lift up his foot
when he was standing he should fall down backward; so that the Bishops were
very much discontented, because they thought that they had never made any
decree better, or more profitable to their religion.

The 56. Apologue, by which is showed the faction of humane religions.
A Certain Roman Gent. caused an enigmaticall description of the four first
facts of their religion to be made in a fair house which he had in the
Country. And in the first place there was painted a Monk of the order of S.
Benet, with scroles and writings in his hand, and attournies, proctors, and
notaries round about him; who taking Mounsier Monk by the habit did draw
him, one this way another that way, to show that they are never out of strife
and contention Next there was a young Friar of S Augustine, who having a fair
beard did Kombe it with one hand, and held a looking glass in the other,
wherein he beheld how hansome it was. And a little below that there was a
Monk of S. Dominicke sitting with a fair young Damsel on her knees before
him, with her bosom all open making her confession unto him; and he, that he
might seems not at all to regard that spectacle, had his hand put before his
eyes, but with his fingers spread abroad. In the last place was a Cordelier,
who held down his head, having his hood over his eyes, and his arms a cross
within his sleeves, so that he seemed to be a Saint; but out at one of his
sleeves, there hung part of a roasted Capon which he perceived not.

The 57 Apologue, wherein is discovered and reproved the ignorance of some of
the Popish Prelates.
IN the Council of Trent (as I have heard) the Fathers did discourse of faith
and good works, wresting the Scriptures to prove that faith was not sufficient
to justify us, but that works also were thereto required; And there was a
Bishop amongst them of great learning as they thought, who said, I marvel
greatly that the Lutherans, dare say that faith alone does Justify, seeing
that there is a text in the Gospel which does manifestly beat down this their
opinion, and I wonder much more at our selves, that none of us heretofore could
find it out; for by this means we had long since shut up the mouths of all
the Lutherans, and constrained them to magnify good works, and say with us
that they justify. And willing to reveal it unto them, he said, do ye not
remember, that it is written in the Gospel that the Apostles being in a ship
tossed with a tempest. Jesus Christ appeared unto them on the waves, and that
S. Peter (who was then a Lutheran believing that faith alone was sufficient to
save him) said unto Christ bid me come unto thee on the waters? and that after
Christ had commanded him to come, he leapt into the sea with his faith, and
was almost drowned? Yea he had been drowned in deed, if Jesus Christ had not
miraculously aided him, and placed him again in the bark, making him return
unto works and rowing with the oar. Wherefore, let who will do as Peter did,
and be drowned with their trust in Jesus Christ, for my part I am determined
not to abandon the little ship but therein (for my better assurance) to remain
rowing with the Dare, and traveling with works, these his speeches (as
containing the revelation of a rare and excellent secret) were entertained with
a great applause by all the other Bishops, except the Bishop of Caua, who said
thus, my opinion is that whereas Peter began to sink, it came to pass not by
reason of his faith, but of his infidelity and want of faith. And therefore
Christ reprehending him said, O thou of little faith! why did thou fear? As
if he had said, If thou had been strong in faith, thou might safely have
marched upon the waves of the Sea. So that if other Bishops heretofore did not
produce this text of Scripture to prove that faith alone was not sufficient to
save us, it was because they did plainly see that it served nothing to their
purpose. He had scarce made an end of speaking, but a Bishop great in wealth
and dignity, called the Greguetto, said that he was an heretic, for his words
did savor strongly of heresy. Now the first Bishop (who was very angry that
his reason which he thought invincible was gainsaid) when he perceived that
his opinion was maintained by a man of such credit, he ran upon the Bishop
of Caua which contradicted him and paid him by the beard, and had done worse to
him if the rest had not speedily come between them, and parted them, and also
reconciled them one to the other, inioyning them straightly that for the honor
of the Council they should never speak word of it.

The 58. Apologue, whereby is showed what are the foundations of the Popedom.
IT is reported that the Emperor was desirous to have three questions disputed
and agreed upon at the Council of Trent. The first whereof was, whether
Constantine could give Rome, or did give it to the Bishop of Rome? The second,
whether it were true as Platina has written, that the Emperor Phoca was he
who gave power to the Bishop of Rome to be Superior and chief of other
Bishops: and whether by that it did follow that the power of the Pope did
depend on him? The third, whether it were consonant to reason, that a Bishop
who ought to be busied altogether in spiritual things, should also have the
government of the temporal estate? These questions (they say) he gave to the
best learned of the Lutherans; that they might study and examine them well, to
the end they might come to the Council armed and furnished with good and
sollid reasons. When the Pope heard of this he was very much perplexed with
it, and therefore proposed this enterprise of the Emperor to the Cardinals in
the Consistory, to know their minds therein; and some of them told him, that
he had no remedys for it, but to hinder the Council by moving new wars and
dissentions in the Christian Commonwealth. But others were of opinion that it
was more for the Popes profit to agree secretly with the Lutherans; to which
the Pope answered, we would willingly yield unto them in all things which
concern the soul, so that they would suffer our Kingdom and Popedom to
remain safe and entire without diminishing.

The 59. Apologue, whereby is showed the use of the Popes Excommunications.
THe Emperor after the death of the Lord Peter Loys, took possession of
Placentia as his own. Wherefore Pope Paul (who was the Lord Loys his father)
being much displeased with it, said to the Emperors Ambassador that he would
have him certify his Majesty, that if he did not out of hand restore it to
him, he would excommunicate him and publish his excommunication in the world:
but the Ambassador answered and said unto him; As fathers to keep their little
Children in fear and obedience are accustomed to show them vizards and other
strange sights, to make them afraid; in like manner your Holiness to keep the
Christians in fear and subjection, have found means to terrify them by
excommunicating, Anathematizing and cursing them; causing them to be painted
with fire and Devils round about them, and even as little Children when they
come to maturity and years of discretion, do no more stand in fear of their
Fathers Bug-beares: So the Christians, (who thanks be to God begin to open
their eyes) do now little regard your excommunications; wherefore may it
please you to vnders tand, that the Emperor is nothing afraid of any such
vain terrors, and also that if you thunder and lighten with your
Excommunications, his Majesty will thunder and lighten with his great Canons,
and Engines of war.

The 60. Apologue, showing the cause that moves the Pope to persecute them
that believe in Christ.
ONe asked Pope Julius the third, wherefore he did so cruelly persecute the
Christians who did believe that faith did justify and save, and he answered
that it was because he did fear least they would begin to believe in Jesus
Christ: and when the other asked of him, what evil it was to believe in
Christ? He answered, that it would be his ruin, and destruction: for if they
did once believe, in Jesus Christ, they would no more believe in him.

The 61. Apologue, whereby is showed that the Popish Absolutions are of none
effect.
A Confessor demanded of his Penitent (before he had absolved him) whether he
did believe that God had pardoned his sins? And the Penitent answered, that
he did not: for (said he) if I assuredly believed that God had pardoned me. I
would not have come to you for your absolution: then the Confessor said unto
him, unless thou do steadfastly believe that God has forgiven thee, I
cannot absolve thee. If (said the Penitent I verily believe that I am pardoned,
do I believe true or false? thou do believe that which is true said the
Confessor. Then (said the Penitent) you cannot absolve me unless God absolve
me first, and being so, what would you have me do with your vain Absolution?
When he had thus said he departed from him.

The 62. Apologue, whereby is showed that in the Church of God there ought to
be no Pope, nor Cardinals.
POpe Adrian was asked on a time, why S. Paul speaking of Ministers ordained by
God to govern his Church: and saying that he had appointd some to be
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, had not
also added (as it was convenient and necessary he should) that he had
ordained, that there should be one Pope, and a great number of Cardinals? and
he answered that in the Primative Church, men were so simple and gross of
understanding, that if he had named such kind of Creatures, they would not
have understood what they had meant.

The 63. Apologue, whereby is showed the folly of them who believe they shall
be saved by the Masses of S. Gregory, and how the world is abused.
A Cerretan or Popish Merchant, traveled about the Country to utter his
commodities, and wheresoever he came, he said unto the people, when any of you
is likely to dye, he ordaines by his last Will and Testament that his friends
shall after his death, give a Crown to the Cordeliers to say the Masses of S.
Gregory for him: but you do not consider that before they are begun and ended
many days do pass away, during which time ye must needs remain in the
fire of Purgatory. Now if ye will give me but half a Crown for a man, I
will assure you that ye shall not come thither at all; so that ye will only
wear about your necks continnually a little cross which I will give you, and
die with it about you. And so many of the people received these crosses, that
the Masses of S. Gregory lost their credit, wherefore the Cordeliers made all
means they could against him, calling him a seducer of the people and a
preacher of lies; but the Cerretan excusing himself, said that he had spoke
nothing but the truth. What? said the Friars, will thou affirm that thou have
authority to bring back Souls out of Purgatory? If I had so said answered the
Cerretan, I would acknowledge my self the greatest sinner in the world: I
said, indeed that I could preserve them from going thither, but I spoke not a
word of bringing them back thence. Do thou presume then (said they) that
thou can send them immediately into Paradise? No (said he) then I were a
fool and an heretic; but I said that if they would wear my little crosses,
and pay me half a Crown a man, I would assure them they should never go
into Purgatory; and my reason why I said so, is, that in such a case they shall
be sure to go to the Devils in Hell, because they believe they shall abtaine
remission of their sins, not by Jesus Christ but by paying half a Crown,
and wearing a little piece of wood about their necks: If that you would take as
great heed to those things which you say when you preach your Indulgences,
Suffrages, Merits, Benedictions Absolutions and Masses of S. Gregory as have
taken to my words, so many false and feigned things which would never proceed
out of your mouths, to the detriment and ruin of so many simple people, who
give credit to your lies, after that ye have blinded their eyes with your
hypocrisy.

The 64. Apologue of the Cardinal of Chiety.
THere was two men on a time talking of the Cardinal of Chiety; and one of
them said, that he had a brain so dry and hard, that a man could not with
mattockes root up the superstitions which grew there, much less imprint Jesus
Christ in it; and the other answered; It is no marvel if his brains be so
hard and dry, for heretofore the measure thereof did consume away with his
studying to be Cardinal: and since he was Cardinal, to be Pope, so that it
does wast and consume continually.

The 65. Apologue, showing why Pope Paul made the Bishop of Chiety Cardinal.
AFter that Pope Paul had made the Bishop of Chiety Cardinal, one of his
friends came unto him, and said that he had done ill, seeing that the Fishoppe
was not so holy a man as the foolish world was persuaded; and the Pope
answered, we did not make him Cardinal because we judged him an holy man,
but that the world might judge us holy in that we exalt those which are
commonly thought good men. Then his friend replied that the Bishop had taught
some Venetian gentlemen part of Luthers doctrine; we know that said the Pope,
and therefore to be revenged on him we made him Cardinal; is it a revenge
(said the other) to make him Cardinal? Yes, very great said the Pope, for
whereas the world before took him for a Saint, now every one will account a
Devil: and we will yet make him more resemble a brast, for we will not only
not esteem or regard him at all, but also make him commit a thousand gross
and absurd errors.

The 66. Apologue, showing how men are abused by the Pope.
Certain Germans being asked why they went not to Rome as the custom was?
answered, that it was because they did no more give credit to the Jubilees and
Indulgences of the Pope, but only to the indulgences of Jesus Christ, which
through faith are offered by God, in all places and to all persons: when the
other replied that it were good to go thither, if for no other cause, but to
see the City of Rome, which is so famous and admirable for monuments of
antiquity: they answered and said, Seeing that for a long space, we have been
so blind and foolish that we have believed that Antichrist was our God, and
upon that confidence have not spared our purses to buy Paradise, we are now
much ashamed to go abroad, and to be seen and known to be Germans.

Thr 67. Apologue, whereby is declared the great perfection of the Chartreuse
Friars.
THe Chartreuse Friars do in virtues exceed all other religious men, which is
proved, first, because they keep Charity always locked in their Cloisters
for fear least they should loose her, and never suffer her to enter into the
Hospital where they lay their Sick, least she should be infected with their
diseases. Again, they never suffer dame poverty to come amongst them, least
that being a woman she should defile their chastity. Thirdly, because they
would not offend through disobedience, they keep themselves for the most part
in their chambers to the end that no man should command them any thing.
Fourthly, the greatest part of their time they spend in sleep, that they may
observe the great virtue silence. Fifthly, they keep patience alwaie prisoner
least she should escape them, so that there is none among them has patience,
but he that is in prison. Sixthly, they eat alone that they may lay up what
they leave. Lastly, that they may be humble in the lowest degree, they tie
their humility at their heels.

The 68. Apologue, wherein is showed of what sort the life of the Monks is.
THe Monks of S. Benet were in hand with a young man of a village near unto
them, to have him be their Gardener: and he told them that he would speak to
his father about it, and give them an answer on the morrow; but when his
father understood of it, although he were a very old man, yet the next morning
he went unto the Abbot, and made a great complaint unto him, saying that the
Monks would mar and corrupt his Son. How corrupt him? said the Abbot. we
would have him be our Gardener, and do him good, and not harm; then the old
man said, my son is a very careful young man, willing to take pains, and
has so strong and able a body to endure labor, that he can work night and
day, though his fare be but bread and water: but you would make him a sluggish
and sloathfull fellow, yea and a glutton too; wherefore do not you think to
have him, for althhugh you would give him twenty Crowns wages by the year,
and all the shoes which he should wear out, yet he should not serve you.
Then the Abbot said, that they would make him labor hard and give him but
moderate diet. As it is impossible (said the old man) to be in company with
Millers, and not be defiled with their meal: so a man cannot frequent the
company of gluttonous, floathfull and Idle persons, but he shall be infected
with their gurmundizeing, and sluggish kind of life. Moreover my son shall
loose his credit for ever hereafter, and never get him any other Master, for
who will accept of his service, when he understands, that he has lived with
Monks: nay, every one will say unto him, get hence, thou art not for my
purpose; for all men will persuade themselves that he is become a sluggish and
unprofitable person, and so he left Mounsieur Abbot without a Gardener.

The 69. Apologue, whereby is showed what good the Monks do in visiting the
sick.
A Certain man having learned the true knowledge of Jesus Christ, and that his
souls safety did consist in him alone, made his only son partaker thereof.
And within a while after it came to pass that his son fell sick, and in the
extremity of his sickness had a con^^^t with the Devils, who tempted him, as
they who were present might easily perceive; wherefore his friends were very
desirous to send for the Monks to drive them away: but his father withstood
them saying, that it was sufficient to pray unto God for him: notwithstanding,
when he was gone abroad about some business his friends sent for the Monks; who
were no sooner entered into the Chamber, but the Devils left the sick man, as
he himself witnessed; not long after his father returned, and as he was
coming into the Chamber, he heard the Monks exhorting him to put his trust
in S. Francis, and his meritorious works, and in the absolutions and pardons
of the Pope, wherefore being very angry, he took the gentlemen by their
frocks and haled them out of the Chamber, as they were well worthy: but his
friends said, alas, what do you mean in such sort to thrust out those holy and
religious men? who as soon as they came into the chamber, made all the Devils
fly away, for they could not abide in their presence. Then the good old man
answered, I do easily believe you, for where these Devils are, all other are
needless and superfluous. Did not I hear them exhorting my son to put his
trust in their trumperyes, leaving the confidence which he ought to have in
God through Jesus Christ? And so shutting the do ore upon the Monks, he
exhorted his son to put all his trust and confidence in God alone.

The 70. Apologue, concerning the beard of the Capuchine Friars.
THere was one maruailled much at the long beards of the Capuchin Friars, and a
man in his company told him that the reason why they did wear them so long,
was that, being they were young plants, they might through fained devotion, and
seeming gravity, take deep root in the hearts of men.

The 71. Apologue, showing the folly of them, who do alms to the Monks.
A Iacobine preacher on a time inueighing against the Monks, amongst other
things. said thus unto his auditors, all of ye deal very preposterously and
foolishly, for if a wolf at any time be seen in your fields, ye presently
set upon him with dogs and outcries to kill him, or at least to chase him
away, and yet he comes but seldom, and then constrained by hunger, being
not otherwise able to live; and if heedde escape unespied he kills but one
sheep at the most: but on the contrary ye kindly entertain and do alms to
the Cordeliers of the observance, worshipping them as Saints, and yet they are
domestical wolves, far more dangerous then those which are wild: for
although they can well live (as they ought) by their own labor, yet without
any necessity they are daily at your gates, and devour not only your sheep,
but also your Calves, your poultry, your bread, and wine, and other of your
goods, and finally your credit and souls.

The 72. Apologue, by which we may perceive what are the Consciences of the
Popes.
POpe Paul minding to give Parma and Placentia to his son, proposed his
purpose in the Consistory: and some of the Cardinals withstood him, saying,
that he could not do it without danger of damnation, and proved it by diverse
reasons. But the Pope answered and said: If S. Paul had so great Charity, as to
desire to be an Anathema, and separated from Christ, for his carnal brethrens
sake, why may it not also be permitted to us, to go to the Devil through
charity, that we may exalt our own son? To this the Cardinals (being
vanguished by the authority of S. Paul) could not tell what to answer, and
therefore they suffered him to do what he would.

The 73. Apologue, showing how much authority the Pope has over Paradise.
POpe Leo bring at the point of death made show of great trouble of Conscience,
and anguish of mind. Wherefore his Confessor said unto him, what do you fear?
you have the keys of Paradise, and of all the merits of Jesus Christ, and
there is none has such authority and jurisdiction over them as you; then the
Pope answered, do you not know that he which sells any thing, has no right
in it after it is sold? wherefore I fear least that we, who have heretofore
sold Paradise, Jesus Christ, and his merrits to others, shall now have no right
nor interest in them our selves.

The 74. Apologue showing a reason of the common saying that Antichrist shall
be borne of a Monk and a Nun.
A German asked a learned man, whether it might be found in the Bible that
Antichrist ought to be borne of a Monk and a Nun according to the common
saying? and he answered no, and that in all the holy Scriptures there was no
mention at all made either of Monk or Nun: whence then (said the Germane)
comes it to pass that this saying is so commonly used, whereas (said the
learned man all men knew that Antichrist must needs be a great and
extraordinary sinner, it seemed likely and agreeable to the truth, that he
should be borne of such persons as were notorious sinners above all others; now
because amongst Women, none are so bad as the Nuns, and amongst Men, none so
wicked as Monks, men judged he should be borne of a Monk and a Nun.

The 75. Apologue, carping at the ignorance of the Papisticke Bishops.
A Certain man being asked what the two parts of the Episcopal Miter did
signify? answered that the part before did signify the new Testament, and
that behind the old, and that the Bishops did wear them on their heads, to
show they both ought to be well understood of them and laid up in their
hearts; being asked again what the two labels did signify which hang on the
right side, and the other on the left? he answered that they did show, that the
Bishops did understand neither the one nor the other of them.

The 76 Apologue, showing where the Popes holiness lies.
THere was a man in Rome which did mock at them who did call the Pope most
holy, and demanded of them whether he were more holy then Jesus Christ, who is
the Saint of Saints, and the holiest of all? we know well enough (said he)
that he is a sinful man as we are, yea that he is an extraordinary sinner. so
that all his holiness is in his heels; then (said another which was present)
that is the reason that men use to kiss his feet, namely because his holiness
lies in his heels.

The 77. Apologue, by which is showed in what Pope Leo was a good Cock.
James Saluiaty having some occasion to, speak to with Pope Leo, came one
morning very early to the Palace, and had much ado to get in to the Pope,
because the Grooms of his Chamber were all asleep. Yet, when at last he was
got in, he found that the Pope had been up a good while before. Wherefore
wondering at it, he said, Holy father, you were up very early this morning: It
is true said the Pope we are a good Cock, you are not a good Cock (said
Saluiatie) to waken your Servants, for I found them all asleep; you are not a
good Cock to Crow, for you have a very bad voice: and as touching fighting you
are not a good Cock, for you are so fat and gross that you can hardly go,
much less fight well: it remains then that you be a good Cock in scraping
in the earth as he does, or else in satisfying many women as he contenteth
many hens. At this the Pope laughed heartily, and confessed that he had said
the truth.

The 78. Apologue, showing that one cannot be Pope and an honest man.
AFter the death of Julius the second Leo (although he were a very young man)
was created Pope* because all men thought him to be a holy and religious man;
but after he had been Pope a while, he proved a notorious sinner, and a
dissipator of the Churches goods: wherefore on a time, certain ancient
Cardinals reprehended and chid him handsomely for his evil life. And he
answered and said, If we are wicked, let it be imputed to you, for you are they
which have made us such as we are; the Cardinals thought his words very
strange, and asked him how they had made him wicked* then he answered; it was
in making me Pope; for it is impossible at the same time to be both Pope and
an honest man.

The 79. Apologue, of the folly of the Cardinal of Lunes.
THere were some that had made the Cardinal of Lunes believe, that the eating
of salt did damage and impair the health of the body; wherefore that he might
live long without sickness, he would never eat salt in any kind of meat; when
a certain man understood of it, he said it is no marvel if the Cardinal of
Lunes be a fool seeing that he does never eat any salt.

The 80. Apologue, by which is showed the quality of the Monasteries.
A Gentlewoman of Sienes on a time meeting with a Sister of hers, amongst other
things, said unto her; I am much grieved in mind by reason of my Daughter, who
is you know already marigeable, and to tell you the truth she has so little
wit, that I am ashamed of her; for so simple and foolish she is, that one
might easily make her believe that the Moon is made of a green Cheese (as the
proverb is) wherefore I am afraid to marry her least she should be a laughing
stock to all that come in her company. And her Sister answered place her then
in a monastery for a time, and you shall find that by frequenting the company
of Nuns, and other young Maids, she will be changed; for indeed it is no
marvel if she be so simple, seeing that you keep her always locked up in
your house, not having any to keep her company; now the Gentle woman,
following the advice and counsel of her Sister, placed her in a Monastery,
where she had not been a year, but being sent for home, she showed that she
knew more then her mother. Insomuch that when she met with her sister again,
she said, I desired that it might rain, and not that there might be a deluge:
but my Daughter is of a little Angel become a great Devil; for I think that
if she had been this time among so many Devils, she could not have learned
more wicknednes then she knows.

The 81. Apologue, showing what thing the Popedom is.
POpe Clement (being very angry by reason of letters which he had received from
England) sent for the English Ambassador and said unto him: we understand
that your king says, that we are not Pope nor Uicar of Christ on earth; then
the Ambassador answered, surely, Holy Father it is but your immagination: an
immagination (said the Pope) we have a letter to confirm the truth thereof. If
it be so (said the Ambassador) it may be that the Kings Secretary did
misunderstand him. He that wrote this (said the Pope) has written nothing but
plain and manifest things. Then the Ambassador said, it may be that the
Secretary did of purpose write that which was false to breed discord between
your Holiness and the Majesty of the King my Master. But the Pope said, he
that wrote these letters is an honest man, and one that desires peace and
unity betwirt us: perhaps then (said the Ambassador) the King spoke these
words in his anger, and is now of another mind: that cannot be (said the Pope)
for he spoke them in the presence of his Counsel, and with good advice, for
he added that it was the opinion of all the learned in his Realm. If it be so,
(said the Ambassador) that this is no feigned thing, but that it was written
by a man fearing God, and faithfully executing the Kings command, and that the
King spoke them not in his anger; be you assured that he has spoken the truth;
for so well am I persuaded of the Kings wisdom, that I know he would not
publicly have spoken a thing of so great importance, if he had not bin
certain that it was true. What (said the Pope) will he take the Popedom from
us? persuading his subjects that we are not Pope: then the Ambassador said, If
you be not truly Pope, the Popedom cannot be taken from you, because you
never had it: and if you be, although all England do not hold you to be
Pope, yet are you Pope notwithstanding; withstanding: then (said the Pope) we
will be Pope in other places, where they will account us sa; and not in England
whers they will not have us Pope. It follows then (said the Ambassador) that
if you be accounted Pope in no place; you are not Pope at all. It is true, said
the Pope. If it be so (said the Ambassador) the Popedom in it self is no
true thing, but only a dream and imagination of men. Wherefore the King my
master saying that you were not truly Pope, said the truth.

The 82. Apologue, by which is showed what kind of men the Popes and Popish
Bishops are.
THere was on a time a Bishopric of Florence void; and a young man of the same
place well known to be a very wicked man, made all the means he could both
with money and friends which he had at Rome, to obtain it: and indeed the
Pope would very willingly have bestowed it on him, in regard that he offered
great store of money for it, but he was ashamed considering the qualities of
the person; notwithstanding he said to them which did solicit him in the
matter, procure the Lord Duke to give us good information of him, and we will
confer the Bishopric on him. Then the young man's friends went unto the Duke
of Florence, and desired him that it would please his Grace to write unto the
Pope, and give good testimonial of him, for all his preferment did depend
thereon; and the Duke answered that he would do it without lying, wherefore to
satisfy them, and perform his promise, he wrote unto the Pope, that the
young man was worthy, not only to be Bishop, but also to be Pope, meaning
thereby that he did abound with all kind of wickedness. Heerevpon the Pope not
understanding (or rather faigning that he did not understand) his meaning, as
if the Duke had said he had been a very honest, learned, and religious man,
presently made him Bishop.

The 83. Apologue, showing the great fault of the Emperor Phoca.
THere were certain learned men talking, and reasoning together of faults,
which Emperors of Rome had committed; and in the end they concluded that the
grossest, and most pernicious fault of all was that of the Emperor Phoca, when
he granted to Boniface the third, that he should be Bishop of Bishops; for
thinking to give him the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, he mistook himself
and gave him the keys of Rome, and of the Empire. Wherefore it was Phoca, and
not Constantine, who did enrich the Roman Church.

The 84. Apologue, whereby is showed what are the deeds of the Popes.
When Leo was made Pope, the Florentines made a great triumph: because he was
the first Florentine Pope; and at that there was a man of Gennes in Florence,
who making as though he did not know the cause of their rejoicing, demanded of
some of the Citizens why they made such a great feast? and they as it were
wondering at his question, said, what? Do you not know that we have a
Florentine Pope? Is that then the cause (said the other) of your feasting and
rejoicing? O foolish people! There is no place except Rome, which has had more
Popes out of it then Gennes; so that if Popes would make their Countries happy,
ours had exceeded others in happiness, whereas it is now more miserable then any
other, and principally by reason of Genuan Popes, which have ruinated it, as
Florentine Popes will ruinate and destroy Florence.

The 85. Apologue, whereby is showed what are the exercises of the Monks.
A Certain Proctour of the law, being desirous to become a Monk of S. Benner,
did discover his mind to some Monks of the same order; and they promised him
to speak to their Abbot about it, not doubling but they should prevail. Now
when they did first commence their suite, the Abbot enquired of them of what
profession the person was? And they answered that he was a Proctour, who did
frequent the Courts of Law, and had been exercised in pleading. Then (said
the Abbot) let him not escape us by any means, he is the man we would have,
for if he knows how to plead well, he cannot choose but be a good Monk, and
so they received and invested him.

The 55. Apologue, showing of what sort the Monasteries are, and what ought to
be done unto them.
THere was in times past a Monastery of Nuns, which by reason of factions and
dissentions reigning in it (according to the custom of all other) as also for
many other respects might very well be called hell. The Abbess well knowing
it, on a day called all the Nuns together into the Chapter house and said
unto them: Ye see plainly how miserable our life is, in this place, where we
live as it were in a coniinuall hell; and without doubt if we persevere in this
kind of life, we shall one day go to the other. Ye know well that when we
came first into this Monastery, we were pure as Angels, chaste, humble,
devout, fervent to call upon God, charitable, and full of all virtues: but
thinking to come hither, as to the school of perfection, we are become
crafty, proud, factions, unchaste, enuicus, disobedient, covetous, yea filled
with all kind of impiety; and yet every day we grow worse and worse, so that
without all hope we shall be damned, if we do not in time seek some remedy.
Wherefore I earnestly entreat you that if ye know any means to redress it,
ye will impart it to me, and if it be good, I will very willingly put it in
practice. Then one of them said, I think it good that we resign our offices
to nouices, (who are Angels in respect of us) and that we choose out of them,
one to be Abbess, another to be Uicaresse, and another to be Mistres of the
school, and so, for all other principal offices; and this we ought to yield
unto, because they are not yet entered into our factions, nor divided among us,
but are pure and virtuous, so that we being governed by them may procure our
own safety, and after our deaths the Monastery will be reformed. But all the
rest opposed themselves against her, saying: Truly that were a fair matter,
that we should become nouices again, and now at length obey them which yet
savor strongly of the world; and it were a great credit surely for us that the
world should know that we had so resigned our offices to nouices; it is far
better (if you would not have the nouices corrupted) that they govern
themselves, and we our selves; the other replied, that so of one Monastery they
should make two, and beside the nouices should have none to teach and instruct
them in the Ceremonies of Religion. In the end, the Abbess seeing they could
not agree among themselves, said, for my part I think it most expedient for
us, that we burn the Monastery, and that all of us return some to our
friends, where we may live peaceably, and honestly: this motion pleased them
them all, and within a while after they set it on fire and departed.

The 87. Apologue, showing the pride, covetousness, and foolish superstition of
them that say they can deliver Souls out of Purgatory.
IN a City of Sicilie, the Cordeliers in their Sermons to the people, said
that S. Francis did every year on his feast day descend into Purgatory, and
deliver the souls of all that had given alms to his Friars; whereupon many
men to be in the number of their Benefastors, gave them alms continually, that
after death they might be delivered out of Purgatory by S. Francis: when the
Friars of Saint Dominicke, or Iacobines, (who are also called the Friars of the
Virgin Mary) perceived that by this means, the peoples alms was diminished in
their endroit, they got up into the Pulpits and said, that the Uirgin Mary,
having more charity and authority then Saint Francis, did not suffer them which
had been benificiall to her Friars, to lie a year in Purgatory, as he did
but only seven days at the most; for (said they) every Satterdaie (which is
dedicated to her) she descends into Purgatory, and delivers all which have
been benifactors to her Friars. After this, many believed in them, so that
they also had great store of alms. When the Friars of S. Augustine (called
also the Friars of the Crucifixe because their Church is dedicated to it)
perceived this, they began to preach Jesus Christ, and say that he being
charity it self, and far more powerful then either S. Francis, or the Uirgin
Mary, did not suffer them which believed in him alone, to enter into Purgatory
at all, but sent them immediately into Paradise. And after that, many did
address themselves to Jesus Christ, wherefore the Inquisitors (or rather
Inquinators) of the faith, approouing the oppinion of the Cordeliers, and also
that of the Iacobines: but on the contrary reproving and condemning of this ye
Friars of S. Augustine, as false and heretical, cited them to appear before
them; and said they would have them burnt, because they were so bold to
magnify and exault Jesus Christ above the Saints. For (said they) if this were
true which ye say, it would follow that not only the Saints but also the Pope
himself, should have no authority in Purgatory.

The 88. Apologue, by which is showed what are the fruits of the Confessionals
and Confessors.
A Certain man having many sons and daughters did nourish and bring them up
carefully: not suffering them to frequent the company of any out of his own
house, for fear least they should be lead aside into any kind of vice; and
he himself supplied the place of a master, for he both instructed them in
good learning, and was unto them an example of virtue and piety; But it
happened for all this, that in time they became all very wicked, committing
among themselves much dishonesty. When their father perceived it, he much
wondered and grieved at it, and calling them unto him, he sharply reprehended
them, and demounded of them where, and of whom they had learned so great
wickedness? and they answered that they learned it out of the book which he
gave them to studdie in, and of the master which expounded it unto them; then
their father said, I am sure that I suffered you to read none but honest
books, and that you have had noe other matter then my self, and I never
taught you this dishonesty. Then they said, do you not remember, that when we
were to make our confessions, you gave us a book called the Confessionall,
commanding us to study our sins therein? Out of that book we learned all the
evil we know, and because we did not understand the one half of the
wickedness contained therein, our Master, that that is to say the Confessor,
did expound it unto us, when their father heard this, he presently cast the
book into the fire, charging and commanding them, that when they were to make
their confessions, they should study none but the books of their own
consciences, and that they should never after confess their sins to any, but
God alone.

The 89. Apologue, whereby is condemned the pride and ignorance of the Monks.
A Carmelite on a time spoke much in the praise of his own religion, and
preferred it before all other, principally, by reason of the antiquity thereof,
saying, that the original of it was from Elias in mount Carmell, whence they
were called Carmes, or Carmelites; and also that in the time of Christ there
were no other Monks or Friars beside them. And one which heard him, said then
S. Paul where he says, Periculum in falcis fratribus, speaks of you, seeing
that there were no other Friars at that time, and consequently your religion is
Jewish, and not Christian* because it began before Christ. The Carmelite, not
knowing what to reply, departed from him ashamed.

The 90. Apologue, whereby is discovered and condemned the ridiculous
covetousness, and superstition of the Cordeliers.
IN Florence the Cordeliers, with many fair words exhorted a Citizens to hyre
them to say the Masses of S. Gregory for a son of his which was lately dead,
saying, that by them he should be delivered out of Purgatory, and he, making
as though he were persuaded by their words, said unto them, go and say your
Masses, and if my son be delivered by them, as your promise is, I will give
you a crown; so the Cordeliers went to the Temple, and quickly mumbled up
their Masses, and then returned to him for the crown, but he said first show
me some token that ye have delivered my son out of Purgatory and then I
will give it you; for so far am I from knowing that he is freed from
Purgatory by your Masses, that I cannot tell whether he went thither or no
when he died: when the Cordeliers saw he would not satisfy their
expectation, they went unto the Duke, humbly entreating him that he would do
them justice; and he presently sent for the Citizen to come before him, and
asked him why he would not pay the Friars the crown which he promised them?
Then he said, I did not promise them absolutely, but in case, that by their
Masses they did deliver the soul of my son out of Purgatory: now seeing they
can show me no good proof that he is delivered, I see no reason why I should
give them the crown; when the Duke heard this, he turned to the Cordeliers
and said, procure the soul which ye have delivered, to come and tell me that
he was delivered by your Masses: or else to send two other souls to testify
unto me that it is true which ye say, or at least to send me a writing
subscribed with the hand of Christ to confirm your words, and ye shall
presently have the crown, otherwise I cannot in justice compel him to pay it.
When the Cordeliers had heard these words of the Duke they went their ways
hanging down their heads and very much ashamed, but nothing at all amended.

The 91 Apologue, showing that the Cordeliers of the Observance enjoy more
worldly pleasure then all other.
THere were certain men talking of the felicity of this world, and one of the
company asked the rest whom they thought had the happiest life of all? and an
old man answered him, that the Cordeliers did exceed all other in happiness;
for first (says he) as touching their goods, they are exempted from all
tithes, impositions, taxes, charges, molestations, and troubles, they may have
what they will, and yet they live in continual idleness. Again, they need
not fear banishment, seeing that there are Monasteries every where, and that
the folly and superstition of the world is such, and so great, that they should
be sure never to want any thing concerning their credit, so grievous that if
the viless rogue, and greatest sinner alive were of that order, he should be
reverenced of all; and for carnal pleasures, man and wife from the first time
they fall in love, have no greater delight and pleasure then they, for they
never marry, that they may be free from the trouble, and charge of marriage,
but as continual lovers, wholly apply their minds, by pleasant devises and love
tricks to win the love and good will of the Nuns, devout sisters, and other
of their spiritual daughters, as they term them. Finally, if we speak of
their consciences, it is certain that they persuade themselves that they are
perfect Saints, and that they can distrbute an overplus of their own merits to
their benefactors: (and indeed they are so over charged with them, that if they
did not disburde^ themselves on other, they were in danger by reason of the
great and horible weight of them, to sink down into the deep pit of hell)
and they think that they never offend God, but judge themselves the greatest
friends he has on earth, so that they pass all the time of their life
without any remorse of conscience, persuading themselves that Paradise is their
own, as sure as if they had it in their hands.

The 92 Apologue, showing the superstition of them that whip themselves.
THere was on a time a Tyrant in a city of Italy, who fearing least he should
be stain by treason, did strictly forbid all kind of Maskes, so that every
one for fear of punishment did abstain from them; but it chanced that in the
week which they call holy, certain young men apparelled after the manner of
whippers, went (as the custom is at that time in Italy) in procession through
the streets, whipping themselves cruelly, to gain pardon for their sins. The
Tyrant being certified of this, caused them to be aprehended, and brought
before him, and then he demanded of them how they durst be so bold, to go
masked contrary to his express commandment? But they answered that they were
not masked, but only apparrelled after the manner of those that whippe
themselves. Then the Tyrant said, are ye not masked, when ye are so disguised
that no man knows you? And the whippers answered, that they so disguised
themselves, not with an intent to do any evil thereby, but to gain remission
and pardon for their sins. If it be so (said the Tyrant) I hold you excused;
and that I may not hinder but rather further your good work, and be partaker
with you in it, you shall go hence to all the Temples in the Town, to gain
pardon for your sins, and the Beadle shall follow you at the heels and whip
you after his best fashion to ease you of your labor; and so he commanded
that they should be our after another well scourged. Thus they who at the
first went forth whipping themselves of their own accord, departed very much
discontented, and well slashed by the Beadle.

The 93. Apologue, showing that the Popes do nothing else but suck and eat
the Church.
IN the time of Pope Leo one asked a Florentine which came from Rome, what he
brought thence? And he answered, good news; for the Pope has given the
Church to be a nurse to his kindred.

The 94. Apologue, showing the liberty of a Council.
POpe Paul the third being certified that the Council of Trent was fled away,
did rejoice greatly for many reasons, but especially because by that flight the
World might plainly perceive, that the Council was free and not tied; for if
it had been tied, it could not have fled away as it did.

The 95. Apologue, showing that the Emperor had not taken hold of a good
occasion.
THere were certain men talking of the Emperors friends; and one asked them
who they thought had been his greatest friend? And some said the Prince Dorie,
other the Marquis of Pescaire, other Don Ferrand: but in the end there was one
said, that it was Martin Luther, because that he had opened him the way, and
given him the occasion to make himself an absolute Monarch, which
notwithstanding he has not made use of.

The 96. Apologue, showing how Pope Paul repented.
POpe Paul as he lay on his deathbed fell into an agony, and therefore was
exhorted by his Confessor to have patience, and to bewail his sins,
recommend himself to God, and have steadfast faith in Jesus Christ: and after
that his Confessor was departed, a private friend of his came unto him and
said, holy father, have not these words of such great importance, which your
Confessor spoke unto you, augmented the pain and grief of your heart? no
surely, (answered the Pope) for they did not move me at all.

The 97. Apologue, which shows what evil proceeds from bad examples.
A Certain Gentleman reproving his son, said unto him, art thou not ashamed
to live as thou do? Thou do not lead the life of a Gentleman, no nor of a
Christian but of an idle, leaud and wicked fellow; for thou do nothing else
but eat, drink, sleep, and play, and do all the villainies which may be
invented. And his son answered and said; Truly Father, I have hitherto thought
that I had lived the holiest and most honorable life of al, seeing that such is
the life not only of many Lords and Gentleman, but also of Priests, Monks,
Prelates, and Cardinals, yea and of the Pope himself.

The 98. Apologue, showing what manner of fellow the Pope is.
THere were certain men talking together of the wickedness which was in ye
world, especially of whoredom and the Patrons thereof: and one of them said
unto the other, whom do ye think to be the most notorious Band alive? And
although for a time their opinions were different, yet at last with one consent
they answered, that it was the Pope; for first, as a Band he is ye Protector
of that Whore he keeps himself, and secondly is the safeguard, and Defender,
not only of one Queen, but of more then fifteen thousands which are in Rome;
so that he punishes those which offend, or displease them, and does
participate with them in the gain which they make as appears by the yearly
tribute they pay unto him.

The 99. Apologue, whereby is discovered the insatiableness of the Mend cant
Friars.
A Friar said on a time, that he did wonder the Sea did not increase, seeing
that so many rivers did run into it daily, and not go out again; but a
secular said unto him, ye ought much rather, to marvel at your selves, seeing
that every one throughout the whole Papisticke common wealth, does give unto
you, and ye give nothing to other, and yet like insatiable gulles ye devour
all, and so far are ye from being rich, that on the contrary, ye are
always in one same estate of poverty.

The 100. Apologue, whereby are showed the qualityes of the Friars.
TWo Cordeliers on a time met with some of the Monks of Saint Bennet, and
mocking at them, said, we are in far better estate then you, seeing that we
pay no tithes as ye do; and the Monks of S. Benet answered, and said unto
them, it is not to be marvelled at; for men do never sheare Asses, nor milk
Fores.

The 101. Apologue, by which is showed what benifite men receive by the
spiritual medicines of the Pope.
THere was on a time in a city of Italy, a Phisician of great fame, who did
not cure the diseases of his patients, but with certain syrups and drugges
made them stupide and senseless, in such sort, that although they did still
remain sick, and worse then they were before, yet they felt no grief, but
thought themselves cured; wherefore certain Monks reprehended him for it. And
he said unto them, ye do the like, for so far are ye from curing those
which are spiritually diseased; that on the contrary, with your humane
traditions, superstitions, and hypocrisies, ye make them inwardly stupid, and
insensible of their sins, and spiritual sickenesses, so that when they,
giving credit to your lies, think themselves freed from them, they are in a
far more dangerous estate then they were before.

Epigramme Englished.
A Curate old within the Town of Bresse,
Did an a time to Mass himself address:
He was an honest man esteemed of all,
But yet a great mishap did him befall,
For's sight being bad, and also being in have,
In The Alter cloths he wrapped his God of paste:
So when he minded was on him to feed,
He could not find him out to serve his need.
Wherefore he turned and gropt, and looked, and cried
Ho, ho, thou devil, where do thou now abide?
FINIS.

