ADAMS Complaint.

THE Old Worlds Tragedy.

David and Bathsheba.

A Jove Musa. HEB ^ DDIEV ^ ^ HEB ^ DDIM ^
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Richard Iohnes, at the Rose and Crown next above Saint
Andrews Church in Holborne, 1596.

To the Right Reverend Father, Richard by the Providence of God, Bishop of
Peterborough, F. S. wishes increase of temporal and spiritual blessings*
LEarned Mecoenas, favorite of Muses,
Renowned Patron, hater of abuses:
Who sitting in Religions golden Chair,
Thou her, she thee adornes with virtues rare.
As Phoebe from her Phoebus borrowes light,
Wherewith again she decketh him by night.
So likewise thou: She thee with swauity,
Thou grace^t her with modern gravity.
Both I my self, and Muse will now assay,
Our tributorie debt to thee to pay.
By duty bound, unbound I can be never,
Vowed to your Lordships service now and ever.
Your Lordships at commandment. FRANCIS SABIE.

ADAMS Complaint.
NEw formed Adam of the reddish earth,
Exilde from Eden, Paradise of pleasure:
By Gods decree cast down to woes from mirth,
From lasting joys to sorrows out of measure:
Fetched many a sigh, comparing his estate
With happy bliss, which he forewent of late.
Rowse up thy self (my Muse) a tale to tell,
A doleful tale in sad and plaintiue verse:
How man in bliss from happiness once fell,
Although not wont such horrors to rehearse.
Oh great Jehovah, heavens great Architect,
In this sad work my fainting Muse direct.
With pensive heart he traced the earth new founded,
Wringing his hands in lamentable wise:
Earth never with ground-cleauing ploughshare wounded,
Now to the starry globe he cast his eyes,
And now to Eden where he erst remained,
From which with fiery sword he was detained.
O hapless Adam (quoth he) unkind father,
Unnatural Parent, childrens fatal foe:
From whence all mankind do such curses gather:
Author of death, first bringer in of woe.
No sooner framed of thine al-making God,
Then purchasing his sin-correcting rod.
Did not Jehovah lend to thee his grace,
More plentiful then other living things:
Who having framed thee, did provide a place,
Even Paradise, the shadow of his wings.
Amongst a thousand sundry kinds of meat,
Forbidding thee one only fruit to eat.
Consider birds, beasts, fish, and other Creature,
Behold, they all look groueling on the ground:
He unto heaven erected has thy feature,
That thou may see his woonders, which abound.
Yet thou on whom most lovingly he looked,
Have first of all to anger him provoked.
For thee he made heavens Azur-painted cou'ring,
Adorning it with stars, with Sun, with Moon:
The blustering winds within the air be hou'ring,
That thou his maruels might behold alone.
Yet thou his greatest fabric, with thy sin
To anger him did first of all begin.
For thee he framed earths euen-poysed globe,
Hanging it in the air to human wonder:
And decked it with fruits, as with a robe,
Making the seas divide the same in sunder.
The seas he dight with fish, the earth with beasts
For thee, yet thou have broken his behests.
What did thou want amid that pleasant plot,
Prepared for thee, by his all-working skill:
Thou can not think, the thing thou had not,
Without all grief thou liued'st, not knowing ill,
Pride, and desire of knowledge made thee taste
The fruit, which did indeed thy knowledge waste.
Had not thy God said, taste not of the tree,
The fruit perhaps had still remained untouched:
Henceforth shall this enormity by thee
In minds of thy posterity be couched,
Burning desire of secrets which are hidden,
And fiery zeal of things which are forbidden.
What made thy wife the fruit so to desire,
The goodly hue and beauty of the same?
What did allure and set thy mind on fire?
The glozing words of thy seducing Dame,
Henceforth therefore will women's words and beauty
Seducers be of mankind from their duty.
Blind Euah, saw thou not as in a glass,
How Satan with his guiles did circumuent thee:
Beheldst thou not the brittle world alas,
How it with vading vanity did tempt thee.
Then how the flesh did combat with the Spirit,
And all of heavenly bliss thee to disherite.
O certain type, true figure, perfect map
Of future euilles t'all mankind to fall:
These still with sleights, as in a subtle trap,
Will seek to make all human offspring thrall.
Whilst Sun remains, and whilst Moon does, endure,
These archfoes will their treason put in ure.
Would thou in bliss not keep one little law?
How will thou now a multitude observe,
When many thousand devils thy mind withdraw,
To which thou can not choose but needs must swerue?
And having sweru'd, thy conscience plainly says,
That every sin deserves a several death.
Then viewed he the cerule-colored Pole,
With pitchy clouds which began to be obscured,
Black foggie mists rose from earths lumpish mole,
Earths mole by plow-swaine never yet manured.
Ay me (quoth he) this may a token be,
That for my sin my maker frowns on me.
Day-guiding Sol with his bright-burning lamp,
Obscures his beams, in clouds his glory hiding:
Night-ruling (...) waxes pale and dampe,
Ashamed of me, my glory not abiding.
Star-bearing skies, with your earth-cou'ring valt,
For me it is, you frown for my default.
Rain-sending clouds, pour out your watery showers
On earth, vast Orb, which from the seas yuo borrow:
Cold-causing frosts deface the fragrant flowers
With hoarie rymes, true types of future sorrow:
Adam now made, his maker has offended,
To whom so many blessings he extended.
Ah how Dame V^r the ground with flowers spread,
Vauting her self amid that pleasant palace:
Four chrystal^ lakes distilled from one head:
Refreshing herbs with humor, thee with sollace.
Thou did not sow, no labor did thou take,
The earth bore all things never touched with rake.
See now how Summers beauty-spoyling drought
Earth of her party-colloured vestments robs:
Transporting all the buds which Ver had brought,
To fruitless hay, dry straw, and withered shrubs.
Then mystie Autumn with his reign, boreaues
The earth of herbs, the trees of parched leaves.
If any Vernall remnant yet be left:
By Aestaes heat, and Autumns rain not spoiled:
The same by chil-cold Winter is bereft
Of vigor: and with hoary frosts de^oyled.
Frost making earth a Chaos to resemble,
For mine offense, whereon to think I tremble.
The bluish skies did only me protect,
I sought not for a stately brick-built Castle:
I needed not a sheltring roof erect,
Against tempestuous winds and rain to wrestle.
The sturdie Oak in mountain tops did stand,
The stones lay still, I took them not in hand.
Now Adam stir thee like the nimble pricket,
Pursued with hounds, ransacke thy Grandams bones,
Cut down the massy Oak from grouie thicket,
To forge a tyled roof for playned stones.
Forge thee a shelter, edify an hold,
To shield thee from the rage of wind and cold.
As I was made, so lived I with my spouse,
Both naked were, yet knew it not (O rareness)
We felt no cold, yet lived in no house,
We blushed not one at another bareness.
But (out alas) what shamefastnes we suffered.
When ugly sin our nakedness vncou'red.
Learn here (O all posterities) the shrewdness
Of Satan, and his treacherous assaults:
Who having once seduced man to lewdness,
Exaggerates the greatness of his faults,
Making him blush like Adam in the garden.
Only to bring him in despair of pardon.
Ye winged birds, send out your woeful quips
In leauelesse trees, once glutting you with berries:
Cold winter now your tender bodies nips.
Depriving earth of herbs, and trees of Cheries:
Your everlasting Spring abridged is,
And all for Adam who has done amiss.
Four-footed beasts inhabitants of field,
Pour out your plaints among the rural brambles,
Now must your hides man's corpse from weather shield,
Your carcasses hang up on bloody shambles.
Diue in the deep, ye water-hanting Fishes,
Now must ye serve to nourish man in dishes.
Help to lament, ye water-flowing Fountains,
Congealing Frosts your passages will hinder:
Keep in your buds, y^ Gote-frequented mountains.
Receivers of the hoarie frosts of winter.
Woods, herbs, and trees, all terrene things bewail,
Tears ease the mind, though little do prevail.
Proud Adam not content with thy condition,
Blessed estate, and ten times happy calling:
Sought'st to atchieue more glory, whose ambition
Has wrought thy fatal ouethrow in falling.
Aspiring to the knowledge of thy maker,
have lost that bliss whereof thou were partaker.
This root of pride (this neuer-withering weed)
Prouoker first of mankind unto folly:
Will still attaint and cleave unto thy seed,
As twinding Yuie on the tender Hollie.
Embracing it, till it has sucked it dry,
And wanting sap, they both together die.
This noisome root in every ground will spring,
The meanest man in thought will still aspire:
The Potentate will seek to be a King,
The King to be an Emperor will desire,
And he to be more higher in degree,
Will also strive, if higher he may be.
I sought more dainties having over many,
From hence shall come desire of variety:
Contentment seldom will be found in any,
Loath some contempt will wait upon satietie.
All men from me will this infection pluck,
As Spyders do from flowers poison suck.
Fond wretches, who in sinful folly blind,
Did think to hide you from I^houahs face:
As does the purblind Hare, or fearful Hind,
Whom yelping hounds do still pursue in chase.
Ah no, ye cannot, his all-seeing eye
Will find you out, where ever you do lie.
Take I to me the south-windes ayrie wings,
And in the utmost coast of earth convey me:
Take I to me the Dolphins watery finnes,
And in the seas vnsounded-bottom lay me:
Let earth into her secret womb me swallow,
Yet will his glorious eie-beams still me follow.
My guilty conscience said, I had offended,
What ^ting on earth more hellish can we find,
A sore it is which cannot be amended,
A worm which always gnawes upon the mind.
Run where I will, into all lands betake me,
Yet will a wounded conscience never forsake me.
O thundering sayings: terrifying words,
Heart-taming speeches, cleaving rocks in sunder:
Proceeding from the supreme Lord of Lords:
Which in mine ears resounded like a thunder,
Words causing earth an Aspen leaf resemble,
Which at the breath of every wind does tremble.
Where art thou Adam? shamest thou my Deity,
Ay me, needs must I my sin display:
Supposing erst my vicious impiety,
That every shaking bramble would bewray.
Thus shall it also fare with all my seed,
Committing any detestable deed.
How feign would I my guilty mind have cleared,
Alleging Eve was causer of mine evil:
She to excuse her self, as then appeared.
Laid all the fault upon the subtle Devil.
Like clouds which pour their rain upon hie-waies,
They into rivers, rivers into seas,
This said; he turned him to the vntill'd field,
Where uncouth weeds, and fruitless brambles breed,
The earth which erst most fragrant herbs did yield,
With thorns and thistles now was ouer-spread.
Oh see (quoth he) the earth for mine ill deeds,
Robbed o^ brave robes, and clad in baser weeds.
Dear Grandam earth, thy fountain heads set open,
Like Crystal tears, my sorrows to discover:
Now must thy mole with deluing share be broken:
A crooked rake thy tilled field pass over.
For me these shrubs and prickling thorns thou bear
For me these yl-beseeming weeds thou rearest.
The heifar now in fields must not be idle,
The servile Ass must bear an heavy pack:
The Courser brave restrained with a bridle,
The silly sheep his woolly fleece must lack.
Horse, sheep, Ass, heifar help me all to moan,
I causer am of all your woes alone.
Still thought he on this string to tune his woes,
And forward went, but lo, three horned Cattle
Near unto him amid proud bearing Does,
With frowning gesture menaced a battle.
At length not able to forbear him longer,
Two weaker ones ran both against the stronger*
Th'encountred beast receiving others stroke,
With like assault the one of them requighted,
Assault resounding like a falling Oak,
Which threw the one back, the other fled affrighted.
And left his friend distressed, his foe inulted,
The victorer triumphantly insulted.
Ah see (he says) see here a world of woe,
An heap of evils unto thy seed ensuing:
What maladies from lewd desires do grow,
As beasts, so men with savageness induing.
Ay me, what dolors, evils, and deeds unjust
Shall not arise to man through sinful lust.
Here may thou have a president of wars,
Tumultuous discord, horrible dissension,
Bloodshedding horror, disagreeing jarres,
Inhumaine murders, pitiful contention:
The mightiest shall be viewed on of all,
The poor dispis'd, the weaker thrust to wall.
Whilst things go well friends will be always near thee
Prosperity will loved be of many:
But falling down, thy dearest friends will fear thee,
Adversity not helped up of any.
The fawning beast does this presignifie,
Who quite forsook his friend in misery.
The small shall subject be unto the greater,
Nobility through strength shall make his entry:
The welthyer will think himself the bett^r,
For covetousness will spring, the root of Gentry.
Though all sprung from one father and one mother,
Yet every one will strive t'excell his brother.
See how the Eagle with his bloody claws
Does massacre the house-frequenting Sparrow:
The lordly Lion with his murdering jaws,
Does rend the Hind as earth is rent of harrow.
The fearful Whale, that monster in the deep
The lesser fish does in his belly keep.
Whale, Eagle, Lion, fitly ye presage
Blood-sucking tyrants and inhumaine murderers,
Which will the weaker sort oppress with rage,
Arch-foes to virtue, and to vices furtherers.
Blush Adam, blush to name these dreadful terrors,
First causer of all maladies and errors.
The pleasant Lark delights to mount on hie,
The little wren near to the earth below:
The greedy Gleyd betwixt them both does fly,
The Dove in course is swift, the Lapwing slow.
The show men's sundry callings and conditions,
These note men's diverse minds and dispositions.
The ayerie-winged blasts as ever mutable,
And never in one certain place abide:
So man's condition shall be ever changeable,
No ground so firm in which he shall not slide.
What seat so strong or what so sure estate
which shall not subject be to frowning fate.
O happy wight, ten times shall he be blessed,
Who with the wren dare not presume to mount:
With mean estate contented who does rest,
And bliss in sole tranquillity does count,
Considering that great things are viewed of all,
And highest things are soonest like to fall:
That highest things are soonest like to fall,
The reaching Pine on mountains does betoken,
which sooner then the shrub or bramble small,
with raging blastes of hoysting winds are broken.
What mortal things henceforth on earth ensuing
Shall not be subject to times fatal ruin.
Times ruin shall so dyre oblivion breed
In men, that noting their so frail variety,
Forgetting me, the cause thereof, my seed
Shall feign to Fate an euer-changing deity.
Proportraying her upon a round wheel dancing,
Euerting some, and other some advancing.
Alas, no sooner night-expelling morning,
Al.-hyding heaven from her black rug exempteth:
But viewing me, and mine offenses scorning,
Her snowie cheeks with rednes she besprenteth,
Disdaining Sols bright beams should long behold me
In Sable night bright Hesperus does fold me.
Vile Covetousness in me first took his root,
For more things thirsting, when no thing I wanted:
Still shall it hold my children by the foot,
And in the hearts of all my seed be planted.
Now shall rush in the greedy zeal of money,
which men will labor for, as Bees for honey.
Now shall rush in the fiery thirst of gain,
And gold in bowels of the earth enclosed:
Which men by toil and labor will obtain,
And coffer up from his dark dungeon losed.
By mortal wightes rare metals will be knocked,
Which earth in her close treasure-house had locked*
Now shall be found the hurtful mine of Iron,
For which men will into earths belly enter:
The glittering steel besieged foes t'enuiron,
They now will into swords and Lances temper.
What mortal thing so hard? or what so geason,
Will not be done and found by human reason?
The lofty Pine which mountain top affoords,
Cut down, shall now into a Mast be squa^ed:
The yellow bras^e nailed to Firre-tree boords,
Shall cut the seas, as earth with plough is ared.
Sea-Porposses and Dolphins huge shall wonder,
To see their Cerule waters cleft in sunder,
The ruddie Diamond and the Saphir fair,
In the utmost coast of earth shall now be sought,
The bright Smaragd* the Pearl, and Onix rare,
Fetched from the East, full dearly shall be bought,
O into what so deep and huge an hell,
Will not the thirst of riches men compel?
This said, on earth his glowring eyes he fastened,
There saw an Ant, a little creeping el^e,
Who dragged with her a Barley grain, and hastened
Home to her cave, grain bigger then her self:
O learn he cries, learn Adam of this Ant,
To work in youth, least afterward thou want.
Behold the Be, a silly painful creature,
How wittily she laboreth in Summer:
Reposing food, she only taught by nature,
Least barraine winters penury should numb her,
Her industry gives to thee an example,
how thou should live, and in what ways to trample.
Now Adam must thou labor, ditch and delue,
Graft, plant, walk, run, hedge, fence, plow, harrow, sow
Pluck down, rear up, set munifie, build shelue,
VVeep, laugh, strive, wrestle, bind up, gather, mow,
Thresh, carry out* grind, bake, brue, spin and card,
Knock, beat, wash, dry, buy, sell, sleep, watch and ward
In sweat of brows and horrible vexation,
To get my living shall I be constrained:
What shall man see but doleful tribulation,
Unto his death from time that he is wained.
Naught shall his race be but a vale of sinning,
Fond, sinful, frail, in end, midst and beginning.
How vain is wordly pomp? how frail and bri^le?
How soon is man of earthly things bereft:
His pleasures pass as swiftly as a shittle
Cast from the weauers right hand to the lest:
His orient hue as vading as a flower,
Which floorisheth and dies in an hour.
O wretched man! O life most transitory!
Deceiptfull world, foul sink of filthy errors:
Eye-pleasing shades of vain delightful glory
Deep gulf of sin, vast dungeon of terrors,
Receptacle of woeful tribulations
Grand treasure-house of all abominations.
O sea of sorrows, laborinth of woes,
Vale full of cares: abyss of imbecilitie:
Thief-harbouring house, field full of armed foes,
Stil-turning orb, true map of muta^ility.
Affoording man as many false yl-willers
As woods have trees, as trees have Caterpillars.
Of lumpish earth I^houah me created,
To the end I should not glory in my feature:
And I again to earth must be translated
By Gods just do me* the end of every creatu^e:
Then whereto should I trust on earth abiding,
Since for my fault all earthly things are sliding,
When first of all man draws virall breath
And spirit, he to die begins then:
No worldly thing more certain then is death,
Nor more uncertain then the hour when.
O lend me then a font of springing tears,
To weep my fill for man's unconstant years.
Ah weladay, me thinks for mine offenses,
My God says still I must to earth again:
O how the thought of death appales my senses,
Though end it be of all man's woe and pain.
So likewise shall all my postoritie
Fear it, though end of all calamity.
O great Jehovah, wonderful in might,
How wisely have thou wrought all things, concealing
The certain hour of death from mortal wight,
Yet certainty thereof to him revealing.
Done surely by thy skillful providence,
That man should fear and learn obedience.
Me thinks I see (O let me yet divine)
How many of my sons will go astray,
Erecting houses, raising buildings fine,
As though they were inthroniz'd here for ay.
O let them know that for my foul offense,
by Gods just doom all flesh must wander hence.
Not he that shall on earth the longest dwell,
Not he that shall in prowess be the rarest*
Not he that shall in wisdom most excel,
Not he that shall in visage be the fairest.
With wisdom, beauty, age or courage fell
Shall able be impartial death t'expell.
O wretched Euah, mankinds deadly Foe,
Accursed Grandame, most ungentle mother,
Sin-causing woman, bringer of man's woe,
Woe to thy self, and woe unto all other.
Thy mighty maker in his just displeasure
Has multiplied thy sorrows out of measure.
In pain shall thou thy seed conceive and bear,
In peril shall thou of it be discharged:
Thou shall it foster up with tender care,
A thousand ways thy griefs shall be enlarged:
Thou shall be guided by thy man's direction,
He as a Lord shall have thee in subjection.
O cursed worm, O exerable serpent:
Blisse-hating Dragon: most abhorred creatu^e:
Infectious Adder: venom* breathing verment,
The food of envy, sdeignfull scorneof Nature:
Fals-hearted traitor, harbourer of evil:
Dark den of spite, foul cabin of the Devil.
Most loathsome be thou of Iehouahs work,
Enuyed both of man and feeding cattle:
In unfrequented valleys shall thou lurk,
And with thy stinging tongue still menace battle.
Man seeing thee, shall fear and seek thy bane,
As isntrumental author of his pain.
For want of feet: through woods and deserts thick
Upon thy griesllie belly shall thou slide:
And for thy food dust of the earth shall lick,
Such plagues shall thee (O loathsome worm) betide,
Such woes on thee Jehovah has disbursed,
Pronouncing thee of all his works most cursed.
The husbandman among the rural bushes,
Will start, and think each moving twig a foe:
Still fearing-least among the marshy rushes
Thou lying hid, should work his second woe.
Thy deadly sting, and golden speckled hew,
In false pretense thy glosing words do show
But thou (O Satan) proud infernal devil,
Chief actor in this doleful tragedy:
Lord of ambition, master of all evil,
Thy fatal fall behold I prophecy:
From out the woman shall an issue spring,
Which will prevail against thy deadly sting.
Between her seed and thee (O fearful fiend)
Shall be continual enmity and fight:
Thou shall but prick her heel, she in the end
Shall conquer thee, and overthrow thy might.
Then man rejoice, O Adam cease to wail,
Thy conquer or shall now no whit prevail.
O woondrous pity, undeserved kindness,
Of earths-sole founder to the work he made:
Who seeing man cast down in sin and blindness,
So speedily him promisd help and aid.
Aid, certain aid his arch-foe to repel,
To conquer death, and conquer conquering hell.
Rejoice then earth, cease frowning heavens to glower,
Now broken are hels euer-lasting bars,
From whence man took by Gods almighty power,
Shall mount aloft above the twinkling stars:
There with the woman's seed which promised is,
For evermore to reign in heavenly bliss.
Ye chirping birds, whose party colloured plumes
With gentle sound the whistling air do trouble:
In shady dales send forth your doleful tunes,
Let Echoes shrill your dulcid notes redouble.
Ada^ your Lord exiled from Eden garden*
By faith and mercy has obtained pardon.
Ha^monious Lark, let neue blushing morning
See dankish earth, but mount thou from the ground:
And bluish skies with pleasant notes adorning.
For man's redemption signs of mirth resound:
Sweet Philomene, let never Hesper shine
Ere thou have tuned a thousand ditties fine.
Mild Eurus reign in blustering Boreas place,
Leap sportiue fish above the Crystal river:
Man reconciled to his God by grace,
Shall now in heavenly bliss abide for ever.
For these glad tidings, frolike tender lambs,
In pastures pleasant with your merry dammes.
And lastly, Adam, since it is decreed,
That thou must fight ere thou can win the fort:
Fight manfully, trust in the promisd seed,
And be most sure thou shall arrive the port,
Port full of joy and heavenly blessedness.
Free from all cares, and worldly wretchedness.
FINIS.
The old Worlds Tragedy.
I Sing of horrors sad and dreadful rage,
Of stratagems wrought in the former age,
Contagious vice, and in conclusion,
Of massacres, death and confusion:
Vouchsafe my muse, my dolefulst muse to tell
What made the King of heaven to be so fell:
Sole Architect of earth and earthly lands,
So furiously the fabric of his hands
To bring to ruin: can Jehovah then
Pour out such fearful threats on mortal men,
Full sixteen h^ndred years from worlds creation,
And fifty six by sacred computation:
When living things replenished the ground.
And earth with mortal wights did first abound:
A doleful Tragedy was brought to pass,
Earth was the stage whereon it acted was*
Upon the stage first came impiety,
Vaunting her self against the Deity.
She in short time began to grow to head,
And all the earth at length she captive led.
Then came in foul desire and loathsome lust,
She in short time seduced even the just:
Who gazing on the beauty of the wicked,
Began with lewd concupiscence be pricked*
In mattimony to their daughters linking
Their sons, and at sins detestable winking.
The Host was ofttimes slain by lodged stranger,
Guest of his host stood many times in danger.
Vile Avarice all mortal hearts possessed,
The weaker lay in every street oppressed:
Men ^ought by cruel bloodshed gain to gather,
The son for riches sought to slay his father:
The brother mixed poison for his brother,
She for her daughter: daughter for her mother.
Pale envy left her Adder-haunted den,
And ruled on earth as supreme Queen of men*
Aspiring pride with weapons in her hand,
To war against humility did stand,
Wherewith in fight she killed her at last,
And from the stage all massacred her cast.
Then dreadful wrath met patience at the field,
And shortly she compelled her to yield.
Fals-hearted treason like a faithful lover,
His woluish back with sheepish skin did cover:
And meeting with true friends^ip s^retely,
Gave her the stab (O monstrous villainy)
Fidelity lay slain by treachery,
Pure chastity by loathsome letcherie.
Here lay the servant by the master killled,
There masters blood lay by the servant spilled.
Then might you see man-murthring falsehood f^ight
With verity, and overcome her quite:
Religion by A^heisme proud was banished,
And she forth with to heavenly kingdoms vanished:
As soon as ere good Conscience showed her head,
By disobedience she was stricken dead.
Then Gluttony upon the stage made entrance
Prodigiously who slew dame Temperance.
Excess appeared with strange variety,
And fiercely put to flight Sobriety.
Envious Anger vehemently assailed
Dame Patience, and in the end prevailed.
Then mounted on the earth obliuious Sloth,
She Industry and labor conquered both.
Injustice lastly with an hideous rout
Of hellish furies traced the stage about:
Her visage stern, her hands in blood imbrue^
Her breast of Iron, ugly Toads she spued:
Her standerd-bearer was ambitious pride,
And next unto her went Don Homicide,
Next unto them a rank of Enuies brood,
Begirt with Adders, se^pents were their food:
Straight after them excess and gluttony,
Deformed Sloth, and impious Simphonie
A thousand other stygian hagges and more,
Then with their Queen imp^etie did grow.
Whom just Astrea seeing in this sort,
A sudden fear amazed her mean report,
And leaving earth with all that hideous crew,
Unto the skies without delay ^he flew.
And now huge Giants upon earth remained,
with whose vile offspring all the earth was stained
O^ them to Dam^els fair committing seed,
A deuillish kind of people there did breed:
A People fierce and of exceeding stature
Pestifferous, and prone to sin by nature.
These tyrannized and lived at their pleasure,
Oppressing weaker people without measure.
With dreadful rigor keeping them in awe,
Despising justice, breaking Natures law.
These heaped sin on sinn^, and fault on fault,
As high as Pelion or (...) vault:
As high as Pindus or steep Oss^ either,
Were Pindus or steep Oss^ clapped together,
When suddenly from his most glorious throne,
Whereon he sitting guides all things alone.
I^ouah founder of the starrie pole,
Of waterie seas, and of the earthly mole,
Daign'd upon earth his sacred e^es to cast,
Eyes seeing all things in the world so vast.
He saw how vice had grown unto a head,
Injustice all the earth had ouerspread:
He saw how sin and vile impiety
Vanted themselves against his Deity.
The Adder-pawed gya^ts, mounts of evil
Touching the skies, base children of the devil.
His sacred head heerat he began to shake,
Whereat the skies, the earth, and all did quake:
He sighed, and most sorrowful he was,
That ever mortal man was brought to pass:
He grieved in heart that ever he created
Man, who with sin was so contaminated.
All things (quoth he) wherein remains breath,
I purpose to destroy (...) sudden death:
This hand which (...) all mortal things alive
All earthly things of life shall now deprive,
From man to beasts, from birds to things which creep,
All flesh shall taste of my displeasure deep.
The birds swift wings shall not his body save*
The Lions for^, nor G^ants courage brave*
Thus am I minded; thus do I intend,
All living creatures now shall have an end.
But yet on earth one only man there dwelled
All other men in justice who excelled:
The third from Enoch was he in descent,
Enoch who all his life uprightly spent:
Enoch of life who never was bereauen,
Enoch, ^ho liuiug was rapt into heaven.
Methushelah who all men did surpass
In length of life, his Grandsire cleped was.
It was just N^ah, Lamec^s son upright:
Three sons he had, Sh^m, Ham and Iaphet hight
He loved virtue, vice he did eschew,
Jehovah therefore ^auour did him show.
Again Earths founder his all seeing eyes
Cast on the world from top of Cerule skies.
Again he saw all wickedness abound,
In all the earth no justice could be found.
The children bathed in their fathers blood,
All naught he saw, and nothing that was good
Vast fields of sin, Abysses fraught with lewdnes
Realms full of errors, mountains huge of shrewdnes.
The height whereof unto his throne ascended,
And with their stench his nostrils fore offended
Then unto Noah, L^mechs son he spoke,
An end of all things now I mean to make:
All flesh wherein remains living spirit,
Of vital breath I purpose to disherit.
Ah how it grieves me now that I have framed
Man, who wi^h sin the earth has so defamed.
Make thee an Arc of Pine trees very strong,
Three hundred cubits shall thou make it long.
Threescore in breadth, and thirty cubits hie,
Make rooms in it where several things may lie.
Three sundry stories s^lt thou in it frame,
And round about with pitch close up the same:
For I upon the earth a flood will bring,
Wherewith I will subvert each living thing,
But unto thee my covenant will I make,
My covenant which I never mean to break;
Thou with thy wife, thy sons, and thy sons wives
Shall in the arc be shut and save your lives.
Of every lining creature also twain,
A male and female shall with thee remain,
And lay up food for thee and every creature,
Even several food according to their nature.
The ark was made, and al things brought to pass
As God commanded, so it framed was.
Then spoke Jehovah unto him, go thou
Into the arc with all thy household now:
For seven days hence shall mighty rain abound
Wherewith I mean to cover all the ground.
Then Noah with his family also
Just eight persons into the arc did go,
And now the hour was near, the fatal hour
Wherein Jehovah meant to show his power:
Six times Auror^ with her blushing hew
Had seen the earth all dark with hoary dew.
Now pitchie night six times began dim the skies*
Last night of sollace unto mortal eyes:
O Luna still detain thy blackish horse,
Let never dismal Tytan run his course,
Bright Vesper still continue thou thy race.
Let never fatal day star thee deface.
Who can alas, express the dole^ull ruin,
And piteous horror of the day ^nsuin.
Now fro her chamber comes the scowling morning,
Her self still in a night-gowne black adorning:
Tytan arose, but yet his glorious head
With pitch-resembling clouds was ouerspread,
Black foggie mystes rose from the earthly mole,
Ascending up unto the a^ry pole.
Winds thronged forth, and strove in skies aloft,
As civil wars among them had been wrought,
As craggie hills had broken been by charms,
As all E^lia had been up in arms.
Winds, air and clouds, all meant the air to sack,
O now or never goes the world to wrack,
Then thou (O woe) heavens Architect began
To pour thy fearful threats on mortal man:
The glowring skies re^ounded like a thunder,
As though heavens sacred vault had cleft in sunder,
As though ten thousand Cannons huge discharged
Their roaring sounds with fall offorts enlarged.
His right hand shoke the earth, his left hand crushed.
The clouds, then rain in great abundance rushed.
Rain poured forth, yet not content, his anger
Enforced swelling tides on earth to wander.
Then broken were the heads of watrie fountains*
They gushed from the feet of craggie mountains*
Seas lent them waves their courses to maintain,
Earth made them passage to his utter bane,
Now had the morn still clad in mourning weeds,
Thrice opened gates to Phoebus fiery steeds,
Steeds smoking wet, yet from his flaming carre,
No light did come, black mystes his light did scarre:
And now the three days rain and flowing floods
Had spoiled quite green herbs and pleasant buds:
And shortly did the husband man complain,
That all his whole years travel and his pain
Were brought to ruin, corn and goodly flowers
Were prostrate laid with ouer-flowing showers.
The silly birds with violence of weather
In bushes thick did ^hroud themselves together:
Beasts shrinking under grouie hedges stood
Half drowned with wet, half dead for want of food.
By this time waters all the earth did cover,
The falling rain and rising floods ran over
All champion countries, where men lately plowed
Now waters stood, and Scullers might have rowed.
O then on earth was heard a piteous cry,
Men crying out, beasts roaring plaintiuely.
Then first of all began the Giants stern
To shake for fear, and flinty hearts to yerne.
Rain falling, and seas rising without pi^tie,
Made entrance into every house and city:
As when a Fort or sacked cities walls,
With violence of ^ampir'd engines falls,
The furious foe runs raging through the stree^s,
With bloody weapons killing whom he meets.
An hideous ^ry and ^ound arri^eth then
Of maimed women and distressed men.
Men seeing weapons come to work their bane,
Yet could not shun them: O what greater pain?
So fat'd it with the people of this time,
Some upon roofes and turrets high did clime,
One takes the highest mountain he can see,
Another sits a fishing in a tree.
One thrusts himself into a wherry boat,
And desperately upon the waves does floate.
And every one did se^ke to clyme alo^t,
For eurie one to shun the waters sought,
They saw the waters come to stop their b^eath,
Yet could not shun't, O greater gri^fe then death.
Their dollours might have been compared well
To one that dying hears the passing bell.
Some were already drowned, thus stood the case,
He lived the longest who had highest place:
And now were turrets high and mountains covered,
And leauie trees which in the air erst houered:
O lend me words the dollours to display,
The Fatal horrors of this dismal day.
There might you see how lovingly the mother
With her sweet daughter kissed one the other:
One piteously requesting others help,
Yet neither of them knew to aid himself.
The dying son now at the latest gasp,
About his clasping f^hers ^eck did clasp^.
And ready now to bid their let farewell,
Were snatched both with seas and billows fell:
The Lord and servant both at one time snatched,
One furiously hold on the other catched.
And still in surging waves together cleft,
Till both of breath together were bereft.
The tyrannizing Giants bodies grim
Now with the criples liuelesse corpse did swim.
The subject with the ^cepter-bearing king,
The murthring billows spared no living thing.
Some might you see half dead and half alive,
Like water-fowles now rise, and now to diue.
Some turning round, and violently borne
Al headlong down, their lims in sund^r torn.
The brisle-bearing bore, and gentle sheep
Swam both together in the surging deep.
The silly Lamb was with the ravening Wolf
Drowned in the vast no-pitie taking gulf.
The liuelesse Lion in the deep did swim,
Naught did the Tigers courage profit him,
Naught booted it the Bear to roar and grind,
No profit by his swiftness got the Hind.
And having long time with exceeding pain
Flowne through the air, disturbed still with rain,
The weary bird not finding any ground,
Falls down in seas, and at the last is drowned.
And now the Arc where Noah did abide,
Was hoisted up with ouer-swelling tide.
One while all hidden to the earth it fell,
As though it would have gone to visit hell.
One while again it seemed to arrise,
And suddenly would mount up to the skies:
No stern it had, no mast, no sail, no guide,
But carried was at pleasure of the tide.
Twice twenty days as black as any cole
The murdering rain distilled from the Pole.
The tallest mountains in the world so wide,
Now covered were with ouer-swelling tide.
The ayrie Alps and eke Pernassus fair
Now hidden were with waves, a wonder rare,
Snow-bearing Pindus and Olympus steep,
Both at this time lay hidden in the deep.
Now first of all igniferous Aetnas caves,
And Ciclops flames were quenched with salt-sea waves,
Sweet Smelling I Would and sacered Ismarus,
Aspiring Pelion and hard Caucasus,
In Scythian mounts, where murdering Tygres hanted:
Now ugly shapes of monstrous seafish vanted:
The Dolphins woonders under watrie floods,
To see fair turrets and thick grouie woods.
In steed of sacrifice on Altars fair
Sit seemly Marmaydes combing of their hair,
In Churches eke their Organists now wanting,
Melodious Odes and ditties now recanting.
The ugly dog-fish and devouring Whales
Against pinacles did dash their shining skales:
And where the Goat was wont her food to swallow,
Foul Porposses and seaish monsters wallow.
Now from his glorious palace heavens creator
Looked down, and saw the world a sea of water:
All was a sea yet wanted it a coast,
Then thought he on the Arc and N^ah tossed:
Through all the world and earth, which many a night
Hid under seas, had seen no cheerful light.
Forthwith he charged the foggie mysts to vanish,
Then all the winds tempestuous did he banish:
And ^hen retreyt unto the water soundes,
Commanding it to keep within his bounds:
Commanding it his fountains to restrain,
And them to stop their springing heads again.
Clouds forthwith fled, and tempests were appeased,
The seas returned, and running fountains ceased.
The scowling morn now left his mourning robe,
And smilinglie blushed on the watery globe.
And shortly might you see mean turrets peep,
And tops of Pine-trees from the floods to creep:
The fleeting arc which long had cleft in sunder
the vast deluge, both carried up and under,
Now unto East, and now unto the west,
At length in mounts of Ar^y did rest.
Twice twenty times had Phoebus drencht his beams*
And Car in grave Ocean^s his streams.
When as the framer of the subtle Bark,
A window did set open in th Arc.
And forth he sent a Raven thence, to know
If waters still the land did ouerflow.
Forth flew she, but returned presently
So went and came until the earth was dry.
Again, he sends a siluer-winged Dove,
To see if still the waters were above.
Out flies the Dove, and through the air does go
As swift as any arrow ftom a bow.
Much air she cuts, and in the earth not seeing
One living creature any where have being.
Nor any ground whereon she might remain,
With weary wings returns to him again.
Then rested he until the day star bright
Seven times remoou'd the canopie of night:
Then once again the Dove he sends out,
She mounts aloft and flies round about.
And finding much dry ground on earth, presumes
To fall thereon, and rouse her ruffled plumes,
Now shakes her self, and with her bill them peckes,
Now lays them down and orderly them deckes*
And having long time frolik'd at her will,
Returned with a green leaf in her bill*
By this knew Noah that the Flood decreased,
Yet other seven days in the arc he rested:
And when bright Vesper in the Welkin pale
Had thrice and four times drawn the clowdy vale,
The third time forth again he sends the Dove,
She swiftly in the air her wings does move:
And finding food her body to sustain,
And ground to rest on, never came again.
Yet rested L^chs osspring in the Arc,
Till seven times again in Welkin dark
B^otes guider of the greater Bear,
Had shown himself, and then expelling fear
Sets open the door, and plainly did epsy
Floods quite decreased, and face of earth all dry.
And then the lord commandment to him gave
That he with all things else the Arc should leave.
No stay they made, all things* man, bird and beasts,
Whom Tita^ saw from either of his restes
Alive on earth, came forth with from the arc,
There stre^ht their limbs, unwieldy yet and stark*
There Enochs offspring to his God erected
An altar, who from Floods had him protected:
And thereon for his preservation
Did of^er up a just oblation:
The smell whereof unto his throne arose,
And cast a pleasant odor to his nose.
Expelling quite that detestable stink
Which erst ascended from worlds filthy sink.
Delighted therefore in this pleasant ^uour,
He blessed all mankind with his gracious favor:
Henceforth (quo^h he) no more my wrathful ^urse
Upon the world or man I will disburfe.
For all his thoughts with wickedness are stained
Fuen from his birth, to time that he is wayned.
Henceforth in ^eason shall ^e plant and sow,
In season shall he after reap and mow.
In his due course hot Summer will I send
And winter, till the earth shall have an end:
Increase abundantly, bring forth and breed*
And earth again replenish with your seed.
Behold, your fear all creatures shall appall,
Rule thou as Lord and master over all.
Whosoever shall man bereave of vital breath,
His life shall be abridg'd with cruel death.
Blood will have blood, whosoever shall cut manslife,
His also shall be cut with blooudy knife.
Increase abundantly, bring forth and breed,
The earth again replenish with your seed.
Behold, with thee I make a covenant sure,
A covenant which for ever shall endure,
With earth, and all things which th^reon remain,
That I will never drown the world again,
And to confirm my promised decree,
A certain seal thereof I give to thee.
This is the seal: a Bow I mean to shrowde
Of diverse colors in a pitchie clowd.
This is the seal, and this shall be a token,
That this my league at no time shall be broken.
And when I shall all-hiding heaven cloak
With clouds, foorth-pouring mystie rain like smoke,
Then I in clouds will place my certain seal,
Mine euer-during promise to reveal.
With surging billows and impartial rain
That earth shall never be destroyed again.
And this a sign infallible shall be,
Of mine eternall-durable decree.
FINIS.
David and Beersheba.
SVch time as Tytan with his fiery beams
In highest degree, made duskish Le^ sweat:
Field-tilling Swains drive home their toiling teams,
Out-wearied with ardencie of heat:
And country herds to seek a shadie seat:
All mortal things from feruency of weather,
In s^ing shades do shroud themselves together.
(...) wife unto Vri^ stou^,
A Captain under I^ab of renown:
Whom princely David with a warring rout
Had sent to beat the pride of A^n down.
And to besiege and ra^sacke Rabbah town,
Betook her self into a garden fair,
Inricht with flowers, which sent a pleasant air.
On every side this garden was beset,
With choice of rare delights and Arbors geason:
The Lentisk, fig tree, and Pomgranet great,
Grew there in order, far surpassing reason.
The ground was decked with Gyl^flowers fine,
Carnations sweet, and speckled sops, in wine.
There might you hear upon the pleasant trees,
The little birds melodiously to sing:
Upon the blossoms wrought the painful Bees,
Near was it to the palace of the King,
Within it also was a pleasant spring.
Whose liquid humor moystened the same,
A garden worthy of so worthy dame.
Now gathers she the sweetest of the sweet,
And prettily from flower to flower trippeth*
Soon after to the fountain tu^nes her feet,
Then daintily her hands of glo^es she stiippeth,
And in the Crystal waves her fingers dippeth.
She likes it well, and calls it passing cool,
And minds to bath her body in the poole.
Then nimbly castes she off her Damask frocke,
Her Satin stole most curiously made:
Her Partlet needle-wrought, her Cambricke smock,
And on a seat thereby them nicely said.
And so to wash her in the well assayd*
O shut thine eyes Narcissus come not neete,
Least in the well a burning fire appear.
Sleep still King David in thy Princely bed,
Where now thou takst thine after-dinners nap:
O rouse not up from sleep thy kingly head.
Least by mifchaunce thou fall into a ^rap,
See here of man's fragilitie a map:
Thou can not ( Da^id) needs must thou vpstart,
Thy God will have thee know how frail thou art.
Now rises he, and up in haste he fli^,
Upon the highest turret of his tow^:
There standing, all the (...) ouerpries
Her carved Bulwarks, and each goodly bower*
But O unlucky time, O dismal hour!
Stop Ishas son thine ears, keep sails on hie,
Least Sirens songs do draw thy mind awry.
Sur^aying thus his town, at length he cast
His eyelids down, and saw Beersheba naked:
His princely heart, which never yet did taste
Of evil, stroke with burning fever quaked:
A fire he caught, by no waves to be slaked.
And as he strives to quench this flaming fire,
Still kindles it with bellows of desire.
Much better had thou kept within thy palace,
There on thy harpet'aue fed thy mind with joy:
Or entertained some pretty pleasing sollace.
But are the godly subject to annoy?
Must they be ruled by a wanton boy?
His eye approou'd, his heart it gave consent,
And both were spurs unto his bad intent.
With washing waves her breast he saw her deck,
He calls it Nectar, whereof Angels drink:
With Iuory arms she rubs her milky neck,
White Doves which fall on snow he does them thin^
He wishes he himself were at the brinke.
But with the candle whilst he thus does play,
At last his wings were burned quite away,
And now begins the combatant assault,
Between the willing flesh and nilling spirit.
The flesh alluring him unto the fault,
The spirit tells him of a dreadful merit.
And in the end flesh conquered the spirit.
He sends, she came, he wooes, she gave consent,
And did the deed, not fearing to be shent*
What have thou done, O Psalmist* blush for shame,
Think thou thy sin will never come to light.
No, no, Iehoua^ will reveal the same,
Though thou had don't in silence of the night.
Yet would he bring it into open sight:
It Was he would put thy piety in trial,
To see if thou would yield or make denial.
Now three times Cynthia in the Welkin bright
Her circle full unto the earth did lend:
Thrice had she lost again her borrowed light,
Since David with Beersheba did offend,
And now began ^he feel her womb extend.
What should she do? her fault she could not cover,
Of many days she had not seen her lover.
And now she mo^ her to the King, and says
In mournful fort, she feels her self with child:
His guilty mind disturbed many ways,
(Wit waits on fear) finds out a pretty wild,
Wherewith he hopes his maker to beguild.
But what? can Prophets then so grofly slide,
And from their God suppose their sins to hide?
He sends word to Ioab presently,
His true estate in letters to express:
And therewith send Vrias speedily,
Vrias comes, he reads their success,
And bids him go unto his wife in peace.
But see. the more he labored to conceal it,
So much the more God labored to reveal it,
Vrias would not go unto his house,
But gathered straw, and laid it in the yard,
And caring not to frolike with his spouse,
He laid him down to sleep amid the Guard.
As soon as David had these tidings hard,
He asks him why he rested not at home,
From toyling wars art thou not lately come?
No (quoth Vrias) it is for me unfit
To sleep within, whilst Ioab is without:
Unseemly it is to see the servant ^it,
And let his master toil and run about:
What, lies not the Ark of God without?
I swear by David's crown and princely head,
Whilst things goethus, I will not come in bed.
And now is David vexed worse and worse,
And every way is forced his wits to sift:
By this be has devised a second course,
And means to put in ure a pretty shift,
To make Vrias diunken was his drift.
So thinks he, hee'ill forget his duty quite,
And moved be therewith to some delight.
He charged his ser^tes entertain him well,
To give him store of wine, and comfits dainty:
Before the King to banqueting they fell,
Sweet syrrops there they had, and wine great plenty:
He drank to twenty, and he pledged twenty.
They quast off flagons full, and spared not,
The third fell always to Vrias lot.
Here, here (says one) I drink unto my brother,
I Will pledge him (quoth Vrias) he is my friend:
I drink to such a Captain (quoth another)
And he to all a good carrouse would send:
Surcharged with wine, he staggerd in the end.
He walks up and down the ^tately hall*
But always leanes, and cleaues unto the wall.
Full glad was David now, and hoped his plot
Would take effect, he almost was secure:
He heard the soldier talk he knew not what,
He with Beershebas name did him allure,
He thought that night would breed contentment s^
But whatso ere he built, it could not stand,
For all his work was built upon the sand.
Now night was come, all (...) went to rest,
Down lay the Hitthite where he slept before:
King David with a sea of cares oppressed,
Was driven welnigh to despair his door,
Yet still against the stream he labors more*
Thus evermore sin leads unto sin,
A lesler ends, and greater does begin.
Stay sinful King, look back, and askethy pardon,
It boots thee not alas thy self to hide:
So guilty Adam hid him in the garden,
So Jonah fled upon the surging tide.
Yet quickly had Jehovah them espide.
Look back (I say) confess it is much better,
To hide a lesser sin do not a greater.
And now again he is driven to invent,
And up and down for policies to roue:
Yet finds he nothing unto his content,
At length the devil a deadly plot does move,
And he thereof does presently approve.
In error blind still walks the Letcher further,
And thinks to hide adultery with murder.
Obliuious Prophet, call to mind thine oath,
Thou vowdst to keep the cou^nant of thy Lord:
More sweet shou saydst then comb or honey both,
More dear then Gems which Tagus does afford.
Thou brag'dst thou joyedst only in his word.
Chose he not thee his tender lambs to keep?
And like a Wolf will thou devour his sheep?
And now begins this deuilishnesse to bud,
He unto Ioab letters does indite*
O fearful letters, messengers of blood,
He wi^s him place him foremost in the fight,
And let him die, whilst they escape by flight.
And by Vrias sends he him away,
he guiltless bears a sword himself to slay.
He guiltless (...) a sword himself to flay,
And harmless fears no ^reason to be wrought:
So does the Cony fall i^to the hay,
So is the (...) unto the Lyme-bush brought,
So on the hookethe nibling Fish is caught.
he to his Captain does his letters bring,
Who reads them, and minds to do the thing.
Soon after causd he them the town to sack,
Next to the walls Vrias preas^'d amain*
The Rabbanits came out, I^b fled back,
And many of his soldiers there were slain,
Among the which Vrias caught his bane,
O joyful tidings to th'offenders ears,
Now ^rolickes he, and no suspi^ion fears*
Securely now he lays him down to ^leepe,
As he were blemished with no sinful spot,
As all his sins were drowned in the deep,
Or Let^es waves, where all things be forgot,
As though Ie^ah winked and saw him not.
Till at the last unto his vile disgrace,
Thus (...) sent, reproou'd him to his face*
Ah Churl (quoth he, and sadly tells the tale,)
Within a little city dwelling was:
Much cattle had he feeding in his pale,
And pastures fair, which yielded h^y and grass,
None could be seen in riches him to pass.
Great store of gold he had, of Gems and treasu^e,
He felt no want, but lived at his pleasure.
A very poor man neete unto him dwell^d,
O^e little sheep, who fo^tered at his manger*
To which in love he migh^ily excelled
And in his bo^ome shroude^ her from dang^r*
Now to this Misers house there came a stranger*
And sparing all his own, unto the feast*
He butchted up, and eat the poor ma^s beast.
Hereat was Da^id very sore incenst,
He chaf^d, and raged thereat exceedingly:
Without revenge his wrath could not be quenched,
He swore the man that did the sin should die,
Himself would see him tortured by and by.
Thou, thou (quoth Nat^an) art the man indeed
That has commitred this detested deed.
Thus says thy God, thou were a shepherds boy,
A servile art, and feddest sheep in field:
Then were thou subject unto much annoy,
A russet cloak did thee from weather shield.
And liuedst of the fruit thy flock did yield.
A shepherds hook upon thy back thou borest,
A leth^r scrip about thy neck thou worest.
Then ioyest thou to gather Filberds ripe,
To play at Barly-breake amongst the Swains:
To tune rude Odes upon an Oaten pipe,
Thy feeding herds to follow o^ the plains,
And drive them back again, no little pains
From greedy Wo^es to shield thy tender Lambs,
And meat to fetch unto their blating Dams*
And now thy title low I have suborned,
Made thee my Prophet of a shepherd base:
And with a Regal Crown thine head adorned,
I chaung'd thy sheep-hook to a ptincelie Mace:
What earthly man is now in higher place?
Thou had seven brethren goodlier in blee.
Yet I refusing them, made choice of thee.
I overthrew Golia^ with thy s^ing,
Thou but a dw^fe, and he a Giant tall,
I ga^e to thee the daughter of a King,
I saved the^ from the hands of murthring (...),
I gave thee wives, and concubines and all*
I made thee feed my people Isra^ll,
And all because I loved thee ^o well.
And if in heart thou had de^ired mo^e,
More also had I added to thy life*
But thou of wives although thou had store,
Have taken unto thee Vrias wi^e,
And caused him to be slain by Amm^ ^ knife.
And walking still in this absurdity,
Think^t to conceal this ha^nous sin from me*
Now whilst thou live, for this which thod ha^ (...),
The sword shall never from thy h^use depart*
And of thy ^eed thou (...) bege^ a (...),
Which shall (...) a (...) dart.
Now is the (...) ^o the (...)*
Thr^ sundry times (...),
Three times he sob'd as t^ough his heart wo^ld br^ak
And now at last begins he (...) rel^,
A shower of tears (...) srom ^is (...)
His heart is humbled, fearing to be (...),
And lifting mind and hands unto the ski^s,
Peecaui Deus, mani^ ^imes ^e cries*
Rise up (quoth Nathan) God ^oth he^re thy (...)
Thy sin is pardo^'d, bu^ thy ^hild s^all di^*
And then in heart as lowly as a child,
Betakes him to his chamber all alone:
There weepeth he before his maker mild,
And oftimes sobbing, makes piteous moan,
Complaining other help it he has none.
Thus in the end distressed as he stood,
He took his harp and warbled out this Ode.
DAVID'S ODE.
O Great Creator of ^he starrie Pole,
and heavenly things:
O mighty founder of the earthly mole,
chief king of Kings.
Whose gentle pardon evermore is nere,
To them which cry unfeignedly with fear,
Distressed with sin,
I now begin,
To come to thee, O Lord give ear,
O Lord look down from thy chrystallin throne,
enuirond round,
With Seraphins, and Angels many one,
thy praise who sound:
Such favor Lord on me vouchsafe to send,
As on thy chosen flock thou do extend.
To thee alone
I make my moan.
Some pity father on me send.
Remember Lord, that it is more then need,
to send redress*
My ^ore will grow (unless thou help with speed)
remediless.
Therefore in mercy look down from above,
And visit me with thy heart-joying love.
Alas, I see
No cause in me
Which unto pi^ie may thee move.
With sin I only have of^ended thee,
O Lord my God,
And therwithall I purchased have to me
thine heavy rod:
The weight of it does press me very sore,
And brings me well nigh to despair his door.
Alas I shame
To tell the sam^*
It is before thee evermore.
And this is not first time I sinned alas,
by many*moe:
Within the womb in ^in conceived I was,
Borne was I so.
And since that day I neueryet did cease,
From time to time thy highness to displea^e*
My life has bin
A race of sin:
Me with thy comfort somewhat ^ase.
O why did I offend thy glorious Grace
so hainously?
Why feared I not the presence-of thy face
who stoodest by?
Because I should acknowledge-thee most just,
And in mine own vprightnes should not trust:
Frail is my fleshs
I must confess,
And naught is it but sin and dust.
If thou shall me asperge with sprinkling grass,
or Hysope green:
As Crystal pure, or as the shining glass,
I shall be clean,
And if thou will me wash with water clear,
More white then Scythan snow I shall appear
Then whitest snow
which wind does blow
From place to place both far and near.
My mind O Lord, infectious and foul,
make clean and pure:
Into thy hands I humbly give my soul
to heal and cure.
Out of thy book all mine offenses blot,
And with thy blood quite take away my spot.
So shall my heart
Be free from smart,
And mine offenses quite forgot.
Turn back thy face which al things does behold
from heavens vault:
Least thou epsy my trespass manifold,
and heinous fault.
My faults, which are in number many more
Then little sands which are upon the shore,
refrain thine ire,
I thee desire,
And also heal my deadly sore.
Within my breast (O Lord) an humble spirit.
do thou create:
And of thy comfort do not me disherit,
I thee entreat.
Let me enjoy the sunshine of thy face,
Take not from me the solace of thy grace,
The holy Ghost:
My comfort most.
Let me retain in any case.
My tongue untie, my lips (O Lord) resolve,
thou art the key:
So will my tongue thy mercy great reuolue,
from day to day-
Then shall the wicked learn by mine example,
To keep thy sta^tes which be sweet and ample
And seeing me,
shall turn to thee,
And in the right way learn to trample.
Would thou have bin with sacrifice content,
much fat of Rams,
Much incense sweet on thee would I have spent
and blood of Lambs:
But thou (O God) thereto have no respect,
A broken heart thou never wilt reject:
That sacrifice
Is of most price,
That only with thee takes effect.
Be gentle Lord to thy Sionian town,
bow down thy face,
And on thy Shalem send thy mercy down,
and loving grace:
Reedifie her bulwarks like to fall,
And up again build her decaying wall.
Then will I praise
Thy name always.
And give burnt offerings therewithal.
Thus did the Psalmist warble out his plaints,
And cease not from day to day to moan,
His heart with anguish of his sorrow faints.
And still he kneels before his makers throne.
At midnight sends he many a grievous groan.
So did his God in mercy on him look.
And all his sins did race out of his book.
F. S.

FINIS.

