TO ALL The CLOTHIERS OF ENGLAND.
The STATE of the DIFFERENCE between the CLOTHIERS and the CITY of LONDON.
TAking notice of a Printed Paper in form of a Petition, said to be presented
to the Honorable House of Commons, much complaining against an Act of Common
Council, (...) made by the City of London; For Regulating the Markets of
Blackwell-Hall, and Leaden Hall: do upon an impartial Survey and Consideration
of each, look upon the Clothiers to be much abused and seduced into the said
Complaints by some evil Instruments between them and the City, who labor to
make a Difference where none was, or can be, if rightly understood: and having
vizzorded their own contemptible Interest (under the Clothiers Name) do carry
on their private designs, to the manifest Injury both of the Citizen and
Clothier.

The matters complained of are chiefly three;

First, The Restraining their Clothes to lie 20. days in the Market, except
Sold.

Secondly, The Raising the Duty of Hallage: And a new Imposition of a Duty for
the Lying of their Goods.

Thirdly, The Requiring of their Factors to be Approved and Admitted by the
Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and to enter into a Recognizance of 200 l.
that they shall not Buy in, nor Sell out of the Markets any of those
Commodities they are Factors in.

I shall not meddle with the Cities indubitable Right to make Laws, for
Conservation of their own Privileges and Customs; nor Discourse the Legality
of this particular Act of Common Counsel, being out of my Sphere, and already
done by Learned Council before the Reverend Judges of His Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas: But only argue the reasonableness of it from grounds of Common
Benefit and Advantage to the Clothiers themselves, That it may appear (as is
alleged) that the Clothiers are abused into this Complaint. And

First, As to the Restraining their Clothes to lie 20 days in the Market,
except sold.

Answ. A Clothier bringing his Goods to London to be sold: It will not by any
rational Man be presumed, that he brought them so many score Miles with Intent
to remove them out of the Market till he had tried it for their Sale two or
three Market days at the least: and therefore the City could not imagine they
did the Clothier any wrong by letting his Cloth lie in a public Market ready
for Sale, with so good Accommodations (that no Citizen of London has the like)
for 20 days: They only intending by that Clause,

1. To abate the Rigor of former Acts of Common Council, which injoynes the
lying of their Goods in the Market till they were sold: which though much more
severe, yet neither then, or since (till now) was it either counted a grievance
by the Clothier, or never complained of as such: Yet the City in Tenderness to
the Clothier by this Act, thought a convenient time of 20 days more fitting to
be Inserted; that might in some measure obviate the Abuses done to the City on
the one hand, and be a Benefit and Advantage to the Clothier on the other.

2. That Foreign Buying and Selling might the better be prevented, which by
present Removing of Goods out of the Markets have been sold to Forraigners and
Aliens, Dutch, French, Germans, and other Nations, in private places and
Warehouses, without all possibility of Discovery, to the almost Ruin of the
Cities Franchises, and great Discouragement and almost Destruction of Trade in
the hands of our own English Merchants. And besides, such private and
Clandestine Sales have given the greatest Countenance to the making of such bad
and deceitful Cloth, to the general disrepute of our Manufacture in Foreign
parts; and raising the Credit, and much advancing the Trade of
Forreignmade-Cloth: which in time may have a dangerous tendency to the utter
overthrowing of our English Trade, and putting of it into the hands of Aliens
and Forraigners.

3. For the Clothiers good, That he may have the Benefit of the public
Market, and not have his Goods removed into Holes and Corners to gratify the
private designs of his subtle Factors; often proving to the Clothiers
Hinderance, by undervaluing Sales; or to his Hazard, by Sales to Irresponsible
persons: Having no Check upon his Factor as he has in the public Market, by
the Registers that the Act orders to be kept of all Goods brought in, sold, and
to whom.

These being the ends of the 20 days, how can their Accomplishment (if the
time were strictly stood upon, which is not) be any Greivance or Inconveniency
to the Clothier? Considering

1. There is no penalty Annexed by the Act upon any Clothiers Removal of his
Goods before the 20. days are expired, and their Printed Petition is mistaken
that affirms there is.

2. There Goods lies in a public Market, where they are exposed to Sale three
days in every Week, to all persons that come into the Halls.

3. They have Security for their Goods all that time, if they should be
stolen, or the Markets broke open, or any way miscarry: and no place in London
will afford the same.

4. They have most neat Accommodations for the laying up of their Goods, better
cannot be in any private House, or Warehouse whatsoever.

5. They are much more safe from all Hazzards and dangers of Fire then any
Factors House or Warehouse can be.

6. They pay nothing for all this for three Weeks time (the City intending to
take off for the lying for the latter 14. days, as well as for the first Week.)

And now I do believe: That there is not an Ingenious Clothier but will
acknowledge, That there is never a Market or Fair in England, or in the three
Nations, that affords them so much of Convenience and Safety upon such cheap
and easy terms as he enjoyes the same within the Markets of the City of London.

If the Clothier objects, Why may he not sell his Goods in any place of London,
if he shall see Cause?

I will only give this short Answer, That such a Permission were not only
Irrational in it self, but a palpable Invasion of the Freeman's Right, (and
here by the way take notice of that equal Justice, that has been ever used in
the Cities Markets) as well as a priviledging of the Forraigner to more then the
Freeman has a Right to, or can claim. All the public Markets of the City are
for the Forraigners use: and no Freeman (as such) ought to Invade the
Forraigners Right by selling there. All the rest of the City, (the Houses,
Shops, and Warehouses of London) are the Freemens-Market, Now there is the same
reason, That the Forraigners should not Invade this Right: So that by keeping
these distinct, they cannot be hurtful each to other. But to admit a Clothier
to Sell in, and out of the Markets too, is to privilege him beyond a Freeman,
who has power of Sales only in the latter. And thus I shall dismiss this
first Complaint: As to the

Second, The Raising the Duty of Hallage, and new Imposing a Duty for Lying.

Answ. I think the falsitie of this Clamor best Confuted by setting down in
two distinct Collumns the Ancient and Present Rates, both for the one and the
other; with some Observations upon them: that so by an Impartial Comparing the
one with the other, and weighing the Lengths, values of Goods, Times then, and
now; a Right Judgment may be had of the thing, and the notorious abusing of
the City in this unjust Charge, more palpably discovered.

Old Rates for Hallage.
1576. By Act of Common Counsel, 18. Eliz. All Long-Coxall, Long-Suffolke, and
Long-Glensford Clothes shall pay -- 2 d. 1612. By another Act of Common
Counsel, 10 Jac. Every Long-Cloth of Coxal, Glensford, and Suffolk, or any
other sort of 30. yards long and upwards, shall pay -- 2 d. All under shall pay
-- 1 d. Manchester-Packs -- 8 d. Welsh-Packs paid -- 8 d. Devon-Packs paid -- 9
d. Devon Bays the piece paid-1 d. ob. Perpetuanaes and Says paid 1 d. Serges
of all sorts the piece paid 1 d. Kersies were to pay thus, viz. 1 Kersie 1 d. 2
Kersie 1 d. 3 Kersie 1 d. 4 Kersies 2 d. and so on to 7 Kersies 2 d. 8 Kersies
3 d. and so on to 10 Kersies 3 d. And so the rest in this proportion. Dutch
Bays the piece paid 1 d. ob. Bays of all sorts, except Dutch, Devon, and
Quinco-Bayes (but including all Wiltshire and Dorsetshire Bays) for each piece
-- 2 d. Worsted-stockings the 20 pair paid -- 2 d. Woollen Stockings for every
two dozen paid -- 1 d.
New Rates for Hallage.
All Broad-Clothes of what kind or name soever, exceeding 30 yards long -- 2 d.
All above 20 yards, not exceeding 30 yards long -- 1 d. All of 20 yards long
and under -- 1 d. Manchester Packs -- 10 d. The same. Now no rate by the Pack.
Now Devon-Bayes pays -- 1 d. The same. The same. All Kersies, white, dyed, or
mixed, if dozens -- ob. If above 12 yards -- 1 d. The same. All Wiltshire, and
Dorsetshire Bays pays now -- 1 d. All Essex, Suffolk Bays -- 2 d. The same.
The same.
Observe,
That by the Statue of 5. and 6. E. 6. no kind of Broad-Cloth was to exceed 30
yards. So then by the Act of Common Counsel, 18. Eliz. they were to pay -- 2 d.
Now by the new Act but -- 1 d. ob. By the Statute of 4. Jac. no Broad-Clothes
were to exceed 33 yards most to be under 30 yards; yet by the Act of
Common Counsel, 10. Jac. all of 30 yards were to pay -- 2 d. Now except above
30-1 d. ob. Note, That Broads are generally made now from 30 to 44 yards, and
yet pay but 1 d. ob. or 2 d. Note, (...) abated Note, here is half abated.
Old Rates for Lying.
1576. By the Act of 18. Elizabeth, Every Horspack of Devon Kersies, shall pay
weekly so long as they remain unsold -- 6 d. All Penistons and Northern dozens
to pay for every single piece weekly -- ob. All Hampshire and Northern Kersies
after the rate of every score weekly -- 6 d. All Broad-Clothes after a months
lying over and above their usual Hallage, shall pay for every Cloth weekly -- 1
d. Every 3 Kersies besides their first Hallage, after a months lying shall pay
for every week during their remaining there -- 1 d.
New Rates for Lying.
It is Enacted, That for all Clothes and other Commodities lying still in the
Markets, Hallage shall be weekly paid, after the first week half so much as was
the rate of the first Hallage. So then by this Rate All Clothes, except above
30 yards long, pay but -- If above 30 yards long though 45 yards, as some are,
but -- 1 d. Three Kersies, if dozens, now pay but --

Observe.
1. This Duty for Lying, is no Innovation, having been above 86 years. 2. The
Clothier or his Agent, has beyond memory constantly paid it, as will be
proved. 3. Though in the Act of Com. Council, 18 Eliz. for several things
therein for which a weekly duty is required for Lying; there is no Hallage at
first pitching; yet if the rates be well considered, (...) rates will come to
more for lying only, then what is required by this new Act for hallage and
lying.
By all which it appears, that the difference between the old and the new rates
for Hallage is little other then in form, the new being more abreviated and
succinct, taking things in more by their lengths, then names, which is the
surer and more equal way, and so the rates will be found to be rather lessened
then augmented; and as to the duty it self, it is consonant and agreeable to
Toll taken in all Fairs and Markets, and is less then is taken in any Fair or
Market in England, (though their Goods be pitched in open places without any
shelter from weather, as here) and is no more then every Freeman of London
pays for that he buys, by pre-contract in the Country, or receives in Custom
from any Clothier, who has no benefit (or can have) of selling his Goods in
the public Markets as the Clothier has, and therefore has more reason to be
agrieved at the [Note.]
Duty then he.

And as to the Duty for Lying, it is so equal and just a thing that no
Ingenious Clothier can complain of it as a burden, when the ensuing benefits he
reaps by the same, are seriously weighed and considered: as,

1. He has his Goods lie in a public Market, and not thrust into a private
Corner, as was partly hinted before.

2. He has security not only for 20 days, but so long as they continue there,
so that for a penny, he has 20 or 30 l. value oftentimes secured to him.

3. He has convenience of stowage in the Hall private to himself or his Factor
(besides his Market place) with Pile Benches, Tables, and other fitting
accommodations, all made and maintained to his hand, at the Cities charge.

4. He has the Halls, Markets, and Warehouses, constantly repaired, which
costs great sums yearly, together with Sallaries for Officers to attend the
Markets, and to Register and look after his goods; all likewise at the Cities
charge.

5. He has freedom to ease himself of the charge when he will (without giving
warning as is required in all other places of the City) by sale or removal of
his Goods, he paying little when he has little, more when he has much,
nothing when he has nothing; his payments always bearing proportion to what
he has, and what can be more just and equal? Any of which Privileges no
Freeman of London enjoyes, and the least of which is of more worth to the
Clothier, then what he pays for all; To all which let me subjoin (though not
so properly under this head)

6. If the Clothier should remove his Goods to his Factors house, the very
Porteridge to and fro, will cost him more then a fortnights lying in the Hall,
and yet can enjoy none of those privileges in his house that he does in the
Markets.

And now let any indifferent man judge whether any thing can be hard upon the
Clothier in these respects? and whether he has not a full pennyworth for his
penny? Or whether any Fair or Market in England, can or does afford him the
like accommodations and advantages as he here injoyes for such petty and
inconsiderable values as he here pays. I confess I am not apt to think that
any Ingenious Clothier whatever should boggle at these petty payments wherein
he reaps so real a benefit, and is to so noble, Christian, and Charitable a
use as it goes to (when all charges are born) when in other things, for less
advantages (and often for real mischiefs) he shall be so generous as to Cram
his Factors pockets with Hundreds by the year. But I shall spare that
Generation for the sake of some among them, that I believe are as just and as
honest dealing-men as lives by bread, and as true to their principles as their
own sons and meniall Servants could be; and so shall dismiss this Second
Complaint. Their next is,

Thirdly, The requiring their Factors to be approved and admitted by the Lord
Mayor and Court of Aldermen, and to enter into a Recognizance of 200 l. etc.

Ans. This, this is that which has made all this Rattle, and strongly to be
suspected has occasioned all the other Complaints, we never hearing any thing
of the Factors zeal for the Clothier in respect of the other, till he was pressed
upon this. And here I would be rightly understood, that what I shall have
occasion in the carrying on of this discourse to speak concerning Factors in
general, not to mean those Factors whose peaceable and obedient spirits
carried them on to a just and ready submission to the City in what was required
of them, who deserve a fair and honorable mention; But those who have been the
Incendiaries, thus causelessely to inflaim the Clothier against the City, the
better to carry on their own By-ends to the prejudice of both. Nor shall I here
defend the Cities Legal Right to what is required (that more properly
belonging to another hand) but show the requisitenesse and absolute necessity
of it in respect of the Clothiers interest only.

As to that of the Lord Mayors and Court of Aldermens approving and admitting
of who shall be constant Factors or Broakers (for in that notion I must now
take them) in any of their public Markets; I shall give these few Reasons for
it.

1. It has been the constant practice and custom of the City (time out of
mind) to allow and admit of persons that make bargains between man and man, and
these men must not think that because of late years they have assumed to
themselves the more Gentile-name of Factors, therefore the Cities privileges,
and the Common good thereby, must by that means be so easily evaded and avoided.

2. That their Illimited Numbers may be abated, and room made for the honest
Clothier to sell his own goods in, if he has a mind to it; the Factors of late
years, by their great increase and taking of Apprentices to increase more, have
quite justled out the Clothier from the Market, for whom it was primarily
Intended; or else making him stand by as a uselesle un-concerned Hangby, while
he sells his Goods to whom he pleases, and then receives a reward and Sallary
for abusing him.

3. To see that they be persons of honest fame and responsible condition, as
the better to secure the trust the Clothier reposes in them; so in regard of
that security, the City gives the Clothier for his Goods, in the Case of Theft
or any miscarriage (as before is hinted) It not being fit that every person
that pretends himself a Factor should have opportunity fraudulently to convey
away other men's Goods, that the City may afterward pay for.

4. The City being the proper Judges of any Nusances arising in their Markets,
finding by long experience both the Factors increase and miscarriage (in making
the public Market his own private shop to sell his own goods in) to be such
both to Buyer and Seller; takes upon them to approve of those that stand or
broak between man and man; that the Market may not be Huckstered and
Forestalled, but kept Indifferent between Clothier and Citizen.

5. Factory, or Broakery in it self being no Trade, are not Subject to any
Rules or Regulations of particular Societies and Companies as Trades are,
otherwise then by the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen; therefore they ought to
have a particular inspection over their persons and ways, to see they do
nothing in the excercize of that feat, by combination and confederacies among
themselves to the setting of the Market, raising or lowering of the
Commodities, to the prejudice of the Subject in General, or of the particular
Buyers and Sellers of those Commodities.

Now as to their being required to enter into a Recognizance of 200 l. etc.

Ans. Here take notice of the Condition of this Recognizance, which is nothing
else but that he shall not buy in, or sell out of the Market any of the
Commodities that he is a Factor in, and that during so long time (only) that he
shall continue a Factor,

Hence Note,

1. That the Clothier is no way concerned in the Condition of this
Recognizance, this not relating to the Factor as he is the Clothiers Servant,
nor restraining him in any thing that is properly the Clothiers Service. His
Service being only to sell his Goods in the Market (out of the Market the
Clothier ought not to sell himself within the City) which notwithstanding his
Recognizance, he is left free to do.

2. That from what the Recognizance restrains him, is only from exercising a
By-Trade of his own in those Commodities wherein he is the Clothiers Servant;
and if this be not common Justice, the world must seek out new-Rules to shape
commerce by; there being nothing more common between man and man, then if a man
imploys a servant to bind him up from dealing in those Commodities (himself)
wherein he is his servant; and oft-times from dealing in any thing else: that
so his Servants time and head may be more occupied in his Masters business,
then otherwise by driving several Intrests it can be: If this were not, it
were impossible to carry on any Trade or Dealing in the Kingdom out of our own
hands, the many continual undiscovered Cheats would be so rife upon the
Imployers, that they could never otherwise be prevented, then by tying up their
Factors from using a By-Trade in those Commodities that they are Servants in:
for want of which restraint upon the Factors, all those many secret and
undoing-mischiefs that has peeled the Clothier to nothing, has flowed in upon
him, and he knew not what to impute his undoing too; certainly had this been
done, the honest Industrious Clothier had found better Markets, better
payments, better accounts, better customers, surer debts, better dealing in
every kind then of late (since their Factors have been Traders for themselves)
they have had; the continuance of the Factors By-Trade (except Factors be
Saints) must necessarily draw upon the Clothier these and many other
inconveniences,

1. The Clothier can never have the true benefit of his Market; as for
Instance, A Clothier sends up half a dozen or more of Clothes to his Factor in
London to sell for his best advantage: His Factor liking them well, and knowing
their request, either buys them all himself, or else culls out the best
Colors, and Clothes among them, leaving the refuse to run the hazard of an
uncertain Market, to the Clothiers no small loss, he thinking in the Country
that he has 2 or 300 Chapmen looking upon his Goods in the Market, has indeed
only his own single Factor; whose By-Trade has prompted him, in stead of
making the best Market for the Clothier, to make the best Market of the
Clothier.

2. As a consequent of this, this By-trading-Factor, makes the Clothier pay
Factorage for the mischief he has done him, for those very Goods he has
bought himself; and in this sense, can truly be said to under-buy any man
living; no man having that privilege but himself.

3. He can create a necessity upon the Clothier when he pleases, by keeping his
Clothes unexposed from Sale, and so in want of moneys, that (if their Rates be
set higher then he would have them) he may the better make his own Markets of
them, and have his Goods at his own price, the easier to carry on his own
private Trade.

4. He can bring what Debts and Losses he will upon the Clothier, if the Factor
has sold off any Clothiers Goods out of the Market (which before he had taken
to his own Account) if the Chapman proves bad or Insolvent, then that is the
Clothiers debt; But if good, the Clothier never hears on it, though the Cloth be
sold for never so much profit; so that the Clothier stands only to the Losing
Trade, his Factor to the Getting.

5. The Factor in Design often keeps the Clothier Ignorant of his Customer to
whom he sells his Goods, it may be for a double end; But I Will instance only in
one, to make him the more to depend upon himself, that so all Goods that come
to the City, may come through the Factors hands, that thereby they may have
opportunities the better to drive the Markets for the benefit of their private
Trade.

It were endless to innumerate the constant flux of evils that the Factors
buying and selling beyond the Clothiers employment will and has occasioned,
but the Clothier knows and feels enough of them, but knows not how to help
himself; these are Greivances indeed upon the Clothier, and yet some of these
are petty things, to what the Clothier finds; had not his Factor had a By-Trade
of buying and selling for himself, as well as for him, he might have got many
Hundred pounds into his own purse, which is now crept into his Factor's. Whence
is it, that the Clothier (of late years) has grown poor and the Factor grown
rich? The Master declined, and the Servant has thrived? Is It in the Sallary of
3, 4, 5. s. per Cloth that he has paid to the Factor for selling his Goods?
No, no it is the By-Trade, the Trade of the Clothier, not for the Clothier that
has done the Deed, these have been like Moaths in his Cloth, that has eaten
him and his Clothes threadbare: And yet now that the Clothier may be secured
against these, and the apparent mischiefs that these have brought, is all the
hurt the City has done them, by taking this Recognizance of their Factors,
that they shall not buy in, or sell out of the Markets, any of the Commodities
that they are Factors for; and in this narrow Compass is the Quarrel between
the Clothier and the City brought, I mean what appears; The true Quarrel being
only between the Factor and the City, for the Clothiers good, as well as their
own from the Clothier, the City has rather deserved their thanks, then their
complaint, and believe from the most Ingenious of them would find it.

There may be as much reason given from the Cities concernments, why the Factor
should be restrained from his By-Trade: (else the Markets will be overthrown as
to the City, no man can buy Goods, but through the Factors Grate, or after he
has made his choice and culled the Market, or at second hand; and this being a
notable encouragement for a few Factors to join together, and to ingrosse the
best of the Manufacture unto themselves, and thereby spoil the Trade of the
rest of the Citizens of London:) But I suppose these and many more
inconveniences that will attend the Citizen in the Market, will be of lesser
regard to the Clothier, then his own Interest, therefore shall forbear to say
more of it, except provoked by a further occasion. And truly all this discourse
I have managed more as an Englishman then a Citizen (which I confess I am)
regarding more the Clothiers Interest then the Cities, though cannot eye one
without the other they are so twisted and linked together, and well knowing the
City has and ever had a tender regard of the Clothier, and of his
concernments, and have been always, and still are, ready to deny themselves in
some of their own privileges for their encouragement and accommodation, and
will upon any address made unto them (which yet was never done by any one
Clothier (that ever I heard of) since the Act was made) be ready to redress
any thing that may be found in that, or in any thing else to be unreasonable or
hard upon them, and therefore (in Relation to this very Act) dare in behalf of
the City, promise the Clothier these three things:

1. That notwithstanding the expression in the Act of their Goods lying in the
Market 20 days, except sold; that there is none of their Clothes, that either
by wet in coming to Town, or by other Casualties shall be unfitted for Sale;
But they shall have them out at their pleasures, to fit and dress up for the
Market.

2. Or if any Clothier having Goods in the Market, would take up moneys upon
them for the supplying his present occasions, He shall have liberty to take
them forth, to make them security to any one that he shall borrow money on.
Provided these be not used as Artifices to evade the Cities Franchizes by
private selling them out of the Market to Forraigners and Strangers. And
further,

3. If the Clothier desires it, they shall have liberty granted them upon any
one of the three days, that are not by the Act appointed Market days in every
Week, for the space of a whole Forenoon freely to come into any of the said
Market places, to See, Count, or lay up their Clothes unsold, the better to
make up, and even their Accounts with their Respective Factors; or any thing
else, that may be for the dispatch, or Accommodation of their Affairs.

And now whether it be the Hospitall-pence, or the Factors pounds, got by his
By-Trade, that wrings, and is a real Grievance to the Clothier, I leave it to
Impartial men to judge; with this one consideration (for a Conclusion) to be
duly weighed by every ingenious Clothier, which may serve as a demonstration
to the verity of what has been said; The vast and great estates that are got
by a sort of men crept in between them and the Buyers of their Commodities,
which is all dreyned out of the Trade by the By, and which must be felt by some
body; and were there but the bare consideration of their great numbers of late
years Multiplied, and continually increasing by the Apprentices they take,
though they were all of plain and honest dealing, yet the very maintenance of
them and their several Families (for they are not kept with a small matter)
must needs beget a charge upon the Manufacture, that if it do not inhaunce the
price to the Buyers, yet must certainly go out of the Clothiers profit; and so
does necessarily call for the lessening of their Numbers, if not Quallifying of
their persons.

D. S.

FINIS.

