FLORA'S FORTUNE. The second part and finishing of the Fishermans Tale.
Containing, The strange accidents which chanced to Flora, and her supposed
father Thirsis: also the happy meeting with her desired Cassander.

Quod grave Sabe iugum patitur ceruice magistri
Hoc grave lene iugum mitis Apollo facit.
By F. S.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, at the sign of the Rose and Crown,
near to S. Andrews Church in Holborne. 1595

To the Worshipful, his very good friend, M. Francis Tresham, son and heir
to to the renowned and virtuous Knight, Sir Thomas Tresham, Francis Sabie
wishes full fruition of mortal and immortal foelicite.
THE report and consideration (Right Worshipful of your exceeding courtesy,
the great and immerited friendship, which I and my parents have, and do daily
find at the hands of that renowned and virtuous Knight, your Father, do
embolden me to present unto your Worship this my unpolished Poem, from which
otherwise, the imbecilitie of my skill in this divine art, and rudeness of
these my lines, do altogether dehort me. Which if your Worship (serious
affairs ended) shall vouchsafe to cast a favorable glaunce upon, and therein
shall find any part or parcel pleasing to your virtuous mind, I shall esteem
my travel as much worth, as had it otherwise been spent, in winning the
golden Apples of Hisperia, or in fetching precious Iems from the crystal lake
of the Pearl-flowing Tagus. The history (I praesume) you shall find
delightful; the matter not offensive to any, only my skill in penning it is,
imbicill; and my presumption, in presenting so rude a piece of work to so wise
a Patron, very great: which I hope your Worship will the more bear with, and
account the rather to be pardonable, in that the fault proceeds from a good
intention and faultlesse meaning.

Your Worships immoouable votarie. FRANCIS SABIE.

To the Reader.
TO expel (scorn-hating Reader) the accustomed tediousnes of cold winters
nights, and partly to beguile slouth-causing sleep, which otherwise would
have claimed some interest in an vnbusied brain, I took pen in hand, and
presuming somewhat of mine own skill, wrote the Lat^ published Poem of the
Fisher-mans Tale, which of necessity I was then abruptly constrained to break
off, both in that Cassander who told the tale, could neither declare what had
then chanced to Flora his Love, nor I what would chance unto him. Since which
time, variable accidents have happened to either of them, which newes-bearing
Report has brought unto mino-eares, and which also thy late acceptance of the
former has encouraged me to promulgate. Whereat if squint-eied Zoylus, or
splay-footed Momus shall carpe, or find fault, let them not, like angry dogs,
al to be slauer with their jaws the stone cast at them, I mean, tear in
sunder my faultlesse Papers, but rather have access unto me their Author, who
will straitwayes fetch forth an old rust-eaten Halberd, which saw no Sun
these seven years, wherewith I will either massacre their deformed limbs, or
(if they speak me fair) guard them safely to Cold-harbour college, where
they may have one whole months leisure, to study their backbiting art. But
courteous Gentlemen will courteously judge of other men's travels, and my hope is
gentle Reader, as thou have friendly read and liked the beginning, so thou will also as friendly accept and judge of the ending.

Thine ever in courtesy. F. S.

FLORA'S FORTUNE. The second part and finishing of the Fishermans Tale.
COme Clio sweet, my neuer-idle Muse,
Whose pleasant tunes so cheers a drooping mind,
Come cheerful Muse from Helicons fair springs,
With Pallas sprigs, and Phoebus Laureats dect,
Help, aid, assist, to sing, declare, rehearse
What did betide poor Flora, late the love
Of stout Cassander, long the inhabitant
of Thetis Cell, and Neptunes Monastery:
On whom the Gods and Fortune minded were
Full seven long winters torments to inflicct.
Unnaturally for that his Sire he left:
Whose austere dealing wrought his fatal bane,
And for austeritie to Thirsis shown,
Not yielding to his Tyger-taming words.
Come gentle Muse, declare the rare events
Which chanced to poor Flora and her Sire:
What? can the Gods both frown and faw ne at once?
No sooner had Prosperities arch-foe.
Death-threatning Fate with force of raging winds,
And shattring billows shrinde her of her love,
But she forthwith her father gad embrace,
And cleft on him on whom she scarflie durst
Now look upon, forgetful she of fear,
And he of rage, distress now made them friends,
Each held one arm about the others neck,
Each held one arm fast on a shatred pine,
Thus saylde they through the monster-shewing sea,
Now flying up to high Olympus tower,
Now down again to Dis his hellish lake,
Sometimes both whelmd with Neptunes frothy waves
Sometimes again revived with drying winds.
Long sailde they thus, not thinking once of life.
Senseless as one on whom Jove's fire has fallen,
Or fearful weapons framed by Cyclops hands,
When suddenly Triton did sound retreyt
To hoysting waves, and Eolus to winds:
Seas were then mild, air calm, each wind was hushed
And quiet then, as in the Halcions days:
The broken bulk on which they sailed then,
Without all peril peaceably did swim,
A ship by chance preserved from this storm,
Came sailing by, the Mariners espide
These wightes distressed, and moved unto ruth,
Directed sails toward them, and took them in,
And carried them (halfe-drownd) to Delphos I Will,
Where wise Apollo gives out Oracles:
Here was poor Flora with her wretched Sire,
Both set on shore, amazed yet with fear,
When seeing death disdaind to end her woes,
Vplifting hands unto the lofty skies,
Exclaiming, sobbing, weeping, crying out,
And furiously renting her yellow hair:
Thus Flora made her lamentable moan.
Death, Dis, Styx, Proserpine, vt Stygian Gods,
Infernal powers, and all ye relish crew,
Why suffer ye me damned wight to live,
Unfit, yea far unfit on earth to dwell?
Alas me thinks, Dis sends me to Revenge,
And Proserpine, to neuer-dying woes:
Ay me, see Death disdaines to end my pangs,
I am reserved, doubtless I am reserved
With Tantalus, or wretched Ixion,
Plagues, euer-during plagues still to abide.
Pardon, good Thirsis, pardon thine own child,
The worker of thy grief and endless bane,
And now Cassander, whose delightful shape,
The gods enuy'd, which made thee be disdainde,
Lo now I come to thee, this fatal blade,
(A blade she held in hand) shall end my days,
And though we might not live together here,
Yet shall our Ghosts (ye Gods forbid it not)
With Lovers blyth, sport in Elizian fields.
This said, she would have therewith slain her self:
Whereat her Sire concealing his great grief,
In this wise moved her from this desperate act.
Stay daughter, stay, let not your hands prepared
To save your life, be authors of your death:
Learn of thy Sire, be warned by gray hairs,
Of many years wit and experience comes:
With grievous plagues the Gods will them torment,
Which be themselves the authors of their death.
Lets rather seek how to preserve our lives,
And not unnaturally work our own bane.
What though you have been breedresse of my woes
And mothers grief, the Gods will have it so.
Men say, Apollo in this sacred I Will,
Gives Oracles to wightes which be oppressed,
Come let us go unto his Temple rich,
And see if he will show to us what course,
Of life to take, or if by any means,
We may return into our native land,
How to return into our native land.
This said, they wandered both with pensive hearts
To wise Apollos Church not far from thence,
Where when they were, sweet odors rich in smell,
On Aultars high religiously they burnt,
Then kneeling down upon the Marble flints,
With naked knees, bare heads, and vp-lifthandes,
Making the Temple sound with grievous sobs,
Old Thirsis in this sort began make his moan.
O wise Apollo, fate-praesaging God,
Who know what things have been are and shall be,
O wise Apollo, crime-disclosing God,
Who doubtless know how fate has dealt with me,
Aid and assist us twain, whom Fortunes spite
Has causde to err in this thy Delian Isle,
And if the Destenies have it decreed,
That of my life the thread be quite out run,
Near this thy temple let me lay my bones:
But let poor Flora my supposed child,
Find some redress, age wills me to expect
And welcome death: Her lusty youthful years
Desire sweet life: the blossoms of my time,
Now withered are, but hers are fresh and green:
Or if we may The Arcadian plaiues once see,
Tell us how we again may them once see:
He held his peace, and Flora thus began.
O Phoebus wise, of Prophets supreme king,
Discloser of all secret mysteries,
Tell how old Thirsis, whom proud Fortunes wrath
Has made a pilgrim in thy sacred Isle,
May once but see his aged wife again,
The Arcadian plains, and swain-frequented fields:
And let me die, death is my due reward:
I crave no other, death I have deserved.
Forthwith a scrowle before them was let fall,
And therewithal these thundering voices sent,
Take what you see Arcadians, shun delay,
And where this ship sets you on land. there stay.
Then giving thanks, they took and read the scrowle,
Wherein these words imprinted were in gold.
Old Thirsis, wise Apollo pittieth thee,
One of his prophets henceforth thou shall be:
Live Flora with thy Sire, end not thy days,
Cassander lives not drowned is he in seas.
Forthwith, as they were charged, he made haste
Unto the ship, then ready to lanch out:
But Flora doubtful of the Oracle,
Stood still amazed, not knowing what to do.
Alas, quoth she, what means the Delian god,
With such ambiguous words me to delude?
What, was it not as easy to have said,
Cassander lives: not drowned is he, or else,
Cassander lives not: drownde is he? I see,
Ay me, I see, the powers minded are
To wrap me in a Laberinth of woes:
He surely means Cassander lives not,
And so I Will take it, drowned is he in deep.
This said, her father wild her to make haste,
And follow him, as Phoebus had given charge.
She followed him, but with a persiue heart,
And doleful mind: they both were set on board,
The shipmen quickly lanched into deep:
And gave full sails unto their flying pine:
Which Boreas steeds began draw through Thetis field,
And plowghd therewith the sea gods marshie realm:
Unlucky Flora trembled as she sat,
Fearing each wave which shrind her of her love.
Seven times had Tytan lift his fiery head,
From Thetis lap, where he all night had slept:
Seven times again in her Chrystaline waves,
He drencht his chariot, and did sleep again,
When Adrian chief ruler of the ship,
Fom top of stern the Greekish coast espide,
From whence they came, and whereat in short space,
Winds helping them, they safely did arrive?
Here Flora landed with her aged Site.
The second time here were they set on shore,
And news was spread through all the land of Greece
That Phoebus had a Prophet to them sent,
From Delphos I Will, and now he could divine,
Presage, and tell all secrets and hid things,
Apollo o^lie had concealde from him
Cassanders fate, his daughters, and his own.
Newes-carying Fame with her loud sounding trump
Had quickly blazed these tidings through the land,
And who so famous now as Thirsis was,
Who so renowned from cuntries far unknown,
Kings, potentates, old, young, both rich and poor,
And all degrees came flocking unto him:
As though he had Apollo been himself,
He briefly would all mysteries disclose,
And tell to them their own peculiar thoughts,
What was, had been, and would be, he could tell.
Great store of gold and wealth was to him brought,
Yet covetous swain, still hungry after gain,
The more he had, the more he sought to have,
Who seeing Grecia cuntrie to contain
Fair Meadows, pastures, grounds and fields in it.
Sought to increase his stock, and though he had
Now changed the air, ye changed he not his mind,
But like the Cat whom Jupiter transformed
Into a maid, still ran she to a Mouse.
Though Phoebus had a Prophet of him made,
Yet would he show himself to be a swain,
He bought him sheep and cotes, and never had
So many flocks in large Arcadian bounds,
As now he had within the Grecian fields,
Sometime himself upon them would attend,
Sometime again, poor Flora would them keep,
And bearing still in mind Cassanders shape,
Abandoning a second Lovers name.
She termed her self one of Dianas Nymphs,
Or Vestas Nuns, detesting Venus laws,
Which was the cause though many did her love,
Yet they refusde to show to her their minds.
Poor Saint, she wandered up and down the fields,
Exclaiming sobbing,, making piteous moan,
And on a time recording her old Love,
As by her herds upon a hill she stood,
Such restless passions gripte her in ward heart,
That desperately she plucked forth a knife,
Ready to pearce therewith her groaning heart,
And therewithal these doleful words sent forth,
To which poor Echo answered in this wise.
Fl. What shall I do, shall I die, what shall Flora kill Flora, shall she?
or to do such a fact shall I leave off? Echo. I leave off.
Fl. Leave off, and why so? what lives there any so wretched,
or any so lucklesse each where as I am? Ec. I am.
Fl. Why tell, what art thou who me so sadly reanswerst;
some distressed Virgin, or woeful Echo? Ec. Echo
Fl. Alas poor Echo we twain maywell go together,
say truly, what do we two not agree? Ec. Not agree.
Fl. Why tell good Echo, lives my Cassander how should I
joy, if thou should tell me that he lives: Ec. He lives.
Fl. Deceitful Echo, what meanst thou so to delude me*
the sea had him doubtless, it had, and it has, Ec. It has.
Fl. I know that too well: we two may then go together.
dispairing Flora bids thee then adieu. Ec. Adieu.
This said, she sent forth grievous sighs and groans,
Groans able to make soft the flintie stones,
And therewithal stretched out again her blade,
Her blade, wherewith she meant to kill her self:
Recording yet her fathers counsel once,
Desisted from this fatal enterprise.
Long lived she thus, poor wretch, yet at the length
Delay did somewhat mirigate her woes,
Whom now hemd in a laberinth of griefs,
And heap of cares, a while I mean to leave.
Now of her birth, hard haps and parents lives,
And native soil, wherein she now remaind,
And famous progeny I mean to speak.
In these seas (O my Muse) let sail thy bark,
And in this ground let run thy wagon wheels:
Agenor once which ware the royal crown
And diadem within this land of Greece.
Summond by fate to appear before the ghostes,
And stricken with deaths fame outracing dart.
Now at last gasp, upon his fatal bed,
Ready to die, his son unto him called,
His only son Palemon whom he left
To wear his crown, and sit upon his throne:
He cam^ Agenor took him by the hand,
And shedding tears, thus dolefullie began speak.
Thou see my son, how death now summons me
T'appeare before the supreme king of kings:
Oh, see my son, how Atropos extendes
Her hand, even now to cut in two the thread,
I must depart, the Fates will have it so:
Ingraue thou therefore in thy youthful mind,
Thy dying fathers last and latest words:
This kingdom now falls unto thee by lot,
And in my steed thou must this throne possess,
Be therefore wise, and as thou know, I have,
So be thou careful of thy subjects wealth:
Give vice his due, and virtue his rewards,
And that thy progeny may also sit
Upon this throne, and wear thy royal crown,
Choose thee a wife equal to thee in birth,
Respecting virtue, and not greedy gain:
More for her wisdom, fame and chastity,
Then riches, form, and transitory shape:
So shall our progeny for ever sit
In this high seat, and wear this royal crown.
This said, such death presaging pangs oppressed
His dying heart, that speech was took away.
At length great Juno pitying his estate,
Sent many-colloured Iris down from heaven.
Of life Dame Iris quickly him dissolved:
Straight to a sigh, and huge death bringing groan,
Out flew his breath, and to the ghosts began post
Ay me, how did this sad and gastfull sight
Apale Palemons young courageous mind,
Thrice fell he down, and thrice again was took
Half dead from ground, so nature in him wrought.
Yet when this dolor began it self remove,
And cloud of grief to vanish from his mind,
He comfort took, and for his burial rites
And funerals, all things he soon preparde,
With regaltie, and worthy such a prince,
And Potentate, were speedily dispatched.
He carried with a noble troop of Peers,
In mourning weeds to Pallas temple rich,
And there in Marble royally entombde,
Shortly met all the Noble men again,
And princely Peers, this mourning laid aside,
And with one mind, as was his right, they made
Palemon king in old Agenors steed.
The set the Crown upon his youthful head,
And princely Scepter in his regal hand.
He governed them, and to them he gave laws,
He was their Lord, he was their only king.
Three times had Ver expelling Hiems frosts,
Refresht the earth, which like a Chaos were,
Three times again had blustering Hyems nipt
The fragrant herbs, which Lady Ver had brought,
When governing the famous land of Greece,
And quite forgetful of his fathers words,
His Lords and Princes began him wisely move,
To take a wise sprung of some royal blood,
Alleging that it would commodious be
To him, and not unpleasant unto them,
A son to see, begotten of his seed:
So being old, yet should he still be young,
So being dead, he still in them should live.
And furthermore, say they, thy neighbor King,
Tuiston high, in Germany who reigns,
One daughter has a Virgin passing fair,
In virtue, wealth, in birth, and natures gifts,
Excelling, rich, most royal, and renownd,
Who after him shall wear the imperial crown,
And by embassage to thy father sent,
Who lately has her proferd to thy wife,
And if so be thou minded art to sail,
To Germany to see this sacred impe,
whose virtues rare shril Fames loud-sounding trump,
Has almost blazed throughout all the world,
We Will guarde thee thither and a fit time now,
It is (it was spring tide) to cut the seas:
He straight ways moved at these his Princes words
Burnt in desire to see this virgin rare.
But by Ambassadors he minded first
To know Tuistons mind, and whether she
Was not betrothed to an any other king,
For else his welcome might have been but cold:
His suit denide, and all his labor lost:
Ambassadors he therefore sent in haste,
Who speedily returnde with gladsome news,
News that Tuiston greatly would rejoice,
And be most glad to see him in his realm,
Palemon hereat leapt for joy in mind,
And for his journey all things soon preparde,
And royally with many of his peers,
Did shipping take, and cut the Caerule seas,
And in short space, winds furthering his intent,
Arrived at Tuistons Germain coast,
Soon heard Tuiston that Agenors son
Was in his realm, and coming toward his court,
Who speedily with all his valiant peers
Came forth to meet, and welcome this great prince.
Iulina also* (for so called was
Tuistons daughter) guarded on each hand,
With troops of Ladies fair, and gallant imps,
Impsable even to make Adonis yield,
To welcome this young Prince, came with her Sire,
She went: ah not unlike in view she went,
To Regal Juno, wife of kingly Jove,
Had Venus been among them, Venus would
Have seemd to her inferior far in shape,
In pregnant wit she Pallas did surpass:
And to be brief more coy and chaste she was,
Then that groue-haunting goddess, who delights,
In menacing the wild and savage beasts.
Palemon saw her, and he was amazed
At her rare form, and excellence in shape,
Her looks, her gesture, and mind-pleasing words,
Allured so his captiuated mind,
Accusing Fame one while, whom then he thought,
Too partial was in sounding her due praise:
And whom even now he did but wish to see,
As greatly now he did desire to have:
Which in short time I, study to be brief,
He did obtain, to both their sweet contents:
Their wedding day appointed, now was come,
I will not tell here what triumphant shows
And joy was held throughout all Tuistons land,
The higher sort in honor of their Queen,
On Coursers brave their valiant prowess showed.
The rusticke crew made bonefiers in their streets,
The pastoral troop made fields with duties sound:
But that days pleasure soon began pass away,
His fiery steeds now Tytan did unyoke,
Her pitchie steedes now Luna did bring forth,
Night summond weary limbs to take their rest:
This princely couple laid them down in bed,
Most joyfully: But oh, unhappy time,
O lucklesse night! the spousall wife of Jove
Was not here present, Hymon was not here,
Eumenides and Furies present were:
And from the chamber top in hellish notes
The Screech owl sang a lamentable song.
Twice with full circle, twice with wained horns,
Did Cinthia see Agenors sportiue son,
Courting Iulina his new wedded wife.
And froliking in old Tuistons Court,
When sudenly a great desire to see
His country Greece, was kindled in his mind,
Forthwith he told Tuiston that he needs
Should then return unto his land again,
Alleging causes of no little force,
Which old Tuiston could not well gainsay.
But as he could, he moved him yet to stay,
But no entreaty would with him take place,
Now were swift ships and all things in the port,
To carry these two princes into Greece:
Aye me what tongue, what Tullie can express,
But half the dolor of this dismal day.
Three times Tuististon kissing his sweet child,
Bedewed her cheeks with his Christalline tears,
Three times he would have said, sweet child farewell,
In steed of which came three heart-renting groans:
Then charged he her, her husband to obey,
And at no time to falsify her faith.
Then praid he him to love his loving wife:
By whom he once should gain so great a Crown.
But now the ships already were lanch'd out,
And they on board, now must they needs away:
Poor issulesse Tuiston cried out,
Like loving Nurse whose babe is took away:
Repenting that he ever had bequeathed
His daughter to Palemon, King of Greece,
Who had her carried from her Fathers land,
Whose only comfort and delight she was:
Accusing one while Fate, and senile age,
Who would not suffer his unwieldy iointes,
Through Neptunes real me to follow his dear child.
Long time lamenting thus upon the shore,
Viewing the pines which carried them, he stood:
And when they were sailde fully out of sight,
Unto his Palace sorrowful returnde:
And as a Turtle Dove, when she has lost
Her loving mate, so seemed he to lament,
Refusing solace, void of earthly joy.
And at the last his life in grief did end.
Seven times Aurora with her ruddie cheeks,
Saw young Palemon sailing with his love,
Seven times in Skies night-bringing Vesper shone,
By which their sails the mariners did guide,
When turrets high began to show themselves
From Pallas temple in coast of Greece,
To which aire-beating Austers flying steedes,
Did quickly draw the saile-supporting pines.
Who can express but half the joy which Greece
Made when Palemon safely there arrived,
Shril Trumpets blew, bells rang, loud Echoes pierced
The lofty skies, at their arrival home,
And now Palemon, who had such a Queen,
A peerless spouse, with virtues rare enricht,
Now might thou have most luckiest been called,
Of all the Monarks under cope of heaven:
But no man may be called fortunate,
Before his death and latest dying day.
Securely now with his most royal Queen,
Luld fast a sleep in sweet contentments bed,
Reigned king Palemon, when blisse-hating Fate,
Prosperities arch-foe, steadfast in naught,
But in wavering unsteadfastness it self:
Envying always Princes happy bliss,
And smiling at great Monarks overthrow,
Now changed sweet dimples into wrinkles fell.
Thrice after their arrival into Greece.
Fair Cinthia in decreasing had increasde.
Her wained horns, and with full circle shown,
When sudden news from Germany was brought,
That old Tuiston lately was deceast,
And that Palemon should without delay,
Go take possession of that royal crown,
Which was his Queens inheritance by right*
This thing to do Palemon was not slack,
Fearing delay might mickle danger bring.
Accompanied with many of his Peers,
He shipping took, and cut the foming seas.
Leaving his wife unto the regiment
And conduit of a grave and senile man,
Eristo called, of whose fidelity,
And truth he thought he needed not to doubt,
Persuaded that his youthful time was past,
And that his age on beauty could not dote.
Not knowing that the Canker soonest eats
The milk-white Rose, and that corruption does
Soon'st enter into gray and hoary hairs.
Palemon was now in the Germain coast,
Eristo with Iulina his sweet Queen,
Who seeing her in feature to exceed
All other wightes, which nature ever framed,
Old cankred Carle began on her beauty dote,
And youthful Cupid rousde up his old limbs,
By outward signs which he did daily show:
But outward signs with him could take no place,
At length not able to suppress these flames,
Which kindled were in this old rotten stock,
Presumptuosly he then by sweet requests
Did her entreat to yield unto his will,
Thou see (quoth he) Palemon is far hence,
And swet desire inflames my youthful mind,
Yield therefore to Eristos humble suite,
Whose life upon thy mercy does depend,
And old Eristo shall himself confess,
As much as life indebted unto thee.
She dying with a red vermilon hue,
Her milkie face, and snow-surpassing cheeks:
Auaunt old Carle, quoth she, presumptuous Earl,
A traitor false to King and loving prince,
Auaunt old fool, whose years full many more
Then virtues are, whose age with vice abounds:
Dare thou in thought but wish thy loyal Queen
Unto thy King to falsify her faith?
No, know Eristo, know, Iulina scorns,
Besides Palemon, any Love to have.
Know that she scorns all other Monarks loves,
Much less Eristoes crime-embracing Earl,
Away depart from chaste Iulinaes sight,
Lust-breathing traitor, crime-committing Carle,
Assure thy self by mine unspotted faith,
And by Palemons Princely head I swear,
Assure thy self thou shall a terror be,
To all adulterous Earls in time to come,
How they dare move their chaste and soueraign Queen
To lewd desire, and this thy foul offense
Shall punished be with more than mortal plagues.
Eristo then departed in a rage,
And by revenge sought how to wreak his wrath,
A false report he presently raisde up,
That he had seen Iulina guilty Queen,
With Lord Alpinor playing Venus games.
Which thing to make more credible, he hired
A treacherous Knight, the same for to affirm.
Forthwith he took Alpinor, spotless Lord,
And caused him in dungeon to be thrown:
He guiltless was, and knevv at all no cause,
Why unto him such rigor should be shown,
Then sent he letters unto his dread king,
How that the Queen defiled had his bed,
And with Alpinor traitorously conspired
To murder him, and take from him his crown*
And that thou may think this no forged tale,
I (says he) with Calingo saw them both,
Like Mars and Venus wrapped in Vulcans net,
Upon thy bed, when Cupid struck the stroke.
Ah how these news apall'd Palemons mind.
His youthful mind impatient yet of grief.
Three times he shook his grief praesaging locks,
Locks never wont so furiously to move.
Not Tantalus, amid the fleeting waves,
Nor wretched Ixion with his rolling wheel,
No damned ghost amid Don Plutoes lake,
Did suffer half the tortures which he did.
Now did he call to mind Iulinaes fame,
Her virtues rare, and neuer-spotted name,
Who said, first Lunas steeds shall guide the day,
And Tytans night, then I Will be false to thee.
One while again he called into mind,
Her heavenly shape, and heart-alluring form,
And that Alpinor was a youthful Lord.
Then of what force sweet Venus fire was,
Which often had causde the chastest gods to yield.
Much less Iulina but a mortal imp,
And therefore prone, and easily overcome,
Long time (quoth he) was Dido counted chaste,
Yet by request Aeneas made her yield.
So has Iulina to Alpinors suite.
What Is of more might then Venus fiery love.
This in a rage he fully did believe,
Not doubting of Eristoes treacherous mind.
And leaving there some of his trusty Peers,
As Deputy and under him Vize-king,
He took his journey speedily toward Greece,
Pricked with the spurs of fierce and dire revenge,
Whom now one while upon the seas we will leave,
And to Eristo make a new recourse.
Who by all means deuisde to bring to pass,
To make it seem more true than truth it self.
The homicide this treason did invent:
He to Pandion keeper of the laile,
Did humbly come, with Sinons flattering tongue,
His withered cheeks bedewing with false tears,
Which from his beautie-bleared eyes did come,
And in these terms his fained suit began.
Pandion, whom as yet I ever found
Eristoes friend, in all his secret acts,
Pandion, unto whose fidelity,
I dare and will my very life commit.
Eristo needs thy counsel now and aid,
And secrecy, but secret thou must be,
Speak on, quoth he, what needs Eristo use
So many words, commixt with princely tears?
If he commauund, Pandion shall obey:
Although it do the loss of life concern:
If he bid secret be, he will conceal,
Yea though a thousand tortures he should have.
Then (sweet Pandion) listen to my words,
And do (quoth he) what I would have thee do.
Thou know I raisde a slanderous report,
Against Alpinor and our royal Queen:
Alas, it was a false report I raisde,
It was because she would not yield to me,
And now Alpinor in thy conduct is,
And will (I fear me) bring the thing to light.
Now that I may my self quite rid of fear,
And make it seem more true than truth it self:
I would have thee with some sharp iron blade
Pierce through his body, so should it be thought,
He slew himself, for fear of further rage.
Pandion stood, not knowing what to do,
That he should slay so innocent a Lord,
Yet at the last he swore by all the Gods,
That he would do it, when time and place should serve.
Eristo then departed, glad in mind,
Pandion doleful, knew not what to do,
Sometime he thought upon his promise made,
Sometime upon this detestable deed.
And standing thus, undoubtful what to do,
He brake into these variable terms.
Ah poor Pandion, how art thou beset,
In two great straits, not knowing what to do:
For lucre sake will thou thy self exclude
From heavenly bliss in sweet Elysian fields?
Will thou now purchase Sisiphus his plagues,
In murdering the sin detesting blood?
What? Fear thou more a poor terrestiall man,
With earthly plagues who can but thee reward,
Than supreme powers, who can for thine offense,
Who can with endless torments thee inflict?
A guilty conscience is a wretched thing,
A torture fell, a worm that ever bites,
A wound which is incurable, a fire
Which always burns, and cannot be put out.
But what Pandion, why talkest thou of this?
Have thou not sworn that thou will do the fact?
Do it I will, let Dis, Death, or Revenge
Do what they can, I Will surely do the deed,
Outragiouslie thus resolute he went,
And caught in hand a knife, a fatal knife.
And running where Alpinor was in hold,
He found him making lamentable moan,
In that he harmless should be forced to lie
In such a pitchie Styx resembling hole.
Whom at the first this hel-hound did sooth up,
with sundry terms, and comfortable words.
Like Mercury, who played upon his pype,
Whilst hundred-eyed Argus he did kill.
Then seeing time, pluct out his fatal blade,
And hellish wretch, I quake to tell the deed,
Pierced Lord Alpinor through the harmless side,
And left him foltring in his guiltless blood.
With all speed to Eristo then he ran,
As though he had not known this heinous act:
And said Alpinor having got a knife,
Had stabd himself for fear of greater plagues:
Fame had no sooner heard this forged tale,
But she it sounded throughout all the coast:
And now it was in every peasants mouth,
He slew himself fearing Palemons wrath.
And now Palemon landed was in Greece:
Whom old Eristo cunningly did meet,
And what by letters he to him had told,
In forged tales now to him he confessed.
I (says he) to my mickle discontent,
Espide them sporting on thy princely bed:
When grieuing that thou should be so abusde,
I causde Alpinor forthwith to be took,
And cast him into prison, where outragiously,
Fearing thy wrath; he butchered up himself.
Calingo can this testify, his eyes
Beheld them both, exclaming out of them,
This made Palemons late-receiued wound
Bleed now more freshlie then it did at first:
With fiery spurs of dire revenge incenst,
He would not once behold his wretched Queen.
But vexed that Alpinor thus was dead,
He swore by heavens and earth, and all the powers,
Iulina should for both their treasons smart.
He causd her therefore straitway to be thrown
Into a deep and pitchie Stygian hole,
I shake to tell, where Tytans fiery beams,
Nor Lunas light was never seen to come:
She lifting up poor wretch, her hands to heaven,
And to the Gods who knew her guiltless mind,
O Fortune (quoth she) now do thou begin
To frown on me, who ever erst have faund!
Shall I now lie among false impious slaves,
Who guiltless am, and have done none offense?
Shall I now lie upon the flinty stones,
In steed of soft and downie fetherbeds?
Shall now these arms be clogd with iron bolts,
In steed of Gems, and bracelets of gold?
Alas I have patrated none offense,
Or crime at all worthy these savage plagues,
Unless when I forsook mine aged Sire,
To come to Greece, I did commit offense.
But oh, I would amid the craggy rocks,
And foming waves I might have plagued been,
When I forsook my care-oppressed Sire
And followed false Palemon into Greece.
But yet the gods I hope, for doubtless they
Have seen, and know my sin-detesting life,
The Gods I hope, with never ending woes,
And lasting tortures shall the tyrant plague.
The day now came, wherein offenders should
(...) punished, according to the law;
Iulina was brought out, and guiltless Queen,
Among unjust and guilty forced to stand.
She lift her hands and heart unto the skies,
Heart never stained with thought of lewd desire:
Protesting that most innocent she was,
And never had in thought done such a crime,
But go to (says she) O thou tyrant fell,
Kill, murder, slay thy chaste and loyal wife,
Death shall at length thy savage torments end.
Death shall at length these earthly woes dispatch,
But yet I trust to see thy gastfull ghost,
With false Eristoes, tortured by Revenge.
Down in a valley, near the snakie Camp,
With Stygian waves enuirond round about,
Boyleth a chaldron with blew Sulphur flames,
With sulphur flames, which never are put out,
There stands Chimera with his gastfull arms,
Arms massacring the sin-delighting ghosts:
There sits a Judge whose name is dire Revenge,
With whips in hand, and firebrands in his teeth,
The Furies daily upon him attend,
And poisoned toads, and serpents on him vvait:
He, he it is which will see me revenged
On don Calingoes crime-concealing ghost.
He, he it is, which will see me revenged
Upon the tytant and Eristo false,
And when thou shall have plagued me as thou will,
And torn in sunder these my liuelesse lims,
I Will follow thee a gastfull gloomi shade,
And never will I leave thee to pursue,
Till I have brought thee to Revenge his mouth.
Presumptuous whore (quoth false Agenors son)
How can thou talk of innocence now?
Did not Eristoe and Calingo see
Thee do the crime? will Earl Eristo lie?
What if they had not feene thee do the deed,
And thou thy self it also had denide?
Why did Alpinor butcher up himself?
Why did he not first clear him of this crime?
Wherefore go to, go to my noble Peers,
Invent some cruel torture for the vvhoore.
Let her be burnt, what thing can be more plain?
What thing can be more manifest than this?
Part of his Nobles did this sentence like
And said, that she was worthy to be burnt:
But yet it was a grief unto them all,
That such a Queen should be so put to death,
Till at the last, a grave and senile Earl,
Who long had judged in virtues rightful seat,
Inspired by the Gods, who saw her wrongs,
Rofe up, and to Agenors offspring spoke.
O mighty Prince, who in this famous land,
Do wear the crown, and bear the royal mace,
Whose duty is to see all vice reformed,
And sinners to be punished by the law.
Thou have condemned thy royal Queen to die,
Accused by Eristoes sole complaint.
He does accuse, and she excuse her self,
He moved with rage, and she to save her life,
Now if thou will have her to see her fault,
And all men know that she does rightly die,
Let her again be sent to prison close,
And send thou to the crime-disclosing God,
Or Themis wife: she once declared how
Lost human kind should be restorde again.
Apollo or wife Themis will declare,
Her treacherous deed, so shall she justly die.
So shall she not plead guiltless as she does.
So shall all men condemn her for her fault.
Palemon might fullwell have been condemned
Of rigor, should he have mislik'd of this:
To prison back he sent Iulina chaste.
Iulina, who with child was very big,
Which when Palemon saw, and did behold,
Her womb, which sweld with offspring therein closde,
He swear by heaven, and all the Gods therein,
The bastard brat should smart for Sires offense,
Two Noble men were speedily sent forth,
To Themis Church, her Oracle to fetch,
And she again to dreadful dungeon sent,
Exspecting always when she should bring forth.
Th'exspected hour now came, she cride and gron'd,
Entreating Juno for deliverance,
Juno releasde her, Juno heard her suit,
She on the flintes, no midwife helping her,
O doleful case!, a daughter sweet brought forth,
Soon brought Pandion keeper of the Iaile,
These tidings to Palemon fretting king,
He straightway charged him take the bastard brat,
Throw't in a boat, and let it flote on seas:
For so (says he) by some sinister chance,
Or death it shall for Sires offenses smart.
He forthwith came, and told the wretched Queen,
These heavy news: who can express her moan?
Thrice kissed she her sweet babe, and dew'd the face
With her Chrystalline pearl-resembling tears,
Impatient, thrice of sorrow she fell down,
As though no life at all had been in her.
Ah little babe (quoth she) but even now borne,
And ready now to yield to cursed Fate.
Shall thou be fed with frothy salt sea foam,
In steed of thy sweet mothers sugared milk?
Shall thou be rockt with winds and raging waves,
In steed of mild and gentle lullabies?
Alas thy Sire, thy flintie-hearted Sire
Will have it thus, begotten of a Bear,
Nursed with a savage Tigers cruel milk,
More cruel then blood thirsty Nero was.
And now farewell, my hapless babe, farewell,
Yet let me kiss thy tender cheeks again,
The Gods I hope, the Gods will thee defend.
Ah see how Nature works in mine heart,
Here take with thee thy wretched mothers ring,
A spousall gift the Tiger once her gave.
Take here this chain, the tyrant me bequeathed:
Take here this purse which has some gold in it.
Fate better may perhaps for thee provide,
Then does thy Sire, she wrapped them in a robe,
And skarlet mantle. Now he took the babe,
And carried it unto the hoysting waves.
The ruthful mother when she saw it go,
Cride out and scrikt, renting her yellow hair,
The child was now laid in a wherry boat,
And it thrust off, which floted in the seas:
Whom to the mercy of the quiet winds,
And hushed waves a while I mean to leave,
And now teturne unto the Grecian peers.
Who were at Themis Temple now arrived.
They kneeling down upon the Temple stairs,
With suppliant voices thus devoutly praide.
Foretelling Themis, Themis only wise,
Disclosresse of al hid and unknown deeds,
Who once did tell Deucalion and his spouse,
How lost mankind should be restord again:
Tell if Tuistons daughter, Queen of Greece,
Has done that crime whereof she is accusde,
Tell if Alpinor late in prison slain,
Committed has so bad and foul a crime,
This said, upon the Altar fell a scrowle,
And therewithal these words the Goddess sent,
Take what ye see, you Greekish Peers, be gone,
Unseal it not before you come at home.
They took it, ploughd the seas, and in short time
Ar Grecia coast were set on land again,
Then kneeling down, they humbly kissed the scrowl,
And gave it to Agenors fiery son,
He read it not strait way, but caused first.
The wretched Queen from prison to be brought,
Then caused he a stake to be set up,
Whereto the tyrant bound her hand and foot,
Persuaded fully that she guilty was.
And there in flames should breath her latest breath.
Then took, unseald, and read the sacred scrowle,
Wherein these words imprinted were in gold.
Let reason rule in Princes, and not rage,
What greater vice than lust in sonile age.
Iulina chaste, Alpinor guiltless was:
Calingo false, Eristo treacherous,
Pandion wicked, and if Destiny
Help not, Palemon issulesse shall die.
Palemon hereat stricken was half dead,
As one on whom Jove's thunderbolts have fallen,
Abashed he stood, not lifting up his eyes,
Ashamed to look upon his guiltless Queen*
Then quickly causde Eristo to be took,
Pandion and Calingo traitors false:
Eristo who sat erst in judgment seat,
Now guilty stood among the damned sort.
And presently unto them all confessed,
His villainy to chaste Iulina wrought:
And that because she would in no wise yield
To lewd desire, the slander he deuisde.
And that Calingo hired of him was,
To verifi't, and make it seem a troth.
And that he had Pandion moved with bribes,
To slay Alpinor as he lay in Iayle:
And so (says he) I deemed the matter would
Without all doubt, have never come to light.
And damned wretch, what must I now exspect,
But Sulphur flames and neuer-ending woes?
Ay me now shall Chimera take these lims,
And gripe them in his Adder-poysened arms:
Through boiling Acheron now must I swim,
And ever dying, never end my pains.
Alas! I see Revenge does spur him on,
With iron whips to massacre my lims:
Devouring vultures shall now tear mine heart,
Mine heart, which as they eat, it shall increase.
With all speed therefore judgment was pronounced,
Against Eristo and his two consortes:
And speedily before Iulinas face.
All massacred, their lims in fire burnt.
The Noble men unbinding their good Queen,
Began comfort her with delectable words,
Affirming that Palemon did repent
Him of the rigor he to her had shown.
Which she might see in punishing her foes.
Poor wretch, she cast her eyes upon the ground,
Refusing on Palemon once to look:
Increasing rivers with her spring of tears:
Her golden locks once trimd with precious gems,
With furious hands now from her head she plucked,
Her eyes which once like glittering Diamonds were,
Now bleated were with fountains of her tears:
Her snowie cheeks, once intermixed with red,
A yellow hue and ashie visage staind.
Naught on her body now but bones were seen,
A grisly Ghost, and bony shape she seemed,
And in short time, out worn with fretting grief,
Death finished her miserable life.
Palemon almost to the same estate,
And misery in sorrowing was brought,
But that the Fates so had it not decreed,
They did reserve him for some other cause.
He buried her as did beseem a Queen,
In royal wise: al Greece did for her mourn.
To Pallas Church her liuelesse corpse were brought,
And she in marble gorgiously entombed,
On whom he causde this Epitaph to stand.
Here lies Iulina, Germanies chaste Queen,
Tuistons daughter false Palemous wife:
Accusde to be unchaste, by Themis cleared,
By rigor yet bereaved of her life.
Her body placed within this Marble is,
Her ghost in sweet Elysian fields in bliss.
He having thus her funerals dispatched,
Lived in vast dolor, and perpetual grief,
Sighing, and crying out against the Fates,
Amid these woes* whom now I mean to leave,
And make recourse unto this little babe,
Who now is floting on the surging seas.
Long time it swam betwixt despair and hope,
Doubtful which wave should have it ouerwhelmd,
At length in Humber streams it forced was,
Which mildly runs by sweet Arcadian downs,
Long saild it hoar, and at the length it staid
Among bul-rushes on the Reedy banks:
Near to this river stood a little house.
whose roof was straw, whose walls were willow twigs;
And herein dwelt a simple country swain,
Whose name was Thirsis, wondrous poor and bare.
He hired was to keep old Damons herds,
And keeping them near to this pleasant stream
As all alone he walked by the banks,
He heard the infant cry for want of food,
He ran to it, supposing it had been
One of his lambs, hanged in the marshy reeds,
And coming near, he saw the skarlet robe
Lie in the boat, at first he was afraid:
And started back, as when a country man
Espies a snake, yet by and by he durst
Go nearer it, then touched he the robe,
And seeing it to be a very child,
He took it up, from it took up, there fell
A chain of gold, he almost dead with joy,
Did snatch it up, and sitting on the grass,
Did open the mantle, there he found a ring,
And massy purse, he took them in his arms,
And covering them with his old ragged cloak
To Mepsa came, and thus to her he said,
Come hither Mepsa, look what I have got,
An infant fair, a sweet and seemly child:
And who shall keep us when we two wax old,
We have no child, weel say that it is ours:
Out knave (quoth she) out cuckold-making rogue,
Whoor-hunting slave, bringst thou thy bastards here?
Auaunt thou knave, thou arrant knave, auant,
Think thou that I thy base-borne brats will keep,
No, Mepsa scorns to mother bastards base,
Though Thirsis counts it credit them to get.
As though we two had naught to do but play
With brawling infants. Out whoore-hunting scab:
Depart (I say) or else I swear by Jove,
I Will make clubs trump, this distaffe shall bumbaste
Thy lither loins, and I will take the brat,
And ding the brains against the flinty stones.
He fearing her, thus mildly did entreat:
Peace Mepsa, peace, good Mepsa be content,
Hold still thy rock: for ever we are made,
See here a chain, which with it I have found,
See here a ring, and purse repleat with gold.
She seeing it, ran unto Thirsis strait,
And gave to him an hundred hungry smackes:
He doubled them as greedily again.
Long stood they kissing and rekissing thus:
Then told to her his chance and luckie haps,
That he them found on reedy Humber banks,
And now we must be silent wife (quoth he)
Or else it will be known unto the king:
Heel take from us what Fortune has bestowd:
So shall we poorer be then ere we were.
And that we may more surely it conceal,
Hark to me wife, I have deuisde a shift:
When gloomie night expels the cheerful day,
And pitchie darkness summons men to sleep,
Feign thou thy self in childbirth to be pained,
And piteously (as women use) cry out:
I presently will for the midwife run,
And all our neighbors: as the custom is.
Lay thou the child all naked at thy feet,
And say thou have brought it before they come,
So shall each one suppose that it is ours.
So very well we may this thing conceal.
This counsel pleased Mepsa very well.
Night-bringing Hesper ruled in dimmed skies:
And Lunas Steeds began cut the darkened air,
Now weary corpse with daily toil oppressed,
Began soundly snort, amid their sluggish bed:
But Mepsa mindful of her late intent,
Began cry and call for Iunos speedy aid.
Poor Thirsis ran, and piteously cride out,
As though his wife had traveled indeed,
Help neighbors, help quoth he, my wife cries out,
And now in childbirth dolefully is paind:
Iana for haste, at threshold brake her nose:
Fauilla ran half naked through the street:
But yet for all their speed they came too late,
Mepsa brought forth a daughter ere they came,
And that she had brought forth they gave all thanks*
It bruted was in short time through the town,
That Thirsis wife a daughter sweet had brought.
And no man thought but she her mother was,
And he her Sire, so cunningly they wrought.
And Thirsis now an hirelings wages scorned,
He now disdaind to feed old Damons heardes,
He with his money bought him sheep and coats,
And in short time grew to be very rich.
When Flora was some nine or ten years old,
For so he named the infant whom he found,
She followed him, and bare his scrip and hook,
And learned how to feed his snowy herds.
And as in age, so she in seemly shape
Seemed to increase, she waxed passing fair,
No Shepherdess within the Arcadian plains,
Was half so fair, as Mepsas Flora was.
In summer time, when fiery Tytans beams
Scortch'd cuntrie truls, with beautie-spoyling heat,
With garlands brave she would adorn her self,
And shadie boughs to keep away the heat.
Good Lord how many, when she came to age,
Burnt in desire, and su'd to have her love.
Wel-pyping Damon, with Amyntas came,
Rich Melibeus, fair Alexis eke:
A thousand more too long here to recite,
A woing came, all which she did repel.
Her father would her often times wish to wed,
Her mother would to marry her persuade,
But mixing whiteness with a skarlet hue:
She would entreat them both to let her live
A Virgin still, for love she did derest.
Thus chastely living, and attending on
Her fathers flocks, with many country truls,
Menalchus son, a famous Grecian Earl,
Came ryding by, saw her, and burnt in love,
And for her love did make himself a Swain.
He after much entreating, did obtain
Her wished love, and carried her away:
When as, you heard, her father missing her,
Ran after her, and would have fetched her back,
But he poor swain, was also partner made
Of their hard haps, and carried into ship,
When floting on the seas, a sudden storm,
And furious tempest brake their winged pine.
The Grecian Knight disioyned from his love,
And by a board drawn to a craggie rock,
A rock whereon a little cell was built,
Where Gods assisting long time he remaind.
Flora and Thirsis, cleaning on a bulk,
At Delos land, Apollos I Will did stay:
Where by the counsel of the Delian God,
As late I told, they carried were to Greece:
And now was Flora in her native land,
Attending herds, where first she breathed life:
Now was she in Palemons land her Sire,
Her woeful Sire, which she full little knew.
Each day she used to keep her fathers flocks,
Still mourning for Cassander, her true love:
At length the Gods did pity her estate,
And Fortune who had seven long winters frowned,
At seven years end began on her to smile.
Cassander coming from his seaish cell,
As he was wont, his Citterne held in hand,
And standing on the bottom of the rock,
Inchaunting fish with his melodious sound,
His Instrument by chance fell from his hand,
And carried was away by surging waves.
He cried out, O Fortune, yet will thou
Now with more woes and torments me pursue?
Will thou again begin me to mollest,
Who erst did think to make a slave of thee.
What shall I do? Shall I depart from hence?
And subject be again to Fortunes spite?
No, no, I will not: in these furious seas,
I Will cast my self, and end my lothed life:
Lo now I die. What said I, I would die?
What shall Cassander kill Cassander? no,
He shall not do it. The Gods with endless plagues
Will them inflict, which spoil themselves of lise.
But yonder sails a ship. O Mariners,
Take pity of a poor distressed wight:
Take pity of one, whom Gods wrathful ire
Long time has causde to live on this cold rock.
They pitied him, and bending sails and oars
Unto the rock, did take him in on board.
He to the shipmen told his hard mishaps:
Which causd them not to think their journey long,
And in short time, (for thither did they sail)
Their ship did land at old Palemons Coast.
Here was Cassander once a Grecian Knight,
Set on the shore, it was his native soil,
Disdayning his inheritance to seek,
Or Fortunes gifts, but pilgrim-like he went.
Now was poor Flora in her native land,
Where both her Sire and Love Cassander was,
Yet neither of them knew where the other was.
Eristos son, a false and youthful Earl,
For villainy whose father martyrd was.
Dryano called, who only bore now sway,
Next to Palemon in the land of Greece.
In summer time unto the grouie woods,
Mounted upon a Steed and Palfrey brave,
Like Mars in valor, with a dart in hand,
Went to pursue the wild and savage Boar.
No sooner came he into bushie woods,
But from a cave a fiery Boar rusht out:
His eyes resembled aiery-lightening flames,
His bristles stood like spears upon his back,
A hoarie foam imbrued his threatening jaws,
His crashing teeth were able even to make
Courageous Mars to quake and shake for fear.
Drlano first began throw at him a dart,
Which like a shaft against a flint redound,
Then all his men their weapons did let fly,
Darts flew as thick as hailstones from the skies,
The fiery Bore fomes, rages, gnasheth teeth,
And with his ire seems even to prostrate pines.
They followed him and never left pursuit,
Till they had laid his carcass on the ground.
Joyful Driano with his merry men,
Returned now from slaughter of the Boar:
And shunning Tytans heat, for it was hot,
Rode home through groves, and leaue-behanged shade
Ah lucklesse Earl, an outward heat who shund,
And purchased thereby an inward flame,
Upon his fiery palfrey as he rode,
Accompanied with all his sportitue men.
He cast his eyes on side, and saw by chance,
Poor Flora sitting with her flock alone,
He saw her, and supposde no earthly impe,
But that she some celestial Nymph had been,
Her feature, ah her seemly feature pearc'd
Him to the heart, so fair he thought she was.
Homeward he rode unto Agenors court,
But thinking still upon her shape divine.
He praisde her hair, her eyes, her seemly face,
Her visage sweet, her fingers small and long.
Ah quoth he, what would she be if she were
Bedecked with gems, in steed of leauie boughs,
How would she look if she in costly robes,
Were clothed, in steed of homely cuntry rags.
But what Driano, what meanst thou, says he,
To talk of such a ragged cuntry drudge?
If she like thee, thou may command her love.
Command it? yea, and force her thereunto.
Come Mylo, come, make haste, and shun delay,
Do what thy Lord Dryano bids thee do,
Go to that sweet-fac'd wench whom late I saw,
Sit keeping sheep, as we from hunting rode,
Go to her: tell her that I burn in love:
Say Lord Dryano likes thee woondrous well:
And bring her with thee, which if she deny,
(As she dares not, I hope) entreat thou her,
And woo her in my name as I know well,
Thou can it do, and doubtless she will yield.
He made all have to do his Lords command,
And found her feeding grasse-deuouring herds.
Fair maid says he, Lord Dryan, whom ere while
From hunting rode through these sheep-hanted fields,
Enchanted with thine heart-alluring shape,
And burning in thy love, and sweet desire,
Entreats thee forthwith to come to him*
I say Dryano, that renowned Earl,
Whose valiant heart, not Mars could make to yield,
Now captiuated with thy comely form,
Confesses him thy prisoner to be.
Come with me then, and yield to his desire,
He Will use thee well, thou shall be his delight.
Out paltry pesant, out whoor-seeking knave,
Go seek (quoth she) thy master queanes else where:
But it is no marvel though he loves an whore,
What Is bred in flesh will never from the bone.
They say his Sire Eristo hanged was,
For slaundering a chaste and guiltless Queen,
He had but right, if he were hanged too:
Who so delights in seeking after whoores.
Go tell Dryano that I scorn to love
The King himself, much less Eristoes son.
Tell him that I a Vestall Virgin am,
And will my vowed Virginity still keep.
Go cogging copesmate, tell th'adulterous Earl,
That Violater of Virginity.
That Flora more esteems a good report,
Than all his glory, fame, and courtly wealth.
Poor Mylo nipt, went with a flea in's ear,
And to his Lord recountred all her words,
Told what opprobrious and reprochful terms,
She had him given, and how she him contrould,
Oh rascal (quoth he) what news bringst thou me?
Could thou so hear thy Lord to be reuilde?
Could thou hear him be scorned of a drugde,
And country trull, and see it unrevenged?
Go villain, slay, kill, stab, pierce through that heart
That strumpets heart, which dares me so revile.
Why runs thou not? But stay, let her alone,
With more than present death, I will her plague.
Go Mylo, say thou heardst her swaynish Sire,
That Soothsayer vile speak treason unto thee,
Say that he said, Palemon was by right
No lawful king, but did usurp the crown.
Say that that strumper did the same affirm,
And cause them both in prison to be cast.
I Will warrant thee, my words before the king
And thine shall be enough to make them die.
Poor Mylo runs, and causes them forthwith,
By th'Officers in prison to be cast:
They both exclaimed, and knew no cause at all,
Why so great rigor should to them be shown.
They curse that ship, that shattred board and bulk,
Which saved their lives from drowning in the seas.
But now the day that dismal day was come,
Wherein offenders should receive their doomes,
The king himself as Judge sat in the seat,
For since the time he ever used to do,
Wherein his wife so falsely was accusde,
Next him Earl Dryan false Eristoes son.
Cassander who now wandered pilgrim-like,
From place to place, and had no one abode,
Heard that the king himself in judgment sat,
And came to hear and see what there was done.
When Thirsis and poor Flora were brought out,
Accusde by Mylo treason to have spoke.
They did deny, he stoutly did approve,
And manifest the words before rehearst.
They surely have (says false Dryano) spoke
These treacherous words, or why should Mylo lie:
He is my servant, and long time has been,
I have had proof of his fidelity:
I never yet in one thing found him false,
And well I know no treason he will hide:
And blame them not, though they themselves excuse,
It does concern the loss of goods and lives.
Palemon forthwith moved at his words,
A fatal doom against them both pronouc'd,
Condemning Flora to revenging flames,
And Thirsis on a gibbet to be hanged.
A gibbet was erected by and by,
Where malefactors should receive their bane:
There faggots lay, wherewith offenders should,
Which had deserved the fire, be justly burnt.
Cassander when he saw this sweet-fac'd maid
To be condemned, waxt heavy in his mind:
He knew her not as yet, but yet his face,
His ashie face began to change the hue.
Now Flora was bound to a fatal stake,
And Thirsis mounted on a gibbet high,
Each of them began their latest words to speak,
And first of them old Thirsis thus began.
O mighty powers by whose most dreadful doom,
I crimelesse wretch, condemned am to die:
Grant now at my last gasp, I pray you grant
That my clear ghost, which heaven and earth do know
Vnguiltie is of this so foul a crime,
With spotless sprites may ever live in bliss.
And as for Flora, whom (vnguiltie wretch)
You have here made copartner of my doom,
Whom all men think to be my child, and whom
I call my daughter, she me loving Sire.
I now make known, for now I will disclose,
My secretst thoughts, she is not mine own child,
But keeping flocks within The Arcadian bounds,
By Humber streams I found her in a boat.
This Ring with her I found, which yet I wear,
A chain I found, which I have left behind,
And purse of gold, which gold I have disburst.
I brought her up, and when she came to age,
A Grecian Knight stole her away from me,
I missing her, made after her straitwaies,
And thought to fetch my sweetest child again:
But merciless he plucked me into ship,
And carried me perforce with them away.
When suddenly a stormy Orion rose,
Mangled our ship, and drowned him in deep:
We two by cleaving on a broken bulk,
Were brought by chance to sacred Delian Isle,
And by Apollo both of us were sent
Unto this land, unlucky land of Greece,
And now accusde unjustly, to have spoke
Most treacherous words against Palemon king,
Which heaven and earth, and all therein can tell
We never thought: and they, I hope they will
Require our blood at our accusers hands.
Cassander when he heard old Thirsis tell
This sugared tale, did leap for joy in mind,
His frostie locks, his snow resembling hairs,
Began change the color, and look yellow now.
And to be brief, his face with red was decked,
And looked as young as ever he had done,
So Venus did him metamorphose then.
So Cupid did his Deity make known.
And now he surely knew she was his love.
Scarce, ah scarce could he then refrain himself.
From kissing her, and taking her in arms:
But yet perforce himself he did withold,
And thought to see what further thing would chance.
Palemon harkened unto Thirsis words,
And caused him from gibbet to be brought,
Inquiring of him at what time he found,
The infant in a bark on Humber banks.
He told the time: Palemons heart began leap,
And willed him to show the foresaid ring.
He showed it him, he strait way knew it was
The very ring which he gave to his Queen.
Then charged he to bring Flora unto him:
And ouercloyd with this so sudden joy,
Embraced her fast in his aged arms:
And kissing her, bedewed her with his tears.
O my sweet child, Iulinaes offspring chaste,
My daughter sweet (quoth he) whom raging seas
Took pity on, and waxed mild and calm,
With blustering winds did greet with gentle blasts
And Eolus with pleasant lullabies:
Who have at length out-worn Fates frowning force,
And not thought on, art found of me again.
Come with thy Sire, sport in thy fathers court,
Palemons court. Now let Palemon die,
Now let me post to chaste Iulinas ghost,
Since I have found mine offspring now, her child.
Ay me (says she) my noble king and Sire,
For all this joy, how can I sportiue be,
Since by a villain thus I am defamed,
Dryano lately as I fed my flocks,
Past by me, and enamored with my shape,
Sent word to me, that I should to him yield:
Whose messenger I with disdainful words
Sent back again to his detested Lord.
And therefore to avenge himself on me,
These slanders false against us both deuisde.
Now then Palemon, O if ere thou did
Love that chaste Queen, who was my mother dear,
If thou do love thy newfound daughter now,
Upon these traitors let me be aueng'd.
Kindled with rage he straitway caused them,
To be arraigned who strait the crime confessed,
Blood-thirstie offspring (quoth this angry king)
Lust-breathing traitors, progenie-vniust,
Whose father sought to violate my Queen,
And nilling yield to his unchaste desire,
Did slander her, and falsely her accuse,
And therefore hanged was, as he deserved,
And thou (his issue) treading in his steps,
Have not aberred from his treacherous acts,
But slaundered have her child, my daughter dear,
In that she did thy wicked lust contemn,
Now therefore as Pandion and thy Sire,
Were justly martyrd for their foul offense.
So Mylo and Dryano now shall be:
A just reward for all such traitors false.
Then took they them before sweet Floras face,
And hanged them in aged Thirsis place.
Now says Palemon, Daughter come to me,
And frolike with thy father in his Court,
Thou see the traitors are already hanged,
What makes thee look so sad, ah tell it me.
Ay me says she, what comfort can I have
Since sweet Cassander drowned is in seas:
He was my love, and I his sole delight:
Would I were still a Swain, so that he lived.
He lives (quote he) and caught her in his arms,
He lives (says he) preserved from the seas:
O my sweet Flora, art thou yet alive?
It Is thy Cassander which imbraceth thee.
What tongue is able to express that joy
Which Flora made, when she beheld her love?
What Tullie can with eloquence declare,
That joy which he made, when he saw his love?
What Homer with his quaint Pernasius verse,
In greekish style, can half those joys express,
Which old Palemon made, when as he saw
Cassander, his found daughters sweet delight?
And woondrous glad that Flora had found out,
So brave a Knight, sproong of so noble race,
With great solemnity he wedded them.
Deposde him self, and gave the Crown to him.
He made old Thirsis famous in the land,
And much renowned through al his Greekish realm,
Who sent for Mepsa, who was yet alive.
She came to him, to their immortal joy.
Each one was glad, each one contented was,
And long time lived, and died in endless bliss.
FINIS.

