MVLD SACK, His gratulatorie thankfulness to Hic Mulier, for her dedication.
IN recompense, sweet Heart, of thy sweet Book,
My Picture I thee send, whereon 'pray look.
All Maids, and Books, not thus rewarded be,
Love has a Tongue, although no Eyes to see.
Then fairest fair, in this sweet little frame,
My Heart and Self I prostrate to thy Name,
Vowing my Sword, my yellow Band, and Feather,
My smoking Pipe, Scarf, Garters, Roses, either
With my spruse Boots, neat Horns, and all I give
To thee, by whose sweet love, I breathe, reign. live.
Muld Sack: OR The Apology of Hic Mulier: To the late Declamation against
her. Expressed in a short Exclamation. Non est mollis e terris ad astra via. Muld
Sack, Muld Sack.

standing man

LONDON Printed for Richard Mewhen, and are to be sold at his (...) under Saint
Clements Church, and at Westminster Hall. 1620.

TO MY PROFESSED FRIEND, MVLD SACK, None of the least of the ancient Society
of Chimney-Sweepers.
AFter I had wearied my unsettled brain, with the finding out of a fit Patron,
or indifferent Judge, for the defense or equal censure of my Apologeticall
answer, to a bitter Declamation, lately come abroad against me, I could hit of
none more fit then your Gaffership, whose equal carriage, both to me, and
Haec Vir (since I did first know you) has been such, that it can be hardly
judged, to whom you are most inclined. One day you wear yellow Bands,
Feathers, Scarffes; cuts your hair and powders it, paints your face so all the
week, that upon Sunday, a pound of soap will not reduce it to the right
color; you dance, sing, and use other jouiall conceits, wherein I (poor
Wench) much delight; but when I look upon your Horns, your Garters, Roses,
and other your Feminine masculine fashions, then J perceive you participate
also with Haec Vir, and are indifferently affected to us both. Wherefore (good
Gaffer) seeing Truth has yielded it self to be the Clyent of my answer, let
this poor Apology find such rich favor with you, that you will become Patron
thereof, censuring this Exclamation of mine, rather by my passions and
distractions, at the writing thereof, then by the judicious or formal
digesting of it,

In the doing whereof, you shall oblige me to continue

Yours, so long as you correspond HIC MVLIER.

MVLD SACK: OR THE APOLOGY OF HIC MVLIER.
THe Title (being Hic Mulier) of your Declamation, gives me just cause, to
rank you amongst those Thrasonical Cowards, who dare enter combat with none,
but with the weak, unarmed, or dead. You have taken arms, not only against a
Woman, Timiditas est, and quod maius est amittere, and quod minus est capere,
Eurip. in Phoen.
but against the weakest of Women, yea so weak, that the breath of a Soldier
is able to throw her upon her back; you have wounded a Man, but more to your
shame, a dead Man. Before I come to my answer, let me expostulate a little with
you; Who be these good Women, whom you so complementally magnify in your
Declamation? or, where do they dwell? It appears to me you have been a
traveler (therefore are Licentiate) and perhaps in the desert of Arabia, have
seen some one, whom you grace with such excellencies; but that such a Phoenix
should multiply to a world-full of good Women, no man (except mad) will
believe you.

I do confess they are the Seminaries of propagation, the supporters of
mankind, (as you rightly term them) and so are we. Perpetuum, and necessarium
malum est mulier, Stob.
The greatest praise that (by the most wise) has been given us therereby, is,
that we are, mala necessaria, and that is all: your other Hyperbolicall praises
are paradoxes not proved. I do confess there be some (whom you call good)
fair, and chaste, but those are commonly proud; some deformed and virtuous,
those be scoulds; some sociable, those are yielding, not impregnable castles;
Ego mulieri hoc vnum credo, quod a morte non reuiuiscat, Anlep.
sayleable, not vnsayleable Rivers; moveable not immovable Seas; Helpers, but
not trusty; Sentinels, but sleepie; signs, but deceitful; true guides, but
full of danger; Balmes that seldom cure; honors, but every day perishing,
and such graces as Seneca never praised, but in his mad or doting age; or (as
you say) with Sophocles presented them as they should be: but I with Euripides
praise them as they are, and shall admire with you and say, O you rare good
women, Rarum est mulieris beneficium, apud Stob.
you are modest when mild, young when virtuous, glorious when chaste; look
not to find your name in this exclamation, but I shall write it with a pen of I
know not what, and upon paper I know not where; I write now with a Goose quill,
on white paper, the deeds of a dull leaden age, blackish, I should say,
brokish age.

To come then to my answer, wherein I will ouerpasse your far borrowed
epithites, and hellish comparisons applied unto us, and only will answer the
more material points of your accusation; A similibus, similia non lu^s fi^r^,
Arist. Rhet. ^^
and thereafter discover the abuses of Haec Vir whom you dare not point at,
much less challenge.

First, I answer that those imputations you do lay against me, are the chief
summum bonum, the most honorable ends, the only virtues, I aim at, And
therefore no marvel although envied, it has been so a principio; for what
greater glory can come to the masculine woman (as you term her) then to
ouerrule her parents and husband? Mulieri imperare in parents, out maritam no^
concedit natura, Pub. Mim.
to be so pitiful that she cuts the hair of her head, to cover their shallow
brains, or horns; so stout that she disarmes the Martial, degrades Knights
by vnspurring (or rather often spurring) them; Antonius Silui^ a Venetian, having
a fair wife, devised a rare lock per la fica sua, which by her cunning and a
false key (in his absence) did open and enjoy her Friend.
So industrious that she is become Painter, Apothecarie, Surgeon, Barber,
and what not: so cunning that she can open the rare Venetian Lock, infect
your purse with want, and your body with the pox: so charitable that (although
carried in a Cart) she will visit Friends, at plays, and Bawdi-houses: and
finally, to be so precise, that she that has not cut Hair, a Fether in her
Hat, a painted Face, naked Breasts, open Skirts, Pistoles, or Poiniards, shall
be bard her society.

Secondly (to vindicate us from the aspersions of Novelty) I will by your own
words, and other examples (ancient and modern) demonstrate the ancientie of
Masculine Women: in the ninth line of your declamation, you say, that since the
days of Adam, Women were never so masculine; whereby you covertly implie, that
in the days of Adam, Eua, or some other was a Masculine Woman; but admitting
there was none in that age, was not David, Solomon, Samson, ensnared with the
beauty, overcome by the multitude, and betrayed by the policy of my sex?
Mulieres ad bona ^uide^ ineptissimae, malorum vero omnium effectrices
sapientissimae, Eurip. in Med.
did not Tarpeia (in later times) betray the Capitol and her Country? Medea,
kill her own Children in dispight of her Husband? Was not Hellens lightness
the cause of the ten years bloody war and destruction of Troy? did not
Sylla steal her Fathers hair, and give it to his Enemy? Biblis fell in love
with her own brother; Myrrha, with her Father; Semiramis, with her son.
These were Gallants in their time, and my dear kinswomen, by whom I hope you
are satisfied for the ancientie of my Ancestors: I do confess at that time
their number was fewer then now, yet sufficient to plead antiquities; but if
in this age a general muster should be taken of Women, I am sure to draw up in
Battle one hundredth Hos Foeminas for one Haec Foemina.

Thirdly, in your description of the Masculine Feminine, you have erred from
the Rules of a good definition, in reducing the general name of Haec Mulier,
to those you call deformed monsters, by cutting their hair, wearing French
doublets, having open breasts and false bodies: but I call a woman, Aeque
facinori videtur obnoxious qui auxilium praestat agenti, and qui perpetratum
facinus quasi iure factum collaudat, Plut. de cla. Mul.
of whatsoever degree, who exceedes the ends of her Creation, Hic Mulier.

A Woman was created to honor her Parents, and obey her Husband; Fathers, to
use their lawful authority over their Children; Husbands to ouerrule and
command their Wives: as he therefore is an effiminate man, that transfers his
birthright upon his Daughter or Wife, so is she a Masculine Woman that
bereaues Parents of authority, A Muliere male regitur ciuitas, Arist. 1. Pol.
Husbands of supremacy, or debords from the modesty required in her sex:
she then, that dare presume to ouerrule her Husband (or sometimes for his own
good beat him) although she neither paint, cut her hair, or be deformed with
new invented fashions, is notwithstanding Hic Mulier.

She that spends more upon delicate cheer, or entertainment of a
Sweete-heart, in a month, then her Husband may allow her for a year, is, Hic
Mulier.

She who sits a gossipping till she be drunk, is, Mulier quae vini vsum
immoderate appetie vt virtutibus cunctis tanuam claudit, ita and vi^ijs aperit,
Max.

Lingua modicum membrum, si refraenata non fuerit, totum corpus corrumpit,
Bern. ad Soror.

Aut appare quod es, aut esto quod appares, Chrysostom.


Hic Mulier.

She whose tongue is able to set the whole world on fire, or whose looks,
gesture, words, oaths, bewray her Luciferian pride, is, Hic Mulier.

The Baud that will bring you a quarte of wine in a pottle pot, an old painted
Whore in shape of a Country Wench new come to Town, is one of my kindred.

The Puritan sister that will cry out against loose breeches, or painting, if
she trade with a Brother (so the wicked do not see) is one of my Sisters.

Item, She that keeps a mass Priest, rather for private Confession then
public Devotion, is Hic Mulier.

I have now answered generally those calumnies you do suggest against me, Sunt
qui quod sentiunt etiamsi ostimum sit, inuidiae metu non audent dicere, Cic.
offic.
and have supplied your lame description (with a full definition) of Hic
Mulier. Now I will lay open your Cowardice by a survey of Haec Vir, whom (not
contented with that description of the Feminine Man, lately set down in a
conference I had with Haec Vir) I will more fully delineate.

The definition of Haec Vir (in the signification I now take it) shall not only
be extended to those young Fellows, who deckes themselves up in effeminate
fashions, Swears, Swaggers, haunts Playhouses, Dicing, Carding, Tauernes,
Tobacco shops, Alehouses, cosens Merchants and Tradesmen, to supply their
never heard of prodigality; but to many others of your Masculine kind, and
specially to those, whose names (according to my definition) are comprehended
under the generaltie of Haec Vir.

Pastorum est vigilare super gregem propter tria necessaria, ad disciplinam, ad
custodiam, ad preces, Bern. sup. Cant. ser. 42.
Imprimis, The Churchman that preferres pride, simony, or other worldly
respects, before the cure of souls committed to his charge, is, Haec Vir.

Item, The false-hearted Puritan, that (under the veil of devotion) will
commit all villainy, take the forfeit of a poor man's bond, and dare affirm,
that God sent it him: you shall know him by the ensuing liuerie. Vult hypocrita
scire diuina eloquia, nec tamen facere, vult recte loqui, nec tamen viuere,
Greg. ^2. Mor.


They run from church to church, through all the town,
They wear a thin small ruff, or bare black gown.
They feign to speak like Chickins when they peep,
Or leere like Cats, when they do seem to sleep.
They make long prayers, and goggle up their eyes,
As if their zeal would tear God from the skies.
They chide at every thing, we say, is good,
(Excepting God) as Prince, as alms, as food:
Christs-masse to name, but Christs-tyde, as it were
Damnation, but the bare word Mass to hear.
They speak to none that walks in the street,
Or with these words, God speed you, any greet.
Not to look up, but fix on earth the eye,
Apparent signs are of hypocrisy.
God pleased is with playnnesse of the heart,
And not with dumb shows of the outward part.
Such is their life, such their Religion is,
Where arts and words agree not, all is amiss.
Item, The supersticious plotting Papist, Vindictam quam petuni Scripturae,
prophetia est non vindicta, Aug. sup. Psalm. 66. Amor and odium, and proprium
commodum faciunt saepe iudicem non agnoscere veritatem, Arist. The. 1. Mayor
plerumque lite quaestio est, Quint. Decl. 3. Paruo ab intio contentionem magnam
hominibus auaritia suppeditat; hoc vero honesti homines maxim cau^ant vicinis
fabricare, Eurip. in And.
and bloody Jesuit.

Item, The Judge, who is corrupt with briberie, or ouer-swayed with greatness,
or other respect, then justice.

Item, The Lawier, who (by too much studying Ploydon) can every day alter the
Case, bastardize the fundamental Laws by wrested glosses, confirming one
thing this day, and another tomorrow; that has more wit then honesty, and
serves only to empty his Clyents Cap-case, and fill his own.

Item, The Pettifogger and Attorney, who wants both wit and honesty, lives
altogether by setting Neighbors together by the ears, are the andyrons that
holds up their Clyents, till they be burnt to ashes, and yet are warmed
themselves.

Item, The Vintner, that (by sophisticating his rotten wines) makes no
conscience to hazard the poisoning of his drunken guest.

Item, The Tailor, that condemns the best part of his Clyents garments to
hell, consumes more paper in writing of a Bill, for a sure of clothes, then
might serve for the conueyance of one hundred pounds Land.

Now, if I did not pity your cowardlinesse, I am ready to cry out (if not
scratch your face) for not daring challenge the base blood sucking Usurer,
neither his slave the Broker.

Peior ciuis existimatur foenerator quam fur.
The first is the Caterpiller of the Commonwealth, the overthrow of
hospitality in the Country, of honesty and trading in Cities, the oppressor
of the poor, the Leuiathan that deuours thousands; who (with the help of a
Broker or Scriuener, brown bread and cheese) will devour ten, sometimes
twenty Knights estates.

These fellows are fit fagots for hell: and if I would (as you do) break
Priscians head, I could call the Usurer Hoc Vir, that is, Crudele, insatiabile,
and inutile animal; fit for nothing but to be the subject, whereupon that
ancient Roman Law, Fur condemnabatur in duplum, vsurarius in quadruplum, should
be executed: would to God, Clinias, that the Roman Law were in England
received, where a poor Thief (for stealing some goods of small value) is
hanged one hour, all merciless Usurers (who neither by threatening of Gods
Word, whereby they are excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, neither by humane
Laws, will be reclaymed) might be hanged two hours: this cure would either end
them or mend them.

The Broker (skorning to be called Usurer) will lend none money, at ten in the
hundred, upon bond or security, but (for sooth) Sir if you will bring a pawn
worth double the sum you desire, and make a bill of Sale, you shall have
half, or sometimes the third of the value thereof: when you come to return
the money, and receive your pawn, he will either persuade you to take some
more money, (that it may lie till the year expire and it forseit) or tell you
it is in a Chest, where he cannot come at it, or if (perchance) you have it,
you must pay the ensuing Bill.

Item, delivered to Mistress Spendthrift upon a bill of Sale, the first of
January, 1618. for a Taffata Peticote, a Beuer Hat, Gold Band, Yellow Feather,
a Fan, a pair of Silk Stockings, Garters, and Roses, -- 3li.

Item, for the bill of Sale -- 1s.

Item, for renewing the Bil every three months 3s.

Item, for Sir Huighes office -- 1s.

Item, for nine months interest at 8d. the month for the pound -- 18s.

-- Summa tot. -- 01l. -- 03s. -- 00d.

This fellow is so cruel, that he will incroch upon the very garments that
shelter the poor and father less. I do know (Clinias) a poor Widow
dwelling by me, here Long-lane, that has four young Children, who for want
has been forced to engage (to one of those Cormorants) the Couerlet of her
bed, for twelve pence, and coming at night to have it back, she could not
have it without fourteen pence, and so in defect of two pence, she and her
Children were exposed to the extremity of cold.

O adamantine hearted broker, how dare thou profess thy self a Christian,
that harbors such a Tigers heart? It may be thou payest to some undiscovered
Usurer, ten or more in the hundredth, but thou are not ashamed to take from thy
Christian Brother above fifty; Turpia Incra and velox inopes trucidat, qui hoe
vtitur, super omnes mercantores maledictus, Chrysostom. sup. Matthew.
I have heard of a people of Scythia who are so addicted to covetousness, that
it is lawful for them to steal or purloyne from strangers; but never did
hear of any, that openly (unpunished) did prey upon their poor neighbors to
satiate their greediness.

It is not without cause (Clinias) that I rail thus against Usurers and
Brokers; for (besides the general loss that redounds to the Country, the
scandal to Christian profession, the complaint of all good men, and the utter
overthrow of all charitable dealing amongst men) I have mine own private
griefs, against them, and am not ashamed to tell you, that now there lies at
a Brokers in Barbican for small money, a Satin Petticote of mine, richly laid
with gold Lace, bordered with a deep fringe of gold, a Muffe lyned with rich
Furre, and a Scarf, for all which I did pay thirty pounds and above: this
money was borrowed from an Usurer upon the bond of Master Woodcocke my Husband,
and goodman Goose our neighbor, the lease of our house pawned therewith:
besides twenty shillings given to the Scriuener to procure the money

I will now leave the City, and survey the Country, Dum pacis amans agrum
intueor odi ciuitatem.

Vita enim rustica maxim disiuncta est a cupiditate, and cum officio coniuncta
Gic. pro Rosc.


from which, those of the Gentry that anciently did entertain hospitality,
their servants and retainers, welcomed their friends, and were helpefull to
such of them as stood in need, are now come into Cities, turned Inmates, where
(with their Coach and Footmen, or (if they be not able to keep a Coach)
their Pander, Page, upon Whores, prodigal clothing, excessive diet) they
spend all that formerly did maintain so many, venting more Smoke at their
noses, then is in their Chimneyes; are altogether estranged both in form,
fashion and Condition, from the rules of virtue; making oftentimes but a puff
of all that their fathers so carefully purchased.

Those be of such (Giant like) strength, Prodigi sunt, quo pecunias aut
patrimonia effuderunt in eas res, quarum memoriam aut brerem, ant nullam sunt
relicturi omnino, Cic. 2. offie.
that by the help of a Merchant-Taylor, and Ieweller, will undergo the
burden of of a Coppie-hold upon their shooestrings, a Freehold upon their
Garters, a Manor upon their shoulders, and a Lordship upon their heads.

From such deuourers of estates, does arise the improuing of lands, racking of
Rents, destruction of ancient hospitality, and oppression of poor Farmers and
Tenants. Is it not great pity that within these few years there be more
householders in England beggered (or in hazard to be) then in five hundred
preceading years? the Gentry having ever thought it their greatest treasure,
to have their Farmers and Tenants able at home and abroad, in good fashion to
attend their service: but now if a Farmer, by multitude of Children, great
charge, bad years, death of Cattle, or other accidents (to which humane
affairs are subject) become poor, straight comes some rich Grasier or
remorselesse Usurer, offers more for his Farm then it is worth; and being no
sooner offered then accepted, the poor Tenant is thrust out of doors, and
oft-times the small remnant of stock he has, seized upon for arrerages.

Iustitiae est, esse eius distributivum tueri patrie consuetudines, instituta,
and scriptas leges seruare; s^ctatur autem iustitiam and sanctitas, and
veritas, and fides, Eurip.
Look to this, you senseless Landlords, whose now cauterized consciences one
day shall tell you, have cruelly oppressed the poor, the bitter gall of whose
tears (reserved by the Almighty for you) without repentance and amendment,
you shall one day drink.

Next unto the Gentry (the Arch-leaders of the troops of Haec Vir) are the
Justices of Peace, of that sort (I say, that sort, because there be others,
whom for the upright discharge of their places, I do honor) who are either
the relics of some old Usurer vp-start Knight, or broken Barrister, are
themselves fore-stallers of Markets, hoarders up of corn, the ouer-seers of
false measures, and other enormities: and sometimes (without commiseration) if
it were but for their Clerks fee, will send a poor man to the Goal (although
it should undo him) for not putting in Surety for his good behavior, at the
suite of some promoting Knave, whom he never offended; their chief aim in
keeping Sessions and Meetings, is to find Ale-wiues, Bakers, Butchers, and such
others, as by private bribes have not bound them to silence.

Who did ever see a prouder corse then a Knave, riding on his Masters horse?
Galf. chauc.

Hosper non praedabile genus, Eurip.


Item, The saucy Constable, that by virtue of his Staff will abuse a better
Subject then himself, and then charge him to the Peace in the Kings name, as
if he were authorized by his place to wrong his Betters.

Item, The cheating Inne-keeper (whereof it is likely there be some) who so
racketh the Stranger or Ghest, that before he come to the end of his journey,
he cannot tell in which pocket his purse is.

Item, The weather-beaten Shepherd, whose cunning is to make his flock leese
some of their wool before shearing time, Dic mihi Dameta, cuium pecus, an
Moelebaei, Virg. Egl. 3.
can practice so with his neighboring fellow-shepeard, that some of either
flock (by cutting off their ears or other new badge) shall be discharged
their Masters livery, and then put the fault upon the Fox, Captain Flood, or
some unknown Thief.

Item, The Miller, who thinks, the wearing of Sheeps satin, no pride;
practices most upon Meal, Malt, and making of Horns.

There be also both in Country and City, a monstrous brood of Feminine
Masculine, the first whereof is a Drunkard, Ebrietas nihil aliud est, quam
insania voluntaria, cor mutans, and mentem alienans, Greg. sup. 1. Reg.
having no more of a man but the shape. This fellow suggesteth to himself
good-fellowship, recreation, or the bearing of much drink; loses the use of
reason (by which man is distinguished from beast) infects his soul with the
leprosy of sin, his body with diseases, and his purse with contemptible
want: O, more then beastly Vice to reign amongst Christians, which was not
known to the Ethnickes, as appears by one, thus complaining:

Hos homines non putassent Ethnici, sed pertentosa hominum monstra and porcos,
se vino obruentes atque ingurgiantes, vltra corporis mensuram, and ventris
capacitatem, ad perdenda vina orti; verum quod Ethnicis turpissimum, multis
nostrae aetatis videtar valde gloriosum.

The second (an inseparable fellow to Drunkenness) is blasphemy, Dico v^bis
ne iurate omnino, ne iurando ad facilitate^ iurandi veniatur, de facilitate ad
consuetudinem, de consuetudine in periurium, de periurio in infernum decidatur,
Aug. contr. Mend.
simpathizing rather with the nature of Devils then of men, or beasts, using
the tongue that ought to be the Herald of God his glory, to be the proclaimer
of most horrible blasphemy against him, tearing his body, heart, and soul in
pieces; this is the most accursed slave that lives, who without any color (as
all other sins have) takes arms against Gods own person; he is accounted
in this age (amongst Feminine men) the brauest Gallant, that can swear the
most rare and new invented oath extempore: common oaths (that formerly were
not heard, or so religiously looked unto, that a known swearer was barred all
honest society) are now transferred upon Clownes, Watermen, Carre^men, and
others of the meanest sort; who together with their Leaders (without earnest
repentance) shall one day pay dear for such unnecessary Ware as they have
taken at so so dear a rate: against whom the Satyrist thus speaks, Per Solis
radios, Tarpeiaque fulmina iurant,
Et Martis frameam and Cyrrhaei spicula vatis,
Per calamos venatricis, pharetramque puellae,
Quicquid habent telorum armamentaria Coeli.


Animal inter omnia noxium est, inter mitia adulator, Bias apud Plut.
In the next place comes the flatterer, rightly called the most cruel of tame
beasts, he is no less hateful to the Wise, then beloved of Fools: he is
the deuourer of all such as trust him, the poison of truth, the impudent
maintayner of false colored lies, the enemy to upright dealing and honesty.
He names lechery, true love; drunkenness, good fellowship; deceit, policy;
cruelty, ^busu^ luge^du^ quo vitae reputantu^ v^tutes, apud Stob.
manhood; niggardly avarice, good husbandry. If his Patron be angry, he is
mad, if merry, he laughes; if sad, (with the Crocodile) he weeps; if
offended with his Friend, he persuades him never to be reconciled; if his
master be a Musician, his flatterer loves music out of measure; if he be a
Faulconer, he loves hawking, although he cannot discern a Falcon from a Kite,
neither himself from a Woodcocke.

This Camelion can turn himself into all colors, following men's fortunes,
not themselves, and is a dish fitter for the Devil, then for a wise, noble, or
generous mind. That you may know him by his habit, read the worthy saying of
Aagapetus to Justinian.

Pellaces adulatorum sermones auerfare, vt coruorum rapaces mores: Illi namque
Corporis effodiunt oculos, isti autem animi hebetant cogitatus, cum non
permittant perspicere rerum veritatem: vel enim commendant, nonnunquam quae
reprehensione digna sunt, vel reprehendunt plerumque quae omni laud sunt
maiora, vt de duobus alterum ab ipsis committatur, vel prauorum laus, vel
bonorum criminatio: sub aleatore passim luditur alea, sub bellaci bellaturiunt,
sub commessatore luxu defluunt, sub ebrio ebrij sunt, sub libidinoso
lenocinantur, sub crudeli deferunt ac calumniantur.

In the next place succeeds the most cruel of wild Beasts (too frequent in
Country and City) called a Detracter. Detraectio amicitia venenum, patientiam
nostram lingua viperea probans: bonum quod est, abscondit, and malum quod non
est mentitur, Greg. sermon. 65.
This Esopicall Fox builds his chief reputation upon the infamy of others;
whom he may undermine or slander is his morning and evening meditation: he is
as very a coward as you Clinias; his hottest pursuit is ever behind back, and
his most deadly blows are with protestation of meaning no harm, or with a
dissimulate co^miseratiue pity of the party: He is most slauishly submisse,
and knows the art of words so well, that he can shroud dishonestie under a
fair pretext, and is like to him that preserues poison in a golden Vessel
Finally, he is the most base amongst men, and to be excluded honest society,
according to that of the Philosopher:

Vir bonus and circumspectus aures Susurronibus and calumniat oribus praebere
non debet, qui persaepe aures nostras ita praeoccupant innocents criminando,
vt difficillimum sit id ex praecordijs euellere, quod falsus criminator
infixit.

I could now join issue with you, that I have rightly named you Clinias; that
I have proved those imputations you lay against us Masculine Women, are the
most honorable ends we aim at, and that the description of Hic Mulier and Haec
Vir is further extended then to the weakest of Women and most foolish of men: I
am sure (although the Jury were so covetous that ten Groates would move more
then a just cause) if you keep your purse close, the Verdict will go on my
side: but I am desirous to come to a more friendly end with you, by offering a
reformation of those things you lay against me, and my kindred, provided that
Haec Vir and his Friends shall perform the articles following.

Imprimis, That such Church men, who (vt haec Vir) have gone out of the way,
(laying aside Pride, Vainglory, Covetousness, and all other worldly
respects) remember that they must answer for their charge, and hereafter feed
their Flocks, In iudicio Pastores cum suis gregibus apparebunt, Gregor. Mor. 33.
and above all go before them in a good and unreprovable life, because good
Examples edify more then Precepts, as it is well said to this purpose,

Non est alia breuior aut efficacior ad corrigendos populi mores via, quam
regentis ipsius incorrupta vita; quae si turpibus contaminata flagitijs, etsi
caput ipsum pestilens fuerit, latius tamen virus serpit.

That all Judges (if any such be) who have been corrupted with bribes,
transported with revenge, Pluit vitium, vbi pluit aurum Greg. in Regist.
favor, or fear, have notice that he ought to face a man of courage,
upright, and fearing God; that he is liable to punishment from God in the
heavens, Pessime iudicabuntur falso iudicantes, Aug. sup. Psalm. 25.
and his Prince upon earth. Let his chief meditation be upon the great charge
of Vicegerency, committed to him from both; remembering what danger he is in
here and hereafter, if his object be not justice, if he defend not the Poor,
Widow, and Fatherless, oppressed by the Mighty: Iudicantes eadem mente
praeditos esse oportet, qua legis latores Lisias, apud Stob.
if he square not his judgments sometimes rather by Conscience then Cases; if
he prefer not the public good before his private gain, minister not by his
life the due execution of Laws, and ever lay before him these four following
grounds.

1. Iudicium rectum verumque non cernit Iudex amore, odio vel pecania corruptus.

2. Iudex sententiam haud proferre debet, nisi vtraque part diligenter audita;
quod nisi fecerit, licet aequum statuerit, haud tamen iustus erit.

3. Iudicis officium est non tantum res, sed and tempora perscrutari, quo
peracto tutus erit.

4. Heroes iustitiae ministri primum ipsi sint iusti oportet, and immaculata
prius omnis honestatis exemplaria, quam importuni vitiorum correctores.

Lis de rebus facile corruptibilibus celeriter determinari debet, vel res vende
apud iurisconsultos, Plut. de Pol.
That such Lawyers who formerly have studied to continue suites, or have shared
(by indirect means) in private benefit both from plaintiff and defendant,
shall forth with recall themselves; lest I give this censure against them:

In nullos seuerius animaduer tendum quam in Iuris consultos ac officiarios,
quorum prauitas, aut auaritia, recte institutas leges ad pessimos vsus
detorquet.

Publicae cont adictiones and controuersia si officiariorum offensiones
subducas leuiores effici solent, Plut. de Pol.
That all Attorneyes and Pettifoggers (whereof there is greater store in every
Market town, and in some Villages, then formerly has been in a whole
Country) who now strives (by setting neighbors at strife) for multitude of
Clyents, may either become peace makers, or discharge the trust reposed in
them, or then acknowledge that they maintain this Maximum.

Lucrum, pudori praestat, and lucri bonus odor e re qualibet.

That all Puritans (who think every idle suggestion consonant to their burning
brains lawful, Nouitas contra Ecclesiae ritum non placet, est enim matter
temeritaris, soror superstitionis, and filiae leuitatis, Bern. in Epist.
can see nothing in others but (through the glass of preiudicate opinions,
deformities and abuses) submit them selves to the uniformity of spiritual and
civil government, lest this saying of Greg. Naz. be justly applied to them:

Tanquam de Deo ac re omnium maxima saluteque ipsa primariaque spe certamen
habentes, atque obsequium non pietatem sed veritatis proditionem
interpretantes, omnia ante proiecerint, quam opiniones quas dome secum
afferunt.

That all plotting Papists, seminary Priests, Omne fidoi dogma sacris
scripturis non congruens superstitiosum est,

Chrysostom. Hom. 1. Omnibus est odio erudilitas and amori pictas, Gic.


bloody Jesuits, hoorded in Country and City, take their oath of allegiance,
embrace the truth, become good Subjects, by forsaking deuillish imaginations,
superstitious and humane traditions, or then retire themselves to Rome, keeping
this Warrant: Roma quid insanis? quid in impietate triumphas?
Quid nectis frauds? stupraue faeda colis?
Concubitus vetitus cordi est, puerilis amorque,
Impurus cultus, vana superstitio?
Dicitur illa quidem meretrix and adultera turpis,
Agnoscit plures quae vitiata viros.
Illa vrbs non aliter, coluit quae numina plura,
Scortum est: hoc Babylon, impia Roma facit.
Vrbs Romana potest meretrix Babilonia dici,
Quae coluit spreto numina plura Deo.
Illa deos coluit plures, simulacra laresque,
Quaestum, diuitias, gaudia falsa, dapes;
Pompas, luxuriam, ventrem, puerosque dolosque
Atque malos genios, stupra, venena, lupas.
Papae fuit quondam meretrix, peperitque platea,
Cuius Imago tibi Romae stat conspicienda.
Roma diu titubans, longis erroribus aucta,
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.


That all Citizens, Merchants, and Tradesmen, from the highest to the lowest
(that fight under the colors of Haec Vir) neither sophisticate their wares,
neither sell them at higher rates, Nemo habet iniustum lucrum fine iusto damno,
Aug serra. 48.
then (with reasonable gain) they may maintain their charge; but more
specially that they sell no rotten Pepper, Ginger, Clones, and other Indian
trash, at double rate, to young heirs upon statutes; lest by a former
conueyance they lose both principal and interest; because Iudice me fraus est,
concessa, repellere fraudem,
Armaque in armatos sumere iura sinunt.


In hac artium sola euenit vt vnicuique medicum professo, statim credatur, cum
sit periculum in nullo mendacio maius, Plin. sent. 29.
That good examination and trial preceede the admission of Doctors of Physic,
Apothecaries, Surgeons, and Empiricks that are of this order; lest they kill
more in a year then they cure in twenty, and give their Patients just cause
to pray: Amedico indocto libera me Domine.

That all Usurers and Brokers, Habes, ne foenereris quia non indiges: non
habes, ne foenereris quia satisfacere non potes, Plut. de Vsur.
leave their biting bargains, and either convert their moneys to honest
purchase, husbandry in the Country, or adventure it upon more lawful trade in
the City; by virtue of the following reasons.

Tollendus penitus Faenerator, ne (sub quouis praetextu populi detrimento)
foedissimum illud vitae genus exerceatur: quisquis enim pecuniae studium
tollet, vitiorum neruos resecabit: vbi enim pecuniae amor, ibi fides, probitas,
pudor, amicitia, and omnia bona vilia sunt.

That such of the Gentry as are unjustly dispossessed of their country
habitations (by Iacke-dawes, Infestissima hominibus possessio est ager, apud
Stob.

Primum luxuria civitates ingreditur, deinde saturitas, postea contumelia,
postea exilium, Thucid.

Quicquid pauperi dederis, tu habebis: quicquid non dederis, alter habebit,
Pet. Rau.


Owls, and night-Crowes) shall presently repossesse themselves and keep
residence till their Princes service or some other urgent necessity withdraw
them; banish all prodigal charges, (to which Cities are most subject) and in
liew thereof maintain frugall hospitality, educate their Children religiously,
be a comfort to their friends, repair the now decayed estate of poor Farmers
and Tenants, and inuest themselves in the true nobilitate virtues of their
ancestors; for nobility without virtue, is a shadow without substance,
according to the Stagiricke saying:

Nobilitas est quaedam maiorum claritas and laus veniens de meritis parentum;
sed ea natiuum decus suum in filijs amittit, si parentum virtutibus non
responderint; nam nobilitas cognatorum nobis non prodest, nisi fuerimus nos
ipsi boni; quanto enim vita, maiorum praeclarior, tanto posteriorum socordia
flagitiosior est.

These above named are the chief persons whose reformation shall bind us
Masculine Women to the good behavior: others there be whom I will not grace,
by couenanting with them, because they are almost (if not altogether) past hope
of recovery, and threfore I exclude them from any benefit of this agreement.

First, the Informer and promoting Knave (amongst a thousand of whom one honest
man is hardly found) whose first institution was to inform the Kings Courts of
abuses prohibited by Law; for which service the half of such fines as by the
Law (by their information) was recouerable, was allowed to them; but this
commendable beginning is so depraved and inuerted by the multitude of intruding
Vagabonds (proiecting nothing but their own benefit) that the innocent are
rather troubled then the guilty punished, Iniquum est vt nocens poenam euadat,
atque vt innocens plectatur, Quintil.
compositions drawn before trial, the King defrauded, and his Courts abused;

Item, all hard hearted Iaylors who (like the Cat) plays with his trembling
prisoner, Maxima pars hominum qui carceribus praeferuntur, situt illu subiecti,
praedae sunt, ita illi (fine resipiscentia) saepe diabolo, apud Stob.
so long as his purse is able to defray their exorbitant exactions, and then
preyes so upon his decaying body, that within short time his obstinate Creditor
may make Dice of his bones

Item, All bankrupt Serieants and Baylifes, the Iaylors bloud-hounds, that (at
Chancery Lane end, the Exchange, Fleet Street, Strond, Kings-street, Licet
eni^m officium quod praestant necessarium sit, tamen qui contra pietatem tale
offi ium exercent pro nebulonibus sunt habendi, Reinb. Lor. Homines non facile
decipiuntur, nisi in eo quod nesciunt, aut in eo, cuius cognitio non est valde
manifesta. Arist. Motaph. 4.
and elsewhere thorowout England) hunts more greedily after a decayed Debtor,
then the Lion or Wolf after a slow Ass, or innocent Lamb.

Item, All cheating Horse-coursers, who (by tricks and oaths) sell lame jades,
fatted by grames or other trash, to ignorant strangers, or purse-beaten
travelers, at greater price then the skin and shoes are worth.

Item, The ingrain'd Ostler, who sells his Hay by the bottle (or rather
bootfull) can furnish six pecks out of a bushel of Market measure at double
rate, and (if he has not anointed the Travelers Horse teeth) will draw the
best part of his allowance back to the Osterie; and if this serve not, will
pick a shoe from your Horse, break your Bridle, steal your Girth, or give
notice of the weight of your Cloke-bagge, lest he fail in correspondence with
his ancient confederates, the Smith, Sadler, and high way Robber.

Item, All highway Rogues, that sells Callico for Cambricke, watered white
iron hilts for hatched silver, Dutch sixe-penny blades for upright Toledoes,
deceiues young Nouices and old Gulls with trash, imposture, and deceitful ware.

Item, All counterfeit strong Beggars, Elcemosyna ad necessitatem non ad
pigritiam accip end 1, Aug: de oper. Mon.
who (by highways and other places) go lame all day, and whole at night.

Now, to untie all that I have knit up in this Exclamation, I do advise all
such that may come under the name of Haec Vir, or (who misgouernes themselves,
and are the stumbling blocks whereupon others fall, Durum est, vt qui nescit
tenere moderamina vitae suae, iudex fiat vita aliena, Chrysostom.

Parere filios necessitatis opus, recte autem educare pij amoris, Eurip. apud.
Stob.


) first remove those misty clouds of darkness, that now ouer-shadowes their
own sight, and then boldly presume to clear the eyes of others; that they go
before us in embracing of virtue, and shunning of vice, and by good education
enter us in the paths of modesty, from which now we are estranged: and then
(without doubt) we that are the weaker Vessels (now only misse-led by the
ouer-sight of careless Parents, or indulgence of effeminate husbands, are let
loose to all licentiousness) shall in short time cast off all such
deformities, wherewith you now tax us. And so (because I must make me unready
and go to a mask) I bid you good night.

FINIS.

