The Discovery of THE KNIGHTS OF THE Post: Or the Knights of the post, or
common common baylers newly Discried.

Wherein is showed and plainly laid open, many lewd actions, and subtle
devises, which are daily practiced by them: to the great abuse of most
honorable Councelers, learned Judges, and other grave Maiestrates: And also to
the defrauding and utter undoing of a great number of her Majesty's good and
loyal subjects.

By E. S.

AT LONDON

Printed by G. S. and are to be sold near the Golden Lion in the old Bailey,
1597.

THE DISCOVERY OF THE Knights of the Post.
AS I traveiled toward Plimmoth, this last voyage, upon my well approved
hacney, (old Bayard of tentors) it was my goodlucke a little on this side
Hounslowe, (just upon the heath, where that villain was hanged in chains,
that murdered the maiden in the wood) to overtake a well trust fellow mounted
upon as proper an nagge as my own, but not altogether so well paced: At what
time I bad him good morrow, good morrow (quoth he:) God grant it prove so, but
as I spe^de, so will I praise the day: why sir (said I) then well overtaken, I
trust my greeting deserves noe grudge. In deeds (quoth he) well overtaken but
ill found. I musing at the man what he meant by these quibs, (...) him how so?
Because (said he) my purse is as empty as my belly, and yet my stomach as good
as yours. I told him that matter would be soon amended, if he wanted pence,
to leave a pawn for his breakfast: The man hearing me say so: answered, my
counsel was better then my charity, and yet (quoth he) your charity may be
better then my pawn: for I assure you, ^ suppose you have more to give, then I
have to gage: and yet yesterday, I had as much money as would fill a quart
pot, if my wisdom had boene so good to keep it: Certainly (said I) he that
would spend so prodigally, and so much in one day, without any regard, in my
opinion is worthy so fast the next day without pity: So sir, I have your
judgment already (quoth he:) it is pity you should be made a Justice of
peace, that can examine a cause no better: If you had asked me how I had spent
so much money in so short a time, and how much the sum had been, you had
shown some wit: but to pronounce me prodigal at the first dash, for so
trifling a cause, argues in deed a man of smnall discretion. Why quoth. he, is
not he to be blamde, and counted a thristlesse waster, that spends the quantity
of a quart of money at one day: if you had gamde it away, it had been another
matter, because I know it a thing soon done, and you not so much to be blamed:
for that a man cannot command the dice as he may his dog, to say, sira fetch
me the same again? Alas quoth. he, how simple of understanding are you, just as
wise as Winefred my wife, that when I wished her to arm her self against her
unquiet neighbors, presently clapped a co^slet on her back, and so ran among
them: You come in with a quart full of money, and I toulde you of as much money
as filde a quart, which God wot was but one penny for the which I had a quart
of ale at Colbrooke.

O was it so, I cry you mercy quoth. I, and because I have made you this offense,
I will pay for your breakefast at Stains, which now is not far off: and I
pray you let me request to know how far you travel this way: Mary sir quoth
he, even as far as I would wish your company, finding you always thus kind:
but indeed my journey is to Plimmoth, if I knew how to get thither, with that
we went into our Inn at the sign of the Ale-stake, where I calde in for bread
and cheese, and ye best beer they had in the house: This is well done (quoth. he)
call you in for that which is good, and I will have a care it shall not be
lost: and with that he claps a penny loaf in his pocket, and anon after he
thrust another into his bosom: I demanding why he did so: he answered,
because (says he) I would try whether ^ bread at the next town be as good as
this or no: For me thinks it has a very good relish, ^ I assure you it is
good for a man to be experienced in such things, and still he fed upon bread
and cheese as nimbly as a squerell on a nutte. I seeing him feed so heartily,
said if his legs were as good as his stomach he needed not to fear his
journey to Plimmoth: so at length being well refresht, I told him that
according to my promise I would pay for his breakfast, but he should pay for
the two penny loaves in his pocket: By the mass (quoth he) I am persuaded your
purse is better linde then mine, not wtstanding if my credit be better than
yours, with this my welfaire hoastice, I am content to pass my word for it
rather. wife you are like to pay all for me.

The woman hearing him flout at her face, was straight inflamed as if she had
been made of tuchwood, and wholly compact of a lump of gunpowder: Why thou
paultry knau? (quoth she) what ailes my face* what can y^ say to my face? or
what do thou see in my face? For soul my face, I hope my face is a
christian bodies face, thou scuruy jack, I te^l thoe I am not ashamed to show
my face. I think so (quoth he) for it is of as good scarlet vie, as ever I saw
any in my days: but say, will you take my word for two pence? Take thy word?
He so thoe hanged first (quoth she) pay me my money, or by Gods body I Will have you
set by the heels: and with that she took by her distasse and beat him out of
doors: (...) I seeing was glad to content her, and so we parted from y^ place.
I would (quoth he) every hoastice would give me such a pasport as my hoastice
of Stains: then would I not doubt but to come to my iourneies end, with
virtuals inoughe in my paunche, and no hurt to my person.

Thus we went on our way, having work sufficient to coment on this
controversy, even till we came to Basingstoke, where with the suns setting we
took up our lodging, and with the beginning of the evening ended our days
(...). Now (quoth my merry companion) to requite your courtesy for my dinner, find
you meat and drink, and I will find bread to supper. And so if I find to
morrow as happy as this day has been to me, I shall be well pleased to hear
you again to salute me with good morrow; otherwise the day shall have my favor
to my fortune. And with that as merry as a man with two penny loaves in his
pocket, he steps into a tippling house and asked for lodging, he was no sooner
come into the house, but there was one clad like a Caualier of Spain, that
took acquaintance of him, saying: What Goodcoll my old friend, my companion
and familiar acquaintance, well met, I am glad to see thoe in health: ho Lapster
fill us a dosen of beer, for we will be merry in faith: with that my companion was
wondrous iocond, and gratifying him with all the reverence he could devise,
with Italian and French im^ bracements, sometimes about the middle, sometimes
below the knees: he required his greeting in this sort: Jack Freeman, A plague
on thee, who would have thought to have found th^e here* trust me by the faith
of an honest man, I am glad of this chance: And in respect of this happy
meeting, I bless my fortunate stars that it was my luck to see thee before
I die: And as thou love me, bid this my friend welcome and let us suppe
together: but Jack Freeman except your purse be better then mine, our cheer
will but mock our stomachs, which at this time I should take in as ill part,
as my hoastice of Stains did my words this morning. Tush fear not (quoth.
Freeman) if thou have no money, I have enough both for me and thee, and in faith
thou shall not lack as long as forty pounds last: why man I thank^ God I have
in this simple doublet (as I may say to thee ^ an hundred angels and upward,
and hang dogs. Goodco^l they shall be all at thy command. Godamercy my sweet
Jack Freeman (quoth. he:) And with that we all sat down to supper: At what time
they fell into great communication y^ one with the other. Freeman declared how
he was newely come out of Ireland, and what hurt the rebels had don there, by
setting diverse towns on fire, and now (quoth he) I am come from visiting my
friends in Hampshire, with purpose to go directly to London. Therefore I pray
th^e tell me how does all our good friends there, and what is the best news.
In troth (quoth. G^odcoll) no news but what is common: The good Earl of Essex is
prepared to sea, and in sooth thither am I going to: for what with my debts,
and my wiucs tongue (before god) I am constrained to leave all, for who would
live in bread of those creep corners, that gets their living by playing
boe^peepe, who like the cookcow have never but one song, and that sounds so
(...) fauouredly, saying: I arest you: that I promise you it makes many a man's
heart ache that hears it. And whither I pray you travels this honest man your
friend (quoth. he:) Truly (said I) my journey is toward y^ sea too, though not for
the like cause as my friend goes. For as for my wife, her tongue did never
displease me, because she could never speak being borne dumb, and as for
Sergeants, I never need to tear them, for no man would ever credit me to
make me run in debt. Then have thou (quoth. Freeman) two good commodities. But
hear thou Goodcoll, I pray thee say: how do all our ancient acquaintance,
y^ good oath-takers, or common baylers: Alias the knights of the Post, the
Lords of sobs pound, and heirs apparent to the pillory: who are as ready to
bail men out of prison, being then well pleased for their pains, as Tiron is
in playing the traitor without causes. Tush (qnoth Goodcoll) that fraternity
of falsehood, and fellowship of fraud, both never lightly pass out of the old
byas, they are all in health, though void of honesty: some are at liberty to
seek a dinner where they can get it: and some to spare shoe-leather lies in
prison. L. that old lad is forth coming, though not coming forth, having
the privilege to walk his stations in one of y^ counters in London, ^ so are
diverse other of the same profession. But tell me I pray you (quoth. Freeman) what
is become of B. is he as sound mettle as he was: And how does the harber of new
corn, old Father C to-towne, L. the Courier, and he whom men call worse then
Craft, are they all living still? Living (quoth. Goodcoll) trust me I, and like
enough to live till shame either prefers them to the pillory, or misery end
their days. B. has sou^ded false larums in Westminster hall a long time, and
has been a graund ^night of antiquity: as well known for his profession, as
mother Bunches ale to nipitaty. But for the store houses of corn, he has
betaken himself to his beads: for in matters of bailing, he is like an old
horse, whose mark is near worn out of his mouth: but notwithstanding though
he be f^eble in body, yet his mind is as good as ever it was, ^ that which he
cannot perform himself, he procures others to do: like that aun^iente rain
beaten harlot M, To, that after thee had quite consumed her young yerea in
lechery, and was no more set by, yet for the love she bore to the whorish art,
procured and enticed younger ones to do it, and so became a notable baude. And
in like sort plays he, for where he bayleth one himself, he procures others
to bail throe.

But as concerning old father C: why man he is oulde suresby, as trusty as
steel, and one that always helps at a deadlift: for after he has smugd up
himself in his borrowed apparel, with his great seal ring on his finger of
pure copper and guilt, when he comes to bail a man before a Judge, being
demanded if he be a subsidy man or no, straight answers, and it shall
please your good Lordshippe, I have been a subsidy man this xx. Winters and
upward: And then he swears, that he was seized at v. pounds in the Queens
books the last sessment of the subsidy: and further affirms it on his credit,
which is as good in r^eapside, as it is at the pudding^y house, where they will
not trust him for two pence: but he has one bad quality, which I doubt will
make him at length loose his customers, and that is this. He will never be
pleased when he has bailed one, except he give him more then his promise and
beside stop his mouth with a pint of old sack. Now (...) he whom men call worse
then craft and L. I think they will give over their trade of bailing, ^ turn
truemen, for they do not so much use it as they have done heretofore. Trust me
(quoth. Freeman) that would be as great a miracle, as to see Banks his curtaile
dance a h^rntpipe. But what say you to little W, and to him that is called more
then a whole bare ow, and the man whose name has but fine letters, first three
vowels, then two consonants? But (quoth Goodcol) they be in these matters like.
Manering at a burial, of no reckoning, except to jest at: being rather
procurers of others then doers themselves. If you make no account of them (quoth
Freeman) what say you then of him that bore the name of the old player with
the beluct cap: of the aged Crane turnde backewarde, K. with the tun, and F. with
the ^rie face, C. the true cook old ye sold away his wife for money, and
afterward received her home again: mary quoth. G. as Larleton said of the
Linker, that they have more craft in their budgets, then crowns in their
purses: notwith^^a^ding of no reputation: for they be but procurers of others
to bail, and not baylers themselves: And above all the rest: the ^n. of the
post, do ^tterly deny to go bef^^e a I. with F. for fear least the fire in his
face should set the I. chamber in a flame: and so they might get more
displeasure, then all the rich rubies in his nose are worth. C. I must nades
say is a good fellow: but he vleth this trade nothing so much now as he has
done: and as for K. he does so tie himself to ye two penny ale, that he can
spare no time to do any thing. Then tell me, how fares L.P.C. and ^l-col. are
they of no reputa^io^ now? they were wont to be jolly doers in this gear: and
so are they ^ill says Goodcole, for L. and P. do many matters continually and
get much money by it, but it prospers as badly with them as the coin that Joseph's
braethren took when they sold him into Egypt, for what is gotten all day they
spend franckly at night in on tauern, aihouse or other, so that for ^ght that
I see, they are as bare as ye spanish friars that were late taken at sea, which
lie now in S. maratins but whereas you speak of C. I have not seen him a long
time either I think he is dead, or else gone to Reding again from whence he
came, but why do you call him C. his name is Cookoo, though he keep not all
ways on tune, truly that is more then ever I heard quoth Freeman, do they
then alter their names when they go about to bail men? as though that you
were ignorant thereof quoth. G. If they should not change their names, and like
Protheus turn their shapes sometimes, they would often be had by ye bark for
their lewd knavery. But then I pray you tell me what is become of the broker,
the bird with the black foot and goulden tail, and the son of R. do they
continue their oulde courses still? What need you move such a question (quoth.
Goodcoll) how should they live if they should leave that sweet profitable
trade: bayling and swearing* I tell you sir it is an occupation that fowls not
their hands, though it corrupt their conscience, which some of them have used
these dozen or fourt^ne years at the least. I muse (quoth. F^eeman) hold these
fellows escape untaken or unpunished all this while, for it is on oulde
proverb, that the pitcher goes so long to the water, that at length it comes
broken home. Tush they are as h^^eful in this matter as may be, for as I told
you, they will seldom tell their right names, nor give true notice of their
dwelling: And beside that they will be sure to know before hand, what Judge it
is that must take the bail: for if their be any judge that he knows does
suspect him, he will keep one leg back from that place, and go before some
other to do the feat.

Call you these feats (quoth Freeman) for wretches to periure themselves in this
sort? truly god may well spare them for a time, but their judgment will be the
greater: and surely goods gotten in this sort must needs be cursed: And no
marvel if none of them do thrive. Why do you say so (quoth. Goodcole) is not
the broker rich^ I, but he got it by brokery and not by bailing quoth the other. I
grant he is a broker (quoth. Freeman) but he was first a bailer and a swearer,
which preferred him to his brokery: for it was a small matter instead of hearing
morning prayer to go fasting before a I. and forswear himself, whereby he
has gotten many a crown, which he accompteth clear gains and the stock
remaining whole at the years end: so that now he has left brokery and is
become a Draper. A Draper (quoth. Freeman) what Draper, of woollin or linen*
No (quoth he) an Ale Draper, wherein he has more skill then in the other:
nevertheless there are more brokers that are bailers beside him. Why is their
own trade of brokery so much decayed (quoth Freeman) that they cannot live by
that, as well as they have done I (quoth Goodcoll) there is so many of them, that
one cannot live by another: And beside that, there is another inconvenience
besa^e them: they must now neither buy any thing, nor take pawn, except first
they come and register it in a place provided by the Daiestrats: so that
whereas before they were wont to buy much stolen goods, whereby their greatest
profit grew: now they cannot do so, because each party that brings goods to
the brokers, must have their names and dwelling place set down by the
Register, or else they that do otherwise, are accounted a^cessary to the
fello^y, if they meddle with any frolne goods.

This is an excellent good order quoth. Freeman. But what is that son of R. you
spoke of* I have heard much speech of him that he has been an notable fellow
for bailing. No Goodcoll and so he is still: but in speaking of him, I must say
to you, as once a king of England said to his Nueene y^ was desirous to know a
certain matter of him: soft (quoth he) thereby hanges a tale: and so likewise of
R. remains another, but that I will refer till tomorrow, for what with this
good supper, and my weary journey, I find my self well preparde for my bed,
and therefore let us know what we hane to pay, that we may rise from the table,
for I assure you my legs are wart as stiff as an old pair of boots after a
nights drying. Then said Freeman, Do tapster what is to pay: five willings two
pence (quoth he) and you are welcome: with that I began to draw my purse, and
Goodcoll went to his pocket: Pay soft my masters (said Freeman) here is not a
penny for any of you to pay: nor will I offer a penny (quoth Goodcoll) but
these, and with that he set the two loaves which he plucked out of his pocket on
the board: this is an odd jest (quoth I) to set bread on the board after the
meat is eaten, much like unto her, that went not for the Physician before she
saw her husband dead under the table If you like not my offer (quoth Goodcoll) I
will keep them till to morrow. Why ^ir quoth. Freeman, it is written you should
not ^are for the morrow; it is true quoth he, and because I will not care for
tomorrow, I provide these loaves tonight. Then said I to Freeman, I beseech you
fir accept of my money, otherwise you will charge your self too much: You
shall not spend a farthing (quoth he) nor should not if we were toegther this
monesh: And trust me my hearts, were it not for one thing I would walk along
with you: but at Bristowe I did disburse an hundred angels, to the good man of
the fryingpan on the Bridge, to have it paid me at London, the fifteenth of I:
next, or within seven days after the sight of his bill: But (said Goodcoll)
who must pate it to you there* Mary Phillipp Curtoise, a man sure enough quoth
Freeman.

I would to Christ said Goodcoll, we might have had your company to Plimmoth,
for I may say to you as to my friend, I have not one penny in my purse,
whatsoever come: quoth Freeman, thou shall not lack for money: And with that
he drew his purse and gave him ten shillings, saying: Would thee my old
friend, vi-
take this to help thee, and if I had more store of white money, I promise
thee thou should have more, mary I thank God I have some charge about me,
more then I mean to make any man privy to: And to say the truth, I am loath to
break my gould, I have left myself five shillings yet in ^luer, and that
shall serve till I come to London: And with that he calde the goodman of y^
house, saying: Good my host provide me a good bed, and a chamber with lock
and key, for I have charge about me.

Sir says the host fear not, you shall lie safe I warrant you, if you had a
thousand pound. Dear ye my host (quoth Freeman) I pray you use my friends
well, I may say to you they are honest men, and of good credit in London,
though as you see they trudge thus a foot, as my self both. I tell you they
have reason for it my host, and so have I too: and hark re me, I pray you let
them have what they will call for, if they will not pay you, I will. I thank
you sir (quoth we) and so we departed to bed.

In the morning they rose early, and calling at Freemans chamber do^e, thought
to take their farewell of him: What my boi^s (quoth he) are you such good
cocks to be rising as soon as the sun* Pay soft, we must not partly so, I
mean to break my fast with you, with that he started out of his bed, and
wiled the tapster to cover the board, so to breakfast we went. Then said
Freeman: now Goodcoll I pray you let me hear the tale of Rob: for I could do
nothing but dream all night what it should be: Mary (qu^^^ he) this R. being
his crafts Master, where he was hicred to come before any Judge to bail a man,
it was his accustomed use to call himself by a wrong name: and if he dwelt in
long lane perhaps he would say he dwelt in white Chapel, and so neither
certify them of his true name, nor of his true dwelling place: so that if any
enquiery be made of him in such place, where he affirmed himself to dwell,
there is no such man to be found: and by this means he scapes many a scouring.

But pardon me I beseech you, good master Freeman, the day wears, and I have
far to go, therefore I cannot stand to tell out the rest: but at our next
meeting in troth you shall know all: therefore let us pay our shot and be
walking.

A sigge (quoth Freeman) here is nothing to pay, and were our reckoning twenty
pound, you should not pay one penny: but because your have is such toward your
journey, and my desire great to hear out your tale, I Will take my sword and
walk a mile or two with you: And thus having discharge the house we went
forth together. Well now to my tale quoth Goodcoll.

I heard it told for a truth, that a certain Gt. now dwelling on Saint
Andrews ^ill, in the direct way toward Tyborne, being a good knight of the
Post, and having learned of To. and such other of that hateful society, to
deny their own names: upon a time when he came before a judge to bail a man:
most knawishly named himself to be a certain Upholster in London: a man that
for his wealth and wisdom was of good account among his neighbors.

The creditor making inquiery of his bail, and finding him by report to be
very sufficient, was well content, so the matter rested till the term: At what
time the action being ca^de upon, there came neither one nor other to make
answer.

At last by course of law an execution was like to be served upon the surety.
The honest Citizen hearing of this matter, was not a little amazed: says he
to the Creditor, Sir you greatly mistake, I am not the man you mean, for I
know no such man you speak off, nor was I ever bail in this court in my life.
Why is not your name thus: quoth, the Attorney your trade Upholstery, and dwell
you not in such a place* Yes indeed quoth the Citizen: well then, except
there be more of this name dwelling there, you are like to answer ^s (said
the Attorney. Tush said the Citizen, as well he might have put in my child's
name as mine, for any knowledge I had of this matter.

Thus was this honest man put to no small trouble before he could clear
himself: while in the mean space the Glouer sat smiling in his sleeue, and
carried away twenty or thirthy shillings for his pains.

Undoubtedly said I, he is a fellow of a filthy conscience: Conscience (quoth
Goodcoll:) I tell you their consciences are like chiuerell shin^, that will
stretch every way. But for all the Glouer is so ^unning, if he use many of
these feats, at length he will come to peep through the pillory, and carry as
many ears on his head as old Harry of P. gardine. But where is P. now a days,
that goulden feathered bird, he has been an ancient professor of bayling, and
many great adventures has he past, like a most hardy knight of the Post.

I says Freeman, but he was like to have caught a foul soil of late: for if
he had been gotten, he had been clapped vy in the kings bench for his knavery:
And how escaped he I pray* Cuen by his wits said Goodcoll, the which he has
beaten thri^ bare.

Also you know P. Alias. A oulde R. not the for, thoug^^ much of his nature, B.
and H.* yes mary, what of them, do they proceed still in bayling, some do,
and some do not, for as I heard, good P. Alias A. ryding out of Town, broke
his neck at Tyborne. And as he went to hanging, R. stood by and would not bid
him once farewell, whereby^on P. broke out into this passion, saying: Ah thou
ungrateful wretch, haste thou been copartner of so many of my profits, and
do thou now participat with my crosses, thou haste sung with me, and dancst
with me, ^ate and drunk with me, and can^t thou not find in thy heart to hang
with me. Well, if thou had not that good nature in thee, yet thou mighst have
took the pains as to go to the Gallows with me, or bid me farewell.

An Officer ryding hard by him with a Iaueline in his hand, bearing him thus
inuaye against his unkind friend, wished him to ^ontent himself with patience,
for (quoth he) though he will not take the pains to go with thee now, yet he
means parhaps to follow thee, shortly.

It was well answered to the discontented man (quoth. Freeman) for the quiet of his
mind, but how fares B. C. and N. mary sometimes with bread and cheese (quoth
Goodcoll, sometimes with bread and butter, and eat rostmeat when they have
money: Nay I inquire not after their chier, but their good estate (says
Freeman.) In troth they live so so, and it were well, if they knew where a good
commodetie of names were to be sold, and yet I think all the money in their
pursses could not buy it.

But to let these bace fellows pass, I can tell you of a great many others
that you never knew men lately come into the trade, but I doubt we have
brought you too far out of your way already: Lut, I respect it not (quoth
Free.) and seeing I am come thus far, I will walk along to Andouer with you,
because in truth I would hear somewhat of those men you speak of, for hang
it by, it is but the coming back of fifteen or sixteen miles, and there I
will bestow your d^inner on you, and so return, why then we shall be too much
beholding to your courtesy (quoth. Goodcoll) but seeing you have so good a mind
to hear of these matters, I will proceed in my first purpose.

There is a most brave fellow but very newly crept into this crewe, and his
name is N. well known, one that looks very high, and at every word casts
his eye above Powles steeple, as if he would quarrel with the Done, or had
some controversy against the seven stars. In his attire, he is neat and
fine, and in his speech stately, with a long piccadeuant after the French cut,
and of a scornful countenance, and when he comes into Westminster. hall, he bends
his brows, as if he would bear down the Kings Bench bar with his looks.
My acquaintance with the man is but small, for I was never in his company but
once, and that was at the kings head in Fleetstreete, at what time being (as it
was supposed) in his holly day apparel, which was after the manner of a
Barchaunt, he seemed to scorn that a poor man should speak to him.

Also at the same time as I well remember P. the golden fethered bird was with
him, very brave, with a fair cloak of somewhat a gray color on his back,
the which (as it was fold me) N. had sent him for that d^y, having bin as it
seemed about their common profits that morning: and these two as I have heard,
have joined themselves together in many actions. There is also another new come
fellow, whose name is S. he dwelt sometime about London bridge, and now is
gotten into Houndsditch to dwell, who seeming to be a very surly proud
companion, and falling at strife with his trade, gave his occupation a pasport,
to get a new master, and betook himself to follow this honest fellowship, and
both also take upon him to do many matters, making both of his ability and of
the effectiug of many matters huge bragges, howsoever he deals in the
performance thereof. Now sir, there is another of this newcome crewe, that by
report is as worthy to be noted as the rest, whose name and nature may well
agree.

Dee is called W. and you know beas^es of his name are great bloudsuckers, and
it is to be feared, he will be as great a pursse-sucker, as the wolf is a
blood-sucker, if in time (...) be not prevented.

And it came to pass that this W. not long since, and S. and N. being before
sworn brethren, and great companions together, on a time they with some other
of the same sect, after their business at the hall in the morning was ended,
finding their guts chyme twelve a clock in their bellies, went all together to
dinner in Westminster: where they fed so heartily, and druncke so hard, that
S. after dinner (while the others were busy in talking) fell asleep, which
when the rest perceived, like most honest men of their profession, consulted
among themselves, to steal away, and leave him to pay the shot, whereupon one
of them after another crept out of the room, and came to the good man, saying,
Sir we have gathered our reckoning, and left our money with our friend above,
who because he was by this morning somewhat early, breaking his ordinary
house, is purposed to take a nappe before he goes and as soon as he wakes he
will pay you: for our own parts we have earnest business that calls us
hence, or else we would be loath to leave him behind us, and therefore we pray
you take care of him, that no man do offer him any wrong.

The good man deeming their abillitie to be answerable to their apparel, and
noting them by their countenance to be civil Citizens, with his cappe in his
hand very mannerly, made this reply.

Uery well Gentlemen, I doubt not my payment, and doubt you not but I will have
good regard to the gentleman above: let him take his rest on Gods blessing:
well, God be with you, ^r quoth. they: you are heartily welcome said the Wintner:
now sir within some quarter of an hour after, S. awaking out of sleep, and
seeing his companions to be gone, maru^iled much thereat, wherefort he
calling the Drawer, presently answered with a shrill voice, anon. anon sir,
when the Drawer came to him, he demanded if all his company were gone out of
the house, yes marry sir, said he, a quarter of an hour ago, and more, what
churles were they (quoth he) to go and leave me here, but seeing it is so,
take up thy plate good Drawer, and with that he stepped out of the rome, ^ay soft
sir (quoth the Drawer) I hope you will pay the reconing ere you part, have not
they paid (quoth S. not ane penny, sir said the Drawer, then said S. with a
pale countenance, why tell me what is to pay, under ten shillings somewhat sir
answered the drawer, with that S. bent his brows and fetched his stations up
and down the rome, with such furious Iesture as if he had been playing
^amberlane on a stage: Drawer (quoth he) thou must not think to make a younger
brother of me, I know my friends would not serve me thus for twenty pound, I
pray thee go call thy master, the fellow runne^ down and tells his master
how the case stood, the goodman incontinent goes to S. who asks him presently
if he were not paid the shot: no verily. said the goodman, your friends told
me at their parting that they had gathered the reconing and given you the money
to pay: and have they s^rued me so (quoth S.) well, here is your money, but I
will take heed how I sleep after dinner again: A small matter sir (quoth the
goodman for one friend to ^est with another. And so they departed, but this
bred no little brable betwixt S. and R. when they met. Certainly I could not
blame S. to be offended (quoth Freeman) to be so unconscionably used by his
companions, in a strange place, but no doubt they paid him again, that is hard
to say (quoth, G. for some of them deal in paying their debtes. like the Plannet
Saturn, that finishes his course but once in 3. years, and they possible once
in three lives.

Now sir there is three or 4. more, that are newly come in, whose names I have
heard, but I know not the men, the one of them is called by the name of the
highest weapon that it carried too, another of them after a word of the third ^.
but the fourth man's name I cannot remember, and alas, they are no persons of
any great reconing, but such as shift it out with others, who like Robin Pypers
spaniell, runs away when they are calde, if they spy but one of the
Marshales men in sight. Twenty more of such fellows could I name, if that
leisure would serve me. and as I have rehearst their names, so could I show
you many of their actions, what wily and cunning prankes they play, which
would make you wonder to hear it, and me weary to tell it, but now I perceive
we are come to Andouer, and therefore leaving these matters, we will bethink
us where we may provide for our dinners, sir I shall tell you quickly (quoth
I:) the sign of the Pie is a very good house for footmen, or at the sign of
the three Marryners, at an^e of those two houses we shall be very well used,
where we may have any thing that we will call for, and very reasonable: At the
sign of the Pie then let it be (quoth Free.) and there my masters we will be,
merry, where I will spend an English Crown upon you, and although I am loath,
yet then I will leave you Master Free. I thank you (quoth Good.) and if it
please God I live, I will requite this kindenes, and with y^ we took in the
house over our heads, and so calling for meat, t^ dinner we went, where when
we had well vi^tual^d our selves, M. Free. would needs have a pottle of wine
sent for, and to make it relish the better, the goodman of the house being a
notable good companion, gave us a piece of sugar, and so sat down with us, and
by that time we had drunk our wine, being well whitled with strong Ale
before, of the goodwiues own brewing, we began all of us to be very pleasant,
and my ^oast of Andouer seeing us grow in a good humor, a^kt us how ^ar we
would go that night, marie by the help of God to Salsberie (said I) and we
are sorry that this our friend must leave us here. Nay (quoth Free.) I will
hear the tale out first, for all the best is behind, in truth that cannot
be (quoth. G.) for the circomstance is too long to be told in a short time, and
as good never a whit begun as not ended: for if it please God at Salisburie
we will lie this night. That is a place I. was never in quoth From ^ with that
the ea^ man of the house began to commend the wholesome and pleasant situacion
of that City: showing also that out of the head of one spring the water ran
through every strate in the same city, and I will tell you what Gentlemen (quoth.
he) you say y^ you were never there: but if you please to go thither, there
you shall see the fairest Cathedral Church (for the bigness) that is in
England, the first stone whereof, King John with his own hand did lay, and
there i^ about the same church as many chapels as there is months in the
year, as many doors as there are works in ye year^, and as many windows as
there are days, and as many pillars as there are hours in the year, I have
been in many countries quoth Freeman but of such a church did I never ^are, well
it is true quoth. our host, and it is but fifteen miles hence, and therefore
seeing you never saw it, if I were as you, I would see it, well Goodcoll quoth
Freeman, were it but to hear out thy tale, I will go to Salsburie, for if the
worst come to the worst, it is but the hi^ring of a hackney to ride to london
and to come time Inonghe to the receiving of my money, well my masters quoth. he,
there is according to my promise, a crown toward the shot, and if it come to
more, you shall pay it between you for me, well sir quoth I, howsoever it goes,
you come still to your cost: and so our shot being paid, we set toward
Saliberie, hiding our good host farewell: now frind Goodcoll you may think
that I love tales well, that go so many miles out of my way to here one, but
it is no matter, my mind to me is a monerkey, therefore now seeing we are
onwarde of our way, let us begile the time with talk, and drive ont
weariness with the residue of the discourse, now quoth Goodcol, you shall
here me discover y^ vilde practices of these bad people, whereby they daily
abuse the grave Judges of the land, her majesty's high commissioners, and the
Justices of the peace, especially th^se for Land. ^idls. ^. and Sur. with y^
shires next adoyning, Stewardes of Courts, and many other, both Honorable and
worshipful: deceiving likewise many poor men, by their most vilde and lewd
practices: for now they (as some of them can brag of) have by y^ continual
practice thereof, made their trade of baileing, better by five C. pounds a
year, then heretofore it has been. Whereupon Freem. demanded how that could
be: I will tell you sir quoth. Goodcole: They are grown now as I say, to bail
men before her M. high Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical: But if their
vila^ie be once found out in y^ place, they will be made to curse the day of
their Nativity: that ever they first began to take these lewd courses in hand.
It seems then (quoth. Free.) that they have prettye fine wits, that they can
escape away so cleanly in their matters, and never be taken tardie: Albeit (quoth.
he) that their long practice in these things, have made them as subtle as
Serpents: yet now and then they are taken in their villainy, but that is very
seldom: perhaps once in seven years.

And now sir, I will show you how that not long since, ^ man that you know
very well, was clapped by the heels in y^ Clinke, for bail^ing (as I supose) a
Papist before the high Commissioners* who as soon as he had gotten his
liberty, got himself away, and (as I have heard) could not be found as yet.
what do they presume so audaciously to bail papists too quoth Freeman* yes
verily: They will not stick to ^ter either Bond or bail for any man y^ will
give them money.

And what will not they do: if they may be well requi^ed for their pains? But
say they, there we shall never be put to our oaths which is a good help unto
us. And thus have they all the shifts and devises that may be devised to help
themselves: But now they are grown more circumspect in their dealinges, then
they were woonte to be. In what sort quoth. ^re They have now taken this order
amongst them, that they will be sure to come before one I. but once in a term,
because they will not be noted in y^ Maiestrats eyes, so that the grave
Maiestrates are not any way able to prevent it, by reason of the multitudes of
people y^ come before them: so that when any Kn^ef y^ post coms before any Ma.
again, he has as clean forgot his countenance, as the man he never saw
before: if it be so, quoth Freeman, that they come before a I. but once in a
term, their gettings must needs be small, and I marvel how they can live of
it, whereunto Goodcoll answered, that as they live badde enough, so ^^ey live
poor enough, fortune feeding the^, as Moss did his mare, through a hurdle,
which made him take her so soon napping. And through want of meat many times
they walk out their dinner in Duke Humfrey his Allie, or else fetch a sleep
under a pillar in Powles, only to beguile hunger. And although they make many
other shifts to get money by, yet none of them dies rich men. And now I will
show you how by a new devise which they have gotten, they get many a crown. I
pray you let me hear that (quoth. Freeman) for novelties breeds most delight. It
is so, quoth. Goodcole as you know, that Newgate being a prison for all kind of
fellons, and other mallefactors, it is commonly replenished with more store,
then any other prison in England, by reason of the populacie and great number
of lewd persons, that lurk about the city of London: which these good
knights looking into, and smelling out what great profit might be gotten by
them, sought means to come acquainted with certain cutpursses and other
pilfering companions, such indeed, as can not forbear once in a quarter at
the least, to wear a pair of shackels in Newgate: and see their good fortune,
it was their chance to be in company upon a time, where one of cutpursse hall
made great moan for a friend of his that was clapped up upon suspicion, a proper
youth quoth. he and of good parentage, and falling in badde company, was
apprehended with the rest as a partner of their practices: and yet I may say to
you, the youth is well known to diverse worthy Captains, for a proper fellow,
and an excellent Drummer, and such an one as has served her Majesty both in
France and Flanders, yet to see his hard destiny, he is now become after all
his credit gotten in the field, to suffer shame in his own Country: and I
promise you I fear he will hardly escape death. Alas poor fellow, quoth. the
knight of the post, has he no friends in the City that will do somewhat
for him, and bail him forth till the Sessions come: he has many friends quoth
the other, but he is ashamed to make the matter known to them, fearing it
should come to his parents ears: which he would not for an hundred pounds,
What quoth. the K. has he any thing to help himself withal? In troth quoth. the
other, he has small store of money, but he has good things to make money of.
Why what would he give quoth. they, to such as would procure his liberty and set
him out of danger, mary quoth. the other he would give four Angels withal his
heart, in troth quoth. they for six Angels, we will for your sake find means to
fetch him forth: and put in good sufficient men to be sureties for his
appara^ce at the next assizes, but we will have our money ready to be paid:
but will not receive one penny before we have done it, you speak like honest men
quoth. the other: I will thus much presume, though without my friends knowledge,
that you shall have six Angels or three pounds in white money, so soon as it
is done: therefore I would wish you go about it straight: and because I know,
you cannot trot about without expenses, there is for a pottle of wine, and with
that he throws them down a shilling: desiring them to tell him where he
should meet them at evening or in the morning: the place being appointed, and
themselves with all circumstances prepared, dressing themselves very handsomely,
to a I. they go, if he chance not to be within, then they trudge to another,
and do not rest till they speak with one or other. And thus with a very grave
look, and duetifull obedience they begin to speak in this sort. We are come
to entreat your good Worship for a poor young man that is in prison, one that
is come of very honest parents though he be far from them, who by mere
chance, lighting in company of some lewd persons, was with them committed to
Newgate, where the poor young man, having been tenderly brought up. through
the weakness of his own nature, and the noisome smell of the place where he
now is, finds himself very ill, and we assure your Worship, that we fear
if he remain their any longer, that it will be his death, wherefore we most
humbly entreat pour Worship, that he may be bayled forth, you shall have
sufficient Citizens and good Subsedie men to be bound for his appearance at the
next sisses, to answer what soener can be laid against him. The good Justice
noting their speech, and therewithal their persons, makes this answer, if his
fact be n^ worse then you speak of, and you seem honest men that would not
report an untruth, I am contented to take bail, so you bring me good
suffieie^t sureties: and if it shall please your good Worship (quoth they) we
will be the men our selves, I assure your sir, we are subsedie men both of us,
and our dwelling is in such a place, and with that they protest that they were
sessed at five pounds in Queens books, the last subsedie, whereupon the
Justice bids his Clarke to take their bonds: And by the means of the notable
Cutpursse coming out of Newegate, the money is straight paid, and then to the
Tauarne they go as pleasant as Popingaies, where they drink and carous
merrily, giving them much thanks for this their great courtesy and ever
after, when they or any other of their society, do chance to meet with these
old shauers, they care not what they spend upon them, spreading their fame
among all their familiars, whereby it is come to pass, that they are as well
known among these companions, as those tittle boys are with the bathes. who
will cast themseues down a great heigh, naked into the water and fetch a penny
in the bottom. So that now there is great familiarity grown betwixt them,
that if any Cutpusse* be clapped up, for using his knife and his horn, they
straight send word to these their assured friends, who whether they have money
or no, will procure their delivery being contented that the next bung the
Cutpursse nyppes, shall serve for his recompense. For these honest men do
consider that their staying in prison is no profit to them, but by their
liberty, they are asured that they will get money Enough both (...) defraye
charges and to recompense them for their pains. why then quoth Freeman it
seems by your speches, y^ the knights of the post and the cutpursses with al
such other leawd companions are confederated together for I perceive the
cutpursse is so kind, that if he have it, the knights shall not want it? no I
assure you (quoth. G.) for both those Scas are grown into one leage of
friendship, having sworn as need requires, one good fellow to help another,
and in his adversity, no more to forsake him, then in his prosperity: do all
the knights of the post use this practice (quoth. Free.?) G. answered, no not all,
but some of them, especially those of the midling or latest sort, what is
there such diversity of them, yea too many (said G.) who go about as
fishwiues carry Oysters, new and stale: But I pray you tell me (quoth. F.) what
shift do they make, when these persons for whom they are bound do not
appiere, at the next Sessions or Gail delivery? You shall understand (quoth. G.
that the K. do know and are ver^lie persuaded, as a thing wherein they are well
experienced, that there is no doubt of that matter, for those fellows falling
to their oulde trade again (because they are so grownded in filching, cannot
otherwise betake themselves to any virtuous labor it is impossible, but they
will be aprehended, for one vilde fact or other, before the Sessions, so that
he will be ^oerth coming sure enough, whereby their bonds are saved. And it is
to be noted that so long as they stand bound for any of them, they will not
bail them out again, but suffer the law either to set them at liberty, or
se^d the^ to the gallows, for they are as careful in this case, as y^ hangma^
is, to tie the halter fast, so that there can come no danger to them in the
world. Then I perceive (quoth. F.) y^ if a man, or a woman, commit never so
heinous offense, except in cases of treason, murder, and such like, he may be
bayled out of prison at any time if he have acquaintance with any of these
fellows, and have store of money to help himself withal, yea verelie (said
Good.) and they do not only bail men out of Newgate, but out of the
Marshalsea, the White Lion, the Gatehouse at Westminster, Finsherie, Wentworth
prison, and out of the counter in Southwark for debt. Some they do (said G.)
but not many, for in these Courts they dare not adventure in cases of debt, so
boldly as in the higher courts, because the courses of law there, comes a
great deal sooner for trialls, then in the rest. whereby an execution comes
upon their backs, before they look for it. Then I perceive (quoth F.) for all
their haste they are overtaken sometimes. Why you must think, it is impossible
(said G. they doing so many matters continually) but that they should be taken
and clapped by the heels for some of them. Now I pray you G. tell me where do
all these knights of the post dwell and inhabit, are they all Londoners? no
not the tenth man (quoth. G.) for some of them dwell at Redding, some at Ware,
some at Colebroke, some at Stains, some at S. Albones, some at Hartford, some
further of, and some nearer hand: Then (said F.) it is great maruill that they
are not refused when they come before the Maiestrate. seeing their dwellings
are so far of, why I told you (quoth G,) that they never give true notice
either of their names or dwelling place, and that they will know before hand,
before what Judge they must go, and also what danger there is in the cause,
before such time, as they will enter into the matter, being as feare^ull to be
taken tardie, as the whelp is to lapp hot porage.

But is it possible (quoth F.) that these men, that are so ready to forswear
themselves, will be trusty in their dealings to them that put them in trust:
nay (quoth G.) I may tell you, some of them use these shifts, when they have
little other buisenes to go from prison to prison, and promise poor men to
work wonders for them, but they will not stur their foot without some money in
hand, and when they have once fingerd it, they neither do the parties good,
nor paraduenture never come to him again, whereby he loses three things at
one time, his good hope, his money, and his name. This was no sooner spoken, but
a foot-poste of Plimmouth ouertooke the, cladde in a flannell wastcoat, and a
linen pair of breeches, with a Spaniardes hat on his head, that sat upon his
pate like the bottom of a pipkin. God speed my masters quoth. he: how far
travel you tonight: even to Salisburie said they. Trust me said the
foot-poste, I guest as much by your soft going, and there likewise will I take
up my lodging. Came you from London quoth. they: Yes marry said the Post, I broke
my fast there yesterday morning What is the best news there? Uery good news
said the Post: Carriage is become so cheap, that a man may ride for nothing.
That indeed is good news quoth Goodcoll for wearied men, is it not? Yes marry
said Freeman, for such as dwell there, but it profits us nothing. It may in
good time quoth the Post: Why? what do thou mean by that says Goodcoll?
That may be answered soon at supper, answered the other, if you like to lodge
at my hoasts house: where is that quoth they? In Salisburie at the sign of the
Griffin says he: where you shall be well used for your money.: and it is the
first Inn that we shall come to in the City. Goodcoll answered: We desire but
good usage for our money and good lodging. Then mean not I to suppe with you
quoth the post: No: why so said they? because you request but good usage for
our money and good lodging: but I must have meat for my stomach. There you
were even with me indeed says Freeman: the post replied: not so: for I am
lower then you by the head: then you reckon not the height of your horns quoth
Goodcoll. The post seeing himself matched: turned his speech to other purpose
and so they post on their way to Salisburie: and to the sign of the Griffin
they go: where the foot-poste as one best acquainted: entered in first and
called the good man of the house: wishing they might have somewhat to supper.
Look what they called for they had: and the goodman sat down with them for
company and bad them all heartily welcome: so with many pleasant speeches they
past their supper time. At length quoth. the goodman: What news (Gentlemen) at
London.

Certainly said Freeman for our own parts we know none: but I remember this
light-footed ladde told us by the way that he would show us some: and
referred the whole story till the time of our supper: which now being ended he
may proceed to the matter when he pleases.

I have nothing to say but this quoth the post: that in London beef is
indifferent good cheap but mutton is dear: for the market is forestald
greatly by the two takers of London who fetch all the fairest muttons out of
common pastures and pens them up to other purposes: by the mass thou art a
knave quoth. the goodman: O my heast says the other, there is such a lamentation
made in Venus court, as the like has not been heard of long time: pretty
wenches go so fast to Bridewell as it passes: some in their taffaty gowns:
some in their wast-coates all ouerw^ought with black work. And poor souls
they weep not so sore, but the beadles of Bridewell laughe as fast: for now
their gains comes in out of all cry. Tush quoth. Goodcoll they have gone a
great while on the score and now possible they are called to a reckoning: and
great reason they should make payment: Nay by the mass they are paid quoth. the
post: Y would not be so paid for an hundred pound But you told. us of
another matter said Freeman as we came over the Plain: and ^s as plain a
matter as the Plain of Salisburie said the post. Then said his host: What
was it? Marry quoth. he one there was of so kind a nature, that he would suffer
any good fellow to lie with his wife that lackt a wife: In requital whereof my
Lord Mayor of L. lent him a Cart to ride in for nothing: and because the
Cuck^ld was rich: no horns would serve his turn but golden horns: and
bearing himself some what brag of my Lords preferment: the proud fool got
on his hollyday cappe upon a working day: whereby every boy perceived his asses
ears: and in this sort he rode up and down the City till the people drove
him away by ^inging of dyrt at him.

And as he went one way I came another with purpose to bring you certain news
of this matter, for such goulden horns as he wore, did I never see in my life.
And now my host, tell us what we have to pay, then said Freeman to G. do you
lay down money for me, and I will give it you again, I love not to show my
gould in an In, for Tapsters and Ostlers (they say) are not always the
honestest men. But come my host (says Fr.) I was never in this City before,
and I would desire you, to take the pains to go with these my friends, and my
self, to view the streets, and to see the minster, for I have heard great
commendation of it, sir (quoth the goodman) I am content to walk with you, and
to show you the minster, or to do you any other favor, that I may: so when
Free, and his two friends, with their host, had taken their pleasure in
walking up and down the City, he would needs to requite his hoastes
courtesy, give him a quart of wine at the Grayhounde, which being as
willingly accepted, as it was kindly offered, into the Tauarne they went,
where they made their quart a pottle: Now the foote-post understanding where
they were, thought he would go to catch a cup of wine among them, and coming
merely in, even as the^ were paying the shot, asked if they lackt company, no
but we lack wine (quoth F.) the worse luck for me, said the post, I would I
had been more forward in coming hither, or you less hasty in drinking the
wine, will thou not give us a pint, says his host, yes marry will I,
answered the other, and with that he calls the Drawer, saying: bring us hither
a pint: what shall it be sir, fair water (quoth. the post) with that they all
laughed, saying: he would be at cost well answered Freeman I will give this
merry fellow a quarte of wine of wine, for his good company today, I thank
you, sir says the foot post, and with that sat down among them, where what
with one merry Jest or another, wine was called for in lustily, At what time
in the midst of their Cups, M. Freeman swore he would go to Plimmouth
with them foot by foote', so when. the reckoning came to be paid, he requested
by Goodcoll again, according to his accustomed order, to lay down money for
him: by the mass quoth. Goodcoll, what with our supper and this shot, I have but
one great left of my ten shillings, for it is no reason my host should pay
any thing at all, or this my friend either, and as for the foot-poste, you
promised him to give him a quart of wine: That is very true quoth Freeman, pay
all Goodcoll at this time, and in faith for that odd groat which remains, we
will have a fresh pint of sack. Now when that was druncke, they went all to
their lodging.

In the morning the foot-post was soonest up: who calling to the rest of his
company: asked if they were almost ready to walk: but Free^an had drunk so
hard over night that he had no list to rise so timely in the morning: and as
for Goodcol his money was all gone and spent: therefore he would not go
before his good friend Freeman: for my own part I would feign have gone along
with the foot-poste: but that Goodcoll did earnestly entreat me to the
contrary: whereupon I stayed: and at length Freeman rising he called straight
for something to breakefast which was soon prepared (for he was still the
Gentleman) so having something refresht our selves we rose from the board: pay
Goodcoll quoth. Freeman lay out for me: I^can lay out no more quoth Goodcoll but
all: then Freeman willed me to lay down for them both, which I did: and so
taking our leave of our host, we set forward on our journey toward
Shaftesbury.

Whereupon travailing by the way, we fell into our old accustumed talk: and
amongst many other things': Goodcoll there told us that the Kn. of the post
were marvelous good companions when they had store of money: and how commonly
they would be sure always to have money before hand of him that should use
the^ though they did nothing.

Then said ^reeman to Goodcoll I had forgot to ask you one question yesterday:
and Indeed the foot-post did break off our talk, or else I had done it.

I pray you tell me, where are any of these Kn. of the post at any time to be
found; if y^ a man should happen to have need of them* Truly, I assure you
(quoth Goodcole) if it be in the term time, you may have them most commonly
in Fleetstreete, about S. In, or else about Chapter lane: or else in some of the
pudding-pie houses at Westminster, or else at the three legs there, and at
one of these places (I say) you shall be sure never to miss of some of them
themselves, or else of some of their parte-takers that are the procurers of
them. But if it be out of term time: you shall have them commonly, once or
twice a day, walking in D. Humfreys Alley in Powles, or at the Lion on the
backe-side of S Nichollas Shambles, or at the Rose in Pannier alley, or at y^
Dolphin in the end of Carter lane: and sometimes at the Wooll-sacke in the same
lane: and there lie crushing of y^ two-penny Ale-pot half a day together: but
if you do miss (as doubtless you cannot) to find any of the^ in*some of those
places: yet there is a Bell (but in what place it may hang I know not) that if
it be toulled, or at leastwise Rong out, it will with the sound thereof,
cause an hundred of them to meet together, wtin three hours, to serve any
man's turn that has need. And I dare warrant you y^ Mephostophilus never
haunted D. Faustus more, then these fellows do those places: where they
consume their time, and spend away all their thrifte. But what do they take
ordinarily quoth. Fr. for baileing of a man? All after as y^ matter is (quoth.
Goodc.) sometimes more, and sometimes less, as they can make their bargain.

But as I have heard (quoth Fr.) that there are another sort of Kn. of the
post, that will bear false witness in any man's behalf that will hire them,
such as came to swear against Christ, whose Glory is their shame: And albeit
some of them do make a show of Christianity: yet are they void of all fear
of God, and of no religion at all: but let us said ^. leave of speaking any
further of them at this time: and at my coming back from Sea I will make a
great number of them be manifestly known to the world. With that I that all
this while lent earnest care to their talk, cast forth my verdicte thus: it
seems (quoth I) M Goodco. that you and M. Fr. have bine much conversant with these
fellows because you know their names so well, and can open all these matters
so perfectly: I was conversant with them so long said Good. that it grudged my
conscience sore to see their dealinges: and grieved my heart to be any longer
in their company: so did it mine said Fr. and with that, there was other
footmen that ouertooke us, which caused us to break of our talk, but
Goodcole vowed deeply, y^ if ever it were his good fortune to come from the sea
again: not only to double what he has spoken, but also to be a scourge for
ever to all such disceitfull persons: and so keeping company with the rest y^
over took us, we drove out our time till we came to Shaftsburie, where M.
Freeman caused me to lay out money again for them both, saying he would change
two or three pieces of gold at Exceter and pay me all again: but when we came
there, and that I had laid out all my money at his request: not one penny or
piece of gold, had he in the world: but was feign to sell his cloak for very
need: whereupon I was a little moved, to see my self thus ser^d in a strange
place, and asked him if he were not ashamed to come so far to hear a tale, and
to spend all his money too: and Goodc. on y^ other side, was as blanke as my
self: in troth M. Fr. quoth he, you had need now to go and receive your money at
London, if there be any for you, is your great store of gold come to this
reckning? no marvel but you should have your chamber doze locked for fear of
robbing. My masters quoth. he, I have deceived you as you suppose, but none is
deceived so much as my self: and if with patience you will hear me, I will show
you: At the same time y^ I landed at Brist. there was one with me, that came out
of Ireland also: a man y^ seemed to be of good credit, who had an Irish boy to
wait upon him, and having bine as he said long out of England, bent his
journey to visit his friends in Lancashire: we coming over both in one ship,
made accout also to lie in one lodging: and he having as well as my self good
store of money, bought him self a new suit of Apparel at Brist, the which in
my eye seeming fair and good, I would needs straight way buy me ye like,
which when I had done, I to have the residue of my gold sure, fe^ring either to
be robed, or deceived thereof, ripped yt lineing of my doublet in diverse places,
and therein basted my gold most secretly, now yt gentlma^ and I, lying together
that night, the next morning he rose before me, and as it seemed, he put on my
doublet and left me his: which I think on my conscience he did it simply and
unknown to him self, be cause he made himself ready in my sight, and at his
departure away, he brought me up into my chamber a pint of metheglin, and
drinkeing to me he bad me farewell: now I supposing all this while yt I had my
own doublet on, made indeed no other reckning: had therein great store of
gold, but when yt this morning I searched and found it not so, you may think
that I was not a liltle grieved: therefore my masters here is the one half of
that I had for my cloak, to bring you to Plimmouth, and with the rest, I will
travel into Lancashire to my gentleman, for my own doublet, and therefore till
I see you again, adieu, and think hereafter no worse of me then you have
found, and so we parted: he toward La^cashire, and we toward Plimmouth.
Thus much (gentle reader) have you heard of the cunning shifts and wicked
devises of those lewd and e^^^l-minded persons: Wishing all honest men to be
ware of them: and at Goodcoles return from Sea, you shall be sure to see a
second part hereof, and if any of them do spurn hereat: let him be well
assured yt the next will touch him to yt quick, and in the mean space I do
with this to be published to yt view of yt world, and so farewell.

FINIS.

