AN HUNDRED Heavenly Thoughts. AND RESOLVTIONS, tending to draw the mind from
EVIL to GOOD.

Written by W. S. PREACHER of GODS Word in S. John's of Mathermarket in Norwich.

PSALM. 1.2. Blessed is the man that Meditates in Gods Law, day and night.

PRO. 14 22. Do they not err that devise Evil? but mercy and truth shall be
to them that devise good.

Printed at London by G. Eld, and are to be sold by C. W. 1616.

To the Right Worshipful and my most respected friend Mrs. Anne Corbet (wife
to tha virtuous and godly Gentleman Mr. THOMAS CORBET of Sprowston) a very wise
godly and heavenly Gentlewoman, W.S. wishes all prosperity.
RIG^T WORSHIPFVLL.
I Am so tied unto you by your many favors, as I profess I know not how to
carry my self in thanksgiving to you. I have here some few thoughts or
Meditations which may do some good, I dedicate them to your Worship in way of
thanks for your favors. If you ask me for what use they be of, I answer
they are for this use, to strengthen us against the Devil, to draw our minds
from foul sins, to alienate our mind from this present world which is
evil; to teach us to order our lives well, and to lead us foreward to the
Kingdom of Heaven. These things, whiles many others let their thoughts run a
thousand ways amiss, I have minded, and if they shall be read with the mind
they were written, and taken on the right hand. They shall I trust not want
their due effect, and good acceptance: I know they be not excellent, and yet I
know they be not worst. Your Worthiness indeed (whom I have often admired)
deserves far better: yet I pray you accept these, and God I trust in time
will enable me to give a further testimony of my love. So the Lord of glory
keep you and all yours:

From my Study in S. John's of Mathermarket in Norwich, this 26. of July. 1616.
Your Worships in the best bond that may be. W. S.

To the Reader.
Leave thou the worst,
and take the best:
I Will thank thee then
and wish thee blessed.
AN HUNDRED Heavenly Thoughts, and Resolutions, tending to draw the mind from
Evil to Good.
1.
A WORTHY thing it is to have a worthy name, for it is the principal ornament
we have, and the fairest flower in our Garden: I had rather have a face
disfigured, a house ruinous, a garment tattered, and to be in any base
condition then to loose my reputation. Me thinks it is like a well arrayed
ground or a pleasant place more then in any other delighted in. Therefore I
vow, I will so rule my liberties, and so temper my vain affection, as rude
simplicity shall have no place to disgrace me. Let Crows then keep their
blackness and be contented, to feed on Carrion. I will Swan-like keep my
whitenes, and delight my self in the gilded streams of goodness. It is
true, my weakness is not fit for any great worthiness, yet such as I resolve to
uphold my self from wickedness, a small fire is easily maintained, but once
extinct, is not easily kindled.

2
IF I see a man of a comely carriage, and noble and wise behavior, manifesting
a most virtuous mind in all his actions, I will long and holily observe him, as
desirous to get some tast-pleasing fruit of so fair a tree. But if on the
contrary, I see him of an ill favored disposition, I will either round him in
the ear with a wholesome admonition: or else my countenance shall deliver to
him in some proportion, that I mislike his wretched conversation.

3
IT is a peuish imperfection, over bitterly to glaunce at others reputation,
and with prologues or without prologues, to let fly at them such words as may
cast a great mist over their glory: And yet this I have often marked, that some
liberal tongues there be, can as easily trauill over Mountains as Molehills,
and exercise the freedom of their Language, as well in a Lordly as a lowly
subject. Hence many worthy guests bidden to men's banquets, are ouer-pressed
with these ouer-flowing stories, and to them cheerefulnes becomes tediousnes,
and good entertaynment is turned to discourtesie. But alas, this either
argues pride, thinking to build up their own worthiness by others
worthlessenes: or else barrennes of Brain that can stumble on no better
subject, or else store of passion with which they are violently transported. O
Lord teach me to gather fruits of Wisdom out of these occasions, and when I
hear others to speak bitter, I may exercise my self to speak better, that
who so marks my words proceeding from me, may know my tongue a quick
messenger of grace, and perceive that store of Heavenly Thoughts have Lordship
in me.

4
IT is an ordinary thing among the Vulger to nourish up themselves with
overmuch hope, and though they be conquered with pestilent passions, so that
they be full of rash enmity, plentiful in impatient sorrows, abundant in
idle works, swelling in haughtines of heart, and deeply bemired in the base
trade of ordinary worldlinges. Yet they think that of God they may be greatly
favored: But as a child, whose wit far ouergoes his age, is quickly
interrupted by death. So these ouer-streching hopes quickly meet with an
unhappy repulse. The Spider buildes and is safe until the trimmers beesome
come, then suddenly she is displaced, dishoused, dispatched: Lo such is the
uncertain hope of the popular sort who never suspect themselves til they be
past themselves. But I will build my hopes on better stays and will not be so
base as to make uncertainty the base or pillar of my safety.

5
Virtues skin is so full of brave beauty, that it scorns to lodge with foul
impiety: it yields no acquaintance to sin, but unfriendly: no entertainment but
unkindly; but vices like thorns can hug together, and love so dearly, that
if you handle them to make a separation, they will scarce spare your blood.
Would a man think that fast and loose could love, lie, and lincke together,
they be so contrary, and yet behold, this is to be found, some fast for outward
things, loose for inward, worldlings, and yet wyldings: some noted and
steadfast misers, yet loose and unsteadfast mistresses. But as for me, I will so
be fast as the poor shall untie me: And I will not be so loose, as the
world shall shame me.

6
SOme vessels may last long, but yet at length will leake. And we know
vessels of glass, though well tempered, yet cannot long endure. Lo thus I have
deemed of wordly friends: If somewhat firm, yet not ever, for being but brittle
glass, they quickly break. Then this shall be my renewed skill to wrap up my
matters in secrecy, since to hold out, or rather to hold in, man is of so
small ability.

7
I see that many golden hours are spent in wasting games, and many dainty
days in greedy getting gains, but though it happen that some games be
gainesome, and gains to others gamesome. Yet will I not encounter with such
strange adventures: But mine eyes, mine ears, my tongue my head shall serve
for a better inquiry. For I have always deemed it miserable to be a man of
mirth, or a man of riches, and not to be (which passes both these), a man of
goodness.

8
THe aged, thinking themselves of some worthiness, for their long and learned
experience, have learn to despise the young. Young folk (say they) think old
folks fools, but old folks know that young folks be fools. Contrariwise,
young men thinking such weakness not fit for worthiness, say, Old folks are
froward, but young folks are toward. As for me, I am neither young nor old,
yet age I will reverence, without contempt of youth: youth I will love without
disgraceing age. Age is heavy and weighes down the frail and fleshly
balance, but liftes up the noble and spiritual part. And youth is quick and
lively, and though often foyld with vain and foul fancies, yet often replenished
with virtuous delights. Give me then an old man spiritual, and a young man
virtuous, and both shall go for current.

9
We use to say that flesh is weak: and so it is, how then preuailes it so much
with men? surely because men are not men, for if we be men the reasonable part
of our soul is to have sovereign and absolute command, against which if any
sensual motions arise, we are to yield al our sound forces to the overthrowing
of so unnatural a rebellion: I will therefore take courage a fresh, and since
I am to deal against so weak an Adversary that in it self is nothing but
weakness, I will resolve to resist it, and what right reason does direct, by
Gods help I Will perfect.

10
I Have lived this thirty years, and every year has 365. days and every day
24. hours so that one year has 8760. hours, but 30. years, the age to
which I have attained, has 262800. hours, now in these many hours, good Lord
how often have I thought amiss, and if the hours amount to so big a sum, who
can count my thoughts. And if to my thoughts I could add my unsavory and idle
words, and then to these my omitting duties and committing iniquities, might I
not be ashamed, O Lord forgive thy poor Servant his innumerable sins, and
teach me so to number my days, as I may apply my heart to wisdom.

11
IT is both Godly and necessary, betimes to fit for death: Godly, because God
has charged, that the ignorance of our dissolution should move us to
preparation, and besides, sends to us diverse messengers to give us warning, for
dulled senses, weakened joints, griping griefs, and aged wrinckles, what are
they but messengers of God to prepare us for death. Again, necessary, for
there be two errors which cannot after commission receive correction: the one
about marriage, the other about death: He then that will dye well, must
prepare well. Oh then I will account those blessed souls that think of these
things, and those foolish and unhappy which cannot abide to hear of death. And
who so by mirth or promotion would stop me from this preparation, I account him
as an Host staying his drunken guest till night come, who riding then in dark,
stumbles and breaks his neck.

12
TO purchase houses, men employ their deepest wits, omitting nothing that
cunning can invent or power minister: for a credit they say it is to be an
owner. But by Gods grace I will die in the streets, before I will be
purchaser or owner of some houses. The Palace of Pride, the slaughterhouse of
cruelty, the filthy stews of uncleanness, the building of oppression: I will
ever loath, never love, nor ever by them live. And yet in the moist and fickle
impression of my eyesight, behold many persons to be Lords of such, and so
love their houses, as they carry them about in their hearts.

13
I Have seen many, whom, no outward cherishing could salve the sores of their
mind; their reason darkened with sorrow, their hearts greatly groaning, tears
have run down their eyes and their tongues have vttred many doleful notes,
their countenances troubled, sometime so ouerpressed, that they have been
dangerously sick, a spectacle of misery. But why was this? surely God had
ecclipsed his favor and love for shining on them. O Lord I will desire above
all things to have thy love, and fear nothing but to miss the same.

14
PEace is worth seeking at all times, but especially when the enemy is
valourous, and men be not of number to keep the field against his forces, yea
it is then worth having though it were with loss: much more to be desired
when it may be had with reasonable and honorable conditions. O my Soul! God is
Almighty in power, and thou art weak: will thou be proud and stubbornly stout
against him? can thou match his might? Oh no. I will then value his valor,
and get with loss his favor, yet I shall not loose since the forgiuer is as
quick as the demander: the forgoing of my holds in lusts may annome, but not
so much as his dear love will joy me.

15
I Have had friends that I have thought of value but they have shaken me off
either through their their imperfectness, or my unworthiness: I will therefore
love the Lord above, with all the powers of my mind, whose perfect friendship
no unworthiness in me nor imperfectness in him can once dissolve, for whom that
he loves once he loves ever.

16
A Man in ill company is like a pretiou^ pearl fallen into the mirie grownd,
the which the longer it lies the deeper still it sinkes into it. I have pitied
the case of some, that (having been of honest disposion) have fallen into such
muddy mire, and so have lost their lovely qualities. But I will rather retire
into some dwelling solitary, then infect my soul with such foul company. A
chaste Dame if once you enter into terms of affection with her she is gone,
and from you flies, as the hasty Hare from the swift greedy Grayhound: So will
I fly from i^l society, and greatly disdain to endanger my precious graces,
amongst their dirty Impieties.

17
I Have often thought in the midst of Agonies, I should have bin thurst out of
my earthly habitation, and that the weak house of my body would have suffered
an utter overthrow: And herein surely I have been like to a Horse, desirous
to run and miserably spurred, but so short rayn'd by his Master, as he cannot
stir forward: But I know before long the Raynes will be loosed and I shall be
so galled as I must run. I will not be so Horshish, as to galloppe I know
not whither; But sithence my house is like to come to ruin, I will make
preparation for a more firm dwelling, least suddenly being cast out of house
and harbor, I be compelled to take up a woeful Lodging.

18
THe Lord employing us in dangerous enterprises, the more our virtue is tried,
yea the more pure we grow. I will learn therefore to like and not mislike, to
love and not to loath his sharpest dealings; For while many things might seem
to ouer-throw us, they set us up upon the height of honor.

19
IF any take a spightfull grief at me, and would force me with ouer-vehement
injuries to break peace, and to utter forth the violent passion of revenge. I
will show forth no other but the fruits of a gentle nature, and I will be so
far from bringing forth that which desperate revenge can imagine, that their
malice shall sooner cease then my unchanged patience.

20
IT is no vulgar thing among the vulgar people to shoot their praises and
commendations at random, sometimes they will sweetly speak and plentifully
praise men of great worthiness: Anon they will not stick to give excessive
commendations to the vilest varlets. I will not care therefore what such
wether-cockes tell of me: For I count it a great happiness only to be praised
of them that are most prayse-worthy-

21
MAny think to receive the gifts of Heaven, and yet shall receive at Gods
hands a resolute refusal, which will be more woeful and unwelcome to them
then a bitter denial to an expected suitor: And no marvel, for it is rather
credit then grace that leads most men to matter of Heaven. And when the spur of
honor ceases, they willingly rest in their carnal delights, and follow the
gentle current of them: But now the most holy God has such vile men in
eternal hatefulness, and for such carriage, there shall be neither grace nor
fauourablenesse. So then I will labor that in me every thing may be Godly and
full of syncerity, and seriously I vow, that neither credit nor favor, shall
make me to slubber over duty.

22
NO close Arbor the Branches of which are so lovingly enterlaced one within
the other can resist the strong violence of Gods eyesight, nor closest rooms
which unchaste Dames count Chambers of delight, are destitute of Gods honorable
presence. Why then brave Knights and fair Ladies, and all my lovely brethren
and Sisters, let us rather dye then spot our selves with secret filthiness. Let
us mark a diligent and nimble dog can find a scent, which we think
impossible, and when God can make such a Creature to find out such a thing,
shall not he be able to find out our wickedness, though we be in our
Dens? Hence then I will account it extreme folly any longer to imprison
iniquity.

23
AN ambitious man strives to bring others virtuous patience under him, and
thinks his maister-hood nothing without doing injury to men: But I dare not
be a man of such excellency, least God should advance me to Hamans dignity.

24
I Have thought it to be no great matter to draw many evil men to many
inconveniences; especially if a man would follow them with a watch full
service: for every present occasion will catch their senses, and their senses
are masters of their silly minds, so that only reverence them: and delight
them: and with that bridle and saddle you shall well ride them. But as for me I
am determined never to be carried with such an eager and impatient delight of
any thing, as the nimble wits of the world shall with their lewd inticements
draw me to sin.

25
IT is no unusual thing to make hard-wrested constructions of words often
proceeding from the kindest natures, which apprehended as true, estranges love
and eclipses affection from shining any longer. But I have often thought and
will do still, that the construction of men's speeches might be best made by
the Grammer-rules of affection.

26
I Find that to a heart fully resolute to preach the truth, hateful persons
and ignorant asses, to whom Counsel is tedious and reprehension loathsome
(both in word and deed work much annoyance, an evident token of an ignorant
and shallow mind. Shallow Brooks murmur, most deep silent slide away: and I
have heard Pies chattering, when better Birds have held their peace. Mine ear
then shall such up kind Counsels and wholesome reprehensions, which true loving
teachers scatter before me. And I will be so far from reproching them, that my
kindest courtesy shall be employed for them.

27
MAny men think on nothing but their sports, seek nothing but their sports.
To their delights their attendance is directed, and to their pleasures the best
fruits they can gather are brought. And surely once I thought these men in the
highest blisse-fulnesse. But experience grounded on feeling has taught me a
better lesson, and has learned me that the wickeds singings must be closed up
with hearty gronings. I will bless the Lord that has vouchsafed to me a
better happiness, and that has loved me so, as to bring me among the sweet
company of his beloved Saints: I say sweet indeed, which I will not forsake for
the worlds fair delights: for God is their saying, and God is their singing,
and God is the Load-starre of their life, the blessing of their eyes, the
sweetness of their heart. Lord let me live and dye in this sweet and heavenly
society.

29
SOme I have beheld very famous and notable for goodness, but since finding
godliness very tedious, and being deadly tired with the length of the
vnco^fortable labor of it, they have discarded it, giving themselves to
outrageous licentiousnes in which they so flesh themselves, as I think they
mean not to stop their race till they come to a headlong overthrow. Thus like
some Mornings, they have made guilden shows of good meanings; but after clouds
have risen pouring out water and blacking over all the face of Heaven. But I am
resolved to put forth my hand to every most painful Office, rather then to
be disseuered from the practisse of godliness.

29
MEn may marvel, why so frail and weak a creature as man, should yet so
harden and stiffen himself in sin against God, as he will not be reclaymed:
But is it not because his power is forgotten? his Sovereign Lordship over all the creatures not carefully considered? For if these were currantly conceived,
the valiantest of men would find inward dismayednesse, and be deeply cast
down for fear of hellish darkness. The Mariners see when the Heavens
favor; the Sea favors also, and they may be safe then and lie calmely: but if
the Heaven frown, and the winds begin to speak loud, and as in a tumultuous
Kingdom to think themselves fittest instruments of commandment, then the sea
will storm also: and the stoutest of them all wax aghast and astonished. I
will there fore keep in a clear Haven and seek the favor of the highest:
and then no inferior Creature will show it self way-ward to me.

30
We count it a miserable condition to be at Sea, in such a boystrous storm
as the ship wherein we are has neither power to stay, nor way to escape:
but being carried with the Tirrany of the wind, and the treason of the sea,
with irresistable violence falls to destruction. But O how miserable is it then
to be tossed and tottered with the outrageous fury of sin and Satan, when
men shall have nothing in them but despair of safety, and an expectation of a
loathsome end? This is a misery that goes beyond the degrees of comfort. I will
therefore fly upon my sins, whiles I have time to master them, and I will
leave none of them alive least they should thus annoy me.

31
AS it is in a storm at the sea, that in it we may see the diverse manners of
minds in distress, some sitting weeping and wailing, till the sea swallow
them, some one more able to abide death then the fear of death, cuts his own
throat to prevent drowning, some pray, some curse, as if the Heavens could not
be more angry then they were: so in the storm of reproof, some weep, some
pray, some fret, and some one or other cuts his own throat, and works
unexpected mischief. O the forcible power of the word that has such strange
effects: I will evermore admire thee, and in admiring thee love thee.

32
I Have thought often, O that I could serve God as I wish. But since I cannot
do as I would, I will still go on and content my self with that measure of
grace my father has bestowed upon me.

33
GOod men and such as be of a most sweet carriage and fair demeanor, are
often unjustly subjected to out-ragious wrongs, ill speeches, rude welcomes,
hard farewels be their kindest comforts from ill disposed persons, when as to
the wicked like themselves their hearts can tumble with overmuch kindness: O
wretched man thus to lay the fairest complexion on the filthiest favor, and to
set forth both in self-sluttishnesse: Me thinks a certain spark of holy
indignation arises in me while I think of it. No excellent spirits will do
themselves such wrong: But since it has pleased the highest power to throw
good men to such estate: I will give passage to my thoughts and rest content,
knowing that though I be a combersome Guest among men, yet of God I shall have
sweet refreshing.

34
MAn is so fond as he desires things both unlawful and impossible* but alas,
poor wretch in so desiring he desires punishing, for unlawful desires are
surely punished after the effect of inioying, and impossible desires are
punished in the desire it self. I will not then desire any thing, but I will
weigh by Wisdom and Virtue whether it be lawful and possible.

35
Diverse young men of the brauest mind, led with the blindness of lust and
rage, never linne till they have performed some notable mischief, thinking
themselves the only men of most approved goodness, but when they have hurt
guiltless persons, and feel the smart of punishment. O the cowardice of a
guilty conscience! angry threatenings and light hurts to these strong hearts are
grievous wounds, and so strange as they faint and know not how to bear them.
So then, a good Conscience shall be to me a Castle, out of which I will not
step so much as a hairs breadth.

36
MAny are masters of lands that are not masters of themselves, who though
great shows are made to blind the world, yet have no other thoughts then come
of unquiet senses. Here poisonous heats of affections torments them, there
strange guests invade their souls, fond and foul desires have strength to
co^quer them. A woeful thing to enjoy other things, but not to enjoy a man's
self. But I will endeavor that no spotted thoughts shall conquer me my life
to stain, least I fall to outrageous follies.

37
When I consider man's meanenes, I wonder God did not disdain to lay any
treasure with him, where they are stained with so many imperfections. But this
is the will of our excellent Creator, who (whatsoever we deem) will hide rare
gifts under such earthen vessels. Oh therefore I will give thanks to God
that settes a Crown on my base estate, and vouchsafes to descend to my poor
matters, meaning by his divine hand to embrace me, and from my baseness to turn
me unto high preferment.

38
SOme have entangled themselves so in folly, that they be tied fast with the
bonds of necessity: but he that suffers himself to be surprised by
necessity, does no more any thing freely his councels is and actions savor of
a troubled judgment. I vow then to keep my self from folly, that I may
think and do at liberty.

39
TO do well among men of honor is easy and ordinary, but not to suffer
himself to be transported with the corruptions of the time, nor to follow
the violent passions of a multitude, but to desire the good, to dare undertake
it, and to effect it in a bad season, in the which vice is honored with the
recompense of virtue, it is an infallible argument of a spirit wonderfully
disposed by nature to all good and commendable things. I purpose therefore by
Gods grace in the midst of corruption to have virtue for my portion.

40
OF great friends are made greatest enemies hatred so follows and accompanies
friendship, Plutarch.
Chilon told him that vaunted he had no enemies that he should also have no
friends. I will then so use my friends, as I look they should be mine
enemies, and only my God shall be my strongest hold who in the day of trouble
knows them that trust in him.

41
IT is hard to repair and recompense the injuries done to faith and
reputation. Famae et fidei damna maiorae sunt, quam quae aestimari queant. The
losses of our fame and faith be greater then can be deemed. I will be wary then
how I run on such rocks as gives me such knockes.

42
CHristianity I have often resembled to a school in which are golden books, and
severe, yet fruitful teachers. But as inother schools it frequently falls
out, so in this: For as I have seen trim books dight in velvet, and decked
with golden leaves, much please the unacquainted sight of silly boys, until
the Rod began to play his part, then they would feign be gone: so whilst many
fools have apprehended pleasing objects in Christ's school, Christianity
should be as dear to them as their embosomed guest, but when the master has
given some noisome blows, as ill appointed Knights they fly the field, and
suck from thence a mortal mislike of such a life: But with good grace I speak
it, in this school all things are beautiful: And with a feeling declaration
my tongue shall utter, that my teachers blows be sweetest blows of love.

43
I Have thought of those that do abuse the Ministers, that they do corrupt
the watchmen Oh then! when the great Captain shall come the corrupter and the
corrupted shall smart for it.

44
I See many noble wits bend themselves to mean subjects when they might bend
their minds to higher thoughts: they furnish themselves with very fair
apparel, fine deckings they think much beautify them: they erect stately
buildings, dainty devices much delight them; huntings, hawkings, gamings,
dicings and dancing be only joys: They give noble entertainment to
strangers: show frankenesse of mind to friends, and set out every thing in
most gorgeous manner to the dignifying of their honor. But where be the men
whose excellency of mind has taken up a well chosen course in virtue? where
be the men that have well trained and long exercised their minds in more
excellent and heavenly contemplations, that have apparelled and decked their
mind with grace: A man might show thousands to these things smaly enclyned
whiles they omit no toil nor service in the other. Unhappy men so to divert
their thoughts from the ways of goodness, and to loose, nay to abuse their
time, I bear great honor to the names of these: But Lord let me be bedded in
my grave, rather then wedded to such iniquity as should cause my affections to
be estranged from thee.

45
RIch men are counted the richest Iuels, although they be neither well formed
by nature, nor framed by education to the true exercise of virtue: These have
the largest praises, the most earme entreaties, the highest Titles, the most
humble service, and the lowest reverence: These be reckned the only blessed,
the high Cedars, the rich Rubies the only shining suns. But if God have any
skill in painting out men's conditions men's marks be taken amiss: for he
will tell us riches without virtue is nothing grateful, and some that have
been acquainted with rich men's private sorrows, will constantly affirm that
their muddy abundance is full of carking agonies. Kings Crowns cannot help
them from the cruel headache, nor shoes of gold preserve from the painful
gout. I will never therefore plunge my thoughts into riches bondage, but look
after and long for my heavenly inheritage.

46
I Marvel much why men should be trans- with such ouer-vehement affection,
to taste so greedily of the worlds vanities, and so much to let loose the raines
of their desires to such fickle moueables. What conceit is it they build upon?
do they think such only favored and advanced of God? No, the eternal spring
of virtue testifies he has such men in eternal hatefulnes: do they think to
be honored of men? Oh yes, with Churl and Carle and Cormorant, and such
deformed titles. So then, I will seek no better wealth then a quiet
Conscience, nor greater pleasures then heavens excellencies. Stand far then
filthy Covetousness from me: I Will be no Carle no Kite, no Cormorant, but a
liberal Christian, a liberal Christian is my name, and a liberal Christian is
my title, and Christianity which loves liberallity shall be the only hope of
my advancement: For my names sake I cannot love thee, and for my makers sake I
must and will detest thee.

47
I Have often thought eating, drinking, and stuffing the carcass, a shrewd
burden and intolerable yoke; it dulls the cheerful limbs, and hales the body
to unworthy servitude: to long and strong diseases, to ouerpressing pangs, and
after to untimely deaths: it bemires the thoughts of the soul deeply in the
trade of uncleanness: it hinders the vigorous mind from feeding on higher
thoughts. The eternal God forbid then that I should so be fettered, Let mighty
beasts be stalled and fatted with their dainty variety. I will take a more
happy resolution, and strike such fast friendship with sober moderation as my
mind shall be a free master to entertain whole armies of heavenly thoughts
and my body a ready servant forthwith to welcome such noble guests. I will
think it foul scorn to yield my sanctified body to such iniquity. And I will
not be such an enemy to my self, as to imprison my self, or to defile my
self with gross impurity.

48
SOme Virtues among foul Vices, are like Pearls in a dunghill. I have known
some of exceeding good parts, full of wittiness, admirable for tongue delight,
endued with clear understandings and hony-flowing speech, and almost every way
so excellent, as if a man would make a description of them, a man might set
such a note upon them, as might make them very notable unto you: yet their,
exceeding worldliness with their close hypocrisy, has altogether disgraced
the other assembly of their most commendable virtues, no otherwise then ragged
penury often overthrows a lovely beauty. I will labor therefore that every
part of my life may be an ornament to me. And as I love not a ragged raiment
for decency, nor a patcht payment for money: so neither like I to tender a torn
life to Gods divine excellency: but bearing shows in my countenance of honesty
and well mindedness. I will resolve in all things to be blameless.

49
IF cruel and fierce beasts did range in dangerous sort anongst us, we would
carefully provide good defenses against such mischiefs, giving those beasts
many mortal and manfull wounds, how marvelous a matter is it then, that when
the horrible foul Devil, like a ramping and roaring Lion, furiously
prosecutes us, we employ not our endeavors to his overthrow, but suffer him to
fasten his claws (most cruel impressions of wonderful passions) upon us. Oh
thou in whom all power and defense is harbored, teach me thy truth, a
sufficient bulwark against such mischiefs.

50
What has man that may make him so lickerous of commendation, his stout and
courageous heart, alas, as it is sometime valiant, so often it is ouerpressed
with mighty passions of grief and fear; his judgment: why the deepest
judgment is often mistaken, and grossly erres, reason being grown a servant to
passions: his sharp wit? why the best wits are often troubled with
vnperswadable melancholy, yea many their wits cracked with violent
affections: his wisdom? what need he when he has many Paragons: his brave
beauty? why the state of the mind is better then the state of the body, and we
know that aged wrinckles deface fairest faces. Lastly his riches or pleasures?
why outward delights and fertile grounds are but halting helps to decaying
souls. Lo then I will count my self vile, and know my weakness to be unfit for
any worthiness: and if my friends in their speeches give me any commendation,
I will think they speak not so much of judgment as blinded with affection.

51
I Have often seen a poor man inritching his clothes, and a wealthy man
whose clothes have inritched him: In the former, his best part is inward, in
the latter, his best outward. But truly I had rather be in rude raiment, with
an unspotted simplicity, then to be set in highest dignity with folly.

52
IT is great indiscretion to bandy against a power invincible and matchless,
such power has GOD: the valiantest of men that dare oppose him shall find
dismaydnesse. They can no more avail then the Emmot pull down a Cedar: I am
resolved then to put my hand to every painful office that I may please my GOD,
but I will never dare to fortify wickedness to the provoking of him.

53
Often have I mused what monster wrought my harm in blunting if not breaking the
love of my dearest and nearest friends: At length I found that suspicion and
facility to believe all things, ruins friendship and batters the walls of the
sweetest and firmest affections: oh then that some of my friends would be less
suspicious, and not so credulous, that my choycest friends might not prove so
unkind and boystrous. It is a very sensible displeasure to be refused of a
dear friend.

54
MEn are more discontented to see themselves frustrated of things promised,
then of those which are but hoped for: in the one there is but mishap, and they
complain only of fortune in the other contempt, and they challenge him that
has broken his promise. I will promise naught then but what I mean to
perform, for I know the nature of man is more sensible of contempt then of
loss.

55
THe just (says GOD) shall live by faith. I will think then every day I rise
I have no life, if I do not walk all that day by faith, doing nothing but
that may seem good in the eyes of GOD, and what I am fully persuaded pleases
him

56
IT was well said. Kings Crowns do not help them from the cruel headache:
nor shoes of gold does heal the gout. Riches avail not in the day of wrath,
but righteousness delivers from death, this is a received rule. How is it then
young men wax so proud of wealth and present age so lofty. An aged Gentleman of
an approved goodness could say. That this boyish bravery would bring one day
a perplexed mind. How shall wise men like then such Gentlemen as be earnest in
every present humor, and make themselves brave in their own liking. Oh be
they not like a bubble blown up with their own small-proud breath and quickly
shall be broken with a greater. Had I then millions of gold I would think that
these outward pleasures would smally pleasure my soul: Small greatness here,
if guilty conscience near. I think it greater greatness to get the surest
kingdom.

57
EXperience has taught me, Miseries do often begin when as they seem to end.
Have I not known some discarded after many notable deserts, which was the more
notable to them because they fell from excess of favor from a heap of
sweetes expected, to a heap of sorrow, rejected. Have I not known sorrow
creep suddenly amidst joy, whiles friends treat of marrying, news comes of
death. I think then there is not any man, but may have more harm then he
has had good. If honey come then and the sweetest pleasures, I vow to look
for change, and to expect, that Sorrow like a Bear is ready to give me a
shrewd imbracement.

58
IT is usual amongst men to accuse Nature, or else men's company, or to cast
their complaints on the evil times, or some way or other to deminish sin, and
to form for themselves substantial excuses. They are cunning to find pleasing
names for things which are bitter and naught. But alas this is nothing. He
that will break with his friend never fails to find occasions, so may we a
thousand, if we will break with GOD. I protest I will never do so. No
remembrance of others noughtinesse, shall delight me to guild over my
guiltiness, if it should what did I else, but make my scratchings incurable
wounds.

59
I Have often observed that many mornings make guilden shows of good meanings,
and yet afterward clouds have risen pouring out water and blacking over all
the face of heaven. Surely not unlike have I seen among the sons and
daughters of men. Lord what glittering shows have I beheld, whence I have
discied the foulest and blackest heart? What calmenes of sea? whence suddenly
has rose outrageous waves: what loving company? mild mouth? honey words? when
under all has closely been dissembled a cruel mind: Lord shield me from such
ugly beasts, whom thou will one day fling into the pit of hellish darkness. I
know there is no danger carries with it more horror then this so adverse to thy
truth. Keep me therefore from this desperate daubing.

60
Injuries done to faith and reputation, are not easily repaired, nor
recompensed, yet men through desperate ambition do often commit this outrageous
wrong: what evil surmises, shrewd suspicious mad meditations be in some? which
being carried with the current of this disposition, do receive all things
with the hardest interpretation, condemn all men of evil, because their mind
has no eye to epsy goodness? But what is there not but in hard wrested
constructions may be counted a blot: so men of incomparable worth may be
debased. I vow to drive away such beastly furies, and to scowre my head of such
surmises, least they be an unhappy occasion of staining my brothers reputation.

61
THe tongue well tuned makes most pleasant music, and is to man a principal
ornament: but men have made it a very false Ambassador delivering affections
whereof their heart is utterly void. What dolorous discourses shall you hear
when heart within has mighty delight? what mighty delights when heart within
makes dolorous discourse? What kindly terms tongue turns out, when
malicious matter is wrapped in secrecy? What malice in mouth when kind
conceits with in? What coy and thundering speeches often deny a thing, when the
heart with dumb eloquence desires it. And are not these now excellent people?
The false Ambassador must be cut off for his presumption, so let the tongue of
such be cut out that talk on such a fashion. I Will tune my tongue aright; if
sighs hearty sorrow s^unds, if cheerful be my heart, my tongue shall show it.

62
CHrist was more pure then the nicest eye can find a spot in, his judgment
sound, his affections spotless, his inward worthiness shined through the
foulest mists. No marvel if he be set for our example. O rare example! not
to be hoped for of any other. Away from me all ye that delight in horrible
foulenes: I delight not in your unpleasant company, your life is rusty and
ilfauored. I will cast mine eye to my beloved Savior: he was full of beauty,
sweetness, and noble Conversation.

63
THe haughty heart of man thinks it foul scorn willingly to submit to be
ruled by Gods teachers: they nourish themselves in overmuch vain hope: But did
they know and acknowledge their value, what heart so hard, and ear so
barbarous, but would be employed to hear and yield. Would men would give
resolute refusalls or happy resolutions to hear his voice. I Will tread the path
let them now follow. Speak Lord for thy servant hears: what thou biddest be
done I resolve to undertake.

64
COnceit is much: some think so highly of their own, as others cannot reach
unto them, but if they be crossed with better Conceits, then burst they out into
rage and bitterness, such troublesome effects self-conceit breeds: Then will
they lie and swear to get advantage: But by their leave who so tells a lie and
ads an oath: I count his conceits deceits, and I esteem him weak in wit and
vile in conscience. O Lord then let me not brag much of any wit I have, least
while I would show my self witty, I demonstrate a heart too far possessed
with folly.

65
ALl men covet to be Best, feign would we surpass one another, but the wrong
course is taken: Hard fair, great iournies, dangerous attempts, mischiuous
Cou^cells, unmerciful force, mortal wounds are vnder-gone and undertaken,
and all to be Best, that is forsooth to be richest: But alas it is not so,
he that sins least is the best man, and he that sins most is the worst. Oh
then, I will fly from sin, and I will account my self excellentest, when
from sin I can stand the farthest.

66
When learned men come among rude and unskillful swains, they many times
have not ordinary courtesy from them, yea often they have given unto them an
unkind and shrewd welcome, I marvel not at it, for between them and virtue
there was never knit a fast frendshippe by any education. Their wit is so
base they cannot conceive the beauty and sweetness of a learned life: But though
such love to drink on the draffe, let my life be spent among the learned
breasts: For this I know: He that leaves the learned to live with the
ignorant may happen on some wealth, but he shall never be wise.

67
Who so has gotten virtue possesses a Lady of great beauty, and such a beauty,
as shows forth the beams of wisdom, where ever it comes. Indeed deep
sorrows, strange wrongs, often mightily darken her excellency for a time. But
as the excellent and swift running Sun quickly breaks out, and kindly
cheeres the short and sweet nibled grass, so Lady virtue quickly adorns her
owner, and well arayes him with most pleasant grace. Lord give me virtue then
rather then the exquisitest dainties and daintiest varieties, that high
conceits can fancy.

68
I Hold it a base thing to be straitened by unworthy servitude, a man can not
then go to behold delightful prospects, nor step aside to have his sorrowful
mind supported. He cannot walk to hear the cherefull and well tuned Birds,
or to see the pretty Lambs with bleating oratorie crave the dammes comfort,
limited he is, and he must give attendance. But more base I deem it, when
Satan so shall fetter a man, that he may not behold Gods holy Temple, where
he may have his sorrowful soul solaced with Preachers breath, more sweet
then South-west wind, that he cannot hear Gods sweet wel-tuned Birds, nor
see Gods Lambs desiring milk.

69
DEath strikes to some a dreadful terror, others are not moved at his
terrible countenance, but by their hardines despise death. Some when he comes
gives him a cheereful welcome. The first is base and servile, the second is
courage without skill, the third is truly valiant. Lord give me a resolute
heart that when I shall be dangerously sick I may not faint: Let me have
courage guided with skill, and skill armed with courage, that when death shall
cast his rufull dart, I may give thee my heart, and leaving this world, I may
feed my mind with higher thoughts, and more excellent contemplations, longing
to be in heaven, my delightful country and my heavenly dwelling.

70
Honor often fetches his earth where he will grow from out of the popular sort:
so low dunghills are fetched to fairest fields: but whiles the poor earth is
thus exalted, it gets a new quality, and holds no more his former, then the
child that has leave to play, holds the last part of his lesson. Times alter
natures, and honors change manners: So such as have disdained all chamber
delights, now like and entertain them with pleasant discoursing. Those who
would not think a thought, that is not weighed by wisdom and virtue, now can
cherish most abominable actions. O Lord though thou should set me high yet
let me know a virtuous heart will never yield to villainy.

71
FRiendship now a days is so rare, as it is to be doubted whether it be a
thing indeed, or but a word, most make love to others, and yet love no body
but themselves: sweet terms and kindest courtesy, things ordinarye, when yet
their hearts within be naughty. But howsoever their walk be close, yet
oftentimes their own feet betray them, for they themselves utter themselves
to be but enemies. O il employed courtesy! I bear great honor to a friend
that is hearty, but Lord let me loath hippocrisie and all such humane
inhumanity. I know some friends whose words bring forth actions, God bless
them, and continue them unto me, but if ever it fall that I loose them, I shall
have hearty mourning for the loss of their sweet conversation.

72
GOd is too strong for my poor power to resist, he can either with cunning or
with force, or rather by his cunning force disfigure and deface me: as he gave
me a timely birth, so he can give me an untimely death. O then how great
soever my other business be (Oh most mighty God) I will most willingly wait on
thee, though my weak body be as a ruinous house, yet thou can make me
dwell in safety.

73
IN my time I have met with strange and unpleasant changes. Often I have found
ouer-vehement constancy has proved sudden Apostacy, and pleasant company
turned to be the forgers of folly. This has made me cry out. A constant Lover
is an admirable Creature. But though such be the times. I am resolved to carry
my self in all my demeanor, so constantly that I will endure any extremity,
rather then in her sweetest growth to destroy virtue.

74
IF Hippocrites be once unmasked, fame will be very prodigal of so notable
an accident: and all will understand what before the fortifier of wickedness
had concealed. It will make mountains of their sins, and over these the
hipocrite as a tossing and tottering ship on wallowing waves, shall mount aloft
to be straight carried down to the pit of hellish darkness. Thus shall they
be carried by the tirranny of fames blast. And the longer they live in sin,
the more wayward will fame be to them. Lord keep me from all close dissembling
that such outrageous waves may never shake me.

75
SOmetimes with heedfull observation I have beheld the water Spaniells sport:
he hunts the diuing Ducke, he waits to spy her rise again, he swims, he
snuffles, he in weeds himself, and all to please his master and make him
sportfulness. O what a wretch is man that imitates not this Creatures
diligence! Even with my strongest desire, I wish I may show more sedulity in
serving my father heauenlily, least this Creatures diligence do shamefully
condemn me.

76
MAny vile things we see, to which we are carried with an eager and impatient
delight which things whiles thus we disorderly love, we disguise our bodies
and disfigure our minds but then especially if led with swiftness of desire,
any thing cross us. Love crossed is a monstrous Lion: and like a valiant beast
with open Jaws it tears us. I have said in my heart then I will look to my
ways my desires shall be to thee O Lord. Not whatsoever likes me shall be
beutifull, but what likes thee shall be to me delightful.

77
THis world is so far possessed with security, that nothing is so strong can
purge it of that infection. The Ministers of God leave nothing unsaid which
their wit can make them know, or their deep love to people can require of them
yet nothing auailes. They use more cunning entreating for men's abode in Gods
holy fear, then any greedy Host can use to a well paying passenger. Yet cannot
their prayers prevail. Yea Gods rod deeply wounds and often he wounds again and
rubs us with greefes afresh, yet such is security in men, as they can no more
lay it from them, then the Crow can be persuaded by the Swan to cast off all
his black feathers. But Lord let me remember, a child that fears not the
rod, will hardly prove gracious, and men that live securely and fear not God
will be in Hell, ere they be aware.

78
IT cannot be imagined how well some have conned the lesson of secrecy. They
are so artificial, as they cannot be hunted out of their villainy. They can
bear shows in their countenance of honest and well minded men and with
seeming virtue satisfy others when no goodness is nourished in their hearts.
These steal sin, and none must know it, neither must any fame bring it to
our ears. But do these persons think to see Heavens excellencies? or thus to
delude and mock GODS Holy Majesty. Oh no, stolen sins are sweet if the
stealer could escape, but he shall be caught and so shall pay for his hunting.

79
IT is strange to see the vnmanlike cruelty of of mankind, for many are so
tirannically ambitious, as they think their maisterhoods nothing worth,
unless they do injury to the virtuous. Hence to holy ones are stired up
wrongs and griefs intolerable. They are misvsed, slandred, belyed and what
not? Their tables are served with bitter roots and furnished with sallets of
wormwood: A fool and a knave cannot take thought, whilst an honest heart is
full of sorrows. But sure it is. A noble cause eases much a gieuous case. This
is the Godlies golden solace. And though man to man bring misery, yet comfort
enough in this, if thou be free from iniquity. If I meet then with Helhownds
that cross me, yet I Will take heed that sight of sin do not also toss me.

80
YOung Gentlemen many times are carried with ouer-vehement desire to see and
behold the rare sights of foreign nations: therefore they take great iournies
strange courses, under go oftentimes unpleasant companies: and sometimes get
mortal wounds and cruel executions. They often go so far as they never
return, meeting with unexpected mischiefs, But as for me I well can say. A
far trauailer sees much but he that goes to Heaven makes a happy journey.
The rare sights of this world shall never so please my fancy, as they shall
draw me from the rauishing delights I see in divinity.

81
Sins committed cause mighty grief to a holy heart: but God teaches his how
to drive away the extremity of sorrow, and to obtain abundant ioyfulnes:
sight of sin with narrow eyes: humble submission for deadly deeds: vehement
desire for merciful favor, strong resolutions of future obedience make a
sweet electuary to chase away griefs fury. An electuary comfortable indeed,
for so the sinner escapes his deadly danger. Yet this I have always thought,
the escape out of sins danger is comfortable, yet to keep quite out of it, is
a heap of wisdom.

82
MAny men in this world have goodly portions, which yet are unfit for the
meanest consultations. How often do we see wisdoms and virtues precepts,
better followed by a beggar then by such as be richer, great ones often make a
mock at virtue, and many be fortunate that be not wise. But who so happily
has this double portion, to follow virtue as well as riches. I shall bless my
eyes with that joyful sight, and shall esteem such as most precious jewels.

83
We see many rich men fairly and hansomely attired as though they were
children of the Summer, they possess fair fields, ride on milk white
horses, sit in coaches richly furnished in black and red and all variety.
Surely most comely sights, and such as calls the ruder eye to view them. Yet
the godly wise can see that many of these are vilely foul and unhandsome in
their minds and souls, in the works of God as slow as slowest Iades. I will
deem of these, as these use to speak of their horses. A fair horse is comely
to look on, but if he prove heavy, he is naught for travel.

84
TRauailers whiles they journey, some-time they step into delicate greenes and
most pleasant grounds cunningly be set with trees able to shelter from a
shower, sometimes they walk on barren heathes, where if sturdy storms do
come, they can find no redress. Lo such is the life of man now fair, now
foul, now sweet, now sour, now green, but strait mirie: sometime full of
delectation, anon turmoyled with affliction. But since I must travail through
this worlds wilderness. I resolve to account my aflictions as my necessary
business yea and on good experience I speak it. The Storms of affliction
scoures the faithful, and happy shall he be indures to the end.

85
IT is a wonder to see, how devoutly religious many seem to be, which yet are
nothing so. They will show a most pure and dainty complexion (so that the
viewer shall be wonderfully mistaken) and yet be most vile in their
conversation. Stayed thoughts and virtuous words shall yield you proofs of
their goodness, but in the uttermost event of matters, all proves a rotten
Carkas. My care shall be then that my deeds shall be suitable to my words. And I
will testify that as I think and speak, so I desire to do virtuously, for
else my enemies may rightly say, great boast and small roast makes a cold kitchen.

86
Where Lady Virtue takes up her lodging, Diligence waits on her with most
humble service, but idleness is shut out of doors, she dares not speak, no nor
look (as from her miserable self) unto her heavenly highness: for her steps
are too slow to follow virtues train, and therefore she denies her service.
I resolve then to be full of sedulity, that I may keep Lady virtue company. I
will not be like such Gentlewomen that mar their complexions, and conditions
with lying long in bed, when as they might have made a handkercher by that time
they rise.

87
TO set out strifes is a matter to monstrous for my capacity: I have earnestly
besought some for peace when they have burst out to fury and shown far more
stirring motions to iniqu ty. But are not these worse then flies and more
absurd then Ants. The flies live together in swarms, and the Ants live quietly
in heaps but men can hardly make a company to live in quiet. But O Lord let me
enjoy peaceablenes, while others are overcome with strifes tediousnes.

88
IF we see fair and beautiful persons, we are often vehemently carried with
shows of affection to them: we then take liberty to loose the raines to our
senses delights: and our reason now servile to passion accepts no satisfaction
without inioying. But O how often have I been taught that poisoned drink may be
in a golden cup. When I see then a woman of beauty, I Will watch if I can spy any
virtue: If I descry none, I Will not care a straw for her company.

89
A Blessed man he is that has such qualities as he is beloved in all good
companies, and whose society draws to godliness: but cursed are those whose
foul courses carry men to wickedness. To which not only nature bends them but
the base bringing up they receive at their Parents hands confirms them. But if
he that sets a a traveler out of his way commits villainy, so these drawing
out of the way of heaven, shall smart for such iniquity.

90
THe children of God me thinks are full of beauty: I find in them most lovely
sweetness. Lambs they be, and therefore gentle, Doves they be, and
therefore simple. The wicked me thinks are full of deformity: I find in them
most loathsome bitterness. Dogs they be, and therefore currish, Swine they
be and therefore swinish. Oh then I will much and greatly delight in the
blessed Saints and detest the cursed doers. For the Lamb and the Dove are two
pretty Creatures, but the Dog and the Hog are sullen beasts.

91
THe dainty varieties of pleasing delights that be among the wicked, draw men's
minds with easy consent to vanity: sometimes short and sudden delights:
sometimes long and pleasant devises are offered, but all be higher points and
stairs to sin, oh that man knew the great growing of the stinking weed of sin:
virtue grows not without exquisite labor, sin alone and willingly: virtue
springs after a long season, sin quickly and in a short space gets up; yea
sin though but a spark sets all on fire presently. I purpose then that mine
eyes shall be watchful and my heart resolute, that not the least weed of sin
shall grow in me, for I see of a little kernel grows a great tree, of a
little spawne a great fish.

92
THe outward duties of Gods service, I see have long and holily been observed
by many: but the inward and hearty duties I fear me of a few. Call upon our
formalists to practice some noble deeds of virtue: heereto you shall find them
smally enclyned. But did they serve GOD aright, their minds so well trained and
long exercised in virtue, would give some rare demonstration of it. As for me,
I ever will conceive, To go to Church for fashion is an abuse of Religion, and
to pray without devotion, is breath to no purpose.

93
SVch heaps of sorrows accompany this life as require a virtuous resolution of
mind to pass them over: sometimes heaviness of heart assailes us, strange
stories scarre us: dangerous sickness afflicts us, and we cannot be quiet,
but long to be in our delightful country and heavenly dwelling. Hence this
has been my resolute thought. He that will hold out the year must bide the
winter and summer, and he that will go to Heaven must endure the miseries of
this world.

94
IF we could behold an armed man of an extreme and irresistable force whose
violence a thousand thousand could not withstand; it would breed in us some
maruailous contemplations: but greater and extreamer force and violence we
know in sin, yet we are no whit amazed at it: Angels in heaven, men on earth
are weak to conquer sin. But thanks be to Christ that has gotten victory.
But since sins force is so violen^: I Will rufully eye him, but not come nigh him.
A sword has a sharp point, and a Cannon a great force, but let them alone and
they will do no harm.

95
SVch is the foul baseness of Man, as the very beasts out stripe him, yea and
in many things do teach him. Some hypocrites there be artificially smoothing
up and smothering sin which have not art enough to learn to avoid it
although the dumb creatures instruct them. Have I not seen a dog rejoice at
the sight of his Master: when his unchaste Mistress will frown at his coming
home? Oh fact full of wretchedness, fuller of disgrace, and fullest of
guiltiness. Oh Lord keep me that my affections be not drunken with such
beastly sins, and that I may not be governed by them.

96
With unspeakable grief I have thought on the abominable wrongs offered by
cruel men to GODS poor Saints, that should have greatest kindness: Poor
hearts by lofty spirits are broken with unkindness and affliction. Yet comfort
comes from above, which cheeres their vital spirrits. But oh how these
thoroughly wound their consciences and will God suffer these wrongs? Oh no, but
he will shake the seat of these secure Tyrants. Me thinks they are worse then
soldiers stabd at heart. For he that is wounded at heart has made an end of
his days: but he that has a wound in his soul knows not when to end his
sorrow.

97
SVch as were nearly acquainted with sin: and have discarded it, know the
poysonful disposition of it: it spreads it self as dead poison in a cup, and
like a plague infects the soundest persons, virtue is not so spreading, not so
speedy in conueying. I marvel not then, why so many be bad, and so few good.
It is because truth has much a do to be believed, but a lie runs far
before it be stayed.

98
O Full often has my breast swollen with eager desire of heaven, for when I
beheld the earth, mine eyes (being my diligent intelligencers) carries me to
much comfortablenesse: In this world weepings and mournings, changings, and
turnings, vanity and folly every where abounds, and he that is in highest
estate even as a poor wretch with languishing steps runs fast to his grave:
But in heaven are all incomparable excellencies and vneffable dignities. Oh
sweet and noble place to be in. I Will be more glad then Children be of sweet
meat to go to such a country, and to dwell in this never enough praised City.
The vigor of men's wit, that can show it self in any subject, must here be
blunted: they cannot speak enough of this euer-noble City if they compare it
with the country, they show therein most rude simplicity, if with the Court.
Alas a Rich Court is a goodly sight, but he that looks up to Heaven will not
care for the world.

99
WHo so when they see good can love it, and affect it. I count such persons my
principal friends, whose acquaintance I would not superficially entertain, for
sure there is no joy in our life if we enjoy not such companions, with such I
learn holy helps to heaven, and happy resolutions, with such I am instructed
to conquer passions, but he that flies from good and scoffs at God I count him
already with the Devil. And though he walk in the world yet he has a hell
in his conscience. This shall be then mine earnest entreaty unto God, that such
good and worthy friends which be this worlds comfort, may not be drawn away
from me by my bad desert.

100
MEn have in use a two-fould Glass: One most for the proud Man, the other for
the Wise. The proud man whiles he looks in his Glass, waxes the prouder: The
humble whiles on his, he waxes the wiser. O Lord grant, while the proud Man's
Looking-glass makes him the prouder; my Houre-Glasse may make me wise to
remember my end.

FINIS.

