Vox medici.
HErbarum vires, Astrorum juncta potestas
Ars medici moderans, et Deus ista beans,
Virginibus, pueris, uxoribus atque maritis:
Queisque recepturis causa salutis erunt.
THE strength of herbs and planets influence,
Physicians skill, through Gods benevolence,
To young and old, to husband* and to wife,
Are the appointed means for healthful life.


THE SICK WOMAN'S Private Looking-glass Wherein methodicaly are handled all
uterine affects, or diseases arising from ye Womb. Enabling Women to inform
the physician about ye cause of their grief By John Sadler Dr in Physic in
the City of Norwich

London Printed for Ph: Stephens and Ch: Meredith at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard Io: Droeshout sculp i636

THE SICK VVOMANS PRIVATE LOOKING-GLASS WHEREIN Methodically are handled all
uterine affects, or diseases arising from the womb; enabling Women to inform
the Physician about the cause of their grief.

BY JOHN SADLER, Doctor in Physic at Norwich.

Orandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano.

Iuvenal. LONDON, Printed by Anne Griffin, for Philemon Stephens, and
Christopher Meridith, at the Golden Lion in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

TO ALL VIRTUOUS AND Modest-minded Women I.S. Doctor in Physic wishes health.
BECAUSE I had my being from a woman, I thought none had more right to the
grape than she which planted the vine. Considering therefore the manifold
distempers of body, which ye Women are subject unto through your ignorance and
modesty, I could not but do my best, to inform and advise you in the
conservation of your own health. And when I had spent some meditations, and
consulted with Galen and Hippocrates for my proceeding; amongst all diseases
incident to the body, I found none more frequent, none more perilous then those
which arise from the ill affected womb: for through the evil quality thereof,
Tatum corpus ab uter^ afficitur. Hippoc. lib. 1. de locis in homine.
the heart, the liver, and the brain are affected, from whence the actions
vital, natural, and animal are hurt; and the virtues concoctive,
sanguifficative, distributive, attractive, Galenus 6. de locis affect. cap. 5.
Bottonus de morbis mulierum cap. 39.
expulsive retentive, with the rest are all weakened. So that from the womb
comes convulsions, epilepsies, apoplexies, palseyes, hecticke fevers, dropsies,
malignant ulcers, and to be short, there is no disease Baptista Montanus d
uterinis affect page 1.
so ill but may proceed from the evil quality of it.

How necessary therefore the knowledge of uterine diseases is, judge ye. And
how many of you labor of them, all through your own ignorance and modesty,
woeful experience makes it manifest. For when a woman is afflicted with any
disease of the womb; first through her ignorance, she knowing not the cause
thereof being not instructed in the state of her own body. And secondly through
her modesty, being lo^h to divulge and publish the same unto the Physician to
implore his aid, she conceals her grief and so increases her sorrow.

For the aid and benefit of a woman in this cause, have I composed this
treatise; Wherein as in a glass she may see her self in private, and view the
nature, cause, signs, prognostics and cure of all uterine diseases, But yet
no further, then thereby to be instructed to confer with the Physician for
the cure of her grief, least by the misapplying of the remedy you augment your
disease, I confess if you look unto the matter it is old; Nil dictum quod non
dictum, prius.
if unto the method new: part of it being selected out of the Greeks, part out
of the Latins, and part out of the experience of my own practice, wherein I
have followed the industry of the Be, who gathers honey out of diverse flowers
to weave into her own comb. Many things more might have been added in it,
which for modesty sake my pen has omitted. I have also stooped to your
capacities in avoiding hard words and Rhetorical phrases, desiring rather to
inform your judgments with the truth, though a plain manner, then to
confound your understandings with a more Rhetorical discourse. But fearing to
be over-tedius, craving acceptance for these first fruits of my brain, until
God indues me with a better harvest, I rest,

The wellwisher of your health JOHN SADLER.

Ad proceres Artis Aesculapij.
PRAENOBILEM medicinae Artem ignobili proferre vulgo, opus hand dignum hodie
non immerito existimetur. Vos igitur qui hujus art is illustrissime est is
professores, me fortean subinsullie esse animi censeatis; qui artem hanc
incly^am gregalibus verbis dedecoravi: quod ne putetis, causam in lemeam coram
vobis venia vestra sic agam. Sciatis vellem, quod ego opusculo hoc meo
promulgando faemininum solummodo sexum instit^ere decrevi: vestra proin
lenitudo and benevolentia (spero) conamen istud meum (licet squalidum) absque
inusto stigmate in lucem prodire patientur. Hocque confido magis, quippe quod
Hippocrates, qui mihi exemplar est, honoratissimus de hoc subjecto nonnulla
vulgo exarata dedit. Et de materia si quaeratur, hanc, ingenue fateor, me ex
authoribus tum antiquis tum modernis excerpsisse totam: circa quam, si errorem
quendam inscius aut incautus expromere videar, suppliciter peto eundem mihi
denudatum fieri, and ipsum elimare conabor serio. At si codicillus iste meus
incultus iudicio vestro (uti spero) inculpatus vixerit; clemen^ia vestra me
vinculo observantiae vobis devinctum habebit imperpetuum. Et quod ad Momum
attinet (cui calumniandi and maledicendi prurigo semper inhaeret) flocci pendo,
quamvis fungus iste sannis and scommatibus hunc meum exerceat laborem: quem
scire vellem, suam de me sententiam inanem prorsus, levemque ducere. Tumescat
ideo invidia donec disrumpatur odio: mihi curae est honos non offendere and
ignorantes informare. Hic scopus. Hic saltus. Hic pes ^igendus.

Ornato

Imprimatur.
Tho. Weeks R. P. Episcopo Land. Cap. domest. John Smethwicke.

Ornato atque erudito juveni Domino Iohanni Sadlero Medicinae Doctori,
Alexander Reidus (...) atque e sociorum inclyti Collegii Londinensis medici
numero S. P. D.
CLarumtuu^ morborum uteri^orum, speculum non oscitanter perlegi, quod ad little
and dignotionem and curationem elaborasti, quod que publici iuris facturum te
mihi significasti. Si de eo quaeras quid sentiam, brevem apertamque animimei
sententiam accipe Dignum existimo quod lucem aspiciat; ad quod (...) omnes
manibus versent. Non est meo indicio quod sciolorum cerulas miniatulas
pertimescas. Phrasis in eo tersa atque elega^s: in eo certant brevitas and
perspicuitas, ut de te Horatianum istud vere pronunciari non possit, Brevis
esse laboro, Obscurus fio.

Methodus clara est atque rei traditioni conveniens. Medicamenta quae
proferuntur selecta sunt and tuta: Ita ut possit liber ipse secure maligni
livoris dentem contemnere. Quamobrem oro author sibisim eum publicandi, ut
pulchris ingenii tui felicis primitiis gloria tibi accedat, atque ad
gratitudinem exprimendam populares omnes obligentur.

Londini, pride. Id. Ianuar. anniab exbibito in carne Messia supra millesimum
sexcentesimum tricesimo quinto, Ex musaeolo meo.
To the Author.
Just in thy spring did the nine Muses meet;
Whom when they spide, they did conspire to greet:
And with fresh Laurel then Parnassus decked:
That they on thee some honor might reflect.
The multitude amazed stood in a round,
To see whose praise fames rathing trump did sound:
'Ere long they heard that, Sadler, 'twas thy worth
That caused that stir, and brought the Muses forth.
Then did Apollo God of Physics Art,
And the nine Muses all consent in heart,
Thy well-deserving mind, thy name, thy state,
With learning, honor, fame to celebrate.
But foggie sleepers and those wanton boys
That spend their golden time in melting joys
Th'unpartiall Muses daygn not to respect,
They neglect learning; and them they neglect;
Or send their Satyrs to proclaym their crime
'Cause creggie stayrs of honor they' not climb
But generous Sadler, thou tooks better way
By making learnings pleasant fruit the prey,
Thou sought'st by early, late, by constant pain,
By cost, by travel, that thou might obtain
Not the vainglorious shell of empty praise
Which shines a while, and sudenly decays:
But the sound kernel of the honored Art^
Which honor thee for thy deserved parts.
Divine Hyppocrates, Galen all such
As read this book may witness well thus much.
Amongst Doctors of thy Art, go, take thy chair:
Now thou may rest; green laurel is thy share.
I. S.

The Contents.
Chap. 1. THe Introduction. page 1. Chap. 2. Of the suppression of the courses.
page 14. Chap. 3. Of the overflowing of the courses. page 30. Chap. 4. Of the
weeping of the Womb. page 44. Chap. 5. Of the false cources and whites. page
49. Chap. 6. Of the suffocation of the mother. page 61. Chap. 7. Of the falling
down of the Womb. page 78. Chap. 8. Of the inflammation of the Womb. page
86. Chap. 9. Of the Schirrositie of the Womb. page 93. Chap. 10. Of the
dropsy of the Womb. page 9.6 Chap. 11. Of Barrennes. 106. Chap. 12. Of the
Mole or false conception. page 122. Chap. 13. Of the generation of Monsters,
and whether devils can engender. p. 180. Chap. 14. Signs of conception page
142. Signs whether it be male or female. page 107. Chap. 15. Of untimely
birth. page 149 A rule frr breeding women. page 149.
THE Sick woman's Private Looking-glass. Wherein Methodically are handled all
uterine affects or diseases arising from the womb.
An Introduction. CHAP. I.
IF any one, but of a mean capacity were asked what were the wonder of the
world; I think that reason would move him to answer, Man; he being the Quia
homo secundum intellectum continet totum mundum.
(...), or little world, to whom all things are subordinate: agreeing in the
Genus with things sensitive, all being Animal, but differing in the Species,
for man alone is endued with reason; Exemplu^que Dei quisque est in imagine
parva.
Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. Wherefore of the Greeks he
is called (...), of turning his eyes upward toward him, whose image and
superscription he bears: whence the Poet writes; Silius Italic. lib. 5.
Nonne vides hominum, ut colsos ad sidera vultus
Sustulerit Deus? ac sublimia fi^xerit ora.
See how the heavens high Architect has framed man in this wise;
To stand, to go, to look erect, with body, face, and eyes.
And Cicero says, Cum cateras animantium naturas abjecisset ad pastum, solum
hominem erexit, and ad coeli quasi cognationi^ pristmi conspectum excitavit.
Cicero lib. 5. de L^gibus
that all creatures were made like Moles, to root upon the earth, man only
excepted; to him was given an upright frame, to behold that mansion prepared
for him above.

Now to the end that this so noble and glorious a creature might not quite
perish, has the Almighty given unto woman the field of generation for a
receptacle of humane seed; whereby that natural and vegitable soul which lies
potentially in the seed, may, by the Vis plastica, be produced into act; that
man being mortal, and leaving his offspring behind him, may become as it
were immortal, and live in his posterity.

And because this field of generation, to wit, the womb, is the subject matter
from whence our ensuing discourse is drawn, like so many lines from the
center; that you may the better judge of that which follows, we will in
brief lay before you the parts of the womb, together with the qualities of
the menstruous blood.

(...) and (...).
First, touching the womb; of the Grecians it is called (...) the mother; or
(...), says Priscian, because it makes us all brothers.

It is placed in the Hypogastrium, or lower part of the belly, in the cavity
called Pelvis, having the Columbus Anatom de visceribus. ^ib. 11. ca. 16.
straight gut on one side, to keep it from the hardness of the backbone, and
the bladder on the other side, to defend it from blows. The form or figure of
it is like a Fushsius institut. medicin. lib. 1. sect. 5. c* 13.
virill member, only this excepted, the manhood is outward, and the womanhood
within.

It is divided into the neck and the body. (...).
The neck consists of a hard fleshie substance much like a Weckerus sentax.
lib. 1. part. 1. p. 67
cartilage: at the end whereof there is a membrane transversly placed, called
Hymen, (...).
or Eugion. Near also unto the neck there is prominent panicle, Haec etiam
membrana flos virginitatis vocatur, quia cum eclest. Signum est virginitatis.
Ostiolum uteri de uterinis offect. p. 9.
which is called of Montanus, the door of the womb, because it preserves the
matrice from cold and dust. Of the Grecians it is called (...); of the Latins
Praeputium muliebre, because the Jewish women did abuse this part to their own
mutual lust, Romans 1.26
as Saint Paul speaks, for which Iuvenal turns Satyrist against them.

Nec distare putant humana carne suillam,
Qua paterabstinuit moxet praeputia ponunt.
(...).
The body of the womb is that wherein the child is conceived; and this is not
altogether round, but dilates it self into two angles, which Herophilus
comparing to the horns of a calfe, calls them (...). The outward part of it
is nervous, and full of sinews, which are the cause of its motion: but inwardly
it is fleshie.

It is fabulously reported, that in the cavity of the womb there are seven
divided cells or receptacles for humane seed. But those that have seen
Anatomies, do know there are but two, and those not divided by a partition,
but only by a line or future running thro^gh the midst of it. In the right
side of the cavity, by reason of the heat of the Liver, Hyppac. lib. 5. Aph^r.
48.
males are conceived. In the left side, by the coldness of the Spleen,
females are begotten. And this do most of our Modernes hold for an infallible
truth; Quibus, dextrum vas spermaticum a renali, and sinistrum a vena cava
descendit, iis mares sinistra, dextra vero part uterifoeminae gestantur. Hipp.
6. Epidem. initio.
yet Hyppocrates holds it but in the general; for in whom (says he) the
spermaticall vessel of the right side comes from the reins, and the
spermaticall vessel of the left side from the hollow vein, in them males are
conceived in the left side, and females in the right. Well therefore may I
conclude with the saying of Empedocles. La interdum vis est seminis ut utr^qu^
sinu ^asculos proferat.
Such sometimes is the power of the seed, that a male may be conceived in the
left side, as well as in the right. In the bottom of the cavity there are
little holes, (...).
called the Cotyledones, which are the ends of certain veins and arteries,
serving, in breeding women, to conveigh sustenance to the child, which is
received by the Vmbilicall vein: And in others to carry the cources into
matrice.

Now, touching the menstruals: They are defined to be a monthly flux of
excrementitious and ^^profitable blood. Aristot. de generatione animali. lib.
1. c. 20.


In which we are to note, that the matter slowing forth is excrementitious;
Sanguis menstruus est benignus non malignus, inquantitate, non qualitute
procons. 14. de usu partium 8.
which is to be understood of the superplus or redundancie of it: for it is a
excrement in quantity, in quality being pure and incorrupt, like unto the blood
in the veins.

And that the menstruous blood is pure, and simply of it self, all one in
quality with that in the veins, is proved two ways: First, from the the
final cause of this blood, Causa finalis menstrui est propagatio and
conservatio humanae speciei.
which is the propagation and conservation of mankind; that man might be
conceived; and being begotten, he might be comforted and preserved, both in
the womb, and out of the womb. And all will grant it for a truth, that the
child, while it is in the matrice is nourished with this blood; and it is as
true, that being out of the womb, it is still nourished with the same; for the
Aristot. de generatione animali. lib. 4. cap. 8.
milk is nothing but the menstruous blood made white in the breasts; and I am
sure woman's milk is not thought to be venomous, but of a nutritive quality,
answerable to the tender nature of an infant. Secondly, it is proved to be pure
from the generation of it, it being the superfluity of the last aliment of the
fleshie parts.

It may be objected, if the blood be not of a hurtful quality, how can it
cause such Fernelius de hominis procreatione lib. 7. cap. 7.
venomous effects; as if the same fall upon trees and herbs, it makes the one
barren, and mortifies the other. And Averroes writes, Aver. 3 Collect. cap. 7.
that if a man accompany with a menstruous woman, if she conceive, she shall
bring forth a Lepar. Sol. Sanguis menstruus obdiuturnam in utero moram, mala^
qua^dam naturam contrahit.
I answer, this malignity is contracted in the womb; for the woman wanting
native heat to digest this superfluity, sends it to the matrice, where seating
it self until the mouth of the womb be dilated, it becomes corrupt and
venomous, which may easily be, considering the heat and moistness of the
place. This blood therefore being out of his vessels, offends in quality; In
this sense let us understand Pliny, Fernelius, Florus, and the rest of that
torrent. L^udabilis and alimentarius est hic sanguis, cujus causa efficiens est
color foeminae debilis.
But if frigidity be the cause why women cannot digest all their last
nourishment, and consequently that they have these purgations: It remains to
give a reason why they are of so cold a constitution more than men; which is
this: The natural end of man's and woman's being, Genesis 1.28.9.1.
is to propagate; and this iniunction was imposed upon them by God at their
first creation, and again after the deluge: now in the act of conception there
must be an Aliquod ut materia, aliquod ut efficiens.
Agent and a Patient, for if they be both every way of one constitution, they
Fernelius de morbis partium and symptom. lib. 6 cap. 7.
cannot propagate; man therefore is hot and dry; woman cold and moist: he is
the Est enim mas, a quo motus procreationisque origo manat:
Agent, she the F^mina vero quae materiam segetemque subministrat.
Patient, or weaker vessel, that she should Semen essusum in ^remium
s^scipiendo.
be subject unto the office of the Man. It is necessary likewise that woman
should be of a cold constitution, because in her is required a redundancy of
matter for the infant depending on her; for otherwise, if there were not a
superplus of nourishment for the child, more than is convenient for the mother,
then would the infant detract and weaken the principal parts of the mother;
and like unto the Viper, the generation of the infant would be the destruction
of the parent. Add december ternis, mulierum menstrua cernis, ad quinquaginta
durat purgatio tota.
These monthly purgations continue from the 15. year, to the 46. or 50. Yet
often there happens a suppression, which is either natural, or morbifficall.
They are naturally suppressed in breeding women, and such as give suck. The
morbificall suppression falls now into our method to be spoken off.

CHAP. II. Of the retention of the months.
(...).
THe suppression of the Terms is an interception of that accustomary evacuation
of blood, which every month should come from the matrice, proceeding from the
instrument or matter vitiated. The part affected is the womb, and that of it
self, or by consent.

Cause.
The cause of this suppression is either external or internal. The external
cause may be heat or dryness of the air, immoderate watching, great labor,
vehement motion, and the like, whereby the matter is so consumed, and the body
so exhaust, that there is not a superplus remaining to be expelled; as is
recorded of the Varandeus lib. 1. de morbis mvli. cap. 2.
Amozonites, who being active, and always in motion, had their fluxions very
little, or not at all. Or it may be caused by cold, which is most frequent,
making the blood viscuous and gross, condensing and binding up the passages,
that it cannot flow forth.

The internal cause is either isntrumental or material, in the womb or in
the blood.

In the womb it may be diverse ways; by Apostoms, Tumors, Ulcers, by the
narrowness of the veins and passages; or by the H^urnius de morbis mulierum.
cap. 1.
Omentum or kell in fat bodies, pressing the neck of the matrice: but then
they must have Hernia Zirbalis: for in mankind the kell reaches not so low.
By overmuch cold or heat, the one vitiating the action, and the other consuming
the matter. By an evil composition of the uterine parts; by the Galennu^ 5
Aphor. 28.
neck of the womb being turned aside; and sometimes, though rarely, by a
Paraeus de hominis generatione cap. 51. and 43.
membrane or excrescence of flesh growing about the mouth or neck of the
womb. The blood may be in fault two ways, in quantity or in quality. In
quantitity, when it is so consumed, that there is not a superplus left, as in
Viragoes and virill women, Erotis de passionibus mulier. cap. 23.
who through their heat and strength of nature, digest and consume all their
last nourishment; as Hippocrates writes of Phaetusa, Hippoc. Epidem. 6
who being exiled by her husband Pythea, her terms were suppressed, her voice
changed, and had a beard, with a countenance like a man. But these I judge
rather to be Anthropophagae, women-eaters, than women-breeders, because they
consume one of the principles of generation, which gives a being to the world,
viz. the menstruous blood. The blood likewise may be consumed, and
consequently, the terms stayed by bleeding of the nose; by a flux of the
Emroides; by a Dysenteria, commonly called the bloody flux, by many other
evacuations, and continual and chronicall diseases. Secondly, the matter may
be vicious in quality; as suppose it be sanguineons, flegmaticall; bilious,
or melancholious, every one of these, if they offend in grosnesse, will cause
an obstruction in the veins.

Signs.
Signs manifesting the disease, are pains in the head, neck, back, and
loins; weariness of the whole body, but especially of the hips and legs, by
reason of a confinity which the matrix has with these parts: trembling of the
heart. Particular signs are these; if the suppression proceeds of cold, she is
heavy, sluggish, of a pale color, and has a slow pulse, Venus combats are
neglected, the urine is crude, watrish, and much in quantity; the excrements of
the guts usually are retained. If of heat, the signs are contrary to those
even now recited. If the retention be natural, and come of conception; this
may be known by drinking of Hydromell, Hyppoc. lib. 5 Aph^. 41.
that is water and honey, after supper going to bed, and by the effect which it
works; for, after the taking of it, if she feels a beating pain about the
navell and lower parts of the belly, it is asigne she has conceived, and that
the suppression is natural: If not, that is it vicious, and ought medicinally
to be taken away.

Prognostics.
With the evil quality of the womb the whole body stands charged; but
especially the Heart, the Liver, and the Brain; and betwixt the womb and
these three principal parts, there is a singular consent.

First, the womb communicates to the heart by the mediation of those Arteries
which come from Aorta; hence the terms being suppressed, will ensue faintings,
swoonings, intermission of pulse, cessation of breath.

Secondly, it communicates to the Liver by the veins derived from the hollow
vein; hence will follow obstructions, cachexies, jaundise, dropsies, hardness
of the spleen.

Thirdly, it communicates unto the brain, by the nerves and membranes of the
back; hence will arise Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Frensies, melancholy passions,
pain in the after parts of the head, fearfulness inability of speaking. Well
therefore may I conclude with Hyppocrates, Lib. 5. Apho. 57.
if the months be suppressed, many dangerons diseases will follow.

Cure.
In the cure of this, and of all the other following effects, I will observe
this order. The cure shall be taken from Chirurgicall, Pharmaceuticall, and
Diaeteticall means.

This suppression is a plethoricke affect, and must be taken away by
evacuation: and therefore first we will begin with Phlebotomie.

In the midst of the menstruall period open the Liver vein; and for the
reversion of the humor, two days before the wonted evacution, open the
Saphena on both feet. If the repletion be not great, apply cupping glasses to
the legs and thighs. And although there be no hope to remove the suppression
(as in some the Cotyledones are so closed up, that nothing but copulation will
open them) yet it will be convenient, as much as may be, to ease nature of her
burden, by opening the Hemerhoid veins with a Leech.

After Phlebotomie, let the humors be prepared and made fluxile with syrrupe
of Staechas, Calamint, Betonie, Hysop, Mugwort, Horehound, Fumeterre,
Maiden-haire. Bathe with Camomill, Penny-royall, Savine, Bayleaves, Juniper
berries, Rue, Marjoram, Feverfew. of the leaves of Nep, Maiden-haire, Succory,
Betony, ana. m.j. make a decoction; take thereof iij. syrrupe of Maiden-haire,
Mugwort, Succory, ana. s. Misce: After she comes out of the Bath, let her
drink it off. Purge with Pil. de Agarico, Elephang. Coch. Foetid. Galen in
this cause commends pil. de Hiera cum Colocyutide, for as they be proper to
purge the humor offending; so also they do open the passages of the womb,
and strengthen the faculty by their Aromaticall quality.

If the stomach be overcharged, let her take a vomit; yet such a one as may
work both ways, lest working only upward, it should too much turn back the
humor. Trochisks of Agrick ij. infuse them i^ iij. of Oximel, in which
dissolve of the Electuary Diasarum is. Ben^dic. La^^t. s: Take this after the
manner of a purge.

After the humor has been purged, proceed to more proper and forceable
remedies.. trochiscks of myrrh is: persly-seed, castor, rindes of cassia ana
i. of the extract of mugwort is. musk gr.x. with the juce of smallage make 12
pills, tak 2 every morning or after supper going to bed.. of cinnamo^, s. roots
of smirnium, valerian, aristolochia, ana ii. roots of Asrum i. castor, saffron,
ana ii. specdiambrae. ii. trochisks of myrrh, iiii, tartari vitriolati, ii.
make all into a powder; with mugwort water and sugar qs make lozenges, take i
of them every morning: or mingle i of the powder with i of sugar and take it in
white wine. of prepared steel, specierum hierae ana ii. borace, species of
myrrh, ana i. with the juce of savine make 38. take three every other day
immediately before dinner.. of castor i. wild carret seed s. with syrrupe of
mugwort make 4 pills take them in the morning fasting, and so for three days
together before the wonted time of the purgations.. of Agaricke, aristolochia,
juce of horehound, ana v. rhubarb, spicknard, anice-seed, galbanum,
assafaetida, smallage roots, gentiane, of the three peppers, laccae, ana vi.
with honey make an electuarie: take of it iii for a dosis. In flegmaticall
bodies nothing better can be given then the decoction of the wood guaiacum
with a little Dictam taken in the morning fasting, and so for 12 days together
without provokeing of sweat.

Administer to the lower parts by suffumigations, pessaries, unctions,
injections, insessions.

Make suffumigations of cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, bayberries, mugwort,
galbanum, melanthium, Amber etc. Make pessaryes of figgs, and the leaves of
mercury bruised and rolled up with lint. If you desire a stronger; make one of
myrrh* bdelium, opopanax, Ammoniacum, galbanum, sagapenum, mithridate,
agarick, coloquintida etc. Make injections of the decoction of origane,
mugwort, mercury, betonie and figgs pouring the same into the womb by a
metrenchyta.. oil of sweet and bitter almonds, lillies, capers, chammomill ana
s. ladani, oil of myrrh, ana ii, with wax make an unguent* with which let the
places be anointed. Make insessions of faengreeke, chammomill, melilote, dill,
marjerom, pennyroyall, feverfew, juniper berries, and calamynt. But if the
suppression comes by a defect of matter, then ought not the cources to be
provoked, until the spirits be animated and the blood again increased. Or if
by proper affects of the womb, as dropsies, inflammations, and the like; then
must a particular cure be used, the which I will not insist upon here, but of
them as they lie in order.

If the retention comes from repletion or fullness; let the air be hot and
dry; use moderate exercise before meals; Let your sleep be shorter then
ordinary; and your meat and drink attenuating. Sees with your meat garden
savorie, time, origan and Cicer. Ariel: number.
ciche peason. If of emptiness or defect of matter; let the air be moist and
moderately hot. Shun exercise and watchings, let your meat be nourishing,
and of a light digestion; as rear eggs, lamb, chickens, almond milk and the
like.

CHAP. III. Of the overflowing of the cources.
(...).
THE Scholearium says, by comparing of contraries, truth is made manifest.
Having therefore spoken of the suppression of the terms; order requires now,
that I should insist upon the overflowing of them, an effect no less dangerous
then the former. And this immoderate flux of the months is defined to be a
sanguineous excrement proceeding from the womb, exceeding both in quantity and
time. First it is said to be sanguineous the matter of the flux being only
blood; wherein it differs from (...) commonly called the false cources, or
whites; of which I will speak hereafter. Secondly it is said to proceed from
the womb: for there are two ways by which the blood flowesforth. The one is
by the internal veins in in the body of the womb; and this is properly
called the monthly flux. The other is by those veins which are terminated in
the neck of the matrice and this is called of Aetius the Hemorrhodes of the
womb. Lastly it is said to exceed both in quantity and time. In quantity says
Hippocrates when they flow above 18 ounces. Hippoc. lib. 1. de morbis mul.
In time says Aristotle when they flow above three days. Aristotelis l. 7. de
hist. animali ca. 2.
But we take this for a certain character of their inordinate flowing, when
the faculties of the body thereby are weakened. In bodies abounding with gross
humors, this immoderate flux sometimes unburdens nature of her load and ought
not, to be stayed without the council of a Physician.

Cause.
The cause of this affect is internal or external. The internal cause is
threefold; in the matter, instrument, or faculty. The matter, which is the
blood, may be vicious two ways. First, in quantity, it being so great that the
veins are not able to contain it. Hippoc. l. 2. de morbis mulierum.
Secondly, in quality, it being adust, sharp, watrish or unconcocted. The
instrument viz: the veins are faulty by the dilatation of the orifice; which
may be caused two ways: Per (...).
first, by the heat of the constitution, climate or season, heating the blood
whereby the passages are dilated, and the faculty weakened that it cannot
retain the blood. Per (...).
Secondly, by falls, blows, violent motion, breaking of a vein, etc.

The external cause may be calidity of the air, lifting, carrying of heavy
burdens, unnatural child birth, falls, etc.

Signs.
In this inordinate flux the appetite is decayed, the concoctions depraved, and
all the actions weakened, the feet are swelled, the color of the face is
changed, and a general feeblenes possesses the whole body. If the flux comes
by the breaking of a vein, the body is something cold, the blood flows forth
on heaps and that suddenly with great pain. If it comes through heat, the
orifice of the veins being dilated, then is there little or no pain, yet the
blood flows faster then it does in an Erosion, and not so fast as it does in a
Rupture. If by Erosion or sharpness of blood; she feels a great heat
scalding the passage; It differs from the other two, in that it flows not so
suddenly nor so copiously as they do. If by weakness of the womb, she
abhors the use of Venus. Lastly if it proceeds from an evil quality in the
blood; drop some of it on a cloth and when it is dry, Hippoc. lib. 1. de
morbis mulierum.
you may judge of the quality by the color. If it be choleric it will be
yellow; If melancholy, black; If flegmaticall, watrish and whitish.

Prognostics.
If with the flux be joined a convulsion; it is Hippoc. lib. 5* Aphor. 56.
dangerous, because it intimates the more noble parts are vitiated; and a
convulsion caused by emptiness is deadly. If it continues long it will be
cured with great difficulty: for it was one of the miracles which our Savior
Christ wrought to cure S. Math. 9.20*
this disease when it had continued 12 years. To conclude, if the flux be
inordinate Hi^poc. l. 5.57.
many diseases will ensue; and without remedy, the blood together with the
native hear being consumed, either chacheriall, hydropicall, or paralyticall
diseases will follow.

Cure.
The cure consists in three particulars. First, in repelling and carrying
back of the blood. Secondly, in correcting and taking away the fluxibility of
the matter. Thirdly, in corroborating the veins and faculty. For the first; To
cause a regression of the blood, open a vein in the arm, and draw out so much
blood as the strength of the patient will permit; Non confertim sed per
intervalla.
and that not together, but at several times; for hereby the spirits are the
less weakened, and the retraction so much the greater.

Apply cupping-glasses to the Hyppoc. lib. 5. Aphor. 50.
breasts; and also to Riolanus sect. 4. tract. 2. de morbis uteri.
the liver that the reversion may be in the fountain.

To correct the fluxibility of the matter, catharticall means moderated with
astrictories must be used.

If it be caused by erosion or sharpness of blood; consider whether the
Erosion be by salt phlegm, or adust choler. If by salt phlegm; Prepare with
sirupe of violets, wormwood, roses, citron-pills, succorie, etc. then take
this purgation following.. myrobolan. chebul. s. trochiscks of agaricke i. with
plantaine water make a decoction: add thereunto sir. rosat. lax. iii. make a
potion.

If by adust choler prepare the body with sirrupe of roses, myrtles, sorrel,
purcelaine, commixt with water of plantaine, knot-grasse, and endive; Then
purge with this potion.. rindes of myrobolanes, rhubarbe, ana i. cinnamon gr.
xv. infuse them one night in endive water: Add to the straining pulpe of
tamarind, cassia, ana s. sirupe of roses i. make a potion.

If the blood be watrish and uncencoct as it is in hydropicall bodies and
flows forth by reason of the tenuitie and thinness, the use of of hydragoga
will be profitable. Purge with agarick, elaterium, and coloquintida. Sweating
is proper in this cause, for by it the matter offending is taken away, and the
motion of the blood is carried to the outward parts. To procure sweat she may
take cardvus water with mithridate: or the decoction of guajacum, fassafras,
and sarsa-parilla, the gum of guajacum also does greatly provoke sweat.
Pills of Sarsa-parilla taken every night going to bed are worthily commended.
If the blood flows forth from the opening or breaking of a vein, without any
evil quality in its self, then ought only corroboratives to be applied;
which is the last thing to be done in the cure of this inordinate flux.

. Of bole-armonie i; London treacle i. old conserve of roses s. with sirupe of
myrtles make an electuarie. Or if the flux has continued long. Of masticke ii.
olibani, troch. de carabe ana i. balaustiorum, i. make a powder; with sirupe of
quinces make it into pills; take one always before meals.. Lapidis haematitis
triti ana ii. specierum triasani ali i. troch. de carabe, de scoria ferri,
coral, frankincence, ana i. fine bole i. beat these to a fine powder; and
with sugar and plantaine water q.s. make lozenges. Asses dung is well approoved
of whether taken inwardly with sirupe of quinces, or applied outwardly with
steeled water. Galen by conveighing the juce of it through a metrenchita into
the womb 4. days together, cured this immoderate flux which no ways else
could be restrained. Going to bed let her take is. Philonii Romani in a wafer,
make suffumigations for the matrice of masticke, franckincence, burnt froggs,
not forgetting the hoof of a mule.. Of the juce of knotgrasse, comferie,
quinces, ana i. campher, i. dippe silk cotton therein and apply it to the
places.. Oil of mastick, myrtles, quinces, ana s. fine bole, troch. de carabe,
sanguinis draconis, ana i. wax and viniger q.s. make an unguent, apply it both
before and behind.. Of plantaine, shepherds purse, red rose leaves ana M.
iii. of goats and asses dung dried ana is. acatiae, hypocistidos ana is dried
mint i. bean meal iii. boil all these in plantaine water, and make of it two
plasters: apply one before and the other behind. If the blood flows from
those veins which are terminated in the neck of the matrice, then it is not
called the overflowing of the terms but the hemorrhods of the womb: yet the
same cure will serve them both; only the isntrumental cure will a little
differ; for in the esterine hemorrhods, the ends of the veins hang over like
little teates or pushes which must be taken away by Paulum lib. 6. c. 7^.
incision, Lege apud
and then the veins closed up with Aloes, fine bole, burnt alum, troch. de
terra sigil. myrrh, masticke, with the juce of comfery and knotgrasse laid
plasterwise thereto.

The air must be cold and dry: all motion of the body is forbidden. Let her
meat be Pheasant, Partridge, mountain birds, Cunnies, Calfes feet, etc. and
let her beer be mixed with the juce of quinces and pomgranuts.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Weeping of the womb.
THE Weeping of the womb is an unnatural flux of blood coming from the womb
by dropps or after the manner of tears; causing violent pains in the same;
keeping neither period nor time. By some it is referred unto the immoderate
evacuation of the cources, yet they are distinguished in the quantity and manner
of their flowing. Distinguu^secundum magis and minus, and Exeundi ^odo.
In that they flow copiously and freely; In this continually, yet by (...)
little and little, and that with great pain and difficulty: Wherefore it is
likened unto the Silvius comment. de mensibus mulierum.
strangurie.

Cause.
The cause is in the faculty, instrument or matter. In the faculty, by being
enfeebled, that it cannot expel the blood: and the blood resting there, makes
the parts of the womb grow hard and stretches the vessels, from whence
proceeds the Dolor tensivus uteri.
pain in the womb. In the instrument, by the narrowness of the passages.
Lastly, it may be in the matter of the blood, which may offend in too great a
quantity, or in an evil quality, it being gross and thick that it cannot
flow forth as it ought to do, but by drops.

Signs.
The signs will best appear by the relation of the patient.

Prognostics.
Hereupon will ensue pains in the head, stomach and back, with inflammations
suffocations, and excoriations of the matrice.

Cure.
If the strength of the patient will permit, first open a vein in the arm,
rub the upper parts, and let her arms be corded, that the force of the
blood may be carried backward.

Then apply such things as may laxate and mollify the stretching of the womb
and assuage the sharpness of the blood; as cataplasmes made of bran, lineseed,
faengrecke, melilote, mallows, mercury and atriplex: If the blood be viscuous
and gross add thereto mugwort, calamint, dictam, and betonie: And let her
take of Venice treakle the quantity of a nutmeg with sirrup of mugwort every
morning. Anoint the places with oil of lillies roses, lineseed, sweet
almonds, and calfes marrow. Make injections of the decoction of mallows,
mercury, lineseed, groundfuell, mugwort, faengrecke, with oil of sweet
almonds.

Sometimes it is caused by a wind, and then phlebotonie is to be omitted; and
in the stead thereof. Sirupe of feverfew i. honey of roses, sirupe of staechas,
ana s. water of calamint, mugwort, betonie, hysope ana i. make a julep. If the
pain continues, take this purgation.. Specierum hierae i. diachatholicon s.
Sirupe of roses laxative i. with the decoction of mugwort, and the 4. cordial
flowers make a potion. If it comes through weakness of the faculty, let that
be corroborated. If through grossness or sharpness of the blood, let the
quality of it be altered as I have shown in the foregoing chapter. Lastly if
the excrements of the gutte be retained, provoke them by a clyster, of the
decoction of chammomill, betony, feverfew, mallows, lineseed, juniper --
berries, cumminseed, aniceseed, melilo^e: adding thereto of diacatholicon, s.
hierae picrae ii. honey, oil, ana i. Sal^iter is. The patient must abstain
from salt, sharp, and windy meats.

CHAP. V. Of the false cources or whites.
FRom the womb proceeds not only the menstruous blood, (...).
but accidentally, many other excrements which by the Ancients are comprehended
under the title of (...), which is a distillation of variety of corrupt humors
through the womb, flowing from the whole body, or part of the same; keeping
neither cource, nor color, but varying in both.

Cause.
The cause, is either promiscuously in the whole body, by a cachochymia or
weakness of the same; or in some of the parts: as in the liver, which by the
inabilitie of the sanguifficative faculty, causes a generation of corrupt
blood; and then the matter is ruddish; sometimes in the gall, being sluggish in
its office, not drawing away those choleric superfluities, which are
engendered in the liver; and the matter is yellowish. Sometimes in the Spleen,
not defecating and clensing the blood of the dregs and excrementitious parts;
and then the matter flowing forth, is blackish. It may also come from catarrhes
in the head; or from any other putrified or corrupted member. But if the matter
of the flux be white, The cause of the whites.
the cause is either in the stomach, or reins. In the stomach by a
flegmaticall and crude matter there contracted, and vitiated through Ex maerore
tristitia and animi affectionibus, vires deiiciuntur and vitiatur prima
concocti^: Gal. art medicina li.
grief, melancholy, and other distempers: for otherwise, if the matter were
only Pituita, crude phlegm, and no ways corrupt or vitiated, being taken unto
the liver it might be converted into blood, for phlegm in the ventricle, is
called Pituita e^^ succus alimentarius, and sanguis ex dimidio c^ctus. Fernel.
de functionibus and humoribus lib. 6. cap. 9. Dimidio coctum alime^^um; quod in
jecore concoctum, sanguis ti^. Fuc^s^us institut. med. lib. 1. Sect. 4^. (...).
3. Secunda concoctio non potest co^rigere primam vitiatam.
nourishment half digested: But being corrupt though sent unto the liver, yet
it cannot be turned into nutriment; for the second concoction cannot correct
that which the first has corrupted; and therefore the liver sends it to the
womb which can neither digest it nor repel it and so it is voided out, still
keeping the color which it had in the ventricle. The cause also may be in the
reins being over heat, whereby the spermaticall matter by reason of its
thinness flows forth. The external cause may be moystnesse of the air,
eating of corrupt meats, anger, grief, slothfulness, immoderate sleeping,
costivenesse of body.

Signs.
The signs are extenuation of the body, shortness and stinking of breath,
loathing of meat, pain in the (...), swelling of the eyes and feet,
melancholy, humidity flows from the womb of diverse colors, as reddish,
black, green, yellow, white. It differs from the flowing and overflowing of
the cources, in that it keeps no certain periods, and is of many colors, all
which do degenerate from blood.

Prognostics.
If the flux be flegmaticall it will continue long and be difficult to cure yet
if vomiting or the flux Diarrhaea hapeneth, diverting the humor it cures the
disease. If it be choleric, it is not so permanent, yet more perilous, for
it will cause ( Rhagadia) clifts in the neck of the womb, and sometimes make
an excoriation in the matrix. If melancholius, it is most dangerous and
contumacious: yet the Hippoc. 6. Apho^. 11.
flux of the Hemorrhodes administers cure.

Cure.
If the matter flowing forth, be reddish, open a vein on the arm; if not,
apply ligatures to the arms and shoulders. Galen. lib. de praenot. ad posthum.
c. 8.
Galen glories of himself how he cured the wife of Boetus laboring of this
disease, by rubbing the upper parts with crude honey.

If it be caused by a distillation from the brain, take sirrup of betonie,
staechas, and marjerom. Purge with pil. coch. sine quibus, de Agarico: Make
nasalia of the juce of sage, hysope, betonie, nigella, with one drop of oil of
cloves and a little silk cotton.. elect. dianth. aromat. rosat. diamb^e,
diamosci dulcis, ana i. nutmeg s. with sugar and betonte water, make lozenges,
to be taken every morning and evening. Take Aureae Alexandrinae s. at night
going to bed. If these things help not, use the suffumigation, and plaster as
they are prescribed page 203.

If it proceeds from crudities in the stomach, or from a cold distempered
liver, take every morning of the decoction of lignum sanctum. Purge with pil.
de agarico, de hermodact. de hiera diacolocynthil. fae^idae, agrigativae..
elect. aromat. ros. ii. cytron-pills dried, nutmeg, long pepper, ana i.
diagalangae i. santali albi, lignialoes ana s. sugar vi. with mint water make
lozenges. Take of them before meals. If with frigility of the liver, there be
join la repletion of the stomach, purging by vomit is commendable: for which
take iii. of the Electuary diasaru. Galen allows of dureticall means; as of
Apium, petroselinum etc.

If the matter of the flux be cholerick^, prepare the humor with sirrup of
roses, violets, endive, succorie. Purge with myrobolanes, manna, rhubarbe,
cassia.. Of rhubarbe ii. anice-seed i. cinnamon is. infuse them in vi. of prune
broth. Add to the strayning of manna i; and take it in the morning according
to art.. Specierum diatrionsantalon, diatragacant. frig. diarrhod. abbatis,
diacydonit. ana i. sugar iiii. with plantaine water make lozenges. If the
clyster of the gall be sluggish and do not stir up the faculty of the
guts, give hot glisters of the decoction of the four mollifying herbs with
honey of roses and Aloes.

If the flux be melancholious, prepare with sirrup of maydenhaire, epithimum,
polipodie, borrage, buglosse, fumeterre, hart's-tongue, and sirrupus bysantinus,
which must be made without vinegar: otherwise it will rather animate the
disease then nature; for melancholy by the use of vinegar is increased; and
both by Hippocrates, Sylvius, and Avenzoar it is disallowed of, as an enemy
Hippoc. (...) lib. 3. de ratione victus in morbis acutis.
to the womb, and therefore not to be used inwardly in uterine diseases.

Purgers of melancholy are pilulae fumariae, Iacobus Sylvius comment. de
mensibus mulierum. Avenzoar lib. 2. tract. 5. c. 1.
pilulae Indae, pil de lapide lazuli, diasena and confectio hamech.. Of stamped
prunes ii. seen i. epithimum, polipodie, fumeterre, ana is. sour dates i. with
endive water make a decoction: Take here of iiii, add unto it confectionis
hamech iii. manna iii. Or. pil. Indarum pil. faetidarum, agarici trochiscati
ana i. pills of rhubarbe s. lapidis lazuli gr. vi. with sirrup of epithimum
make pills, take them once every week.. Elect. laetificantis Galeni iii.
diamargariti calidi i. diamosci dulcis, conserves of borrage violets, buglosse,
ana s. citron pills condited i. sugar vii. with rose water make lozenges.

Lastly let the womb be clen^ed, from the corrupt matter, and then
corroborated: for the purifying thereof, make injections of the decoction of
betony, feverfew, mugwort, spikenard, bistow, mercury, sage, adding thereto
sugar, oil of sweet Almonds ana ii. pessaries also may be made of silk
cotton, madified in the juce of the forenamed herbs. To corroborate the womb,
you may thus prepare trochiskes.. Of mugwort, feverfew, myrrhis, amber, mace,
nutmeg, stirax, ligni aloes, red roses ana i. with the mucilage of tragacanth
make trochisks: cast some of them on the coals, and smother the womb
therewith. Make fomentations for the womb, of red wine, in which has been
decocted masticke, fine bole balaustia, and red roses: An oint the matrix with
oil of quinces and myrtles* and apply thereto Emplastrum pro matrice; and let
her take of diamoscum dulce and elect. Aromaticum, every morning.

A drying Galen. lib. devictu atten^ante.
diet is commended to be best, because in this affect the body most commonly
abounds with flegmati^all and crude humors. For this cause Hippocrates
counsels the patient to go to bed supperlesse. Hippoc. l. 2. (...).
Let her meat be Partridge, Phesant, mountain birds rather roasted then
boiled. Immoderate sleep is forbidden moderate exercise is commanded.

CHAP. VI. Of the Suffocation of the Mother.
THis affect which simply considered is none, but the cause of an affect, is
called in English the Suffocation of the Mother, (...); ab co quod mulieres
praefoces.
not because the womb is strangled, but for that it causes the woman to be
choked. It is a retraction of the womb toward the Diaphragme and stomach,
which presses and crusheth up the same, that the isntrumental cause of
respiration the midriffe is saffocated; which consenting with the brain
causes the Animal faculty the efficient cause of respiration also to be
intercepted; whereby the body being refrigerated, and the actions depraved, she
falls to the ground, as one being dead.

In these histericall passions some continue longer, some shorter. Rabby Moses
lib. 2. directorij cap. 41. Iacobus Ruffius lib. 6. de morbis mulierum cap. 8.
Rabby Moses writes of some, which lay in the paroxisme of the fit two days.
Ruffius makes mention, of one, which continued in the same passion, three days
and three nights; and at the three days end she revived. That we may learn
by other men's harms to beware, I will give you one example more. Ambrosius
Paraeus lib. de generatione hominis cap. 64.
Paraeus writes of a woman in Spain, which suddenly fell into a uterine
suffocation and appeared to the judgment of man as dead: her friends wondering
at this her sudden change, for their better satisfaction, sent to the
Chirurgian to have her dissected, who beginning to make an incision, the woman
began to move, and with a great clamor returned to herself again, to the
horror and admiration of all the spectators.

To the end therefore, you may distinguish the living from the dead, the
Ancients prescribe three experiments. The first, is to lay a light feather to
the mouth, and by the motion of it you may judge, whether the patient be living
or dead. The second, is to place a glass of water on the breast, and if you
perceive it to move, it betokens life. The third is to hold a pure
Lookingglasse to the mouth and nose; and if the glass appear thick with a
little dew upon it, it betokens life. And these three experiments are good;
yet with this caution, that you ought not to depend on them too much: for,
though the feather and the water do not move, and the glass continue pure and
clear, yet it is not a necessary consequence that she is destitute of life:
for, the motion of the lungs, by which the respiration is made, may be taken
away that she cannot breath; yet the internal transpiration of the heat may
rem^ine, which is not manifested by the motion of the br^st, or lungs, but lies
occult in the heart and inward arteries. Examples Arist. l 1. historia animali
1.
hereof we may have in the fly and swallow, which in the cold of winter, to
the ocular aspect, seem dead, inanimate, and breath not at all, yet they live
by the transpiration of that heat which is reserved in the heart and inward
arteries; therefore when the summer approaches, the internal heat being
revocated to the outward parts, they are then again revived out of their
sleepie ecstasy.

Those women therefore that seem to die suddenly, and upon no evident cause,
let them not be committed unto the earth until the end of three days, lest
the living be buried for the dead.

Cause.
The part affected is the womb; of which there is a twofold motion, natural
and Symptomaticall. The natural motion, is when the womb attracteth the
humane seed, or excludes the infant or secundine. The Symptomaticall motion,
of which we are here to speak, is a convulsive drawing upward of the womb.

The cause usually is in the retention of the seed, or in the suppression of
the months, causing a repletion of corrupt humors in the womb; from whence
proceeds a flatulent refrigeration, causing a convulsion of the ligaments of
the womb. And as it may come from humidity or repletion, being a convulsion,
it may be caused by emptiness or Arist. 1. de generatione animali.
dryness: and lastly, by Abortion or difficult childe-birth.

Signs.
At the approaching of the suffocation there is a palenesse of the face,
Galenus 6. de locis affectis cap. 5.
weakness of the legs, shortness of breath, frigidity of the whole body
with a working up into the throat, and then she falls down as one void both of
sense and motion. The mouth of the womb is closed up, and being touched with
the finger feels hard. The paroxisme of the fit once past, she opens her
eyes, and feeling her stomach oppressed, she offers to vomit. And least that
any should be deceived in taking one disease for another, I will show how it
may be distinguished from those diseases which have the nearest affinity with
its self. It differs from the Apoplexy, being it comes without shreeking out
also in the hystericall passion, the sense of feeling is not altogether so
destroyed and lost, as it is in the Apoplecticall disease. It differs from the
Epilepsie in that the eyes are not wrested, neither do any spumy froth come
from the mouth; and that convulsive motion which sometime is joined to the
suffocation, is not so universal, as it is in the epilepsie, only this or
that member is convulst, and that without any vehement agitation. In the
Sincope both respiration and pulse is taken away; the countinance waxes pale,
and she swounds away suddenly; but in the histericall passion, commonly there
is both respiration and pulse though it cannot well be perceived, her face
looks red, and she has a forewarning of her fit. Yet it is not denied but
that a Sincope may be joined with this suffocation. Lastly, it is distinguished
from the Lethargy by the pulse which in the one is great in the other little.

Prognostics.
If disease has its being from the corruption of the seed, it foretells
Maguinus Mediolanensis, de regimine sanitatis. cap. de coi^u.
more danger then if it proceeded from the suppression of the cources; because
the seed is concocted, and of a purer quality, than the menstruous blood; and
the more pure being corrupted, becomes the more foul and filthy; as appears
in eggs the purrest nourishment, which vitiated yield the noysomest savor. If
it be accompained with a Sincope, it shows nature is but weak, and that the
spirits are almost exhaust. But if Hippoc. lib. 5. Aphor. 35.
neezing follows, it shows that the heat which was almost extinct does now
begin to return, and that nature will subdue the disease.

Cure.
In the cure of this affect two things must be observed: first, that during
the time of the pararoxisme, nature be provoked to expel those malignant
vapors which binds up the senses, that she may be recalled out of that
sleepie ecstasy. Secondly, that in the intermission of the fit, propper
medicines be applied to take away the cause.

To stir up nature, fasten cupping-glasses, to the hipps and navell: Apply
ligatures to the thighs. Rub the extreme parts with salt vinegar and
musturd. Cause loud clamours and thundrings in her ears. Apply to the nose
Assa faetida, castor and saga penum steeped in vinegar. Provoke her to neeze,
by blowing up into her nose the powder of castor, white pepper, pellitory, of
Spain, and white Hellebore. Hold under her nose Partridge feathers, hair and
old shoes burnt and all other stinking things: for evil odours are an enemy
to nature, hence the Animal spirits do so contest and strive against them,
that the natural heat is thereby restored. The brain is so oppressed sometimes
that we are compeld to burn the outward skin of the head, with hot oil, or
with a hot iron. Sharp clysters and suppositories are available. Of sage,
calamint, horehound, feverfew, marierom betonie, hysope, ana m.i. anice seed s.
coloquintida, white hellebore, salis gemmae ana ii. boil these in lib. ii. of
water to the half: add to the straining oil of castor ii. heirae picrae ii.
make a clyster. Or. of honey boiled ii. euphorbii s. Coloqnintida. gr. iiii,
white hellebore gr. ii. salt i. make a suppositorie. Hippocrates writes of a
hystericall woman which could not be freed from the paroxisme, Hippoc. 5. Epid.
but by pouring cold water on her: yet this cure is particular, and ought to be
administered, in the (...). Hippoc. lib. 5. Aphor. 24.
midst of summer when the Sun is in the Tropicke of Cancer.

If it be caused by the retention and corruption of the seed; at the instant
of the paroxisme, let the Midwife tak oil of lillies, marjerom, and bays,
dissolving in the same of Civet and Musk ana gr. ii. Let her dippe her finger
therein and put it up into the neck of the womb tickling and rubbing the same.

The fit being over, proceed to the curing of the cause. If it arises from the
suppression of the months look the cure, page 25 If from the retention of the
seed; a good husband will administer cure: But those which cannot honestly
purchase that cure, must use such things as will dry up and diminish the seed,
as Diacyminum, diacalaminthes, etc. Amongst Botanicks, the seed of Agnus Castus
is well esteemed of whether taken inwardly, applied outwardly, or received as a
suffumigation: It was held in great Libra de ortu sanitatis. cap. 11.
honor amongst the Athenians, for by it they did remain as pure Vestales, and
preserved their chastity, only by strowing it in the b^d whereon they lay;
hence the name Agnus Castus, is taken from the effect. Make an issue on the
inside of each leg, a handful breadth below the knee.. Trochisks of agaricke
ii. wild carrotseed, ligni aloes ana s. w^sht turpentine iii. with conserve of
Anthos make a bolus. The use of castor is worthily commended, i. of it being
taken in white wine. Or you may make pills of it with mithridate and take them
going to bed.. Of white brionie root dried and cut after the manner of carrots
i. Put it into a draught of wine placing it by the fire, Pharm. Dogmat.
re^titu^a cap. 25
and when it is warm drink it of. Quercitane draws a faecula out of the
root, the substance of which is to be taken in white wine or peonie water.. Of
myrrh, castor, Assafaetida ana i. saffron, rue seed, ana gr. iiii. make 8
pills, take every night 2. at your entrance into bed. Galen by his own example
commends unto us Agaricke pulverized, of which he gave frequently i. in white
wine.. Of the seeds of rue, Agnus castus, anice, feuell ana s. ligni aloes,
citron pills dried ana i. sugar iii. with feverfew water make lozenges.. Of
tryphera magna Nic. i. mugwort water iiii. Take this every other day for the
space of 12 days. Hang about her neck little tabulets of Vngula Alces.. Of
bdellium, ammoniacum, and ii. Agnus castus, Centorie, Cassia-wood, feverfew,
marjerom ana is. turpentine q. s. make two plasters apply one before and the
other behind. Lay to the navill at bedtime, a head of garlic bruised,
fastening it with a sweathing band. Make a girdle of galbanum for the wast,
and also a plaster for the belly, placeing in one part of it, both civet and
musk, which must be laid upon the navill.. Pulveris benedict. Trochiscks of a
garicke, ana ii. mithridate q. s. make a pessarie: It purges the matrice of
wind and phlegm: foment the natural parts with sallade oil, in which has
been boiled rue, feverfew and chammomill.. Of rose leaves m.i. cloves ii.
twilt them up in a little cloth and boil them in malmsie, the eight part of an
hour; and then apply them close to the mouth of the womb as hot as may be
endured: Let her be covered well that the smell passes not to the nose.

A drieing diet must be observed, the moderate use of Venus is commended. Let
her bread be Anice seed biscuit; and her flesh meat, rather roasted then boiled.

CHAP. VII. Of the descending or falling down of the Mother.
THE falling down of the womb is a relaxation of the ligatures, whereby the
matrice is carried backward, and in some, hangs out in the bigness of an egg.
Of this there be two kinds distinguished of Fernelius by Descensus, Fernilius
lib. 6. de partium morbis cap. 16. (...)
and Prolapsus by a descending and a precipitation. The descending of the
womb, is when it sinketh down to the entrance of the privities, and appears
to the eye, either not at al or very little. The precipitation, is when the
womb, (...).
like a purse, is turned the inside outward, and hangs bewixt the thighs in
the bigness of a cupping-glasse.

Cause.
The cause is external, or internal. The external cause is difficult child
birth, violent pulling away of the secondine, rashness and inexperience in
drawing away of the child, violent coughing, neezing, falls, blows, carrying
of heavy burdens. The internal cause in general is overmuch humiditie
flowing unto those parts, hindering the operations of the womb, whereby the
ligaments by which the womb is supported are relaxt. The cause in particular,
is referred to be in the retention of the seed; Hippoc. 2. Epidem. Arist. 7. de
historia animali.
or in the suppressions of the courses.

Signs.
The Arsgut and the bladder oftentimes are so crushed, that the passage of both
the excrements is hindered. If the urine does flow forth, it is white and
thick: the proecordia are molested, the loins be grieved; the privities
payned; the womb sinkes down to the entrance of the private parts, or else
comes clean out.

Prognostics.
This grief possessing an old woman, is cured with great difficulty, because
it weakens the faculties of the womb, and therefore though it be reduced into
his propper place, yet upon every occurrance it is subject to the like danger
it was in before. So is it with the younger sort, if the disease be inveterate.
If it be caused by putrefaction, in the nerves it is incurable.

Cure.
The womb naturally being placed between the straight gut and the bladder,
and now fallen down, ought not to be put up again until the faculty both of
the guts and bladder be stirred up.

Nature being unloded of her burden, let the woman be placed on her Hippoc. l.
2. de morbis mulierum.
back, in such sort that her legs may be higher then her head; let her feet be
drawn up to her hinder parts, with her knees spread abroad. Then mollify the
swelling with oil of Lillies and sweet Almonds; or with the decoction of
m^llows, beetes, faengreck, and lineseed. When the inflation is dissiputed; let
the midwife anoint her hand with oil of Mastick, and reduce the womb into
its place. The matrice being put up, the situation of the patient must be
changed. Let her legs be out at length and laid together. Set cuppingglasses
to the breasts and navill. Boil Mugwort, Feverfew, red Roses, and Comferie in
red Wine, and foment the places therewith. Make a suffumigation for the matrice
of Castor assa faetida, Frankincence and Mastick;. Sandarachae Olibani* Cipres
Nuts, ana iii, Masticke, Styrax, Franck in^ence, ana i. fine bole i. with oil
of myrtles and wax make two plasters apply one before and the other behind..
Of red roses, Pomgranate pills, Accorne cups, Myrtle berries, ana ii. Medler
leaves, Sage, Rue, Origan, Comferie, wormwood ana mis. boil all these in
water and make an insessio^. Move sweet odours. to the nose: And at the coming
out of the Bath, give her of sirrup of Feverfew i. with i. of Mithridate..
Ladani, Masticke, ana iii. Galbani s. Styracis;ii. make a plaster for the
navill. Make pessaries of Assafaetida, Saffron, Comfery, masticke, adding there
to a little Castor. The practice of Paraeus, Paraeus de generatione hominis
cap. 41.
in this cause, was to make them only of cork, in figure like a little egg,
covering them over with wax and masticke dissolved together, fastening to it a
thread, and so to put it up into the womb. The present danger being new taken
away, and the matrice seared in its natural abode, the remote cause must be
remooved. If the body be plethoricke open a vein; Prepare with sirrup of
betonie, calamint, hysope, and feverfew. Purge with pil. de hier a cum agarico,
pil. de colocynthide. If the stomach be oppressed by crudities, unburden it by
vomiting. Sudorifficall decoctio^s of Lignum sanctum and sassifras taken twenty
days together dries, up the superfluous moister and consequently suppresseth
the cause of the disease.

Let the air be hot and dry, and your diet hot and attenuating. Abstain
from dancing, leaping, neezing, and from all motion both of body and mind.
Eat sparingly; drink not much: sleep moderately.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Inflammation of the womb.
(...).
THE Phlegmon or inflammation of the matrice, is a tumor possessing the whole
womb or part of it, accompanied with unnatural heat, by obstructions and
gathering together of corrupt blood.

Cause.
The cause of this affect is suppression of the months, repletion of the whole
body, immoderate use of Venus, often handling of the genitalls, difficult
childe-birth, vehement agitation of the body, falls, blows; to which also may
be added the use of sharp pessaries, whereby not seldom the womb is
inflamed. Cupping-glasses also fastened to the pubes and hypogastrium draw the
humors to the womb.

Signs.
The signs are aguish horrors, pains in the head and stomach, vomitting,
coldness of the knees, convulsions of the neck, doting, trembling of the
heart; sometimes there is a Dyspnaea or streightnes of breath, by reason of the
heat which is communicated to the diaphragme. The breasts symphathizing with the
womb are payned and swelled. Particular signs. If the forepart of the matrice
be inflamed, the privities are grieved, the urine is suppressed, or flows forth
with difficutie. If the after part; the loins and back suffer, the excrements
are retained. If the right side; the right hip suffers, the right leg is
heavy slow to to motion, in so much that sometimes she seems to hault. And so
if the left side of the womb be inflamed, the left hip is payned, and the left
leg is weaker then the right. If the neck of the womb be affected; the
midwife, putting up her finger, shall feel the mouth of it retracted and
closed up, with a hardness about it.

Prognostics.
All inflammations of the womb are Hippoc. l. 2. de marbis mulierum. 5 Aphor.
43.
dangerous, if not deadly; and especially if the total substance of the
matrice be inflamed. Yet less perilous are they if they be in the neck of
the womb. A flux of the belly foretells health if it be natural; for nature
works best by the use of her own instruments.

Cure.
In the cure, first, let the humors flowing to the womb be repelled; for
effecting of which, after the belly has been loosened by cooling clysters,
phlebotomie will be needful. Open therefore a vein on the arm; and if she
be not with child, the day after strike the Saphena on both feet. Fasten
ligatures and Cupping -- glasses to the arms; rub the upper parts.

Purge lightly with Cassia, Rhubarbe, Seen, Myrobolanes, etc. as,. Of Seen ii.
Anice seed i. myrobolanes s. Barley water. s.q. make a decoction: dissolve in it
sirrup of Succorie with Rhubarbe ii. pulp of Cassia s. oil of Anice seed gut.
ii. make a potion. At the beginning of the disease anoint the privities and
reins, with oil of roses and quinces. Make plasters of Plantaine, Lineseed,
Barley meal, Melilote, Fengrecke, whites of eggs, and if the pain be
vehement, add a little opium. Foment the genitalls with the decoction of
Poppieheads, purcelaine, knotgrasse, and water lillies. Make injections of
Goates-milke, rose water, clarified whey, with honey of roses. In the declining
of the disease, use insessions of Sage, Lineseed, Mugwort, Penny-royall,
horehound, faengrecke. Anoint the lower parts of the belly with oil of
chammomill, and violets.. Of lilly roots, mallow roots ana iiii. mercury m.i.
Mugwort, feverfew ana m.s. Chammomill flowers, melilote, ana. p.i. bruise the
herbs and the roots and boil them in a sufficient quantity of milk: then
add of fresh butter, oil of chammomill, lillies, ana ii. bean meal s.q. make
two plasters apply one before and the other behind.

If the tumor cannot be removed but tends to suppuration. Of faengrecke,
mallow roots, decocted figgs, line seed, barley meal, doves dung, turpentine
ana iii. deers suet s. opium s. with wax make a plaster.. Of bay leaves, sage,
hysope, chammomill, mugwort with water make an insession.. Of wormwood,
betonie ana ms. white wine, milk ana lib. s. boil them until one part be
consumed; then take of this decoction iiii. honey of roses ii, make an
injection. Yet beware the humors be not brought down unto the womb.. Of
roasted figgs, mercury bruised. ana iii. turpentine, ducks grease, ana i, opium
gr. ii. with wax make a pessarie.

The air must be cold: All motion of the body, especially of the lower parts
is forbidden Vigilancie is commended, for by sleep the humors are carried
inward, whereby the inflammation is increased, eat sparingly. Let your drink
be barley water or clarified whey; and your meat chickens and chicken broth
boiled with endive, succhorie, sorrel, buglosse and mallows.

CHAP. IX. Of the Schirrositie or hardness of the womb.
OF a Phlegmon neglected, (...).
or not perfectly cured, Galenus lib. 2. artis curativae ad Glauconem.
is generated a Schirrus of the matrice, which is a hard unnatural swelling
insensible, hindering the operations of the womb, and disposing the whole body
to slothfulness.

Cause.
One cause of this disease may be as^i^ed to want of judgment in the
Physician; as many Empirickes, administering to an inflammation of the womb,
do over much refrigerate and astring the humor, that it can neither pass
forward no backward; hence the matter being condenst degenerates as it were
into lapidious or hard substance. Other causes may be suppression of the
menstrualls; retention of the Lochia, commonly called the after-purgings;
eating of corrupt meats, as in the disordinate longing called Pica, unto which
breeding women are often subject. It may proceed also from obstructions and
ulcers in the Matrix; or from evil affects in the Liver and Spleen.

Signs.
If the bottom of the womb be affected, she feels, as it were, a heavy
burden representing a mole; yet differing in that the breasts are attenuated,
and the whole body waxes less. If the neck of the womb be hardened, no
outward humor will appear; the mouth of it is retracted, and being touched
with the finger feels hard, that she cannot have the company of a man without
great pain and prickings.

Prognostics.
A Schirrus confirmed, is Riolanus de morbis uteri sect 4. tract. 2.
incurable, and will turn into a Canker or a Dropsy, and ending in a Canker
proves Hippoc. libro. 6. Aphor. 38.
deadly; because the native heat in those parts, being almost smothred, can
hardly again be restored.

Cure.
Where there is a replection, phlebotomy by our master Galen is both commended
and commanded. Wherefore open the mediana on both arms, and then the Saphena
on both feet, especially if the terms be suppressed.

Prepare the humor with Sirrup of Borage, Succhory, Epithimum, and clarified
Whey. Then take of these Pills following, according to the strength of the
patient.. Hierae picrae vj. black Hellebor, Polipodie ana iis. Agaricke
lapidis lazuli abluti, salis indi, coloquintida ana is. misce make Pills. The
body being purged, proceed to molifie the hardness, as follows. Anoint the
privities and the neck of the womb with Vnguentum dialtheae and agrippae. Or
of Opopanax, Bdellium, ammoniacum, Myrrhae ij. Saffron 9. Dissolve the gumms in
Oil of Lillies and sweet Almonds; with Wax and Turpentine make an Unguent.
Apply below the navill the plaster of Melilot and Diachylon Fernelij. Make
insessions of Figs, Mugwort, Mallows, Pennyroyall, Althea, Fenell roots,
Meliote, Foengrecke, Line seed boiled in water. Make injections of Calamint,
Line seed, Melilote, Foengrecke, and the four mollifying herbs, with oil of
Dill, Chammomile, and Lillies, dissolving the same iij. of the gum Bdellium.
Cast the stone Pyrites on the coals, and let her receive the fume of it into
her womb. Foment the secret parts with the decoction of the leaves and roots
of Danewort.. of the gum Galbanum, Opopanax ana i. Iu^e of Danewort, Mucilage
of Fengrecke, anna s. Calves marrow i. Wax q.s. make a pessary. Or make a
pessary only of Lead, dipping it in the aforesaid things, and so put it up.

The air must be temperate. Gross, viscuous, and salt meats are forbidden; as
Porke, Bulls-beefe, Fish, old cheese, etc.

CHAP. 10. Of the dropsy of the womb.
THE uterine dropsy is an unnatural swelling, (...)
ellevated by the gathering together of wind, or phlegm in the cavity,
membranes, or substance of the womb, by reason of the debility of the native
heat not digesting the aliment received, and so it turns into an excrement.

Cause.
The causes, are over much cold and moystnesse of the Milt and Liver,
immoderate drinking, eating of crude meats; all which causing a repletion do
suffocate the native heat. It may be caused likewise by the overoflowing of
the courses, or by any other immoderate evacuation. To these may be added
abortion, ulcers, phlegmons, and schirrosities of the womb.

Signs.
The signs of this affect are these. The lower parts of the belly with the
genitals are puffed up and payned, the feet swell; the natu^all color of the
face decaies, the appetite is depraved, and the heaviness of the whole body
concurres: If she turns her self in the bed from one side to the other, a
noise like the flowing of water is heard. Water sometimes comes from the
matrice. If the swelling be caused by wind, the belly being hit with the
hand, sounds like a drum; the guts rumble, and the wind breaks thorough the
neck of the womb with a murmuring noise. This affect may be distinguished from
a true conception many ways, as will appear by comparing this chapter with
the 14. It is distinguished from the general dropsy in that the lower parts of
the belly are most sweld. Again, in this the s^nguificative faculty does not
apppeare so hurt, nor the urine so pale, nor the countenance so soon changed;
neither are the superior parts so extenuated as in the general dropsy.

Prognostickes.
This affect foretells the total ruin of the natural functions, by that
singular consent the womb has with the liver, and therefore that a cachexia
or a general dropsy will follow.

Cure.
In the cure of this disease, imitate the practice of Hypocrates. Hippoc. lib.
de morb mulierum.
First, mittigate the pain with fomentations of Melilote, Mercury, Mallows,
Line seed, Chammomile, Althea. Then let the humor be prepared with syrrupe of
Staechas, Hysope, Calamint, Mugwort, de bisant. With the distilled waters or
decoctions, of Dodder, Marjorum, Sage, Origan, Sperage, Penny-royall, Betony.
Purge with seen Agaricke, Rhubarb, Elaterium.. Specierum hierae, Rhubarb,
trochisckes of Agaricke ana i. with the juce of Ireos make pills. Or. pill de
Rhubarbaro s. pill de mezereo i. with Mugwort water make pills. In diseases
which have their being from moystnesse, purge with pills: and in those affects
which are caused by emptiness or dryness, purge with potions. Fasten cupping
glass to the belly with a great flame, and also to the navill, especially if
the swelling be flatulent. Make an issue on the inside of each leg a handful
breadth below the knee.. Specierum diambrae, diamosci dulcis, diacalamenti,
diacinnam omi, diacymini troch. de Myrrha ana ij. Sugar lb. i. with Betony
water m^ke Lozenges: take of them two hours before meals. Apply to the
bottom of the belly, as hot as may be endured, a little bag of Chammomill,
Cummin, and Melilot, boiled in Oil of rue. Anoint the belly and secret parts
with Vnguentum Agrippae, and Vnguentum (...), mingling therewith Oil of Ireos.
Cover the lower parts of the belly with the plaster of bay berries; or with a
cataplasme made of Cummin, Cha^momill, Briony roots, adding thereto Cows and
Goats dung. Our Moderns ascribe a great virtue to Tobacco water, distilled and
poured into the womb by a metrenchyta.. of Baume Sothern wood, Organ,
Wormwood, Calamint, Bayleaues, Marjorom, ana m i. Juniper berries iiij. with
water make a decoction: of this may be made fomentations, injections and
insessions. Make pessaries of S^yrax, Alloes, with the roots of Dictam,
Aristolochia, and Gentiane. Instead of this you may use the pessary prescribed
page 77. Let her take of Electuarinus aromaticum, diasat^rion, and Eringo
roots, condited every morning.

The are must be hot and dry: moderate exercise is allowed. Much sleep is
forbidden. She may oate the flesh of Patridges, Larks, Chickens, mountain
birds, Hares, Conies, etc. Let her drink be thin Wine.

CHAP. 11. Of Barrenness.
Hoe fuit maximum Opus obstetricum, scire conj^ngere invicem corpora apta ad
conceptione. Nimole^^ Rocheus de morbis ^^l. ^^p. 20.
IN times past before women came to the marriage bed, they were first searched
by the midwife; and those only which she allowed of, as fruitful, were
admitted. I hope therefore it will be thought a needles labor, to show how ye
may prove your selves, and turn the stonny ground into a fruitful soil.

Barennesse is a deprivation of life and power which ought to be in the seed,
to procreate and propagate; for which end both man and woman were made.

Cause.
It is caused by overmuch heat or cold; Hippoc. 6. Epiden. 5. Aphor. 62.
that drying up the seed, and making it corrupt; this, extinguishing the life
of the seed making it watrish and unfit for generation. It may be caused also
by the not flowing or overflowing of the cources, by swellings, ulcers and
inflammations of the womb; by an Mauricius Cordo^^^ in Hippoc. lib. 1. de
mulier^bus, comm^ni. 2.
excrescence of flesh growing about the mouth of the matrice: by the mouth of
the womb being turned unto to the back, or side: by the grossness and
fatness of the body, whereby the mouth of the matrice is closed up, by being
pressed with the Hippoc. 5. Aphor. 46.
Omentum or caul; and the Arist. 2. de partibus animal.
matter of the seed is converted into fatness. Or if she be of a lean and
exhaust body, to the world she proves barren, because though she does
conceive yet the fruit Hippoc. 5. Aphor. 44.
of the womb will wither before it comes to perfection for want of
nourishment. Actius libro ultimo cap. 26.

Sylvius libell^ de generatione b^mi^^s commeat.


Aetius and Sylvius, ascribe one maine cause of barrenness to compeld
copulation; as when parents enforce their daughters to have busbands contrary
to their liking, therein marrying their bodies but not their hearts, Coitus
co^ctus, est coitus inanis.
and where there is a want of love, there for the most part is no conception;
as appears in women which are Non concipitur saet^s absque mutu^ voluptate.
Columbia de Anatom. l. 11. cap. 16. Cuj^sque omplexionis excessus mutua
qualitatum contrariarum repugn^nti^ coerceretur.
deflowred against their will. Another maine cause of barrenness, is
attributed to the want of a convenient moderating quality, which the woman
ought to have with the man, as if he be hot, she must be cold; If he be
dry, she must be moist: But if they be both dry or both moist of
constitution, they cannot propagate, Sape tamen usu venit, ut ^^^ter coen^^^um
sit sterilis s^d quia eorum int^r se s^nt abhorrentes naturae, nihilidcirco
exs^s^, es al is vero ge^n rare p^ss^nt. Fernelius de pariium morbit and
Symptom. lib. 6. cap. 7.
and yet simply considered of themselves they are not barren; for he or she
which before was as the barren fig tree, being now joined with an apt
constitution becomes as the fruitful Vine. And that man and women being every
way of a like constitution cannot procreate, I will bring nature it self for a
testimony, who has made man of a hotter constitution, Cum itaque calidum
frigide, commixtum fuerit, ex hisjusmodi c^mmixti^^e aliquid generari potest.

Hortensius Baptista lib. ^1. divin. instit de aminia vegitiva cap. 19.


then woman, that the quality of the one may moderate the quality of the other.

Signs.
If barrenness proceeds from the overmuch heat, she is of a dry body,
subject to anger, she has black hair, quick purfe; her purgations flow but
little, and that with pain; she loves to play in the courts of Venus. But if
it comes by cold, then are the signs contrary to those even now recited. If
through an evil quality in the womb: Make a suffumigation of red storax,
Hippoc. lib. 5. Aphor. 59.
myrrh, cassia wood, nutmeg, cinnamon, and let her receive the sum of it into
the womb, covering her very close; and if the odor so received passes
through the body up into the mouth and nostrills; Lege apud Moschionem cap. 161.
of herself she is fruitful: but if she feels not the fume in her mouth
and nose, it argues barrenness one of these ways; that the spirit of the seed
is either through cold extinguished, or through heat dissipated. If any woman
be suspected to be unfruitful, cast natural brimstone such as is dug out
of the mine, into her urine and if worms breed therein, of herself she is not
barren.

Prognostics.
Barrenness makes women look young, because they are free from those pains
and sorrows, which other women are accustomed to bring forth withal. Yet they
have not that full perfection of health which fruitful women do enjoy,
because they are not rightly purged of the menstruous blood and superfluous
seed, the retayning of which two, are the principal cause of most uterine
diseases.

Cure.
First the cause shall be removed, and then the womb strengthened, and the
spirits of the seed enlived.

If the womb be overhot; take sirrup of succhorie with rhubarbe, sirrup of
violets, endive, roses, cassia, purselaine.. Ofendive, water lillies, borage
flowers, ana m. rhubarbe, myrobolaneus ana iii. with water make a decoction,
add to the strayning of the sirrup laxative of violets i. sirrup of cassia s.
manna iii, make a potion.. Of the sirrup of mugwort i. sirrup of maiden hair
ii. water of succhorie, borage, feuell, ana iii. pul^. elect. tri^sand. i. make
a julep.. diapru. solut. elect. ros. Mesuae ana iii. rhubarbe i. make a bolus.
Apply to the reins and privities, fomentations of the juce of lettice,
violets, roses, mallows, vine leaves and nightshade. Anoint the secret parts
with the cooling unguent of Galen.

If the power of the seed be extinguished by cold* Take every morning two
spoonfulls of cinnamon water with i. of mithridate.. Sirrup of calamint,
mugwort, beto^y ana i. water of penny royal, feverfew, hysope, sage ana ii.
make a julep.. Oil of anice seed is. diacymini, di^c^l^minthe, diamosci,
diagalangae ana i. sugar iiii. with water of cinnamon make lozenge^: take of
them is. twice a day two hours before meals. East^n cupping-glasses to the
hipps and belly.. of stira^^, calamint, ana i. masticke, cloves, cinnamon,
nut^^g, lig. aloes, frankincen^^ ana s. musk gr. 10. ambergrise s. with
rose water make a confection: divide it into four equal parts; Of one part
make a pomum odoratum to smell on, if she be not hystericall. Of the second,
make a mass of pills, and let her take three every night. Of the third, make a
pessarie, dippe it in oil of spikenard and put it up. Of the fourth make a
suffumigation for the womb. If the faculties of the womb be weakened, and the
life of the seed suffocated by over much humidity, flowing to those parts;. Of
betonie, marierom, mugwort, penny royal, bawme ana m.i. roots of asrum,
fenell, ellecampane ana ii. anice seed cummin ana i. with sugar and water. s.
q. make a sirrup, take of iii. every other morning. Purge with these pills
following;. Of digridion gr.ii. specierum dacastorei, i. pil. faetid. ii. with
sirrup of mugwort make vi. pills. spec. diagemmae, diamosci, diambrae, ana i.
cinnamon is. mac^, cloves, nutweg ana s. sugar vi. with water of feverfew make
lozenges, to be taken of every morning* Take of the decoction of sarsaparilla,
and virga aurea, not forgetting sage; which Agrippa wondering at the operation
of, has honored it with the name of a holy herb. Sacra berba.
And it is recorded, that after so many of the Egiptians were dead, Heurnius
methodus ad praxin. cap. 14.
the surviving women that they might multiply the faster, Read D^d^naeus
history of plants. lib. 2. cap. 77.
were commanded to drink the juce of sage. Anoint the genitalls with oil of
aniceseed and spikenard.. Of mace, nutmeg, cinnamon, ^rax, amber ana i. cloves,
^^dani ana s. turpentine q s. ^^^ke trochis^ks, to smother the ^^ombe.. Of the
roots of Va^^rian, ellecampane, ana lb. i. ^^ulangale ii. origan, laven^^r,
marjerom, betonie, mug^ort bay leaves, calamint ana (...). iii. with water make
an ^^osession, in which she shall (...) after she has had her ^^ources.

If barrenness proceeds ^^om dryness consuming ^^e matter of the seed; Take
very day of Almond milk, ^^d Goats milk extracted ^ith honey. Eat often of
^^e roots Satyrion condited, ^^nd of the electuary diasaty^on. Take three
weathers ^^ds, boil them until the flesh comes from the bones; then take of
melilote, violets, chammomill* mercury, orchi^, with their roots ana m.i.
faengrecke, li^es^ed, vale^an roots ana li.i. Let all these be decocted in the
foresaid broth, then let the woman fit in the decoction up to the navill.. Of
Decres suet ^. Cowes marrom styracis liquid^, ana ii. oil of sweet almo^ds ii.
with silk cotton make a pessarie. Make injections only of fresh butter and
oil of sweet almonds.

If barrenness be caused by any proper affect of the womb, the cure is set
down in the foregoing chapters. Sometimes the woman proves barren when there is
no impediment of either side; except only in the manner of the act: as when in
the emission of the seed, the man is quick and the woman too slow, whereby
there is not a concurse of both seeds at the same instant, as the Petrus
Bayr^^^ prac^. lib. 3.15. cap.
rules of conception require. Wherefore to take away this inconvenience, Muller
praeparari ac disponi debet molli complexu, lascivis verbis osculu lasciviora
miscenda. If this does not suffice; before the act of coition, foment the
private parts with the decoction of betony-sage, hysope, and calamint. Anoint
the mouth and neck of the womb with Musk and Civet.

The cause of barrenness being removed, the womb shall be corroborated as
follows.. Of bay berries, masticke, Nutmegge Frankincense, Cypress nuts,
Ladani, Galbani, ana i. Styracis liquid ii. Cloves s. Amber grise gr. ij. Musk
gr. vi. with Oil of Spiknard, make a pessary.. of red Roses, Lapidis
hematitis, white Frankincense ana s. sang. draconis, fine bole, Masticke, ana
ii. Nutmegge, Cloves ana i. Spicknard s. with oil of Wormwood make a plaster
for the lower part of the belly. Let her eat often of Eringo roots condited.
Make an injection only of the juce of the roots of Satyrion.

The aptest time for conception is instantly after the months be ceast,
because then the womb is thirsty and dry, Post purgationem siccior est vierus
et semen avidius ^^abit.
apt to draw the seed, and also to retain it, by the roughness of the inward
superficies. And besides, in some, the mouth of the womb is turned unto the
back, Rhoderic. cast de natura muliebri lib. 2. cap. 13.
or side, and is not place right until the last day of the courses.

Excess in all things is to be avoided; lay aside all passions of the mind.
Shun study and care as adverse to conception; for if a woman does conceive, the
wise parents being otherwise addicted, of ten beget but foolish children,
because the animal faculties of the parents viz. The understanding and the
rest (from whence the child has his reason) are, as it were, confused through
the multiplicity of cares and cogitations. Examples hereof we have in learned
men, who after great study and care, instantly accompanying with their wives,
often beget doting children. A hot, and moist air is most convenient, as
appears by the women in Egypt, which usually bring forth three, or four
children at one time.

CHAP. 12. Of the Mola, or halfeconception.
THis disease, is called of the Greeks (...), and the cause of this
denomination is taken from the load or heavy weight of it, (...).
it being a moles, or great lump of hard flesh burdening the woman.

It is defined to be an inarticulate piece of flesh without form, begotten in
the matrice, as it were, a true conception: In which definition we are to note
two things. First, in that a mole is said to be inarticulate, and without
form, it differs from monsters, which are both formata and articulata.
Secondly, it is said to be, as it were, a true conception, which puts a
difference between a true conception and a mole; which difference holds good
three ways. First, in the Genus, in that a mole cannot be fayd to be animal.
Secondly, in the Species, because it has no humane figure and bears, not the
character of a man. Thirdly, in the Individuum, for it has no affinity with
the parent, either in the whole body, or any particle of the same.

Cause
About the cause of this affect, amongst learned authors I find variety of
judgments. Avicenna 10 de animalibus et 21. tertij tract. 2. cap. 19.
Some are of opinion, that if the woman's seed goes into the womb and not the
man's, thereof is the mole produced. Others there be that affirm it is
engendered of the menstruous blood: Aristol. 4. de generatione animali. cap. 7.
but if these two were granted, Plinius lib. 10. cap. 64.
then mayds by having their courses, or thorough nocturnall polutions might be
subject unto the same, Hippoc. 2. Epidem.
which never any yet were. The true cause of this fleshy mole proceeds both
from the man, Galenus 14. de usu partium. 17.
and from the woman, from corrupt or barren seed in the man, and from the
menstruous blood in the woman both mixed together in the cavity of the womb;
where nature finding her self weak (yet desiring to maintain the perpetuity
of her species) labors to bring forth a vicious conception rather than none.
and so instead of a living creature generates a lump of flesh.

Signs.
The signs of a mole are these. The months are suppressed, the appetite is
depraved, the breasts swell, and the belly is puffed up and waxes hard. Thus
far the signs of a breeding woman, and of one that bears a mole are all
one. I will now show you how they differ.

The first sign of difference is taken from the motion of a mole; it may be
felt to move in the womb before the third month, which the infant cannot: yet
that motion is not to be understood of any intelligent power in the mole, but
of the faculty of the womb, and of the seminall spirits defused through the
substance of the mole; for it lives not a life animal, but vegitative in the
manner of a plant. Secondly, in a mole, the belly is suddenly puffed up; but in a
true conception the belly is first retracted and then rises again by degrees.
Thirdly, the belly being pressed with the hand, the mole gives way, and the hand
being taken a way it returns to the place again: But a child in the womb,
though pressed with the hand, moves not presently, and being removed returns
slowly or not at all. Lastly, the child continues in the womb not above
eleven months; but a mole continues sometimes four or five years, more or
less according as it is fastened in the matrice. I have known when a mole has
fallen away in the fourth or fifth month.

If it remains until the eleventh month, the legs wax feeble, and the
whole body consumes; only the swelling of the belly still increases, which
makes some think they are hydropicall though there be little reason for it;
for in the Dropsy the legs swell and grow big, but in a mole they consume,
and wither.

Prognostickes.
If at the delivery of a mole the Flux of blood be great, it shows the more
danger; because the parts of nutrition having been vitiated by the flowing
back of the superfluous humors, whereby the natural heat is consumed: and
then parting with so much blood, the woeman thereby is so weakened in all her
faculties, that she can hardly subsist.

Cure.
We are taught in the school of Hippocrates, Libro. 5. Aphorism. 31.
that phlegbotomy causes abortion, by taking away that nourishment, which
should sustain the life of the child. Wherefore, that this vicious conception
may be deprived of that vegetative sap by which it lives; open the liver
vein, and then the saphena on both feet. Fasten Cupping-glasses to the loins
and sides of the belly: which done, let the uterine parts be first mollified,
and then expulsive faculty provoked to expel the burden.

To laxate the ligatures of the mole:. Mallows with the roots m.iij.
Chammomile, Melilot, Pellitory of the wall, Violet leaves, Mercury, roots of
Fenell, Parsley ana m.ij. Lineseed, Faengrecke, ana lb. i. boil them in water
and let her sit therein up to the navill. At the going out of the bath, annoint
the privities, and reins with this unguent following.. oil of Chammomile,
Lillie^, and sweet Almonds ana i. fresh butter, Labdani, Ammoniaci, ana s. with
the Oil of Lineseed, make an unguent. Or instead of this may be used ^nguentum
Agrippa or Dialtheae.. of Mercury, roots of Althea, ana m. s. fol. Branchae
Vrsinae m. s. Lineseed, Barley meal, ana vi. boil all these with water and
honey, and make a plaster. Make pessaries of the gum Galbanum bdellium,
Ammoniacum Figgs, Hogs suer, and Honey.

After the ligaments of the mole are loosed; let the expulsive faculty be
stirred up to expel the mole, for effecting of which all medicaments may be
used which are proper to bring down the courses.. troch de myrrha i. castor,
aristolochia, Genti^^, dictam, ana s. make a powder, like i. in iiij. of
Mugwort water.. of Hypericon, Calamint, Penny-royall, Betony, Hysope, Sage,
Horebound Valerian, Madder, Sabine with water make a decoction, take iij. of it
with is. of Sirrupe of Feverfew.. of Mugwort, Myrrh, Gentiane pil. coch. ana
iiij* Rue, Penny-royall, Saggapenum, Opopanax ana s. assa foetida, Cinnamon,
Juniper berries, Borage, ana i. with the iuce of Sabine make pills to be taken
of every morning. Make insessions of Hysope, Bay leaves, Assrum, Calamint,
Bayberries, Chammomile, Mugwort, Sabine.. of Sagapenum, Marjerom, Gentiane,
Sabine, Cloves, Nutmegge, Bayberries, ana ij. Galbanum i. hierae picrae, black
Hellebore, ana i. with Turpentine make a pessary. But if these things prove not
availeable; then must the mole be drawn away with an instrument put up into
womb, called a Pes griphius; which may be done with no great danger, if it be
performed by a skillful Surgeon.

After the delivery of the mole (by reason that the woman has parted with much
blood already) let the flux of blood be stayed as fast as may be.

Fasten Cupping-glasses to the shoulder, and ligatures to the arms. If these
help not; open the liver-veine on the right arm.

The air shall be moderately hot and dry; and her diet such as does mollify
and attenuate, she may drink white wine.

CHAP. XIII. Of the generation of monsters.
BY the Ancients monsters are ascribed to depraved conceptions; and are defined
to be excursions of nature, which are Heurnius institut. medicin. lib. 5. cap.
8.
vicious one of these four ways. In figure, situation, magnitude, or number.

In figure, when a man bears the character of a beast, as did the Ruffius de
mul. lib. 5. cap. 3.
monster in Saxonia, which was borne about the time of Luthers preaching.

In magnitude, when one part does not equalize with another, as when one part
is too big or too little for the other parts of the body; and this is so
common amongst us, that I need not produce a testimony for it.

In situation, as if the ears were on the face and the eyes on the breast or
legs, of this kind was the Conradus Licostenes tractat. de miraculis.
monster borne at Ravenna in Italy, in the year 1512.

In number, when a man has two heads or four hands, of this kind was the
Ludovicus lib. 24. cap. 3.
monster borne at Zarz^ra in the year 1540.

I proceed to the cause of their generation, which is either Divine or
Natural. The Divine cause proceeds from the permissive will of God, suffering
parents to bring forth such abominations, for their filthy and corrupt
affections which are let loose unto wickedness, like brute beasts that have no
understanding. Wherefore it was enacted amongst the ancient Romans, that those
which were any ways Gellius lib. 1. cap. 12.
deformed should not be admitted into religious houses. L^ 18. epistola and
Demetriadem. lib. 2.
And S. Hierome in his time grieved to see the deformed and lame offered up to
God in religious houses. Lib. de art conci^^^^di.
And Keker^a^e by way of inference excludes all that are mishappen from the
presbyteriall function in the Church: and that which is of more force then all,
Levit. 21.18.
God himself commanded Moses not to receive such to offer sacrifice amongst
his people; and he renders the reason, Least he polute my sanctuaries: Verse
23.
because the outward deformity of the body is often a sign of the polution of
the heart, Quot natu^ra nolavit d^mn^vit.
as a curse laid upon the child for the parents inco^tinency. Yet there are
many borne depraved which ought not to be ascribed unto the infirmity of the
parents. S. Ioh 9^.2.
Let us therefore search out the natural cause of their generation, which
(according to Aristotle and Avicen which have dieved into the secrets of
nature) is either in the matter or in the agent, Arist. t. tertio mat^^r.
Avicenna 2. metaph.
in the seed or in the womb.

The matter may be in fault two ways, by defect or by excess. By defect when
as the child has but one leg, or one arm. By excess, when it has three
hands, or two heads.

The agent, or womb may be in fault three ways. First, in the formative
facultive, which may be too strong, or too weak, by which is produced a
depraved figure. Secondly, in the instrument or place of conception, the evil
conformation or disposition whereof, will cause a monstrous birth. Thirdly in
the imaginative power at the time of conception, which is of such force that it
stamps the Cardanus de rerum veritate. lib. 8. cap. 44.
character of the thing imagined upon the child: so that the children of an
adultresse may be like unto her own husband though begotten by another man;
which is caused through the force of the imagination which the woman has of
her own husband in the act of coition. Aristotle reports of a woman, who at
the time of conception beholding the picture of a Black more, conceived and
brought forth an Aetheopian. I will not trouble you with any more humane
testimonies, but I will conclude with a stronger warrant. We read how Jacob
having agreed with L^ba^ to have all the spotted sheep for the keeping of his
flocks; Genesis 30.31.
to augment his wages, took hasell rodds, and pilled white strakes in them and
laid them before the sheep when they came to drink, and the sheep cuppling
there together, whiles they beheld the rods conceived, and brought forth
spotted young.

The Imagination also works on the child after conception: Per imaginationis
impressionem, f^tu^ in utero matris afficitur figno notabil^ sine corporali
contactu. Osualdus Crollius praefatione admonitoria ad Basilicam Chymicam.
for which we have a pregnant example of a worthy gentlewoman in Suffolcke,
who being with child and pas^ing by her butcher-killing of meat, a drop of
blood sprung on her face, whereupon she said, that her child would have some
blemish on the face, and at the birth it was found marked with a red spot.

Some are of opinion, that monsters may be engendered by some infernal spirit.
Of this mind was Libro de Cometa.
Egidius Facius speaking of that deformed monster borne at Cracovie. And Lib.
de rebus contra ^aturam.
Hieroni^us Cardamus, writes of a maid, which was got with child, by a Devil,
she thinking it had been a fair young man. The like also is recorded by De
naturali specul^. lib. 21. cap. 30.
Vincentius, of the Prophet Marliu, that he was begotten by an evil spirit.

But what a repugnancie would it be, both to religion and nature, if the
Devils could beget men, when we are taught to believe, that not any was ever
begotten without humane seed except the Son of God. The Devil then being a
spirit having no corporal substance, but in appearance, and therefore no seed
of generation; to say that he can use the act of generation effectually, is to
affirm that he can make something of nothing, and consequently the Devil to
be God, for creation solely belongs to God alone. Again if the Devil could
assume to him a dead body, and enliven the faculties of it, and make it able to
generate (as some affirm he can) yet this body must bear the image of the
Devil; and it is against Gods glory to give permission so far unto him, as
out of the Image of God to raise up his own offspring. In the school of
nature we are taught the contrary, viz. that like begets like; Omne generans
generat sibi sim^l^.
therefore of a Devil cannot man be borne. Yet it is not denied, but that
Devils transforming themselves into human shapes, may abuse both men and
women, Lege apud Ruffium lib. 5. c. 6.
and with wicked people use the works of nature. Yet that any such conjunction
can bring forth a human creature is contrary to nature and religion.

CHAP. XIV. Of the signs of Conception.
IGnorance makes women become murderers to the fruit of their own bodies. For
many having conceived, and thereupon finding their bodies to be out of cource,
and not knowing rightly the cause, do either run to the shop of their own
conceit and take what they think fit; or else as the custom is they send, to
the Physician for cure, and he perceiving not the cause of their grief (seeing
that no certain Forestus lib. 2. de incerto urinarum judicio cap. 3.
judgment can be given by the urine) prescribes what he thinks best,
peradventure some strong diureticall, or catharticall potion whereby the
conception is destroyed. Wherefore Hippocrates says, S^ientia multi opus est
ut mulier in uteris ges^e^ puerum, and ut nutriatur and ut evadat ab ipso
partu. lib. (...).
there is a necessity that women should be instructed in the knowledge of
conception, that the parent as well as the child might be saved from danger.
I will therefore give you some instructions by which every one may know whether
she be with child or not.

The signs of conception shall be taken from the woman, from the urine, from
the infant, and from experiment.

Signs collected from the woman are these. The first day after conception she
feels a light quivering or chillinesse running through the whole body; a
tickling in the womb, and a little pain in the lower parts of the belly. Ten
or twelve days after, the head is affected with giddiness, the eyes with a
dimnesse of sight: then follows red pimples in the face, with a blue circle
about the eyes; the breasts swell and grow hard with some pain and pricking in
them: the belly suddenly sinketh, and rises again by degrees with a
hardness about the navill. The nipples of the breasts wax red, the heart beats
inordinately, the natural appetite is dejected, yet she has a longing desire
after strange meats. The neck of the womb is retracted that it can hardly
be felt with the finger being put up, and this is an infallible sign. She is
suddenly merry and as soon melancholy; her monthly courses are stayed
without any evident cause; the excrements of the guts are unaccustomedly
retained by the womb pressing the great gut; and her desire to Venus is abated.

The surest sign is taken from the infant which begins to move in the womb
the third or fourth month, and that not in the manner of a mole from one side
to another rushing like a stone, but mildely as may be perceived by applying
the hand hot on the belly.

Signs taken from the urine. The best clerks do affirm that the urine of a
woman with child is white and has little motes, like those in the Sun beams
ascending and descending in it, and a clowd swimming aloft of an opall color;
the sediment being divided by shaking of the urine, appears like carded wool.
In the middle of her time, the urine turns yellow, next red, and lastly
black, with a red cloud. Signs taken from experiment: At night going to bed,
let her drink water and honey; afterward if she feels a beating pain in her
belly and about her navill, she has conceived. Or let her take the juce of
Card^us, and if she vomiteth it up, it is a sign of conception; Cast a clean
needle into the woman's urine put in a brazen basin, let it stand all night, and
in the morning if it be colored with red spotts she has conceived, Lege
apud Hippoc. lib. de sterilitate.
but if it be black or rustie she has not.

Signs taken from the Sex to show whether it be male or female. Being with
child of a male, the right breast swells first, the right eye is more lively
then the left, her face well colored, because such as the blood is, Hippoc. 5.
Aphor. 42.
such is the color; and the male is conceived of purer blood and of more
perfect seed then the female. Vide Moschionis caput 162.
Red motes in the urine settling down to the sediment, foretell that a male is
conceived, but if they be white, a female. Put the woman's urine which is with
child into a glassen bottle, let it stand close stopped three days; then
strain it through a fine cloth, and you shall find little living creatures;
if they be red, it is a male, if white a female. To conclude the most certain
sign to give credit unto is the motion of the infant: for the male moves in
the third month, and the female in the fourth.

CHAP. XV. Of untimely birth.
WHen the fruit of the womb comes forth before the seventh month, (that is
before it comes to maturity) it is said to be abortive. And in effect the
child proves In nostris regionibus praecipue: In Aegypto autem et Hispania
octomestres partus sunt vitales, quia aer ibi calidus est similis loco uteri,
in quo perman^bat faetus.
abortive (I mean not to live) if it be borne in the eight month. And why
children borne in the seventh, and ninth month may live and not in the eight
month, may seem strange yet it is true: The cause hereof by some, is ascribed
unto the Planet under which the child is borne; for every month from the
conception to the birth is governed by his proper planet: and in the eight
month, Saturn does predominate, which is cold and dry; and coldness being an
enemy unto li^e, destroys the nature of the child. Hypocrates gives a better
reason: Libro de Septimestri pari^.
The infant being every way perfect, and complete in the seventh month,
desires more air and nutriment than it had before, Septimo mense semper movet
infans ad partum.
which because he cannot obtain he labors for a passage to go out: and if
his spirits be weak and faint, and have not strength sufficient to break the
membrances and come forth; it is decreed by nature that he should continue in
the womb until the 9th month, that, in that time his wearied spirits might be
again strengthened and refreshed; but if he returns to strive again in the
eight month and be borne, he cannot live, because the day of his birth is
either past or to come; for in the eight month, says Avicen he is weak and
infirm, 21. tertij tract. de abortu.
and therefore b^ing then cast into cold air his spirits cannot but sink.

Cause.
Untimely birth may be caused by cold; for as it makes the fruit of the tree
to wither and fall down before it be ripe, so does it nip the fruit of the
womb before it comes to full perfection, and make it to be abortive. Sometimes
by Hipoc. 5. Aphor. 45.
humidity weakening the faculty that the fruit cannot be retained until the
due time: by dryness or 5 Aphor. 44.
emptiness, defrauding the child of his nourishment; by one of the three
alvine 5 Aphor. 34.
fluxes; by 5 Aphor. 30.
phlebotomy and other evacuations; by 5 Aphor. 43.
inflammations of the womb, and by other 5 Aphor. 31.
sharp diseases. Sometimes it is caused by joy, laughter, anger, and
especially by Gulenus 2. in 3. Epid. 8.
fear; for in all, but in that especially, the heat forsakes the womb and
runs to the heart, to help there, and so the cold strikes into matrice
whereby the ligaments are relaxt, and abortion follows. Wherefore Plato in his
time, Libro 5. de legibus.
commanded that the women should shun all temptations of great joy and
pleasure, and likewise avoid all occasions of fear and grief: Abortion also
may be caused by the corruption of the air; by filthy odours, and especially
by the smell of the Aristot. 8. de historia animali. cap. 24.
snuff of a Candle, also by falls, blows, violent exercise, leaping, dancing,
etc.

Signs.
Signs of future abortion, are extenuation of the breasts with a flux of
watrish milk; pain in the womb; heaviness in the head; unaccustomed
weariness in the hippes, and thighs; flowing of the courses: Signs
foretelling the fruit to be dead in the womb, are hollownesse of the eyes,
grief in the head, aguish horrors, palenesse of the face and lips; gnawing
of the stomach; no motion of the infant; coldness and looseness of the mouth
of the womb; the thickness of the belly which was above is fallen down;
waterish and bloody excrements comes from the matrice.

A regiment or rule for breeding women.
THe prevention of untimely birth consists in the taking away of the
forementioned causes; which must be effected both before and after conception.

Before conception, if the body be ever hot, cold, dry or moist correct it
with the contraries; if cacochimiall, purge it; if plethoricall, open the liver
vein; if too gross, extenuate it; if too lean, corroborate and nourish it;
all diseases of the womb must be removed as I have showed.

After conception, let the air be temperate: sleep not overmuch: avoid
watching, exercise of body, passions of the mind, loud clamours and filthy
smells: sweet odours also are to be rejected of those that are histericall.
Abstain from all things which provoke either the urine or courses; also from
salt, sharp, and windy meats: a moderate diet shall be observed.

If the excrements of the guts be retained, lenifie the belly with Clisters
made of the decoction of Mallows, Violets with Sugar, and common Oil; or make
broth with Borage, Buglosse, Beets, Mallows, taking in the same a little Manna.
On the contrary; if she be troubled with looseness of the belly, let it not be
stayed with out the judgment of a Physician; for all alvine Fluxes, have a
malign quality in them, which must be evacuated before the Flux be stayed.

The cough is another accident which accompaneth breeding women, and puts them
into great danger of miscarrying, by a continual distillation falling from the
brain; to prevent which, shave away the hair on the coronall, and sagittall
commissure, and apply there on this plaster.. Resinae, s. Ladani i. Citron
pills, Ligni aloes, Olibani ana i. Stiracis liquidae et siccae s.q. dissolve
the gumes in Vinegar, and make a plaster. At night going to bed, let her take
the fume of these trochickes cast upon the coals.. of Frankincense, Stirax,
powder of red roses, ana is. Sandarachae iij. Masticke, Benjamen, amber, ana i.
with Turpentine make trochis^kes. Apply a cautery to the nape of the neck: and
every night let her take of these pills following.. Hypocistidis, terrae
sigillatae fine bole, ana s. Bistort, Acatiae, Stiracis Calamitae ana ij.
Cloves i. with sirrupe of Mirtles make pills.

In breeding women there is a corrupted matter generated, which flowing to the
ventricle dejecteth the appetite and causes vomitting: and the stomach being
weak, not able to digest this matter, sometime sends it unto the guts, whereby
is caused a flux of the belly, which greatly stirs up the faculty of the
womb. For the eschewing therefore of all these dangers, the stomach shall be
corroborated as follows.

. Ligni Aloes, Nutmeg ana i. Mace, Cloves, Masticke, Ladanum ana ii. Oil of
Spike i. Musk gr. ii. Oil of Masticke, Quinces, Wormwood ana s. make an
ungvent for the stomach, to be applied before meals. Instead hereof may be
used Cerotum stomochale Galeni.. of conserve of Borage Buglosse, Anthos ana s.
Confect. de Hyacintho, Lemon pills condited* Specierum diamarg. pulv. de gemmis
ana ii. Nutmeg, Diambrae ana ii. Peonie roots, Diacoralli ana i. with sirrup of
roses make an electuarie of which she shall take twice aday, two hours before
meals. Another accident which perplexeth women with child, swelling of the
legs, which happens the first three months, by superfluous humors falling
down from the stomach and liver; for the cure whereof.. Of Oil of roses ii.
Salt, Vinegar ana i. shake them altogether until the salt be dissolved, and
anoint the legs hot therewith, chaffing it in with the hand. But purging is
more proper if it may be done without danger, as it may in the fourth, fifth
and sixth month of Hippoc. 4. Aphor.
pregnation: for a child in the womb is compared to an Apple on the tree. The
first three months it is weak and tender, subject with the apple to fall away:
but afterward the membranes being strengthened, the fruit remaynes firmly
fastened in the womb, not apt to michances; and so it continues, until the
seventh month; then growing near the time of maturity, the ligaments are
again relaxt (like unto the apple that is almost ripe) and grow looser every
day until the time of delivery. If therefore her body has need of purging,
she may purge without danger in the 4, 5, or 6. month; but not before, nor
after, unless in some sharp diseases in which the mother and child both are
like to perish. Apply plasters and unguents to the reins, to strengthen the
fruit of the womb.. Of Gum arabeck, galangale, bistort, hypocistid storax. ana
i. fine bole, nutmeg, masticke, balaust. sang. draconis, myrtle berries ana is.
wax and turpentine s.q. Make a plaster: apply it to the reins in the winter
time; and remove it every fourteen days, lest the reins be over hot
therewith. In the interim anoint the privities and reins with Vnguentum
Comitissae. But if it be summer time, and the reins hot, this plaster
following is more proper.. Of red roses p.i. Masticke. red sanders, ana ii;
bole armenie, red coral, bistort, ana i. Pomgranate pills, prepared coriander
ana iis. barberies ii. Oil of Masticke and quinces ana i. juce of plantaine
ii. with pitch make a plaster, anoint the reins also with unguentum
sandalinu^. Once every week wash the reins with two parts of rose water and
one part of white wine, mingled together and warmed at the fire: this will
assuage the heat of the reins, and disperse the oil of the plaster out of the
pores of the skin, and cause the ointment or plaster the sooner to penetrate
and strengthen the womb. Some are of opinion that as long as the loadstone is
laid to the navill it keeps the woman from abortion. The like also is
recorded of the stone Aetites being hanged about the neck. The same virtue
has the stone, Samius.

Thus briefly (as far as modesty would give leave) I have run through all
distempers of the matrice: God make my labor profitable; for healing comes
of the most High.

Hinc omne Principium huc refer exitum.

Horat. The Authors prayer for his patient.
WHat Cure I undertake S. Luke 7.6.

within this roof,
Lord say the Word be whole,
and it is enough.
Thy Word alone, Acts 3.7.

did make the lame to walk;
The deaf to hear, S. Mark 7.3.

yea and the dumb to talk.
The servants Palsy, S. Mat. 8.13.

by thy word was cured;
The Leapers cleansed, S. Math. 8.3.

and of health assured.
By it the borne blind man, S. John 9.1.

was made to see:
By it the dead to life, S. John 11.44.

even raised be.
By it were the secures wrought,
o Lord grant then,
Unto my prayer that,
thou will say Amen.
Wisdom. 16.12.
For neither herb,
nor plaster will do well:
Unless therewith thy
benedict does dwell.
FINIS.

