A DIVINE DICTIONARIE, OR, The Bible abreuiated. CONTAINING THE WHOLE
Scripture. Being most necessary for the present finding out of any part
thereof.

By T. S.



LONDON, Printed by E: ALLDE for FRANCIS CONSTABLE, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard over against the great North door, at the sign of
the white Lion. 1615.

To the Christian Reader.
Having many times a desire to read some special Chapters in the Bible, I
could not so readily find the same but by turning over a great Volume: now for
the readier finding thereof, I have made this brief collection of the contents
of all the Chapters contained therein, whereby the same may be the more easily
found, for the better satisfying of such, as shall have the like desire to
read the same. And so wishing the best use to be made thereof, I bid you
Farewell.

Of the incomparable treasure of the holy Scriptures, with a prayer for the
true use of the same.
HEre is the spring where waters flow, Psalm. 12. 3. and 49. 10. ^e. 21 16 and
22. 17 Ierem. 33* 15. psalm. 119. 1^0 Reave. 2. 7. and 22. 2. psalm. 119. 142 144.
Ioh. 6. 35. Luke 2. 10.
to quench our heat of sin:
Here is the tree where truth does grow, to lead our lives therein:
Here is the Judge that stintes the strife, when men's devices fail:
Here is the bread that feeds the life, that death cannot assail.
The tidings of salvation dear, comes to our ears from hence:
The fortress of our faith is here, Ephesi. 6. 16.
and shield of our defense.
Then be not like the hog that has Math. 7. 6.
a pearl at his desire,
And takes more pleasure of the trough 2. Peter 2. 22
and wallowing in the mire.
Read not this book in any case,. Math. 6. 22.
but with a single eye:
Read not but first desire Gods grace, Psalm. 119. 27 73.
to understand thereby.
Pray still in faith with this respect, Jude. 20.
to fructify therein,
That knowledge may bring this effect, Psalm. 119. 11
to mortify thy sin.
Then happy thou in all thy life, Joshua. 1. 8. Psalm. 1. 1. 2. Psalm. 94 12. 13
what so to thee befalles:
Yea, double happy shall thou be, when God by death thee calls.
O Gracious God and most merciful Father, which have vouchsafed us the rich
and precious Jewel of thy holy word, assist us with thy spirit, that it may be
written in our hearts to our everlasting comfort, to reform us, to renew us
according to thine own Image, to build us up, and edify us into the perfect
building of thy Christ, sanctifying and increasing in us all heavenly virtues.
Grant this O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
How to take profit in reading of the holy Scriptures.
(...)
1 Earnestly and usually pray unto God that he will vouchsafe to Teach the ^^y
of his statutes. Give understanding. Direct in the path of his commandments At
the least twice every day this exercise be kept. Psalm. 1^9. Deuteronomy. 11. v. 19.

2 Diligently keep such order of reading the scriptures and prayer as may
stand with his calling and state of life, So that The time once appointed
hereunto after a good entry, be no other wise employed. Superstition be
avoided. At one other time that be done, which is left undone at any time.
Luke. 9. v. 62. Esai. 29. v. 36. Ephe. 5. v. 1^.

3 Understand to what end and purpose the Scriptures serve, which were written,
to Teach, that we may learn truth. Improve, that we may be kept from error.
Correct, that we may be driven from vice. Instruct, that we may be settled in
the way of well doing. Comfort, that in trouble we may be confirmed in patient
hope. 2. Tim. 3. v. 16. 17. To. 15. v. 4.

4 Remember that scriptures contain matter concerning. Religion ^ the right
worshipping of God, as Faith in one God ^^e state of mankind, by. -- The
Church and the government thereof he word of God written in the testament
Sacraments The end and general judgment of the Father Son Holy Ghost 1.
Creation 2. fall and sin. 3. Regeneration in Christ
Before Christ.
Since Christ. Old.
Before Christ. Since Christ. New.
Good. Wicked.

Commonwealths and governments of people, by Magistrates Good. Evil.
Peace and war. Prospertie and Diagnes. Subjects Quiet. Disordered.

Families and things that belong to household, in which are Husbands. Wives.
Parents. Children. Masters. Servants. Godly blessed. Ungodly plagued.

The private life and doings of every man in -- Wisdom and folly. Love and
hatred. sobernes and incontinency. M^^th and sorrow. (...) and silence. ^r^de
and ^^militie. Covetousness ^ liberality.
The common life of all men, as Riches poverty. Nobility, Favor. Labor and
idleness.
5 Refuse al sense of Scripture contrary to the Articles of Christian faith,
co^ed in the common Creed. First and second table of Gods commandments
6 Ma^^eand consider ^e 1. Coherence of the text, how it hangs together. 2.
Course of times and ages, with such things as belong unto them. 3. Manner of
speech proper to the scriptures. 4. Agreement that one place of Scripture has
with another, whereby that which seems dark in one, is made easy in another.
7 Take opportunity to Read Interpreters, if ^e be able. Conferte with such
as can open the Scripture^ Acte^. 8. v. 30. 31* ^^. Hear preaching, and to
prove by the scripture that which is taught Act. 17^^ 1^



THE NAMES AND ORDER OF ALL THE BOOKS OF THE Old and New Testament, with the
number of their Chapters.
Genesis has Chapters 50 Proverbs Chapters 31 Exodus 40 Ecclesiastes 12
Leuiticus 27 The Song of Solomon ^ N^mbers 36 De^^eronomie 34 Isaiah 66 Joshua
24 Jeremiah 52 Judges 21 Lamentations 5 Ruth 4 Ezekiel 48 1. Samuel 31 Daniel
1^ 2. Samuel 24 Hose^ 14 1. Kings 22 Joel 3 2. Kings 25 Amos 9 1. Chronicles ^9
Obadiah 1 2. Chronicles The prayer of Manasse^, Apocrypha. 36 Jonah 4 Micha 7
Nahum 3 Ezra 9 Habakkuk 3 Nehemiah 13 Zephaniah 3 Ester 10 Haggai 2 Job 42
Zachariah 14 Psalms 150 Malachi 4

The books called Apocrypha.
1. Esdras 9 Jeremiah ^ 2. Esdras 16 The song of the three children Tobit 14
Iudeth 16 The story of Susan^^ The rest of Ester 6 The Idol Beland the Dragon
Wisdom 1^ Ecclesiasticus 51 1. Machabees 16 Baruch with the Epistle of 2.
Machabees 15

The books of the New Testament.
Mathewe 28 2. Thessalonians 3 Mark 16 1. Timotheus 6 Luke 24 2. Timotheus 4
John 21 Titus 3 The Acts 28 Philemon 1 The Epistle to the Romans. 16 To the
Hebrews 13 The Epistle of Iame^ 5 1. Corinthians 16 1. Peter 5 2. Corinthians
13 2. Peter 3 Galatians 6 1. John 5 Ephesians 6 2. John 1 Philippians 4 3. John
1 Colossi^ns 4 Jude 1 1. Thessalonians 5 Revelation ^^

The Table.
A brief Table of the whole Scripture of the Bible, divided into the old
Testament and the new: which Book is of diverse natures: some Legal, some
Historical, some sapientiall, and some Prophetical. The old teaches by
Figures and Ceremonies, that the Law was given terribly in lightning and
thundering, to induce the people to the observance thereof by fear: The new
Testament came in more gloriously, with the gentle name of the Gospel and good
tidings, to enduce men to observe it by love.

Books Legal, be so named, wherein the Laws and judgments of God be
pronounced, by his own mouth, and they be five Books: which is to say.
page 1 Which does treat of the beginning of the world, and of all creatures:
of the Deluge, of Noes ship, and of the confusion of tongues: of the election
of Gods people, and of the going down of the people into Egypt. Chapters. 50.
Genesis. 5 Shows the ten plagues of Pharaoth, and of the departing of the
children of Israel out of Egypt, of the ten precepts and judgments, and of
the instruction of Gods people, of the Arc of Gods covenant, and of the
Tabernacle, of the Altar, and of Aarons vestures. chapters. 40. Exodus. 8 It
does treat of sacrifices and oblations to be offered, of the pot and of the
vestures of Aaron, of the order and ministry of the Levites. chapters. 27.
Leuiticus 10 It treats of the numbering of the people of the Tribes of Israel,
of the prophecy of Balaam, of the mansions in wilderness. chapters. 26.
Numeri. 12 Does report again those things that were done in the former four
Books. chapters. 34. Deuteron^.

Books Historical, be so called, wherein Histories of diverse acts be
expressed: and there be of them Books nineteen.
page Iosuah. Which does treat of the passing over the flood of Jordan, and
of the subversion of the Kingdoms that were the Jews adversaries, of the
bringing in of Gods people into the land of Behest, and of the division of the
land. Chapters. 24. 15 Judges. Which treats of Princes and Judges, and of the
defense of the people of Israel, and of their conquestes and triumphs had
against their enemies. Chapters. 21. 17 Ruth. Which treats of the matrimony
betwixt Boos and Ruth, of whom Christ did spring. Chapters. 4. 19 Samuel. 1.
Which treats of the governance of the people of Israel by Judges, and of the
election of King Saul, of his governance, of his acts, and of his death.
Chapters. 31 19 Samuel. 2 Which treats how king David governed the people,
and of his deeds. Chapters. 24. 21 Samuel. 3. Treats of King David's death and
of the succession of his rule, and of Salomons acts, and of other Kings of
Judah and Israel. Chapters. 22. 24 Kings. 4. Of the fall of the Kingdom of
Judah, and Israel for the sins of their Kings, of the captivity of the people,
and of the overthrow of the City and Temple. Chapters. 25. 26 Chronicles.
Paralipomenon. It treats of the genealogy of King David, where is also a
rehearsal of his election, of his governance and of his acts. Chapters. 29.
28 2. Wherein is reharsed again the governance of the people by Solomon and
other Kings of Judah and Israel. Chapters. 36. 30 Esdras. Which treats how the
people of Israel were brought out of Captivity from Babylon, and of the
instruction of the people so returned by Esdras Doctor of the Laws. Chapters.
10. 35 36 2. Whose author is Nehemias, which treats of the building again of
the Walls and of the City of Jerusalem, and of the correction of evil men,
and of the disorders that rose in the absence of Nehemias. Chapters. 13. Esdras
64 3. Which Book is Apocriphus, wherein he repeateth things other where
written, about the captivity of Babylon in the time of Josias: some things that
chanced in the time of Zorobabel and Esdras, and there is also a solution to a
certain question. Chapters. 9. Esdras. 65 4. Which Book is also Apocriphus,
wherein he put certain visions and dreams over the people of the Jews; of
their delivery and captivity, and of the restoring of the Temple in Jerusalem.
Chapters. 16. Esdras. 66 Which treats of his probation and diverse virtues of
the ministry, of R^phael the Archangell, and of the instruction of his child,
and of the honesty of Matrimony. Chapters. 14. Tobie. 67 Which does treat of
the besieging of Bethulia, and of the people of Israel, of the honesty and
virtue of Judith, of the slaughter of Holofernes, and delivery of the people of
Israel. Chapters. 16. Judith. 37 and 69 Which treats of the cruelty of Haman
and of his hanging, so procured by the prudence and humility of Esther, and of
the promoting of Mardocheus, and delivery of the Jews. Chapters. 16. Esther.
38 Which treats of the patience of Job, and his disputation that he had with
his friends of Gods providence, and of the last rising again. Chapters. 42.
Job. Psalms of David. 150. 113 80 1. Which treats of the battles between
the Jews and the people of Persia, and of the delivery of the people by
Mattathias, Judas, Ionathas,, and Simon. Chapters. 16. Machabees. 81 2. Wherein
be repeated again some things which be in the first Book, and of the
tribulation of the people, of the constancy of the seven brethren, and of
their mother, and of the delivery of the people by Judas Maceabeus. Chapters.
15. Machabees

Books Sapientiall be so called, for in them Prudence and true wisdom is
taught, and there be of them, Books five.
^^g. Proverbs. Which does treat of instruction and nurture of such as begin
to serve God. chapters. 31. 41 Eccl^siastes. Which treats of the vanity of
the world, of the hate to vice, and of the going forward in Gods ways.
chapters. ^2. 43 Canticl^s. Which treats of the perfection of the righteous
man, of the contemplation of a holy s^ule, and of the conjunction of Christ and
his Church. chapters. 8. 44 Sapience. Which treats how Prelates should
govern, and of the construation of Justice, and of the dispraise of Idols, of
the coming and passion of Christ which is the true wisdom. chapters. 19. 69
Ecclesiasticus. Which treateh of the obedience of subjects: of the description
of good manners, of the worthiness of wisdom, and of the commendations of
virtuous men. chapters. 51. 71

Books Prophetical, be such wherein are showed, and prophesied things to
come, and there be in number of th^se Books eighteen.
page Psalter. Which treats of the divinity of Christ, of his humanity, all
other mysteries of the same, and o^ diverse points of Christian Religion, and be
in number. 150 113 Esaias. Which treats of the faults of the Jews, of Christ's
incarnation, and of his passion; of the vocation of the Gentiles, of the reign
of Iud^ and Israel. chapters. 66. 45 Jeremy. Which treats of the captivity
of the Jews, and of 49 the destruction of Jerusalem, of his lamentation for
the destruction of the city. chapters. 52. The lamentation has chapters. 5.
53 The lamentations of Jeremy. 75 Which treats of the words which be read to
the captives of Babylon, how he foretold the return of the Jews, and of their
last fortunes. chapters. 6. Baruch. 54 Which treats of the visions, and of
the Jews sins and of the fall of Jerusalem, and of the reparation.
chapters. 48. Ezechiel. 57 75 76 Which treats of the Monarchy of the world,
and of the change of times, of the power and eternity of Christ's Kingdom, of
the story of Susanna, of the destruction of B^ll, and of the Dragon. chapters.
14. Daniel. 58 Which tells of the Idolatay of the people of Israel, figured
by a common Harlot, of the ouerflow of sins, and of the warning to the Jews
to turn to the God of Israel. Chapters. 14. Osel. 59 Which speaks of the
destruction of the people of Israel by the Catterpiller, the Grasshopper and the
Locustes, of their inducement to penance, and of the day of doom. chapters. 3.
Joel. 59 He speaks of the sins of the Jews and Gentiles, of Gods wrath to
fall upon them, and of moving them to pennace, and prophesies of the final
destruction. chapters. 9. Amos. 60 Which cries out and threatens the
destruction of Edome and Esau. chapters. 1. Abdias. 60 He speaks of the
ship-wracke, and in this figuring before the passion of Christ, he calls
back the world to repentance, under the name of Niniuie, and prefigureth the
salvation of the Gentiles. chapters. 4. Jonas. 61 Which prophesies of the
destruction of Samaria, and of the captivity and destruction of the chief men
of Israel, and of the false Prophets, and of the unkindness and malice of
them. chapters. 7. Micheas. 91 Which speaks of Gods wrath and of his grievous
vengeance against Niniuie, which did penance for their sins at the preaching
o^ ^o^as, afterward they were wrapped in great offenses. chapters. 3. Nahum.
Abakuk. Which speaks of the disputation which the Prophet had of God, and of
this world, and how that good men be trodden down, and wicked men prosper.
Chapters. 3. 62 Sophonia. Which speaks of the Judgment of God against the
Jews, and to strange nations, and of the comforting of the people of Israel.
Chapters. 3. 62 Aggei. He Prophesies of the reuersion of the people of the
Jews, and of the building again of the Temple, and of the calling back
again of the City. Chapters. 2. 62 Zachary. Which speaks of the delivery
of the Jews, and of their punishment by their enemies, and of the humility of
Christ's coming, and of his Passion. chapters. 14. 63 Malachie. Who speaks of
the abiection of the children of Israel, and of the sacrifices, and of Chrsts
coming. chapters. 4. 64 The song of the three children. 75 The story of
Susanna. 76 The Story of Bell and the Dragon. ^6 The prayer of Manasses. 76 A
necessary Table. 77

The new Testament in like manner.
Books Legal, as it were, where Christ's Laws be expressed, and contains
four Books or Gospells.
page A Table with the description of the holy land. 85 Mathewe. Who
principally treats of the acts of Christ, of his humanity, of his death,
resurrection and ascension. Chapters. 28. 86 Mark. Wherein chiefly is treated
of the fortitude of Christ, and does repeat most things of Mathewe. Chapters.
16. 89 Luke. Which speaks chiefly of the Annuntiation of the blessed virgin,
and of Christ's acts, death, and resurrection. Chapters. 24. 90 92 In whom
Christ's divinity is chiefly showed, and other acts of his divine power.
chapters. 21. John.

Books Historical, showing the Acts of the Apostles, and is one Book.
93 Wherein Saint Luke declares the sending of the holy Ghost after his
visible Ascension into heaven, and of the acts of the Apostles, especially of
Paul, wherein is also set out as it were the young age of the Church in her
first growth chapters 28. Acts of the A^ostles. 96 The order of Times. 99
Wherein Paul does revoke the Romans from the errors of the Gentiles, declaring
the order of their justification, what should proceed and what should follow
their justification. chapters. 16. Romans. 100 1. Wherein he does call back
some that were deceived of false Apostles and Philosophers by their eloquence:
some that were deceived by the judicial observation of the Law, he calls
them back to true faith, and to the wis^dome of God. chapters. 16. Corinthians
101 2. Wherein Paul upon their conversion and repentance, praises and
comfort them. chapters. 13. Corinthians 102 Wherein Paul calls again such
as were deceived by false Prophets, that they should return back to the Lord
and to their ceremonies, and wills them to come again to the true faith of
the Gospel. chapters. 6. Galathians. 103 Wherein the Apostle praises the
Ephesians, which did persist constantly in the faith of the Gospel received.
chapters ^. Ephesians. 103 Wherein the Apostle praises the Philippians, for
that after they had received the word of truth, they did not receive the false
Apostles. chapters. 4. Philippians. 104 Wherein Paul blames the Colossians,
for that they Collossians. were seduced by the false Apostles, and exhorts
them to return to the verity of the Gospel. chapters. 4. Thessalonia. 1.
Wherein he does commend the Thessalonians, which receiving the word of truth,
though they suffered persecution of their own kindred yet they did persist in
the faith, nor would receive the false Apostles. chapters. 5. 104 Thessalonia.
2. Wherein the Apostle instructed them of the last times, of the coming of the
persecution of Antichrist and of his advancement and overthrow. chapters. 3.
104

Books Sapientiall be named these wherein the wisdom of Christ is expressed
by examples and precepts of God^y liui^g, given by his Apostles, and be Books
^n ^n^,
page Timothy. 1. Wherein Paul instructs him of the order and office of
Bishops and Deacons, and of all Ecclesiastical discipline. chapters. 6. 105
Timothy. 2. Wherein Paul does exhort him to the crown of Martyrdom, and
does inform him of all the rules of the Catholic verity, and what shall be
done in the last days, and of his own suffering. chapters. 4. 105 Titus.
Wherein Paul does instruct Titus his disciple, of the constituting and
ordering of Priests or Elders, and of all spiritual conversation, and of the
eschewing of heretics. chapters. 3. 106 Philemon. Wherein the Apostle
commends Philemon of his faith in Christ, and of his charity to the godly,
and he prays him to deal gently with Onesimus his servant, and to entertain
him friendly. 106 Hebrews. Wherein the Apostle shows the weakness and the
abolishment of Moses Law, and the perfection of the doctrine of the Gospel,
and that Christ is true God and man, and a Mediator between God and man.
chapters. 13. 107 James. Wherein James gives exhortation unto patient
suffering, and that there is no exception of pesons before God, and does also
open the hearts that come by an evil tongue, 108 he forbids wars and
dissentions, he rebuke the rich that be uncharitable, and does s^^re men to
virtue. Chapters. 5. 108 1 Wherein Peter gives thanks unto God, which by the
death of his son, did mercifully save all mankind, and does instruct to
good life: diverse states of men. chapters. 5. Peter. 109 2 In which the
Apostle induces the believers to hold the true faith, he does note and
condemn the falsenesse of heretics, and does describe the second coming of
Christ. Chapters. 3. Peter. 109 1 In which St. John does testify of the word
of truth and life, exhorting ^en to confess their sins, assuming that we
have Jesus Christ an advocate with the Father, dissuading men from the love of
the world, and persuading men to love God and their neighbors. chapters. 5.
John. 110 2 Wherein he commends the elect Lady and her sons and does exhort
them to broth^^^y l^ue, and does admon^sh them to eschew heretics. chapters.
1. John. 3 In this he pra^seth the godliness of his beloved Gaius, which he
extended unto strangers, and he does exhort him to persevere still in that
godliness and well doing. chapters. 1. John. 110 In which the Apostle does
admonish all men of their own salvation, and he does bring in by the way the
alteration that was betwixt Mi^h^el and the d^uill, and does detest the life of
heretics. chapters. 1. Jude.

Books Prophetical.
page 111 Which treats of Revelations showed unto John by an Angel in the
I Will of Pathmos, of the tribulation which the Church of Christ did then suffer,
and prophecieth also of such tribulations which the Church shall suffer
hereafter, and especially in the time of Antichrist, and of the pun^shments of
them which be damned, and of the rewards of the elect. chapters. 22. Apocalipse

A BRIEF COLLECTION OF THE CONTENTS OF ALL THE CHAPTERS, AS WELL OF THE OLD AS
NEW Testament.
The first Book of Moses, called in Hebrewe B^reschit and in Greek Genesis:
has fifty Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
_1 HOW Heaven, Earth, the light, the Chapters. 50.
Firmament, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and fishes in the Sea, and all
beasts and fowls, were made by the word of God, and how Man was also created.

2 The hollowing of the Saboth day, the ^ree of knowledge is forbidden, Adam
names all creatures: Hena is created, and marriage is ordained.

3 The Serpent deceives the woman: the Serpent, woman and man, are cursed and
driven out of Paradise: Christ the blessed seed of the woman is promised.

4 Kain kills his righteous brother Habel; Kain is cursed, The Contents of
Genesis.
and d^spaireth, the generation of Henoch, Mathuiale, Tubal, Lamech, Sheth, and
Enosh.

5 The Genealogy of Adam and other Fathers, and the years of their lives,
unto Noah and his children.

6 The cause of the flood is the sin of man, Noah the just is preserved in
the Ark with all kind of beasts.

7 Noah with them that were with him, enters into the Arc: the ^loud
destroys all the rest upon the earth.

8 The waters of the floods being diminished, Noah sends forth the Ra^en, and
the Dove: Noah goes out of the Arc, and offers sacrifice unto God.

9 God blesses Noah and his sons, God gives liberty Chapters. 50.
of meat, and forbids the eating of blood, he promises no more to destroy
the world with water, and gives the rainebowe for a token thereof.

10 The increase of mankind by Noah and his sons, the beginning of Cities,
Countries, and Nations, after the flood.

11 The building of the Tower of Babel, the confusion of tongues, the
generation of Sem the son of Noah unto Abram, which goes with Lot to Haran.

12 Abram is blessed of God, and goes with Lot to the land of Canaan, which
God promised to give to him and his seed: Abram goes into Egypt, his wife
calls herself his sister, for whom Pharao is plagued.

13 Abram and Lot depart out of Egypt, Abram deuideth the land and cattle
with Lot his brothers son: the promise made to Abram is renewed.

14 Lot after the spo^le of Sodom is taken prisoner, Abram The Contents of
Genesis.
delivers him: Melchisede^ offers gifts to Abram.

15 The Lord is Abrams defense and reward, God promises seed to Abram, and he
believed and was ^ified: the land of Canaan is ^et again promised to Abram.

16 Sara g^^^th Abram leave to take Hagar her maid to wise, Hagar despises
her mistress, and being evil entreated, runs away from Sara, an Angel
comfort her, willing her to turn again, and names her first c^^lde
Ishmael.

17 Abram is called Abraham: the land of Canaan is promised unto Abraham the
fifth time, Circum^^sion is ordained: Sarai is named Sarah, Izhac is promised
again unto Abraham, Abraham Circumciseth him self, Ishmael, and his household
servants.

18 Christ is promised to all Nations, the destruction of Sodom is declared to
Abraham, Abraham prays for them.

19 Lot receives two Angels into his house, the filthy lusts of the
Sodomites, Sodom is destroyed.

20 Abraham dwells as a ^tranger in the land of Gerar.

21 Izhac is borne, Hagar is cast out with her young son Ishmael, the Angel
comfort her.

22 The faith of Abraham is tried in offering his son Chapters. 50.
Izhac: Izhac is a figure of Christ.

23 Abraham bewaileth Sarahs death, he buyeth the field for her burial of
Ephron the Hittite, Sarah is laid in her grave.

24 Abraham causes his servant to swear to take a wise for Izhac of his own
kindred.

25 Abraham takes Ketura to wise and begets many children: the patrimony
given to Izhak and guiftes to the children of his concubines: the birth of
Ia^ob and Esau.

26 Abimelech rebukes Izhak for ^alling his wife his sister: the atonement
between Abimelech and Izhak.

27 Jacob s^^^^^e^h ^is fathers blessing from Esau by his mothers counsa^le,
Esau hates Jacob. Rebecca sends Jacob aw^^ into ^aran to his Uncle Laban.

28 Izhak f^rbiddeth Jacob to take a wise of the Canaanites: Jacob sets up a
Pillar and makes a vow.

29 Jacob comes to his Uncle Laban, and serves him seven years for his
daughter Rahel. Lea was brought to his bed in steed of Rahel.

30 Rahel and Lea being both barren, give their maids to The Contents of
Genesis.
the^r husband, God enricheth Laban for Jacobs sake, and blessed Jacob with
^lentie.

31 Labans children do grudge against Jacobs wealth, Rahel steals her
fathers goods, Laban pursues Jacob.

32 God comfort Jacob by a vision of Angels, Jacob w^estleth with the Angel
who named him Israel.

33 Esau meets his brother Jacob, and is agreed with him: Jacob bu^eth a
possession, and builds an Altar unto God.

34 The ra^^shing of Dina Jacobs daughter by Shechem the son of Hamor, who
requires her in mariadge for his son: the sons of Jacob do guilefully
require the Schechemites to be circumcised, the whoredom is revenged by Simeon
and Leui Jacobs sons: Jacob reproves his sons.

35 Jacob at Gods commandment goes up to Bethell, and burieth his images
under an Oak: Rahel dies in travail of Beniamine.

36 The wifes of Esau. Jacob and Esau are enriched. Esau departs from Jacob,
and dwells in mount Seir: the Pedigree of Esau.

37 Joseph tells his dreams, and is hated of his brethren, Chapters. 50.
Jacob being persuaded that his soune Joseph was dead, bewaileth him.

38 The marriage of Judah, the trespass of Er and Onan, and the vengeance of
God that came therefore.

39 Joseph is sold to Putiphar, God prospers Joseph and blesses Putiphar for
Joseph's sake, Joseph does withstand the temptation of his mistress: he is
falsely accused and cast into prison, where God shows him savor.

40 Joseph expounds the dreams of the two prisoners, the truth whereof
appeared at the birth day of Pharaoh.

41 Joseph expounds Pharoes* dreams of Kine and Ears, he is made ruler over
all Egypt, the dearth begins in all lands.

42 Jacob sends Joseph's brethren into Egypt, to buy Corn, Joseph knows
them, and ^rieth them, Simeon remains in prison, the other return to their
father to fetch Benjamin, Jacob is loath to let Benjamin go, but at the last
The Contents of Genesis.
he is content.

43 Jacob suffers Benjamin to depart with his children.

44 Joseph commanndeth his cup to be put in the Sack of Benjamin: the cup is
found in the Sack of Benjamin. Joseph accuses his brethren of theft: Judah
offers himself to be bound for his brother Benjamin.

45 Joseph makes himself known to his brethren, he comfort them, and
shows that he was sent thither by Gods providence.

46 God assures Jacob of his journey into Egypt.

47 Jacob comes before Pharaoh to whom Pharaoh gives the land of Gossen.

48 Joseph with his two sons visits his sick father. Jacob rehearses Gods
promises.

49 Jacob blesses all his sons by name, and shows them what is to come, he
appoints the place of his burial.

50 Jacob is honorably buried. Joseph forgiueth his brethren all injuries done
unto him.

The second Book of Moses in Latin with a Greek word called Exodus, and in
Hebrewe Vellesech^moth: has forty Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THE Children of Jacob which came into Aegipt: the Chapters. 40.
new Pharaoh goes about to oppress them in vain, by ouerburdning of them, by
murder and drowning of their men Children: the Midwiues have pity on them,
and be rewarded of God.

2. Moses is borne and cast into the Flages: he is taken up of Pharaoes
Daughter and delivered to his own Mother to be nurssed.

3. Moses keeps the sheep of Iethro his Father in law: God appears to him
in a Bush, and sends him to deliver the Children of Israel.

4. God gives three signs unto Moses, which do declare that he was sent of
God: Moses takes his leave of his Father The Contents of Exodus.
in law.

5. Moses and Aaron do their message to Pharao, who will not suffer the
Children of Israel to depart, but oppresses them more and more.

6. God renueth his promise concerning the deliverance of the Israelites.

7. Moses and Aaron speak to Pharao, they turn the Rod into a Serpent, and
the Water into blood, and Pharaoes Sorcerers do the like. And Pharaoes heart
is hardened the more.

8. The plague of Frogs, which die at the prayer of Moses. Moses prays
again, but Pharaoes heart is hardened.

9. The Moraine of Beases, the plague of Botches and Soars. The horrible
Hail, Thunder, and Lightnings.

10. The plague of Grasshoppers. Pharao confesses his sin. Pharao forbids
Moses to come any more in his presence. Chapters. 40.


11. The Lord commands the Hebrews to rob the Aegiptians. The death of the
first borne of all things in Aegipt is signified.

12. The Lord ordains the Passover. The Number that went out of Egypt, and
how long they continued in Egypt.

13. The first borne are sanctified unto the Lord. Children must be taught how
their Fathers were delivered out of Egypt.

14. Pharaos heart is hardened and he pursues the Israelits.

15. Moses with the men and women sing praises unto God for their deliverance.

16. The Israelites come into the Deserts of Sin, Manna is reserved for a
Remembrance unto their Posterity.

17 The Israelites come into Rephidim. Moses holds up his hands in prayer,
and the Amaleckites are overcome.

18. Iethro Moses Father in law, brought his Wife and The Contents of Exodus.
Children unto him.

19. The People are commanded to be sanctified.

20. The ten Commandments of God are declared unto the People. Gods of Silver
and Gold are again forbidden.

21. Judicial and civil Ordinances appointed by God touching servitude,
stealing of men, man slaughter, cursing of Parents, brawling, punishment of
like with like, and of a goaring Ore and such like.

22. The Laws of God concerning Theft, Damage, Lending, Borrowing, entising of
Maids, Witchcraft, Idolatry, supporting of Widows, Strangers, and
Fatherless, Usury, Reverence to Magistrates.

23. A multitude is not to be followed in evil, the reward of them that keep
the commandments.

24. Moses offered up Sacrifice unto the Lord, and sprinkled the People with
the blood of the Covenant. The People promise obedience unto the Lord.

25. The voluntary gifts for making the Tabernacle.

26 The form of the Tabernacle and furniture thereof.

27. The form of the Altar of burnt Sacrifice, the fashion Chapters. 40.
of the entrance of the Tabernacle, the Oil of the Lamp.

28. The Lord calls Aaron and his Sons to the Priesthood, and the form of
their Garments is described.

29 The manner of the consecrating of the Priests, of the the two Lambs of one
year old duly to be offered.

30. The form of the Altar, of Incence, the sum that the Israelites should
pay to the Tabernacle.

31. The Sabbath day is the sign of our Sanctification.

32. The Israelites worship the Golden Calfe, Moses prays for the Sin of
the People.

33. The Lord sends an Angel before his People, the People sorrow because
the Lord denies to go up with them.

34. The description of God, after the fast of forty days: Moses comes down
from the Mountain and speaks to The Contents of Exodus.
the People with a covered face.

35. The Sabbath is commanded to be kept.

36, The great readiness of the People in offering toward the building of the
Tabernacle.

37. The making and framing of the Arc of Witness.

38. The Altar of the whole burnt Offerings, the Brazen Lauer, the sum of
that which the People offered.

39. The apparel of Aaron and his Sons, all that the Lord commanded was
done and finished. Moses blesses the Peole.

40. The Tabernacle is reard up, the glory of the Lord appears in a cloud
covering the Tabernacle.

The third Book of Moses called in the Hebrewe Vaicrah, and in the Latin
Leuiticus: has twenty seven Chapters.
The contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. OF whole burnt offerings for particular persons, the manner to offer whole
burnt Offerings, as well Chapters, 27.
of ^ullocks, as of Sheep and Birds.

2. The order of meat offerings: all meat offerings must be seasoned with salt.

3. The order of peace offerings, of Sheep, of Lambs, of Goats.

4. The offerings for the sins of the Priests: of the Congregation, the
Princes, the private persons: sin done of ignorance.

5. Of Oaths: the cleansing of him that touches unclean things: the purgation
of an Oath, and of sin done by ignorance. The Contents of L^uiticus.


6. The offering for sins which are done willingly: the offering of Aaron and
his ^onnes.

7. Trespass offerings, sin offerings, of Peace offerings, the sat and blood may
not be eaten.

8. The C^nsecration of Aaron and his Sons, and of the annoynting of the
Tabernacle.

9. The first offerings of Aaron. Aaron blesses the people: the ^lory of the
Lord ^s showed.

10. Nadab and Abihu are slain: Israel mourns for them: the Priests are
forbidden w^^^.

11. Of Beasts, Fishes and Birds, which ^e clean, and which be unclean.

12. A law how Women should be purged after their deliverance.

13. The Priests must have a consideration and judge Chapters. 27.
who are Lepers: of the leprous Garment.

14. The cleansing of the Leper, and of the house that he is in.

15. The manner of purging the uncleanness both of Men and Women.

16. What Aaron must do, of the escape Goat, the cleansing of the Sanctuary.

17. All sacrifices must be brought to the door of the Tabernacle: to De^^ls
they may not offer: they may not ^at blood.

18. The Israelites may not walk after the m^^ner of the ^giptians nor
Canaanites, what degree of kindred may marry together.

19. A repetition of sundry Laws and Ordinances: a consideration of the poor.

20. They that give of their seed to Molech must die: against such as seek
after Sorcerers.

21 At what Funerals the Priests may be present, how pure the Priests ought to
be touching themselves and their families. The Contents of Leuiticus.


22 Who ought to abstain from eating the things that were offered: how, what,
and when they should be offered.

23 Of the holy days: of the Sabbath, the Passover, the feasts of unleavened
bread.

24 The Oil for the Lamps: he that blasphemeth must be stoned: he that
kills shall be killed.

25 The Sabbath of the seventh year, and the year of Iubile.

26 They are blessed that keep the commandments of God, and cursed are they
that keep them not.

27 Of diverse vows, and redemption of the same: all Tithes are due to the Lord.

The fourth Book of Moses called in the Hebrew Vaiedabbar, and in the Latin
Numery, has thirty six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1 MOses and Aron, with the twelve Princes of Tribes, Chapters, 36.
are commanded of the Lord to number them that are meet for war, The Levites
are exempted for the se^^^ce of the Tabernacle.

2 The order of the Tents, the heads of the kinreds of Israel.

3 The Levites go not to battle, but minister in the Sanctuary, they pitch
their Tents next to the habitation.

4 The Office of the Levites.

5 The Leprous and polluted persons, shall be put out of the Tents, the
satisfaction for sin, the Law of Jealousy.

6 The Law of consecration of the Nazarites: how the Priests shall bless the
people. The Contents of Numbers.


7 The offering of the heads and Princes of Israel, in the dedication of the
Tabernacle and the Altar: the Lord speaks to Moses out of the mercy seat.

8 The order of the Lamps, the ^orme of the Candlestick: the cleansing and
offering of the Levites.

9 What time the clean and what time the vncle^^e ought to keep the
p^ss^ouer: the cloud covering the ^abernacle leads the Israelites through the
wildern^.

10 The Trumpets of ^^^^er, and their use: Ho^^b ref^seth to go with Moses.

11 The people murmureth* they desire ^l^^^: the^ Manna: it ra^^eth ^uailes,
the (...) are (...)

12 Aron and Miriam geudge against Moses, Miriam is stricken Chapters. 36.
with Leprosy and healed at the prayer of Moses.

13 Certain men are sent to search the land of Canaan: They bring of the fruit
of the land.

14 The people murmr against Moses and Aron: they would have stoned Caleb and
Joshua.

15 What manner of offerings the Israelites should offer when they enter into
the land of promise: the man stoned.

16 The rebellion of Chorah, Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth swallowed up
quick.

17 Arons rod buddeth and bears blossoms, whereby his priest hood is
confirmed against the rebellions people.

18 The office of the Levites, the Tithes and first fruits must be given them:
Arons heritage.

19 Of the ashes of the red Cow, the water of expiation is made to wash away
diverse uncleanness.

20 Miriam the sister of Moses and Aron dies, Moses and Aron shall not enter
into the land of promise.

21 Israel vanquished King Arad and a Cananite: the fiery Serpents are sent to
sting the murmuring people. The Contents of Numbers.


22 ^ing Balac sends twice for Balaam to curse the Isra^lites, the Lord
forbids him to go, the Angel rebukes him, and Balaams Ass speaks.

23 Balaam causes seven Altars to be built* God teaches him what to answer:
in st^^de of cursing, he blesses the Israelites.

24 Balaam Prophesies prosperously of the Kingdom of Israel* and of the
coming of Christ.

25 For the fornication of the people committed with the daughters of Moab, God
commands the chief rulers to be hanged, Phi^e^s kills Zimri and Cosbi.

26 The children of Israel are numbered in the plain of Moab from twenty years
and upward.

27 The law of the heritage of the daughters of Zalphaad, Moses prays for a
governor of the people, and Joshua is appointed.

28 What must be offered on every feast day.

29 What must be offered the eight first days of the seventh month.

30 Of vows, when they shall be kept* and when not. Chapters. 36.


31 The Madianites are slain and their Cities, burnt Balaam als^ is slain:
only the virgins are reserved alive.

32 Moses gives to the Rube^tes, Gadites, and to the half (...) o^ Manasses
their portion of their in heritance beyond (...)

33 The two and forty iourneis of Israel are numbered: they are commanded to
kill the Canaanites. The Contents of Numbers.


34 The costs and borders of the land of promise: certain men are assigned to
deu^de the land.

35 The law of man slaughter: for one man's witness shall no man be condemned.

36 An order for the marriage of the daughters of Zalphaad: the ^n^eritance
could not be given from one Tribe to another.

The fifth Book of Moses called in Hebrew Elle haddebarim, and in Latin
Deuter^nomium, and has thirty four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1 MOses reproves the people for their in^redulitie. Chapters. 34.


2 A rehearsal of the benefits of God bestowed upon his people: his people
Israel is forb^dden to fight against the Edomites, Moabites, and Ammomtes:
Sehon King of Hesbon is discom^^ted.

3 Things that chanced from the two Kings Sehon and Og, The Contents of
Deuteronomie.
unto the Institution of Iosuah in Moses stead.

4 An exhortation to observe the law without adding thereto or diminishing: we
must teach the Law to our children: we ought to make no Image whereby we
might be induced to Idolatry.

5 Moses is the mean between God and the people, the Law is repeated, the
people were afraid at Gods voice, the Chapters. 34.
Lord wishes that the people would fear him: they must neither decline to the
right hand nor left.

6 An exhortation to fear God and keep his Commandments, God ought not to be
tempted.

7 The Israelites may make no conuenant with the Gentiles.

8 Moses puts the Israelites in remembrance of all the benefits which God
bestowed upon them, and the afflictions which God sent them in the wilderness,
least the forgetfulness thereof should bring them to destruction.

9 God is not good to them for their own righteousness, but for his own sake:
the two Tables are broken, Moses prays for the people.

10 The Tables are renewed and put into the Arc.

11 An exhortation to love God, and always to be mindful of his Laws and to
keep them. The Contents of Deuteronomie.


12 God commands the places of idolatry to be destroyed, God will be served
as he does appoint, and not as men do fantasy.

13 The false Prophets and the inticers to idolatry must be put to death.

14 The manner of the Gentiles in mourning for the dead may not be followed:
what meats are clean to be eaten and what not.

15 The forgiveness of debts in the seventh year: to help the poor is
commended: the freedom of servants.

16 Of Easter, Whitesuntide, and the feasts of Tabernacles: what Officers and
Judges ought to be ordained. Idolatry is forbidden.

17 The punishment of the Idolater: the election of the King.

18 The portion of the Levites* God will not leave them without a true Prophet,
the false Prophet shall be slain, and how he may be known.

19 The Towns of refuge, the punishment of him that bears false witness.

20 The exhortation of the Priest when the Israelites go to battle: peace
must first be proclaimed, the Trees that Chapters. 43.
bear fruit must not be destroyed.

21 Inquisition for murder, of the woman taken in war, the birth right
cannot be changed for affection, the disobedient child: the body may not hang
all night.

22 He commands to have care of our neighbors goods: of the wife not being
found a Virgin: the punishment of adultery.

23 What they ought to avoid when they go to war, to ^lee all kind of
whoredom, of usury, of vows.

24 Diuorcementis permited, he that is newly married is exempted from war,
mercy is to be showed toward the poor detters.

25 The beating of offenders: in what cause a woman's hand must be cut off: of
just weights and measures.

26 The offering of the first ^^uites: to what honor God prefers them which
acknowledge him to be their Lord.

27 They are commanded to write the Law upon stone for a remembrance.

28 The promise to them that obey the Commandments, the threatening of them that
disobay them. The Contents of Deuteronomie


29 The people are exhorted to observe the Commandments, the whole people from
the highest to the lowest are comprehended under Gods covenant, the punishment
of him that flattereth himself in his wickedness: the cause of Gods wrath
against his people.

30 Mercy showed when they repent: life and death is set before them: the Lord
is their life which obey him.

31 Moses preparing himself to die, appoints Iosuah to rule the people, he
gives the Law to the Levites that they should read it to the people.

32 The Song of Moses concerning Gods benefits toward the people, God
forewarneth Moses of his death.

33 There is no God like unto the God of Israel, nor any people like unto his.

34 Moses sees all the land of Canaan, he dies, Israel weepeth, Iosuah
succeeds in Moses room, the praise of Moses.

The Book of Josuah, whom the Hebrews call Ie^osuah, has twenty four
Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1 THe Lord encourages Iosuah to i^uade the land of promise, Chapters. 24.
the Lord promises to assist Iosuah if he obey his word, Iosuah commands the
people to prepare themselves to pass over Jorden, and exhorts the Rubenites
to execute their charge.

2 Rahab acknowledges the God of Israel to be the highest God.

3 Iosuah comes with the people unto Jorden, God shows by miracles that he
is with Iosuah and that he guides the people.

4 Twelve s^o^es out of the Channel be erected, for a sign^ of the drying of
Io^den.

5 Of the second Circumcision under Iosuah and wherefore it was: Manna fa^leth
and becomes scarce.

6 God gives the City of Jericho unto Iosuah, Jericho is The Contents of
Iosuah.
taken Rahab is saved, the builder again of Jericho is cursed.

7 Achan usurps of the Church jewels, Ai is searched, what things Achan had
conveyed of those which ought to have been burnt.

8 The siege and winning of Ai, the King thereof is hanged, Iosuah sets up
an Altar, he writes the Law upon st^^es and reads it to all the people.

9 Certain Kings are gathered against Iosuah* the Gabaonites do guile fully
require peace of Iosuah, the G^b^on^tes are made (...) in cu^t^^g w^ and
bearing of water.

10 F^ne Kings make war again G^b^on wh^me Iosuah discom^^tet^* the ^u^ne
s^andeth st^ll at Io^^^hs p^^^^r, the five Kings are ha^^ed.

11 ^gs are gathered against Iosuah, God ^^* delivers all the Kings unto
Iosuah, which had conspired against Chapters. 24.
him.

12 The rehearsal of the Kings which were smitten of the Israelites beyond
Jorden.

13 The Lord commands Iosuah to divide the land that remains unto the
Israelites: possession is not given unto the Tribe of Leui: Balaam is put to
death.

14 The land of Canaan was divided among the nine Tribes and the half: Caleb
requires the heritage that was promised him: Hebron was given him.

15 The lot of the Children of Judah, and the names of the Cities and villages
of the same: Calebs portion: the request of Achsah.

16 The lot or part of Ephraim: the Cananites dwells among them.

17 The portion of the half Tribe of Manasses: a portion is given to the
daughter of Zalphaad

18 The Tabernacle is set in Silo: certain are sent to divide The Contents of
Iosuah.
the land to the other seven Tribes: the lot of the Children of Benjamin.

19 The portion of Simeon, of Zabulon, of Isachar, of Aser, of Nepthali, of
Dan, the portion of Iosuah.

20 The Lord commands Iosuah to appoint Cities of refuge, the use thereof,
and their names.

21 The Cities given to the Levites in number eight and forty, the Lord
according to his promise gave the Children of Israel rest.

22 Ruben, Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasses, are sent again to their
possessions.

23 Iosuah exhorts the people that they join not themselves to the Gentiles.

24 Iosuah rehearses Gods benefits, and exhorts the people to fear: God
Iosuah dies.

The Book of Judges called in the Hebrew Sophtim, and in the Latin Iudicum:
has twenty one Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1 AFter Iosuah was dead, Judah was constituted Captain, Chapters. 21.
Adonihezek is taken, the request of Achsah, the Children of Leui, the
Canaanites are made tributaries but not destroyed.

2 The Angel rebukes the people, because they had made peace with the
Canaanites: the cause is showed why God suffered Idolaters to remain among
them.

3 The Canaanites were left to try Israel, Othoniel delivers Israel, Ahud
kills King Eglon: Samger kills the Philistims.

4 Debora judges Israel, and exhorts Barac to deliver the people: Sifera
flees, and is killed by Iael. The Contents of Judges.


5 The Song and thanksgiving of Debora and Barac after the victory.

6 Israel is oppressed of the Madianites for their wickedness: Gedeon is sent
to be their deliverer: he asked a sign.

7 The Lord commands Gedeon to send away a great part of his company: the
Madianites are discomfited by a wondrous sort: Oreb and Zeb are flame.

8 Ephraim murmureth against Gedeon: he makes an Ephod which was the cause of
Idolatry: of Gedeous sons and his death.

9 Abim^lech usurps the Kingdom, and puts his brethren to death: Ioatham
proposes a Parable.

10 Thola dies: Iaire also dies: the Israelites are punished for their
sins, they cry unto God and he has pity on them.

11 Iphtah being chased away by his brethren, was after Chapters, 36.
made Captain over Israel: he makes a rash vow, he vanquisheth the
Ammonites, and sacrifieth his daughter according to his vow.

12 Iephtah kills two and forty thousand Ephramites: after Iephtah
succeeds Ibzan, Elon and Abdon.

13 Israel for their wickedness is oppressed of the Philistims: the Angel
appears to Manoahs wife: the Angel commanded him to sacrifie unto the Lord:
the birth of Sampson.

14 Sampson desires to have a wife of the Philistims: he kills a Lion, he
propounds a riddle, he kills thirty, his wife forsakes him and takes an
other.

15 Sampson tieth fire brands to the Foxes tails: the Philistims burn his
father in law and his wife: with a The Contents of Judges.
iawe bone of an Ass he kills a thousand men: out of a great tooth in the
Iawe God gives him water.

16 Sampson carries away the gates of Azza: he was deceived by Dalila: he
pulls down the house upon the Philistims and dies with them.

17 Michas mother according to her vow, made her son two Idols.

18 The Children of Dan send men to search the land: then come the six
hundredth and take the Gods and the Priest of Micah away: they destroy Laish.

19 Of the Leuite whose wife was villanously killed in Gi^ea: the Leuite
cutteth her in twelve pieces and sends them to the twelve Tribes.

20 The Israelites assemble in Mispah, to whom the Leuite declares his wrong:
they send for them that did the villainy.

21 The Israelites swear that they will not marry their daughters unto the
Beniamites: they flay them of Iaves Gilead, and gives their Virgins to the
Beniamites: the Beniamites take the daughters of Silo.

The Book of Ruth, contains four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1 ELimelech goes with his wife and Children into the Chapters, 4.
land of Moab, he and his sons die: Naoni and Ruth come to Bethelem.

2 Ruth gathers corn in the fields of Booz: the gentleness The Contents of
Ruth.
of Booz toward her.

3 Naomi gives Ruth counsel: she sleeps at Booz feet: he acknowledges
himself to be her kinsman.

4 Booz speaks to Ruths next kinsman touching her marriage: the ancient
custom in Israel: Booz marieth Ruth of whom he begets Obed: the generation
of Pharez.

The first Book of Samuel, otherwise called the first Book of the Kings, has
thirty and one Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1 THe Genealogy of Elkanah Father of Samuel: his two Chapters. 31.
wives, Hannah was barren and prayed to the Lord: her answer to Eli. Samuel is
borne, she does dedicate him to the Lord. The Contents of 1. Samuels


2. The song of Hannah. The sons of Eli are wicked: the new customs of the
Priests. Samuel ministers before the Lord. Eli blesses Elkanah and his wife.

3. There was no manifest vision in the time of Eli. The Lord calls Samuel
three times, and shows what shall Chapters. 31.
come upon Eli and his house: the same thing declares Samuel to Eli.

4. The Ark of the Lord is taken: Eli and his children dye.

5. The Philistims bring the Arc into the house of Dagon. The men of Ashdod
are plagued. The Arc is carried to Gath and after to Ekron.

6. The Philistims offer golden Emerods. The men of Beth shemesh are stricken
for looking into the Arc.

7. The Arc is brought to Kiriath iearim. Samuel exhorts the people to
forsake their sin and turn to the Lord. The Philistims fight against Israel
and are overcome. Samuel judges Israel.

8. Samuel makes his sons Judges over Israel, who follow not his steps. The
Israelites ask a King.

9. Saul seeking his fathers Asses, by the counsel of his servant goes to
Samuel. The Prophets called Seers.

10. Saul is anointed King by Samuel: Samuel assembleth the people, and
shows them their sins. The Contents of 1. Samuel.


11. Nahash the Ammonite warreth against Iabesh Gilead who asks help of the
Israelites: Saul promises help, the Ammonites are slain: the kingdom is
renewed.

12. Samuel declaring to the people his integrity, reproves their ingratitude.

13. Saul being disobedient to Gods commandment, is showed of Samuel that he
shall not reign.

14. Jonathan and his harness bearer, put the Philistims to flight.

15. Saul is commanded to slay Amalek, he spares Ag^g and the best things:
Samuel reproves him.

16. Samuel is reproved of God and is sent to anoint David. God regards the
heart. The Spirit of the Lord comes upon David.

17. The Philistims make war against Israel. Goliath defieth Israel: David
kills Goliath and the Philistims flee.

18 The amity of Jonathan and David. Saul would have slain David: Saul fears
David seeing that the Lord is with him.

19. Jonathan declares to David the wicked purpose of Chapters. 31.
Saul. The spirit of Prophecy comes on Saul.

20. Jonathan comfort David: they renew their league: Saul would have killed
Jonathan: Jonathan aduertiseth David by three Arrows of his fathers fury.

21. David fleeeth to Nob to Abimelech the Priest: he gets of him the show
bread to satisfy his hunger.

22. David hides himself in a Cave: many that were in trouble came unto him.

23. David chaseth the Philistims from Keila. Jonathan comfort David: Saul's
enterprise is broken in pursuing David.

24. David hid in a Cave spares Saul, he shows to Saul his innocence: Saul
acknoweledgeth his fault: he causes David to swear unto him to be favorable
to his seed.

25. Samuel dies: Nabal and Abigail: the Lord kills Nabal: Abigail and
Ahinoam David's wives: Michal is given The Contents of 1. Samuel.
to ^halti.

26 David was discovered unto Saul by the Ziphims: David takes away Saul's
spear and a Cruce of water that stood at his head: Saul confesses his sin.

27. David f^eeth to Achish King of Gath, who gives him* Ziklag: David
destroieth certain of the Philistims: Ach^sh is deceived b^ David.

28. David had the chief charge promised about Achish. Saul consulteth with a
Witch, and she causes him to speak unto Samuel who declares him ruin.

29. The Princes of the Philistims cause David to be sent back from the battle
against Israel because they mistrusted him.

30. The Amalekites burn Ziklag: David's two wives are taken prisoners: the
people would ^^one him.

31. Saul kills himself, his children are slain in the battle.

The second Book of Samuel otherwise called the second Book of Kings, has
twenty and four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. IT was told David of Saul's death: he causes him to be Chapters. 24.
slain that brought the tidings: he laments the death of Saul and Jonathan.

2. David is anointed King in Hebron.

3. Long war between the houses of Saul and David: the children of David in
Hebron. Abner turns to David: Ioab kills him.

4, B^anah and Rechab slay Ish-bosheth the son of Saul: David commands them
to be slain.

5. Daud is made King over all Israel: he takes the Fort The Contents of 2.
Samuel.
of Sion: he asks counsel of the Lord, and overcomes the Philistims twice.

6. The Arc brought forth of the house of Abinadab: Vzzah is stricken and
dies. David danceth before the Arc, and is therefore despised of his wife
Michal.

7. David would build God an house, but is forbidden by the Prophet Nathan.

8. David overcomes the Philistims, and other strange Nations, and makes
them tributaries to Israel.

9. David restores all the lands of Saul to Mephibosheth the son of
Jonathan: he appoints Ziba to see the profits of his lands.

10. The messengers of David are villanously entreated of the King of Ammon:
Ioab is sent against the Ammonites.

11. The City of Rabbah is besieged: David commits adultery: Vriah is
slain: David marieth Beth-sheba.

12. David reproved by Nathan confesses his sin. The child conceived in
adultery dies.

13. Amnon David's son defiles his sister Tamar: Tamar Chapters. 24.
is comforted by her brother Absalom: Absalom therefore kills Amnon.

14, Absalom is reconsiled to his father by the subtlety of Ioab: Absalom may
not see the Kings face.

15. The practices of Absalom to aspire to the Kingdom: David and his servants
flee: David's prayer.

16. The infidelity of Ziba. Shimei cursed David. Hushai comes to Absalon.

17. Ahithophels counsel is overthrown by Hushai.

18. David deuideth his army into three parts.

19. Ioab encourages the King: David is restored: Shimei is pardoned:
Mephibosheth meets the King: Barzillai The Contents of 2. Samuel.
departs: Israel strives with Judah.

20. Sheba raises Israel against David. Ioab kills Amasa traitorously. The
head of Sheba is delivered to Ioab. David's chief Officers.

21. Three dear years. The vengeance of the sins of Saul lights on his
seven sons which are hanged.

22. David after his* viccories praises God: the anger of God toward the
wicked.

23. The last words of David. The wicked shall be plucked up as thorns. The
names and facts of his mighty men: he desires water and would not drink.

24. David causes the people to be nombred: he repents and chooses to fall
into Gods hands: seauentie thousand perish with the pestilence.

The first Book of the Kings commonly called the third Book of the Kings,
after the reckoning of the Latinists: which third Book, and the fourth also is
but one with the Hebrews: it has twenty and two Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. A Bishag keeps David in his extreme age. Adoniiah Chapters. 22.
usurps the Kingdom: Solomon is anointed King: Adoniiah flees to the Altar.

2. David exhorts Solomon, and gives charge as concerning Ioab: Barzillai
and Shimei. The death of David: Adoniiah asks Abishag to wife.

3. Solomon takes Pharaohs daughter to wife. The Lord appears to him and
gives him wisdom: the pleading of the two harlottes, and Salomons sentence
therein.

4. The Princes and rulers under Solomon: his Books and writings.

5. Hiram sends to Solomon, and Solomon to him, purposing The Contents of 1.
Kings.
to build the house of God: he prepares the stuff for the building: the
number of the work men.

6. The building of the Temple and the form thereof. The promise of the Lord
to Solomon.

7. The building of the house of Solomon: the excellent work man ship of Hiram
in the pieces which he made for the Temple.

8. The Arc is borne into the Temple: a cloud fills the Temple. The King
blesses the people.

9. The Lord appears the second time to Solomon: Solomon gives Cities to
Hiram.

10. The Queen of Saba comes to hear the wisdom of Solomon, his royal
Throne, his power and magnificencie. Chapters. 22.


11. Solomon had a thousand wives and concubines, which bring him to Idolatry.

12. Rehoboam succeeds Solomon. Jeroboam reigns over Israel

13. Jeroboam is reprehended of the Prophet: his hand dries up

14. Jeroboam sends his wife disguised to Ah^iah the Prophet, who declares
unto him the destruction of his house.

15. Abiiam reigns over Judah. The battle between Asa and Baasha.

16. Of Baasha, Elah, Zimri, Omri. Ahab marieth Iezabel, The Contents of 1.
Kings.
Jericho is built again.

17. Eliiah is forewarned of the famine to come, he is sed of ^auens.

18. Eliiah is sent to Ahab: Obadiah hides an hundredth Prophets. Eliiah
kills all Baals Prophets.

19. Eliiah fleeing from Iezabel is nourished of the Angel of God: he is
commanded to anoint Hazael, Iehu, and Elisha.

20. Samaria is beseeged: the Lord promises the victory to Ahab by a Prophet.

21. Iezabel commands to kill Naboth for the Vineyard that he refuses to
sell to Ahab. Eliiah reproves Ahab and he repents.

22. Iehoshaphat and Ahab fight against the King of Siria: Michaiah shows the
king what shall be the success of their enterprise: Zidk^iah the false Prophet
simteth him Ahab is slain, A^aziah his son succeeds. The reign of
Iehoshaphat, and Io^am his son.

The second or fourth Book of Kings, has twenty five Chapters.
The contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. A Hazia by a fall falls sick, and consulteth with Baalzebub. Chapters,
25.


2. Eliiah divides the waters with his cloak: he is taken up into Heaven. The
children that mock Elisha are rent in pieces with Bears.

3. The reign of Ioram: he and Iehoshaphat go to war against Moab which
rebelleth the Moabites are overcome.

4. God increases the oil to the poor widow by Elisha: he obtains for the
Shunamite a son at Gods hand, who died and was raised up again.

5. Naaman the Sirian is healed of his leprosy: Elisha refuses his gifts.

6. Elisha makes Iron to swim above the water: he The Contents of 2. Kengs.
dicloseth the King of Syria's counsel to the King of Israel.

7. Elisha prophesies plenty of victuaile and other things in Samaria,

8. Elisha prophesies unto the Sunamite the dearth of seven years.

9. Iehu is made King of Israel, and kills Ioram the King thereof.

10. Iehu causes the seauentie sons of Ahab to be slain: he kills also
all the Priests of Baal.

11. Athaliah puts to death all the Kings sons, except Ioash the son of
Ahazia. Iehoiada causes Athaliah to be (...). Baal and his Priests are
destroyed.

12. ^^hoash makes provision for the repairing of the Temple: Iehoash is
killed by two of his servants.

13. Iehoahaz the son of Iehu is delivered into the hands of the Assirians:
he prays unto God and is delivered. Chapters. 25.


14. Amaziah the King of Judah puts to death them that fine his father, and
after smites Edom.

15. Azariah King of Judah becomes a Leper.

16. Ahaz King of Judah consecrateth his son in fire.

17. Hoshea King of Israel is taken.

18. Hezekiah King of Judah puts down the brazen Serpent, and destroieth
the Idols, and prospers.

19. God promises by Esaiah victory to Hezekiah.

20. Hezekiah being sick, receives the sign of his health.

21. King Manasseh restores Idolatry, and uses great cruelty.

22. Josiah repaireth the Temple. Helkiah finds the book of the Law, and
causes it to be presented to Josiah, who sends The Contents of 2. Kings.
to Huldah the Prophetess to enquire the Lords will.

23. Josiah reads the Law before the people: he makes a covenant with the
Lord: he puts down the Idols after he had killed their Priests: he keeps
the Passover: he destroieth the Coniurers: he was killed in Megiddo: and his
son Iehoahaz reigns in his steed: after he was taken, his son Iehoiakim
was made King.

24. Iehoiakim, made subject to Nabuchad-nezzar, rebelleth: he and his people
are carried to Babylon. Zedekiah is made King.

25. Jerusalem is besieged of Nabuchad-nezzar and taken. The sons of Zedekiah
are slain before his eyes, and after, his own eyes put out.

The first Book of the Chronicles, called in Latin Verba dierum, after the
Greeks Paralipomenon, which the Hebrews call Dibre Haiamim, and re^ken both
the Books but for one: has twenty and nine Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe genealogy of Adam and Noah, until Abraham, Chapters. 29.
and from Abraham until Esau: his children: Kings and Dukes came of him.

2. The genealogy of Judah unto Ishai the father of David.

3. The genealogy of David and his posterity unto the sons of Josiah.

4. The genealogy of the sons of Judah: of Ashur: of Iabes, and his prayer.

5. The birth right taken from Reuben and given to the sons of Joseph. The
genealogy of Reuben and Gad, and of The Contents of 1. Chronicles
the half Tribe of Manasseh.

6. The genealogy of the sons of Leui: their order in the Ministry of the
Tabernacle. Aaron and his sons Priests. Their habitation.

7. The genealogy of Issachar, Benjamin, Naphtali, Manasseh, Ephraim, and
Asher.

8. The sons of Benjamin, and race of Saul.

9. All Israel and Judah are numbered Of the Priests and Levites, and of their
offices.

10. The battle of Saul against the Philistims in which he dies, and his
sons also: the cause of Saul's death.

11. The ^^busites rebel against David, from whom ^e takes the Tower of Sion.

12. What they were that went with David when he fled from Saul: what they ^ere
that come unto him unto Hebron out of every Tribe to make him King.

13. The Arc is brought again from Kiriath-iearim to Chapters. 29.
Jerusalem: Vzza dies because he touched it.

14. Hiram sends wood and work men to David. By the counsel of God he goes
against the Philistims and over comes them.

15. David brings the Arc with joy, and dancing before it is despised of his
wife Michal.

16. The Arc being placed, they offer s^^rifices David appoints a notable
Psalm to be sung in the praise of the Lord.

17. Christ is promised under the figure of Solomon.

18. The battle of David against the Philistims and against Moab, Zobah, Aram
and Edom.

19. Hanun King of the children of Ammon does great injuries to the servants of
David: he prepares an army against David, and is overcome.

20. Rabbah destroyed. The Ammonites tormented. The The Contents of 1.
Chronicles.
Philistims are th^^^e overcome with their ^iants.

21. David cau^eth the people to be numbered, and there dye seauentie thousand
men of the pestilence.

22. David prepares things necessary for the building of the Temple.

23. David being old, ordeineth Solomon King. Aaron and his sons are for the
high Priest.

24. David assigns offices unto the sons of Aaron.

25. The singers are appointed with their places and lots.

26. The Porters of the Temple are ordained every man to the gate which he
should keep: and over the Treasure.

27. Of the Princes and Rulers that ministered unto the King.

28. Because David was forbidden to build the Temple, ^e w^lleth Solomon and
the people to perform it: exhorting him to fear the lord.

29. The offering of David and of the Princes for the building of the Temple.

The second Book of the Chronicles, which in the Hebrewe is one with the
first: has thirty and six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe offering of Solomon at Gibeon. He prays unto Chapters. 36.
God to give him wisdom, which he gives him, and more. The number of his
Charets and horses: and of his riches.

2. Solomon sends to Hiram the King of Tyrus, for wood and work men.

3. The Temple of the Lord, and the Porch are builded, with other things
thereto belonging.

4. The Altar of brass: the Lauatorie: the Caldron: the Candlestickes, etc.

5. The things dedicated by David are put in the Temple.

6. Solomon blesses the people. He praises the Lord: he prays unto God for
those that shall pray in the Temple. The Contents of 2. Chronicles.


7. The fire consumes the Sacrifice: the glory of the Lord fills the Temple.

8. The Cities that Solomon built: his Sacrifices which he offered.

9. The Queen of Sheba comes to see Solomon and brings gifts.

10. The rigor of Rehoboam: he follows lewd counsel. The people rebel.

11. Rehoboam is forbidden to fight against Jeroboam.

12. Rehoboam forsakes the Lord, and is punished by Shishak.

13. Abijah makes war against Jeroboam: he shows the occasion: he trusts
in the Lord and overcomes Jeroboam.

14. Asa destroieth Idolatry, and commands his people Chapters. 36.
to serve the true God.

15. The exhortation of Azariah: Asa purges his Country of Idolatry, they
swear together to serve the Lord: he deposes his mother for her Idolatry.

16. Asa for fear of Baasha King of Israel, makes a covenant with Benhadad
King of Siria: he is reproved by the Prophet.

17. Iehoshaphat trusting in the Lord prospers in riches and honor. he
abolisheth Idolatry and causes the people to be taught.

18. Iehoshaphat makes affinity with Ahab: four hundred Prophets counsel
Ahab to go to war: Michaiah is against them. The effect of his prophecy.

19. After Iehoshaphat was rebuked by the Prophet he calls again the people
to the honoring of the Lord.

20. Iehoshaphat and the people pray unto the Lord: the marvelous victory
that the Lord gave him against his enemies: The Contents of 2. Chronicles.
his reign and acts.

21. Iehoshaphat dies. Iehoram succeeds him which kills his brethren: he
is oppressed of the Philistims: his miserable end.

22. Athaliah puts to death all the Kings lineage: Ioash escapes.

23. Ioash the son of Ahaziah is made King: Athaliah is put to death. The
Temple of Baal is destroyed: Iohoiada appoints Ministers in the Temple.

24. Ioash repaireth the house of the Lord: Ioash is killed of his own
servants.

25. Amaziah puts them to death that fine his father: he falls to
Idolatry.

26. Vzziah obeying the Lord prospers in his enterprises: he waxes proud and
usurps the Priests office.

27. Iotham reigns, and overcomes the Ammonites: his reign and death: Ahaz
his son reigns his steed.

28. Ahaz an Idolateris given into the hands of the Sirians, and the King of
Israel. Ahaz increases his Idolatry: his death and successor.

29. Hezekiah repaireth the Temple, and aduertiseth the ^s ^f the corru^tion of
Religion. Chapters. 36.


^0. (...) k^^pi^g of the Pass over by the kings commandment.

31. The people destroy Idolatry: Hezekiah appoints Priests and Levites,
and provides for their living.

32. Sanche^^^ ^^uadeth Judah: Hezekiah prepares for the war: he exhorts
the people to put their trust in the Lord.

33. Manass^^ an Idolater, causes Judah to err: he is led prisoner into
Babylon.

34. Josiah destroieth the Idols and restores the Temple: The Contents of 2.
Chronicles.
The book of the Law is found.

35. Josiah keeps the pass over: he sets forth Gods service: he fights
against the King of Egypt, and dies, the people bewail him.

36. After Josiah, reigned Iehoahaz, after him Iehoiakim, after him Zedekiah,
in whose time all the people were carried away to Babylon for contemning the
admonitions of the Prophets.

Here follows a very profitable declaration, for the understanding of the
Histories o^ Esdras* Nehemias, Esther, D^ and diverse other places of
Scripture, very dark, by reason of the discord that is among Historiographers,
and among the Expositors of the holy Scriptures, touching the successi^^ order
of the Kings or Monarchies of Babylon and o^ Persia, of the years that the
said Monarchies la^^ed, from the Transmigr^tion of the Jews under N^^* until
the Monarchies of the Greeks, and of the confusion that is in the names of the
Kings of Persia.

That which happened to the people of Israel during these Monarchies. The
Monarchy of Babylon. Of the years that the Monarchies of P^^si^ reigned* of
the difference of ^uth^^^ ther^^^ and of the diu^rsi^^e and confu^^on of the
names of the said Monarchies. Nebuchad-nezzar the nineteenth year of his
reign destroyed Jerusalem and led the people Captive. 2. Kings 24 and
Jeremy. ^9. 1 Nebu^ha^nezzar after the ca^ reign^d* 6. yee^e^. The difference
of authors as well Historiographers, a^ Expositors of the holy (...), is great
touching the time* and ^^res that the two Monarchies of the Babylonians* and
Persians continued, and also touching the names of the Monarchies herein
described: wherein there is great confusion. And therefor all other opinions
set (...) we^ will herein follow Iud^us, and Me^^^^henes a^ci^nt authors, whose
opinions do nearest agree with the holy Scriptures. The twenty and fifth
year of his said reign he ^itute his Monarchy: in the second year of the
same he saw the dream of the four Monarchies, Daniel. 2 2 (...) his son ^^
^s having conquered the kingdom of the M^des against ^ ^^^ages, left the said
kingdom to his uncle Darius, by whose aid he to^k Babylon, and transported
the Monarchy of Babylon to the Persians. Two years after the said Darius
^^^^^^ed into M^de* and ^^rus rei^^ed ^lone in Babylon: ^hen he moved war
against the S^^^hia^s, and marched toward them* and in the mean while* l^^t
Cam^^ses his son ^^ng of the country in his absence, according to the (...) of
the Persians, which was to appoin^ ^^^ nearest of the kings bl^^d* to be ^^^g
(...) the Country, when the king went out to ^ight against an^ strang^ nation.
(...) is the ca^se (...) ^am^^^^s (...) with* su^^e o^^^r ^^ the Mo^* (...) is
(...) of two brothers that were Mag^^ians* which (...) usurped the (...) th^^r
(...) being known* t^^y (...) a ^s* and Darius (...) to (...) ch^^en (...).
The fifth year, he saw the dre^^e of the tr^e hewon down Daniel 4. 3 Re^^^er
3. years. ^s ^^^ ^^^^e of the (...) The sixth year, he was d^^uen amongst the
wild b^a^^s, by the space o^ seven years Dan. 4. 4 (...) 6. years.
E^^^^^rod^ch, the first year of his reign delivered (...) as, whom his
^ath^r had put in prison. 2 Kings ^5. ^ Ierem: 52 5 (...) fiu^ ye^r^s. The
first year of Balthazar, Daniel saw the dream of the faure beasts signifying
the four Monarchies. Daniel 7. ^ Ci^us with (...) ^^^ed 2* years. From
Nabuchodonosor his carrying the people into Babylon, until the end of the
Monarchy of Balthazar, it amou^^ed to threescore and ten years fore^^lde by
Jeremy. 1 (...) ^^^^n^th alone ^2. years. Cirus delivered the people from
captivity, the ^ame year that he took Ba^^lon and ga^e the^^ great tresures
to build up the ^em^le of Hierusa^em wh^^h^r ^^ sent them v^^^^ the Conduct of
^oroba^el ^^^^as 1. 2 (...) the ^e of (...) b^^^g ^hosen (...) (...) his
successor ^^^d^ed the building of the (...) Esdras 4. The second (...) of (...)
xes Agge and Zachary prophesied, stirring the people to go foreward with the
building of the Temple, notwithstanding the h^^^^a^^e. Esdras. 5. and surnamed
A^ ^ssuerus reigned 20. years. Darius succeeded him, but is not here placed in
the number of the Monarchies, for that he left his Kingdom to Darius long-hand
his son according to the custom of the Persians, when he went to war
against the Greeks. The Greeks Historiographers not respecting that custom
number the said Xerxes and Cambises above mentioned, among the said Monarchies,
successively in order which is the cause that they count more years in the said
Monarchy, that is to say, 226, y^es. The third year began the History of
Ester. 3 Darius A^^^^ longhand 37 in the time of t^is Darius began the (...)
w^^k^s of D^. As touching these confused names, ye shall understand that among
the Persians, Darius signifies he that subdueth, Xerxes a ^r, Artaxerxes a
great ^a^riour. Also that this name Assuerus is drawn^ from the Hebrews, in
steed of Artaxerxes, further that Artaxerxes was the common name of all kings
of Persia, as Pharao was the common name of all the kings of Egypt, and Caesar
of the Romish Emperors. The seventh year E^^er is brought into him. Esth^r.
2. 4 D^^ius N^^us Therefore when you find any indi^^ere^tly n^med Darius or
Artaxerxes, or ^oth together, that is the cause of the difficulty, how to
understand under what King that happened which is recited in the said books of
Esdras, Nehemias, Esther, Daniel and other places of the holy Scriptures,
except you will mark them and well understand the contents of this Table. The
twelfth year Aman threat^eth ^he Jews. Esther. 3. 5 19. Ar^xes* (...) ^5.
years Darius long-hand the second year of his reign commanded the Temple to
be made an end of* E^d^as. 6. 6 D^s ^6. years The si^t year the Temple was
end^d. Esdras. 6. 7 A^^^^^s four years The seventh year Esdras we ^^ i^^o
Judea. Esdras. 7. ^ D^rius the last Monarch^ overcome by Alexander the great
which transported the Monarchy to the Greeks r^^^n^d 6. years. The twentieth
year began the seauentie weeks fo^^* showed b^ Daniel. D^^. 9. And the said
year* ^^ch^^^as went into Judah, to ^^ild up the wall^s of Jerusalem. Nehe. 2*
The sum of the years o^ the Mon^^chie of the Persians is of 191* and N^*
2^1. The two and thirtith year Nehemias returned again t^ Darius according to
his pr^mise and obtained leave of him to return to Jerusalem. N^he. 13. All
the time of the Persians Monarchy ^^ounteth to 191 years. Alexander the great
transp^rted the same year the said Mona^^hie to the Greeks* which was in the
twentieth we^ke (...) to Daniel. Dan. 9.

The first Book of Esdras Chapters. 10.
has ten Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. CIrus sends again the people that was in captivity, and restores them
their holy vessels.

2. The number of them that returned from the captivity.

3. The Israelites build the Altar of God: they ^ffer to the Lord: they prepare
for the Temple, and sing unto the Lord.

4. The building of the Temple is hindered, and how: Letters to Artaxerxes, and
the answer.

5. Aggeus and Zachary do prophecy: the work of the Temple goes foreward,
contrary to the mind of Tatnai: his letters were sent to Darius. The Contents
of 1. Esdras.


6. At the commandment of Darius King of Persia, after the Tem^le was builded
and dedicate, the Children of Israel keep the f^alt of unleavened bread.

7. By the commandment of the King, Esdras and his companions come to
Jerusalem ^^e gives thanks to God.

8. The number of them that returned to Jerusalem with Esdras: he causes
them to fast, he admonishes the Priests of their duty: what they did when
they came to Jerusalem.

9. Esdras complains ^n the people that had turned themselves from God, and
married with the Gentiles: he prays unto God.

10. The people repent and turn, and put away their strange wives.

The Book of Nehemias, or second Book of Esdras, has thirteen Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. NEhemias bewaileth the calamity of Jerusalem, he Chapters, 13.
confesses the sins of the people, and prays to God for them.

2. After Nehemias had obtained letters of Artaxerxes, he came to Jerusalem
and builded the walls.

3. The number of them that builded the walls.

4. The building of Jerusalem is hindered, but God breaks their enterprise:
the Jews build with one hand, and hold their weapon in the other.

5. The people are oppressed and in necessity: Nehemias forbids usury.

6. Nehemias answered with great wisdom and zeal to his adversaries: he is
not discouraged by the false Prophets. The Contents of Nehemias.


7. After the wall once builded is the watch appointed: they that return from
the captivity are numbered.

8. Esdras gathers the people together, and reads the Law to them.

9. The people repent, and forsake their strange wives: the Levites exhort
them to praise God.

10. The names of them that sealed the Covenant between God and the people.

11. Who dwelled in Jerusalem after it was builded, and who in the Cittie^ of
Judah.

12. The Priests and ^euites which came with Zorobabel unto Jerusalem are
numbered, and all the wall is dedicated.

13. ^^e L^w is r^, they s^^arate from them all stranger^: ^o s^^ue God.

The Book of Esther has sixteen Chapters.
The contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. KIng Ahasuerus makes a Royal feast, whereunto Chapters. 16.
the Queen Vasthi would not come, for which cause she is put away: the Kings
decree touching the pre^minence of man over his wife.

2. After the Queen is put away, certain young maidens are brought to the
King: Esther pleases the King and is made Queen.

3. Haman after that he was exalted, obtained of the King that all the Jews
should be put to death, because Mardocheus had not done him worship as other
had. The Contents of Esther.


4. Mardocheus gives the Queen knowledge of the cruel decree of the King
against the Jews: she wills that they pray for her.

5. Esther enters unto the King and bids him and Haman to a feast: Haman
prepares a Gallows for Mardocheus.

6. The King turns over the Chronicles and finds the fidelity of
Mardocheus, and commands Haman to cause Mardocheus to be had in honor.

7. The Q^^e^e prays for her help and her people: she accuses H^man, and he
is hanged on the Gallows that he had prepa^ed ^o^ Mardocheus.

8. After the death of H^man was Mardocheus exalted: comfortable letters are
sent unto the Jews.

9* ^t the commandment of the (...) the Jews ^ut (...) to death: the ^^^ sons
^^ H^m^n are hanged.

10. (...) Ma^do^^ai. The (...) 14. 25. (...).

The Book of Job, has forty two Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe holiness and richesse of Job* the care of Job for Chapters. 42.
his children: Satan has permission to tempt him: he tempts him by taking
away his substance and his children: his faith and patience.

2. Jobs wife tempts him to forsake God: his three friends visit him.

3. Job complains, and curses the day of his birth, he desires to dye, as
though death were the end of all man's misery.

4. Eliphaz blames Job for impatience, injustice, and for the presumption of
his own righteousness.

5. Eliphaz shows the difference between the children of God and the wicked.
The Contents of Job.


6. Job answers that his pain is more grievous then his fault: he wished
death: he complains of his friends.

7. Job shows the shortness and misery of man's life.

8. Bildad ^heweth that Job is a sinner, because God punishes the wicked and
preserves the good.

9. Job declares the mighty power of God, and that man's righteousness is
nothing.

10. Job is weary of his life, and sets out his frailenesse before God: he
desires him to stay his hand: a description of death.

11. Job is unjustly blamed of Sophar: the majesty of God cannot be searched:
God is merciful to the repentant: the godly live in safety.

12. Job accuses his friends of ignorance: he declares the might and power of
God: and how God changes the course of things.

13. Job prays unto God that he would not handle him Chapters. 42.
rigorously.

14. Job describes the shortness and misery of the life of man: hope
sustaineth the godly: the condition of man's life.

15. Eliphaz blames Job because he ascribes wisdom and pureness to himself.

16. Job, moved by the importunacy of his friends, counts in what extremity
he is; and takes God to witness of his innocence.

17. Job says that he consumes away, and yet does patiently abide it: he
exhorts his friends to repentance, showing that he looks but for death.

18. Bildad rehearses the pains of the unfaithful and wicked.

19. Job reprooueth his friends, and recites his miseries and grievous pains:
he assures himself of the general ^esurrection.

20. Sophar shows that the wicked and the covetous shall have a short end
though for a time they flourish. The Contents of Job.


21. Job declares how the prosperity of the wicked makes them proud, insomuch
that they blaspheme God.

22. Eliphaz affirms that Job is punished for his sins: he accuses him of
unmercifulness, and that he denied Gods providence: he exhorts him to
repentance.

23. Job shows that he both knows and fears the sentence of the Judge:
and that he is not punished only for his sins.

24. Job describes the wickedness of men, and shows what curse belongs to
the wicked.

25. Bildad proves that no man is clean, nor without sin before God.

26. Job shows that no man can help God, and proves it by his wonderful
works.

27. The constancy and per^ectnes of Job: the reward of the wicked and of the
Tyrants.

28. Job shows that the wisdom of God is unsearchable.

29. Job complains of the prosperity of the ^ime past, he sets forth his
authority, Justice, and equity.

30. Job complains that he is contemned of the vilest, because of his
adversity and affliction: death is the house of Chapters. 4^.
all flesh.

31. Job rehearses the innocence of his living, and number of his virtues.

32. Elihu reproves them of folly: Age makes not a man wise, but the spirit
of God.

33. Elihu accuses Job of ignorance: he shows that God has diverse means
to instruct man, and to draw him from sin.

34. Elihu charge Job that he calls himself righteous: he shows that God
is just in Judgment.

35. Neither does godliness profit, or ungodliness hurt God but man: the
wicked cry unto God and are not heard.

36. Elihu shows the power of God and his Justice, and wherefore he
punishes: the property of the wicked.

37. Elihu proves that the unsearchable wisdom of The Contents of Job.
God is manifested by his works, as by the Thunder, Snow, and the
whirlwind, and the rain.

38. God speaks to Job, and declares the ignorance of man in the
consideration of his creatures.

39. God proceeds in declaring the ignorance of Job, in the consideration of
his marvelous works in beasts and sowles.

40. God declares the weakness of Job, by comparing the same to his great
works, and to the strength of Behemoth.

41. God sets forth the malice, the members, the strength, and the pride of
Leuiathan.

42. The repentance of Job: he prays for his friends: and his goods are
restored double unto him.

The Psalms of David being in all 1^0. follow after the Re^elation.

The Proverbs of Solomon has thirty one Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe power of the word of God: of the fear of God Chapters. 31.
and knowledge of his word: we may not consent to the intising of sinners:
wisdom complains that she is contemned: the punishment of them that contemn
her.

2. Wisdom exhorts to obey her: she teaches the fear of God: she is
given of God, she preserves from wickedness.

3. The word of God gives life: trust in God, fear him, honor him, suffer his
correction: to them that follow the word of God, all things shall succeed well.

4. Wisdom and her fruits ought to be searched: the way The Contents of
Proverbs.
of the wicked must be refused: by the word of God, the heart, eyes, and course
of life must be guided.

5. Whoredom forbidden, and prodigality: he wills a man to live on his
labor: to help others: to love his wife: the wicked taken in their own
wickedness.

6. Instructions for sureties: the slothful and sluggish is stirred to work:
he describes all the nature of the wicked: The Contents of the chapters unto
the xi. And from the x. to the xx no Contents* And from the xx. to the xxx. no
Contents of chapters as by the blanck places appears.
the things that God hates.

7. An exhortation to wisdom, and to the word of God, which will preserve us
from the harlot, whose manners are described.

8. Wisdom declares her excellency, riches, power, eternity: she exhorts
all to love and follow her.

9. Wisdom calls all to her feast: the scorner will not be corrected: the
^eare of God: the conditions of a harlot.

10. In this Chapter, and all that follow, unto the thirtith, the wise man
exhorts by diverse sentences which he calls Parables, to follow virtue and
^lee vice, and shows also what profit comes of wisdom, and what
hinderance Chapters. 29.
proceeds of foolishness.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19. The Contents of Proverbs.


20.

21.

22.

23.

24. These are the Parables of Solomon which the men of Hezekiah King of Judah
copied out.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

The words of Agur the son of Iakeh.

30. The pureness of the word of God, and what we ought to require of God,
with certain wonderful things that are in this world.

And the Prophecy that the same man spoke unto Ithiel, and Vchal.

31. He exhorts to chastity and Justice, and shows the conditions of a wise
and worthy woman.

The words of King Lamuel, and the lesson that his mother taught him.

The Book of the Preacher, otherwise called Ecclesiastes, which is Solomon the
King: has twelve Chapters.
For Solomon is called in the Scriptures, by three sundry names, the one
Solomon, that is, the maker of peace, the second, Idida, that is beloved of
God, the third, Ecclesiastes, that is a Preacher; teaching, that true and
eternal felicity consists not in any worldly wisdom, or abundance of
riches, or in carnal pleasure, which all be but vain and transitory, but he
proves that true felicity consists in a whole joining our selves to God by
pure Religion, that is, with a sincere faith, and the fear of God, observing
his commandments.

The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. ALl things in this world are full of vanity, and of none Chapters. 12.
endurance, all man's wisdom is but folly and grief.

2. Pleasure, sumptuous buildings, riches, and possessions are but vanity. The
wise and the fool have both one end touching their bodily death.

3. All things have their time: the works of God are perfect, and cause us to
fear him: God shall both judge the just and unjust.

4. The innocent are oppressed, men's labors are full of The Contents of
Ecclesiastes.
abuse and vanity: man's society is necessary: a young man poor and wise is to
be preferred before an old King that is a fool.

5. Not to speak lightly, chiefly in Gods matters: the covetous man can never
have enough.

6. The miserable estate of him to whom God has given riches, and not the
grace to use them.

7. Diverse precepts to follow that which is good, and to avoid the contrary.

8. To obey Princes and Magistrates: the works of God pass man's knowledge.
Chapters. 12.


9. By no outward thing can man know whom God loves or hates: no man
knows his end: wisdom excels strength.

10. The difference of foolishness and wisdom: a slanderer is like a
Serpent, that cannot be charmed: of foolish Kings and riotous Princes: and of
good Kings and Princes.

11. To be liberal to the poor: nor to doubt of Gods providence: all worldly
prosperity is but vanity.

12. To think on God in youth, and not to defer till age: The soul
returns to God: wisdom is the gift of God, and consists in fearing him,
and keeping his commandments.

The Ballet of Ballets of Solomon, called in Latin Canticum Canticorum, has
eight Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe familiar talk and mystical communication of the Chapters, 8.
spiritual love between Jesus Christ and his Church: the domestical enemies
that persecute the Church.

2. The Church desires to rest under the shadow of Christ: she hears his
voice: she is compared to the Dove, and the enemies to the Foxes.

3. The Church desires to be joined inseparably to Christ her husband* her
deliverance out of the wilderness.

4. The praises of the Church: she is without blemish in The Contents of
Solomon.
his sight: the love of Christ toward her.

5. Christ calls his Church to the participation of all his treasure: she
hears his voice: she confesses her nakedness: she praises Christ her
husband.

6. The Church assures herself of the love of Christ: The praise of the
Church: she is but one and undefiled.

7. The beauty of the Church is in all her members: she is assured of Christ's
love toward her.

8. The Church will be taught by Christ: she is vpholden by him: the vehement
love wherewith Christ loves her: she is the ^ine that brings forth fruit of
the spiritual Solomon, which is Jesus Christ.

The Book of the Prophet Esaias, has sixty six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe Prophet accuses the sins of the people, namely Chapters. 66.
ingratefulnesse, stubbornness, faithles service of God: and shows Gods
terrible judgment against them, unless they repent.

2. A Prophecy of Christ and his Kingdom: pride, covetousness,
susperstition, and Idolatry, are reproved: Gods terrible judgment against
these.

3. The mischief that God sends on Commonweals, for the contempt of his
word: the covetousness of rulers reproved: the proud niceness of women
punished to their The Contents of Esaias.
shame.

4. The misery of the stubborn: a promise of Gods favor to the residue.

5. Of Christ and his Vineyard, with an execration of covetousness,
drunkenness, and contempt of Gods word.

6. Esaias saw the glory of the Lord, and was sent to prophesse the desolation
of Jury.

7. The Syrians move battle against Jerusalem: a Virgin shall bear a child.

8. The deliverance of the land by Emanuel: the stone of offense at which many
s^umble.

9. He prophesies of Christ's Nativity and dominion.

10. He threatens the oppressors of the poor, and prophesies against
Sennache^ib.

11. He prophesies of the nativity of Christ and his people: Chapters. 66.
of the remnant of Israel, and of the faith of the Heathen and Gentiles.

12. The song of the Church, for the obtaining of the victory and ouercomming
the world.

13. He prophecieth the destruction of Babylon, the captivity and the coming
again of the people.

14. The return of the people from captivity: the prosperity of the people of
God, and affliction of their enemies: the pride of Babylon.

15. A prophecy against Moab.

16. The destruction of Moab.

17. A prophecy against Damascus.

18. An exhortation to the Ethiopians and the countreies nigh adjoining to
them: the vocation of the Gentiles.

19. He prophecieth against Egypt; and the vocation of the Gentiles to Christ.

20. Against Egypt and Ethiopia.

21. Against Babylon, Idumea, and Arabia.

22. A prophecy against Jerusalem. The Contents of Esaias.


23. A prophecy against Tyrus, and a promise that it shall be restored again.

24. A prophecy of tribulation to come upon the world because of sin.

25. A thanksgiving to God for his works.

26. A song of deliverance of the people.

27. A prophecy of the coming of Christ and destruction of Idolatry.

28. Against the pride of Ephraim, and against false Priests and Preachers.

29. A prophecy against Jerusalem, and against the vain traditions of men.

30. Against them that forsake the counsel of God, and clea^e to the counsel
of men: the Prophet also threatens the remnant of the people, that after the
destruction of Jerusalem went into Egypt.

31. He curses them that forsake God and seek for the help of men.

32. The condition of good rulers and Officers.

33. Threatenings against the Assirians: a destruction of Chapters. 66.
them that shall see the Lord.

34. The last destruction of the Sinagogue, in which the Kingdom and Priest*
hood of the people was translated to the Church and congregation of Christ.

35. Of the time and Kingdom of Christ.

36. Jerusalem is besieged by Senacherib, in the time of King Ezekiah.

37. Ezekiah humbles himself before the Lord: the army of Senacherib is ^lame
of the Angel of the Lord: and he himself is killed of his own sons.

38. Ezekiah is sick unto death, but is revived by the Lord, and lives
fifteen years after, for which benefit he gives thanks.

39. Ezekiah is reproved of Esaias, because he shows his treasure unto the
Ambassadors of Babylon.

40. The coming of Saint John Baptist: the preparation of the Apostles: the
calling of the Gentiles.

41. Of the goodness and mercy of God toward the people. The Contents of Esaias.


42. The coming of Christ.

43. God promises to send his Christ which shall deliver his people: he
forgiueth sins for his own sake.

44. Christ promises to deliver his Church without any her deserts.

45. The coming of Christ, and the calling of the Gentiles.

46. Idolatry is reproved: the health that comes by Christ is prophesied.

47. The word of the Lord against Babylon.

48. The Hypocrisy of the Jews is reproved: the Lord alone will be
worshipped, which has chosen us, and which succoreth us for his his own sake.

49. Christ shall gather together all nations be they never so far off.

50. The Jews are reproved and also called.

51. Consolation and comfort is promised unto the faithful.

52. An exhortation and comfort to the people of God.

53. He pro^e^cieth evidently of the Passion of our Savior Chapters. 66.
Jesus Christ.

54. Of the great domination of Christ: the indignation of God endures but a
short space, but his mercy is everlasting.

55. An exhortation and comfort of the people: the fruit and profit that
comes of the word of God.

56. An exhortation to judgment and righteousness, and to the spiritual
keeping of the Sabbath: against Shepherds that devour the flock.

57. The good men are taken away: the wicked ones take pleasure in Idolatry:
the godly receive comfort: the wicked does perish.

58. The Lord by the mouth of the Prophet reproves the people for their
fastings, which were full of hypocrisy. The Contents of Esaias.


59. The Lord is mighty to save, and ready to hear our requests: our sins
are the cause why God hears us not, neither grants our requests.

60. A consolation and comfort to Jerusalem: the Church is gathered together
among the Gentiles, by preaching of the Gospel, and abounds with all good
things.

61. He prophecieth that Christ shall be anointed and sent to preach.

62. A prophecy of the coming of Christ.

63. Of the redemption promised to the people.

64. The Prophet (under the person of the Jews) bewaileth their ^r^^e and
banishment: man's righteousness is as a cloth def^l^d.

65. The re^ecting of the Jews, and calling of the Heathen.

66. God dwells not in Temples made by man's hands: he despises sacrifices
done without mercy and faith: God comfort them that are troubled for his
sake: among the Christians the Sabbath is continually.

The Book of the Prophet Ier emie* has fitftie two Chapters.
The Coments of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe stock of Ie^emie, and in what time he prophesied: Chapters. 52.
he excuses himself, and would refuse the office of Prophet, because he is
young and inexpert: he is taught of the Lord and be comes bold.

2. God rehearses his benefits done unto the Jews: against Priests and
Prophets or Preachers that contemn and despise God: the Jews are destroyed
because they forsook God, and because they ran a whore hunting after Idols.

3. God being merciful calls to repentance his people which he had forsaken,
for their whoredom with Idols: he exhorts Israel unto repentance, promising
them Shepherds The Contents of Jeremy.
that should have the true knowledge of God: the return of Israel unto God
confessing their offense.

4. The true repentance or returning to God: he exhorts to the Circumcision
of the heart: the destruction of Jury is prophesied, for the malice of their
hearts.

5. In Jury is there no righteous or faithful man found, ^ither amongst the
people or the rulers, for whose sake the Lord should spare the City: wherefore
Jury is destroyed of the Assirians.

6. The sins for which Jerusalem is afflicted: uncircumcised ears,
covetousness, d^c^^pt: the Lord rejects the sacrifice of the Jews: the
coming of the Babilonians is prophesied again.

7. Jeremy is commanded to show unto the people the word of God, which
trusts in the outward service of the Temple: the evils that shall happen to
the Jews for the despising of the Prophets: Sacrifices ^oth not the Lord
chiefly require of the Jews, but that they should obey his word. Chapters. 52.


8. The destruction of the Jews: the Lord moves the people to amendment,
reckoning up their sins: he reprehendeth the lying doctrine of the Prophets
and Priests.

9. The complaints and bewailing of the Prophets: the malice of the people: in
the knowledge of God ought we only to rejoice: the uncircumcision of the heart.

10. The constellations of the ^larres are not to be feared: of the weakness
of Idols, and of the power of God: of evil creatures.

11. A curse to them that obey not the words of Gods promise: the people of
Judah following the steps of their fathers worship strange Gods: the Lord
says, that he will not hear the Jews, and forbids also Jeremy to pray
for them.

12. The Prophet marueileth greatly at the prosperity of the wicked, although
he confess God to be righteous: the Jews are forsaken of the Lord: he
speaks against Curats and Preachers that seduce the people: the Lord
threatens destruction unto the Nations that bordered upon Jury, which The
Contents of Jeremy.
troubled and vexed it.

13. The destruction of the Jews is prefigured, and their sparsing abroad: why
Israel was received to be the people of God, and why they were forsaken.

14. Of the dearth that should come in Jury: the prayer of the people asking
mercy of the Lord: the unfaithful people are not heard: of prayer, fasting,
and of false Prophets that seduce the people.

15. The Lord will not hear Moses and Samuel, if they pray for the people, but
wrap them in many miseries: the cause of such great miseries.

16. ^^ prophecieth the miseries of the Jews, he shows that the worshipping
of Images, and the contempt of Gods Law, is cause of their miseries: he
prophecieth the captivity of Babylon, and their deliverance from thence again.

17. The f^^wardnesse of the Jews: cursed be those that put their confidence
in man, and those blessed that trust in God: men's heart is wicked: God is the
searcher of the heart: the living waters are forsaken: the hallowing of the
Sabbath is commanded.

18. God shows by the example of a Potter, that it is in his power to destroy
the despisers of his word, and to help them Chapters. 52.
again when they amend: the conspiracy of the Jews against Jeremy: his
prayer against his adversaries.

19. He prophecieth the destruction of Jerusalem, for the contempt and
despising of the word of God.

20. Jeremy is smitten and east into pris^n, for preaching of the word of God:
he prophecieth the captivity of Babylon: he complains that he is a
mocking-stocke for the word of God: he is compelled by the spirit to preach the
word.

21. He prophecieth that Zedekias shall be taken, and the City burned.

22. He exhorts the King of Judah to judgment and righteousness: why
Jerusalem is brought into captivity: the death of Sellum the son of Josias
is prophesied.

23. He speaks against evil Curats that make havoc of the flock of the
Lord: the coming of the true Shepherd The Contents of Jeremy.
Christ is prophesied: against false prophets: the miracles of false Prophets.

24. The vision of the two panniers of flgges: the first vision signifies,
that part of the people should be brought again from captivity: the second,
that Zedekias and the rest of the people should be destroyed.

25. Jeremy prophecieth that they shall be in captivity 70. years, because
they contemned and despised the word of God.

26. Jeremy moves the people to amendment: he is taken of the Prophets and
Priests, and brought to judgment: Vrias the Prophet is killed of Iehoakim,
contrary to the will of God.

27. Jeremy at the commandment of the Lord, sends bonds to the King of
Judah, and to the other Kings that were nigh, whereby they are admonished to
become subjects unto Nabuchodonosor: he warns the people and the Kings and
rulers that they believe not false Prophets.

28. The false prophecy of Hananias: the Prophet Jeremy shows that the
prophecy of Hananias is ^alse, by the example of the other Prophets.

29. The Epistle of Jeremy sent unto them that were in captivity in Babylon:
he prophecieth their return from captivity Chapters, 52.
after seauenty years.

30. The re^urn^ of the people from Babylon: God by his cha^^ening, shows
that the people is ^^nfull: the destruction of the enemies of Israel.

31. He prophecieth that the Children of Israel shall be restored again unto
their prosperity: to be turned from sin is the guis^ of God: the birth of
Christ is prophesied.

32. Jeremy is cast into prison, because he prophesied that the City should
be taken by the King of Babylon.

33. The Prophet is monished by the Lord to pray for the deliverance of the
people, which the Lord promises: God forgiueth sins, and does graciously to
the people for his ^wne renown: of the birth of Christ.

34. He threatens that the City and the King Zedekias also shall be given
into the hands of the ^ing of Babylon.

35. He propounds the obedience of the Rechabites, and thereby confounds
the pride of the Jews.

36. Baruch writes (what Jeremy enditeth) the Book of the curses against
Judah and Israel. The Contents of Jeremy.


37. Zedekias succeeds Cononiath: he sends unto Jeremy ^o pray for him.

38. By the m^tion of the rulers Jeremy is put into a dung^on.

39. Nabuchodonosor besieges Jerusalem: Zedekias ^leeth: he is taken of the
Chaldees: his sons are ^lame: his eyes are chrust out.

40. Jeremy has licenc^ to go whither he will: Iohanan prophecieth death
unto Gedeliath.

41. Ismael kills Gedeliath guilefully, and many other with him: Iohanan
follows after Ismael.

42. The Captains ask counsel of Jeremy what they ought to do: Jeremy
admonishes the remnant of the people not to go^ into Egypt.

43. Iohanan carries the remnant of the people into Egypt, c^ntrary to the
mind of Jeremy: Jeremy prophecieth the destruction of Egypt.

44. He reprou^th the people for their Idolatry: they that set light by the
thr^atning of the Lord are chastened.

45. Baruch is reproved of Jeremy. Chapters. 52.


46. He prophecieth the destruction of Egypt: deliverance is promised unto
Israel.

47. The word of the Lord against the Phi^s.

48. The word of the Lord against the M^^b^^^s.

49. The word of the Lord against the Ani^o^^tes: against Iou^a Damascus,
Cedar, Cl^m.

50. He prophecieth the destruction of Babylon, and the deliverance of Israel
which was in captivity.

51. How Babylon shall be ouer-throwne: Jeremy gives his Book to Saraias.

52. He repeateth the taking of Zedekias: Jerusalem is taken of the Chaldees:
the Temple is spoiled and robbed.

The Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremy, has five Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. IT happened after Israel was brought into captivity, and Chapters. 5.
Jerusalem destroyed, that Jeremy the Prophet sat weeping, and sorrofully
bewailed Jerusalem; and ^^ghing, The Contents of Jeremy.
and howling with a heavy and woeful heart, said.

2.

3.

4.

5. The prayer of Jeremy.

The Prophecy of Ezechiel, has forty eight Chapters.
The contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe time wherein Ezechiel prophesied, and in what Chapters. 48.
place: his kindred: the vision of the four Beasts: the fashion and work of
the wheels: the vision of the Lord.

2. The Prophet sent to call the people from their error.

3. The Prophet being fed with the word of God, and with the constant boldness
of the spirit, sent unto the people that were in captivity: the office of true
Preachers.

4. The siege of the City of Jerusalem is signified: the long continuance of
the captivity of Israel: a hunger is prophesied to come in the captivity.

5. The sign of the hairs, by which is signified the destruction The Contents
of Ezechiel.
of the people: the causes of the anger of God toward the people.

6. He shows that the people shall be plagued for the sin of Idolatry.

7. The end of all the land of Israel shall suddenly come: the cause of the
destruction thereof: the Prophet is commanded to show the sum of the evils
that are at hand.

8. An appearance of the similitude of God: Ezechiel is brought to Jerusalem
in the spirit: the Lord shows the Idolatries of the house of Israel, and
chiefly of the Priests.

9. The destruction of the City: they that shall be saved are marked: a
complaint of the Prophet for the destruction of the people.

10. Of the man that took hot burning coals out of the middle of the wheels
of the Cherubins.

11. Who they are that seduced the people of Israel: against these he
prophecieth, showing them how they shall be dispersed abroad.

12. The parable of the captivity: the exposition of the Chapters. 48.
parable, by which the taking of King Zedekia is signified.

13. The word of the Lord against false Prophets, which teach the people the
counsels of their own hearts.

14. The Lord denies his word to the people for their sins sake

15. As the unprofitable wood of the Vine tree is cast into the fire, so says
he that Jerusalem shall be burnt.

16. The Prophet declares the benefits of God toward Jerusalem: mercy is
promised to the repentant.

17. The Parable of the two Eagles.

18. He shows, that every man shall bear his own sin: to him that amendeth
is salvation promised.

19. The captivity of Iehoas and Iehoiakim is signified by the Lions whelps and
by the Lions.

20. The Lord denies that he will answer them when they pray, for the offense
of unkindness that he here obie^teth.

21. He threatens the sword, that is to say, destruction to The Contents of
Ezechiel.
the City of Jerusalem.

22. The word of the Lord against Jerusalem, for manslaughter, and for denying
due honor to their fathers and mothers, and other wickedness.

23. Of the fornication, that is to say, of the Idolatry of Samaria and
Jerusalem, under the name of Aholah and Aho^bah.

24. He proves the fiering of Jerusalem by a Parable of a seething pot.

25. The word of the Lord unto the sons of Ammon, which rejoiced at the fall
of Jerusalem: against Moab and Seir, against Idumea, against the Philistims.

26. He prophecteth that Tyrus shall be ouer-throwne, because it rejoiced at
the destruction of Jerusalem.

27. The Prophet is moved to bewail the desolation of Tyrus.

28. The word of God against the King of Tyrus for his pride.

29. He prophecieth against Pharao, and of the desolation of Egypt, with the
sparkling abroad of the Egyptians.

30. The destruction of Egypt and of his Cities is bewailed. Chapters. 48*


31. A comparison of the prosperity of Pharao, with the prosperity of the
Assirians: he prophecieth a like destruction to them both.

32. The Prophet is commanded to bewail Pharao King of Egypt: he prophecieth
that destruction shall come unto Egypt through the King of Babylon.

33. He sets out the office of the Governors and Ministers: he strengthens
them that despair, and boldneth them with the promise of mercy.

34. Against Shepherds that despise the flock of Christ, and seek their own
gain.

35. The destruction that shall come on the Mount Seir, that is, on the
Idumeans, because they troubled the people of the The Contents of Ezechiel.
Lord.

36. ^e promises to deliver Israel from the Gentiles: the benefits done unto
the Jews, are to be ascribed to the mercy of God, not unto their deseruings.

37. ^e prophecieth the bringing again of the people, being in captivity: he
shows the vn^o^ of the ten Tribes with the two.

38. He prophecieth that Gog and Magog shall come with an appointed ho^t into
the land of promise.

39. He shows the destruction of Gog and Magog: the gra^^ of Gog and his
host.

40. The restoring of the City, and of the Temple that was to come, is showed
unto the Prophet.

41. The disposition and devise of building again of the Temple* and of the
other things thereto belonging.

42. Of the chamber of the Temple for the Priests: and the holy things.

43. ^^ s^^th the glory of God going into the Temple, from ^^ence ^^ had before
departed.

44. ^e ^heweth that the door of the Temple is shut: he is commanded to
vpbraid the people for their ^^^ence.

45. Of (...) weights and measures.

46. The sacrifice of the Sabaoths, and of the new Moons: through which door
they must go in or come out of the Temple.

47. The vision of the waters that came out of the Temple: Chapters. 48.
the coasts of the land of promise, and the division thereof by Tribes.

48. The lots of the seven Tribes: the lots of the ten Tribes.

The Book of the Prophet Daniel has twelve Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe Prophet shows the captivity of Iehoiakim King Chapters. 12.
of Judah: of the children that were in captivity: the King commands to choose
which of them should be taught the learning and language of the Chaldeans.

2. The dream of Nabuchodonosor: he calls unto him sooth-saiers, and
requires of them both the dream, and the interpretation thereof.

3. The King sets up a golden Image, which he commands to be worshipped:
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, The Contents of Daniel.
are accused because they despised the Kings commandment.

4. Nabuchodonosor dreameth again.

5. Balthazar King of Babylon, abusing the vessels of the Temple, sees a hand
writing on the wall: the sooth-saiers called of the King, cannot expound the
writing.

6. Daniel is made ruler over the Lords.

7. A vision of four beasts is showed unto Daniel.

8. A vision of a strife between a Ram and a he Goat.

9. Daniel desires to have that performed of God, which he has promised,
concerning the return of the people from their banishment in Babylon: the
death of Christ.

10. There appears unto Daniel a man clothed in linen, which shows him
wherefore he was sent.

11. A prophecy of the Kings of Persia: of the Kingdom of Greece, of the
Kingdom of Egypt, and of the bond thereof: of the battle with the Kingdom of
Syria. Chapters. 12.


12. He prophecieth the resurrection of the dead: the darkness of the
Prophecy of Daniel.

The Book of the Prophet Osee has fourteen Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe time wherein Osee prophesied: the Idolatry of Chapters. 14.
the people: the calling of the Gentiles: Christ is the head of all people.

2. The people is called to repentance: he shows their Idolatry, and
threatens them, except they repent.

3. The Jews shall be cast off for their Idolatry: afterward they shall
return to the Lord.

4. A complaint against the people and the Priests of Israel.

5. Against the Priests and Rulers of Israel: the help of The Contents of Ose^.
man is vain.

6. Affliction causes a man to turn to God: the wickedness of the Priests.

7. Of the vices and want^nnesse of the people: of their punishment.

8. The destruction of Judah and Israel, because of their Idolatry.

9. Of the hunger and captivity of Israel.

10. Against Israel and his Idols: his destruction for the same.

11. The benefits of the Lord toward Israel: their ingratit^de against him.

12. He admonishes by Jacobs example, to trust in God and not in man*

13. The abomination of Israel, and cause of their destruction.

14. The destruction of Samaria: he exhorts the Israelites to turn to God,
who requires praise and thanks. Chapters. 14.


The Book of the Prophet Joel has three Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. A Prophecy against the Jews: he exhorts the people Chapters. 3.
to prayer and fasting, for the misery that was at hand. The Contents of Joel.


2. He prophecieth of the coming and cruelty of their enemies: on exhortation
to move them to convert: the love of Christ toward his people.

3. Of the judgment of God against the enemies of his people.

The Book of the Prophet Amos has nine Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe condition and state of Amos, and the time of his Chapters. 9.
prophecy: the word of the Lord against Damascus, the Philistims, Tyrus,
Idumea, and Ammon.

2. He prophecieth against Moab, Judah, and Israel. The Contents of Amos.


3. He reproves the house of Israel of ingratitude, foreshewing Gods most just
punishment for the same: strangers are called to see the equity of Gods
judgment against Israel.

4. Under the name of fat Kine of Basan, he in^^ieth against the Governors of
Samaria, and fore-sheweth their punishment. Chapters, 9.


5. The Prophet lamenteth the captivity of Sion: he calls to repentance: he
describes the power of God.

6. He prophecieth against the Princes of Israel living in The Contents of Amos.
pleasures.

7. God shows certain visions, whereby he signifies the destruction of the
people of Israel.

8. By a vision of a basket of summer-fruit, the end of the Kingdom of Israel
is showed.

9. Threatenings against the Temple: the subversion of the people.

The Book of the Prophet Abdias has one chapter.
The Contents of the Chapter. viz.
1. AGainst Edom, and the trust that they had in riches. Chapter. 1.


The Book of the Prophet Jonas has four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. Jonas fled when he was sent to preach: a tempest rises, and he is cast
into the sea for his disobedience. Chapters. 4.


2. Jonas is in the fishes belly: his prayer: he is delivered.

3. Jonas is sent again into Niniuie: the repentance of The Contents of Jonas.
the King of Niniuie.

4. The great goodness of God toward his creatures.

The Book of the Prophet Micheas has seven Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. OF the destruction of Samaria because of her Idolatry. Chapters. 7.


2. Threatenings against the sinful people: they would teach the Prophets to
preach.

3. Against the Tyranny of Princes, and false Prophets.

4. The calling of the Gentiles, and conversion of the The Contents of Micheas.
Jews.

5. Of the destruction of Jerusalem.

6. An exhortation to hear the judgment against Israel being unkind: what
manner of sacrifices do please God.

7. A complaint of the little number of the righteous: against the truth ought
we not to hold, with our greatest friends: the prosperity of the Church.

The Book of the Prophet Nahum has three Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. OF the destruction of the Assirians, and of the deliverance Chapters. 3.
of Israel.

2. He describes the victories of the Chaldeans against the The Contents of
Nahum.
Assirians*

3. Of the fall of Niniuie: no power can escape the hand of God.

The Book of the Prophet Habacuck has three Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. A Complaint against the wicked that persecute the Chapters. 3.
just.

2. A vision against pride, covetousness, drunkenness, The Contents of
Habacuck.
and Idolatry.

3. A prayer for the faithful.

The Book of the Prophet Sophonie has three Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. Threatenings against Judah and Jerusalem, because Chapters. 3.
of their Idolatry.

2. He moves to return to God, prophesying unto the one The Contents of
Sophonie.
destruction, and to the other deliverance.

3. Against the Governors of Jerusalem: of the calling of all the Gentiles: a
comfort to the residue of Israel.

The Book of the Prophet Aggeus has two Chapters,
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe time of the prophecy of Aggeus: an exhortation to Chapters. 2.
build the Temple again.

2. He shows that the glory of the latter Temple shall exceed Chapters. 2.
the first.

The Book of the Prophet Zacharias has fourteen Chapters.
The contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HE moves the people to return to the Lord, and eschew the wickedness of
their fathers: he prefigureth Chapters. 14.
Christ and his Apostles.

2. The renewing of Judah and Jerusalem.

3. Of the low and high estate of Christ, under the figure of Io^ua the high
Priest: a prophecy of Christ.

4. The vision of the golden Candle* stick, and the exposition thereof.

5. A vision of the flying Book, signifying the curse of thieves, and such as
abuse the name of God: by the vision of the measure is signified the bringing
of Judah to Babylon.

6. By the four Charets he describes the prosperity of four Kingdoms. The
Contents of Z^^^ar^as.


7. The true ^asting: the rebellion of the people is cause of their affliction.

8. Of the return of the people unto Jerusalem: and of the mercy of God
toward them: of good works: the calling of the Gentiles.

9. The threatenings of the Gentiles: the coming of Christ sitting on an Ass.

10. The people is moved to require the doctrine of the truth of the Lord: the
Lord promises to visit and comfort the house of Israel.

11. The destruction of the Temple^ the ^are of the faith* full is committed to
Christ by ^^e Father: a grievous vision against Jerusalem and Judah.

12. Of the well of grace and truth: of the clean riddance of Idolatry and of
false Prophets. Chapters. 14.


14. The wasting of the Church under the figure of Jerusalem: of the Kingdom
of the Lord.

The Book of the Prophet Malachias has four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. A Complaint against Israel, and chiefly the Priests. Chapters. 4.


2. Threatenings against the Priests, being seducers of the People.

3. Of the messenger of the Lord, John Baptist, and of The Contents of
Malachias.
Christ's office*

4. The day of the Lord, before the which Elias should come.

The third Book of Esdras has nine Chapters.
1 Josias appoints Priests, and keeps the passe-ouer: offering Chapters. 9.
of the priests and people: the upright life of Josias: the destruction of
Jerusalem.

2. Cyrus gave leave to the Jews to return: the names of them that returned:
their adversaries did let their buildings: and the Kings letters for the same.

3. The feast of Darius: the three wise sentences. The Contents of 3. Esdras.


4. The strength of a King: of the strength of women: of the strength of truth:
which sentence is approved, and the petition granted.

5. The number of them that return from captivity: their vows and sacrifices:
the Temple is begun to be built: their enemies would craftily join with
them. Chapters. 9.


6. Of Aggeus and Zacharias: the building of the Temple: Sisinnes would let
them: his letters to Darius: the Kings answer to the contrary.

7. Sisinnes and his companions follow the Kings commandment and help the
Jews to build the Temple: the time The Contents of Jonas.
that it was built: they keep the Passe-ouer.

8. Esdras comes from Babylon to Jerusalem: the copy of the commission given
by King Artaxerxes: Esdras gives thanks to the Lord.

9. After Esdras had read the Law for the strange wives, they promised to put
them away.

The fourth Book of Esdras has sixteen Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe people is rerroued for their unthankfulness: God Chapters. 16.
will have an other people, if these will not be reformed.

2. The Sinagogue finds fault with her own children: the Gentiles are called.

3. The wondrous works which God did for the people are recited: Esdras
meruaileth that God suffers the Babilonians to have rule over his people,
which yet are sinners also.

4. The Angel reproves Esdras, because he seems to The Contents of 4.
Esdras.
^nter into the profound Judgment of God.

5. In the later time truth shall be hid, unrighteousness and all wickedness
shall reign in the world.

6. God has foreseen all things in his secret counsel, and is author
thereof, and created them for his children: the felicity of the age to come.

7. Without tribulation none can come to felicity: God aduertiseth all in time
the coming and death of Christ: the resurrection Chapters. 16.
and last Judgment.

8. The works of God are excellent: Esdras prays for him and for his people:
the promise of salvation unto the just.

9. All things in this world have a beginning and an end, torments for the
wicked after this life: the number of the wicked is more then of the good.

10. Esdras and the woman that appears unto him commune together.

11. The vision of an Eagle coming forth of the sea: and of her feathers: of a
Lion coming out of the forest.

12. The declaration of the former visions. The Contents of 4. Esdras


13. The vision of a wind coming out of the sea, which became a man: his
prophecy and power against his enemies: the declaration of this vision.

14. How God appeared to Moses in a b^sh: all things decline to age: the latter
age worse then the former, the ingratitude of Israel: the resurrection and
judgment.

15. The prophecy of Esdras is certain: the evils which shall come on the
world: the Lord will avenge the innocent blood.

16. Of the evil that shall come upon the world; with admonition how to
go^^rne themselves in afflictions.

The Book of Tobias has fourteen Chapters,
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. TObias pa^^^tage, his godlin^s, his equity, his charity, and prosperity:
he flees, and his goods are confiscate, Chapters. 14.
and after restored.

2. Tobias calls the saithfull to his table: he leaves the The Contents of
Tobias.
feast to bur^e the d^ad: how he became blind: his wife labors for his
living, she reproa^heth him bitterly.

3. The prayer of Tobias: Sara, Raguels daughter, and the things that came unto
her: her prayer heard: the Ang^^ R^pha^l sent.

4. Precepts and exhortations of Tobias to his son.

5. Tobias is sent to Rages: he meets with the Angel Chapters. 14.
Raphael which did conduct him.

6. Tobias delivered from the fish: Raphael shows him certain Medicines: he
conducteth him toward Sara.

7. Tobias marries Sara, Raguels daughter.

8. Tobias drives away the evil spirit: he prays to God with his wise:
Raguel prepares a grave for his son in law: Raguel blesses the Lord.

9. The Angel goes to Gabellus at the desire of Tobi^s: The Contents of Tobias.
which delivers the letter, and receives the money.

10. Tobias and his wife think long for their son: Raguel sends away
Tobias and Sara.

11. The return of Tobias to his father: how he was received: his father has
his sight restored, and praises the Lord.

12. Tobias declares to his father the pleasures that Raphael had done him,
the which he would recompense.

13. A thanksgiving of Tobias, who exhorts all to praise the Lord.

14. Lessons of Tobias to his son; he prophecieth the destruction of Niniue,
and the restoring of Jerusalem and the Temple.

The Book of Judith has sixteen Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe building of Ecbatanis: Nabuchodonosor made Chapters. 16.
war against Arphaxad and overcame him: he threatens them that would not
helps him. The Contents of Judith.


2. Nabuchodonosor commanded presumptuoufly that all people should be brought
to subjection.

3. The people subject to Holofernes: he destroieth their Gods, that
Nabuchodonosor might only be worshipped. Chapters, 16.


.4 Eliacim the Priest writes to Bethulia, that they should fortify
themselves: they cried unto the Lord, and humbled themselves before him.

5. Achior the Ammonite does declare to Holofernos the manner of the Israelites.

6. Holophernes blasphemeth God whom Achior confesses.

7. Holophernes does besiege Bothulia.

8. The parentage* life, and conversation of Judith.

9. Judith humbles herself before the Lord, and makes her prayers for the
deliverance of her people.

10. Judith decketh herself, and goes forth of the City: The Contents of
Judith.
she is taken of the watch of the Assirians, and brought to Holophernes.

11. Holophernes comfort Judith, and asks the cause of her coming: she
deceives him by her fair words.

12. Judith would not pollute herself with the meat of the Gentiles.

13. Judith prays for strength: she smites off Holophernes head: she
returns to Bethulia and rejoices her people.

14. Judith causes to hang up the head of Holophernes: Achior joins himself
unto the people of God: the Israelites go out against the Assirians.

15. The Assirians are afraid and flee: the Israelites pursue them.

16. Judith praises God with a song: she offers to the Lord Holophernes
stuff: her continence, life, and death: all Israel lamenteth her.

The rest of the Chapters of the Book of Esther, which are neither found in
the Hebrwe, nor in the Chaldee: after the Latin, has six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
11. THe dream of Mardocheus. Chapters. 6.


12. Mardocheus utters the treason devised against the King, and is therefore
rewarded of him.

13. The copy of the letters of Artaxerxes against the Jews: the prayer of
Mardocheus. The Contents of Esther.


14. The prayer of Esther for the deliverance of her and her people.

15. Mardocheus moves Esther to go in unto the King and make intercession for
her people: and she performs his request.

16. The copy of the letters of Artaxerxes, whereby he reuoketh those which
he sent first forth.

The Wisdom of Solomon has nineteen Chapters.
The contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HOw we ought to enpuire and search after God: who Chapters. 19.
they are that find him.

2. The imaginations and desires of the wicked, and their The Contents of
Wisdom.
counsel against the faithful.

3. The conservation and assurance of the righteous: the Chapters. 19.
reward of the faithful: who are miserable.

4. Of virtue and the commodity thereof: the death of the righteous, and the
condemnation of the unfaithful.

5. The constantnes of the righteous before the persecutors: the hope of the
unfaithful is vain: the blessedness of the Saints and godly.

6. The calling of Kings, Princes, and Judges, which are also exhorted to
search wisdom.

7. Wisdom ought to be preferred above all things.

8. The effects of wisdom.

9. A prayer of Solomon to obtain wisdom.

10. The deliverance of the righteous, and destruction of The Contents of
Wisdom.
the enemies comes through wisdom.

11. The miracles done for Israel: the vengeance of sinners: the great power
and mercy of God.

12. The mercy of God toward sinners: the works of God are unreprovable: God
gives leisure to repent.

13. All things be vain except the knowledge ot God: Idolaters and Idols are
mocked.

14. The detestation and abominations of Images: a curse of him and them that
make them, whereof Idolatry is proceeded: what evils come of Idolatry.

15. The voice of the faithful praising the mercy of God, by whose grace they
serve not Idols.

16. The punishment of Idolaters: the benefits done unto the faithful.

17. The judgments of God against the wicked.

18. The f^ry pillar that the Israelites had in Egypt: the deliverance of the
faithful.

19. The death of the Egyptians, and the great joy of the Hebrews.

The Book of Jesus the son of Sirach, which is called in Latin
Ecclesiasticus, has fi^tie one Chapters.
The Prologue of Jesus the son of Sirach unto his Book.
Many and great men have declared wisdom unto us out of the Law, out of the
Prophets, and out of other that followed them, in the which things Israel ought
to be commended, by the reason of doctrine and wisdom. Therefore they that
have it and read it, should not only themselves be wise there-through, but
serve other also, with teaching and writing. After that my grandfather Jesus
had given diligent labor to read the Law, the Prophets, and other Books that
were left us of our fathers, and had well exercised himself therein, he
purposed also to write something of wisdom and good manners, to the intent
that they which were willing to learn and to be wise, might have the more
understanding* and be the more apt to lead a good conversation: wherefore I
exhort you to receive it lovingly, to read it with diligence, and to take it
in good worth, though our words be not ^o eloquent as the famous Orators; for
the thing that is written in the Hebrewe tongue, sounds not so well when it
is translated into other speech; not only this Book of mine, but also the
Law, the Prophets, and other Books, sound ^arre otherwise then they do when
they are spoken in their own language.

Now in the thirty eighth year, when I came into Egypt, in the time of
Ptolomie E^erges, and continued there a long season, I found Books there left
full of great and profound learning, wherefore I thought it good and necessary
to bestow my diligence and (...) to interpret this Book: and considering that
I had time, I labored and did my best to perform this Book* and to bring it
to light, that the strangers also that are disposed to learn, might apply
themselves unto good manners, and live according to the Law of the Lord.

The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. Wisdom comes of God: a praise of the fear Chapters. 51.
of God: the means to come by wisdom.

2. He exhorts the servants of God to righteousness, love, understanding,
and patience, to trust in the Lord: a curse upon them that are faint-hearted
and impatient.

3. To our father and mother ought we to give double honor: of the blessing
and curse of the father and mother.

4. Alms must be done with gentleness: the study of wisdom and her fruits:
an exhortation to eschew evil and to do good.

5. In riches we may not put any confidence: the vengeance of God ought to be
feared, and repentance may not be deferred.

6. It is the property of a sinner to be evil tongued: of friendship, desire
to be taught.

7. We must forsake evil, and yet not justify our selves* the behavior of
the wise toward his wife, his friend, his The Contents of Ecclesiasticus.
children, his servant, his father and mother.

8. We must take heed with whom we have to do.

9. Of jealousy: an old friend is to be preferred before a new.

10. Of Kings and Judges: Pride and covetousness (...) to be abhorred: labor is
praised.

11. The praise of humility: after the outward appearance ought we not to
judge.

12. Unto whom we ought to do good: enemies ought not to be trusted.

13. The companies of the proud, and of the rich are to be eschewed: the loved
of God: like do company with their like.

14. The offense of the tongue: man is but a vain thing: happy is he that
continues in wisdom.

15. The goodness that follows him which fears God: God rejects and
casts off the sinner: God is not the author of the evil. Chapters. 51.


16. Of unhappy and wicked children: no man can hide himself from God.

17. The creation of man, and the goodness that God has done unto him: of
alms, and repentance.

18. The marvelous works of God: the misery and wretchedness of man: against
God ought we not to complain.

19. Wine and whoredom brings men to poverty: In thy words must thou use
Discretion.

20. Of correction and repentance: Of the gift of the wiseman and of the fool:
of lying.

21. Not to continue in sin: the prayer of the afflicted: to hate to be
reproved: the mouth of the wise man: the thought of the fool.

22. Of the sluggard: not to speak much to a fool: a good conscience fears
not.

23. A prayer against pride, lechery and gluttony: many The Contents of
Ecclesiasticus.
sins proceed of adultery: of the fear of God.

24. A praise of wisdom proceeding forth of the mouth of God: of her works
and place where she rests.

25. Of the three things which please God, and of three which he hates: of
nine things that be not to be suspect: and of the tenth, chiefly of the malice
of a woman.

26. The praise of a good woman: of the jealousy, and drunkenness of a woman.

27. Of the poor that would be rich: the probation of the man that fears
God: the wicked imagines evil, which returns upon himself.

28. We ought not to desire vengeance, but to forgive the offense: of the vices
of the tongue, and of the dangers thereof.

29. How we ought to lend our money and do alms: of a faithful man answering
for his friend: of liberality and hospitality.

30. Of the correction of Children: of the commodity of health: death is better
then a sorrowful life.

31. We ought to give diligent heed to honesty: of them that take pain to
gather riches.

32. Of the discretion and praise of the preacher, and of the Chapters, 51.
hearer: of the fear, faith, and confidence in God.

33. The deliverance of him that fears God: man is in the hand of God, as the
earth is in the hand of the Potter.

34. Of dreams, diuinations, and enchantments: we ought to confute vain hope
and lying: the praise of them that fear God.

35. It is well done to pray and to do sacrifice: the prayer of the fatherless
and of the widdowe, and of him that humbles himself.

36. A prayer to God, in the person of all faithful men: the praise of a good
woman.

37. How a man should know friends and counselors, and search the company of
an holy man.

38. A Physician is commendable: to bury the dead: the wisdom of him that is
learned.

39. A wise man: the works of God: unto the good, good The Contents of
Ecclesiasticus.
things do profit: but to the evil, even good things are evil.

40. Many miseries light in a man's life: all things pass away: but a firm
and stable faith remains: of the blessing of the righteous: and prerogative
of the fear of God.

41. Of the remembrance of death: death is not to be feared: A curse upon them
that forsake the law of God.

42. The law must be taught: a daughter, a woman: God knows all things, yea,
even the secrets of the heart.

43. The sum of the creation of the works of God.

44. A praise of certain holy men, Enoch, Noah, Abraham.

45. The praise of Moses, Aaron and Phin^hes.

46. The praise of Iosue, Caleb, Samuel.

47. The praise of Nathan, David, and Salo^mon.

48. The praise of Elias, Eliseus, Ezechias, and Esaias.

49. Of Josias, Ezechias, David, Jeremy, Ezechiel, Zorobabel, Jesus, Nehemias,
Enoch, and Joseph.

50. Of Simeon the son of Onias: an exhortation to praise the Lord.

51. The prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach.

The Book of the Prophet Baruch has six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. BAruch wrote a Book during the captivity of Babylon, which he read before
Iechonias and all the people: Chapters. 6.
the Jews sent the Book with money unto Jerusalem to their other brethren,
to the intent that they should pray for them.

2. The Jews confess that they justly suffer for their sins. The Lord will
that we obey unto Princes although they be evil. The Contents of Baruch.


3. Only God was the finder of wisdom: of the incarnation of Christ.

4. The reward of them that keep the Law, and the punishment of them that
despise it.

5. Jerusalem is moved unto gladness, for the return of her people, and
under the figure thereof, the Church.

6. A copy of the Epistle that Jeremy sent unto the Jews which were led away
prisoners by the King of Babylon; wherein he certifieth them of the thing that
was commanded him of God.

The Song of the three Children which were put into the hot burning Oven, has
one Chapter. The common translation reads this song, in the third Chapter of
Daniel.
The Contents of the Chapter. viz.
1. THe prayer of Azarias: the cruelty of the King: the fire deuoureth the
Chaldeans: the Angel of the Lord was Chapter. 1.
in the Furnace.

The Story of Susanna has one Chapter, which is the thirteenth Chapter of
Daniel after the Latin.
The Contents of the Chapter. viz.
1. THe two Governors are taken with the love of Susanna: Chapter. 1.
they take her alone in the Garden: they entice her to wickedness: she choose
rather to obey God, though it The Contents of Daniel.
be to the danger of her life: she is accused: Daniel does deliver her: the
Governors are to put death.

The Story of Bell and the Dragon Chapter. 1.
has one Chapter, which is the foureteenth Chapter of Daniel after the Latin.

The prayer of Manasses King of Chapter. 1.
Judah, when he was holden captive in Babylon, has one Chapter.

Here follows a necessary Table of the knowledge of the state of Judah, from
the beginning of the Monarchy of the Greeks, where the table we have set
forth upon Esdras ends, until the death and passion of Jesus Christ.

The 70. weeks foreshewed by Daniel. Dan. 9. The Monarchy of the Greeks. The
State of the Jews. THe Angel of the Lord sent to Daniel, said that it was 70.
weeks of years, that is to say, seventy times seven, which comes ^o 490.
from the giving forth of the commandment that Jerusalem should be builded
again, and restored, until Christ the Prince. This commandment was given
forth by the mouth of Darius Long-hand, Monarch of the Persians, as ^^ ^^
written. N^h. 2. Therefore the said 79. weeks ought to begin there, though all
agree not therein, for some begin it in the second year of the said Darius:
others the first year of Cirus. So that from the beginning of the said weeks
^^^^ the time that Alexander usurped the Monarchy, we reckon four years and
eighteen weeks, which makes 130. years. To show the verifying of the said
weeks* according to the foresaid prophecy of Daniel. 9. we will proportion
them with the years in which the Kings of Siria (set there in order on the
right side) have ended their Kingdom* each of them in order. ALexander the
great son to Phillip King of Macedon, conquered the Monarchy of the
Persians, from Darius the 192. year of ^irus the first Monarch, tra^sported it
to the Greek: he reigned six whole years, and the seventh dyed, leaving
diverse successors, to whom he divided the said Monarchy before his death, that
is, the Kingdoms of Siria, Asia, Egypt, and Macedonia. We will here treat of
his successors Kings of Siria only, because the Scripture makes men^^on
thereof, and makes the supputation of the years by the time that the said
King reigned, beginning at the first, as appears in the first Book of the
Macha^ees. And we will orderly set their names and the time, that each of them
has reigned, to confer them with the number of the weeks placed on the left
side of this ^able: To the end the said weeks may be verified, and that the
prophecy of Daniel may be plainly understood, touching the coming and death
of our Savior Christ* AFter the people of the Lord were delivered from the
captivity of Babylon by ^^^us, and returned unto their land, under the conduct
of Zorobabel: there was no (...) ^ame of King in Judah, ^ut Prince and
Governor, which were for the most part of the line of Judah, and are these that
follow. 1. Zorobabel the years ^f the government of each Governor.
reigned 38. years. 38 2. Resa Mesillam, 66. years. 66 3. Ioanna Ben Re^a, 53.
years. 53 weeks years 4. Judas Hircanus, 15. years. All which time amounts
to 191. years, that the Monarchy of the Persians dured. 15 25 4 1. Seleucus
the first King of yee^es (...) the first King o^ ^ll the d^c^^s^ ^^ ^^ch King.
Siria, surnamed Nichanor began his reign the 13. year after the death of
Alexander, and reigned 31. years. 5. Joseph was Governor the year of
Alexander the great, and reigned 7. years. In his time, the said Alexander had
the Temple and sacrifice in great honor. 7 28 2 2. Antiochus Soter held the
Kingdoms of Siria, and reigned 19. years. 50 6. Abner S^m^^ ruled with
Joseph, and reigned 11. years. In his time Ptolomie the first King of Egypt
after Alexander took Jerusalem, by deceit, spoiled the Temple, and carried a
great number of the people in to Egypt. 11 30 3 3. Antiochus Th^o^ began his
reign the year 51. and reigned 15. years. 65 7. Mathathias H^li governed 12.
years. 12 33 4 4. Seleuchus Gallicinus reigned 20. years. 85 8. A^er* Maath
^ouer^ ^ 33 6 6. Antiochus the great began his reign the year 75. and reigned
36. years. 124 9. Nagid Arphaxat reigned 10 years. In his ^une Eleazar the
high Priest sent the 70. Interpreters to Ptolomie Philadelphe* the ^. King of
Egypt, and son to the said Ptolomie, to translate the Holy Scripture out of
Hebrewe into Greek, and the said Ptolomie delivered all the Jews that his
father had holden captive* 10 40 4 7. Seleucus Philopater reigned 12. years.
136 42 2 8. Antiochus Epiphanes the Tyrant mentioned in the first Book of the
Machebees began to reign the year 137. and reigned 12. years. 160 4 42 9.
Antiochus Eupator his son reigned two years. 150 0 44 10. Demetrius Soter
began his reign the year 151. and reigned 10. years. 160 10. Agar Eli
succeeded him and reigned 8. years. 8 11. Mallot Naum governed 7. years. 7 44
0 11. Alexander reigned 5. yer. 165 45 12. Demetrius Nicanor reigned 2 years.
167 12. Amos Sirach 14 years. 14 3 13. Mathathias Sil^a 10. yer. 10 45 13.
Antiochus Sedetes reigned but 3. years. 170 14. Joseph Arses 66. years. In
his time Ptolomie Philopater the 4. King of Egypt, entered into Jury, and killed
60000. Jews, and restored the country into the hands of Anthiochus the great,
which delivered it again to Ptolomie the successor of the said Philopater, for
the friendship between them. 66 6 45 14. Triphon began his reign the year
171. and reigned. 3. yer. 173 4 47 1 15. Antiochus Pius reigned 12. years. 185
48 16. Demetrius Nicanor the 12. king before mentioned was kept prisoner by the
Parthians, and then returned again to his Kingdom, and reigned 4. years. 189
3 15. Ianna Hircanus was the last of the line of Judah, and reigned 16. years,
he was slain by Antiochus the Tyrant. 16 48 17. Alexander began his reign in
the year 190. and reigned 2. years. 191 4 52 0 18. Antiochus Griphius reigned
29 years. 220 16. After Ianna succeeded a kindred of the Priests named
Asmodus. The first was Judas Machabeus, which reigned 6. years with great
prowesie and virtue. 16 54 19. Seleuchus, son to Griphius, was at strife with
his uncle and others of his kindred by the space of ten years. 230 4 6 56 20.
The year 221. the Sirians being grieved at the Princes debate for the
Kingdom, (...) Tigranes 248 17. Ionathas his brother reigned in great prowess
and virtue 18. years. 18 18. Simon his brother reigned 1^. years. 8 4 19.
John Hircanus his son reigned 34. years: he, and the predecessors of his
kindred, held both the Kingly authority and Priestly dignity together. 43 59 1.
The year 149. Pompey overcame Tigranes, and delivered Siria into the hands of
the Romans. And 17. years after, Julius Caesar was first Emperor of Rome:
who reigned in the Empire 5. years. 269 20. Aristobulus, the son of John,
reigned 1. year, he took again the Crown, and title of King, for himself
and his successors. 4 67 2. Augustus the second Roman Emperor reigned 56.
years, Christ was borne the 41. year of the same Emperor, the 65. week and
3. years. 305 21. Alexander reigned King 27. years, and left the Kingdom to
Alexandra his wife, which held it 9. years, but left the Priesthood to
Hircanus her son, which reigned 3. years after her death. Then Aristobulus
brother to the said Hircanus, drove him from the Crown and Priesthood, and
reigned in his place 3. years. Pompey with the Army of the Romans, having
taken all Siria, led Aristobulus captive, leaving Hircanus in the Priesthood,
and Antipater Herod's father, governed in Jury. And the 51. year after, Herod
was proclaimed King, and the scepter taken from Judah: Christ our Savior came.
27 9 0 70 3. Claudius Tiberius Nero the third Emperor, reigned 23. years. The
15. year of the same Emperor, Jesus was baptized, and began then to show
himself openly, which was the 5. year and 69. week. The third year
following he was put to death for our Redemption, at which time the 70. weeks
were finished. 3 51

The first Book of Machabees has sixteen chapters.
The Contents of the Chapter. viz.
1. AFter the death of Alexander the king of Macedonia, Chapters. 19.
Antiochus takes his kingdom.

2. The mourning of Mattathias and his sons, for the destruction of the holy
City.

3. Judas is made ruler over the Jews: he kills Apollonius and Seron the
princes of Siria.

4. Judas goes against Gorgias which lies in wait.

5. Judas vanquisheth the Heathen that go about to destroy Israel, and is
helped of his brethren Simon and Ionathas.

6. Antiochus, willing to take the City of Elimas for a prey, is driven away
of the Citizens.

7. Demettius reigned after he had killed Antiochus and The Contents of
Machabes.
Lysias.

8. Judas considering the power, and goodly policy of the Romans, makes
peace with them: the rescript of the Romans sent unto the Jews.

9. After the death of Nicanor, Demetrius sends his army against Judas:
Judas is slain.

10. Demetrius desires to have peace with Ionathas: Alexander moves war
against Demetrius: Demetrius is slain: the friendship of Ptolomeus and
Alexander.

11. The dissension between Ptolomeus and Alexander his son in law: the
death of Alexander.

12. Ionathas sends Ambassadors to Rome, and to the people of Sparta, to
renew their Covenant of friendship: Ionathas puts to flight the Princes of
Demetrius: Triphon takes Ionathas by deceit.

13. After Ionathas was taken, Simon is chosen Captain: of whom Triphon,
taking his children and money, for the redemption of Ionathas, kills him and
his children.

14. Demetrius is overcome of Ar^aces; Simon being Chapters. 16.
Captain there is great quietness in Israel: the covenants of friendship with
the Romans, and with the people of Sparta, is renewed.

15. The Romans write letters unto kings and nations, in the defense of the
Jews.

16. Sendebeus the Captain of Antiochus host, is put to flight by the sons
of Simon.

The second Book of the Machabees has fifteen Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. AN Epistle of the Jews that dwelt at Jerusalem, sent Chapters. 15.
unto them that dwelt in Egypt: wherein they exhort them to give thanks for
the death of Antiochus: of the fire that was hid in the pit: the prayer of
Nehemias.

2. How Jeremy hid the Tabernacle, the Arc and the Altar, in the hill* of the
^iue books of Jason contained in one.

3. Of the honor done unto the Temple by the kings of the Gentiles: Simon
utters what treasure is in the Temple. The Contents of 2. Machabees.


4. Simon reports evil of Onias: Jason desiring the office of the high
priest, corrupted the king with rewards.

5. Of the signs and tokens seen in Jerusalem: of the end and office of
Jason: the pursuit of Antiochus against the Jews.

6. The Jews are compelled to leave the law of God: the Temple is defiled:
the readers are admonished, that they shall not abhor the adversities
wherewith the Lord afflicts them: the grievous pain of Eleazarus.

7. The punishment of the seau^n brethren, and of their Mother*

8. Judas gathers together his host: Nicanor is sent against Judas: the Jews
give thanks after they put their Chapters, 15.
enemies to flight, dividing the spoils unto the fatherles, and widows.

9. Antiochus willing to spoil Persepolis, is driven to flight: As he
persecuted the Jews, he is stricken of the Lord: the feigned repentance of
Antiochus: he dies.

10. Judas Machabeus takes the City and the Temple: he begins to show
the acts of Eupator: five men appear in the air to the help of the Jews:
Timothy is slain. The Contents of 2. Machabees.


11. Lysias goes about to overcome the Jews: succor is sent from heaven unto
the Jews.

12. Timotheus troubles the Jews: the wicked deeds of them of Ioppa against
the Jews.

13. The coming of Eupator into Jury: the death of Menelaus.

14. By the motion of Alcimus, Demetrius sends Nicanor to kill the Jews.

15. Nicanor goes about to come upon Judas on the Sabbath day: the
blasphemy of Nicanor.

The description of the holy Land, containing the places mentioned in the
four Evangelists, with other places about the sea-coastes* wherein may be
seen, the ways and iournies of Christ and his Apostles in Judea, Samaria, and
Galilee: for into these three parts the Land is divided*

Mount Oliuet is two mile from Jerusalem, East and by South: Gethsemani a
Village, lies at the foot of the Mount, betwixt the same and Jerusalem:
Bethphage a Village lies not far from it. Also in the vale betwixt the Mount
and Jerusalem, Golgotha, or the Mount of Caluarie, lies hard by Jerusalem West
and by North.



Here follows a necessary Table to make plain the difficulty that is found
in Saint Mathewe and Saint Luke, touching the generation of Jesus Christ the
Son of David, and his right Successor in the kingdom, which description
begins at David, and no higher, because the difficulty is only in his
posterity.

Matthew. S. Luke. David begat Solomon ^. Nathan the Kings brother. The
posterity of Solomon left in O^hosia^, whereby the Kingdom was translated to
the line of Nathan in the person of Ioas son to Judah Mathatha Roboan^ ^e^na
Ab^a Me^cha Asa Eliacim Iosaphat Iona Ioram Joseph Ochosias Judah. Simon called
Ioas which begat Amasias The names here contained, as well on the left side as
on the right, issuing from Ioas have* diverse names and yet are all one person.
Therefore note that the persons on the left side, named by S. Matthew are the
very same that are otherwise named by S. Luke on the right side till Sala^^iel.
Leui Azarias Matthath Ioatham Ioram Achas ^li^xer Ezechias Jesus Manasses Her
Amon Holma^^m Josias Cosan Ac^aas Abdi Ioacim Mel^hi I^^ko^ias Ne^i Salathiel
Salathiel Zorobabel which begat Abiud After the people were returned into the
land with Zorobabel, being delivered from the captivity of Babylon, he
governed the same people 58. years and left diverse children, among whom Rela
and Abiud were the chief. So the government and rule ^uer the people, remained
to Rela and his posterity until Iann^, and thence descended the Virgin Ma^ie,
as is declared by the generation described by S. Luke, ^ Joseph her husband
descended from the said Zorobabel by Abi^d brother to Rela as Saint Matthew
declares in the generation by him described. Re^ which governed 66. years.
Ioa^na 53. years. Judah 14. Joseph 7. S^^^i 11. Ma^ha^h^: Nahat 9. Nagg^ 10.
Hel^ ^. N^um 7. Amos 14. Mathath 10 Joseph 66. I^nn^ 16. Melchi Matthath H^li
called Ioacim Ma^i^ the mother of Christ. Eliacim* A^c^ Sad^^ Achin Eliud
Eleaz^^ Matha^ Jacob Iosesph the husband of Ma^ie the virgin mother to our
Savior Christ. Jesus Christ.

FOr better understanding of the Contents of this Table, ye shall note that the
Evangelists S. Matthew and S. Luke, have diversely recited the generation of our
Savior Christ, accordgin to the flesh, and yet tend both to one end, that is
to prove (that according to that which is written of him in the prophesies) he
is descended of the Royal blood of David, and ^^ghtly succeeded him in the
Kingdom. So the diversity of the said recital consists in this, that S.
Matthew sets forth the said generation descending from the father to the
son, and S. Luke ascends from son to father, which come all to one end.
But to show the agreement of Saint Luke with S. Mathewe, we have here set
forth the generation by him described, descending after the order of S. Matthew,
to the end that the one may be conferred with the other: furthermore S. Matthew
describes the generation of Joseph, though it belong nothing to Jesus Christ,
after the flesh, and S. Luke that of the Virgin Marie: for it was very
necessary to recite both, forasmuch as women were commonly reputed of the line
or kindred of their husbands and so as well of her husbands side as on her own
offspring, it is manifest that she was of the Royal line of David. 1. Judah of
the line of Nathan engendered Simeon called Ioas, which came to the Royal
Seat, because the posterity of Solomon failed in Ochos^as, and therefore the
Kingdom belonged to Nathans posterity according to the ordinance of David, as
Philo recites, that is: the youngest of the children of Ber^ebe (which was
Solomon) should reign after him, and that if the posterity failed, the
Kingdom should come to the posterity of the next younger, which was Nathan:
and therefore Nathan was called Ahiscar that is to say brother of the Prince,
and they of his posterity Ahiscarim, that is to say brothers of the Prince, and
Mathitim, which signifies, Given to succeed. The said (...) recites, that
the posterity of the said Na^ was so honored of the King Iosaphat, that (...)
called his children the brothers of I^ram (...) and their children the brothers
of Ocho^^a (...) nephew: and this is the cause why the ^pture says that Io^s
was the son of ^s^as, though he were not his natural son, b^ son of Judah
descended of Nathan.

Note that S. Matthew going about to describe the generation by foureteens, did
first leave out Ioas, Amazias, and Azarias, which are set in between Ochos^as,
the last of the race of Solomon and Ioathan: further he has left cut Ichaas,
and Ioacim, placed between the same description more perfect and plain

Forasmuch as it seems that S* Luke makes no mention of the generation of
Marie, but rather of Joseph, for he uses these words, that Jesus was counted
the son of Joseph, which was of Heli, that is to say, the son of Heli: we
must understand that in this place the name of son is taken for the name of
son in law to Heli, for that he took to wife the Virgin Mary daughter to the
said Heli, which manner of speech is common in the Scripture: for we find that
Noenn calls Ruth her daughter which was but her step-daughter, her sons
wife.

The Gospel by St. Matthew. has twenty eight Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe genealogy of Christ from Abraham: the marriage Chapters. 18.
of his mother Mary: the Angel satisfies Joseph's mind: the interpretation of
Christ's names.

2. The time and place of Christ's birth: Christ flees into Egypt: the young
Children are slain.

3. John's preaching: office: life: baptism: reprehending of the Pharisees: and
baptizing Christ in Jordan.

4. Christ fasteth, and is tempted: he calls Peter, Andrew, James, and John.

5. In this chapter, and in the two next following, is contained the most
excellent, and loving Sermon of Christ in The Contents of St. Matthew.
the Mount: which sermon is the very key that opens the understanding into
the law: in this fifth chapter specially, he preaches of the eight beatitudes
or blessings: of man slaughter: wrath, and anger: of swearing.

6. Of alms, prayer, of fasting: he forbids the careful seeking of worldly
things.

7. He forbids foolish and rash judgment: he reproves hypocrisy.

8. Christ cleanses the leaper: stilleth the sea, and the wind: and drives
the devils out of the possessed into the swine.

9. He heals the palsy: and calls Mathewe from the Custom.

10. Christ sends out his twelve Apostles to preach in Chapters. 28.
Jury.

11. Christ preaches: John Baptist sends his Disciples unto him: Christ's
testimony concerning John.

12. Christ excuses his Disciples which pluck the ears of corn.

13. The parable of the seed, and of the tares.

14. John is taken and beheaded: Christ feeds five thousand men, with five
loaves and two fishes.

15. Christ excuses his Disciples, and rebukes the Scribes and Pharisees.

16. The Pharisees require a token: Jesus warns his Disciples of the Pharisees
doctrine.

17. The transfiguration of Christ: he heals the lunaticke.

18: He teaches his Disciples to be humble and harmless, to avoid occasions
of evil.

19. Christ gives answer concerning marriage, and The Contents of St. Matthew.
teaches not to be careful, nor to love worldly riches.

20. Christ teaches by a similitude, that God is debtor unto no man: he
teaches his Disciples to be low^ly: and gives to blind men their sight.

21. He rides into Jerusalem: he drives the merchants out of the Temple: and
curses the fig tree.

22. Tribute to be given unto Caesar: he answers the Scribe unto his question.

23. Christ cries woe to the Pharisees, Scribes and hippocrits: And prophecieth
the destruction of Jerusalem.

24. Christ shows his Disciples the destruction of the Temple: the end of the
world, and the tokens of the latter days, and warns them to wake, for the
world shall suddenly perish.

25. The ten Virgins: the talents delivered to the servants: and of the
general judgment.

26. Mary Magdalen annointeth Christ: they eat the Easter Lamb.

27. Christ is delivered unto Pilat: Judas hangs himself.

28. The resurrection of Christ: the high Priests give the soldiers money to
say that Christ was stolen out of the grave.

A Table for the better understanding of the six and twentieth Chapter of Saint
Matthew, the foureteenth of Saint Mark, the twenty two of Saint Luke and the
nineteenth of Saint John. The beginning of the days. according to the Jews
reckoning. The day of 24. hours, comprising the night, begins the Evening
at Sunne-set, and ends the next day at Sun set. according to the Romans
reckoning. The day of 24. hours, comprising the night, begins at Sun
rising, and continues until the next day Sun rising. according too ur
reckoning. The day of 24. hours, comprising the night, begins at midnight
and ends the next day at the same hour at midnight. The names of the days
after the Jews. the 1. day of the sabbath or of the week. the 2. day of the
sabbath or of the week. the 3. day of the sabbath or of the week. the 4. day
of the sabbath or of the week. the 5. day of the sabbath or of the week. the
6. day of the sabbath or of the week the sabbath that is to say the day of
rest. the first of the sabbath as before. The names of the days after us.
sunday. monday. tuesday. wednesd thursday frieday. saturday. sunday. Certain
days of the month of March, in the year that Jesus Christ suffered.

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 the en^ring of Jesus Christ on the ass* co^^ with the
she ^^s^e into Hi^^^sa^em. the Figgetree cursed and withered. the dining with
S^mon the leaper. Jesus Christ sold by Judas. the preparation of the passover*
according to the Law. the preparation of the passover according to the Jews.
the day of the feast of the passover according to the tradition of the Jews.
Jesus ris^^ again o^ the sunday before the break of the day. WE have in this
description conferred the use and manner of the celebration of Easter, that the
Jews held, with that which we use to reckon and beg^n at, and also to name the
dates of the week, and have added thereto certain days of the month of
March, in the year that Jesus Christ suffered, to declare the understanding of
the said difficulty, wherein is to be noted, that the ^d Jesus celebrated not
the passe-ouer the same day that the Jews did: but that ^^ which came not to
break the Law, but to fulfill the Law^ in every point* cate the Lamb with his
Disciples at the time ordained by the Law Exo. 12. which is the 14 day of the
first month (that is to say March) in the afternoon, on the which bega^^^ the
said feast, which fel^ this year on the Frieday, the even of the Sabbath or
day of (...) on the which day, he which was the true Lamb was offered, to the
end that the tr^th might agree with the figure: but the Jews celebrated the
said Passe-ouer the day following at even after the Sun set, Jesus Christ being
in the grave, for that by tradition of their pr^ssors, the said feast which
fell on the Frieday according to the Law* (...) the Disciples prepare the la^be
which Jesus Christ ^ate with them after even the same day, on which even began
the feast. Jesus having eaten the Lamb with his Disciples instituteth the
Sacrament of the supper is kissed by Judas, is crucified dead and buried. Jesus
Christ rests in the grave all this day. the wom^^ c^r^e ointment very yearly
in the morning to (...) grave. deferred to the next day, which was the day of
their weekly Sabaoths, because they would not keep two feasts together; for
this feast day, they called the great Sabbath. John. 19. and also because as
enemies of the truth, they would seek all means possible to keep him from
being known the Messiah. Here is also to be noted, that where the ^ating of
the Lamb, the institution of the Sacrament with the residue before mentioned,
is referred to Thursday, and Frieday, if you reckon according to the Jews
account, who begin their Frieday night, on Thursday after Sun set, and
continues that night and day, until the next day after Sun s^ shall find
that Christ did ^ate the Paschall Lamb, instituted the Sacrament of his body
and blood, was kissed by Judas, and was c^ucified, dead, and buried upon
Frieday: but if you reckon after our v^^, then Christ did ^ate the Paschall
Lamb, instituted the Sacrament of his ^od^ and blood, and was kissed of Judas
on Thursday, but was crucified, dead, and buried upon Frieday.



The Gospel by St. Mark. has sixteen chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe office of John Baptist: the Baptism of Christ: his Chapters. 16.
fasting: and preaching.

2. He heals the man of the palsy: and calls Leui the Customer.

3. He helps the man with the dried hand: and chooses his Apostles.

4. The parable of the sower: Christ stilleth the tempest of the sea, which
obeys him.

5. Christ delivers the possessed from the unclean spirit: The Contents of
St. Mark.
and the woman from the bloody issue.

6. Of Christ's doings* and estimation in his own country.

7. The Pharisees find fault at the Disciples eating of meat with unwashed
hands: the healing of the deaf and dumb.

8. The miracle of the seven loaves: how we should follow Christ.

9. The transfiguration of Christ: of seasoning with salt.

10. Of diuorcement: a rich man questioned how he might inherit eternal life.
Chapters. 16.


11. Christ rides to Jerusalem: the Pharisees ask Christ of his authority.

12. The vine-yeard is let out to husband men: the poor widows farthing.

13. The destruction of the Temple: signs before Christ's The Contents of St.
Mark.
coming: Gods word shall not pas^e away.

14. The high priests conspire against Christ: the passover is prepared, and
eaten.

15. Jesus is delivered bound to Pilate: Joseph beggeth Christ's body and
burieth it.

16. The women come to the Sepulcher: the signs that follow the preaching of
the Gospel.

The Gospel by St. Luke has twenty four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe preface of Luke: of Zacharias and Elizabeth: Mary Chapters. 24.
visits Elizabeth.

2. The taxing of the world by Augustus Caesar.

3. The preaching of John: the age and genealogy of Christ.

4. The temptation and fasting of Christ: the devils confess The Contents of
St. Luke.
Christ, and are of him reproved.

5. Christ teaches out of a ship: new and old agree not.

6. The Disciples pluck the ears of corn on the Sabbath: with what fruit the
word of God is to be heard.

7. He heals the Captains servant: the faith of the Centurion: the woman
washes his feet with her tears.

8. Christ and his Apostles go from town to town and preach: the parable of
the seed: and of the Candle.

9. The Apostles are sent to preach: of three that would follow Christ but
after diverse sorts of looking back. Chapters. 24.


10. He sends his seauentie Disciples to preach, giving them charge how to
behave themselves.

11. Christ teaches his Disciples to pray: he drives out a dumb devil.

12. The leaven of the Pharisees is to be avoided: against care of earthly
things.

13. Of the fig tree that bare no fruit* few enter into the kingdom of
Christ.

14. To feast the poor: of the great supper: the salt of the earth.

15. The great mercy of God is set forth in the parable of the lost sheep.

16. No man can serve two masters: the rich glutton and The Contents of St.
Luke.
Lazarus.

17. Christ teaches to avoid offenses: the manner of Christ's coming.

18. Christ teaches to continue in prayer: he foresheweth his death.

19. Christ rides to Jerusalem: and weeping over it forsheweth the
destruction thereof.

20. Christ the stone reproved: Christ the son of David.

21. The liberality of the poor widow: of the end of the world.

22. Judas sells Christ: they eat the Passe-ouer.

23. Jesus is accused before Pilate, and sent to Herod.

24. Christ appears to the two Disciples that went to ^maus.

The Gospel by S. John has twenty one Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe divinity, humanity, and office of Christ: the testimony of John: the
calling of Andrewe, Peter, Chapters. 21.
Philip and Nathaniel.

2 Christ turns water into wine.

3. Christ teaches Nichodemus: the love of God toward the world.

4. Christ (wearied) asks water of the woman of Samaria: the lively water.

5. Christ heals, on the Sabbath day, the man that was sick thirty and eight
years.

6. Faith is the work of God: of the bread of life: of Faith. The Contents of
St. John.


7. Jesus fled the murmuring Jews: Christ's kinsmen believed not on him.

8. Christ the light of the world: Abraham did see Christ's day.

9. Christ restores sight on the Sabbath day, to him that was borne blind.

10. Christ the true Shepherd, and the door: Princes called Gods.

11. Christ raises Lazarus from death: certain Jews believe Christ.

12. Marie annointeth Jesus feet: wherefore the Jews believe not*

13. Christ washes the Apostles feet: whereby Christ's Chapters. 21.
Disciples are known.

14. He armeth his Disciples with consolation against trouble.

15. The consolation between Christ and his members, under the parable of the
Vine.

16. Of the holy Ghost and his office: of Christ's ascension: to ask in the
name of Christ.

17. Christ prays to his Father, that their glory might be made manifest. The
Contents of St. John.


18. Christ is betrayed by Judas: the Jews ask Barrabas to be let loose.

19. Christ is whipped, beaten, and crowned: all power is of God.

20. Marie comes to the Sepulcher: the Apostles were ignorant of the
resurrection.

21. Christ sore warns Peter of his death, and persecution.

The Acts of the Apostles has eight and twenty Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe words of Christ and his Angels to the Apostles: Chapters, 28.
his ascension: wherein the Apostles are occupied till the holy Ghost be sent:
and of the Election of Matthias.

2. The holy Ghost came upon the Apostles in visible signs: the Godly
exercise of the faithful.

3. The halt^ ^s restored to his feet: Peter preached Christ The Contents of
the Act^.
unto the people.

4. The Apostles are brought before the Council: the Church increases in
doctrine, and exercises of all godliness.

5. M^racles are done by the Apostles: the sentence of Gamaliel.

6. Seven Deacons are ordained in the Church: Steven is accused.

7. Steven makes answer to his accusation, rebukes Chapters. 28.
the hard* necked Jews, and is ^^o^^d to death.

8. The Apostles are scattered abroad: Philip bapti^eth the Eunuch.

9. the Conversion of Saul: Peter heals Aeneas, and raises up Tabitha.

10. The vision that Peter saw: he was sent to Cornelius.

11. Barnabas and Paul preach at Antiochia: Agabus prophecieth dearth to come.

12. Herod persecuteth the Christians: the Gospel flourishes:

13. Of Sergius Paulus. and Elimas the Sorcerer: the The Contents of the Acts.
Jews are rejected.

14. God gives success to his word: Paul is stoned.

15. The decree of the Apostles concerning Circumcision, and other ceremonies
of the Jews: Paul and Barnabas preach in Antioch: Paul and Barnabas falling at
strife break company.

16. Paul circumciseth Timothy: the spirit calls them from one country to
another: Lidia is converted.

17. Paul comes to Thessalonica, where the Jews s^t the City in an uproar.

18. Paul preaches at Corinth: of Apollos, Aquila, and Priscilla.

19. Of baptism: of the holy Ghost given by Paul's hands: the Jews blaspheme
the doctrine of Paul.

20. Paul goes to Macedonia and Grecia: he celebrateth the Lords supper, and
preaches.

21. Paul's journey by shipp^: of Philip the Evangelist, and Agabus the Prophet.

22. Paul renders an account of his life and doctrine: he escapes the whippe,
by reason he was a Citizen of Rome.

23. Paul comes before the Counsel: Ananias causes him to be stricken.

24. Paul being accused answered for his life and doctrine.

25. The Jews accuse Paul before Festus: he answers for himself. Chapters.
28.


26. King Agrippa hears Paul: Paul's modest answer against the injury of
Festus.

27. Paul shippeth toward Rome: Julius the Captain entreats him courteously.

28. The Viper hurts not Paul's hand: Paul preached Christ at Rome.

The order of times.
Here have thou (gentle Reader) for thy better instruction, the description of
the journey and peregrination of Saint Paul* which is in this second book of
St. Luke, called the Acts of the Apostles, most entreated of. And for because
thou read often times of Emperors, kings, and Deputies, thou have set
forth to thee the names, the years, and how long every Emperor or King
reigned, or Deputy governed, and under whom any of these Acts were done even
until the death of Saint Paul.

The years of the Emperors of Rome. The years of the Presidents of the Jews.
The years of the Herodians. The years of Christ's Int^^n^^i^n. The years of
Saint Paul the Apostle. Tiberius. Pilate. Herod. Christ. Paul. Herodes
Antipas. Math. 8. Mark 6. Luke 9.
18 6 18 3^ In this year Christ suffered, arose from the dead, ascended into
Heaven, from thence he sends unto his Apostles the holy Ghost: the Apostles
do assemble and gather a Congregation unto the Lord Christ, and do continue
in prayer, and suffer persecution. 19 7 19 34 1 Steven was stoned this year
Eusebius chron.
Samaria does receive the doctrine of Christ. Saint Steven was stoned: Saint
Paul is converted to Christ as he iournyed toward Damascus, and from thence he
departed to Arabia to preach the Gospel. 20 8 20 35 2 Philip does preach the
Gospel unto the Cities by the sea side, and does convert a man of Ethiopia,
an Eunuche, and of great authority with Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians. 21 9
21 36 3 The Gospel is preached to the ^irians, and Phenitians: of those that
were dispersed and fled from Jerusalem. 22 10 22 37 4 Pilate was president
full t^^ years Josephus.
Saint Paul comes to Jerusalem to see Peter, from thence he goes into
Siria, Cilicia, etc. Saint Peter comes into Lidda: after that he was called
of Cornelius to come unto Cesarea, where he did baptize; and from thence he
went to Jerusalem, giving answer to each one that entered in question with
him. 23 Marcell. 23 38 5 Antioch in Siria is converted unto Christ: the
Apostles send thither Barnabas: Barnabas brings Paul out of Tarsa to Antioch,
whither also Agabus came, speaking of dearth that was to come: Paul and
Barnabas did succor them of Jerusalem. Gains. Agrippa. 24 39 6 Paul and
Barnabas by the commandment of the holy Ghost, were sent from Antioch to
preach the Gospel unto the Heathen. 2 2 In this year all things pertaining to
this former Herod was given to this Herod Agrippa, of whom read Acts 12.
Josephus Eusebius.
Herod Agrip. 40 7 Paul and Barnabas sailed from Paphos to Perga, a City of
Pamphilia, from Perga unto Antioch, a City of Pisidia: from whence by a
commotion stirred by the Jews, they were expelled out of their coasts. 3 3 41
8 Paul and Barnabas thus driven from Antioch come to Ico^ium, where they abode
a long time. 4 4 42 9 In these years were Cipres Pamphilia Pisidia and
Licaonia converted.
Claudius. 5 43 10 2 6 44 11 3 7 45 12 This year was James the elder beheaded
of Herod Agrippa, and Peter was cast into prison, and was delivered by the
Angel of the Lord. This King also died in his seventh year. 4 Fadus. Dearth.
46 13 Prophesied by Agabus* was the dearth this year as Eusebius, Orosi^^ and
Beda affirm.
Paul and Barnabas (after their preaching) returned unto Antioch, where they
continued many days with the Congregation. 5 2 Felix about this time came into
Siria. 47 14 6 48 15 About the beginning of this year Paul and Barnabas took
their journey through Phenicia, and Samaria, unto Jerusalem, to the Sinod or
council: after they returned unto Antioch, where they remained a year,
whither comes Peter, whom Paul rebukes Galat. 2. Then Paul goes into
Cilicia and Licaonia. 7 Tiberius Ale. 49 16 Josephus says that the dearth was
in this year.
8 22 50 17 In this year were converted the countries of Phrigia, Galatia,
Misia: from Troada he went by water into Macedonia, and converted the Cities,
namely Philippes, Apollonia, Amphipolis, Thessalonica, Athens. 9 3 51 18 He
comes to Corinth. Agrippa of whom read Act 26. he comes to Ephesus.
10 Cumanus. Agrip. Junior. 52 19 Paul goes by sea to Jerusalem, from thence
he comes again unto Antioche, from Antioche, he visits the Congregations,
of him in time past constituted in Galatia and Phrigia. 11 Felix. 2 53 20 12 2
3 54 21 13 3 4 55 22 14 4 5 56 23 Paul ferieth over into Grecia: from thence
about Easter in his 22. year, he goes by sea into Siria, not a straight
course because of the Jews, but first unto Philippos a City of Macedonia, and
comes about Pentecost unto Jerusalem, there he is imprisoned of the Jews,
set at liberty immediately of Claudius Lisia, Tribunus, and is sent unto Cesarea
to Felix; is kept in custody of Felix two years. Nero. 5 6 57 24 Festus
comes about May into Judea, before whom he pleads this matter: after that
before Festus and Agrippa the King; he is sent unto Rome in Italy, the second
year of Nero. 2 Festus Porti. 7 58 25 Two years he remains in free prison.
3 2 8 59 26 4 3 9 60 27 5 4 10 61 6 Albinus. 11 62 29 7 2 12 63 30 8 3 13 64
31 9 4 14 65 32 10 Florus. 15 66 33 The beginning of the first universal
persecution of Christians the tenth year of Nero.
11 2 16 67 34 12 3 17 68 35 13 4 18 69 36 14 Vaspasia. dux 19 70 37 After that
Saint Paul had preached the Gospel of Christ, both in the East and West, about
thirty seven years, he was in the last year of Nero the Emperor beheaded at
Rome with the sword.

The Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul to the Romans has sixteen Chapters.
The contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. PAul shows to whom and to what purpose he is called: Chapters. 16.
what the Gospel is: the vengeance of God upon the wicked: the use of the
creatures: the ingratitude and punishment of the wicked.

2. Gods judgment upon the hipocrites: all men are sinners.

3. The Jews have a prerogative: all are justified by grace through faith, and
not through works.

4. Justification is the free gift of God, as it appears by David and
Abraham, and also by the office of the Law and faith.

5. The fruit of faith: from whence comes death, and from whence life. The
Contents of Romans.


6. Newness of life follows justification, to the which he exhorts.

7. The fight between the law of the flesh, and the law of the spirit.

8. The assurance of the faithful: the fruits of the holy Ghost.

9. Paul declares his fervent love toward his nation.

10.

11. God repents him not of his gifts: the deapth of Gods Judgment.

12. How every man should walk in his several calling.

13. Of obedience to the Rulers, which bear not the sword in vain: charity
must measure all our doings.

14. One ought to bear with another conscience in charity.

15. Paul shows his zeal toward them, and requires Chapters. 16.
the like of them.

16. A number of salutations: Paul wills them to beware of false brethren:
he prays and gives thanks for them.

The first Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians has sixteen
Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HE praises the great graces of God showed toward them: exhorting them to
concord and humility. Chapters. 16.


2. He puts for example his manner of preaching, which was according to the
tenor of the Gospel.

3. Paul rebukes the sects and authors thereof: Christ is the foundation of
the Church.

4. After he had described the office of a true Apostle, seeing they did not
acknowledge him such one, he appealeth to Gods Judgment.

5. He reproves sharply their negligence in punishing him that had committed
incest, willing them to excomm^^icate him: to embrace purity and fly
wickedness. The Contents of Corinthians.


6. Christians ought rather to suffer: he reproves the abusing of Christian
liberty: and shows that we ought to serve purely both in body and soul.

7. The Apostle answers to certain questions which the Corinthians desired
to know.

8. He rebukes them that use their liberty to the slander of other, in going
to the Idolatrous sacrifices.

9. He exhorts them by his example to use their liberty to the edification of
others.

10. He fears them with the example of the Jews, that they put not their
trust carnally in the graces of God: exhorting them to flee all Idolatry, and
offense of their neighbors.

11. He rebukes the abuses which were crept into th^^ Church, as touching
prayer, or prophesying, and ministering the Lords supper: bringing them again
to the first in^^itution thereof.

12. The diversity of the gifts of the holy Ghost, ought to be used to the
edifying of Christ's Church, as the members of man's body serve to the use of one
another. The Contents of Co^in^h^ans.


13. Because love is the fountain and rule of edifying the Church: he sets
forth the nature, office, and praise thereof.

14. He exhorts to charity: commends the gifts of tongues and other
spiritual gifts, but chiefly prophecyings.

15. He proves the resurrection of the dead, and first that Christ is risen.

16. He puts them in remembrance of the gathering for the poor brethren at
Jerusalem.

The second Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians has thirteen
Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HE declares the great profit that comes to the faithful by their
afflictions.

2. Paul rejoices in God for the efficacy of his doctrine. Chapters, 13.


3. Paul exalts his Apostle-ship against the bragges of the false Apostles.

4. He declares his diligence and roundnesse in his office, showing what
profit comes thereby.

5. Paul proceeds in showing the vtility that comes by The ^te^ 2. (...)
the Cross.

6. An exhortation to a Christian life.

7. He exhorts them by the promise of God to keep themselves pure.

8. By the examples of the Macedonians, and Christ, he exhorts them to
continue in releeuing the poor Saints: Chapters. 13.
commending their good beginning.

9. The cause of Titus, and his companions, coming to them.

10. He touches the false Apostles, and defends his authority, exhorting
them to obedience. The Contents of Corinthians.


11. He declares his affection toward them: the excellency of his ministry,
and his diligence in the same.

12. He rejoices in his preferrement, but chiefly in his humbleness.

13. He threatens the obstinate: and declares what his power is by their own
testimony.

The Epistle of the Apostle St. Paul to the Galathians has six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz. Chapters. 6.

1. PAul rebukes their inconstancy, which suffered themselves to be seduced by
the false Apostles.

2. Confirming his Apostle-ship to be of God: he shows why Titus is not
Circumcised.

3. He rebukes them sharply: and proves by diverse The Contents of
Galathians.
reasons that justification is by faith.

4. He shows wherefore the ceremonies were ordained; which being shadows
must end when Christ the truth comes.

5. He labors to draw them from Circumcision: and shows them the battle
between the spirit and the flesh, and the fruits of them both.

6. He exhorts them to use gentleness toward the weak, and to show their
brotherly love and modesty, also to provide for their Ministers.

The Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle unto the Ephesians has six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. AFter his salutation: he shows that the chief cause Chapters. 6.
of their salvation, stands in the free election of God through Christ: he
declares his good will toward them: giving thanks, and praying God for their
faith: the Majesty of Christ.

2. To magnify the grace of Christ, which is the only The Contents of the
Ephesians.
cause of our salvation.

3. He shows the cause of his imprisonment: and desires them not to be faint
because of his trouble.

4. He exhorts them unto meekness, long suffering; unto love and peace.

5. He entreats of corporal marriages, and of the spiritual betwixt Christ
and his Church.

6. How children should behave themselves toward their fathers and mothers,
likewise parents toward their children: servants toward their masters,
masters toward their servants.

The Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the Philippians has four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. SAint Paul discovers his heart toward them: by his Chapters. 4.
thanckesgiuing, prayers, and wishes, for their faith and salvation.

2. He exhorts above all things to humility, whereby pure doctrine is chiefly
maintained. Chapters. 16.


3. He warns them to beware of false teachers, against whom he sets
Christ.

4. He exhorts them to be of honest conversation: and thanketh them because
of the provision that they made for him being in prison.

The Epistle of St. Paul the Apostle unto the Colossians has four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HE gives thanks unto God for their faith, confirming Chapters. 4.
the doctrine of Epaphras: he prays for their increase of faith.

2. Having protested his good will toward them, he admonishes them not to
turn back from Christ.

3. He shows where we should seek Christ: he exhorts The Contents of
Colossians.
to mortification, to put off the old man, and to put on Christ.

4. He exhorts them to be fervent in prayer: to walk wisely toward them
that are not yet come to the true knowledge of Christ: he saluteth them, and
wishes them all prosperity.

The second Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians has three
Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1 HE thanketh God for their faith, love and patience: Chapters. 3.
he prays for the increase of the same, and shows what fruit shall come
thereof.

2. He shows them that the day of the Lord shall not come till the departing
from the says come first, and the kingdom of Antichrist, and therefore he
exhorts them not Chapters. 3.
to be deceived, but to stand steadfast in the things that he has taught them.

3. He desires them to pray for him, that the Gospel may prosper.

The first Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle unto Timothy has six Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HE exhorts Timothy to wait upon his office, namely to see that nothing
be taught but Gods word. Chapters. 6.


2. He exhorts to pray for all men: wherefore, and how: as touching the
apparel and modesty of women.

3. He declares what is the office of ministers, and as touching their
families: the dignity of the Church, and the principal point of the heavenly
doctrine. The Contents of Timothy.


4. He teaches him what doctrine he ought to flee, and what to follow, and
wherein he ought to exercise himself continually.

5. He teaches how he shall be have himself, in rebuking all degrees: an
order concerning widows.

6. The duty of servants toward their masters: against such as are not
satisfied with the word of God.

The second Epistle of Saint Paul to Timothy has four Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. PAul exhorts Timotheus to stedfastnes, and patience Chapters. 4.
in persecution, and to continue in the doctrine, that he had taught him.

2. He exhorts him to be constant in trouble: to suffer manly; to abide fast
in the wholesome doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ. Chapters. 4.


3. He prophecieth of the perrilous times: also what profit comes of the
Scriptures.

4. He exhorts Timotheus to be fervent in the word, and to suffer adversity.

The Epistle of Saint Paul unto Titus has three Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
He aduertiseth Titus, touching the government of the Chapters. 3.
Church: the ordinance and office of Ministers: the nature of the Cretians: and
of them which sow abroad Iewi^h fables and inventions of men.

2. He commends unto him the wholesome doctrine; and The Contents of Titus.
tells him how he shall teach all degrees to behave themselves through the
benefit of the grace of Christ.

3. Of obedience to such as be in authority: he warns Titus to beware of
foolish and unprofitable questions: concluding with certain private matters
and salutations.

The Epistle of St. Paul unto Philemon has one Chapter,
The Contents of the Chapter. viz.
HE rejoices to hear of the love and faith of Philemon, Chapter. 1.
whom he desires to forgive his servant Onesimus: and lovingly to receive him
again.

The Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews has thirteen Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HE shows the excellency of Christ, above the Angels: and of their office.
Chapters. 13.


2. He exhorts us to be obedient to the new Law which Christ has given us.

3. He requires them to be obedient unto the word of Christ, who is more
worthy then Moses.

4. The word without faith is unprofitable: the Sabbath or rest of the
Christians: punishment of unbelievers: the nature of the word of God.

5. He compares Jesus Christ with the Leuitical Priests; showing wherein they
either agree or dissent.

6. He proceeds in reproving them, and exhorts them not to faint, but to
be steadfast and patient, forasmuch as God is sure in his promise. The Contents
of Hebrews.


7. He compares the Priesthood of Christ unto Melchisedech: also Christ's
Priesthood with the Levites.

8. He proves the abolishing as well of the Leuiticall Priest hood, as of the
old couenante, by the spiritual and everlasting Priesthood of Christ and by
the new covenant.

9. How that the ceremonies and sacrifices of the Law are abolished, by the
eternity and perfection of Christ's sacrifice.

10. The old Law had no power to cleanse away sin, but Christ did it with
offering of his body once for all.

11. What faith is, and a commendation of the same.

12. An exhortation to be patient and steadfast in trouble and adversity, upon
hope of everlasting reward: a commendation of the new Testament above the old.

13. He exhorts us to love, to hospitality, to thinck upon such as are in
adversity, to maintain wedlock, to avoid covetousness.

The Epistle of Saint James has five Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. HE exhorts to rejoice in trouble: to be fervent in Chapters. 5.
prayer with steadfast belief, and to look for all good things from above.

2. He forbids to have any respect of persons, but to regard The Contents of
St. James.
the poor as well as the rich.

3. He forbids all ambition to seek honor above our brethren: he
describes the property of tongues.

4. He exhorts them to love God, and submit themselves to him.

5. He threatens the wicked rich men; exhorts unto patience and to beware of
swearing.

The Epistle of St Peter the Apostle has five Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz. Chapters. 5.

1. HE shows that through the abundant mercy of God we are elect and
regenerate to a lively hope: and how faith must be tried.

2. He exhorts them to lay aside all vice, showing that Christ is the
foundation whereupon they build. The Contents of Saint Peter.


3. How wives ought to order themselves toward their husbands: and in their
apparel.

4. He exhorts all men to cease from sin: to be sober and apt to pray.

5. The duty of Pastors is to feed the stock of Christ, and what reward they
shall have if they be diligent.

The second Epistle of Saint Peter has three Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. FOrasmuch as the power of God has given them all Chapters. 3.
things pertaining unto life: he exhorts them to slay the corruption of
worldly lusts.

2. He prophecieth of false teachers, and shows their punishment.

3. He shows the impiety of them which mock at Gods promise: after what sort
the end of the world shall be: that The Contents of S. James.
they prepare themselves thereunto: who they are that abuse the writings of
Saint Paul and the rest of the scriptures: concluding with eternal thanks to
Christ Jesus.

The first Epistle of Saint John the Apostle has five Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe true witness of the everlasting word of God: the Chapters, 5.
blood of Christ is the purgation of sin: no man is without sin.

2. Christ is our advocate: of true love, and how it is tried: to beware of
Antichrist.

3. The singular love of God toward us, and how we again The Contents of Saint
John.
ought to love one another.

4. Difference of spirits: how the spirit of God may be known, from the
spirit of error.

5. Of the fruits of faith.

The second Epistle of St. John has one Chapter.
The Contents of the Chapter. viz.
1. HE writes unto a certain Lady, rejoicing that her Chapter. 1.
children walk in the truth, and exhorts them unto love.

The third Epistle of S. John has one Chapter.
The Contents of the Chapter. viz.
1. HE is glad of Gaius that he walks in the truth: and Chapter. 1.
exhorts to be loving unto the poor Christians in their persecution.

The Epistle of Saint Jude has one Chapter.
The contents of the Chapter. viz.
1. SAint Jude admonishes all Churches generally to Chapter. ^.
take heed of deceivers, which go about to draw away the hearts of the simple
people from the truth of God.

The Revelation of St. John the Divine has twenty two Chapters.
The Contents of the Chapters. viz.
1. THe cause of this Revelation: of them that read it: Chapters. 22.
John writes to the seven Churches: the Mai^sty and office of the son of
God: the vision of the Candlesticks and stars.

2. He exhorts four Churches to repentance, to perseverance, patience and
amendment, as well by threatenings as by promises of reward.

3. He exhorts the Churches or Ministers to the true profession of faith, and
to watching.

4. The vision of the Majesty of God: he seeeth the throne and one sitting
upon it, and four and twenty seats about it, with four and twenty Elders
sitting upon them, and four beasts praising God day and night.

5. He sees the Lamb opening the Book, and therefore The Contents of the
Revelation.
the four beasts, the four and twenty Elders, and the Angels praise the
Lamb, and do him worship for their redemption and other benefits.

6. The Lamb opens the six seals, and many things follow the opening
thereof.

7. He sees the servants of God sealed in their fore*heads, out of all
nations, and people; which though they suffer trouble yet the Lamb feeds
them, leads them to the fountains of living water: and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.

8. The seventh seal is opened: there is silence in heaven: the four Angels
blow their Trumpets: and great plagues follow upon the earth.

9. The first woe is past, the four Angels that were bound are loosed, and
the third part of men is killed.

10. The Angel has the book open, he swears there shall be no more time,
he gives the book unto John who eats Chapters. 22.
it up.

11. The Temple is measured: two witnesses raised up by the Lord are murdered
by the beast.

12. There appears in Heaven a woman clothed with the Sun etc.

13. The beast deceives the reprobate, and is confirmed by an other: the
privilege of the beasts mark.

14. The notable company of the Lamb: One Angel a^nounceth the Gospel,
another the fall of Babylon, and the third warns to flee from the beast: of
the Lords harvest.

15. The song of them that overcome the beast.

16. The Angels pour out their vialls full of wrath, and The Contents of the
Revelation.
what plagues follow thereof: admonition to take heed and watch.

17. The description of the great whore, and her sins and punishment.

18. The lovers of the world are sorry for the fall of the whore of Babylon,
but they that be of God have cause to rejoice for her destruction.

19. Praises are given to God for judging the whore.

20. Satan being bound for a certain time, and after let loose, vexes the
Church grievously.

21. The blessed estate of the godly, and the miserable condition of the wicked.

22. The river of the water of life: the Angel will not be worshipped.

A brief collection of the contents of all the Psalms of David in meeter
being in number one hundredth and fifty
The Contents of the Psalms. viz.
1. THis psalm is set first as a preface, to exhort all godly men to study and
meditate the heavenly wisdom: for they be blessed that so do, but the wicked
contemners thereof at length shall come to misery.

2. David rejoices, that albeit enemies and worldly powers rage, God will
advance his Kingdom even to the farthest end of the world: therefore he
exhorts Princes humbly to submit themselves under the same; herein is
signified Christ and his Kingdom.

3. David, driven out of his kingdom by his son Absolon, was greatly
tormented in mind for his sin: therefore he calls upon God* and is bold in
his promises against the terrors of enemies and present death: then he
rejoices for the victory given to him and the Church over their enemies.

4. David, persecuted by Saul, calls upon God with assured The Contents.
trust, reproves his enemies for resisting his dominion, and prefers the
favor of God before all treasure.

5. David, persecuted by Doeg and Achitophell, Saul's flatterers, calls upon
God to punish their malice: then assured of success he received comfort.

6. David for his sins felt Gods hand, and conceived the horror of
everlasting death, therefore he desires forgiveness, and not to die in Gods
indignation, then suddenly feeling Gods mercy, he rebukes his enemies who
rejoice at his affliction.

7. David, falsely accused by Chus, Saul's kinsman, calls God to be his
defender; first that his conscience did not accuse him of any evil toward
Saul; next that it touched Gods glory to award sentence against the wicked, and
so upon Gods mercies and promises he waxes bold, threatening that it shall fall
on their necks that which his enemies purposed for others.

8. The Prophet considering the excellent liberality and fatherly providence of
God toward man, whom he made as it were a God over all his works, gives
thanks and is astonished with the admiration of the same.

9. David gives thanks for his manifold victories received, desires the same
wonted help again against his new enemies, and their malicious arrogance to
be destroyed.

10. He complains of all the wrongs which worldly men die, because of their
prosperity, who therefore without all fear of God think they may have all
things uncontrolled, he calls for remedy against such, and is comforted with
the hope thereof.

11. This Psalm shows first, what assaults of temptation and anguish of
mind, he sustained in persecution: next The Contents.
he rejoices that God sent him succor in necessity, declaring his justice, as
well in governing the good and wicked men as the whole world.

12. He prophesying the miserable decay of all good order, desires God
speedily to send reformation: then comforted with the assurance of Gods help
and promises, concludes, that when all orders are most corrupted, then God
will deliver his.

13. David as it were overcome with afflictions, flies to God his only
refuge: encouraged through Gods promises he conceiueth confidence against the
extreme horrors of death.

14. He describes the wickedness of men, so grown to such licentiousnes,
that God was brought to utter contempt; for which albeit he was greatly
grieved, yet persuaded that God would redress it, he is comforted.

15. Here is taught why God chose the Jews his peculiar people, and placed his
Temple among them, which was that they by living uprightly, might witness that
they were his special and holy people.

16. David prays to God for succor, not for his works but for his faiths
sake: protesting that he hates all Idolatry, taking God only for his comfort
and felicity, who suffered his to lack nothing.

17. Here he complains to God of the cruel pride and arrogance of Saul
without any cause, therefore he desires God to revenge his innocence, and
deliver him.

18. David gives thanckes entering into his Kingdom, extolling the marvelous
graces of God in his preservation: here is the image of Christ's Kingdom, which
shall conquer through Christ, by the unspeakable love of God, though all the
world resist.

19. He moves the faithful to glorify God, by the work* manship, proportion
and ornaments of the heavens: and by the Law wherein God is revealed familiarly
to his chosen people.

20. The people pray to God to hear their King, and receive his sacrifice
which he offered before he went to battle against the Ammonites: declaring
that the heathen put their trust in horses, but they trust only in his name,
wherefore The Contents.
the other shall fall, but the King and his people shall stand.

21. David in the presence of the people praises God for the victory given
them against the Sirians and Amonites 1. Samuel 31. wherein he was crowned with
the Crown of the King of Ammon: 2. Samuel 12. and endued with the manifold
blessing of God.

22. David complains of the desperate extreamities, and declares whereof he
recovered himself from temptation: under his person is figured Christ.

23. David having tried Gods manifold mercies diverse times, gathers the
assurance that God will continue his goodness for ever.

24. The grace of God being now uttered in the Temple more glorious then before
in the Tabernacle, David with exclamation sets forth the honor thereof,
moving the consideration of the eternal mansions prepared in heaven, where* of
this was a figure.

25. David grieved at his sins and malicious enemies, mo^ fervently prays
for forgiveness, especially of such as he committed in youth.

26. David injuriously oppressed and helpelesse, yet assured of his integrity
to Saul, calls God to defend him causeless afflicted, then he desires to be
in the company of the faithful in the Congregation of God, when he was
banished by Saul, promising godly life, open praises, thanckesgiuing, and
sacrifice for his deliverance.

27. David delivered from great perils gives thanckes, wherein we see his
constant faith against the assaults of al his enemies, and the end why he
desired to live and to be delivered: then he exhorts to faith and to attend
upon the Lord.

28. Being in fear and pensiveness to see God dishonored by wicked men, he
cries for vengeance against them, and being assured that God has heard him,
he commends all the faithful to his tuition.

29. David exhorts Princes, who for the most part think there is no God, at
least to fear him for the thunders and tempests, for fear whereof all
creatures tremble: and albeit it threatens sinners, yet it moves his to
praise his name.

30. When David should dedicate his house to the Lord, he fell extreme sick
without all hope of life, and therefore The Contents.
after recovery he thanked God, exhorting others to do the like, and learn by
him that God is rather merciful then severe toward his, also that adversity is
sudden: then he prays, and promises to praise God for ever.

31. David, delivered from great danger, shows first, what meditation he had
by the power of faith, when death was before his eyes, and how the favor of
God always is ready to those that fear him: he exhorts the faithful to
trust in God, because he preserves him.

32. David, punished with grievous sickness for his sins, counts them happy
to whom God does not impute their transgressions: and after that he had
confessed his sins and obtained pardon, he exhorts the wicked men to live
godly, and the good to rejoice.

33. He exhorts good men to praise God for creating and ^o^erning all things:
for his faithful promises: for scattering the counsel of the wicked; teaching
that no creature preserves any man, but onely^* is mercy.

34. David ^auing escaped Achis, 1. Samuel 21. praised God for his deliverance,
giving others example to trust in God, to fear and serve him, who defendes the
godly with his Angels and utterly destroieth the wicked in their sins.

35. Saules flatterers persecuted David, who prays for revenge, that his
innocence may be declared, and that such as take his part may rejoice, for
which he promises to magnify Gods name all the days of his life.

36. David vexed by the wicked, complains of their malice, but considering
Gods great mercy to all creatures, especially toward his children, by faith
thereof he is comforted and assured of his deliverance.

37. Because the godly should not be daunted to see wicked men prosper, David
shows that all things shall be granted even with hearts desire to them that
love and fear God, but the wicked, albeit they flourish for a time, shall at
length perish.

38. David, sick of some grievous disease, acknowledges himself to be
chastised of the Lord for his sins, and therefore prays God to turn away
his wrath, but in the end with firm confidence and commending his cause unto
God, hops for speedy help at his hand.

39. David having determined silence, yet burst forth into The Contents.
words that he would not, through his bitter grief, for he makes certain
requests which taste of men's infirmities, yet mixed with many prayers, and all
to show a mind wonderfully troubled, that it may appear how he did strive
mightily against death and desperation.

40. David, delivered from great danger, does magnify God therefore, and
commends his providence toward all mankind: then he promises to give
himself wholly to Gods service, and declares how God is truly worshipped:
afterward he gives thanks, and having complained of his enemies he calls
for aid and succor.

41. David grievously afflicted, blessed them that pity his cause, complaining
of faithless friends, such as Judas. John, 15. then he gives thanks for Gods
mercy in chastising him gently, not suffering his enemies to triumph.

42. David grieved, that through persecutors he could not be present in the
Congregation, protesting his presence in heart, albeit in body separate, at
last ^ee shows, that notwithstanding these sorrows and thoughts, yet he
continually puts his confidence in the Lord.

43. He prays to be delivered from them which conspire with Absalon, to the
end he might joyfully praise God in his Congregation.

44. A most earnest prayer made in the name of the faithful, in persecution,
for sustaining the quarrel of Gods word; as in Paul, Romans 8.

45. Solomon his Majesty, honor, strength, beauty, riches, and power, are
praised: his marriage with the Egyptian: an heathen woman is blessed if that she
renounce her people and country, and give herself wholly to her husband: here
is figured the wonderful Majesty and increase of Christ's Kingdom and the
Church his spouse, now taken of the Gentiles.

46. A song of thanksgiving for the deliverance of Jerusalem, after
Senacherib with his army was driven away, or some other like sudden and
marvelous deliverance by the mighty hand of God whereby the Prophet commends
this great benefit: does exhort the faithful to give themselves wholly to the
hands of God, doubting nothing* but that under his protection The Contents.
they shall be safe against all the assaults of their enemies.

47. An exhortation to worship God for his mercies toward Jacobs posterity:
herein is prophessed the kingdom of Christ in the time of the Gospel.

48. Thanks are given to God for the notable deliverance of Jerusalem from the
hands of many Kings, the estate whereof is praised, for that God is present at
all times to defend it. This Psalm seems to be made in the time of Ahaz,
^o^aphat, Asa, or Ezechia for then chiefly was the City by foreign Princes
assaulted.

49. Gods Spirit moves the consideration of man's life, showing that the
welthiest are not happiest, but notes how all things are ruled by Gods
providence, who as he judges these worldly misers to everlasting torments, so
does he preserve his, and will reward them in the day of his resurrection. 1 Thessalonians. 1.

50. He prophesies how God will call all Nations by the Gospel, and require
no other sacrifice of his people but confession of his benefits and thanks
giving, and how he detesteth all such as seem zealous of ceremonies, and not
of the pure word of God only.

51. David rebuked by the Prophet Nathan for his great offenses, acknowledged
the same to God, protesting his natural corruption, wherefore he prays God
to forgive his sins and ren^e in him his holy Spirit, promising that he will
not be unmindful of those great graces: finally fearing least God would punish
the whole Church for his fault, he requires that he would rather increase his
graces toward the same.

52. David describes the arrogant tyranny of Doeg Saul's chief sheepe-heard,
who by false surmises caused Abimele^k and the Priests to be slain: he
prophesies his destruction, encourages the faithful to trust in God who most
sharply reuengeth his: and renders thanks for his deliverance: herein is
lively set forth the kingdom of Antichrist.

53. David describes the crooked nature, the cruelty and punishment of the
wicked, when they look not for it, and desires the deliverance of the godly
that they may rejoice together. The Contents.


54. David in great danger through Zephims calls upon God to destroy his
enemies, promising sacrifice for his deliverance.

55. David in great distress complains of Saul's cruelty, and falsehood of
his familiar acquaintance, effectuously mo^uing the Lord to pity him: then
assured of deliverance he sets forth the grace of God as if he had already
obtained his request.

56. David being brought to Achis the King of Gath 2. Sam. 21. 12. complains
of his enemies, demands succor, trusts in God, and promises to perform
his vow, which was to praise God in his Church.

57. David in the desert of Ziph betrayed by the inhabitants, and in the same
cause with Saul, calls unto God with full confidence that he will perform
his promise and show his glory in Heaven and earth against the cruel enemies,
there* fore he renders laud and praise.

58. He describes his malicious enemies, Saul's flatterers, who secretly and
openly sought his destruction, from whom he appealeth to Gods judgment,
showing that the just shall rejoice at the punishment of the wicked, to Gods
glory.

59. David, in great danger of Saul, who sent to stay him in his bed, declares
his innocence and their fury, praying God to destroy all malicious sinners who
live for a time to exercise his people, but in the end consume in his wrath to
Gods glory: for this he sings praise to God, assured of his mercies.

60. David, now King over Judah, after many victories shows by evident signs
that God elected him King, assuring the people that God will prosper them if
they approve the same: after he prays unto God to finish that he begun.

61. Whether he were in danger of the Ammonites, or pursued of Absolon, here
he cries to be delivered and confirmed in his kingdom, promising perpetual
praises.

62. David declares by example and name of God that he and all people must
trust in God alone, seeing that all without God goes t^ naught who only is of
power to save, and that he rewards man according to his works.

63. David after his danger of Ziph, gives thanks to God for his wonderful
deliverance, in whose mercies he The Contents.
trusts, even in the midst of misery: prophesying the destruction of Gods
enemies, and contrariwise happiness^ to all them that trust in the Lord. 2.
Samuel, 3.

64. David prays against the false reporters and ^landerers, he declares
their punishment and destruction, to the comfort of the just, and the glory of
God.

65. A thanksgiving unto God by the faithful, who are signified by Sion and
Jerusalem: for the choosing, preservation and governance of them, and for the
plen^ifull blessing powered forth upon the earth.

66. He erhorteth to praise the Lord in his wonderful works: he sets forth
the power of God to affray rebels: and shows Gods mercy to Israel, and to
provoke all men to hear and praise his name.

67. A swe^t prayer for all the faithful to obtain the favor of God, and to
be lightened with his countenance, to the end that his way and ^^dgem^nt may be
known throughout the earth* rejoicing that God is the governor of all nations.

68. David expresses the wonderful mercies of God toward his people, who by
all means and most strange sorts declares himself to them: Gods Church
therefore by reason of his premises, grace and vi^tori^s, does excel all
worldly things, wherefore all men are moved to praise God for ever.

69. Christ and his elect are figured in David's zeal and ang^^^h, the
malicious cruelty of whose enemies and their punishment, Judas and such
traitors notes who are accursed: then gathers he courage in afflictions, and
offers praises to God, which are more acceptable then all sacrifices: finally
he does provoke all creatures to praises: prophesying of the Kingdom of Christ
and building of Judah, where all the faithful and their seed shall dwell for
ever.

70. He prays to be right speedily delivered; his enemies to be ashamed: and
all seek the Lord to be comforted.

71. He prays in faith established by promise, and confirmed by the work of
God from his youth, to be delivered from his wicked and cruel son Absalon,
with his consederacy, promising to be thankful therefore.

72. Gods Kingdom by Christ is represented by Solomon, The Contents.
under whom shall be righteousness, peace and felicity, unto whom all Kings
and nations shall do homage, whose name and power shall endure for ever.

73. David teaches that neither the prosperity of the ungodly, nor the
affliction of the good, ought to discourage Gods children, but rather move
them to consider Gods providence, and to reverence his judgments, for that the
wicked vanish away like smoke, and the godly enter into life everlasting, in
hope whereof he resigneth himself to Gods hands.

74. The faithful complaint of the destruction of the Church and true Religion
under the name of Sion, and the Altars destroyed, and trusting in the might and
free mercies of God, by his covenant they require help and succor for the
glory of Gods holy name, the salvation of his poor afflicted servants, and the
confusion of his proud enemies.

75. The faithful praise the name of the Lord, which shall come to judge at
the time appointed, when the wicked shall be ^ut to confusion, and drink the
cup of his wrath, their p^id^ shall be abated, and the righteous shall be
exalted to honor

76. This Psalm sets forth the power of God, and care for the defense of
his people in Jerusalem, the destruction of the army of Senacherib, and
exhorts the faithful to be thankful for the same.

77. The Prophet in the name of the Church, rehearses the greatness of his
affliction, and his grievous temptation whereby he was driven to this end, to
consider his former conversation, and the continual course of Gods works, in
the preservation of his servant, and so he confirms his faith against these
temptations.

78. He shows how God of his mercy chose the Church of the posterity of
Abraham, casting in their teeth the rebellion of their fathers, that their
children might acknowledge Gods free mercy, and be ashamed of their perverse
ancestors: the holy Ghost has comprehended as it were the sum of al Gods
benefits, that the gross people might see in few words the effect The Contents.
of the whole histories.

79. The Israelites complaint to God, for the calamity that they suffered, when
Antiochus destroyed their Temple and City, desiring aid against his tyranny,
least God and his Religion should be contemned by the heathen, who should see
him for saken and perish.

80. A lamentable prayer to God to help the misery of the Church, destring him
to consider the first estate when his favor shined toward them, that he
might finish that work which he had begun.

81. An exhortation to praise God for his benefits, condemning their
ingratitude.

82. David declaring God to be present with Judges, and Magistrates, reproves
their partiality and unrighteousness, and exhorts them to do justice, but
seeing no amendment, he desires God to execute Justice himself.

83. The Israelites pray the Lord to deliver them from their enemies, both at
home and far off* also that all such wicked people be stricken with his stormy
tempests, that they may know his power.

84. David exiled his country, desires ardently to return to Gods Tabernacle,
and assembly of the Saints, to praise God: then he praises the courage of the
people, that pass the wilderness to assemble themselves in Sion.

85. Because God withdrewe not his rods from his Church after the return from
Babylon: first they put him in mind that he should not leave the works of his
grace imperfect: and complain of their long affliction: then they rejoice in
hope of promised deliverance, which was a figure of Christ's Kingdom, under
whom should be perfect felicity.

86. David sore afflicted prays fervently for deliverance, sometimes
rehearsing his miseries and mercies received, desiring also to be instructed of
the Lord, that he may fear and glorify his name: he complains also of his
adversaries, and requires to be delivered from them. The Contents.


87. The holy Ghost promises that the Church, as yet in misery after the
captivity of Babylon, should be restored to great excellence, so that nothing
should be more comfortable, then to be numbered among the members thereof.

88. The faithful sore afflicted by sickness, persecution, adversity, and as
it were left of God without any consolation, yet call on God by faith, and
strive against desperation.

89. David praised God for his couenante made between him and his elect, by
Jesus Christ: then he complains of the desolation of his Kingdom, so that
the promise seemed to be broken, but finally he prays to be delivered from
afflictions, mentioning the shortness of man's life: and confirming himself by
Gods promises.

90. Moses seeing the people neither admonished by the breuity of their life,
nor by plagues, to be thankful, prays God to turn their hearts, and
continue his mercy toward them, and their posterity for ever.

91. Here he describes the assurance he lives in, that commits himself
wholly to Gods protection in all temptations: a promise of God to those that
love him, know him, and trust in him, to deliver them and give them immortal
glory.

92. A Psalm of the Sabbath, to stir up the people to acknowledge and praise
God in his works: David rejoices therein, but the wicked consider not that
the vngoldly when he is most flourishing, shall most speedily perish: in the
end is described the felicity of the just, planted in the house of God in
praise of the Lord.

93. He praises the power of God in the creation of the world, and beats
down all people which lift the^ up against his Majesty, and provoke to
consider his promises.

94. He prays to God against the violence of Tyrants, and comfort the
afflicted by the good issue of their afflictions, and by the ruin of the
wicked.

95. An earnest exhortation to praise God for the government The Contents.
of the world, and election of his Church, to eschew the rebellion of the old
fathers, who tempted God in the wilderness, and therefore entered not the land of
promise.

96. An exhortation both to the Jews and Gentiles, to praise God for his
mercy, and this specially ought to be referred to the Kingdom of Christ.

97. David exhorts all to rejoice for the coming of the Kingdom of Christ,
dreadful to the rebels and Idolators, and joyful to the just, whom he
exhorts to innocence, to rejoicing and thanksgiving.

98. An earnest exhortation to all creatures to praise the Lord, for his power,
mercy, and fidelity in his promise by Christ, by whom he has communicated his
salvation to al nations.

99. He commends the power, equity, and excellency, of the Kingdom of God by
Christ, over the Jews and Gentiles, provoking them to magnify the same, and
to ^^are the Lord as the ancient fathers, Moses, Aaron and Samuel, who calling
upon God were heard in their prayers.

100. He exhorts all men to serve the Lord, who has made us to enter into
his Courts and assemblies to praise his name.

101. David describes what government he will observe in his house and
kingdom, by r^^ting out the wicked and cherishing the godly persons.

102. It seems that this prayer was appointed to the faithful to pray in the
captu^^ty of Babylon* a consolation for the building of the Church, whereof
follows the praise of God to be publ^^hed unto all posterities: the
conversion of the Gentiles, and ^tability of the Church.

103. The Prophet provoke men and Angels, and all creatures to praise the
Lord, for his fatherly mercies in delivering of his people from evils, in his
providence over all things, in preservation of the faithful.

104. A thanks giving for the creation of the world, and governance of the
same, by his marvelous providence: also The Contents.
a prayer against the wicked, who are the occasion that God diminishes his
blessings.

105. He praises the singular goodness of God, for choosing a peculiar people
to himself, never ceasing to do them good, for his promise sake.

106. The people d^spearsed v^ Antiochus do magnify the goodness of God, among
their repentant: and prays to be gathered from among the heathen, that they
may praise his name.

107. David exhorts all, that are red^emed by the Lord, and gathered unto
him, to give thanks therefore: who by sending prosperity and adversity,
^ringeth men unto him. Therefore as the righteous there rejoice, so shall the
wicked have their mo^thes s^op^^^.

108. David, ^^^^ Har^^ an^ ^^^c^, praises the Lord, and assures himself of
(...) of God, concerning his kingdom ^u^r Israel, and (...) again^ other
Nations* who though he seem to forsake us for a time, yet he alone in the end,
will cast down our enemies.

109. David being falsely accused by Saul's flatterers, prays God to help him
to destroy his enemies: who represent Judas the traitor unto Jesus Christ: and
all like enemies of the children of God.

110. David prophesies of the power, and everlasting kingdom of Christ: and
of his priesthood, which should put an end to the priesthood of Leui.

111. He gives thanks to the Lord, for his maruailous works toward his
Church: and declares, wherein true wisdom, and right knowledge consists.

112. He praises the felicity of them that fear God, and condenmeth the
cursed state of the contemners of God.

113. An exhortation to praise the Lord for his providence in that, that
contrary to the course of nature, he works in his Church.

114. Israel delivered out of Egypt, puts us in remembrance The Contents.
of Gods great mercies toward his children, and of our unthankfulness for the
same.

115. The faithful oppressed by Idolatrous Tyrants, promise that they will not
be unmindful of so great a benifite, if it would please God to hear their
prayer, and deliver them by his omnipotent power,

116. David being in great danger of Saul in the desert of Maon, perceiving
the great, and inestimable love of God toward him: magnifieth such great
mercies: and protests that he will be thankful for the same.

117. He exhorts the Gentiles to praise God, because he has accomplished
as well to them as to the Jews, the promise of life everlasting, by Jesus
Christ.

118. David, rejected of Saul, and of the people, at the time appointed
obtained the kingdom, for the which he bids all them that fear the Lord,
to be thankful: under whose person, Christ is lively set forth, who should be
of his people rejected.

119. The Prophet wonderfully commends Gods Law; wherein he cannot satisfy
himself, nor express sufficiently his affection thereunto, adding notable
complaints, and consolations meet for the faithful to have both in heart and
voice: and in the Hebrewe, every eight verses begin with one letter of the
Alphabet.

120. David banished from among the barbarous Arabians, through false reports
of envious flatterers, lamenteth his long abode among such infidels given to
all kind of wickedness and contention.

121. The Prophet shows by his own example, that the faithful ought to
look for all their succor of God alone, who will govern and give good
success to all their godly enterprises.

122. David rejoices that God accomplisheth his promise, and placed his Arc
in Sion, giving thanks and praying for the prosperity of the Church.

123. A prayer of the faithful, which are afflicted by the wicked worldlings,
and contemners of God.

124. The faithful delivered from great danger, acknowledge The Contents.
not to have escaped by their own power, but through the favor of God.

125. He describes the assurance of the faithful in their afflictions, and
desires their wealth, and the destruction of the wicked.

126. This Psalm was made after the return of the people from Babylon, and
shows that the mean of their deliverance was wonderful, after the 70.
years of captivity, for^* spoken by Jeremy 25. 12. and 29. 10.

127. It is not man's wit, power, or labor, but the free goodness of God that
gives riches, preserves Towns, and Countries, gives nourishment and
children.

128. Here is described the prosperous estate of persons married, in the fear
of God and the promises of Gods blessings, to all them that live in this
honorable estate, according to his commandments.

129. He admo^isheth the Church, though afflicted in all ages, for God will
deliue^ it, and suddenly destroy the enemies thereof.

130. An effectuous prayer to obtain mercy and forgiveness of his sins, and
a^ length deliverance from all evils.

131. Daui^ charged with ambition protests his humility before God.

132. The faithful grounded upon Gods promise made unto David, desires that
he would establish the same both as touching his posterity, and the building of
the Temple, to pray there as was before spoken.

133. The commendations of godly and brotherly amity compared to the most
precious oil mentioned in Exodus. 30.

134. He exhorts the Levites that watch in the Temple to praise the Lord.

135. He exhorts all the faithful to praise God for his marvelous works
and graces, wherein he has declared his Maie^tie, to the confusion of all
Idolaters.

136. An earnest exhortation, to give thanks unto God The Contents.
for the creation and governance of all things.

137. The Israelites in their captivity, hearing the Chaldeans reproach and
blaspheme God and his Religion, desire God to punish the Edomites, who
provoke the Babil^mans against them, and prophecieth the destruction of
Babylon.

138. David praises the goodness of God toward him, for which even foreign
Princes shall praise the Lord, together with him, and he is assured to have
like comfort of God, hereafter as heretofore.

139. David to cleanse his heart from all hypocrisy, shows that nothing is
so secret which God sees not: after declaring his zeal and fear of God, he
protests to be enemy to all them that contemn God.

140. David prays unto the Lord, against the cruelty, falsehood, and injuries
of his enemies, assuring himself of his succor: wherefore he provoke the
just to praise the Lord, and to assure themselves of his tuition.

141. David being grievously persecuted under Saul, desires succor and
patience, till God take vengeance of his enemies.

142. David neither for fear nor anger, would kill Saul, but with a quiet
mind prayed unto God, who preserved him.

143. An earnest prayer for remission of sins, acknowledging that the enemies
did cruelly persecute him by Gods just judgment: he desires to be restored to
grace, to be governed by his holy spirit, that he may spend the rest of his
life in the true fear and service of God.

144. David praises the Lord for his victories, and Kingdom restored, yet
calling for the destruction of the wicked, and declares wherein the felicity
of any people consists.

145. David describes the wonderful providence of The Contents.
God, in governing and preserving all the other creatures: he praises God for
his justice, mercy, and special loving kindness toward those that cast
upon him, that fear and love him.

146 David teaches that none should put their trust in men, but in God alone
who is almighty, and delivers the afflicted, nourishes the poor, sets
prisoners at liberty, comfort the fatherless, widows, strangers, and is
King for ever.

147 The Prophet praises the bounty, wisdom, power, Justice, and providence
of God, upon all his creatures, but especially upon his Church, which he
gathered together after their dispersion, declaring his word and judgment so
unto them, as he had done to no other people.

148. He provoke all creatures to praise the Lord in heaven and in all
places, especially for the power that he had given to his people Israel.

149. An exhortation to the Church, to praise the Lord for his victory and
conquest, that he gives the Saints against The Contents.
all man's power.

150. An exhortation to praise the Lord without ceasing, by all manner of
ways, for all his mighty and wonderful works*

FINIS.

