THE GOVERNMENT OF JRELAND UNDER THE HONORABLE, JUST, AND wise Governor Sir
JOHN PERROT Knight, one of the Privy Council to Queen ELIZABETH, beginning
1584. and ending 1588.

Being THE FIRST BOOK OF THE CONTINVATION OF THE History of that Kingdom,
formerly set forth to the year 158^, and now continued to this present 1626.

Whereof The rest succeeding this already collected, but not fully perfected,
shall shortly follow.

Historia vera, vera vita temporis.

LONDON: Printed for THOMAS WALKLEY, and are to be sold in Britains Bursse,
at the Sign of the Eagle and Child.

1626.

TO MY MOST REspected and worthy Cossin BEVELL GRENVILE Esquire.
AT your instant entreaty, I spent many hours in a Commentary upon Londognos
disscourse, which was no sooner ended, but lost through a misfortune, which
fell upon my Papers, by the last Years Infection, lighting in my Lodging. And
not being able yet to recover another of the same Books, I cannot begin
again, till my defect be supplied. In the mean (such being your desire) J
adventured on the Story of our Irish Wars, But as I was in my travail, J
discovered the best part of my Journey already perfected by a better
undertaker. J therefore here stopp, and present you with thus much. Jf this
little like you, I will proceed again another way, as the time shall permit
me. Wherein you shall view no further then my own Eyes have seen. So shall J
not turn back till J have finished. All being but to please you, dispose as
you may in any thing,

Your Kinseman, E. C. S.

To the Reader.
THis Noble Gentleman, liking the plain writing of a Soldier, (in whose
profession an Honorable mind has made him add experience to his affection)
better then the eloquence and elaborate work of a professed Scholar,
(affecting Caesar's matter not his words) especially, amongst our late writers
delighting in two plain discourses of the famous Knight Sir Robert Williams;
And finding just fault that our English are to idle in memorizing their own
exploit. Entreated, nay, commanded me (for such is his power) since he could
draw no better pencill to so good a picture, to put my self in print, (though
to the censure of every busy body) wherein, in observance to his will, I spent
some time in discoursing upon the Spanish form of Discipline, by such exploits
of our Nation against the Spaniard, as I my self had seen performed. But, by
misfortune, already mentioned in the Epistle, my labor miscarried. And not
having means to begin again at this time, as willingly I would for his
satisfaction, I was by him enduced to treat of another Subject, being yet
matter of the same profession, and some part acted within the compass of mine
own experience; wherein, because the fountain might better show the stream,
I could not choose but ascend to a time foregoing mine, as well to begin where
the former Historian of that Countries Government left; as because, that from
that time, the later and succeeding troubles had their likely beginning;
purposing to have proceeded thence, to the end of the last Wars of Ireland:
In most part of which, I had spent many of my endeavors, thither removed from
the Netherlands, where from a child, I had received breeding, then living in
those Wars, when this worthy Governor Sir John Perrot ruled in Ireland,
where, if such had beeue Gods pleasure, we may guess, it had been happy that
he had governed much longer, as well for the good of that Kingdom: as for the
honor and contentment of our late most famous and ever renowned Queen, to
whom the ensuing troubles (through the faulty Government of his Successors,
brought dishonor and grief. First, by the loss of many worthy men (the
flower of our Nation) with an infinite number of guiltless souls torn out of
this world by misery and slaughter in those Wars, the expense of a wondrous
mass of Treasure, with other provision, enough to have shaken the Walls of the
greatest Monarchy in Europe, if all these had been so employed, which was not
unlikely, if Sir John Perrot had been returned into Ireland, as upon the
beginning of the Wars the Queen determined. Then by being so long resisted
by such base Rebels concluding her Reign, (that had flourished with so many
famous Acts against the capital Enemy of her, and her neighbors, by which
they at this day, redeemed out of misery, flourish again in greatness) with a
strong War against so petty Traitors: Whereon, since time will discover the
passage it self, I shall need to insist no longer: This purpose of the
Queens to return Sir John Perrot, was prevented by the two sins of
Covetousness and Malice, reigning in the then Governor there, and a person
here transcendent both in power and authority: the one, to maintain his profit
(whereunto some powerful friend of his had too much relation:) the other not
brooking Sir John Perrots high, and (indeed) too chollerick spirit and
condition, being fearful of his advancement, joined with the other. So
grounding a combination, builded up by the help of two other instruments of
that State, the one in his own Nature evil, the other contentious for his
particular ends. Thus an Enemy Armed, it was no difficult thing, that a
condemned Traitor should be encouraged in hope of pardon, and some other
mercenarie persons to accuse an Innocent.

To this forged accusation, That great and just Prince (incensed to displeasure
by such an one as was near in favor, who pretended her safety, as the color
of his intended malice, and that displeasure exasperated by some part of the
accusation, which to her was personal) was urged to give way, even against her
heart to his prosecution, as appeared by her answer to the news of his
condemnation: for she casting into the balance of her just judgment his
former weighty Services, and zealous endeavors, and weighing them with those
base persons his Accusers, and their light proofs produced against him, said
thus in the hearing of men of good account, and some near to me in blood and
acquaintance. Is he found guilty? Then, in my conscience, they have found an
Innocent guilty.

And had she restored his Estate to his issue, as she respited his. Execution,
being hardly drawn to give way to his sentence. The fault had wholly layne
upon the false accusations, and sentence, thereupon procured, by the power of
his Prosecutors, and Perjury of his Accusers: But so long a Reign as hers,
has seldom escaped being spotted with greater blots, then this omission,
which, if God had spared her a little longer life, she had (as I have been
credibly told) repaired by a Real restitution of his Estate, to such as he
had disposed it in his life time.

Thus much I am moved the more to mention by writing his Government, which
gave me occasion to look further then others have done into the course and
cause of his condemnation.

As I was proceeding in my intended discourse, I gained notice, that this Story
succeeding Sir John Perrots time, was already under the pen of a more able
hand, one that had taken much pains in that Subject, (only having omittted
Sir John Perrots time for some particular reasons) which must needs blemish my
work, because not so substantial. I abruptly therefore brake off, with such
an excuse as to him belonged, who was the motive of my undertaking. And if
this, thus much, come in Print, I pray you know it, to be his will only. But
if this weak labor be not misliked, I will proceed further, as time shall
spare me leisure.

To the Queens most Excellent Majesty.
Sir John Perrots Opinion for the suppressing of Rebellion, and the well
Governing of Ireland, written by him upon the Queens commandment, in the time
of the Earl of Desmonds and the Lord of Baltinglasses Rebellion. 1582.
I Have found the charge that your Majesty committed unto me for the setting
down of mine opinion, how your Realm of Ireland might with the least charge
be reclaimed from Barbarism to a godly Government, somewhat difficult, by
reason of mine own insufficiency, many ways for so weighty a cause.
Nevertheless, entering into consideration, first of your Majesty's most godly
and Princely care in this behalf, and next of my most bounden duty to your
Majesty; I have been emboldned to set down what I observed, were the causes
of the disorders of the Land, whilst I had some piece of Government in it, and
what I then thought, and now do think, may be some means to reform the
same, most humbly referring both my self, and this my simple discourse to your
Majesty's, and Councels grauer and deeper consideration, and as humbly craving
pardon, if in seeking to discharge my duty truly and plainly, I touch any
thing that may seem offensive.

It is most apparent, that the regard your Majesty has had to God, and his
will in all your Princely proceedings, has so wonderfully blessed your Estate,
that as we your faithful Subjects, do love and honor you, so all foreign
Nations do admire and reverence you for it: A cause for us to thank God most
heartily, and a pattern for all Princes to immitate most diligently. We
therefore to you, and you to God, are to give all the honor and glory.

It is also apparent, what continual care you have had of that your Realm of
Ireland. The great and almost insupportable charges that you have sustained to
do it good, does well witness the same. For so great a mass of Treasure have
you already employed to that end, that no Prince in the world, (except your
Majesty, who has bin moved with conscience of your people, and fear of God
only) would in reason or good policy, give so much for the purchase of such an
other Land, to be enjoyed in peaceable possession. And yet, notwithstanding
all that, your Majesty's care and cost that way, has not hitherto yielded that
fruit that your Majesty does desire. For the State of that Country has grown
daily from worse to worse, and from dangerous t^ most dangerous.

Many men do allege causes hereof: But next to the want of the true knowledge
of God, and of the due course of Justice, to give every man a peaceable
propriety of that which is his own; I take (under correction) that the
smoothing up of all former Rebellions, by Pardons and Protections, has been
the misery and cause of most of this mischief. For if it were not too bitter a
rehearsal, it were no hard matter to make it appear, how one Rebellion during
your Majesty's Reign, has hatched another; and how again of all them, this
last more dangerous then they all, has taken this strong rooting with
foreign combination.

Leaving this third cause a while, I crave pardon to say a little of the two
former principal causes, want of Religion, and Law. It is a lamentable thing
to behold, how generally in that Realm, they are so far, of not only, from
true, but also (in effect) from any knowledge at all of God; tha^ Saint Patrick
is more familiar, and of better credit with them, then Christ Jesus our
Savior. How can a people so estranged from God, and their duty to him, have
any grace to know their lawful Prince, and their duty to her? The like is to
be said of the Laws, from which they fly, as from the yoke of bondage, and
not desire to be tied by it, as by the link of humane Society, as they ought
to be; The reformation must therefore begin at God. His will and word must be
duly planted, and Idolatry extirped. Next, Law must be established, and
lycentious customs abrogated.

The means to effect both, is now most fitly offered by the Rebellion now a
foore: So as a man that should give his opinion for the reformation of Ire^and,
might conclude all circumstances with this one short resolution: Correct this
Rebellion thoroughly, and reform Ireland presently. I must therefore crave
pardon to say a little more concerning this Rebellion, before I meddle with
other particularities of reformation. There be three strong reasons to move
your Majesty to correct this Rebellion with all earnest severity, not allowing
pardon or protection to be given to any man, but upon special and urgent great
causes. The first reason is, The charge that God has committed to your Majesty
over that people, to see the good maintained, or at the least, defended, and
the bad suppressed, or at the least repressed. Then the account that God will
require for the innocent blood, that has been there cruelly spilt by
Traitors, and for the miserable oppression of the better sort of your Majesty's
Subjects, who have been there burned, ravished, robbed, and spoiled: the cry
whereof is now shrill in Gods ear, for vengeance against these cruel Rebels,
and disordered dealers.

The second reason, is a present urging necessity, which may not be neglected,
but with dangerous error in policy of Government. For remit this Rebellion,
and yield wholly and for ever the Lamb to the Wolf, and the Subject to the
Traitor, who will so keep him under, that he shall neither will nor dare ever
hereafter to oppose himself on your Majesty's behalf or Service.

The third reason is commodity: For (besides that all rules and orders for
reformation, may thereupon be the more readily and less chargeably put in
execution) there will excheate to your Majesty by due course of Justice the
better half of that Land, whereof what great ^ue may in short time accrue to
your Majesty, over and above, what may be employed to reward and strengthen
those that are dutifully disposed, shall in part appear in place, where the
commodities of Ireland shall purposely be spoken of.

Thus it appears, that the severe correction of this Rebellion, is the first
and soundest step of reformation, and that the same is grounded upon duty to
God, necessity, policy, and commodity; all which points would yield a larger
discourse, if that it were either my purpose, or needful to your Majesty, who
knows and understands all.

Least some might draw this mine opinion of a severe correction, into the
reckoning of a more cruel sentence then I mean: I protest it is far from me
to desire any extirpation; but rather that all might be saved, that were good
for the Country to be saved. Yet this I say, Till your Majesty's Sword has
meekened all, I think it neither Honor nor safety to grant mercy to any. But
when the Sword has made a way, then, as to pardon all, would be too remiss a
pity: So, not to pardon many, would be an extremity nothing agreeable to your
Majesty's most godly and merciful inclination. Otherwise there would be such a
vacuity of ground there, (as it is already too great) that your Realm of
England, though it be most populous, through your Majesty's most godly
Government, (God be thanked, and long continue it) were not able to spare
people, to replenish the wastes.

It rests now to speak of the particular means, as well to repress this
Rebellion, as thereupon to reform the Realm. First, very good choice being
made (as there is already) of your Deputy, it is most requisite (for the time
of his continuance in that Service, which in my opinion had need be seven
years for so great a work) that all his actions there be thoroughly backed by
your Majesty, and none of them crossed, to work him your Maisties disgrace
(which the Irish will soon epsy) either by suggestions thence, or practices
here, during his continuance in charge there; but upon his discharge to answer
all with his life and living: your Majesty's Deputy being thus fortified with
credit, he must also be thoroughly maintained with sufficiency of men, money,
munition, and victuals: but before I speak of them, I think it necessary to
remember, that for the principal points of the government of that Land, it
shall be requisite that certain rules be prescribed to every Deputy by your
Majesty, and Counsel here. And yet he not to be so tied to any of them, but
that upon urgent causes he may break or altar them.

To return to provision. And first for men. All wards being furnished, I take
800 English horsemen: 3000 English footmen, and 1000 Galloglaghes, Kerne, and
Irish shot will suffice for this purpose: But because it shall be necessary
to ease your Majesty's good subjects of the Cesse for the soldiers, wherewith
they have been hitherto burdened, I think it requisite that in leuy of that
Cesse, the pay be according to the rates ensuing, as your Majesty allows in
all your other services. And the rather in respect as well of the painful
dangers that these Soldiers must abide, as also that they may live without
rauine and spoil.

The pay.
Every band of 100 Horsemen to have a Captain at 6 s. 8 d. a Leiutenant at 3
s. 4 d. a Guidon at 2 s. a Trumpet at 18 d. a Surgion at 18. d and every 15120
lib.
horseman (besides 10 dead pays) at 12 d. which being all sterling, and every
band by the day to 105 s. by the month of thirty days, to 157 lib. 10 s. by
the year of 12 months and fine odd days to 1890. lib. Jn all by the year.

Every band of 100 foots*men to have a Captain at 4 s. a Lieutenant at 2 s. an
Ensign at 12 d. a Serieant 45625. lib.
at 12 d. a Drum at 12 d. a Surgion at 12 d. and every Soldier (besides 10
dead pays) at 8 d. which being all sterling ancient; every band by the day to
4 lib. 3 s. 4 d. by the month of 30 days, to 125 li. by the year of 12
months and 5 odd days, to 1120 lib. 16 s. 8 d. Jn all by the year.

Every band of 100 Kernes, Galloglaghes, and Irish shot, to have a Captain at
2 s. a Lieutenant at 12 d. a Guidon at 8 d. a Piper at 8 d. and every Kerne
6874 lib. 38. 4 d.
at 4 d. without dead pays, which being all sterling, amounts every band by
the day to 36 s. 8 d. by the month of 30 days, to 56 lib. 10 s. by the year
of 12 months and 5 odd days, to 687 lib. 8 s. 4 d. Jn all by the year.

Totalis of your Majesty's pay. 67619 lib. 3 s. 4 d.

Whereunto.
Add for the Deputies and other officers entertainment, furnishing of wards,
and other extraordinary 37380. lib. 16 s. 8 d.
charges, and also toward buildings in places convenient, whereof the charge is
very uncertain.

And so.
Your Majesty's whole charge in certainty for this service, (excepting the
uncertainty of the charges 100000 lib.
of buildings) will amount unto.

Here (by the way) I think it expedient, for avoiding of confusion of new and
old reckonings together, that old former pays and debts remaining in arrerages
unto the taking of this service in hand be cleared, and discharged. And then
for this new reckoning thus made, it behooves to show how or whence the money
may be leauied. In mine opinion, (the things before rehearsed advisedly
considered) it were money well bestowed for so good a purpose, though the whole
came directly out of your Highness Treasure; And yet it is to be remembered,
that besides your Majesty's contitinuall yearly charge which is not small, you
have in some one year (as I am given to understand) spent as much as this upon
that country service. But considering the great charges that your Majesty
has and must sustain otherwise for the safety of your people and Countries,
you may in reason and honor admit an extraordinary remedy, though at the first
sight, it carry some show of an inconvenience. I suppose therefore (under
correction) that it shall be good, that your Majesty after the example of
France, Spain and Flanders, where most of the small money consists of base
coins, do also cause to be coined yearly during the first four years,
100000 li. in pieces of 8 d. 4 d. 2 d. and 1 d. the same to contain, but a
fourth part of fine silver, letting all coins that are current there of good
gold and silver to run as now they do: so your Majesty's charge, besides all
charges of coynage, will amount to no more but 25000 lib. yearly which in four
years would come to 100000 lib. which by that time your Majesty with Gods
favor should see would bring you a fair reckoning of that country and
government.

The place fit for coynage, whether at the Tower of London, or any other port
town of England that has more commodity for fuel, or else rather in
Ireland. I refer to your Majesty's, and Counsels considerations. If in
Ireland, I think it very necessary to call in all the base money that is there
now current, paying ready sterling money for the same, at the rates it now
goes. The mass of that base money would presently set the mint a work: and
being new molten, would with some supply serve this turn. This being thought
good: then surely the Town of Rosse in the County of Wexford will be a most
apt place for the mint, by reason of the great abundance of wood which grows
along the River that comes close by that town, the felling whereof will be
serviceable; not only for this work, but also for the quietness of the
country there abouts.

Some scruple may be made here by the late experience of this Realm, what
inconveniences may grow by imbasing the coin. It cannot be denied, but it was
somewhat inconvenient for this Realm, living under civil and orderly
government: yet the necessity of the weighty service then being supplied by
it, we see all the inconveniences well overcome through your Majesty's
peaceable government, (God be thanked for it.) But the example of this Realm,
or of any other commonwealth already reformed does not hold in this case: For,
as imbasing of coin and such like dangerous innouocations may breed harm in
well governed States: So in Ireland being all out of order it can do no harm
at all, but rather it is to be hoped, that the admission of this one small
inconvenience, may be a mean to redress, not only a number of other greater
inconveniences, but also it self too withal in the end.

Let it be confessed, that the prices of things will by that means within a
year or two, upon discovery of the baseness, rise to double, and that both
Soldier and Country man shall for the time loose accordingly.

If the reformation do immediately recompense the loss treble, then may I
ask, what harm has either Soldier or Country man received? That it will so,
may appear thus. Scarce the fourth foot of Ireland is at this hour manured;
and of that scarce the fourth penny profit made, that the soil would yield, if
through a reformation the Husbandman might have a safe and peaceable use both
of it and of his Cattle. And yet I say nothing of Mines, and a number of other
hidden Commodities that a civil reformed Government would bring with it. Now
it may please your Majesty, that I may reckon, and reason thus: First, coining
in four years 400000 pound, your Majesty's turn is served for 100000 pound.
Then calling it down at six years end, to the just value it is worth,
whereby it will be for ever after a very necessary Coin to be current, for
the relief of your poor Subjects, not only of Ireland, but also of England,
the Country shall lose 300000 pound. That this shall be treble recompensed, by
the reformation I suppose will thus be proved. Allow (for example) that the
whole profit of Ireland is not yearly above 100000 pound. Add to this a
treble profit in quantity of ground to be manured, and another treble in
quality of manuring, for two years betwixt the end of the Coynage and the
fall, allowing the first four years to be fruitlesly spent in reforming
(though there be hope that that time will be shortened) I think the reckoning
of a treble recompense, falls out apparently. In these matters of State,
there can be nothing set down so plain, that will not admit a contradiction.
And therefore (perhaps) it may be said* This is a good and easy speculation.
But I trust (God giving good increase) it will prove as good and as easy an
action. To God therefore, and to your Majesty's gracious consideration, I thus
leave it.

Victuals and Munition are now to be provided for. And sure there must be
special regard had of both. Experience of the misery, and defect in Sernice, I
found that way makes me to give this special caution, leaving all particular
direction thereof, to those that have better skill therein then I have.
Nevertheless, the chief Victualer being chosen a man of good substance,
skill, and conscience, he had need (in mine opinion) be imprested 10000 pound
current money of England upon good sureties, not only to answer the Stock,
but also to have Grainers of Corn in places apt for the Service.

These things thus provided; In mine opinion, the standing seat for the Deputy
and the Law, would be translated from Dublin, (which is apt for nothing else,
but to send and receive readily from England) to Atblon, which is (as it were)
the Center of Ireland, and situate both in a good soil, apt for all things
necessary, and on the Shennon, which is the best River of the Realm, and would
with a small charge be made portable twenty miles above Athlon at least. By
that means, as the Deputy may upon every occasion (be it never so sudden) be
within twelve hours in the farthest Province from him: So in short time the
repair hither from all quarters of the Realm, would breed a thorow-fare,
even through Deserts and Woods, that are now lurking holes for Rebels, and
Nourceries for Rebellion.

The Deputy thus furnished and seated, he had need for his better assistance,
to have two Presidents with competent Officers to those States, and those such
men for Religion, conscience, courage, diligence, and ability both of bodies
and purses, as respecting their duties to God and your Majesty, the good of
their Country and their own credites, may attend their charges constantly
against all toylesome dangers, and corrupt gain, showing themselves in all
their actions reformers and not deformers.

Their standing seats will be most apt, the one for Mounster at Killmallock,
the other for Vlster at Liffuer. So (as occasion shall require) may they best
answer the Deputy, and the Deputy then being, as it were, in the midst
betwixt them, of equal distance from them both.

Then there is needful to be two Marshalls, who being aptly chosen for the
purpose, should at the direction of the Deputy and Presidents go to one
exployt, while they be either at some other, or else otherwise necessarily
ministering Justice. Thus the Deputy answering, and they assisting one another,
both the labor will be the easier, and the Enemy the more doubtful, being
set to five several ways. As before of the Deputy, so here of these Officers,
I think it requisite that their Service have some limitation of time, and that
the Presidents five years, unless sickness, or other necessity occasion the
contrary. And for the Marshalls, it were not amiss they were made Patentees to
continue during life, unless through misbehauiour they should deserve to be
displaced, or through good desert to be better advanced.

In choice of the Lord Chancellor and all other Officers, there would be like
regard had, that through needinesse they be not carried from Justice, which
next under God must be the chiefest reformer. The like is to be said of the
Clarke of the Check, that he be a careful man to see the bands full.

Also the Captains, their Officers and Soldiers, that they make neither a
Harvest of the Service, nor a spoil of the Subjects, but rather (together with
seeking to suppress the Rebellion without malice to any man's person) to sow
the seed of good example, whereby both themselves, and those that their
Service shall be mean to reform, may reap of God and your Majesty an honest
and godly Harvest, to the just reward of their Services both for bodies and
souls. There are diversities of opinions, what service were fit to be first
attempted, and where.

Some in Vlster against the Scots: Some in Connaught against the Burks: Some in
Mounster against Desmond: and some in Leynster against Baltinglass, and each
have their reason: It were not good to neglect any of them, but presently at
least to front every of them: The choice therefore where to begin, would be
left at large at the Deputies discretion, to do therein as he sees cause.
Nevertheless, above all the rest, that in Leynster, which aptly may be called
an intestin mischief, would be (in mine opinion) first dealt withal as well
for the indignity of the matter, as also for the suppression of the Birnes,
Tools, and Cauenaghes, which (as now to Baltinglass) have, and ever will be
ready Rebellion to the Omoores, Oconers, and all others: For until they be
either extirped, or thoroughly brought under by fortifications upon their
fastnesses, Dublin, Kildare, Westmeth, the Kings and Queens Counties cannot be
clear either of theirs, the Omoores and Oconors incursions and spoils, or of
doubt of the Magoghigans, Omoloyes, and other stirring Irish borderers. But
they being suppressed, the Omoores and Oconors lose all their chief strength
and refuge, and the residue with either the Sword or the Law, will be easily
enough kept under: So as then the Pale may without fear or danger, attend your
Majesty's other Service with their best aid: That being happily (as it willw,
ith Gods favor, be soon at chieued) then is your Deputy to proceed against
the rest, and still as he goes to make great paces throughout all their Woods
and fatnesses, and small fortifications upon every their straight and strength,
after the example of your Majesty's most Noble Progenitors in subduing of
Wales. And whilst this is in doing your Majesty, had need to have not only
part of your Navy to lie on the Coast, to answer foreign attempts if there be
cause, and to keep the Rebels from starting over Sea. But also small Vessels to
lie upon the Scots to impeach their Invasions. The Rebellion being repressed,
and your Majesty having showed mercy to those that you shall see cause to
bestow it well upon, then must the fruits of peaceable Government be made to
appear; To that end, it shall be requisite to call a Parliament, and by
Authority thereof, not only to revive all former old Statutes, that shall be
consonant to a reformed Government; but also to Enact new for the establishing
of the Articles ensuing, and such other, as upon advice shall be thought meet.

1. First, for as much as the only way for true obedience to the Prince,
grows by true knowledge of God, it shall be requisite that two Universities,
where the same may be truly taught, be erected with as convenient speed as
may be. The fittest places for them will be at Lymbrick for the south part, and
Arnagh for the North: The means to do it, may be partly by some of the Lands
that shall excheat to your Majesty by this Rebellion, and partly by imposition
of works, labors, carriages, and money, as Fines upon those that shall be
thought fit to be pardoned.

2 Item, to the end it may appear, that the reformation tends to a lawful
Government, it shall be meet that a Collection be made of the Laws already
in force, and a public denuntiation made by Proclamation, for the putting of
them in present Execution, especially the Laws of King Kogish.

3 Item, the Earl of Ormond is to be compounded withal for his liberties of
Tibredary: so as your Majesty's Laws only ruling there, my Lord,
nevertheless, to have the Excheats, as by the ordinance of Wales the Lords
Marchers have there: As for the Earl of Desmond his liberties of County
Pallantine in Kerry, there needs no composition with him, he being in
Rebellion.

4 Item, that all Ireland be reduced into Manours; so as having Courts,
Barons, Leetes, and Lawdayes kept orderly upon them, the people may have
Justice for mean actions near home.

5 Item, that all Cesse, cuttings, and Irish exactions, as Bonnaght Coin, and
Liuory, Fowey, Soren Black rents, and such like be clean abollished: And that
in lieu thereof a certain Annual rent be rated upon every Plow Land, to the
use of the Lord by composition, tripartity indented to be made betwixt your
Majesty, the Lord, and his Freeholder by the Lord Deputy, Lord Presidents, or
other Commissioners by them authorized, reserving besides for your Majesty,
according to the Statutes made for that purpose, 13 shillings four pence upon
every Plow*land, with prouiso, that if the Lord do break the composition, or
take again any of the said exactions, then he to forfeit the inheritance of
those Lands. And that by that tripartity Indenture, both the Lord and the
Freeholder be bound to let his demeanes, or any other Land that he shall
demise to the Tennant, otherwise called Churl, at a reasonable rent certain,
for term of 21 years at least.

Thus the Freeholder and the Tennant being at a certainty, and rid of the
uncertain spoil, and spending of the Lord, and feeling the ease and commodity
thereof, will withstand the unlawful attempts of the Lord, and be ready with
his body and goods against him (if need be) at the devotion of the State,
that shall be means thus to enrich and better his estate.

6 Item, no Lord or Gentlemen for any respect or color of Service, be admitted
to put upon his Lordship or Signory any Galloglagh, Kerne, or Shot, or to grant
them any Kenelagh. Follow Bonaghbeg or Bonaghburr upon pain offellony:
Nevertheless upon any great necessity the Lord Deputy, or Lords Presidents,
shall put in any Galloglagh, Kerne, or Shot, and those to be called and reputed
your Majesty's Galloglagh, Kerne, or Shot.

7 Item, that all Brehons Carraghes, Bardes, and Rymers, that infect the
people, Friars, Monks, Jesuits, Pardoners, Nunns, and such like, that openly
seek the maintenance of Papacy, a Traytrous kind of people, the Bellows to
blow the coals of all mischief and Rebellion, and fit spies of Antichrist,
whose Kingdom they greedily expect to be restored, be executed by Marshall
Law, and their favorers and maintainers by due course of Law, to be tried and
executed as in cases of Treason.

8 Item, if your Majesty in respect of policy, or otherwise, do not think
it good, utterly to destroy the Irish Scots, that do continually invade your
good Subjects, and aid the Rebellious against your Highness: That it were
well your Majesty did grant to the Earl of Arguile an yearly Pention for a
time, to the end he should restrain them from coming ever into England.

9 Item, that the English Horsemen and Footmen, the Galloglaghes, Kerne, and
Irish Shot, be placed in the several Provinces of the Realm, as the service
and the necessity of the place shall require: And that of the Lands in your
Majesty's disposition by Excheat or otherwise, as soon as conuensently may
be, some portions be allotted to them to dwell upon, and manure at a certain
reasonable rate. And yearly as the commodity of their Lands increases, the
wages to abate, and so at length clean to extinguish.

10 Item, to the end the Ports in Ireland, especially of Mounster, may be
inhabited and fortified against foreign attempts; it shall be well your
Majesty do not only strengthen the Privileges already granted, but also
grant new.

11 Item, that Merchants in general be prohibited upon pain of death, to sell
Powder, or any kind of Warlike Munition to any of the Irish.

12 Item, that honest and skillful men be taken out of every Court of Record
here, and placed there for the settling of the due course of the Laws. And for
their better encouragement to do well, that in respect of their honest
travels, they be promised preferments of Offices in the Courts here, as any do
fall fit for them.

13 Item, that the Glybb, and all Irish habit of men and women, be presently
abollished, and that Orders be set down for enlarging the English tongue, and
extinguishing the Irish in as short a time as conveniently may be.

14 Item, that the factions of Butler and Geraldine, with the titles of Ahmabo
and Cr^ghmabo be taken away.

15 Finally, to the end your Majesty's State be more followed, and depended
upon then hitherto it has been, and the Lords of the Counties less,
(reserving to them the honor and reputation due to their places, as the Noble
men here have.) I think it very necessary that a suruay be taken of all their
Lands: and that your Majesty, by good advice, shall take such a third part
thereof into your hands, as shall lie fittest for the furtherance of your
Service* Giving them of improoued Lands in England by way of exchange, a
valuable recompense. So shall your Majesty's followers increase, and theirs
diminish to the great assurance of your State there: Besides, that by that
means your Highness shall have always

A CONTINVATION of the History of IRELAND unto this time 1626, whereof this is
the first Book, beginning 1584. and ending 1588. the rest shall follow.
Queen Elizabeth's prosperous and peaceable government.
WHen Queen Elizabeth (the mirror of women, and most famous of Princes) had
to the wonder of the world, and her own ever flourishing fame, governed these
her Kingdoms of England and Ireland, 1584
for the space of almost six and twenty years, and did now plainly find;
that the Romish and Spanish practices (those ambitious States affecting
universal Supremacy; the one in over* ruling Religion, the other in coveting
absolute Monarchy) had taken hold of the reuolting disposition and nature of
the Irish (now wearier of the English yoke of obedience then ever: in respect
of their contrariety in Religion, which (through their wildness and
barbarism) they would not have been The Roman Locusts, and especially
Sanders, incendiaries of Rebellion*
so sensible of, but by the stirring up of the Roman Locusts: the instruments
of strife, blood, and dissension) as late manifestation was made in the fruit
of that wicked Priest and Traitor, Doctor Sanders his work, who not only drew
in the inuading Popish-Spanish forces (one of those States aucthorising, the
other The Popish-Spanish forces defeated by the Lord Gray then Deputy.
supporting) into Mounster, where at Smerwick they were defeated by her
Majesty's forces, under the command of the right worthy and religious Deputy
the Lord Gray, but had likewise incited the Lords of Desmond and Baltinglasse,
with many their confederates, to an insurrection (not without suspicion of the
Earl of Kildares conniuencie therein) which fire being well quenched, by the
wisdom The too specdy recalling of the Lord Gray hindered the utter
extinguishing of Desmonds insurrection.
and valor of that noble Governor, but not utterly extinct, he being too
speedily revoked thence by the means of his enemies at Court, envying his
virtues, and malicing his success. And the sword committed unto two Justices;
who as in bodies and qualities, so varied they indispositions and affection.
Way was given by neglect, (the Handmayde of division) to the reviving those
sparks, which lay hid, and covered in the embers of the Jesuits forge; which
her Maiestic discerning, repented, (no doubt) the calling away of the former
Deputy, but like a great minded Prince, (unwilling to confess error, or to
show the power of such as had prevailed with her in this particular) called her
self home to a new election of such a Governor, as was likely to answer the
necessity of her service, and to rule that Kingdom to the good and quiet of
her people, wherein though her happiness was such, as to have plenty of worthy
servants (Regis ad exemplum, etc.) yet most worthily, the lot of Sir John
Perrott elected Lord Deputy of Ireland.
her judgment fell at this time upon Sir John Perrot, a Gentleman descended of
an ancient and Noble family, and that illustrated by his own virtue, which
being supported with a fair Patrimony, (the effectual grace of Ancient
Nobility) gave glory to his mind. His profession being a Soldier, for as his
means bestowed grace upon the profession, so the profession returned the more
honor to his undertaking; free hazard being indeed the high path to honor,
especially when it is guided by a transcendent judgment, which he had
formerly manifested by diverse employments. In her Majesty's Navy he had not
long before, Sir John Perrotts employment against Stukely.
the command of six of her Ships, to encounter Stukeley, expected with the
Papal banner, to have invaded Ireland: He was the Sir John Perrott the first
Praesident of Mounster.
first Lord President of the Province of Mounster, made by the advice of Sir
Henry Sidney: While he was Deputy of Ireland, wherein he had governed with
good success to her Majesty's Service, and such notice had she taken of his
judgment and experience in that Kingdom, as she required his opinion in
writing Sir John Perrotts opinion for reformation of Ireland, applauded by the
Queen and Council.
for reformation of errors, and establishing a perfection in the government
there, which he performed to her good liking, and the applause of her Council.

This judicious and exact discourse I have added (for the satisfaction of the
Reader) to my Preface. These merrits induced that provident Prince to this his
Election. So as commission Sir John Perrots taking of the sword.
was given, and the sword delivered him in Christ's Church in Dublin on the 26.
of June anno 1584. by the before mentioned Justices, at which time,
(peradventure in imitation of the ancient Roman Governors, who were ever
accustomed at their Election into Sir John Perrots speech when he received the
sword.
public Office, to make Orations to the people) he made a brief speech more
plain and pithy then glorious or eloquent, the words being to this effect.

That since it had pleased God and her Majesty to commit to him that great
government, how weak so ever he were to undergo so heavy a weight, yet he
would do his best endeavor to distribute equal Justice unto all, which he
knew to be her Majesty's mind. And, quoth he, this sword (laying his hand upon
the sword of State) shall punish ill doers without partiality, and protect the
good subject from violence and injury; but because words and deeds do now a
days use to dwell far assunder, I leave you that hear me now, hereafter to
judge me and my words by my deeds. This short speech, being pronounced in
such a manner, as his natural Majesty of personage, spirit, and countenance
did usually afford; received no less applause from the standers by, then it
gave them hope it would prove a debt wherein the payment would justly follow
the promise. The ceremony being ended with the accustomed rites thereunto
belonging. The next day he communicated in Council his commission and
instructions; which for the better satisfaction of such as mistake the grant
of that government, both in limit of authority and term of Residencie: I have
thought meet to declare, that his Pattent was as all other Deputies* not with
limitation The amplitude of the Deputies Commission.
of years, or time of government, but during pleasure, containing power to make
war and peace; To leauy Arms and Forces for that purpose; To punish and
pardon offenders; To confer all Offices, and collate all Spiritual
promotions and dignities (a few of them excepted) concluded with the greatest
Latitude of authority which can be given a Subject; which is, to do all
things in cases of Justice and government, as the Prince might do being
present. The reservation of making Privy Counsailers, great Officers, Bishops,
and such like, always given here by the Prince himself, with diverse other
things, too long to be here recited. In his private instructions, besides
matters of profit, as sparing her Majesty's purse, and easing her charge,
settling of differences amongst the subjects, and planting indifferency
between the superior and inferior, taking away thereby dependencie; The
erecting of the University in Dublin, given in charge to the Deputy.
the bane of that Kingdom. There was precisely given him in charge the erection
of an University in Dublin, for the advancement of learning, never till that
time set on foot (and that by this Deputies urging) though long time before
proiected, and in King Edward the sixth time intended; So soon as the mists of
Ignorance (the mother of Popish devotion) was by the shining reformation of
Religion dispierced; and most especially requisite in that Kingdom, as a
chief spring and fountain of ciuility.

(His authority thus showed:) He fell with them in Council, touching the
affairs of that Kingdom, both as it was given him in charge, and as they were
presented to the view of his own experient judgment, wherein he spent
eighteen days; after which consultation, he fell to show the fruits of
Council, in setting down acts and decrees Amnestia, or the act of Oblivion.
for the good of her Majesty's service and Kingdom; amongst which, was
Amnestia, or the act of Oblivion, according to the institution of the ancient
and excellent Law-giuers, the Lacedaemonians, being in the nature of a general
pardon for offenses past, which was both a merciful, and a politic
provision, to keep Transgressors from despair; the ready mean to enduce them
to the increase of mischief, but being reduced to obedience by this act of
clemency, and so settled in security. It was most probable and likely, that
they who had lately felt the smart of raging and wantfull war; would now
kiss peace, and embrace it with a firmer constancy.

At the same time he sent into England, the son of the late Earl of Desmond,
being but young (and yet held dangerous he should be bred in that Kingdom,
where practice might work his escape, and little means was to yield him a
meet breeding) with request for his careful education here, that Religion and
ciuility might after lead him to the performance of those duties, wherein
(through barbarism) his Predecessors had erred and trangressed.

Then like a good Governor, that would abandon ease, the mother of error and
corruption, The Lord Deputies Progress into Connaught and Mounster.
he left Dublin, the seat of State, to settle the remote parts and Provinces of
Mounster and Connaught, under their Governors, newly sent over; General Norrys
Lord President of Mounster, and Captain Richard Bingham chief Commissioner of
Connaught, in whose choice this Lord Deputy (as I have heard) had a great hand,
judging them meet men both for the managing of war, and conservation of
peace: So much did their valor, judgment, and experience promise for them;
who had at that time gained the reputation of the two most able Captains of
our Nation, wherein his wisdom, or fortune, did appear the greater: when by
such means his directions should not only be skilfully performed, but
himself cased of that care and fear, a Chief is subject to, when his
substitutes be weak: especially such principal Governors, as have power to
answer sudden occasions upon their own discretions; but how sufficient so
ever they were, as his authority was to govern them, so he thought it his part
to guide them by the example of his own work, purposing in those Provinces to
hear complaints, to redress abuses, to decide controversies, and to appease
dissentions and quarrels, between Lords of Countries, and men of Ability, and
special quality; whose discords and controversies had usually drawn them into
unwarrantable actions, and many times enforced the Prince, both to the hazard
and loss of the good Subjects, and to the expense of Treasure, to bring an
Army to appease their quarrels, as in the contention between Desmond and
Ormonde had lately fallen out, and that which is most dangerous in that
Kingdom: It has always been found, that Rebellion has been the Successor
of private quarrels: Mischief like ambition, clyming to the highest places.
For these ends and purposes, the Deputy took his journey from Dublin, the
thirteenth day of July; attended on by diverse persons of account in that State,
and came to Molingarre, the 16. of the same month, where to prevent discovery
of such intelligence, as should pass between him and the Council at Dublin,
by the interception of his or their Letters: He devised and sent thence to the
Lord Chancellor, and Sir Henry Wallop the Treasurer (the late Justices, and
now by him authorized for the dispatch of the affairs of the State in his
absence) The Deputies Alphabeticall device of secrecy.
certain ciphers, and figures, framed after an Alphabet, importing the names of
some of the chief persons and places in England and Ireland, which devise for
secrecy was most necessary in that Kingdom, where the people are very
inquisitiue, and in the succeeding War, were apt to give discovery to the
Rebel, as well for Religions sake, as to gain favor upon his Incursions. The
want of this course had like to have opened to the Rebel, the last and
greatest intention of the Lord Burgh against them, by the interception of his
last Letter to the State: opened and coppied by a Captain, trusted with the
conueyance thereof; and by him certified to the Traitor Tyrone, but in the way
intercepted by the Marshal, Sir Henry Bagnall. The original of these Ciphers
are yet to be seen, with the worthy Son of that most worthy Father, Sir
Henry Wallop; of whom, since my heart upon good knowledge of him guides my Pen:
I crave pardon for digressing from my matter now in hand, to speak a word of
him. He was of an ancient family, and an Inheritour of a fair fortune, which
he managed with so much providence, as it being seconded by a well known
wisdom; he was Elected to this place of Vice-Treasurer, and Treasurer at
Wars in Ireland; which, as I have often credibly heard, he was unwilling to
accept of, (not because the place was in the Market at a price to be had,
according to the Custom of France, but freely disposed, as all Offices were by
that glorious Queen, who well understood, that he which buys dear, must sell
at the same rate; by which means the poor Subject (whose weal lay next her
heart) must suffer inconvenience:) but out of fear, that treasure which
corrupts most men, might do no less to him. This place he discharged many
years with so clean hands, and so upright a heart, as he added not to his
fortune any matter of moment, but at his death was found upon an even ground:
neither in debt to the Queen, nor to be charged with any gratuity from
Officer, Captain, or other in that Kingdom, and carried this report to his
grave: that never Treasurer so wise and provident enjoyed so long, and reaped
so little benefit by so beneficial a place, and dyed without the Taynt of
corruption, either in that Office or any other, which he held by the favor of
the State in that Kingdom.

The Lord Deputy having performed this, with many other things of importance:
set forwards on his journey into Connaught, where he dealt with the chief
Lords, to change their custom of strife and controversy (at this time
frequent) into amity and friendship, (Charity breeding Piety, and both
establishing ciuility;) as the Earls of Thomond and Clanrichard, the Lord
Bremigham, the Burghs of Euter Connaught, the Okelleis, Oconnor Roe, Oconnor
Don, Oconnor Sligo, Mac-William Eughter, Murtho-ne-doe-Oflarty. The Oneales,
Mac Trenor, Mac Mahond, Mac Enispoc, both the Mac Nemurroes, the two Mac
Mahones, and all the Chiefes of Connaught and Thomond: that both they, and the
meaner Subject; might be preserved in peace, without private wrongs, for
assurance of their loyalties, and the readier payment of their compositions: He
put to death Donnogh Beg Obryan, Donnogh-Beg-Obryan put to death.
(a bioudy murderer, and spoyler of the good Subject) with six of his
accomplices. This naughty person showed as much resolution in suffering death,
as before he had manifested cruelly in his bloody actions, which did argue the
goodness of the service in cutting him so timely off: for he that wants
remorce of conscience at the time of his death, is in his soul delighted in
doing mischief.

The practice of Surleboys inuading Vlster, discovered.
He passed on to Limbrick, in the Province of Mounster, where he received
intelligence from the Baron of Donganon, Sir Nicholas Bagnall the Marshall,
(Captain Mince then lying in Odonnells Country, and others, of the approach of
a Thousand Scottish Islanders, called Redshankes, being of the Septs or
Families of the Cambiles, Macconnells, and Macgalanes; drawn to invade Vlster
by Surleboys, one of that Nation, who had usurped, and by power and strong hand
possessed himself of the Macguilies, and other men's Lands in Vlster, called
the Glimes and the Routes: meaning to hold that by force, which he had gotten
without right, by violence, fraud, and injury. The Deputy at the same time
received private notice, of a Messenger sent from the Irish of Vlster, to
stir up the Lords and Chiefes of Mounster and Connaught, to join with them
in Rebellion, for whom he caused wait to be Tirlogh Leynaghs fosterer taken.
laid, and had him apprehended, and brought to himself; who upon examination,
after some denial, confessed that he was Tirlogh Leynagh, then called Oneales
fosterer, and by him employed to procure those people to join in Rebellion
with him, and his Accomplices, according to a former combination made before
his Lordshippes arrival in that Kingdom, when it was destitute of an
understanding Commander, or such a Garrison of Soldiers as was fit to answer
such an occasion: (hereby expressing the condition of that people: to watch all
opportunity to deliver themselves from the yoke of the English government,)
and he confessed withal, that now having moved the Lord Fitzmorrice, and some
other Lords of Mounster, to enter into The opinion of the Deputies Justice kept
the Lord Fitzmorrice and others from Rebellion.
the promised Insurrection: he was answered by them, that since Sir John Perrot
(who all that Country knew, and esteemed to be a just man) was arrived and made
Deputy; none of them would stir so long, as he and the Earl of Ormonde
continued in that Kingdom; so as the cause, which makes the English government
heavy to that people, plainly appears to be, the corruption of our
Governors, else had not Sir John Perrot (whose sincerity was known to them)
had more power to contain them in obedience, then another of his Country and
quality should have had* and in the process of this Story it will likewise
appear, that Oneale himself was wonn to loyalty, and a peaceable subjection,
merely by the Justice of this Deputy; when he came once to be known amongst
them of the North. Nevertheless, the news of the Preparation in Vlster, The
Deputies return to prevent the Ilanders.
and the danger of a descent of the Scottish Islanders there, being by the
Deputy well weighed, broke off his farther proceedings in that Province, and
called him back, to the prevention of the same; leaving this Province secured
by taking Pledges of all suspected persons, and constituting in each Country,
trusty and able Governors, to keep the people in obedience, if any stir
should happen in his absence; taking the President of Mounster (who was
desirous to accompany him) along with him to the Northern Expedition, and
appointing such as he suspected, to attend him to Dublin: ordaining in his
absence the County of Cork to be governed, by the Justices Walshe and Miagh:
The Sheriff Sir William Stanley; the Lords Barry and Roche; the County of
Limbrick to the Provost Marshall; the County of Desmond to the Earl of
Clancarthie; Sir Owen Oswilliuan, and Oswilliuan More. The County of Kerry to
the Sheriff, and the Lord Fitz-Morris, with others, whose pledges he took
with him. The Liberty and County of Tipperary (whose Jurisdiction was by
Charter challenged to belong to the Earl of Ormonde) he left as he found it to
the ancient course of government, under Thomas the then Earl, a man of
singular wisdom and loyalty, and by her Majesty highly favored. This Earl
first met him in Connaught with Mac Morris, Oswilliuan More, the Knight of
Kerry, and certain Septs of the Galloglasses, who accompanied him to Limbrick,
where there came unto him all the principal persons of that Province, saving
the chief of the County of Cork, as the Lords Barry and Roche, Sir
Owen-Mac-Carthie, and others, who did accompany their Sheriff Sir William
Stanley, provided to entertain him, and present themselves upon the Confines
of their own County: but were prevented by the Northern news already
mentioned, the Deputy having changed his purpose of visiting those parts.

Malachias Amalone, a Friar converted.
In this passage through Connaught, Malachias Amalone, brother to Mac William
Eughter (who had long been a Friar) was brought unto him, and by him with
private consultation, and dispute, made to understand his errors. He
publicly, and before a great Assembly did renounce the Pope and Romish
Religion, gave over his order and habit, and made his Recantation by professing
himself a Protestant, and conformable to the Religion established in her
Majesty's Dominions.

With these courses of Providence, Justice, ending of Controversies, and taking
security for the preservation of future Peace: the people generally seemed to
be well pleased and satisfied* but in nothing more, then with the correction of
the Sheriffs corruptions, and limiting them to a small number of followers,
who had formerly used with Multitudes to travail and Cesse, under color of
Service, to the grievous oppression of the Country: so as mixing the peoples
case from exaction, with their reformation, they gladly yielded to the hardest
conditions, that cold be desired to keep them in obedience and due
subjection.

These parts being left to the care of the Justices, and other selected
Commissioners: The Deputy retired with as much celerity as he could toward
Dublin, and in his way as he passed through Leix, he took Pledges of Fiaugh
Order taken with the heads of Lemster for the certainty of their obedience.
Mac Hugh, (the Fierbrand of the Mountains, between Dublin and Wexford) which
were his Son and Uncle, and for the rest of his Sept, the Obyms, and
O-Tooles: Sir Henry Harrington, the Captain and Commander of that Country,
was appointed to receive the li^e. The two brethren of the Oconnors, who used
to be followed with great troops of Sauaging and idle people; doing and
threatening mischief to the Queen and Kings Counties, and the parts adjoining:
submitted themselves there to the Deputy, and were by him reduced to a more
orderly course: by putting away their idle men, and bringing their Sept and
followers into a smaller proportion, according to their quality.

After the death of James More alias Meigh, the Mores who challenge dominion in
L^ix, were divide into two or three Septs: them the Deputy caused to render
Pledges for their Loyalties, as the Oconnors had done.

The Cana^aghs not being ready with their Pledges, (who are the bordering busy
men of the Counties of Wexford, Catherlogh, and Kildare) were respited to
perform the same to Sir Henry Wallop, Sir Nicholas Walsh, and other
Commissioners appointed for the suruaying the Forts of Mary Burgh, and Philips
Town. The Forts of Mary-Burgh and Philips Town, built by the Earl of Sussex.
Philips Town, and the Kings County was assigned to the command of Sir George
Bourgier; and Mary Burgh with the Queens County, to Captain Warham St. Ledger,
which Forts were built, and Counties so named in Queen Mary's time, by the
Earl of Sussex then Lieutenant of Ireland, before begun by Edward Bollingham,
being otherwise called Leix and Ophaly; these being the first Counties that The
King and Queens Counties divided by the Earl of Sussex.
had been in this Kingdom since King John's Reign, at what time the twelve
first Shires were established: which enlarging of the English Plantation, was a
Service of very great moment; those two Irish Septs of Mores and Oconnors,
possessing these two Countries, being the most powerful Rebels of Lemster at
that time, and by this good Earl and his Predecessor happily brought under.

The Orealies (as well Sir John as Philip) being then in controversy, were
thence su^moned by the Lord Deputy, to repair to him at Dublin, which shortly
after they performed, and submitted their cause to his order, who appeased
their controversy by settling an indifferent course between them to both their
lykings.

Having secured all the Western parts in the manner as is declared (which was
certified unto England by those of the Privy Council that attended him in
this journey) he repaired to Dublin upon the 9. day of August, having bin
absent a month wanting two days, where he remained sixteen days, to make
provision of convenient power and means for his Northern journey, for to
resist the Invasion of the Scottish Ilanders, whereof his intelligence did
daily increase; and to suppress the rebellious purpose of the Vlster
Confederates, making the greater have to keep them from uniting. His force
which he could on such a sudden make, was the Earl of Ormond and his Rising
out, The Earl of Thomond and his: The Army for the North.
From Mounster the Lord Barrys his Rising out, sent by his brother: The Lord
Roche and Fitz Gibon, called the white Knight, with theirs: The rising out of
the County of Kildare. The Lord of Trimelstowne, with the rising out of Meathe;
The Vice-Count Gorm^nstowne, and the Lord of Heathe, with other rising out of
the English Pale, being such of the old English descent, as were tied by their
tenures and custom of Service, to leauy certain Horse and Foot, called
Risings out; to attend the Deputy or chief Governor for a time, without the
Princes charge, in all Services of importance, when he went himself in
person. To these were added ten English Companies of Foot, of one hundred in
each Company, under the Command.

1 Sir Henry Wallops Company commanded by his Lieutenant.

2 Captain Rees ap Hugh, the Provost Marshall.

3 Captain Thomas Lea.

4 Captain Bethell.

5 Captain Randal Brewerton.

6 Captain Merryman.

7 Captain Mince.

8 Captain Parker.

9 Captain Collum.

10 Captain Bangor.

These Companies Risings out, and some half Companies of Kerne brought by
particular Irish Lords being ready; The Deputy accompanied with the aforementioned
Lords, General Norreys, Lord President of Mo^nster, Sir Nicholas Bagnall, then
Marshall of Ireland; Captain Jacques Wingfield, then Master of the Ordnance.
Sir George Bourchier, Sir William Stanley, Mr. Thomas Norreys, Sir Henry
Harrington, all Governors, Commanders, and most of them ancient Captains,
well experienced; with him likewise went Sir Robert Dillon chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Sir Lucas Dillon chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Nicholas
White Master of the Rolls, Master Ieffrey Fenton Secretary of the State, Master
Henry Bagnall, Sir Edward Denny, Sir John Tyrrell of Farrtallaugh, Master
Dudleigh Bagnall, Sir Henry Cooley, Sir Thomas More, Sir Anthony Brabauson,
Warham Saint Ledger, Henry Warren, and William Warren his brother, set-forwards
from Dublin the five and twenty day of August, and came to the Newry the 29.
thereof, where within a mile of the Town met him Tirlogh Leynaughs first
coming to the Deputy.
Tirlogh Leynaugh, the chief man of Vister, whose rebellious spirit (as well
by the report was given of the Deputies Justice and sincerity, as the advice of
his Mounster friends) being quieted, he presented himself to the Deputies
favor, without either pardon or protection for his late seditious Conspiracy,
whom the Deputy entertained with a loving but grave countenance, accepted his
submission, and promise to the State of duty and obedience; for the performance
whereof, he willingly put in Pledges. During his stay and abode here; there
came unto him upon his commandment The heads of Vister come to the Deputy upon
his word
and word of safety, Magenize, Mac, Mahone, Tirlogh Braselogh, and the Irish
Captains and Commanders of the Phews, Farry, Clancarrol, Kilwarlen,
Killultagh, and those of Clanyboys side, and others the chief borderers, from
whom appointing Pledges to be taken; he assured their Countries. So as no doubt
of Insurrection behind him could happen, when he should be advanced to the
Enemy and Rebels abroad. From whence he marched forwards with his Forces
toward Surleboys, and his inuading Ilanders, who hearing of his approach, with
more power and speed then they expected (celerity being the only advantage to
a Commander, and the greatest dismay to an unresolved Enemy) were much
appalled; withal understanding, that the Deputy had sent Shipping to surprise
their Galleys lying at Loghfoyle, as he had secured the whole Country, those
men attending him with their Forces; whom they expected to be their partakers:
So as their hoped for friends were now become their assured Enemies. They made
a quick retreat to Loghfoyle, and The retreat of the Scots to Loghfoyle, and
their escape thence.
escaped away in their Galleys before the approach of the Shipping, who came ere
they were passed Kenne: So as for a while they gave chase to them, though to no
purpose. This unhappy escape of the Ilanders, was imputed to the negligence of
the Sea Commanders, the Deputy having provided against it, sending the Ships
in good time, foreseeing what these barbarous Savages were likely to do upon
his approach: but it was excused, by the sudden springing of a leake, which
enforced their stay till it was mended. These fugitlues by this aduange being
escaped; made the danger of Surlcboys Confederacy seem small. Nevertheless,
as well to answer her Majesty's charge, as to punish the Animatours of this
Invasion; Surleboye, Ocane, Bryan Caraugh, and others, standing yet upon ill
terms, encouraged by the strength of their fastness, and their hope to hold
out, till the approach of unseasonable weather, (Winter hastening on.) The
Deputy proceeded on to the River of Band, where he divided his Force into two
parts, to pursue them upon both sides The Deputy deuides his Army.
of the River. Himself, with the Earl of Ormond, and the rest of the Nobility,
kept the side of Claniboy, the other part of the Army he put under the Conduct
of General Norreys, which (notwithstanding his great Command over great Armies
in the Low Countries, where he had achiued famous Victories) he took no skorne
of; willing to express his readiness to serve his Prince, and Country in any
kind, who accompaned with the Baron of Donganon, kept upon Tyrone The Baron of
Donganons insinuating with General Norreys.
side* Where this wyly Serpent Donganon so behaved himself to this brave
hearted Norreys; as it bredd such an affection, that after was the cause
(through the treacherous Nature of this Rebel) of much mischief to the State,
and dishonor to the never enough praised Norreys; such force has fawning
seruility, oftentimes to catch hold of a Noble Nature, and indeed so great was
the wit of this fatal Villainy, as to diue into, and apply himself
satisfactorily unto all dispositions, and to change himself like Proteus into
all shapes, that might bring advantage to his Treasons, hatched with him in his
Cradle. The Deputy spoiled Bryan Caraughs Country, and forced him, and
Surleboy, to fly into Glancom-K^ne with their Criaghts and Cowes, which is the
strongest and The Preying of Ochane by General Norreys.
greatest fastness in the North. General Norreys ouerslipping Surleboy, fell
upon Ochane and took from him a Prey of two hundred Cowes, which gave the
Soldier good relief; Bryan Canaughs falling upon the Horse-Boyes.
but a hundred Horse-boyes and Lacqueis, belonging to his Troops, Scauaging
abroad, and ranging loosely, as their manner is; being careless of a flying
enemy, were cut in pieces by Bryan Caraughs men. Upon this their straggling,
through their cry, when the Rebel light upon them, some of the Forces flew
into their reskue: Where laques, Sir William Stanleys Lieutenant, was hurt with
a Skottish Arrow, and Ouenton, the Baron of Donganons Lieutenant likewise. Thus
Boys follies sometimes procure men's harms, but if these two had then lost
their lives, the loss had been small, if not gain, they after proouing bad
members to their Country. Upon the revolt of Sir William Stanley in the
Low Countries, and in the late and great Rebellion of Tyrone, wherein Ouenton
was a principal Firebrand. At this time Master Master Thomas Norreys hurt, and
Mr. Lambart taken prisoner.
Thomas Norreys was hurt in the knee with an Arrow, and Master Oliver Lambart,
then a private man, but since, a special Commander, was taken Prisoner in
Ochanes Country. Captain Merrymans preying the Rebels
Captain Merryman the day before brought a prey of Cowes out of the Rebels
fastness unto the Deputies Camp. The day after General General Norreys
preying Bryan Caragh.
Norreys having passed the great woods of Glancom Kewe, preyed Bryan Caraughs
country at the bottom of the Glimes and slew them that were put to defend them.

Ochane finding his Country harrowed, and his Ochanes submision.
men destroyed, and himself straightly pursued, sued for mercy, and obtained
it: whereupon his submission and putting in pledges he received a grave but
sharp admonition from the Deputy, being the first pardoned man, that had
committed act of hostillity, since his coming to the government; where the
reproof was notso great to Ocane, as it was a lesson to the standers by, who
might in time prove little better affected to the State, then he had bin.

Surleboys prosecuted by General Norreys
Surleyboyes flying the Lord Deputies side, betook himself into his strong
fastness which he trusted to, but the Deputy desirous to bring him into a
straight, sent over more Horse and Foot, with most of the Kerne from his own
side, to General Noris; conceiving that he by dividing his force (with such
draughts as might be made by espialls) might do good Service upon this
sugitiue, by forceing him into such extremity as he should not escape without
death, or yielding.

In the mean time himself, with the rest of his Force, besieged the strong
Castle of Don Luce, which though but a small Pile, Don Luce besieged.
yet in respect of the Seat, is one of the most impregnable Castles of that
Ringdome, being situated upon a Rock hanging over the Sea, and divided from
the Marine with a narrow neck of Land or Rock, not above four foot broad,
and fifty foot long, the denthes of each side being at the least ten fathom.
The Castle it self commanding the passage, is seated upon a hard Rock, which
has in it Caves as it were Sellers, which would secure the guard, though the
Castle were battered and beaten down: Here was at this time a strong Ward
commanded by a Scottish Captain, who being summoned to deliver up the Castle
to the Queen, resolutely denied; protesting to defend it to the last man,
whereupon the Deputy, hoping the terror of the Canon might dismay the Ward
(for other hope he had not to win so strong a place) drew his Forces nearer,
and planted his Artillary (being two Culuerings and two Sakers) for battery.
This Ordnance was brought by Sea from Dublin to Skerreys Portrushe, and thence
being two miles, was drawn by men's hands (through want of other means) to
this place. The Ward of the Castle played thick with their small Shot upon the
Soldiers, that made the appraoch; much to the discouragement of the workmen,
and impeachment of the work, being within Musket shot. The Deputy seeing the
Soldiers shrink, commanded some of his own servants to supply the places of
them that were fearful, to fill the Gabions, and make good the ground,
himself encouraging A worthy part of a Deputy.
both them, and the rest by giving not only his presence, but his hand to the
work; by which means the Ordnance was planted, and the blinders set up, the
Canoniere beginning to play, which at first did little annoy the Castle or the
Ward therein; but within a little time the Pile began to shake through
continuance, and the discharging at once of the Artillary. Then the courages of
the Ward (unused to the defense of such places) began to quail, insomuch
Parley with the Castle of Don Luce.
as the next morning a Parley is demanded, and conditions propounded; leave to
depart with bag and baggage, is by the Deputy granted; as well to take time
while the fear lasted, to prevent such resolution, as despair, and a better
consideration of the strength of the place might yield them; as to save the
charge of reedifying the Castle, which he intended to keep for the Queen,
being a place of no small importance. Besides, the small provision was then in
the Army, not easily supplied in that place in a short time, by which means
other intended service of no less (if not more) importance might be hindered,
was another motive of saving time and charge, which had bin spent, if the
Captain had continued in his first resolution, and peradventure without
success to the Deputy, who stood in doubt of the loss of many men in the
assault through the difficulty of the entry, as is before mentioned, howsoever
it would assuredly Surrender of the Castle of Don Luce.
have cost more time then had stood with the conueniency of the Service.

After surrender of this place, and a Ward there established, he took in the
Fort of Don-fret, The taking of Don-Fret, and another Castle
(the Ward having quitted it before) and another Castle or Pile near Portrush.
All Surleboys Loghs and Islands were left without Submission of Surleboys.
defense, so as he had no place of strength within the main to fly unto, but
the woods. The Ranglings being the chiefest refuge for the inuading Ilanders to
make their aboade in, as the usual Rendeuous where they consulted upon the
course of their Invasion. Surleboys thus beaten from his holds, Judging no
continuance of safety to be in his flight, sued at length for mercy, as all the
rest of his Confederates had done, which in after time, through the necessity
of the season, and the want of provision, the Deputy much against his mind
granted, well waighing what good Service it would have been, utterly to have
extirped the nest of these greedy valtures, but necessity oftentimes ouer-rules
judgment.

Odonnell and Sir Owen OToole come to the Deputy.
During the Deputies aboade here, Odonnell the principal Lord of Tireconnell,
and Sir Owen O Tool came, and presented themselves unto him. There Tirlogh
Lenaugh, and the other chief Lords of Vister submitted their differences and
Controversies unto his Order, The Deputy brings the wild Irish to the use of
law.
whom he caused to impleade each other by bill and answer, in a legal manner;
an unusual course to them who had been ever accustomed to try all by the
strength of the sword, which mischief had ever kept that Country in
barbarism. He ministered an oath of Allegiance, and the observation of her
Majesty's peace unto them, which they by his persuasion The beginning of the
composition of Vlster.
willingly accepted. He drew them to a composition proportionably, to find the
Queen a certain number of Soldiers in Garrison, to whose charge she should
contribute only 250. pound a year, to every Company of a hundred, for their
maintenance, and the rest should be paid by the Country in this manner.

Tirlogh Leynaugh (who styled himself Oneale) for him and the rest, whom he
claymed to be under him, as Ochane and Macguire should give allowance to five
hundred Soldiers, with the addition mentioned; Odonnell and his followers
should do the like to 200, Macguilly and his followers to 100 Foot, and 25
Horse.

Before the Deputies departure hence, the Lady Cambell, Donnell, Grome, and
Oneales Submission of the Lady Cambell and others.
wifes son, came and tendered their submission, whom he received into pardon
and protection; and passed unto them, her Majesty's promised grant; procured by
his mother, for so much of the Glimes as were sometime Massets Lands, for which
he should pay yearly 50 Beefes, and find upon his charge 80 Soldiers to
serve in any part of Vlster, at the Governors command.

The Deputy prevented from passing further into the Rawghlings as he intended,
for the utter rooting out of Surleboys, by the approach of Winter, and want of
victual; the one usually making the passages difficult, by the rivers rising
upon the fall of rain, and the wind and weather hindering the others arrival,
which had been long since shipped at Dublin; so as now victual was very scant
in the Army, he determined of his return homewards, having happily begun,
and hopefully proceeded in this reformation of the North. At which time fell a
sudden and dangerous storm, by which the Rivers grew great and likely to
Retreat of the Deputy homewards.
prove worse, which enforced him to speed his retreat, not willing to give
advantage to a perfidious people, but would rather leave to another time, the
perfection and finishing of this work, which he had molded in his judgment
for the future securing of this quarter, and dispossessing these fugitives that
had crept and intruded into it: But necessity, which controules great actions,
and ouer-maisters the best resolutions; gave an after-stop to his proceedings
therein, as in the sequel will appear.

The Deputy having settled thus much for the establishing of peace: increase of
reuenew, and force for the Prince in Vlster, where nothing but Reuolts and
Rebellions had heretofore been practiced, and now threatened, and begun with a
strong combination; likely to have taken deeper rooting, and to have spread it
self into other parts of that long infected turbulent State, if his wisdom,
industry, and celerity had not prevented it. Now begins to draw homeward
toward the Newry, but before his rising thence, considering it the sit and
best means to secure that Country: The Deputy plants Garrisons in the North.
he planted Garrisons in all convenient places. He sent four Companies of Foot
into Tirlogh Heynaughs Country, under the leading of Captain Merryman, Parker,
Bangor, and Collum, to continue all the Winter: He assigned two hundred foot,
and fifty horse of the old Bands under Captain Carleyle, to lie at Colraen,
to prevent both Insurrection within, and The Deputies coming to the Newry,
where all the Lords of Vlster present themselves, and conclude the Commission.
Invasion from the Islands abroad. This done, he came to the Newry the 28. day of
September, where he remained ten days in pursuing and perfecting the courses
begun. Whether Tirlogh Leynaugh (according to his Lordships direction and
appointment) brought Henry Oneale the son of Shane Oneale, Tirloghs
predecessor in the thiefery of Vlster, who had escaped from Sir Henry Sidney
before, and sometimes held by Tirlogh as a prisoner, to prevent his claim to
his Fathers place of Oneale.

Thither came also the rest of the Lords adjoining; as Sir Hugh Macquenize, Mac
Mahone, Ohanlone, Tirlogh Brasilogh, Mac Carthen; the chiefetaines of the
Ferney, Phues, Kilultaugh, Kilwarlen, and others, who all willingly took an
oath of faith and fidelity to the Queen, and to serve her against all men, and
for their performance of the same, delivered to the Deputy such Pledges as he
demanded, and granted to such composition for the maintenance of the Army, as
Oneale* Odonell, and Macquilly had formerly done. Hugh Oge, and Shane Mac Bryan
for the nether Clanyboy allowed eighty men, Sir Hugh Macguennizo for the
County of Enagh forty, The Commander of Kilultagh fifteen, of Kilwarlene
ten, Mac Carthen ten.

This composition for the maintenance of a Garrison by the Country, mounting
in all to 1100. (as it was a Service of no small importance, and before it was
effected, opposed by the Council through their opinion of the difficulty)
received great applause and commendation even of those that maligned his
success in any thing, and did admire that Vlster, which for many years
together could scarsely endure the Scepter of Justice or Government, should be
now reduced to such obedience: as to contribute to the maintenance of their
own yoke; but doubtless it was a work of great danger in the attempt, and of
great consequence being achieved: wherein much was to be attributed to the
Deputies person that gave his persuasion, grace with the people; so as
Majesty, Hauiour, and Comeliness, are most necessary qualities in the wisest
Governor of a barbarous Nation.

Heart-burnings bred by questions for superiority and government between
Tirlogh Leynaugh called Oneale, The Baron of Dunganon; and Sir Nicholas
Bagnall, who did ouerlooke them both, (and thereupon as much envied of them, as
they did malign one another) Grudging between the Governors of Vlster
appeased.
the Deputy took care to appease (though it be difficult to reconcile grudges,
growing for government and dominion.)

He divided the greater governments into smaller, that no one should be too
strong for another, and yet each should have sufficient, if not to satisfy
himself, yet to balance the ouer-growing greatness of his neighbor: but
indeed his chiefest aim was to extinguish the greatness of Oneale, which
name being by the barbarous people of that whole Province had in so great
adoration, as neither the law formerly made in Sir Henry Sidneys time, (a most
worthy Governor,) nor any iniunction of State could abolish, what time and
ignorance had so established. Withal to suppress his claim to the Vriaghts,
and petty Lords, second chief men unto him, whom he styled his vassalls, and
sometime used them as his Slaves, when he had power to prevail either over
them, or against the State, whereby they becam instruments to advance his
supposed greatness; many times to his ruin and their own, not without much
trouble and charge to the State. The Deputy therefore divided the Province into
three Lieutenantcies: one he Division of the North into governments.
assigned unto Tirlogh Lennaugh, as much as was already under his rule. The
other two he parted between the Baron of Donganon, and Sir Nicholas Bagnall,
then Marshall of Ireland.

Nor did he neglect to appease and reconcile the differences of meaner Lords,
as of the Claniboyes, to all which Country Con mac Neale Oge (by the old and
corrupt custom of Claniboy divided.
Tanestry) claymed to be Governor: And Shane Mac Bryan and Hugh Oge, straue for
the dominion of the nether Claniboy, and could not agree of their portions,
opposing the general and striving in their own particular. This the Deputy
(through private persuasion and counsel joined with authority) arbitrated
between them, and concluded with their mutual consent; that Con O Neale
should hold the upper Claniboy, and Shane and Hugh, the nether, to be equally
divided and bounded between them, by such Commissioners as he had appointed
thereunto.

These courses were of more importance, then by some are conceived to be: for
Possessours of great Territories, and Commanders of many people, being proud
of their own greatness, and enflamed with desire of Dominion; draw many to
follow them through the flames of commotion: And the lesser, especially the
second sort, either coveting to be higher, or binding themselves to the will of
their Superiors, that are able to command, run headlong at their direction,
and by consenting, or discenting in times of division, join only in the bad
effects, to trouble the State, and to destroy or vex those that are best
affected. Vlster thus suddenly appeased, reuolting hearts partly pacified, and
partly constrained to obedience; a composition of benefit to the Queen, and
the Countries quiet settled. Private controversies ended, or at The Deputies
return to Dublin.
the least, abated and qualified. The Deputy returns to Dublin the eleventh of
October, whence he had been absent three months and two days, and thence he
gave an account to the Lords of the Council here, of these his proceedings;
signifying by his Letters, his quick and speedy dispatch, of so many weighty
and difficult business, by his travail through all the Provinces of Ireland,
in the space of five months; and might with Caesar have said, Veni, vidi,
vici: and withal, that he had reformed what was amiss, established peace, and
increased the Princes power. This his relation was ratified by like Letters
written by such of the Privy Council, as did accompany him in these his
iourneyes; wherein it is to be noted, that it was a wise part of the Deputy to
cause his actions to be justified by others, who were, General Norreys, Sir
Lucas Dillon, The Councels report to the Lords, of the success in Vlster.
Sir Edward Waterhouse, and Mr. Ieffrey Fenton. Some so just, as they would
inform no untruths, and some using always to deprave from the Governors
there: For the condition of our State, was rather to deminish the acts of the
Deputy to her Majesty, then to grace them by a true relation, least as his
merit might challenge rewards; so the weight of his actions cast into the
balance of her discerning judgment, might show the lightness of their own
little doings.

Thus much to the indifferent: But most of our great men did not relish Sir
John Perrots stoutnesse, who stood upon his own feet only without
dependancy, upon any of them, but the Queen alone, which made them envious of
all his good Services, but now their mouths were stopped, her Majesty being
satisfied of the truth by so indifferent Relators.

Now was it found time by the Deputy, to consult how these good beginnings
might be prosecuted, and that which was done, might not be euerted by the
inconstancy of a wavering and yet unbridled people, who being brought by force
only to yield to that which is good, will be good no longer then while force
constraines them, until their ignorance, how far the good extendes to their
own particular, be taken away by their taste and feeling, which in an instant
comes not to The Deputy writes for Soldiers to be sent out of England.
pass. Therefore to this end he propounded to her Majesty and Council, that
six hundred Soldiers might be sent over, whereof 400 to land at Dublin, for
supply of the Northern Garrison, and two hundred to be sent to Waterford, to be
placed in Mounster, all which should be mixed with the old Companies, and
maintained by the charge of Vlster, according to their composition, with small
addition of payment from her Majesty's Treasure. He likewise propounded, that
the large and unbounded Countries of the North, and other parts, might be
divided into small Counties, for the better governing of the rude and unruly
people, who might learn ciuility, and know the laws, and by that knowledge be
brought to love that, under which they did enjoy their own, whereof they were
now ignorant.

The Deputies offer, if 50000 pound might be spared for three years.
He offered farther, that if 50000 pound might be added to the reuenew of that
Kingdom, but for three years to come, he would not only therewith support
the charge of the State: but wall seven Towns, and build as many Bridges in
places now scarce passable, (especially in the Winter) and erect so many strong
Castles in places of peril: withal 2000 Foot, and 400 Horse, should be
maintained by this allowance, supplied by the Northern composition, during the
time.

This sum, though it seemed great, yet was less then her Majesty many times
was enforced to expend for the suppressing of a light Rebellion, and the
preservation of her good Subjects, without any other fruit of reformation, or
assurance of future Peace: So as this charge (thus employed) would not only
secure the whole Country for the present, but make other Service of importance
more easy after to be performed.

He added to these motions, others of consequence for execution of Justice, (a
chief mean to breed in the people awful love and ciuility) as that a chief
Justice of The Deputy demands a chief Justice out of England.
English birth might be sent over; such a one as for learning in the Law, and
integrity, might be a light, and guide unto the rest: whereby the Courts and
course of Justice might be reduced into order, now governed by such as (for
the most part) were either insufficient in the knowledge of the Laws, corrupt
in Religion, or partial in their affection, whom he wished might be changed
into such as were free from these faulty offenses.

That Tanestry might be abolished.
And that the bad and barbarous custom of Tanestry might be abolished, which
custom (amongst the mere Irish only is in use) being that the Son does not
inherit his Fathers estate, but most commonly such a one is elected by the
Country, in the life time of the Lord, as does express by valor, and a
stirring spirit the best ability, to lead the whole Sept in all their actions,
which were most commonly such as were mischievous to the State. Him so Elected,
they called their Tawnist, upon which Election happened oftentimes murder and
bloodshed, even amongst the nearest of their kindred, besides other innumerable
mischiefs. This evil and unnatural custom the Deputy desired to abolish,
thinking (as matter then stood) he had both power and opportunity to bring it
to pass.

That charge of Tenures might be made.
He desired that he might be enabled to pass estates unto the Irish,
according to the English tenure, upon surrender of their former claymes, which
would bring them to depend upon the State, and loose them from the tirannous
yoke of their near and great Lords, whereto the Irish seemed in his judgment
at this time forward and enclinable.

The Deputy demands reward for the deserving Soldier.
He concluded with requests for the rewarding, some principal Seruitors of
that Realm, whom he had found faithful, and painful furtherers of her
Majesty's Service, as encouragements for others to do the like.

To all these motions, both her Majesty, and Council, returns fair
answers, accepting and applauding his Services, giving GOD thanks for his
prosperity, and good success therein, to the advancement whereof promises of
assistance were given; and in particular to his propositions, gave this
resolution.

Touching the composition made in Vlster, for the maintenance of the Garrison,
it was well allowed, as a thing not only tending to the reformation of that
Province, but to the reduction of the rest of the Kingdom, with more facility
to order, obedience, and ciuility: To the rest for the most part they did
condescend, or at the least gave him such satisfaction therein, as might
encourage his proceeding, concluding with praise and promise of reward. A
smooth letter from the Lords in England.
Which the Queen well knew were the best spurs, to set on so forward a spirit
to enterprise nobly in her service.

The next and principal of his cares, (indeed clayming the first place, and
so was it seated in his heart) was to establish Religion, the true supporter of
Peace, Obedience, and Fidelity, to which end Letters were addressed to the
Bishops, and chief of the Clergy, especially of the English Pale, for the
repairing The Deputy caused the Churches to be repaired.
and re-edifying of their decayed Churches, as a mean, the better to enduce the
people unto Gods service, where they might be taught their duties to God and
their Prince.

He wrote likewise into England against the The Deputy against Bishops in
commendam.
granting of Bishoprics in Commendam; showing the inconueniencies that follow
the heaping of many Lyuings into one hand: for the more sufficient men being
employed, the more increase of Religion is likely; and on the contrary, the
diminution of Teachers must needs hinder knowledge, and increase ignorance.

In the second place; Advice was taken, how to bring the rude and unruly
people, to be pliable to the Laws (which are the best balances of right, and
rules of Justice) and to that end Letters were directed to the Lords and
Chiefes of account, that their Countries which were large in circuit, might be
divided into Counties (in places where now were none, as in Vlfter) and to
place Officers therein according to the use and custom of England, as
Shriefes, Excheaters, Feodaries, Constables, and the like; whereby the poorer
sort of people might be kept from oppression, and speedier Justice, with less
charge, might be had nearer at home. The ignorant might be instructed what to
do, and how to live; The wilful made subject to the rule of Law, or corrected
by it. The great men kept from tyrannizing over their Tenants and Underlings:
and the Inferior sort should know how to support themselves, by lawful means
against unlawful Usurpations. This course was consented to by most, and not
contradicted by any, but some few of the worst condition, and that rather by
secret then open opposition.

Division of Counties in Vlster.
The Counties thus made in Vlster, were these, Ardmagh Monahan, Tyrone
Colerane, Denegall Fermanagh, and Cauan.

These circuites thus divided and settled into Shieres, the Deputy (with the
Chancellor) appointed sundry of the best estimation to be Justices of the
Peace, to whom he wrote to show into what degree of trust they were called,
and how important the charge was for her Majesty's Service, and that if in them
should Admonition to the Justices of Peace.
be found such industry and sincerity as was expected, he then saw no cause,
but that the course of enormities (which had heretofore run with more
impunity then was meet) might be stopped, and the State of that Country
brought from good to better; or at least not suffered to decline again from
bad to worse, as heretofore in the late broken times it had done. Further
assuring them, that as he should be glad to find them to perform their
duties; so he gave them to understand, that in which of them so ever he found
any crime or defect (whereby so good a Service should be hindered or
cortupted) they should be brought under such leuere penalty and reprehension,
as the Law could any way permit, besides the diminution of their credit, and
good opinion.

This Letter of admonition bare date, the 15 of December 1584, and with it were
sent certain Articles of Order, for Justices of Peace, Orders for the Justices
of peace, and choice of a Coronor and Constables
to be observed within their several limits, through the whole Realm.

To these were added an Authority, and Writs directed for the choice of a
Coroner in every County, and of two able and discreet men to be Constables in
every Barony: besides ^^tty Constables, to be Assistants, and yet inferior
Officers in the discharge of their duties.

These affairs for that Kingdom thus begun, and in some sort settled in the
first year A Parliament in England.
of this Deputies government, A Parliament beginning in the end of the year in
England, and his care continuing to prosecute always for the support of that
long unstayed State; finding but cold success of the promises to his
propositions, from the Lords in England, the Ruler of her Majesty's Purse,
being loath to advance any, never so important Service, by the expense of
Treasure: especially, such a sum, as nothing, but extremity, could make him
think meet should be disbursed, (which sparing, indeed, brought extremity to
that Kingdom,) he resolved to try what the Parliament would do in so
important a cause, and to that end wrote over a Letter, to crave their help
for the reformation, and strengthening of that ruinous Realm, which because it
was such a zeal and direction to do good, and may perhaps serve for a
President, when time shall require; for the further establishment of that
State, I have thought good to set down, and insert the Letter it self.

Sir John Perrot, Lord Deputy of Ireland, to the Commons House of Parliament
in England.
The Deputies Letter to the Parliament in England.
MOst high and Noble Assembly, the duty I owe to God, her Majesty, and my
Country, and the interest I have in you rproceedings, though I now be not (as
often I have been a member of that House) moves me, not only to pray
devoutly, that God will bless all your Counsels, but also to think carefully
of any thing that I conceive, may be worthy your grave consultation, and tend
to the glory of God, her Majesty's Honor, and safety, and strength, and profit
of the whole State.

The malice of the Pope, and all combinations and practices, both Foreign and
Domestical thereupon depending, which have been most apparently discovered
from all quarters, and of late partly from hence, I humbly leave to be by your
grauities provided for, and therefore her Majesty having assigned me (though
unworthy) to the charge of this Realm. I am drawn by commiseration to present
the torn, and miserable estate of the same unto your viewes, together with the
occasions and means of redress that are now offered, and which it humbly
imploreth through your godly and Honorable aids.

I trust I shall not need to go about to confute the bad opinion, that has
been held of some, concerning the reformation of the same; for I am persuaded,
that there is no one amongst you so ungodly, as does think all mischief
sufferable in a Commonwealth, for policies sake; or so ill advised, as not to
see the great charge this Realm has been unto that, and must still breed
unto it, while it is in disorder, or degenerate from the Noble courage of our
Forefathers; as to doubt that England shall not be able to rule and hold
Ireland, being reduced to good estate: For since all power is of God, and that
either of his mercy he establishes the happy continuance of all well ordered
Kingdoms, or of his justice overthrows, or translateth the contrary. No man
that has any spaike of grace, or reason, can hope that ever England may long
enjoy Ireland, if it suffer it in this licentious impunity, to embrewe it self
in Heathenish and superstitious Idolatries, Treasons, Rebellions, Murders,
Rapes, Robberies, Mischiefs; or doubt, that it may become a strong and
profitable ornament to England, if on the other side, religion, duty,
obedience, peace, quietness, true dealing, order, ciuility, may be planted in
it.

Because examples do more persuade sometimes then reason, I humbly beseech you
to reuiew the ancient State of this Kingdom, and it will appear by good
demonstrations, not unknown to some of that most Noble Assembly, that our
Predecessors in a very short time planted in every part of this Kingdom,
Cities, Towns, and Castles, whereof do remain yet the Relics even in Vlster
(where Barbarism most prevailed) and yielded unto England great yearly
revenues; the decays thereof grew from Gods heavy hand, visiting the Enemies
of that time, first upon England, and consequently upon Ireland, as an appendix
by the division of York and Lancaster, the harms (God be praised) is
repaired again in England by the happy Union of those two Houses (all being of
one Nation; but not in Ireland, where the Irish prevailed against the English,
by reason of that division under the factions, raised here for the
maintenance of the same, not unknown to some of you that have had the
mannaging of these causes of this State: Much blood has since been spilt, and
an infinite treasure consumed to recover that damage, through a deadly hate
conceived between the two Nations, and that not without the maintenance of the
degenerate English, whereof the late Earl of Desmond may be an example for the
rest.

This dissension has been ever since maintained, and lately nourished by the
needy Scots of the out Isles, and lately by the Popes crew under Saunders, upon
whom Gods curse prevailed against their Chiefetaines blessing.

Thus you see, how this matter has long hung in question, what misery and
mischief has ensued thereof, and what honor and profit it was, and again
would be unto England, if it were redressed.

It remains: I show not only the good occasions, and means thereof now
offered; but also the good thereby to ensue, and so to conclude with my humble
Petition for your aid. Heretofore the Irish have been jealous of the English,
immagining that not themselves, but the recovery of the usurped Lands have
been sought, and the degenerate English, as Desmond and some others, have
fallen into the same errors, which has made them to spurn against all
Authority, and use the aid of the Scots, almost to their own extirpation.

But now her Majesty's mercy, and gracious meaning, being publicly denounced
upon the overthrow of the Rebels and Foreign Enemies, that her Highness
equally ballanceth her Subjects, according to their due deserts, without
respect of Nation, as having interest from GOD in them all alike: they see
their error, not only in flying from so gracious a Princes and Sovereign;
but also in embracing the needy ravenous Scot, that had well-nigh devoured them
all. And therefore I am far from the opinion of those, that would have the
Irish extirped, since I see that the occasion of dissension being now taken
away, they are (as I suppose) easily made one with us, and so as likely to be
continued, as any other generation whatsoever, that in their place should be
planted.

I make this collection by proof, I have had not only of their willingness,
to join with me in the expulsion of the Scots, but also to yield their Lands
simply, as many of the best have done, and the rest are ready to do, to be
resumed of her Majesty, by Tenures, Rents, and Services, both honorable and
profitable to her Majesty, serviceable to the State, and commodious to
themselves; which I have made particularly known to her Majesty, and the
Lords of her most Honorable Privy Counsel.

Hereunto I have to add, that they are most willing, and ready to leave old
Irish exactions upon their Freeholders and Tenants, and to convert the same to
Rents certain, whereof what wealth and quietness is like to ensue, I will
leave to the report of some of you, that know this State: for I should trouble
you too tediously to discourse it particularly.

I have besides so prevailed with them as well by good dealings, as by
ouerruling them with her Majesty's Forces, that I have won them to entertain
English Soldiers instead of Scots; so as I have compounded with the
Chiefetaines of Vlster, for the maintenance of 1000 English Soldiers, and do
mean to proceed with the rest, with their content anon, and to their own good,
that I hope to have a trained Garrison here in a readiness of two thousand
footmen, and four hundred Horse ready for all events, and those in time to
be but a small charge to her Majesty, and that Realm.

Those occasions may in some men's opinion seem good, but uncertain, and so
indeed are, as all occasions are, if they be not well taken hold of, and that
in time. For the Irish, as all mankind besides, yea, even borne in Middlefex,
as naturally slippery, uncertain, and unruly: and therefore the means to be
used to make them stayed, certain, and orderly, which are partly by Justice,
and partly by force: Justice may be executed with small boast, but so cannot
force, and yet the force I mean is not violable, but benefie all to the whole
State.

The Irish Rebel, and his Scottish partaker, or rather maintainer, do greatly
trustin in their advantage of Wood and Bogg, where they run up and down
sauagely, and in our disadvantage (especially in Vlster the Scot arriueth)
through want of Bridges, Towns, and Forts, as well to pursue them, and to
keep Garrison against, as also to breed Traffic and good Society, between
the well disposed of both the Nations, whereof I of late as others before me
have, and do daily find the great discommodity. I have therefore determined
there chiefly, and in some part of the Realm besides, to build seven Towns,
seven Castles, and seven Bridges in the places herevnder mentioned, which
were these, viz* the Towns Athloan, Dingle, Colerant, Liffre, Sligo, Newry.
The Castles, the black water to be better fortified, Balleshannon, Belleck to
be new erected; The broad water in Mounster, Castle Merten upon the Rout,
Gallin in the Queens County, Kilcoman in Feagh Mac Hughs Country. The Bridges,
Colerane, Liffer^, Ballishannon, Dondalke; the Broad water in Mounster, the
River of Veale under Slelogher, Kelles in Clana deboy.

With those new Buildings, or rather for the most part reparations of old
ruins, and those that be already, the Realm will be as it were walled in (as
upon view of the Charter) will appear unto you: and by Gods grace, I trust not
only thereby mutual Traffic and amity will grow, the waste part of this
Land may be planned, and peopled with good Subjects, those that be dutiful
strengthened and countenanced, and those repressed that are ill affected; but
also that the composition already made, or here after to be made for the
numbers before mentioned, may be holden good, as also other matters of honor
and profit to both the Realms, may be brought to pass.

But since this will not be done without some charge, albeit the same be not
great, in respect either of the good it will bring, or of some other greater
charges hereto fore bestowed, I humbly pray, that I may presume to recommend
the same to your most Noble and favorable considerations, which is, for the
fifty thousand pounds a year to be had thence for three years together.

A sum not exceeding her Majesty's yearly charge, one year with another,
since the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, and short of her Highness charges
in three years, not long since, by almost 50000 pounds, as may appear by
Auditors Books: and as humbly I pray you, that you do conceive, that this my
motion does not proceed from any direction, but only from the cause itself;
which I have at Eye, and wherein for zeal and duties sake, I auowe, and
protest not only to employ my body and mind, but also all that substance that
I am well able to spare, which I know will fall out upon me the greatest
Subsidy of any Subject in the Land, through the charge that has, and will
arise of my continual travailing to effect these Services from place to place,
(for otherwise it will not be done) where I might save by feeling my self in
places certain.

Having thus protested to spend mine own with good contentation, I trust I may
easily avoid all opinion of intent, to get by issuing of the money; for I
utterly denounce the handling or directing of one penny, otherwise then by the
advice of such as shall be specially assigned to that trust with me.

If our Ancestors, when the world was more needy and bare, did not make stay
at great sums to lesser purpose. I trust the present plentiful State of
England, will show a frank and cheetefull readiness to advance a matter,
that according to the occasion now offered, requires present help and remedy.
I humbly beseech you think what a continual sink both of men and money has
this State been unto that.

Think also what Foreign Princes have attempted, and do still gape for it,
waiting only opportunity, and if they do catch it, what a dangerous and
noisome neighbor unto England they will make it. Choke up the sink at once,
make one charge of all, conceiving you do but lend so much upon large
Interest, and that you cast now your seed into a fruitful ground, that will
yield a profitable Harvest, and by your Honorable Magnanimity and care, put
down the courages of those ambitious Princes, and stop the course of their
ambitious intentions against this Realm, and consequently that. And I (for my
part) do auowe, besides that small portion of wealth that God has lent me, to
afford my life, well bestowed in that action, with no less care and diligence
then I have already used, in the short time of government I have passed, which
I trust seems not altogether fruitless. And so craving humble pardon, if
zeal and affection have any way miscarried me: I humbly end from her Majesty's
Castle of Dublin this 17 of January 1584.

Parliament in Ireland.
on) is now summoned to be held at Dublin, where the Nobility, Clergy, and
Commons, being assembled, Order was taken, that none Order for Irish apparel,
not to be worn in Parliament.
were permitted to go in Irish attire (as in former time they used) but to sort
themselves in such habit after the English manner, as was answerable to their
several ranks and qualities; and because the charge might breed no
difficulty with the chief men in Parliament, to yield to this Order. He
bestowed upon Tirlogh Leynogh, the principle Lord of Vlster, and on some
others, chief of the Irish, Gowns and other Roabes fit for that place, and
their degrees; which they embraced like fetters: of which being weary, one of
them came to the Deputy, and besought him, that one of his Chaplains (which
he called Priests) might go with him along through the Streets, clad in his
Irish Trouses: for then (quoth he) the Boys will laugh as fast at him, as they
now do at me, whereat though the Deputy could have smiled; yet casting a
frown upon his countenance, told him, there was no cause he should think any
laughed at him, for wearing those which were fit ornaments for the place he now
held, and did present in Parliament: but if any did so, it was at his ill
wearing of the same, which want of civil custom caused: Therefore since use
would make that seemly, which now was ridiculous, he advised him to view the
difference of being fit for all Assemblies, and only fit for the Woods and
barbarous Places; but (quoth the Deputy) if any idle or ill affected person
shall put the contrary into your head, believe it to be done out of an ill
meaning to the State, and worse unto your person, for contempt of order and
decency, will in the end be your downfall. This advice was taken either as
found good, or out of necessity to be followed: but hereby we may discern
that custom, is commonly preferred before decency, and opinion before reason,
especially amongst people where ciuility is unplanted; Withal it is to be
observed in the The reason, the Irish are unwilling to sort themselves to the
English habit.
proud condition of the Irish, that they disdain to sort themselves in fashion
unto us, which in their opinion would more plainly manifest our Conquest over
them; and this I take to be the cause of their untowardness in this
particular, which made the Deputy to set the reformation more to heart, well
knowing that the Lords and chief of the Irish, framing themselves in habit
and plainness to their Underlings, made themselves the more popular. Willing
or unwilling, they were constrained to come to the Parliament in that civil
habit, which did best fit the place and present service.

In this Parliament, which began at Dublin the 26 of April 1585, in the 27
year of the Queens Reign. Sundry Bills were passed in the first Session,
which being Enacted, and new Printed, therefore need here no further mention;
but their disputes and differences arose about a Bill preferred in the Commons
A Bill for the suspension of Poynings Acts.
House, for the suspention of Poynings Act, which past in the tenth year of
King Henry the seventh, before Sir Edward Poynings then Deputy. That no Bill
should pass in any Parliament in Ireland, for a Law, until the same had first
a Royal assent in England. This the Deputy would have suspended by Act of
Parliament, to the end, that opportunity might be taken for passing such Bills,
as the present occasion might offer for the good of the Service, without
attending the further resolution of England: whereby the advantage of advancing
present Services might be lost, making that by delay more impassable, which at
the present, might easily be perfected: But this, howsoever grounded upon good
judgment by the Deputy, was impugned, especially by some chief stirrers in
the English Pale, and overthrown by them at the third reading, (who feared
perchance, that something might be propounded, and speedily Enacted, which
might cross some purposes of their own) and therefore by suspicion were
carried to their own prejudice; yet afterward upon better information (that
doubt being cleared) they then seemed more enclinable to the passage of the
Bill, and upon demand obtained conference with the Deputy, touching the same,
and departed, seeming satisfied in their duties; whereupon the Parliament was
adiourned for three weeks. Afterward notwithstanding the qualification The
Commons against the Bill concerning Poynings Act.
of this Bill (agreed upon by their Co^mitties) they overthrew it the second
time.

The jealousy, and mistaking of some Lawyers (joined to them of the English
Pale) likewise suspecting the repeal of this Statute, was intended for some
other end then was pretended, made much contention and dislike about it, and by
withstanding it, gaine-saide their own profits; for indeed it was preferred
to no other end, but to have free liberty, without restraint to treat of such
matters as might equally concern the good of that Kingdom, yet such strength
has Jealousy and Suspicion to hinder good endeavors, as seeking to avoid
harms, preuents the good which is intended, and by a by course runs with a
full sail upon the mischiefs feared.

Notwithstanding, this discention about Poynings Act (whereof some that did
most in public oppose it, did afterward in private confess their error)
yet diverse profitable Acts were passed, both for the private and public in
this first Session, which ended the 25 of May, and was prorogued till April
following. Amongst the rest, a Bill being preferred Prerogation of the
Parliament.
for the Attainder of the late Earl of Desmond, and passing his Lands by
Excheate to the Crown, received at the first some opposition by the means of
one John Fitzedmonds, A Bill for the attainder of Desmond passed.
who showed there a Feofment, made by the late Earl before he enterd into
actual Rebellion, until Sir Henry Wallop the Treasurer, brought in an
Instrument of Confederacy, between the Earl and his Followers, bearing date
before the Feofment, unto which Fitzedmonds own hand was subscribed, which
Treasonable subtilty being well weighed, and considered of, the Bill passed
without difficulty.

Soon after the end of this Session, notice was given to the Deputy, of a new
practice of Alexander Mac Surly's intention to invade the North.
Alexander Mac Surly, son to Surleboys (under the color of a discention,
between him and the chief Lords of Vlster) to draw again the Scottish
Islanders thither, who had prepared in a readiness 400 of those firebrands,
daily expected to arrive. And because Tirlogh Leynaugh Oneale, was weakened by
want of government, and by age grown unable to rule his people; but much more
disabled by his late dependency upon the State, and conformity to the will of
the Deputy, through the perverse Nature of those people, growth was given to
the Baron of Donganon his aspiring, who quickly took occasion thereby to
advance himself into the hearts of those barbarous and State despising people.
Therefore Vlster, and so speedily performed it, as he was enforced to go with
much less power and provision then he had done in the former; setting
forwards The Deputies second journey into the North.
upon the 26 day of July, and passed speedily as far as Donganon, in the
County of Tyrone, the Barons chief seat. Hither (being by the Deputy sent
for) repaired all the Chiefetaines of Vlster, except those of the Claniboyes,
whom he appointed to defend that Coast of the Country, against the Islanders
invasion. Oneale with his pretended Vriaghs and Dependents, Odonnell and his
Followers, especially Hugh Duffe Odonnell (the elected Tawnist, or next
succeeding Lord of that Country) who brought with him Odogherty, and Sir Owen
Otoole, yielded to all his Lordships demands, which he thought meet to
require at their hands; but James Caraugh, a man of account amongst the
Donelaughs, and most devoted to Shane Oneales family, avoided the Deputies All
the chiefes (saving Bryan Caragh) submit themselves to the Deputy.
presence, of which for the present no great notice was taken.

At this time the Deputy did perfect the reducing of this Province into Shires
or Counties (as was before appointed) by placing and setting bounds (with
advice of the Country) to each County. After which, perceiving that the
Ilanders continued on in their purpose of Incursion into Vlster, he sent one
Captain Dawtrey unto the King of Scots, with Captain Dawtry sent into Scotland.
Letters to move his Majesty against this their frequent course, of inuading the
Queens Dominion, and that if he would be pleased to restrain his people from
the same, and to cause restitution to be made of some Irish Merchants goods,
taken and withheld in some parts of Scotland, there should be the like
correspondencie of Justice showed to his Majesty's Subjects, coming into
Ireland, while he governed in that Kingdom.

The King of Scots answer.
To this the King returned a Princely answer, signifying that he had received
his Letter, which manifested his good disposition to Justice, as formerly he
had taken notice thereof, by his Order with the Merchants of Scotland,
restoring their goods restrained in sundry parts of Ireland; for which good
Office he gave him many thanks, promising the like, that the Merchants of
Dublin and Carick Fergus (lately robbed, or pretended so to be) should have
the same course of Justice at his hands. As for the restraint of Surleboy, with
his brother, their sons and followers, which the Deputy omitted in his
Letter, as a point committed only to the credit of the Bearer, the King also
promised immediately to direct his Letters to inhibit them upon pain of
Treason, from molesting any of the Queens Subjects; and if they
(nevertheless) should attempt the contrary, his Highness would use them as
Rebels, and to that end gave Commission to Mac Allen, and the Country
thereabouts to rise and prosecute them accordingly; but before the delivery of
this Letter (which bore date at Saint Andrews in Scotland, the fourth of August
1585) or immediately after, and before the Kings pleasure could be made known
to any his Governors or Subjects. The Ilanders to The arrival of the Ilanders
in Vlster.
the number of 400 arrived in Vlster, and joining with Con Mac Neale Oges son,
and with those of the Dufferin: The Okelleys, most of the Wood kerne of
Kilwarlen, Mac Cartines Country, and with Hugh Mac Felmis son, they had doubled
their number within a fortnight to at least 800; such being the condition of
that Country people, as to be quickly weary of Peace, wherein the work of
ciuillity might be wrought, being a thing as hateful to the Barbarous, as
Barbarism and wildness is to a people flourishing in wealth and ciuillitie,
under a wise Government. So sweet is Idleness to those who have never tasted
the fruit of Industry, wherein the Governors of Ireland (for the most part)
had hitherto failed, even since the Conquest of the same, neglecting the ways
and courses to ciuilize those called the wild Irish, whereby the English
Families (governed according to the custom of England) following the Nature of
man, ever enclining to the worse, rather learnt rudeness and Barbarism of the
Irish, then taught them ciuillity and manners.

The Deputy hearing of these Scots landing, gave order unto Captain Francis
Stafford (a man of a forward spirit, and an extraordinary understanding) for
their present prosecution in the nether Claniboy, who with a small force, not
consisting of the fourth part of these fugitives, and their partakers, made
head against Captain Stafford encountered the Scots.
them with 170 Soldiers, besides a few kerne; and upon the 28 of July,
encountered them in the morning; and according to the loose manner of the Irish
fighting, continued in skirmish till four in the afternoon, marching on, and
winning ground, much to the commendation of the Commanders judgment, and the
Soldiers resolution: the custom of these Island Soldiers (if they may be
termed Soldiers) is to fly when they be closely followed, and to be fierce,
when they are fearfully resisted, or faintly prosecuted; for indeed neither
they, nor the Irish, ever gave our Nation defeat, but upon our shrinking from
them. At this time Shane Mac Bryan serving upon our side, showed himself
forward and faithful to his great commendation. At length Captain Stafford
recovered a place of advantage, having in this skirmish lost but eight men, and
brought off twelve hurt, and had slain of the Enemy 24 upon the place; and
wounded at least 40 more, which the Deputy for the grace of the Captain and
his Assistants, gave a praisefull report of into England; where doubtless it
was little regarded, in respect of the small show it presented: but considering
the State of things as they then stood, it was well done to gain advantage,
the war of that Kingdom in those days being acted with small numbers.

The Enemy being thus with a few, in respect of their number, resisted and
beaten back, did afterward shun place and occasion of fight, putting
themselves over the River of Band into Tyrone, from whence by the Deputies
direction to the Baron of Donganon, Alexander Mac Surly, resisted by the Baron
of Donganon.
they were by him, and such Forces as the Deputy had sent unto him, speedily put
to retreat, and Captain Stafford with a new supply had them again in chase,
which enforced those straggling runnagate Strangers to draw back toward
Donluce, where Alexander Mac Surly, their chief Co^mander, supposed he might
have had best succor from his Fathers friends, or at least by their means
might have shipped away into the Islands: but the Deputy being still in the
North, and studying their prevention every way; They were constrained to
Alexander retires to Enishowen.
take toward Enishowen in Odogherties Countries, to draw force out of
Tyrconnell for their Assistants: but Hugh Duffe Odonnell lately mentioned, a
man then faithful, or at least standing firm to the State, for his own ends,
that by the favor thereof, he might the more surely succeed Odonnell, came to
Strabane, a Town of Tirlogh Leynaughs, not far from Odonnell offers aid to
the English.
the Lyffar, and acquainted the English there, that Alexander Mac Surly, being
at Enishowen with 600 Ilanders and others, had a purpose to surprise them at
Strabane, knowing by intelligence, that the Companies sent thither the year
before were grown weak, and the Captains all absent saving Merryman, who
indeed had but 160 able men remaining of the four Companies: and withal,
offered to draw a draught upon the Enemy himself, if Merryman would assent
thereunto, which Merryman accepted, and enterprised with those few men,
marching all night, thinking to take the Enemy unprovided; but contrary to his
expectation, he found them under good guard, having (as it seemed)
intelligence, or suspicion, of this their coming, or attempt.

Upon discovery, the Enemy draws out to fight. Merryman finding himself
weak, puts his whole Troop into one Body; Alexander Merryman fights with
the Scots.
his, into three Divisions, purposing to assault the English upon so many sides
at once, and so to overthrow them easily: but in respect the ground gave
advantage to the English, he found the work more difficult.

Alexander being a daring young fellow, and a good Sword-man, showed himself
in the head of his men, and called for Merryman to answer him in a single
Combat, with a Gallinglasse (standing on the outside of the English, saying
he was the man) accepted. They encounter, and Alexanders Target being at the
first blow by the Gallinglasse Axe beaten Alexander Mac Surly kills a
Gallinglass.
to his head, was astonished; but soon recovering himself, got within the
other, and with his Sword cleft his head, so as he left him for dead; which
Merryman seeing, who was not far off, met Alexander, so as with Sword
Alexander and Merryman fight hand to hand.
and Target they held for a few blows a good fight: but Alexander being sore
hurt by the Captain on the leg, withdrew, and got Alexander hurt retires,
and his men are overthrown.
himself out of the field to ease and dress his wound.

The rest of his Company missing their Leader, and loosing withal their
courage, began to fly, and in the end were utterly overthrown and rowted.
Captain Merryman making search for Mac Surly, who he knew, was not able to go
far with his wound, found an old woman sitting sadly, of whom he demanded
for him: she being terrified by the Soldiers, pointed with her finger to a
place where a few Turfes were laid over Hurdles, under which Alexander
Alexander Mac Surly's head cut off, and sent to Dublin.
was hidden. There they found him stiff with his wound, and using small
ceremony with him, struck off his head, which being sent to the Deputy, was set
upon a Pole at the Castle of Dublin.

This Incursion being ended, and the Inuaders absolutely defeated, being the
second good success of the Deputy in his War, and principally achieved by
his presence in the North, which withheld many of the rebellious people, from
joining with the Ilanders, and especially their Chiefes from giving countenance
to their proceeding.

He was nevertheless upon the sixteenth day of July, contrary to the good and
necessity The Deputy retires to Dublin.
of the Service, enforced to retire toward Dublin, to provide himself to
answer complaints, made by some of the Council there against him into
England, who took occasion to inform this his journey, to be an expedition
superfluous, chargeable, and unprofitable to her Majesty, and the Country.

Surleboys submission.
Shortly after Surleboys submitted himself at Dublin to the Queens mercy,
where, one showing him his sons head; he made answer, My son, quoth he,
has many heads* alluding (as it seemed) to the Hidra, resembling, indeed a
factious and turbulent State, and the disposition of an Enemy, who (living in
extreme poverty) will ever be finding means and heads to lead them to better
themselves, by the spoil of their neighbors, which the death of this one man
could not prevent.

The Deputy informed against.
Amongst the informations against the Deputy, there was objected, that he had
taken strict courses in his government, as requiring the Oath of obedience;
appointing Officers to look into men's Patents, Warrants given in the late
Parliament, to prefer Bills for making the like Laws, as were in England
against Recusants. Causing a Bill to be preferred in the first Session, for the
suspension of Poynings Act, to the hazard of stirring up a commotion: Urging
that these courses did decline the people from peace to unquietness: Such
force had slander got by malicious Envy, as to make a Be a Spider, and to
work that honey without, of the flowers of his judgment and sincerity, he had
painfully gathered, to a corrupt poison, as by the woeful effect, it, in after
time, too manifestly appeared.

This information was given against him, by such as he had left in trust for
State causes in his absence, especially by the Chancellor, the Archbishop of
Dublin, a man of great wisdom and experience, and such a one, as for his
parts might well merit the estimation of an extraordinary Statesman and
Councellor, and it was pity these good things should be the cause of evil
effects; for between him and the Deputy were discontentments grounded upon
directions, given by the Deputy in The Deputy and Chancellor differ about the
erecting of the University.
the last Parliament, for conversion of the living of Saint Patricks in Dublin,
to the maintenance of a College, and University there to be erected: first
intended by King Edward the sixth, and now at this time given in charge to this
Deputy by the Queen, which he accordingly purposed to prosecute, as a
certain foundation of the reformation of that Kingdom; which howsoever the
Chancellor could not but in his judgment know and allow of* yet in respect
some of his kindred, friends, and Allies, were interrested in these
possessions; he gave great opposition thereunto, pretending the cause to be in
right of the Church, whereof he undertook to be the Patron. Likewise (as it
seemed) he took to heart the peremptory proceeding of the Deputy, as well in
other matters of State as in this, finding himself slighted of that regard,
some precedent Governors had yielded him; for he being a Prelate, great in
place and made greater by the Offices he had lately borne; now finding that
this man's prosperous beginning, carried perchance with a more absolute Authority
then others had usually exercised, if it were not crossed, would breed a
diminution of his power in that State, by his wisdom already highly planted,
preferring his particular too tenderly* which to preserve, The Chancellor
raises a faction against the Deputy*
he fell into contention with the Deputy, and raised a faction against him of
some of the Counsel; as Sir Henry Bagnall, (who had married his sister to his
eldest son) and others; so that from hence sprung not only private
informations, but public crosings at the Council Table, even in things,
which, if they had been peaceably handled, might have much advanced her
Majesty's Service, and the good of that Kingdom. Such is the State of
Ambition, is it never sees any way, but by the stairs of its own climing.

The Deputy makes answer to these objections, against his late Northern
journey, and the other things already mentioned, especially for the conversion
of Saint Patrickes Living, therein indeed lying the most assured root of
reformation. Nevertheless, the Lord Chancellor taking upon him (as is said)
to be the only Patron of the Church affairs, and knowing his power with the
Lord Treasurer of England, in the balance of whose wisdom, most State causes
(especially concerning England and Ireland) were at that time cast, labors
by all means to hinder the Deputies proceeding as well by his Letters which
heretofore had been preualent, as by his Agents who watched the best
opportunity, and took the right way of prevailing in Court, which the Deputy
not suspecting, or at least not fearing trusting to the weight of his own
zeal, The Chancellor in England prevails.
could not prevent; whereby at length the Chancellor so far prevailed in that
one point, as Letters were written from the Queen and Council, to make stay of
the conversion of those Livings; withal, advertisement is given by the Queen
to them both, that she had taken notice of their contentions, with admonition
to for bear such crossing, as must needs give impediment to the public
service. The Queen reproves the Chancellor by her letters.
And by her own particular Letter to the Chancellor, in express manner, she
commanded a reformation, wherein was to be obsorued, how careful she was of
the common good, though the interest of the Chancellours friends in her favor
wrought deeply, to the advancement of his particular. But this her gracious
admonition was not well followed oney there side; for the Deputy being by nature
cholletick, and not able to endure the affronts of an Inferior, especially
discerning that the Chancellours particular ends had gained respect above his
public, (which to a good Patriots patience was no small mouer) could not
contain himself upon the provoking words of his wily Adversary, who omitted
no means, or occasion that might enforce his intemperance; and so distemperd,
he so The Deputy through choler exceeded himself.
exceeded himself, as he spared not the greatest, by whom he thought himself
wronged: which fault of his is iudiciously observed by Sir Walter Raleigh, to
have been the greatest cause of his overthrow; private misrespect oftentimes
swaying in a Princes heart* more then public miscarriage. So the one not
brooking an equal, and the other e^^ying a Superior, the bonds of charity,
patience, and policy, were by both broken.

Upon the Chancellours side, the then Secretary (a Moath in all the Deputies
garments The Secretaries double dealing with the Deputy.
of his time) was factious, who upon the beginning of the Parliament hold in
Ireland, was employed into England to negotiate in the affairs thereof, which
at the first he seemed well to attend, and desirous that the success of that
Parliament might breed the common good: but at length either by the evil of
me own disposition, or wrought by the Deputies Adversaries in Court, or the
Chancellours instigation, he became from a private Practizer, a public and
professed Adversary, for whereas by his Letter of the ^1 July (...) signified
her Majesty's good allowance of the Deputies service in these words. That he
had procured general peace, and had gained the peoples hearts unto their
Prince: but on the ninth of September following, he wrote of the alteration of
the Queens good opinion in some of his Services; which being likewise
manifested by some other such his sharp intelligence, and some circumstances:
especially her Majesty's own Letters concurring, which he brought over: the
Deputy was confirmed in his opinion of the Secretaries factions, and false
informing courses against him. Upon receipt of which Letters, being partly
admonitory, and partly reprehensiue, although the Queen was pleased, to
signify therein, that she was well persuaded of his care and diligence, and
took in good part all his doings, as proceeding from a special zeal to do
her service: yet finding or suspecting a tax withal to be laid on his
judgment, in some matters which did arise (as he conceived) from the
persuasion of his Euemies, his nature would not suffer him to The Deputy
writeih to the Queen.
suppress, or conceal his grief. He therefore wrote over unto her, as he
had already done unto the Lords of her Counsel, showing the good success of
his late Northern journey, with the necessity thereof, and the content of the
Council thereunto, and to his proceeding in tendering the Oath of obedience,
he pleaded warrant and policy of State, and to all the other allegations, as
of Novelties and supposed inconuemencies, he replied: that they were malicious
furmises, and without cause of doubt therein, as his Adversary pretended;
alleging a dangerous consequence, to breed fear, doubt, and disquietnesse
in the Natives, which were but suggestions, to hinder such services, as would
easily be performed without peril; finding now the pride and power of the
evil affected Irish, to be altogether abated, and the people inclined to yield
conformity unto his commandments. Therefore it seemed fit to him to take the
opportunity which the time offered, to work that which former time could not
compass. But finding all this (how necessary so ever) crossed by them, which
should rather have given furtherance to it, construing his actions astending to
innovation, likely to stir dissension, and produce danger. He confessed that
he was much disconraged, but yet would pursue his course in the best manner he
could (being so restrained.) For the view of men's Charters, wherewith he was
charged, he denied that ever he intended, much less practiced the Accusers
malice and slander. He confessed that he had urged some of them to take the
Oath of obedience, and gave his reason for it, for finding their obstinacy,
and repugnance to reason in Parliament; he held this the best means to try
their sidelily by, concluding with all humility, which tasted something,
nevertheless, of passion and grief, for it must needs trouble him to see his
zealous care, to assure all things to the good of his Prince, mistaken by the
malice of his Adversaries, whose whole aim being but at their own particular,
were not so sensible as they should have been, how they euerted the public
by pudling the water wherein their fish lay. And to strengthen this their
information, to the end he might be made the more distasteful to her Majesty,
and the Lords of her Counsel. Some of the Lords of the English Pale, are
incited The Lords of the English Pale write against the Deputy.
to write unto the Queen 15 July 1585, in complaint against the Deputy, that
over and besides a composition of two thousand pounds yearly reuennew formerly
made in lieu of Cess, and other charges claimed to belong by Prerogative unto
the State, from the five Counties of the English Pale* he intended to impose a
second charge of fifteen hundred pound per Anum sterling; so making the yoke
of her Government to appear heavy and insupportable. But not long after some
of those Lords (finding themselves abused) as the Vicount Gormanstowne, the
Lords of Slany, The Lords by another Letter recanted their error.
Heathe, and Trimelstene, by another Letter recanted their error, expressing
sorrow for mistaking the Deputies meaning, acknowledging his fatherly care of
them, and the Country: (for those were the words of their Letter) and that they
would not have written against him, neither for the former particular, nor for
the suspension of Poynings Act, if they had discerned or understood what they
now found of his disposition, to do them, and the Country right. This shows
in what a slippery sear they fit, that govern that Kingdom, for Innocence
is not always safe, though it be ever best, for it cannot be free from
imputation, when it is free from corruption, the vnder-Instruments of State
aduauncing themselves thereby.

Notwithstanding these complaints, crossings and backbitings, the Deputy like a
careful Commonwealths man, and just servant to his Prince, professed he would
proceed on to the discharge of his duty, as long as he held that place,
esteeming it better to be disgraced for doing well, then to be remiss in doing
well. Therefore care is had, to settle a Composition in Cannaught suitable to
that in Vlster, begun for the increase of the Crowns reuennew, and settling of
some certainty in that Province, betwixt the Lords and their Tenants; for the
prevention of such mischiefs as had happened formerly, there by their
disagreement, and for the reformation of such enormities, as were frequent by
the dependencie of the mean person, upon the chief Lords.

To this purpose in the same year, so soon as the late begun troubles of
Vlster were pacified, and the other Provinces of Ireland began to be pliable,
and conformable to Justice and Peace. A commission is directed to Sir Richard
Commission sent into Connaught for making the composition.
Bingham, the Governor of Connaught, Sir Nicholas White Master of the Rowles,
Sir Thomas Lestrange, Charles Calthorpe the Queens Attorney General, Thomas
Dillon Chief Justice of Connaught, Gerard Comeford Attorney there, and
Francis Barkeley, to enter into a course for procuring a composition with the
principal Lords spiritual and temporal.

The Chiefetaines of Countries, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of that Province of
Connaught, to pass unto the Queens Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, a
grant of ten shillings English, or a mark Irish, upon every quarter of land
containing 120 Acres, manured, or to be manured, as the phrase went, and was
significantly set down, that bears either horn or corn, that was, with
tillage or cattle, in lieu and consideration to be discharged from other
Cess, taxation, or tallage, excepting the rising out of Horse and Foot, for
the Service of the Prince and State, such as should be particularly agreed
upon, and some certain days labor for building and fortifaction for the
safety of the people and Kingdom. According to which Commission, and the
directions therein contained. These Commissioners did travail through the
several Counties of Connaught, first calling and conferring with the Lords,
Chiefetaines, Gentlemen, and Freeholders in their several Precincts and
Possessions, to find their dispositions, how far they were willing to
condescend, and yield to such a course, for the satisfaction of their Prince,
and freedom of themselves from further burdens, to make their charge
certain, and that but small. These things well The Commissioners handled the
Commission discreetly.
propounded, and discreetly prosecuted: most, and in a manner, all the
principal possessours of land in that Province, as they were generally dealt
withal, did assent to this contribution for their own ease, as well as for
the satisfaction and service of the Prince: of the first themselves were
sensible, of the other they had only advertisement from the Commissioners,
being well chosen for that purpose; especially, Sir Richard Bingham the
Governor, then whom the Queen had not in her Dominions a more able and
sufficient Gentleman, and that did more nearly lay his actions to a good
conscience, so as he did nothing but by the warrant thereof; and nothing did
argue his duty to God, and his Princemore, then his The hard cause held against
Sir Richara Bingham.
unjust fall, (notwithstanding his prime desert) in that ^nhappy Kingdom, by
the deprauing and malicious courses of those Instruments, that in time
prosecuted the like against him, as they did now against this Deputy, of whom
we now treat, till the light of his innocence cleared him (though too late)
from their aspersion, and brought him to a new and further advancement in that
Kingdom, though his great heart (disdayning the injustice was done him) would
not hold out long enough, to prosecute the service which was in his power to
perform: but ere I come to relate this tragical misdeede, I must mention his
virtuous actions, by which he got the hate of his worthless Adversaries, and
must recommend the Earl of Clanrikard, who being a most noble Gentleman, and
loyal Subject, was one of the principal in this Service.

After treaties, succeeded Inquisitions to find what quantity there was in
each Barony, The covenants between the Queen, and the Lords of Connaught.
and who were found owners thereof. Indentures were drawn between the Deputy
in the behalf of the Queen on the one part, and the chief possessioners in
the several Precincts on the other, expressing so many quarters and quantities
of Land, with the Rents thereon reserved, and such other covenants as were
therein contained.

In the County of Clare and Thomond, the Earl of Clanrikard, the Baron of
Inse^^uin, the Bishop of Killalowe, the Elect Bisho^ of Kilfanorough, with
diverse Knights, and chief Gentlemen, subscribed to an Indenture of covenants
for the perpetual, paying out of the nine Baronies of that County, amounting
177 quarters.

Certain Freedoms were granted to some special persons: some quarters of
Land to be exempted from this imposition: In consideration whereof, the Lords
and Owners of those Lands did likewise couenaot with the Deputy, that the
names, styles, and Titles of Captainship chiefly, and all other Irish
Authorities and Jurisdictions heretofore used by the Lords, Chiefetaines and
Gentlemen, together with all elections, and customary divisions of Lands (which
had occasioned great strife and division amongst them) should be thenceforth
utterly renounced, extinct, and abollished. The like composition was made upon
the same conditions, with the Lords spiritual and temporal. The Chiefetaines,
Gentlemen, and Freeholders in the County of Maio, containing nine Baronies, and
1448 quarters of Land, every quarter esteemed to be 120 Acres: so that out of
this 1448 quarters found in this County, there being granted so much to be
free, as there remained 1200 quarters chargeable, which amounted to six
hundred pound sterling in that County. There was also by the same composition
and covenants, to be maintained by the County for the Service of the Prince,
forty good able Horsemen furnished, and two hundred Footmen well Armed, at
their own costs and charges, whenever they should be called, or commanded
thereto by the Deputy or chief Governor of the Realm, or by the chief
Officer of the said Province, and to find fifteen good Horsemen, and fifty
Footmen well furnished, in such sort, as the Peers and English Bishops ought
to do the same. The like composition was made for the County of Sligo, and all
other Counties, Countries, Baronies, and Territories of this Province. By the
eighth of September 1585, the Commissioners had travailed through the Okelleys
Country, all Thomond, Clanrickard, Eighter, Connaught, and the rest of the
County of Galway, which Mac William Eighter, and the rest of his name, which
were of many branches; besides the petty Lords, and other of the second rank
in their Sir Nicholas White his letter to the Lord Deputy.
Countries: So that as Sir Nicholas White certified to the Lord Deputy, they
conceived hope to come home laden with Pledges, and leave that Country
unloaded of many Macks and Oos, translated by their own assent (unto which
their hands and Seals were had) to a better course, and more certainty of
living, then hitherto they could afford themselves. In the advertisement of
these affairs, Sir Nicholas White did propound unto the Deputy an ingenious
Enigma or Ridle. That all sorts were eased with their bearing, and yet her
Majesty's revenue, with the Livings of the Lords increased.

From the County of Mayo the Commissioners were to repasse to the County of
Sligo, and so homewards to the County of Roscoman.

The Commissioners doubtful to meddle with Orurk.
With Orurkes Country called Letrim, they were doubtful how to meddle,
considering the condition of himself and his Country, both uncivil and unruly.

In those places where they had dealt, they began to erect Mannours to hold of
her Majesty, besides the Compositions and Royalties reserved unto the Crown.
Upon the return of this Commission, and the Indentures thereupon drawn, as
formerly mentioned. It appears there were found in that Province 8169
quarters of Land, whereof Freedoms were granted to 2339, so then remained
chargeable 6836, whereon there were reserved in yearly Rent to her Majesty and
the Crown 3418 pound five shillings eight pence sterling, with the Service of
so many Horse and Foot, as is already mentioned, and hereafter set down.

Horsemen for rising out within the Province of Connaught, upon their own
victuals. 224 Horsemen for rising out within the same Province for forty days
upon their own victuals. 88 Footmen for rising out within the Province upon
their own victuals. 1054 Footmen for rising out of the Province for forty
days upon their own victuals. 332
The Tawnist was cut off in that Province.

Mac William Enghters Country being the lower Bourkes, was divided into five
parts.

The Lords and their Tenants were agreed together for a certain Rent, in lieu
of all exactions.

That Province was divided into six Counties or Shieres, where there were but
three before: for so I find it in a note under the Deputies, Sir John Perrots
own hand, yet by another painful Author I see it mentioned, that Sir Henry
Sidney made the whole six Counties, Clare, Galway, Sligo, Mayo, Roscomon, and
Letrim, then but one, as he had formerly done, the County of Longford in
Lemster, being before called the Annaly or Oferralls Country; but I suppose he
is mistaken being divided, and The Counties of Connaught divided by Sir John
Perrot, not by Sir Henry Sidney.
peradventure named by Sir Henry Sidney, but perfected by Sir John Perrot.
Justices of Assize were ordained, and Shriefes, and Justices of the Peace, with
other inferior Officers, were established in most parts of this Province.

This Service so available to the State by cutting off the Inferiors,
depending only upon the Superior, was affected beyond the expectation of
many, who could not conceive, that Chiefetaines would easily condescend to quit
their cuttings, Cosherias, and other Irish exactions of so long continuance and
custom, which the people had borne so long, as they thought it now no burden,
knowing no better, and feeling that least wherewith they had so long bin
acquainted. But now the Chiefes understanding, that they should have freedom of
lands instead, and lieu of their Chieferies, and the people by persuasion,
brought to believe, and perceive, they should by this means live more free
from exaction, both yielded to this composition, which to this day does
continue.

If this Service had proceeded (as the Deputy intended) as well through the
whole Province, as in these parts, and so extended to the rest of the Kingdom:
it had surely introduced peace and wealth amongst the people, with obedience,
and increase of revenue to the Prince, which at that time might easily have
been affected: but the blood and fatal mischiefs threatened unto that unhappy
Kingdom, were not to be prevented by the care and industry of this good
Governor, whose works (though built upon the strong foundation of zeal,
knowledge, and integrity) were shaken by the storms, blown from the breath of
his maligners both here and there, using not the Engine of slander only, but
like Magicians stirred up every spirit, that might move him to impatience, the
already mentioned fault of his Nature. That begot The second information
against the Deputy.
rash words, which no sooner spoken, but was informed with advantage, which
took away her Majesty's good opinion of his zeal, to But here his misfortune
rested not; for now the most perilous practice of his Enemies began to break
forth, which fatally in short time proved his ruin.

Denis Oroughans practice discovered.
One Dennis Oroughan, who had been a Romish Priest, counterfeited certain
Warrants in the name of the Deputy, directed to all the Queens Officers within
the Realm of Ireland, unto which Warrants the name of the Deputy was set in
the usual place of Assignation: In them was a general pardon granted to the
Priest, without limitation of time, or exception of any offense, terming the
Realm of Ireland and Council thereof, as if they had been his, and he King
of it and them, contrary to all usual form, which seemed not to be the
Priests own device, because the extraordinary form must needs bring it in
question, and thereby make it of no avail to him, but the Priest being a fit
instrument, in respect of his offense, and the fitter through an extraordinary
villainy grafted in him, was wrought by others to take upon him this part, to
manifest the Deputies ambition, and thereby make him odious to the State here;
which deuillish plot was more timely discovered, then the Plotters wished, for
the Priest being taken with these counterfeited Warrants (upon other suspicion)
and brought before the Archbishop of Cashell, who taking pains in the
examination of him, discovered that these Warrants were written by one Henry
Bird, Register to the high Commission. Advertisement was given hereof to the
Deputy, a Commission thereupon was directed to the Lord Primate, Sir Henry
Wallop, and Sir Nicholas White, to call Bird before them, and to make search
amongst his papers thereby, as by his examination, to find the meaning of
these counterfeited papers of warrant. At first he denied the writing of the
Warrants, but afterward being tripped in his Answers, he confessed he wrote
them; but stiffly for swore the subscription of the Deputies name thereto, which
(as it should seem) was done by the Priest himself, for he was the man that
after accused Denis Oroughan, the false Author of Sir John Perrots accusation
in England.
the Deputy in England; upon which he was condemned: so as either the Deputies
own remissness in severely punishing this man, or his Adversaries underhand
protecting him from his deserved punishment, gave scope to his detestable
accusation, which the villain Denis Oroughans repentance.
a little before his death (being not many years since) confessed with a
seeming remorse for his so falsely accusing an Innocent, by the procuring of
others, who were never known in this world, to repent their misdeede, how they
answer in the next, is only known to God himself: but it is a fearful
thing to observe, what power such false persons often have to prevail against
the most innocent, even in the iustest Commonweals, which neither the wit of
man, nor any thing, but the miraculous hand of the highest can prevent or
discover*

Another practice about this time, or shortly after succeeded against him,
which though it were not so dangerous, yet it troubled him no The Deputies
secrets bewrayed.
less, being a means to prevent his intended Services, for his Letters and
secrets being bewrayed by (as it should seem) John Williams, his own
Secretary, unto his Adversaries, and by them communicated unto others, whom
they concerned, her Majesty was defrauded of her Service, and he brought into
suspicion amongst those, where the way of his prevailing lay: upon the first
notice thereof he wrote unto the Lords of the Council in England, who
thereupon gave commandment unto the Lord Chancellor, and the Bishop of
Mead, to make the Authors known of that discovery, showing the dangerous
consequence that followed such practices of publishing secrets, which did
concern the State; but they for some particular respects (as it should seem)
disobeyed that commandment, though the Queen her self did after expressly
require it to be done. And withal, she wrote unto the Lord Chancellor,
charging him to forbear contestation with the Deputy, which could not but
hinder his service, and embolden evil affected persons, disposed to resist the
power of her Governors, when they should discern such contention amongst
those, that were chief in authority.

Shortly after the Baron of Donganon went into England, who having been
brought up with the English, showed always forwardness in the Queens Service
against Tirlogh Leynaugh, and Shane Oneale, in times of their disobedience,
wherein his special aim was only his own advancement into their title and
place, they once suppressed.

Coming into England with the fair show of his former Services, he professes
future fidelity in himself, and advises (under color of the Countries peace
and quiet) a suppression of the exorbitant Title, and jurisdiction of Oneale,
which notwithstanding he afterward assumed and extorted unto himself, though
a known Bastard, taking advantage of the loose hand was held upon the Irish in
Vlster, and the corrupt Government at that time in the State, as shall in his
due time be made manifest; with this profession of Service; and by applying
himself to the greatest in power, and grace at Court, he gained the Queens
favor, and The Baron of Donganon created Earl of Tyrone.
was created Earl of Tyrone: but hereat his ambition was not leuelled, for the
name of an Earl was not the thing he aimed at; but, as is mentioned, the
barbarous Title of Oneale, for Tyrone his ambition to be Oneale.
he has been often heard to say: I had rather be Oneale of Vlster, then Philip
of Spain, who in the Papists reckoning, is the greatest Monarch of the world:
and as Tirlogh, then the Tawnist Oneale grew in weakness and impotencie: so
this new created Earl did more and more aspire to sit in his room, within
process of time he obtained; so as the Queens policy in making him Earl, to
out-countenance the Title of Oneale, made him potent to gain it, and thereby to
prove the greatest firebrand that ever that Kingdom had.

Not long after the Composition of Connaught The Burks repenting their
Composition.
before mentioned, some of the Burkes, with others of that Province better
discerning the policy of the State then at first, or at least taught to
interpret it so, by the persuasion of the Priests, now fearing that their
usurped power over the people, would be diminished (preferring power to do
mischief in after time, before their present profit and plenty,) fell into
counsel and consideration, how they might undo the knot the State had almost
tied, and proceeded to a promise of combination to the same effect, whereof the
vigilant Governor Sir Richard Bingham taking light, advertised the Deputy, and
from him received advice, not to provoke the people, by giving them any just
occasion of offense; but to try by all fair persuasions and pollitique means,
that they might be held in obedience, and to persevere in such courses of
conformity; as they had lately yielded and submitted themselves unto: for this
purpose Commissioners are sent to hear their grieuances, and to yield A second
Commission sent into Connaught, to appease the Burks.
them right upon their just demands, (but this course indeed, because it
argued fear in the State, made them holder in their practices.) The
Commissioners were the Archbishop of Toome, the Bishop of Meathe, etc.

These Commissioners heard their complaints, which proved most against the
Governor, and his under Officers, somewhat they exhibited for their own
claims, alleging Interest. They were offered right, and persuaded to
obedience, which they promised, but did not long perform: for the matter of
their usurped and customary authority and superiority (being of more value in
sound and show, then in substance) did so ouer-possesse them, as they not long
after entered into a second conspiracy, for the maintenance of that their
lawless intrusion, which being shaken by the composition, they intended now to
hold by force.

And for the better effecting this evil and Traiterous enterprise, they
persuaded the Clandonnells, Ioyces, and others (that Sir Richard Bingham had
already taken from them their ancient Liberties, and was ready to do the like
unto all others in that Province, if it were not prevented, and therefore
entreated them to join in action of Rebellion for their future Freedom.

Thus they began to assemble, and to gather troops, amongst whom the sons of
Edmond The Burks enter into an Insurrection.
Bourke of Castlebarry, being many were Partisans, and so entered into an
insurrection. This Edmond, an old man, was one of the Competitors of the Mac
William Shie; His sons with Edmond Kettaugh Burke; Richard Burest son unto
him, called the Devils ^ooke, Meyler Oge Burke, Walter Mac David Barie, Cayhir
Mac Connell, and others, associating unto them many idle persons their
followers, entered a Castle called Castle ne Kelly, manned the same, and kept it
against the Queen, with Thomas Roes Castle, which after his decease was in the
hands and possession of his brother Richard Burke.

About this time Mahone Obryan held a Castle called Clan Owen in Thomond,
against the State, who was a dangerous and great practizer with foreign
power, for the Invasion in Sir Richard Bingham besieged Clan Owen.
Ireland. This Castle the Governor Sir Richard besieged, and after seven
days siege won it, and slew Mahon Obryan. The siege was all by water in
Boats, for it could not otherwise be attempted, the Castle being seated far
within the Logh upon a small Island, where Sir Richard going about to burn a
Boat or two belonging to the Rebels, that lay close to the wall of the Castle,
was enforced with sudden rising of wind and foul weather (which much
favored the Rebel) to leave the attempt, with the loss of one or two of his
Boats, and two or three of his Soldiers: Himself and such as were with him,
hardly escaping, by the help of other Boats, which came as they were
appointed in time to second him. The Boat which he lost, the Rebels got, in
which they shipped themselves, and fled into the Woods, before he could
return to give them a new assault.

This Pile, and another of Fardara^gh Mac Donnells, Sir Richard razed down to
the ground, as held not fit to be kept by the English, and dangerous to be in
the hand of the Irish.

Richard Bourk hanged.
Richard Bourke called the Vsule of Ireland, was at Castellne Kelly, hanged by
Marshall law. Information being there given, that he was confederate with the
Rebel, and under pretext of dutiful obedience, and visitation of the
Governor, intended to betray him and his company.

Some of the Burks sent to call the Scots.
The Burkes again gather greater forces, joined with their other confederates,
and the more to manifest their malice, they murdered fifteen or sixteen of
the Officers of Connaught, and sent Edmond Kettaugh Burke, with John Iteleaga,
brother unto Walter Kettaugh Burke, to practice with the Scottish Ilanders, to
draw them thither to their aid, whereof the Deputy being advertised, sends
directions to the Governor, to raise what Forces he could in the Province for
the present, promising to send him supplies with all possible The Deputy
promises to come to the Governor.
speed, and to come himself in person, if the necessity of the Service so
required; but therein he reckoned without his Host, for his Adversaries, A plot
to restrain him.
finding his former success, to have gained him great reputation, whose
increase might make him too powerful to be shaken by their plots, had procured
Letters of restraint to be sent out of England, to prohibit him to do any
thing, without the assent and approbation of the Council.

The Governor with such Forces as were then in pay in the Province, and some
other aid of the Country began upon the 12 of July 1586, to draw toward the
County of Mayo, and came to Ballincrobe, the fourteenth of the same, whereall
the Gentlemen best affected in the Country met him, as the Earl of Clanrikard,
the Lord Bremicham, Sir Hubert Mac Dauie Teige, Okelly, with many others.
Thither came the Captains Mostian, Merryman, and Mordant, with their Companies
sent by the Deputy to supply him.

Commissioners are likewise appointed to parley with the Burkes, but could not
prevail: The Burks proyed by the Governor, and their F rces overthrown.
Whereupon the Governor prosecuted them, and took from them 3 or 4000 Cowes,
whereof 1000 are reserved by the Governor, toward the defraying of
extraordinary charges in that Service, done by him for the easing of her
Majesty's Charge, but reported by his Adversaries to be converted to his own
use. The rest were distributed amongst the Forces; in the taking of this prey,
were of the Rebels slain six or seven score, the rest were disperced, and
forced to sue for pardon.

Hereupon the Governor discharged the Kerne, and dismissed the rest of the
Forces, all saving his own Horse, and three Companies of Foot.

The chiefest of the Galloglasses make their submission.
Euston Mac Odonnell, chief of the Galloglasses, made his submission, and gave
his son in Pledge for himself and his Sept.

Edmond Bourke, Mac Richard Euerren, (son to the last Mac William but one)
gave his son for Pledge in like manner: But the sons of Edmond Burke of
Castlebary, persisted in Rebellion, purposing to make their Father, Mac Edmond
Burk of Castlebary executed.
William, wherein they continued, till their Father was Executed, by the course
of common Law; so done, that his Lands might be excheated to the Crown, being
of good value, which could not have been, if he had dyed by Marshall law.
After whose death, his sons offered to submit themselves, upon condition of
restitution of their Fathers Lands, which the Governor referred to the Lord
Deputies resolution and pleasure.

As the Bourkes (by the well advised and quick prosecution of the Governor)
were reduced to a low estate (few of them being now able to make head:) news
came that the Scottish Ilanders The Scottish Ilanders land.
were arrived in the North, being drawn by Edmond and John Burke before
mentioned, in the name of all the rest of the Sept of Burkes, to invade upon
condition of having part of that Province to inhabit in, after the expelling
of the English by their aid and assistance. The number of these Inuadors were
uncertain, being by some estimated to be 2700, and by others Earne, toward
Sligo.

Of this news, (hindering the peace of Connaught for the present) the Deputy
was by Sir Richard Bingham advertised, withal that he had not sufficient
power to resist so great a number as these Inuadors, with the Rebels, The
Governor durst not trust the Irish of the Province.
their Assistants were, neither durst he rely upon the aid of the Provincial
Lords and Gentlemen, who for the most part were allied to the Rebel Burkes,
the Inducers of this Invasion, to which he received answer from the Deputy, to
the same effect he had formerly received upon the first making Head by the
Burkes.

Upon this the Governors intelligence, it was debated in Council at Dublin,
whether the Deputy should go in person, with such power as could be there
provided, to assist the Governor, which the forward Deputy alleged, to be
most necessary, for the better countenancing of the action, since his presence
was most likely to disunite the Rebel from the Inuador, (as it had formerly
done in Vlster) and so make the War more easy. Hereto The Deputy and
Council differ about his journey to Connaught.
much opposition was given by some of the Council, and those not of the
meanest: so as that the more earnest he was to undertake the enterprise, the
more stiff they were to withstand it, alleging for their reasons, that the
number of the Inuadors were not so great as was reported; and therefore it was
inconueuient to put the Queen to such a charge, as an Army would require to
attend the Deputy in person: Nevertheless, the Deputy with some of the
Council, sought to persuade the contrary, considering Sir Richard Binghams
diffidence in the assistance of that Country people, the weakness of his
Forces there (especially English) the number of the Inuadors being certainly
known to be above 1600, besides the daily supplies of the evil affected
Irish, so as it could not but be dangerous, not only to that Province, but to
the whole Kingdom, to hazard a far greater charge after, by the sparing a
little now. Besides, the not taking time which is the mother of good success;
but celerity one of the strongest finewes of action, was not understood by
Clergy men and Lawyers; to one of which professions delay breeds profit, and
the other were contented, any mischief might be hazarded; so as their own
ends might be achieved, who well knew withal, that the saving of Charge
would make a strong excuse in England, for any error might happen thereby,
which providence proved always improuidence, and begot The Council conclude
the Deputy shall not go in person, of which he complains to the Queen.
much mischief in the Wars of Ireland: so it was concluded (the greatest
numbers of voices carrying the resolution) that the Deputy should not go
himself in this Expedition, nor send any extraordinary force, until the
sequel, should express the necessary increase of her Majesty's Charge;
wherewith the Deputy being much discontented, and finding himself limited to
their opinion, complains himself to the Queen, and some of her principal
Councillors; That his Authority (formerly allowed, both by Patent, and the
practice of his Predecessors in that place) was not a little abridged upon
some suggestions (as he conceived) of his euill-willers, who to work his
disgrace and coffeehouse, had informed many things amiss of him, which were
the motives of this unexpected or undeserved restriction. And in this
particular Service, he expresses his grief, that the Inuading Ilanders,
being, as Sir Richard Bingham in one Letter advertised, above two thousand, and
therefore craved speedy aid: And in a second, being doubtful of his
Prouincialls, request English to be sent unto him, he found it perilous, the
Governor and his small force should be hazarded in this Straight; besides, the
chief Charge of the Goueruement lying upon him as Deputy, who was to encounter
all eminent accidents of danger; for the prevention of which, he had at this
time a purpose to go himself in person, knowing that his presence, besides
the power he should bring with him, would have given countenance to the work,
strengthened the good Subject, settled the fickle, and secured not only that
Province, but others there abouts; yet he was restrained by most of the
Council, as by their opinions under their hands did appear, and must abide
at home whatsoever should happen, whence (as he conceived) must needs grow
contempt of his Government in the English, and disobedience in the Irish. He
therefore declares plainly, that notwithstanding The Deputies resolution
against his restraint.
this Tie upon him by direction, if he found any manifest danger to the State,
which he greatly feared, he would rather undertake a journey without the
Councels allowance (though to his own peril and prejudice) then hazard both
that Province, and consequently the peace of that Kingdom, by sitting still,
when there was most need of his stirring.

By this time the Ilanders being joined with the Bourkes and others, who
flocked fast unto them, resolved to enter into Connaught* their Force now
amounting to almost 3000.

Sir Richard Bingham at the first, either to settle things in the safest manner
he could, or to gather more force, being in expectation to receive speedy
supplement from the State, went not with all his strength against them, perhaps
knowing himself unable to encounter so many, and being not thoroughly assured
of such as should come to serve him of the Irish Forces The Governor
dispatcheth the Earl of Clanrikard, and then goes in person himself against
the Scots.
raised there, dispatched the Earl of Clanrikard, (in whom he reposed good
confidence) and in respect of his faith and worthiness had good reason, with
some few Horse, and three Companies of Foot, joined with his brother George
Bingham, then Shireffe of the County of Sligo, who had lately leauied some Shot
and Horsemen, before the coming of the Earl.

They being thus united, were directed to stand upon their Guard, and to coast
the Enemy as he should march.

Sir Richard himself speedily hastes after, and comes to Sligo, and in his
way at the Abbey of Aboylehe, found Sir Thomas Lestrange with the Rising out of
the Country, whom he left to defend those parts. At Sligo he was informed, that
the Ilanders lay still at the River of Earne, some on one side, and some on the
other, that Sir Art Oneale, and Sir Hugh Macguire, had sent them aid, so that
their number was much increased.

The coming of the Governor to Sligo, and the pacification of the County of
Mayo being bruted, made their aboade the longer about the River of Earne and
Bundroys, to expect more aid from their Confederates, and to procure that some
new stir might be raised within the Country, whereby the Governor might be
enforced to divide his forces.

The Governor on the other side lay at Sligo, and the Curlews about fourteen
days, expecting supply from the Deputy. In the mean time the Enemy draws on
by little and little through Orurkes Country toward the Curlews, with
intention to pass that way into Mayo. And one night proving dark and
tempestuous, The Scot^ passed by Sir Richards forces.
they passed on that way near Sir Richards Forces, who upon notice they were a
foot, drew out to see their countenance, and came so near, as himself being
Armed under his Cassock, was shot with many Arrows, that hurt him not. They
passed on, seeming yet unwilling to give him Fight, (which in respect of his
small force, gave him the advantage of discerning their fearfulness) and
escaped by a Foard unknown.

Sir Richard with his Company marched into the Barony of Magherie Leauy,
chiefly to preserve the prey of that Country; from thence he marched through
the Plains, a way contrary to the passage of the Enemy, which this advised
Captain did on purpose to breed Supply is sent from the Deputy to the
Governor.
their security. At length there came some Companies of Foot, and fifty Horse
sent from the Deputy to supply him, before their arrival, and upon opinion
that Sir Richard was retired; The enemy being encamped at Ardnarey, proclaimed
that the Country was theirs, and that the Governor was returned in fear to
Roscomon, and that all his forces had forsaken A good Stratagem of the
Governors.
him, which Sir Richard caused to be reported to them as a truth; and suddenly
so soon as he knew their abode, and that they were grown secure, marches
with speed and encamped within twelve miles of them, whence he rose before
break of day, and came within two miles of their Camp, before nine of the
Clock in the Morning, with his Horse, where he made a stand a while, for the
coming up of the Foot; then passed on with such silence and celerity, as he
approached their Camp within half a mile before they knew any thing of his
coming; assuring themselves by rumors, that he durst not attempt them: so
that his Scouts, which he had sent before to discover how they were lodged,
fell in upon them unexpected, and gave them a fearful Alarume; who being thus
surprised, standing without any guard, did nevertheless, strive to make head,
but Sir Richard charging, and recharging them with his Horse, kept them in
disorder, which they assayed to amend, by drawing toward the Bogg, where they
might avoid the force of the Horse, but Sir Richard knowing before that he
should drive them to that shift, had sent his brother Captain John Bingham
with the Foot to approach them that way; who meeting them, they were charged
both in Front and The Scots defeated.
Flank, which quickly disordered them wholly, and so broken, were soon dismayed,
and put to rout; neither did he leave them any place of safety to fly unto,
but forced them to take the River where such as were not slain by the sword
were drowned, none escaping of above 3000, excepting some fourscore, part of
who^ were slain by George Bingham, and the rest by their friends the Burkes,
that had drawn them thither, who thought that the best means to insinuate
with the State, by such being the reward which the partaker of Treason may
expect from the Traitor, yet a few, some 6 or 7 escaped by the wily conduct of
Shane Mac an Earl, a Bastard of the Earl of Kildares.

Before this discomfiture was given, the Deputy fearing the Governors
strength, was not great enough to encounter the Enemy, in respect of their
number, (which indeed had not been, if he had been an ordinary Commander,
and not so judicious and experienced a Captain, as few of his time was like
him) raised more power, and marching toward Connaught, notwithstanding the
Councels opposition, but by the way, being come as far as Mullingar, he heard
of their defeat by Sir Richard Bingham, when The Deputy discontented, that he
came not time enough to overthrow the Scots himself.
it was a question whether he were more glad that the Service to her Majesty
was performed, or sorry that himself in person was prevented of the honor
thereof; which doubtless besides the greatness of his spirit, for other causes
he much desired, as well to manifest the Councels error in dissuading his
journey, as to satisfy his friends in England of the necessity thereof; so as
he could not choose but emulate the Governors good success; who on the other
side made the more speed in his business, not only to gain the honor, but
to show the State, the benefit of his long experience.

By this victory, whereby the bed of Rebellion was in that Province, at that
time broken. The Deputy had less cause to make any long aboade there, where
he remained but ten days, taking order for such affairs, as the present
State of the Country, and particular men's causes and controversies did require:
wherein he made the more speed for the ease of the Queens Charge, upon which
providence, most unwisely, his ignorant Adversaries through malice, insisted,
for much more time might otherwise to good purpose have been spent, in rooting
out the original cause of this Invasion, and securing the after time of any
the like Confederacy. But all things being now whist, and no commotion at that
time appearing, the Deputy retired to Dublin, to answer his Adversaries
devises against him, The third Information against the Deputy.
there being now matter given them to work on, by his uncontrollable departure
thence.

There the Deputy bent his course to satisfy all the Subjects in their just
complaints, amongst which some private Injuries were alleged to be done in the
County of Cauan, by the Collectours of the Queens Rents. The Examination and
Writing whereof, was by Commission referred to Sir Henry Duke, and others.

Complaints in the County of Cauan redressed.
The Tenants of the several Baronies within the said County, exhibited their
several complaints against Patrick White and William Brataugh, Collectours;
most of the offenses alleged were triuiall, as the taking of distresses, being
of greater value then their Rents amounted to, with the laying more Cess, for
Horsemen and Boys, upon the Country, (which did accompany the Collectors and
their Serieants) then was meet for that Service.

These things being examined, and the proofs returned by the Commissioners,
the Deputy, though he saw them to be but of small moment: yet he gave order for
the Complainers satisfaction, with express Charge for the no more committing
of such oppression, which ministered good contentment unto the Country.

Shortly after, upon like complaint the like Commission was directed unto
certain Justices Complaint against Francis Louell, Sheriff in the County of
Kilkenny.
of the Peace, in the County of Kilkenny, upon allegation made by the Earl of
Ormonds Officers against Francis Louell, Sheriff of that County, that he
should execute and put to death by Marshall law diverse persons, out of malice
and evil will, for his own private gain, who were out of the compass of
Marshall law, having both Lands and Goods, whereunto the Queen might have bin
entitled upon due offense, if proceeding against them had been at the common
law, whose goods he had gotten into his own possession, to the defrauding of
her Majesty: Withal that he had omitted the apprehension of diverse
Malefactors, such as were notorious disturbers of the Country and common peace.

To which Commission the Deputy added instruction to the Justices, who were to
examine the particular complaints, and all parties thereupon, and to return
the proofs produced (with their proceedings therein, by a certain prefixed
time, under their hands closely sealed, that they should carry themselves
justly and sincerely, with especial care to avoid exception. This was
accordingly performed, the Sheriff being present, and the Earls Officers
appointed their time to bring their witnesses:

At which time the persons names, their offenses, abilities, and qualities
examined, who had been executed by Marshall law: the Jury found that the
parties so put to death, were justly proceeded against, and not maliciously, as
was informed, they being Vagabonds, having no Goods or Lands: Save only one
Patrick Beg Baron, who at his Execution, was possessed of some small things
rated at a very little value, whereof part was restored unto the true owners
from whom they were stolen, and the rest being but of the value of twenty
shillings, were divided between the Sheriff and his Officers.

They found likewise that the Sheriff had not omitted to do his endeavor, for
the apprehension of any notorious malefactor, or received any reward; but
proof was offered of a gift given to the Sheriffs wife, to persuade her
husband not to prosecute a Carpinter, who was charged to lodge one Peiree
Grace, a man then out in action of Rebellion. The book of Articles exhibited
against the Sheriff, with his several answers, was showed unto Hen. Sheath, the
Earl of Ormonds Steward, and he willed to consider thereof, that he might
inform the Jury, and provide his proofs; but he refused, alleging he had not
sufficient time so to do: whereupon the Jury returned their verdit, and the
Commissioners sent the same, with their Francis Louell cleared.
proceedings unto the Deputy, who upon perusal thereof, finding no cause to
condemn, but to clear the Sheriff, signified so much unto the Earl of
Ormond; and withal, that he was glad to see an English Gentleman, as Louell
was, serving in that Country, especially in that Office, charged with so great
abuses, to acquit himself so well.

This with some other such passages, (which did cross the Earls Officers,
using absolute, and in a manner, unlimited Authority in their Masters
Dominions, especially in the next The Deputy and the Earl of Ormond at odds.
County adjoining, which was his Palatine) bred some dislike between the Earl
and the Deputy, which in time grew to a heart-burning, though in former time
they had been ancient and inward friends, but now the profit and command of
the one being questioned by the Authority of the other, converted friendship
into enmity.

Though at this time there were a general tranquillity through the Kingdom of
Ireland, yet it could not be but some corrosiues must remain harbored in the
minds of men, either misliking good government, which tended to the diminution
of their own powers, or envying the Authority of others over them, or carried
away with personal quarrels, or particular respects, which would easily enduce
an attempting spirit to break the bond of peace and loyal duty.

Walter Reughs entering into Rebellion.
Of such at this time one Walter Reugh Fitz Morice, a Geraldine, but not of the
right line, (degenerating from the race he pretended to be descended of) entered
into actual Rebellion. This man upon some great discontent, and an evil
disposition in himself, with as bad an affection to the State, associated to
him: company of lewd and filching people, then committing stealthes in the
Country. With these he betook himself to the Woods and Bogs, being the
fastnesses of the Countries, Kilkenny, Waxford, and some parts of Leix. His
party in short time increased by the resort unto him of some of the Oburnes and
Tools, with whom one night by force he entered the house of John Asman*
dwelling in the Moroughs Country whom they murdered, and preyed of all the
Cattle, Sheep, and Goods he had about his house, which murder and spoil was
suspected to proceed from the Conspiracy of some descended of the English,
who upon private grudge and malice had drawn the Rebels to fall upon him; upon
examination whereof some were apprehended as culpable. Walter Reugh himself
was so straightly pursued (by the Deputies special direction) as from thence
he was enforced to fly to the Mountains, where he endured great misery; yet
in the end upon his humble and earnest suit, putting in Walter Reugh pardoned.
pledges for his future loyalty, he obtained pardon.

The division of Desmonds Lands into Signories.
About this time Commissioners were sent out of England, to divide Desmonds
Lands, which after an exact suruay made of all the Lands, were divided into
Signories and half Signories, and disposed to diverse personages of good
quality of the Kingdom of England: but in this the Deputy had no hand, which,
as he had cause, he took to be a discountenance to his Authority, and Place,
wherein he felt the Queens displeasure.

A Regiment of Irish sent with Sir William Stanley into the Low Countries.
Not long before, a thousand of the Irish were sent into the Low Countries,
under the command of Sir William Stanley, by an especial direction out of
England, and at the same time, order came to the Deputy for the cashiring Order
for the casting of the Forces in Vlster.
of the Vlster Forces, which the Deputy had raised by Composition, as is
formerly mentioned: Two acts, as pernicious, as that time could afford, to the
public Service, as the sequel made manifest; for the first not only proved
the loss of a worthy Gentleman, who had valiantly and successively served in
that Kingdom. He meeting in the Low Countries with sharper conceits then his
own, and finding him ignorantly wavering between two Religions, fastened him
to the worse, and consequently made him to the State, a Traitor; against whom
he has since done great mischief, proving one of the best Captains under the
Spaniards Command. Besides, those Irish that went with him, have been a
Seminary of Traitors to afflict that Kingdom, of whom some yet live to
threaten no less hereafter.

And the other, those Forces in Vlster so cast, was not only the pulling of
the bridle from the heads of those inconstant people, which no sooner off, but
they ran headlong again into new practices, but likewise proned a trebble
charge to her Majesty in ensuing time, as more particularly shall be expressed
in the story following, yet the chief reason alleged, for their disbanding
was the ease of the Queens charge, who was informed, that it was a needless
thing to keep Garrisons in time of peace; and this burden laid upon the
Country, would in time break the peoples obedience in those parts, where they
began already to grudge.

Thus much the Queen signified in a Letter, partly written with her own hand,
unto which she was wrought by such as were adverse to the Deputy, and desirous
to weaken his work in that Kingdom, whose enuies were set the more on fire by
the wily tricks of Tyrone, who took this opportunity to lay the foundation of
his ensuing rebellion, finding their hearts bent to use all means that might
extenuate the Deputies merit, and weaken his Government.

This Letter of the Queens, as it raised wonder in the Deputy, knowing it
tasted not off her high Judgment; so it gave grief to him to see such
preposterous Councels take effect against his faithful endeavors, which The
Deputies Letters by Sir William Stanly to the Queen and Council.
he took occasion to express by his Letter, upon the dispatch of Sir William
Stanley, wherein he signified he had performed her Majesty's pleasure, but
could not suppress his grief, nor in duty conceal that, which he conceived
would prove perilous to her Service, and disgraceful to himself in that
place of Authority, he held under her Majesty, especially for removing the
Garrison of the North so soon in a State so unsettled. And although the
submission of the Chiefes, with the general obedience of the people, did seem
to promise nothing but peace, yet considering the attempts of her Majesty's
foreign Forces, and the fickleness of that people (newly brought to a show
of conformity) he could not assure their loyalties, much less establish such
things as he had begun, and further intended for the good, and advancement of
her Majesty's service, and that these Soldiers being thus cashiered (who were
a tie upon such as had minds to be troublesome) which were 900, her Majesty
being at charge but of little more then 800 pound a year, the rest being bome
by the Country. So that now her charge being reduced to the rate it was at his
coming to the Government, before the raising of Forces, to resist them that
did rebel, and invade Vlster, he wished that this saving did not The Deputy
writes to be recalled from the government, or admitted to the Queens
presence.
prove an after spending of greater sums, with more peril to Her and her
Country.

He likewise wrote after his plain and passionate manner to the Queen, that
her sharp reprehension, and restraint of his government, with some tax laid
on his judgment, made him now stand to the world, vasit (as he always
conceived of himself) to manage the weighty affairs of such a place, and
therefore he besought her that she would be pleased to revoke him thence, or
at the leaft to lycenoe his access unto her presence, as well for answering
the calumniations of his Adversaries, as to discover some things for the
furtherance of her service in that Kingdom; proffering (If The Deputies offer
to bring over the Irish Lords.
her Majesty were so pleased) to bring with him the Lords, and chief Irish
Commanders of that Country: so that she would be pleased to disburse 3000
pound, ready for them to receive at their landing in England, to defray their
charges (they being owners of much Land and Cattle, but not of money) which
should he repayed at reasonable prices in Beefes, for her Majesty's profit in
the payment of her Forces there. This he thought would make much for the
furtherance of her Majesty's service, since the chief men of that Kingdom
coming over in that sort, should take their Lands by such tenure, as her
Highness should prescribe, whereof diverse of them had already made offer unto
him. Besides, it would be a greater honor unto her, to have more of the
greatest and wildest Chiefetaines of Countries in Ireland, to prostrate
themselves and their estate, at her Majesty's feet and pleasure in England,
then ever had been performed to any of her Noble predecessors.

The Deputies offer silenced.
But this complaint and offer so made unto the Queen, was silenced, and took
little effect, either through the vnderhand-working of the Deputies
Adversaries, or else through the press and multitude of weighty affairs then
in hand in England, to defend the Netherlands, and to prevent Invasion, with
other perils threatened to her Majesty and her Dominions, which might perhaps
put out of mind, or at least, set back for the time, the consideration of
that, which at this season did most concern Ireland.

Within short time after, the Companies of Soldiers were removed out of
Vlster, save such as remained with Tirlogh Leynaugh at his request.

A stir in the North upon the casting of the Forces.
wont to rule their disorders. Amongst which, dislike and complaints were moved
by Macquire against Mac Mahone, and the Earl of Tyrone for trespasses, and
supposed wrongs to be offered. Sir Oconnor Macquire being behindehand for his
Composition, and charged with doing some things amiss, was sent to, by the
Deputy, and required to perform what was meet for him to do; or else to
repair unto his prefence, to answer these contempts; which message was sent
unto him by Sir Henry Duke, who appoints him a place of meeting; Macquire
writes unto the Lord Deputy, and excuses his coming to Sir Henry, according
to his appointment, being hindered by sickness, and the infirmity of the
Gowte, complayneth on the Earl of Tyrone, and Mac Mahone, desiring him not to
believe complaints against him, and offers to double the pledges, he had put
in, if any doubt were had of his good disposition to the State.

Mac Mahone likewise exhibites his agreeuance against Tyrone, for Ceasing in
his Country, and compelling him to maintain Horsemen for him, as if he had
been tributary to the Earl, which cause the Lord Deputy heard and determined,
freeing Mac Mahone from any such duty as the Earl demanded.

The rest being but complaints (of which the Kingdom is never free) and no
practices to draw dangerous consequence to the State (yet discovered) were
only appeased by admonition.

Contention between Orurk and Sir Richard Bingham.
Besides these, Sir Bryan Orurke, the Lord of Letrim, and Sir Richard Bingham,
the Governor of Connaught, grew into dislike one with the other, the one
being strickt in his Government; the other not willing to be severely
commanded, Sir Bryan wrote unto the Deputy, that he had wrongs and
indignities done him, being often summoned by Sir Richard, to go before George
Bingham his brother, and Captain Thomas woodhouse, to answer as well
complaints, as to take directions, which he held to be a disparagement to him,
and to avoid that inconueniencie, was forced to forsake his Island, the place
of his dwelling, and to wander upon the hills, which he would not do, but for
the care of performing his promise, to be obedient unto his Prince, otherwise
he said, he would deal well enough with those men, and meet Sir Richard and
his brethren with the same measure they measured him* therefore in as much as
he meant to do nothing against her Majesty, he desires they might be kept
from him, for he would not go to them, but in the Deputies presence, whose
Commandments he would in all things else perform, and craves of him that
peace might be kept with him in the Province of Connaught, as he does with
them, to which the Deputy returned answer, requiring him to yield conformity
in all things reasonable to the Queens Officers, and if any wrongs were
offered him, not to right himself by resistance or revenge, but to make The
Deputy admonishes both.
it known, and he should receive redress. He likewise wrote unto the
Governor, aduising him to use a gentle hand in the dealing with Orurke, and
people of his quality, men of such fierce dispositions and natures, being with
roughness handled, would easily be excited to the breach of obedience, which
might prove a charge to the State, and a disquiet to the Country. This
admonition Sir Richard took somewhat unkindly, as a mistike of his
Government, and resteaint of his proceedings against Orurke. and did not stick
to tell the Deputy afterward at the Council Table, that his Lordship gave
countenance to Orurke, unto the diminution of his Authority in that Province.
So difficult it was for the Deputy to appease or reconcile a difference
between so stout a Commander, and so factious and rebellious a spirit being
powerful. The Governor being persuaded out of his judgment, that it was now
time to prosecute Orurke while the Bourkes were yet weary of their late
struggling, so as standing without partakers, he would the more surely fall, or
at least be brought with more facility to the path of obedience, being the
only man now to be doubted in that Province, having in his possession the
strongest and fastest Country there. And it is not unlikely but the Deputy
would have joined with him therein, if he had not had private reasons to the
contrary, arising from the present question of his actions in England, and his
desire and suit to be revoked thence, which were things only known to
himself.

These distempers now yet but flashes, which were kindled by discontent, were
quenched by care and providence, and had they not been well met within time,
would have grown to greater flames of commotion, and did afterward arise
again, for want of like circumspection in the succeeding Government, which
argued both the wisdom of the Governor, who would have taken the time to
take away the cause, and the prevailing power in the Deputy, even in the worst
Subjects hearts, to make them conformable against their natures.

While the Deputy was busy, to prevent perils which might grow by heart
burnings within his Government: Some of his Adversaries were as deeply
travailed to procure A rumor of the Deputies remove.
his disquiet and disgrace. Amongst other inventions, Reports were raised, that
he should presently be revoked, and another sent in his place, being a thing
not as yet thought on in England, whereof so soon as he had notice, though he
esteemed them but as rumors, yet lice took occasion to renew his suite unto
the Queen for his removing: And besought her, if such were her pleasure, which
he humbly desired, and showed reasons for such his desire, that yet her
Highness would suppress the opinion, and publishing thereof, until his
successor should be ready to come over, because he knew by experience, that
the wavering and worst sort of people in that Kingdom, were apt to take
advantage (upon the alteration of the chief Governor, especially in the
Interim of his Government, if they had notice before hand) to stir up
troubles in the State.

The Gentlemen of the English Pale stir up the Lords to write to the Queen
for the stay of Sir John Perrot in that government.
The Gentlemen of the English Pale in love with his Justice and upright
Government, were much troubled at this news, of whom diverse of the better
sort of Plunbetts, Flemmings, Barnewells, Bellews, Cusacks, Delahides, Taafs,
Nangles, and others of good account, to the number of 67, wrote a joint Letter
to the Noble men their neighbors, of the notice they had taken, of the
removing the present Lord Deputy from that Government, whom they therein
testified to have governed with Justice, care, and providence, for the good of
that Kingdom, whereby they had enjoyed much peace and prosperity: for the
truth whereof they appealed unto them, whom they besought as they tendered the
welfare of their Country, to be a means unto the Queens Majesty for the
retayning and continuing him in that Government, to perfect what he had
begun, and was likely to bring unto a good end, if he remained amongst them.

The Lords of the English Pale upon receite of this Letter, though many of them
(as is said) had been wrought to write against the Deputy, yet now
acknowledging the same the Gentry did, wrote a particular Letter, which they
sent unto the Queen, desiring the continuance of the present Deputy amongst
them, giving him all the specious attributes, could be yielded an extraordinary
Patron of that poor Country, some of them (as is already mentioned) recanting
their error of accusing him of heavy and tirannous courses, now called him the
Father of that poor Kingdom, setting forth his fatherlike care for the
universal tranquillity, and the administration of particular Justice.

These Letters though they needed not, for as yet there was no intention of his
calling thence; yet they gave a sharp blow to his Adversaries, whose
informations must needs be suspected to proceed only out of malice, since
the parties that most felt the good and evil of Government, gave this
testimony of him, which they did in respect of the fear they had of his remove
(being so bruted, as well in approbation of his actions, as to prevent the
mischiefs which might happen by his going thence, the smart whereof they were
like to feel. The Copy of this Letter is yet extant.

The Cauanagh show the cause of the Rebellion.
About this time Donnogh Mac Murtogh Cauanagh, and Murtogh Oge Mac Morough
Cauanagh, lately revolted from their obedience, made humble submission to the
Deputy, showing the cause of their revolt, as the killing of their Father by
Sir Dudieigh Bagnall, and Heron whom they slew. His not permitting them to
live on the Lands given by Sir Peter Carew unto their Father, pursuing and
forcing them to fly unto the Woods, in which pursuit he was shine. They crave
pardon and offer Service, showing who they were that procured Mr. Bagnall and
Heron to kill their Father, and to banish them (...) Mac (...) Art Cormagh Mac
Anispeck, Conologh Mac Gilpatrick, with other their Followers and Companions.

While the Deputies care concurring with the peoples good liking, did prevent
many mischiefs like to ensue. The practice of such as he had displeased, by
crossing their courses and undue proceedings, did not cease to work his
trouble and disquiet. Amongst whom the Earl of Ormond was now become one that
labored The Earl of Ormond enformes against the Deputy.
by secret information, to incense the Queen against him, which procured from
her and in her name sharp reprehensions, which did much disquiet him, and
provoked his choleric and passionate nature to offend and exceed himself,
for being vexed with indignities and conceived injuries, he could not forbear
to speak, and sometimes to write as tarely, as he found himself dealt withal.

The Deputy writes again to the Queen for his remove.
And now thinking himself wounded in his reputation, he wrote to the Queen
her self, showing again how he was disabled to do her Service, and
dishonored by her belief of his unjust Adversaries, their practices and
suggestions: He prays license to repair unto her Presence for aunswering of
his Accuser, and that he might be removed from that unfortunate Government.

He likewise wrote unto the Earl of Leycester, who (much favored him)
protesting in plain manner, that rather then he would live there to be so
vexed in mind, crossed in his best intended courses, and brought into the
Queens displeasure, he wonld take on him George the Chimney sweepers place at
Court (those being his words) and therefore urges his help for his remoouall,
or leave to come unto the Queen: but that Earl then engaged in the Action of
the Lowe-Countries, wherein all his power was set a work, could not yield
him that help, his love would otherwise have afforded.

Contention between the Earl of Tyrone and diverse Vlster Lords, preying one
upon another.
Diverse dislikes, and some disturbance of the public, began betwixt Tirlogh
Leynaugh Oneale, and the Earl of Tyrone, for whereas formerly there had been
a division of the Lands in Vlster, challenged to belong to Oneale, divided
betwixt them both, and of later time Tirlogh Leynaugh had been drawn by
composition to take a thousand Marks Rent by the year of the Earl, to be
paid at four Feasts, for certain Lands during some years. Now Tirlogh
Leynaugh complains, that the Earl did not only refuse the payment of this
Rent, but had committed outrages on himself and his people, having taken
diverse preyes out of his Country, terrified his Tenants, and had enticed diverse
of them from him and his Lands: whereof he writes particularly by sundry
Letters unto the Deputy, showing his unwillingness to break the Queens
peace; desires order may be taken for the return of his Tenants', and their
goods, with satisfaction for his men slain, and such Rent as the Earl was
endebted to him.

These complaints being by the Deputy sent to Tyrone, he makes answer, that
first for Tirloghs Tenants, that since Tirlogh was not able to restrain his
people from annoying his Tenants, he was not to refuse any that would come
from Tirlogh to live under him: denies any killing or preying upon Tirlogh;
his men or Country by him or his men for the arreare of Rent due or claymed to
be due, he partly denies, and partly euades the payment.

In the mean time while these complaints were exhibited, and answers
expected: more outrages begun between them and their followers, and new
violences were offered before the old could be redressed, for Tirlogh being
grown old, and forsaken by many of his followers, either for want of
protection from Tirlogh, or fear of the Earls increasing greatness, Tyrone
gives another blow to Tirlogh, by taking a prey of 2000 Cowes, with many Mares
and Garons, from Sir Art Oneale Tirloghs son, whereof the Deputy being
advertised, sent to Tyrone what was informed; and to require him, both to
forbear further acts of hostility, and to restore what had been so taken from
Tirloghs son or his Tennants, to which the Earl makes answer by accusing
Sir Art Oneale, to have taken a prey from his people, at his last being at
Dublin, and instead of restitution which he demanded, sent the Earl defiance,
when he required peace to be observed. Sir Arthur Oneale affirmed on the other
side, that the Earls brother Cormagh took a prey first from some of his men,
who in recovering of their loss, took the like from his, for which Tyrone
spoiled him and his followers, of a far greater value as he complained.

The Deputy looking upon the danger of these brawles, contentions, and spoils,
sends two Messengers called Bynion and Bremicham, with Letters and straight
commandments unto Tirlogh and his son, and to the Earl of Tyrone, charging
them upon their loyalties unto their Sovereign, to forbear all attempts of
violence and revenge one toward another, and to the Earl he signified, that
if it were true that he had received some injuries at the hands of Sir Arthur
Oneale, yet it could not be lawful, that he should be a revenger of his own
wrongs, and if he had sustained any such damage as he pretended, he had being
his own caruer, ouer-recompenced himself for the prejudice done unto him.
Therefore he again requires him to make restitution of such goods as did
exceed the value of what had been so taken from his followers, and that he
would thence-forth take warrant from the State for his doings; so should it be
safer for him and his, and for the better ordering of this difference, he
would shortly send Commissioners which should render unto each one his own.
This for a time did qualify their contentions.

But shortly after, Tyrone (finding that Peace would be no way to that which he
aspired unto) upon further pretense of injury done to him by Tirlogh, and his
followers, makes an in-roade into his Country, and entered with force as far
as Strabane, Tirloghs Town and Tyrone beaten by the English Companies at
Strabane.
place of aboade, where Captain Mostian and Parker, with their Companies,
remained for Tirloghs defense: they with such power as Tirlogh could make,
charged Tyrone and his troops, and forced him to fly.

Odonnell denies to entertain a Sheriff.
Odonnell set on by Tyrone (as Tirlogh affirmed) began to quarrel, and offer
violence to Tirlogh, and to manifest his Traiterous disposition to the State,
denied to entertain the Sheriff sent into Tirconnell, lately made a County,
seconding it with other signs of disloyalty.

The Deputy and Council certify their suspicion of Tyrone, desire order out
of England.
The Deputy and Council, seeing what mischief now begun to grow by the
casting the Northern Garrison, giving way to Tyrones aspiring, certifies into
England his practices, as well in stirring up private quarrels, the
forerunners of Rebellion, as his sending to Agnes Mac Connell, a principal
Chief of the Inuading Ilanders, certain of his men, conditioning with him to
receive such aid and supplies from him again, when he should need them, or
upon occasion require them, and his desire to be Oneale, clayming the chief
men of Vlster to be his Vriaghs, and to depend on him. His late sending his
son to be fostered by Ochane, between whom and him there had been great
enmity, which showed a present combination, to make way for his further
greatness. This fostering being the greatest bond of amity amongst the Irish.
Of this they crave consideration to be had; withal they desire that the
pledges of Mounster now lying in the Castle of Dublin, (for prevention of their
escape) might be removed into England, and conclude with request, that some
Treasure might be sent thither, for supply of the Soldiers wants.

These clouds and ouer-castings of the

Odonnell practices with the Ilanders.
Now Odonnell began to be doubted likewise upon constant Intelligence sent by
Tirlogh Leynaugh, that he had sent into the Islands for hired men, to assist him
in some action he was about to undertake; which raised a question in Council,
how he should be dealt withal; some of them being of opinion first to summon
him to answer his contempts, and then (if he came not) to raise Forces to
fetch him in, or punish him for his disobedience: but the Deputy (restrained
from iourneyes in his own person) knowing it would ask long and chargeable
work, to subdue him and his Confederates, dissented from that opinion, and
told the Council he would make trial of a A stratagem whereby Odonnells son
was taken.
stratagem he had conceived whereby to bring him in, or secure him from doing
harm, before he would put her Majesty to so great charge, or hazard her good
Subjects, which might breed anoyance to the Country, and interruption of the
present Peace; to which, way was given, and the Deputy accordingly attempted
it, by sending one Skipper, a Merchant of Dublin, with a Ship laden with
Sacks, as if he had come out of Spain, directing him to run up by Donagall,
as far as he could unto Odonnels Country, where he should not only offer to
sell at a cheap price, but be liberal in giving Wine to such as should come
aboard him: And that if Odonnell or his son came aboard him by that means,
(as he knew they would) he should give them so much as might make them forget
themselves, and being drunk, should clap them under hatch, and bring them away
to Dublin. This device was as carefully performed as proiected, young Odonnell
being by this means surprised and brought away: A Service at that time very
available to the State, for keeping that Country in quiet, and restraining so
stirring a person as Odonnell was, from the pursuit of his evil affections,
bent at that time against the Queen and her Service: Notwithstanding,
afterward in the ensuing trouble, it was imputed as an injury done to
Odonnell; and interpreted as an act that did rather interrupt, then preserve
the Peace of that Country; the State thinking that the blame which should be
laid upon Sir A simple device of the Council of Ireland.
John Perrots carriage herein would please Odonnell, and make him the more apt
to be drawn to conformity and obedience; but this shallow and colloguing
policy, did work little effect in him, whose heart was wholly (by foreign
practice) alienated from his loyalty, and by marriage of Tyrones Daughter,
altogether devoted to his faction and Service, being his assistant and partaker
in all his Rebellion.

The Deputy thus busied in the public, receives a new interruption by the
means of his Adversaries, who had caused a Letter to be written to the Queen,
in the name of Tirlogh A letter countersaited to be written by Tirlogh Leynaugh
to the Queen, but disauowed by himself.
Leynaugh, complaining of the Deputies hard usage of him, which being certified
to the Deputy, much troubled him (because one of his greatest Services, was the
conforming this man to be a faithful servant to the State) to find Tirlogh
Alyend from him; but Tirlogh had no sooner notice hereof, but he sent one
Solomon his Secretary into England to disauowe this Letter, protesting he
never caused any such to be written, neither had he cause, the Lord Deputy
always using him well, and doing him many favors; and therefore humbly
desired, that the Author of this forgerie might be punished: But the Deputies
respect in England being extenuated by continual information against him
thence, little was done to his satisfaction in this particular, and the less,
because the whole State was filled with the foreign preparation threatened
against England, and her Majesty's Dominions; which his Enemies finding, grew
more insolent in crossing and opposing his endeavors, which so wearied his
impatient Nature, as he made all the means he could, both by his own
continual suite, and by the pressing mediation of his friends in Court, to be
revoked thence; The Queen graunts the remove of the Deputy.
which by long importunity he at length obtained promise of from the Queen, who
sent him word she would shortly provide him a Successor.

In the mean time, to prevent farther trouble in Ireland, that he might leave
all things in as great security as possibly he could, he (as one of his last,
but not least Services) sends for all the Lords and Chiefes, which might in any
The Deputy takes pledges of all the suspected persons in Ireland.
part be suspected, to take part with the foreign Enemy, if any attempt
should be made in that Kingdom by them as was doubted, and of all these
demanded Pledges for their own faithfulness, and the quietness of their
people: and for the more easy enclining them to this demand, which seemed at
first harsh unto them, he made a solemn speech, wherein he declared, that it
was done as well for their own good, as for the Kingdoms quiet, for he knew
that the Queen would be well pleased with their willingness, to yield
testimony of their loyalty unto her, which could not but make them better
accepted, and trusted in the time to come; protesting that if the case
concerned him as it did them, he should choose rather at this time to be bound,
then to be left at liberty, within the danger of suspicion, being a deep
corrosiue to every well meaning man, as he assured himself they all were,
howsouer their former slips had made them apt to be doubted, aduising them to
use all good means for the conservation of Peace in each of their Dominions,
whereby their pledges might shortly have freedom, and they themselves gain a
better estimation for ever.

By this perswassion they did with less grudging and contradiction yield
pledges, which were bestowed in the Castle of Dublin, so as all the Heads of
all the Provinces in Ireland were tied by this means to quietness and
subjection, which at that time was most necessary, because the Deputy by diverse
good intelligences out of Spain, whereof he had given speedy and often
information into England, knew the Spanish preparations were great, and whether
intended for England or Ireland, or for both, was not certain, but Ireland
threatened by the common brute.

This done, the Deputy writes again to the Queen, humbly thanking her, that
at his suit, and for the recovery of his health, which now began to impair,
she had been pleased to promise his discharge from that Government, and
withal besought her speedily to send his Successor, using the same reasons he
had formerly done, when it was bruited he should be removed, before it was
intended, the loose people being indeed apt out of their evil affection, to
take advantage of the time, and to attempt that, which they durst not do in a
confirmed and well countenanced Government.

At length when this good Deputy had governed four years with much travail,
and good success; notwithstanding, the opposition mentioned in this discourse,
of private and particular Adversaries (the enuiers of his felicity) he
obtained his discharge. And Sir Sir William Fitz-Williams sent into Ireland.
William Fitz-Williams was sent to succeed him, who had formerly governed that
Kingdom, with liking and commendation, which though it bred some hope in the
people, that he would build well upon his Predecessors platform, yet it
could not keep the peoples eyes from tears for the loss of Sir John Perrott,
such impression had his upright and clean handed Government (unusual to that
unhappy Kingdom) taken in their hearts, as appeared at his departure.

The Deputy gives a Cup to the City of Dublin.
Before his delivery of the Sword, he gave a covered Cup of Silver guilt to the
Mayor and City of Dublin, with these words upon the top engraven, In Pace
relinquo, meaning that he left the City and Kingdom in peace.

At the delivery of the Sword in Christs-Church, he told the new Deputy Sir
William Fitz Williams in the public hearing of many, of whom some are yet
living.

Now my Lord, since that by her Majesty's direction, I have given up the
Government of this Kingdom into your hands, I must give your Lordship to
understand (and I thank God I may say so) that I leave it in perfect peace and
tranquillity, which I hope your Lordship will certify unto her Majesty, and
the Lords of her Council: to whom the Deputy made answer, that he confessed
it to be so, and wished he might leave it no worse. Then my Lord, replied Sir
John Perrot, I must add thus much: That if there be any man in this Kingdom
suspected to be evil minded to the State, who is able to draw but six
Swordmen after him into the field (if he have not already put in pledges for
his fidelity) so your Lordship shall think it necessary; I will undertake
(though now but a private man) to send for him, and if he come not within
twenty days, I will forfait the credit and reputation of my Government:
whereto the Deputy answered, that all was well, it needed not.

The love of the Irish State unto Sir John Perrot.
At Sir John Perrotts departure from Dublin, after he had left the Sword, many
of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of that Kingdom, came thither to see* and
take their leave of him, so that as he went from his Lodging to the Key to
take Boat. The press of People coming to salute him, (some with cries of
applause, and some with tears bemoaning his departure) was so great, that he
was well-neere two hours before he could pass the Street, and was enforced
twice or thrice to take house for his ease, to avoid the throng, amongst whom
Tirlogh Leynaugh was one, who coming along with him to his Boat, and standing
at the Key until he saw his Ship under sail, did then weep, and grievously
bewail his departure. Such power has the opinion of Justice and sincere
government, to make even them that are barbarous, to love the Ministers
thereof, though themselves know not the things, but by the effects.

At Sir John Perrots going to Sea, the Citizens of Dublin in testimony of their
love, sent with him some of their young men with Shot to guard him into
Pembroke Shire, who passed with him to his Castle called Carewe, whence he was
not long after called to the Court to be made a Privy Counselor, the step to
his fall and ruin.

Sir Nicholas Whites expression of Sir John Perrots Government.
Of his Government Sir Nicholas White, Master of the Rolls in Ireland, and a
learned man, wrote these few words.

Pacificauit Connaciam, Relaxauit Mediam,

Thus Englished.

He pacified Connaught, loosened the bonds of Meathe, subdued Vlster, brake the
bonds of combination in Leynster, and bound fast in obedience Mounster. He
extirped the Inuading Scots, bridled the bold Extortions of the English, and
to all these, added much to the Queens reuenew: for besides the compositions
in Vlster and Connaught mentioned in this discourse, he drew new increase, and
reseruations of Rents, Tenures, and Services from many Lords of Territories,
and Services from many Lords of Territories, and sundry other persons in the
several Provinces. The particulars are yet extant to be seen, though tedious
here to be set down: which he did upon Surrenders, and renewing of their
Estates, which bred a double benefit unto the Crown, the better assurance of
their Loyalties, and the advancement of reuenew.

These Services so well begun (if they had been perfected) had made that
Kingdom more peaceable, rich, civil, and subject to good Government: but
want of time which makes the best begun works to miss the period of their
perfection: And Envy which crosses the best Designs, left this man's
Government, though successful, yet without the full fruit with his longer
stay (well seconded) might have brought forth. But all humane affairs must
have their Periods, and the success of good or evil in them all, will be
ever in some sort answerable to the Actors intentions.

FINIS.

