THE KEY OF DAVID, That opens the Gates to the City of GOD: Also, Of Faith
and Repentance, and how they are wrought, and brought to pass: and whether
Faith be commanded in the Law, or not.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Thomas Haueland for Nathaniel Fosbrooke. 1610.

TO HIM THAT LABORETH, AND is heavy laden; thirsts, and would have rest;
Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, and from Christ our Savior, be
multiplied.
FInding of late (in a little Treatise) a great treasure, I thought most fit to
present it, to him that would best esteem of it. If then thou be a good
Lapidist, and can judge or discern of a perfect stone; heerin thou have that
Pearl of price, for which the Ieweller aduentureth, by sea, by land, by fire,
by water to attain.

A wise builder will be sure to lay a good foundation: a valiant Soldier will
not be unarmed in the day of battle: neither will a discreet Mariner
carelessely respect, how to avoid the perils of a dangerous gulf.

How much more (good Reader) behooves it thee, wisely to forecast how to turn
over the leaves of thy life, that thy passage be not stopped, in the way of thy
pilgrimage, and thou disappointed of the land of promise, which pertains to
such only as graciously and in due time do begin, and constantly continue
unto the end?

Be not then like to the builders of Babel, that bring mortar for stones, and
stones for clay: but as the wise virgins, did prouidently provide that their
Lamps might be ready against the coming of the Bridegroom: so thou
likewise, see that thy foundation be sure, and thy building raised up, not with
stubble and straw, which will rot and perish, but with lime and stone that is
firm and strong, which (though the rain do beat, and the winds blow,) yet
being strongly built upon the Rock, it shall stand fast for ever.

If thus thou intend wisely to erect a Tower, turn over the leaf, consider
this plot, wherein is the frame of a glorious building, not made with men's
hands, or such a one as perishes, but framed by God in a wonderful manner.
Herein thou shall see how the foundation is laid, and the Roof covered: what
manner of men they be for whom the holy City is prepared, and unto whom the
glory thereof is denied: how the way is made plain unto it: and by what
means we must enter thereinto. Let it not be lightly regarded of thee,
seeing it is now high time thy work were begun: Winter is at hand; the winds
do begin to blow: If thou want harbor, the stormy tempests will perish thee.
Thus leaving thee to thy labor, and praying for thy good speed, I rest,

Thine, least worthy, T. S.

THE KEY OF DAVID, that opens the Gates to the City of GOD.
THE general condition of mankind, being already brought unto such wretched
pass, and forlorn misery, partly by natural corruption, partly by leaud
conversation, that nothing is more evident and certain, then the fast coming
on, and drawing near of that appointed day, in which must be rendered unto
every one the deserved punishment of all their false opinions, and wicked
deeds: who would not in this case, judge it his part and duty, greatly to
esteem, and worthily to receive with attentive ears, that counsel and
instruction which teaches the way, how the determined vengeance of that
approaching doomes day may be escaped. To perform this, is an hard matter
indeed: yet a very worthy work: In the setting forth whereof, I suppose the
more extraordinary pains to be required, because nothing has been more
assayed, by some aduenturous divines of this age, yet nothing less brought to
a point and finished.

As for this my labor, such as it is, I bequeath it to posterity; for I
neither seek after nor reckon of, such common Patrons, as these days afford:
Because I have hated even with perfect detestation, the nice untowardness of
these dainty times, running after each palpable error of former ages, with
strong emulation; but denying to themselves, with envious folly, all benefit of
things present, be they never so good: And being daily and continually
advertised, by the plain and sensible proof of so many mischiefs, coming in
troops upon them, yet nevertheless (a just plague for fools) they still
remain sottish, and without understanding. Therefore I appeal unto the age
next following: not this now consisting of fleshly minded and worldly men, that
will be set to sale, and corrupted: but that succeeding after this, which
shall be filled with the spirit, and good conditions: This small treatise, do I
betake unto that age: whereof seeing that I have no fear, lest it should give
partial sentence, forestalled with favor, or impoisoned with malice, I am
come to this assured hope, to think that it will entertain this work, with
all readiness: And (if truth deceive me not) will preserve and keep it
safely from time to time. But before I come to the point it self, I think it
not amiss, briefly to repeat the flourish and preamble of B. Lecture;
wherein both the seat of the question now in hand, is contained. And whereof
betwixt him and me, there is full agreement without any controversy: Namely,
that the Apostle, whilst he informs the Romans of the way, and means to
attain salvation; he teaches them, that the same does wholly consist in
nothing else, but the Gospel only. And the Gospel is the free exhibiting, or
gracious vouchsafing of Gods favor, viz. The mercy and love of God for
Christ's sake, which the Apostle sometimes calls the Righteousness of God,
sometimes the power of GOD unto salvation. And he says that it is revealed,
manifested and communicated to men by the means of faith, as it is written:
Romans 1.17. Abac. 2.4.
The Just shall live by faith. And lest any man advancing himself in the
fleshly conceived worthiness of his own perfections, should boldly persuade
himself, that by some help or other, either of natural strength,
inclination, or else of learning, skill, and profound knowledge, or of
ceremonious worshipping, and customary devotions, he might procure this
Righteousness and salvation; this is the very first thing, which the Apostle
sets in the forefront of his disputation: handling the same (as you may
see) from the 18. ver. of the first chapter to the 28. ver. of the 3. where he
makes a distribution, or division of all mankind, into two sorts or companies:
The former whereof, comprehends all the Gentiles, the latter contains the
Jews only. And first of all, he pulls down the arrogancy of the Gentiles;
because howsoever that which may be known of GOD, be written in the
natuturall Tables of their hearts: yet they not regarding this divine and
natural illumination, did run headlong upon all wickedness, and hatred of
God, lust, covetousness, envy, spite, cruelty, strife, etc. And that they might
fully reach unto the highest outrage of rebellion, and filthy behavior: He
lays to their charge, that they are guilty of strange and execrable
uncleanness: having indeed most foulely committed such loathsome
abominations, against nature it self, as are not to be named.

After he has thus brought under the haughtiness of the Gentiles; he then
sets upon the Jews also: whom with two encounters, he utterly
overthrows: First, because they had wickedly falsified with their corrupt
interpretations, and had transgressed or broken that Law of God, which in
express words was delivered to them by the hand of Moses. Secondly, he
confounds them plainly, by alleging the testimony of the Prophet, who
being ordained a King and a Prophet, to them which were under the law, thus he
writes upon them, in a certain place of the Psalm. There is not a good one,
Psalm. 14.53.
surely not one: There is not that does good, not so much as one. Thus at the
last all works of mortal men, which they made (as it were,) their props and
stays to rest themselves upon, being quite cast away, he draws to an end
in this manner: Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith, Romans
3.28.
without the works of the Law, (viz.) without any works or deeds of our own:
whether they beframed according to the law of God, written in the fleshly
tables of our hearts, or directed after the will of GOD, engraven once in
stone, or fashioned by any other writing and rule of divine ordinances.

When as therefore B. did perceive, that all salvation and righteousness of
mankind, was placed wholly in the alone grace of Jesus Christ: (Viz.) in the
free favor of God, insomuch as he takes pity upon them, and loves them in
Christ Jesus: And that also God sets forth unto mankind one only way, one
only means, which indeed is faith, by which as by a certain ladder, they
must get up to the attainement of this grace. When he saw that these things
were so, the man was presently inflamed, with a passing earnest zeal, thoroughly
to inform his hearers, concerning this so divine and wonderful benefit, or
gift of faith: and for that end, took upon him to unfold this verse or sentence
of the Apostle (Viz.) We conclude, that a man is justified by faith, etc. In
explication whereof, he promises that he will observe two things: First, what
this so precious and excellent faith is, by which the righteousness of God is
said hold upon or apprehended: Secondly, touching the works of the law, and
amongst all other points thereof, that which is the chiefest of the rest,
whether faith is to be reckoned amongst those things, which are commanded in
the law. This large vnder-taker of so great a charge, will we pursue the very
same way that he is gone. And first we will consider what faith it self is,
what be the causes, and parts thereof, and after what manner it is wrought,
and bred in men: In the next place, we will discuss that point, whether it be
commanded in the law or not.

But if a definition of faith be required, says B. I suppose that worthy to
be preferred before all other, which the Apostle delivers, writing to the
Hebrews, when he says, that faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things which are not seen. In which assertion (to speak nothing
of the rest) I find fault with B. for two things.

First and chiefly, because this word faith, being of many significations,
and carrying diverse senses or meanings in holy scripture; he did not before all
other things distinguish that kind or nature of faith, which he would define
unto his hearers from all the rest, by which means surely, that faith whereof
our question is: (being set apart by it self, and freed from all
inconvenience of commixture, with other matters) would then be kept in our
open sight, plain, single, vnconfused, and always like it self. How much
better is the advertisement, Tertul. contra. Marcionem.
of one that gives much good advise? when it is so, says he: The difficulty
arises, as well from the ambiguitie, and doubtfulnesse of meaning, as from the
obscurity or hiddennes of matter: Then there must be first a distinction,
after that a definition; for as the same writer says very well: The faithful
interpretation, or true meaning of words and names of things, does afford a
safe and suit way rightly to understand, what be their due properties.

The second reproof, which I cast upon B. is, because he has affirmed, that
the Apostolic writer, does in this place, give a definition of faith: as if
belike the man were ignorant, that it is a far other matter, to make a
description of a thing, or to extol it, with some high commendations, then it
is to express the same by a definition: For every definition, is a short and
limited declaration of that thing, which thou would define, from the nearest
and most proper causes thereof: For if any shall say, that a man is most
excellent of creatures, that he is a brief or map of the whole universal
world, and that for the structure, or fashioning of him, the most mighty and
blessed GOD, did fould up (as it were) in one lump, a certain representation,
and notable resemblance of all things, whatsoever are either by our sight
discerned, or else be far above our view and past our knowing; he that
should thus speak, might elegantly indeed, and wisely describe a man:
nevertheless, all this yields us not the definition of a man, nor shows
properly what he is.

And after the selfsame manner, even here our Apostlelike writer; forasmuch,
as he was to deal with a nation, that ever was enemy to true godliness, which
at all times refused the righteousness appointed by GOD, even the faith of
Jesus Christ; he does so much the more advance, or set forth at large, the
dignity and worth of faith; telling them, that therein consists full and
wholly, both the promise and inheritance, and what benefit soever, a godly and
blessed life requires, together with all the substance of things eternal,
which by hope are to be expected: Neither could their fathers, says he, have
ever pleased God, by any other good parts or virtues of their own; but by this
faith only.

In which discourse, verily he makes a well garnished description of faith:
setting it out with honorable words, of great commendations, well beseeming the
excellency thereof; yet does he not define it: for if he had done that, then
thou must needs be a man, very ill advised, to go and seek another
definition thereof, as thou have done. But now at length, let us come to the
question of faith: which we have taken in hand, and before I do define the
nature thereof, what it is (lest I should fall into B. error) I will plainly
show the diverse significations of it. This word faith therefore, how it is
taken in humane learning, I will not busy my self at this time to declare: But
in holy scriptures, it has reference, sometimes unto God, sometimes unto men;
if to God, then it imports nothing else, but the steadfast and unchangeable
truth of his decree and promise; if unto men, then it signifies, either the
doctrine of the Gospel it self, or the faithful discharge of their office
that preach the same, or else some special gift, which the holy ghost
vouchsafes unto us: Now of those gifts of the holy ghost, there are but three
only, which are entitled, by the name of faith: For sometimes the knowledge
of that great mystery, which the holy ghost reuealeth, and the certain
understanding of the truth of GOD, is called faith, which may fitly be named,
either historical Faith, or the faith of knowledge.

Now for this Faith, although all the Saints have it in some measure, yet is it
not peculiar to them alone, for usually many wicked and filthy, do excel in
this: yea, even Satan himself, does go far beyond all others, in this kind
of Faith. For he believes that God is the creator of the world, that he is
Lord over all, and acknowledges himself under his dominion: And that God made
all things by his word; as it is written, Genesis 1.3. Psalm. 33.9.
He spoke the word, and they were made; he believes this word, to be that
which is both called the Son of God, and is so indeed: by whom and for whom all
things were made, begotten before all time, the immortal and wise God, always
blessed for ever and ever: Who after diverse manners appeared to the fathers, and
spoke by the Prophets: He believes that the same Word in fullness of time,
came down into the Virgin, by the power of the holy ghost, was made flesh, and
of her was born that anointed Savior, thence-forth called Jesus Christ: that
the same wrought great miracles, preached that hidden mystery of the will of
GOD, which being at that time almost buried in oblivion, was long before
foretold by the Prophets, and he likewise sealed, and confirmed it by his
Apostles.

He believes furthermore, that the same Word, or son of GOD Christ Jesus,
after all this, was nailed to the cross, dead and buried according to the
Scriptures, the third day rose to life again, and was taken up into heaven,
and sits there at the right hand of the Father, which has put all things
under bis feet: Because he alone is worthy. He is also most undoubtedly
persuaded, that the Lord Jesus Christ, did for supplying his own place, send
down from heau en the powerful efficacy of his holy spirit, to guide and
govern his Church: which past question is nothing else, but the company and
society of his holy ones, in all places, here and there scattered over the
whole world: And he believes, that this company of Gods own people, is
sanctified by the lauer of repentance, and the word of faith; to be an holy
nation for ever, to the Lord himself. He believes moreover, that the same
Lord Jesus, shall at the last day come in the clouds, with greatest power, and
shall then take up the Saints to receive reward of eternal life, and to enjoy
the promises of heaven.

But as for the ungodly and wicked, his coming shall be to condemn them,
unto everlasting fire: yet both sorts shall in that day receive their fleshly
bodies, with restoration whereof, they shall from the first death return
again. And with thus much faith, the very skirmigers of Satan: Bribers,
promoters, hypocrites, witches, heretics, reprobates, covetous persons,
whoremongers and filthy fellows, of which kind of believers, at this day the
whole world is full, betwixt whom and Infidels this is all the difference: the
one by not believing, like wretches as they are, do come unto perdition: the
other by believing in such woeful manner, as they do, bring themselves to most
damnable destruction: This kind of faith, if any one would define, he may well
express his mind, in saying that it is nothing else but a sure knowledge and
a settled assent of the mind, by which any man most undoubtedly believes such
things, to be revealed for the salvation of mankind. Secondly, that gift of
the holy ghost, by which any one causes great admiration, to be amongst the
people, at his great signs and wonders, is very often in holy writ called by
the name of faith: which not unfitly we may call miraculous faith: But this
faith, neither have all the sanctified, nor they only: For John wrought no
miracles, although on the contrary Judas did excel therein: And with this
faith, are sometimes notably endued, and made famous, those witches, deceivers,
and Iuglers, which Rome that head of abominations both calls Saints, and
worshippeth them also, with altar, prayers and Images, of whom our Savior has
foretold, saying; And they shall do great wonders, Math. 24.
and works of great power, so that they would deceive if it were possible the
very elect. And this kind of faith may one sitly define in this manner:
namely, that it is a certain undoubted confidence, whereby one believes, that
God will by him do this, or that miracle.

Thirdly, that the gift of the holy ghost, which any one receives to eternal
life, is called by the name of Faith, and that most often of all the rest:
which very same the scripture calls the Faith of God: The faith of the son of
God: The faith of Abraham: The faith of Jesus: The faith of Christ: and the
faith of Jesus Christ. The professors of divinity have significantly named it
Justifying Faith. Now for this kind of Faith, both all the Saints, and they
only have it; for this kind of faith, cannot befall any but such as are
sanctified.

This faith if we will, we may fitly define in this manner: Namely, that it
is a certain full and firm confidence, engraven by the power of the holy
Ghost, in the heart of such a one as is penitent, whereby he assuredly
believes, that all his sins are remitted, and that he is reconciled and
made one with God, in an everlasting love, through Christ Jesus. See, now B.
this is the Faith, which sanctifies him that has it, and of one miserable
makes him Blessed, as it is written: Psalm. 32.1.
Belssed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose God is the Lord
Jehovah.

Behold B. this is the Faith which Justifies the wicked, and by which the
Justified lives: as it is written: The just shall live by Faith. Abac. 2.4.
This is that faith which overcomes, which excels, and which the divine
writer to the Heb. sets forth with such ornament, and inuironeth on every
side, with such a multitude of praises: this is the faith whose worth and
fairness, so clearly shines throughout the scripture, that as it is to be
wondered, how ever it could be so grossly darkened, by the unskillfulness of
some wise divines of this our age, so much more marvelous is it, that the
ignorance of such a great benefit (especially in this clear light of all
things) should not hitherto, by Gods most righteous judgment, be severely
punished.

And this is that faith, concerning which is all the controversy this day,
betwixt me, and B. which also the Apostle commends to the Romans in these
words: Romans 3.28.
Therefore we conclude that a man is Justified by faith.

Whilst B. is inquiring, and searching for the original or beginning of this
faith: First of all he is reckoning up the causes thereof: but he does that
very untowardly: for he speaks of the Efficient cause, and of no more but
that one. He might have dealt more exactly in all men's judgments, if he had
put down all the rest of the causes. But at once to rid the silly man of that
trouble, (for as it seems he sticks fast hereat:) we say that the matter of
this faith, is a sure, full, and undoubted trust or confidence, and the form
is the favor or grace of God the Father, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The efficient cause is the finger of God, (Viz.) the holy Ghost, who alone
imprinteth this confidence of Grace, in the hearts of the elect.

The end subordinate is the salvation of the Saints: but the maine and cheifest
end is, the glory of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom with the
Father: and the holy spirit one God, blessed for ever, be all power, praise and
honor, throughout all times and ages, Amen.

Now then we understand what faith is, as also the causes, and essential
parts whereof it consists, (viz) Confidence or trust, and grace or favor:
Therefore let us thus pass over these things: yet so, as although we have
dispatched them aforehand; nevertheless, we will, that they remain still in
mind, for our help in those matters that follow after: that we may have an
eye as it were back again unto them, as occasion shall require.

One thing only is yet behind, yet the greatest of al, even that wherein the
sum of the whole controversy is placed: Namely, that we discuss this
point: How this so precious faith is wrought and ingrafted in men, and by what
degrees we must attain unto it. In the setting forth whereof, if our Divines
had walked so uprightly as they ought to have done, in so weighty a cause,
peradventure we might have had this powerful faith upon earth, the true
nature whereof, being now (as it were) utterly lost, we do retain nothing of
it, but the bare shadow only.

First let us see what B. holds concerning this point, and then we will
establish the truth it self. Whilst B. goes about to prove unto us the
petigree (as it were) of Faith, or whence, or how it comes: he teaches, that
the whole substance or nature thereof, arises and issues from three effects,
or works of the holy Ghost: the first of which (he says) is knowledge, the
second (as it were an increase of the former) he calls assent, and the third
(being the end and perfection of all the rest) is trust or confidence. Now in
as much as he says, these are three effects or works of the holy Ghost, that
does he well enough. But in this that he teaches them to be essential parts
of faith, therein he is much amiss. But let us discuss these things
severally and in order: This first work therefore of the holy Ghost, B. (with
more) does call it the gift of illumination, or the faith of knowledge: And he
teaches that the same is incident to unclean spirits and wicked men, into
whom the Faith of Abraham can no way come. For which cause, I do the more
exceedingly wonder at the man, that when as he perceived these differing
natures of Faith, and knew them to be as sundry specials of one, and the same
general, and so diverse gifts of one and the same spirit; yet for all that, he
makes one, an essential part of another: for indeed howsoever this faith of
knowledge, does necessarily go before the faith of Abraham: yet does it not
thereupon follow that it is an essential part thereof: for many things may be
of such necessity, that some work cannot be dispatched, unless they be had
before, yet were it a very improper speech to say, that they be of the essence,
or parts substantial, whereof such work is made and consists; it is most
necessary, that a man should be born before he can be an Arithmetitian; is
birth therefore a part of Arithmetic? It is necessary for him that will deal
justly, first of all to consider the case prudently; is prudence therefore a
part of Justice? But even like stuff to this, is that also which presently he
infers, in terms forsooth iumping trimly with Aristotle's Philosophy:
(Viz.) that the end of this good being once known, is to desire it, to follow
after it, and to apprehend or lay hold upon it, (viz.) that we may speak
according to sobriety: The end of this faith of knowledge, is to enjoy GOD and
his righteousness, even the grace of Jesus Christ; which to affirm, without
setting down any due and reasonable difference; is an impious falsehood: for
God vouchsafes not this faith of knowledge to Satan, and to reprobates to this
end, that he may bring them unto his Christ, (viz.) to righteousness of life:
But even as the bountifulness of God, does grant the benefit, that comes
from earth and heaven, together with the fruit of that benefit, which is,
growth and increase as well to the Tares, as to the Wheat, equally and
indifferently; yet not to this end, that the Tares should be made wheat: In
like manner God very often grants the benefit of the word, and the fruit of
that benefit, which is to believe the truth, even to those that perish: yet not
to this end, that he may sanctify them; but that insomuch as they would not
obey the known truth, which they plainly understood, he may take vengeance
upon them in greater rigor of his Justice and severity: for he that knows
and does not, shall be beaten with more stripes, and to whom more is committed,
of him more shall be required.

The second effect, or work of the holy Ghost, B. sometimes calls assent,
sometimes a certain putting forward of the will, or a kind of love and good
liking of this happiness which is offered. But what strange boldness is this
(o B.) that thou in things appertaining to God, should thus platonize, or
rather play and deceive the people of God? for the scripture speaks far
otherwise, and ealleth this 2. work of the holy ghost, which is the beginning
of our regeneration, by the name of Repentance, even the thing whereby we are
prepared, to receive the sanctification of faith: For not one (believe me)
either of the Prophets, or Apostles, has at any time called it assent, or a
forward inclination of the will, or a love of the cheifest good, being offered
unto us: neither do I think indeed, that any other durst ever so call it,
besides thy self. I let pass this, that thou so wantonly have devised, a
twofold love, one called the former, which forsooth is before faith, and
another termed the latter, which follows after faith, which all of us with
one consent do say is the effect of faith, and called Love or Charity; But
what shall we say that former love of thine is? B. confidently affirms, that
it is the very soul or life of faith, and the truest difference of it that can
be given.

Because (says he) none can trust in the promise of God, but such a one as
earnestly longs after God (viz.) by B. exposition loves God. Wherein he
shamefully fails, both in mistaking the word, and the matter it self: He is
deceived in the word, because he calls this earnest longing, or desire by
the name of love: he erreth in the matter, because he says it is a part of
faith: for although we grant, that this fervent desire, and wonderful seeking
after God, must needs go before faith: yet we avouch that it is no part of
faith, but of repentance, as hereafter shall be declared: And furthermore, to
call this desire, by the name of love, proves him to be a most erroneous
fellow. For to speak properly in things divine, there is great difference,
betwixt desire and love: for we desire such things as we have not, but
exceedingly feign would have: Again, we are said in matters divine, to love
those things which we have already, and which we seek to enjoy for ever:
which points though some others might miss, yet to thee so great a doctor,
this should not have bin unknown: Namely, that none can love God, unless he
be first sanctified by faith, and by that very means do indeed possess
God, whom he loves: for until thou art persuaded in thine own heart, that
all thy sins are remitted, and that thou art eternally beloved of God, thou
can not possibly love God again, as it is written; Therefore we love God,
because he loved us first. 1. Joh. 4.19.


Now it follows, that we speak of this third effect, or work of the holy
Ghost, which B. calls trust or confidence. Where that none may mistake him,
he understands the confidence of Grace, wherein J cannot but bewail the
woeful blindness of this Nicodemus, because he has placed and set the last
and highest stone of our regeneration, before ever he once laid the foundation
of repentance; especially seeing that it is most impossible, for any one, to
obtain this confidence of Grace, except he first repent himself of his
former life, seriously and from the bottom of his heart: for even as the faith
of knowledge, namely, to believe without all doubt that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of all them that do seek him in Christ Jesus, and contrarily, one
that takes vengeance on all those which turn away from him, for all their
sins and wicked deeds that ever they committed: even (as I say) this faith,
must of necessity go before true repentance toward God: So our repentance,
(viz.) that we converting from our own ways unto God, should return into the
right way, must needs go before the faith of Jesus Christ. Therefore this is
the difference, betwixt the Gospel of God, and the Gospel of B. The beginning
of the Gospel of God is Repentance, as it is written: The beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, prepare ye the way of the Lord: (viz) perform
Repentance: on the contrary, B. bestows faith upon his elect, never so much
as once naming Repentance. I can easily imagine why it is, namely, because
according to fleshly wisdom, he perhaps supposes, that repentance is a
companion of none but fools: Therefore he has utterly rejected it, as not
well beseeming the dignity or credit, of one that is wise. O vile and
ungracious fellow! surely I can scarce hold in my self, yet I will refrain.
Oh wretched man (J say, how dare thou so seditiouslie disturb that most holy
order, which the wisdom of God has established? First, therefore I will
inform this erroneous doctor, that true repentance toward God, must of
necessity, go before the faith of Jesus Christ: Then what this true
repentance toward GOD is, shall likewise in order be declared.

But to the end, that these things more clearly may be understood, it
behooves us, not only to call to mind, those things which have bin
abouesaid, but to make somewhat a further repetition of the whole matter.

The first benefit therefore which God vouchsafes (I speak only of those
blessings, which pertain to salvation) is the seed and ministry of the Word:
unto this outward benefit, and ministry of the Word, there is sometimes added
a certain inward virtue, and efficacy of the holy ghost, who as he leaves
some in unbelief: so he inclines others, and causes them to cleave fast unto
the truth, with the whole assent of their minds, and to believe it: And this
kind of faith, (because it is a solitary or barren exercise of the
understanding only) we call the faith of knowledge: and such like, faithful;
because they profess the faith of Christ, we call by a common and general
name, Christians.

Now after this the holy ghost, causing his wheel as it were to run about the
second time, goes to his work again, and of those which are believers, some
he reformeth and makes new creatures, others he reserueth to their more just
condemnation, because the truth which they knew they obeyed not. But betwixt
these general Christians, and those which be regenerated, there is no less
difference, then betwixt the Altar and the Temple, the Sanctuary and the
Porch: betwixt him, the foreskin of whose heart is circumcised, and him, whose
house only is clean swept and garnished: (viz.) as betwixt those that are bid
to the supper of the lambs marriage, and those which are without, Dogs,
Witches, Covetous, Murderers, whoremongers, and such as take pleasure in lies.
But in the reforming of these, or making them new creatures, the holy Ghost
observes this order.

First, he mollifieth or softneth them, and causes them to bewail their
sins, and by earnest prayer to make sure for pardon, and with restless and
unspeakable desire, to seek the favor of that GOD, whom without all reason
they have offended. And this is that second effect or work of the holy Ghost,
which is the beginning of our regeneration: which B. himself calls the
second effect of the spirit: but he is so far from teaching the same
perfectly, that he does not so much as name it rightly: for he calls it a
certain motion or action of the will, unfitly and philosophically. The
scripture contrarily calls it repentance, which is not only a certain
motion of the will, but a full change altogether of the whole man: when that
which before was pleasant and delightful to the sinner, is now become nothing
but grief and sorrow of heart, unto him: when that which before he chiefly
sought after, now he most of all abhoireth: and whereas formerly he reioiced
in his falling from God, now he incredibly seeks, entreats, thirsts,
longs, even as the Heart pants, after the rivers of water: desiring to have
his tedious thirst satisfied. To this man now, like a woman with child,
laboring of sorrow; the holy Ghost does the third time reach forth his hand,
and administreth unto him comforts, according to the multitude of his sorrows:
and upon the heart of this woeful and trembling penitent, that confidence of
grace which we enquire after, is imprinted by the same Spirit: whereby he
assuredly believes, that all his sins which oppressed him so, are now
forgiven unto him; and that God, whose goodness and favor, he once so
greatly longed after, now bears good will and has a love unto him, not only
for the present, but for ever. And this is that third effect or work of the
holy ghost, (viz.) the sanctification of faith; which finisheth or makes up
our regeneration, which B. himself also calls the third effect of the
Spirit: and which he so much endeavors to commend unto his hearers,
miserably begging it (as it were) from other men's coffers.

This is Gods steadfast and immutable order, whereof he will neither repent,
nor change it for ever. Hereof gives he assurance unto all, by his own
testimony, who alone is as much as all other; being a faithful witness, and
Lord over all; who preaching his own kingdom to men, in express words
speaks after this manner: Mar. 1.15. Mar. 6.
Repent and believe the gospel. Likewise the Apostle being sent forth to
preach, going forth: they admonish all men every where to repent: Repentance is
it indeed, which in the first place they ever proclaimed, for hereby as by a
ladder, we must ascend to Christ.

The same Apostle, when the Jews asked, Acts 2.37.38.
Men and brethren what shall we do: Peter answered, Repent and be baptized
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins. And good reason,
because the Baptism of the holy ghost, for the remission of sins, can be
vouchsafed to none but such as repent.

The same Peter exhorts those which murdered the Lord of life, to repent and
be converted, Acts 3.19.
that your iniquities (says he) maybe done away. And very rightly: for no
man's sin can be taken away, unless he repent, and be converted. Isay thus
prophecieth concerning the Savior of Israel: Isai. 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, that I should preach the gospel, (viz.) The
joy full and happy embassage of the free grace, and favor of God, for Christ's
sake to be vouchsafed. But upon whom? To the captives, the poor, the broken,
(viz.) The penitent: for the kingdom of heaven pertains to none; but the
humble, the poor, the lowly, and little ones: (viz.) The penitent. Stayest
thou still? whilst I ouersway thee with the authority of the scriptures, art
thou not rather amazed, that these things should either be unknown or denied
of such a one as thou art? To go a little further, I will demand this one
thing of thee: wherefore I pray thee did the Lord give such an honorable
testimony of his servant John, assuring, Namely, Luke 7.
that he was a Prophet, yea and more then a Prophet: and that amongst all the
sons of women, there was not his greater? Beware thou answer not with
Babylon, either because he was never married, or for his austere and hard kind
of living, lest thou make the whole cope of heaven, laugh at thy folly. Why
stickest thou at it man? I will rid thee of this trouble: it was indeed for
the dignity and necessity of his ministry: and the ministry of John, was
the baptism of Repentance, wherewith except a man be first washed, he can by
no means put on Christ; for which cause, the Prophet calls John; Mal. 3.1.
Jsai. 40.3.
The forerunner, appointed to prepare the ways of the Lord: for in very truth,
even as a field is not fit for seed, unless it be tilled, so the hearts of
sinners, are never made ready and prepared to receive the promise of faith, but
by Repentance; as it were by divine and heaueniy tillage. And that thou may
never make more doubt, but know past question, that this is both the ordinance
of God, and also everlasting; hear what the Baptiser himself speaks: I
(says he) baptize you with water. With the water, namely, Luke 3.16
of regeneration (viz.) with Repentance. But he that comes after, shall
baptize you with the Spirit and with fire: (viz.) shall sanctify you with
faith. Therefore Faith meets or takes a place with Repentance, that has bin
before it; for by these two only, is made of a sinner a new creature, John 3.5.
as it is written: Except a man be borne again of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Yea but I, say thou, do not so
understand these things. And say thou so indeed? Thou so great a man:
Dector of the chair, that as it were, let out to farm thy learning in the
Scriptures, teaching from an higher place heavenly matters, and yet
understand not earthly, and such as are far beneath the chair: for so our
Savior calls these principles and rudiments, as it were, or first beginnings
of christianity.

But let us dispatch that which remains, and consider, what this true
repentance toward GOD is indeed. Concerning the name thereof, in another place
may be spoken: Now we will insist upon the thing it self.

We say therefore, that repentance, is an effectual operation of the holy
Ghost, whereby a man returns from his own ways, and conuerteth himself
unto GOD. Now to return from his own ways, is to bewail his sins, and the
transgressions of his life, in which as in wandering paths he has gone
astray. Wherefore his returning, comprehends the mollifying of his heart, or
contrition; and to be converted unto God, is to confess our sins unto God,
and most earnestly to seek peace, and reconciliation with him: Therefore
conversion unto God contains in it, confession, detesting and praying against
the offense, and a certain incredible desire, or longing after Peace.

Requirest thou further proof B. of this repentance? look then upon that
prodigal, and forlorn son, of a very exceeding good Father: in whose
example our Savior teaches, both thee and me, and all sinners what to do.

Hearken therefore, what the Lord says concerning him. Luke 15.17.
But when (says he) he came to himself, (viz.) When be was returned from his
own ways, which was by bethinking himself more seriously, how rashly and
unadvisedly he had dealt in sinning against God his most bountiful and kind
father, then was he in an utter dislike of himself, and with a broken heart,
he sorrowed amain continually.

Thus have thou his contrition: Now listen after what manner he conuerteth
himself unto God: I will return, Luke 15.18
says he, unto my Father: There thou have his conversion.

Now hearken further, what confession he makes unto his Father: And I will
say unto him, Father, I have finned against heaven, and before thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thine. In this thou have the guilty confessing his
fault, with detestation of it, and strong requests against it, knocking his
woeful breast in rufull manner, with his guilty hand.

Last of all, hearken unto his incredible desire of Peace and reconciliation:
Make me as one of thy hired servants: as if he should say, Return unto me (O
my God) and receive me: though now unworthy the name of a son, yet set me in
the office of one of thy hired servants, yea, make me the least and lowest of
thy servants, so thou make me thine at all. Here is his unspeakable longing
after God. Perceiuest thou (o B.) how this man is now prepared in heart, and
how much he is changed from that he was before?

Being descended of an high and honorable race, he now takes unto him a low
and base estate; being before of manly stomach, now he sits down among the
little children: being before hard and stubborn, now is become soft as water.
And further (believe me) the mountain does not more differ from the valley:
the crooked from the straight: the ragged from the smooth: the discreetly aged,
from the little child: the hard flint, from the soft and tender water. These I
say differ not from other, more then this man now from that he was in time
past: and this is the right order and manner of true and unfeigned repentance.
Oh happy and blessed man, indeed beyond all compare, who can understand it,
and do thereafter. But hitherto have I lightly contended, by a general kind
of discoursing, with this cragged and cloudie sophister: for if I should stand
upon every particular, there would be no end of reprehensions: for it is
incredible to be told, how often he stumbleth and misseth: taking Faith for
Repentance, and likewise Repentance for Faith, whereby he evidently declares
unto us, his gross ignorance of both: Page 19.20.
He has not so much as made any mention of Repentance, in that place, where it
should especially have been spoken of: at the last he puts it after faith, or
rather he says, it is faith it self: which surely he ought in no case to
have done, forasmuch chiefly as God himself, both in his eternal counsel,
and unchangeable order, has distinguished these each from other: for
Repentance is the first beginning, and as it were the entry of our
regeneration: (viz.) the effectual working of the holy Ghost: whereby a sinner
coming to himsselfe again, does most earnestly seek after nothing else at
the hand of GOD, but to have his sins pardoned, and to be received into his
favor.

But faith is the very perfection, and as it were the highest top of our
regeneration: (viz.) The insculpture or engrauing of the holy Ghost: whereby
the repentant does assuredly believe, that all his iniquities are forgiven, and
his sins covered, and that he is united with God in an everlasting love,
through Jesus Christ only.

I might now perform a work perhaps, well worth my pains, if I should here
declare what be the fruits of this excellent faith, that so might be observed
concerning this sanctified and regenerate man, whom the holy Ghost, with such
great industry, and special care has begotten and brought forth; not only
what a one he is within himself, and at home: but also what are his works
abroad, and in open sight. But because B. has altogether omitted this point,
we also will defer to speak of it, until some other time. Now when his
hearers were ready to depart, he puts one question more unto them: (viz.)
whether this faith do by the worthiness of it self justify a man ot not.
Wherein he is so tedious that he cloies them all: seeing very children can
tell that these kinds of speeches are all figurative, and there is in them the
Metonymia of the cause: For the scripture when it teaches that a man is
justified by faith, means by the figure hypallagie, that a man is justified
by the grace of Jesus Christ, which is revealed through Faith: which kind of
speaking is most usual, even amongst the vulgar sort, as to say, Philoctetes
lived by his bow and arrows, Orpheus by his Harp, Zeuxis by his pencill; when
as nevertheless it is understood, that they by these instruments of their
arts and trades, did get such things as were requisite for their use, and for
the maintenance of their lives.

We have already accomplished, as I suppose, the first part of our promise: we
have set forth the true faith of Jesus Christ; we have furthermore showed the
true causes and parts thereof, and after what manner it is wrought, and
brought to pass in men. Moreover, we have declared what true repentance
toward God is, and that the same necessarily before faith, and by the eternal
ordinance of God, in the new making of a sinner, and that faith does of
necessity follow after repentance, yet not by debt, but by grace, not for the
worthiness of him that has repented, but for the fidelity of him that has
promised, according to that which is written: Eze 18.28.
As often as a sinner repents of his sins, as I live (says the Lord) I will
blot out his iniquities, etc. That the inheritance might always be given by
promise, as testifies the Apostle, saying: Romans 4.16.
But God gave the inheritance to Abraham, freely by promise.

Thus briefly, have we followed B. upon the saying of Paul: that a man is
justified by faith. Romans 3.28.
It remains that we see whether this Justifying faith, be commanded in the
law, yea or no: Upon the words of this verse. 28. Without the works of the
Law, etc.

The full and perfect explanation of which words, B. by a five fold question,
seems to himself notably to have performed. And first he asks, whether the
works of the law, are of force to attain the righteousness of God, and
answers, that they are so, as they proceed from faith.

Secondly, whereas the works of the law done by faith justify; he answers
with Austen, that indeed they do not justify, but follow him that is
justified.

Thirdly, whereas the works of the law done by faith, be necessary to
salvation; he answers that they are necessary to salvation, but not for
Justification. And lest this new vpstart copulation, of works of the law and
faith, should trouble any (which the Apostle every where, and here especially
opposes as contraries) he enquireth in the 4. place, whether faith may be
said in any respect, to be commanded in the law: and answers readily that it
is. And he labors in the last place, to explain the reason of this
exposition, that Paul makes between faith and the law.

We will first see what this violator of the law has disordered in the
fourth place: for this decided, his ignorance in making the other doubt, will
be evident to any: for in this point alone, as in a hinge, all the weight of
the other difficulties is turned, and in these things we will follow our own
order: first we will confute B. afterward fortify the truth.

B. first reason then, whereby he goes about to prove, that faith is required
in the law, is drawn out of these words of the law: I am thy God that is, as
this Glossographist and subtle Sophister interprets it; I only will be thy
God, and thou alone shall put thy whole confidence, and hope of salvation in me.

Here therefore, (says he,) is faith commanded. As if, B. these pronounes,
Mine, Thine, are notes always and necessarily of a fatherly power, and not
rather of Lordship and superiority. What authority is this? Or what are you?
have you power over words, that thus make and mar them at your pleasure?

But you say: Not I only, but many learned men before me; Melanct. Martyr, and
other. As if it skilled, whether you, of your own accord, and of your self
erred, or following other, suffer your self to be seduced, even as cattle go
headlong after the flocks of cattle going before them.

The 2. reason of B. is thus framed. All piety toward God is commanded in the
Decalogu: but in faith only, all piety is contained: therefore faith only is
commanded in the law. Here this Proteus does delude us by ambiguitie: for if
by all piety toward God, he ineane all those duties of godliness, which
respect the perfect righteousness of the law, (viz). the righteousness of
works, then his proposition is true, and agreeing to the majesty of the Law:
but his assumption is manifestly false: for faith, neither conteines, nor
performs that spiritual obedience of the law, (viz.) the righteousness of
works, for it cannot, it only lays hold upon the righteousness of God,
(viz.) the grace of Jesus Christ.

Whereby it no less attaines the inheritance, then if he had performed, the
spiritual righteousness of the law. But if by all piety toward GOD, he
understand all those duties of piety, which the faithful (their nature being
now sold under sin) do perform from faith, and that no other obedience is
required in the law, besides this of faith: if this he hold, I say, then his
proposition is erroneous, and no less opposite to the majesty of the law,
then is the furthest part of the East, to the uttermost corner of the West: for
the decalogu requires that piety of the faithful, which none of them can
fulfill: neither does it by the righteous sentence thereof, condemn that
righteous man that falls 7. times a day, less, then any wicked one that
never believed, for the law is delivered to the delinquent, and transgressor,
not to this, or that particular, but to all, of what mould so ever thou art
made, that sinnest, of what stock, virtue, piety, says: in what favor with
God it passes not; if thou fault never so little, it adiudgeth thee to death;
for the law of the decalogue is a spiritual law; contrariwise every one,
even the most holy is sold under sin, and so, that if God had not found out
another law of grace and promise, by which he might freely give the
inheritance, to holy Abraham and his seed; then blessed Isaak should as well
have been dishinherited, as abject Ismael; and Jacob beloved had perished with
Esau that was hated. What then, will some say, is God unjust, that has given
such a law to men, as none can perform? God forbid. What? is God unrighteous,
because thou art wicked? made he not thee holy, and graced thee with that
perfection, that thou might easily if thou would, perform those things
which the law commands: contrariwise, thou wittingly and wilfully, casts thy
self headlong into such a forlorn estate, as that now thou art utterly
unable to pay the debt. I will somewhat assuage the sadness of this argument,
by the lenity of a similitude. A certain master committed to two of his
servants, 1000. pieces of silver, upon a bill at a certain day; in the mean
space, the servants through idleness abou^ding in riot and excess wasted al:
The day comes, the master calls one of them, shows the bill, requires the
silver. The servant on the other side confesses the bill of his hand, but
says that all the money is spent, and accuses his master of unmercifulness
and cruelty, because he does so hardly exact a 1000. pieces of silver, of a
poor miserable man, that has not one penny to pay. To whom his master
(wondering at the shameless boldness of the man) answers: Ask I thee any
thing but mine own? may I not by right require of thee, that which freely and
of my own bounty, I put into thy hands? am I unrighteous, because thou art
riotous, or am I cruel, because thou art prodigal? So his master angerly bids
that he be carried to prison, there to be punished, and takes a great oath,
he shall not come from thence till he have paid the uttermost farthing. Also
he calls for his fellow, with whom after the same manner, he deals by his
bill. But he being privy to his riot and prodigality, quakes every joint,
and hanging down his head (says) I acknowledge the bill indeed, and confess
all the debt to be due. But my sin has brought me to that extremity of
misery, that I am not able to discharge it: o master have pity on me, (says
he) and weeping falls at his feet. This was the controversy: This also is
the issue of it. Now B. be Judge your self: for this Lord and master dreadeth
not to commit his matter to any vmpire. Nay I think there can scarce any
debtor be found, so impudent and past shame that durst speak in this manner
against any covetous, base lawe-breaking usurer, as that wicked minded debtor,
and desperate spendthrift spoke against his master.

But B. goes on, God, says he, would first of all have his people believe in
him, which is the principal part of religion: Therefore it follows, that he
commanded them faith, in his most perfect law. o poor and blind conscience! as
if forsooth, he had not from the beginning given another law, (viz,) of
promise and life, no less perfect, then this most perfect law of the
Decalogue: whereby he commanded his people to believe, and place all their
affiance in him. Here then by the doubtful terms of the law, he deludes
both himself and others: for God in this Decalogue has inioined that
righteousness to us alone, which the worthiness of the worker obtains, as
it is written: The man that does these things shall live in them. But by the
law of grace, he has first, twice, thrice, yea always commended to us that
righteousness which is only obtained, by the faith of the believers, as it is
written: He that believes in him, shall not be ashamed. But B. still
proceeds to speak perplexedly. If, says he, God have not commanded faith in
the law, why has he commanded other things, which without faith are vain and
frivolous? I would know B. what you mean by this word, Other things: mean you
the ceremonies? The^ master Doctor you dispute not the point: for the
controversy is not of the ceremonial, but of the moral law: for we know, and
every one does think (except I be deceived) that the law is Synec. used for
the ceremonies, that was our schoolmaster to Christ, and that howsoever it set
not out Christ in express terms, yet in obscurer sort it shadowed him out.
But if by that word, Other things, you understand the duties of all the
commandments of the Decalogue; then are you pressed down by the same weight
that you were before: for not only the work that we do without faith, but
also the actions of sin that proceed from faith, are vain and frivolous, yea
hateful to God, if they be brought to that perfect righteousness of the ten
commandments: for the legal righteousness is spiritual, (viz.) it taxes thee,
not only for the fact, but for the inward lust.

This wicked and faithless man is a man-flaier: thou a St. and believer art
angry: The law of God condemns you both for it, commands not to kill:
wherein he forbids as well anger, as murder: This wicked and faithless
man, altogether desolate, gives himself over to whoredom, and reioiceth in
it. Thou being holy and a believer, art set at liberty from the dominion of
lust, as from a rude and impious mistress, now hate and fliest all the
enticements thereof, but yet thou have some affection of pronenesse thereto,
remaining and rebelling against the government of the spirit: The law condemns
both: for it has said to him; Thou shall not commit adultery: to thee, thou
shall not lust. O thou dissembler and heartlesse doctor, if thou see not
these things: a trifler, if thou do.

But B. goes on. If, says he, GOD has not commanded faith in the law, he
commands hypocrisy. O wickedness worthy to be carried abroad to be wondered
at! Whence come you B? I marvel. What from Rome? seeing you dare so without
fear, cast out against God, the poison of your rashness. With how much fairer a
forehead, might you have made these distributions of the matter? Either GOD
has commanded faith in the Decalogue, or perfect righteousness: but not this,
therefore that. But now you assume that which is falser then falsehood it self.
So that neither you, nor the very mother of all subtlety, can ever be able to
prove it. But B. proceeds in his troubled speech. Christ, says he, is
propounded to us in the law: Therefore faith is commanded in the law. The
Antecedent he strengthens by two reasons; the first is this; There is often
mention made (says he) of the Messiah in the law, and a perpetual shadowing
out, and representation of him, and his oblations in the washings, and
sacrifices: Therefore Christ is set forth in the law. I would wonder truly,
if that you would utter any word in truth, with an honest mind: for hereby
also as you are wont, you delude us with ambiguitie, for the antecedent
comprehends the law of the ceremonies, whereof there is no controversy that I
know: for with one mouth, all do confess that it was instituted to that end,
to inform that people to the righteousness of God, (viz. the faith of Jesus
Christ, and that not so darkly, but the ceremonial law may more rightly be
called a Gospel, then a law: contrariwise, his conclusion of the law does
deceitfully thrust upon us the decalogue: So that he expounds one thing, and
concludes another, that though the Antecedent be true, yet the conclusion is
false. But B. seeing this first ioinder of no force, does again set upon the
matter, and deals with God by the sealed tables.

For (says he) when God says he is thy God, which brought thee out of
Egypt: does he not set forth himself as a Redeemer? But he is not a Redeemer
but in Christ. Therefore inclusiuely Christ is propounded to us in these words.
Here B. if I would object their judgments against you, as the Treach of the
Alps, who say that in every perfect law, three things are to be observed.
First, the preface, whereby he makes his Auditors attentive: Secondly,
direction, whereby he bids a thing to be done, or left undone: Thirdly,
correction, whereby he denounces punishment, to the delinquent. Here (I say)
if as they do, that are instructed with subtle deceits (that with the very
names of these men, as with legions brought out, I could put you to flight) I
should say that these words of the law: Hear O Israel, I am the Lord thy God,
that brought thee out of the land of Egypt; were only a preface of the law,
and as it were a commendation of the future speech, should I not stop thy mouth
and thy fellows, except you were refractarie?

But I will not wound you, with other men's darts: but rather out of my own,
thus I answer: though God says, he is their deliverer, touching this private
bondage, he does not incontinently propound Christ to them, and the benefit of
this deliverance. But this is his meaning before all things: That Israel might
never put out of mind, the memory of so great a benefit, and the author
thereof. Take heed that you do not bark again, as if J should say, that
this Egyptian deliverance, does here typically signify, the spiritual
deliverance of man's bondage: only, I affirm, that God has not unfolded to his
people Israel, neither his Christ, nor his deliverance.

These are, if I be not deceived, all the deceits of B Which, that they might
have more weight of deceit, he has also added men's Authorities: M. and N.
for he thought that he should not procure to himself sufficient credit, by his
own proper and domestical engines, and inventions, except he undertook the
patronage of foreign errors, taken to them. Howsoever one may fitly thus
interpret N. that he thought very soberly and godly, if you respect the
righteousness of the law: (viz.) the righteousness of works. But if he mean
the righteousness of God, which is of faith, I think he has erred with you; if
either he thought that God would exact all the piety, which the regenerate
perform to God by faith: according to this rule of the Decalogue, or he that
appointed none, or enioined other works to the faithful any where, then that
which agrees to the righteousness of this law, as to the rule.

But this our labor, seems a little to take breath. Now after it has come out
of the starting holes of B. as out of writhen turnings of the labyrinth, that
which is behind we shall more pleasantly pass. Truth I hope being my
companion.

All the error of B. then consists herein, that he has not distinguished the
law of life, from the Moral law: which yet God in his eternal counsel, and
prescript words, even from the beginning has severed, with as great a distance
one from another, as Hager differs from Sara: bondage from liberty, Sina from
Sion. But now B. I see thee like a fearful Mariner, to foresee the tempest,
coming a far off: and to dread the Shipwreck of thine error. Now when I
speak of the Law of life, I mean the promise which was given to Adam in these
words, Genesis 1.
The seed of the woman shall break his head, etc. It was preached afterward
to Abraham: In thee shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed: again, Genesis
12.
Look to heaven and count, if thou can, the number of the Stars; so shall
thy seed be. Genesis 22.
At last it was delivered by Moses: Hear o Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
the Lord our God is one God, thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, etc.
Again, Deuteronomy. 10.12
Now o Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but that thou fear
the Lord thy God and honor him, etc.

This is that Law whereof the same Moses says, Deuteronomy. 30.19
Behold I set before you blessing and cursing, Life and good, death and evil,
etc. Blessing and life, if thou choose this, viz. If thou love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart etc. Deuteronomy. 28.
If thou choose this (says he) Blessed shall thou be at home, and blessed
abroad, etc. But contrariwise (says he) If thou will not be obedient to the
voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and do the Commandments of this Law,
cursed shall thou be at home and cursed abroad, etc. Behold B. the Law, the
most high and perfect publishing whereof, when the Prophet foresaw, thus said,
The Law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. He
speaks not of the Law of the Decalogue which was come out most perfectly,
700. years before: but this Law of life, (viz.) The word of truth, (viz.) The
Gospel Behold the Law, of which the Prophet Jeremy speaks, I will write my
Law in their hearts. Not that of the ten commandments, which is to be
trembled at, He that does these things shall line by them: but this Law of life
and the promise, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, and I will
remember their sins no more, says the Lord. Behold the law, whereof the true
speaking King and Prophet David, says, The Law of the Lord is perfect every
way, converting souls, etc. He means not B. that Law of the Decalogue, which
although it be the Law of God, and a Law every way perfect, yet does not
convert souls, neither can it give life nor restore a sinner. But he means
this Law of grace, viz. The promise and righteousness of God, by the faith of
the Messiah, which is given to the believer.

Behold B. the law wherein faith is commanded, for none can love God with all
his heart, and his neighbor as himself, but he that first is sanctified by
faith, viz. none but he that is washed before, by virtue of the holy ghost,
shall believe that al his sins are forgiven him. Hoe, says B. what news bring
you here? for that which you call the Law of grace, we say it is the same with
the law of the Decalogue. What exposition is this? will you thus inwrap the
Israel of God, with your exposition? Dare you say, this is the same Law with
that, when God himself says, it is another from it? Ier. 31.31.
For behold the days come (says the Lord) that I will make a new covenant
with the house of Jacob, Heb. 8.9.
not such as I made with your Fathers, etc. Hitherto leads the Testimony of
Moses, and that so clear as if it were written with the beams of the Sun,
(which yet this Oule sees not.) Who when he had delivered this Law of life to
Israel, and had added Ceremonies, which were as a shadowing out of a Redeemer;
at length breathing out says, Deuteronomy 29.1.
These are the words of the covenant, which the Lord commanded Moses, that he
should make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, besides that
covenant which he made in the mount Horeb. And that the law of the Decalogue,
and the righteousness of it which is of works, is not only another from, but
also opposite to the law of grace and righteousness of God, which is manifested
by faith; the Apostle is a most plentiful witness, who calls the law of the
Decalogue, A weak Law: the Law of sin, the Law of death, the ministry of
condemnation. But the law of grace, he calls the power of God unto salvation:
The righteousness of God, the ministry of the spirit, the ministry of life.

But hoe, will some say, Paul is a mere Maniche, and a manifest Marcionite,
that thus detracts from the majesty of the Law, and so odiously inueies against
the holy Law of God. Say thou so, dog? is the Apostle an Heretic, because
thou art blind. Thou conceiuest not the truth of his words: for he has not
brought in this combat of the law, either in respect of God, or the laws
themselves, for both are of, and from, the same God. both perfect, holy, and
just: but in respect of us, and our sin; for what so repugnant and hostile,
as to condemn a sinner, and to absolve the same? Therefore as we are wont to
call, a day deadly or fatal, not in respect of the day it self, but of them
which must undergo some danger: And the Julian law of Treason, we call a
deadly law in respect of them that are accused of Treason: So the Apostle calls
the law of the Deca. a weak law, because it cannot give life to the sinner:
The law of wrath, because it causes wrath against sin. The law of sin, because
it accuses us of sin. The law of death, because it judges us, being bound
over to death. The Ministry of condemnation, because it condemns every
transgression. In which phrase of speech he calls also the Gospel it self,
sometimes the savor of death unto death, namely, in respect of those that
perish.

But B. opinion, gasping at last, does yet throw one dart more: if (says he)
the righteousness of the law, be so contrary to the righteousness of God, which
is of faith, how does faith establish it? This I say, B. Christ and his
righteousness is given to us, who are justified by faith: now the righteousness
of Christ is the righteousness of works, viz. the full and perfect performance of
the Decalogue. To us then that are in Christ Jesus, viz. to us that believe in
him, who has performed the righteousness of the law for us, it is as much to
us as if we our selves had fulfilled it. For the end of the law is to justify
the keeper of it: but he that believes in him, who has perfectly performed
it, this faith shall be imputed to him for righteousness, no less, the^ if he
had perfectly performed the same.

But let us proceed, and pursue this breathless opinion, even to the
sepulcher: which in a manner dying, and cannot cast darts, does yet cast out
words. To what end then, says he, serves the law: or what use is there of it
now? I say, much, every way: first, it is set down for the sinner, both that
he may not deny the punishment, denounced against him for sin, and also that
it may take vengeance against him justly for the same: it is also set for a
holy and regenerate man, that as often as he look upon it (and always he
ought to look upon it) he may so often bewail his wickedness, and quake at
it; and likewise as often as he calls to mind, which night and day he ought to
call to mind: so often he may think, of the riches, mercy, and love of God,
by giving him thanks by Christ Jesus his Lord and intercessor, who so
mercifully has set him free from the wrath of this just and holy law. Nothing
that I know is now omitted: Let us therefore take breath awhile; especially
seeing we have gone so far, and come as it were to the sepulcher of this dead
and spiritlesse opinion, which whiles it is cast into oblivion, as into the
fire, and while the burial is attended; I will turn me to B. and by a
certain comparison, as much as I can, I will comfort him, lest he without
comfort lament the death of his opinion, as of a daughter dearly beloved: and
if any sense be left in him, I will labor to make him sound minded. A certain
king has many debtors, indebted unto him, for much money by writing; whereby
it is provided that except they faithfully pay all the money at the day
appointed, their goods should be confiscate and themselves cast into prison:
the King in the mean time foreseeing, that they will not be able to pay the
debt, being moved with pity, he makes a new edict, that if any of the debtors
will desire to be released, before the day of payment, he will freely forgive
them. You see, B. the bill is just and sure. for he requires nothing but his
own: you see also that the Edict is good and firm; for by it he succors the
poor miserable souls that otherwise should perish in prison: you see the Bill
is contrary to the Edict; for that adiudgeth the not paier to perpetual
bondage: contrariwise, the Edict frees him that paieth not, so he pray to be
pardoned: further, you see, the Bond established by the edict; for all that
will rejoice for the benefit thereof, do no less satisfy the King, then if
they had fully paid all the debt due by the Bill: for the King requires his
fummes, either by the usurers severity, or by his great equity showed toward
those that crave release: the first, by law; the latter by favor; if thou do
either, thou do sufficient. Lastly, B. you see what you would not: namely,
that the Bill does not command any asking of pardon, no it admits no such
matter, it calls either for payment or punishment, nothing else: for the free
benefit of asking pardon pertaines only to the Edict. Go to then, let the
Decalogue be the Bill, let the law of promise be the Edict or Proclamation of
free pardon; namely, the grace of the Messiah: let faith be the asking of
pardon: I will not mince it smaller, a word is enough to a wise man. Behold,
now B. the fruit of your outcrying, the seeds whereof this twenty years you
have dispersed, with such roughness of words and impotency of mind, that you
ought to bear it more patiently, if the truth now take some punishment of you:
For believe me B. every error shall suffer punishment; shall suffer, I say, at
the hands of truth, either sooner or later; neither is there a more certain
hour of sinning, then of suffering. Call to mind with me that day, wherein
applauding your self in your subtilties, you challenged one in the
Universities; to whom, when as it was not lawful to answer or reply
sufficiently unto you, making the Challenge, either for the authority of your
part, or for the obscurity of your Sophistry, and snares of your subtilties;
good God, how you crowed over him. Neither did you think it sufficient only,
this your poor lecture, to be published in triumph of this so base victory,
that it might bring darkness to the light, except also the sixth year after
(dau^cing in the funerals of the truth) you caused to be published a new
Commentary of the excellency and dignity of the law, an eternal Monument of
your ignorance and blindness: for it is almost incredible, how in that work
you mingle heaven and earth together, and make squared things straight: how
often in that little book, you put foedus for foedere: The law for the law;
faith for faith, viz. a lie for a testimony: and that which is a sign of a
mind smally ingenious, how often do you make monsters to your self, which you
might easily make away? I accuse you not, the matter it self speaks; you
shall be iudgeed of your own papers. This one thing I would have you
understand (whereof B. you shall be an example to posterity, while this work
shall live, and it shall live forever:) That the book of God is a book indeed
full of eyes within and without, and written on both sides, but withal sealed;
so that there are many hard things in it, which you Barowists do not
understand. But if you desire to open your closets to enter into the inwards of
it, you had need of a key: I mean not that which Rome reioiceth in, which
opens the bottomless pit, and brings out monstrous lies, and blasphemies:
neither do I mean that key, B. which lays up for thee a great heap of
silver, which brings great increase to the dropsy of thy covetousness:
neither do I mean that key which opens the smokes of Sophistry, and the
mere froth of words, and of Divine Plato and the Sophisters, or such like
builders of darkness, and made wisdom. But I mean B. the key of David, that
searches out the most secret things of the truth, and the hidden things of
Gods wisdom, and so opens them that none can shut, and so shuts them that
none can open. Which key by your writing, I am sure you are without, as any
thing that you want. And thus much of faith, the holiness whereof you have
defiled. Thus much also of the law, the majesty whereof you have violared. And
if any thing seem less spoken then ought to be, either for your deserts, or
as so weighty a matter requires; let him think it is reserved until anoother
time, when God blessing our enterprises, we shall have more strict examination
of you upon that book, which you have scribled of the excellency and dignity
of the law. Jn the mean time, I bid you in Christ Jesus to repent, and
Farewell.

FINIS.

