PANS PIPE, Three Pastoral Eglogues, in English HEXAMETER. WITH OTHER POETICAL
Verses delightful.

Parue nec inuideo, sine me liber ibis in arua,
He^ mihi quod domino non licet ire tuo.
For the further delight of the Reader, the Printer has annexed hereunto the
delectable Poem of the Fisher-mans Tale.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, at the sign of the Rose and Crown,
near to S. Andrews Church in Holborne. 1595.

To all youthful Gentlemen, or Apprentises, favorers of the divine Art of
sense-delighting Poesy.
GENTLEMEN, expect not in this my slender volume, amorous passions of some
Courtly Lover, graced (as the custom is, with super fine rethoricall phrases:
look not here for some melodious ditties, descended from the wel-tuned strings
of Apollos sweet-sounding Cittern: here plainly have I presented unto your view
rusticke Tyterus, rehearsing in rude country terms to his fellow Thirsis his
happy bliss, and luckie fortune in obtaining the love of his desired Phillida:
Or clownish Coridon, one while taking and giving quaint taunts and privy quips
of and to his froliking Copesmates: One while again contending for
superiority, in tuning rural ditties on Pans pastoral pipe. Now Gentlemen, if
with Coridon, you shall find me not to play so well as the rest of my fellows,
my sole and humble request is, that you would not forth with proceed in
condign judgment against me, but with wise Faustus conc^ale your opinion,
which doing, you shall animate, otherwise altogether discourage a young beginner.

Yours ever in courtesy. ^. S.

AVTHOR AD LIBRVM.
VAde liber, rus dulce subi, pete pascua l^ta
alba vbi depascurt agmina mill gregum
Te lacta accipict pecorum Benef^ldia dives,
ad^^nies gratus montibus ipse suis.
Vis vbi pastorum gelidis numerosa sub vmbris
sistula arundinea cartatna loeta canit,
Ibit (...) Coridon te complexurus* Alexis
accipiet, Thirsis te leget are rudi.
Laudabit doctus Dominum tibicine faustus.
hunc hedera dignum Thestilis ore canet.
Heu si forte via rocta peregrinus aberres
and Domino sumas orbus in vrbe locum
Ridebit ciuis te, nescit rustica ciuis,
rustica t^ cantas, rusticus ergo legate.
Formido nimium ne Momus itinere cernat
mordebit dominum ferr^a ltngua tuum,
Quam potes excusa* dic est herus exul, amica
non datur huic requies, fert iuga, vade liber.
Pans Pipe.
IT was in the month of May,
All the field now looked gay:
Little Robin finely sang,
with sweet notes each greenwood rang.
Philomene forgetful the^,
Of her rape by Tere^s done.
In most rare and joyful wise,
Sent her notes unto the skies:
Progne with her bloody breast,
Began in chimney build her neast.
Flora made each place excel
with fine flowers sweet in smell.
Violets of purple hue,
Primroses most rich in show:
Unto which with speedy flight,
Bees did fly and on them light*
And with Thyme loding their thyes,
Did it caric to their hiues.
Some it took, which they had brought,
And in combs it rarely wrought.
Fish from crystal waves did rise,
After gnats and little flies:
Little Lambs did leap and play,
By their Dams in Meadows gay.
And as soon as Lucifer
Had expelde the lesser stars,
Tyterus and Thirsis hight,
Through a lettice-seeing light,
Which did come from Ecus bright.
As they lay in drowsy beds,
Up did lift their sluggish heads:
Hasting Sheep from fouldes to let,
Sheep which bleated for their meat.
Sheep let out from place to place,
Greedi^ie did pluck up grass.
And by chance as herds did meet,
Shepheardes did each other greet,
Thirsis looked very sad,
As he some ill fortune had:
Tyterus first began to speak,
And his mind in this sort break.
Eglogue first.
Tyterus. Thirsis. THirsis what mean these heavy looks? thy face so besprented
with tears, shows il news, why? thou were wont to be merry
Wont on a pipe to play, to grace our joyful assemblies,
With merry jests and sports, tell me why art thou so pensive?
Th. Ah Tyterus, Tyterus, how can I cease to be pensive?
One o'mine ewes last night, hard fortune, died in ^aning,
One o'mine ewes, a great ew, whose fruit I chiefly did hope of,
Eaned a tidie lamb, which she no sooner had eaned,
But the Fox did it eat, whilst I slept under a thicket:
Thus have I lost mine Ewe, my lamb the Fox thus has eaten:
Ah Tyterus, Tyterus, how can I cease to be pensive?

Tyt. Hard fortune neighbor, but what? will heaviness help you?
Will grief get your sheep again? cast care away therefore,
Shun dolor, use patience, patience in misery profits:
To smile is wisdom when waspish destiny thunders.

Th. Good counsel Tyterus, but not so easily followed,
Man is borne in grief, and grieueth at every mishap.
I think we shepherds take greatest pains of all others,
Sustain greatest losses, we be tired with dayli^ labor,
With cold in winter, with heat in summer oppressed,
To many harms our tender flocks, to many diseases
Our sheep are subject, the thie^e pra^es over our heardlings,
And worse then the thief, the Fox prays over our heardlings,
Thus we poor heardsmen are pincht and plagued above other.

Tyt. Truth, but I know not why, we do not only deserve it,
But lets be content, since Fortune has so provided.
And rather hark to my tale, since under this shadie valley
Either of us do sit, since both our flocks be together,
Lets now tell our ancient loves, least sleep cr^^pe upon us,
And the crafty Fox, who priuiliy lurks in a thicket,
Or in these huge holes, our lambs should greedily murder:
Better is it to wake, then sleep, what thing ever happens.

Th. Content, yet fro my mind this grief yet cannot ^ banish,
Begin first your self, you first made mention of it.

Tyt. Well, ^^e now begin, Venus aid me, sweet Venus aid me,
Aid me Cupid once my friend, the prosperous event
Of my love to rehears^. Not far from hence in a village
Was I borne, in a merry town rich in shadie valleys,
Rich in grounds, in soil fertile, in cattle abounding:
With my father I lived, he was calde rich Melibeus;
Rich Melibeus was my Sire, old Mepsa my mother.
Long time single I lived, long time vnma^ied I was:
He would often to me say, when shall I be called a Grandsire,
She would often to me say, when shall I be called a Grandam:
Flora does hope for thee, the lusty daughter of Aldus,
Ian^s hopes thou shall be to his daughter an husband:
I despising love, hating the name of a woman.
Would them both desire to let me single abide still,
For love I did detest, I did hate a l^bidinous Hymen.
But mark how't fell out, I ^ed my sheep in a pasture
Near to the wood, it was summer time, and I very weary,
Down all alone me laid, no sooner down had I laid me,
But sleep shut mine eyes, near to this wood abode hunters,
Hunters, who let slip at an hare, the grove she recou'red,
And got away, the dogs returnde, and ran to my cattle:
My sheep from them ran, great harm they did to my cattle:
They did a Wether kill, they killed a douty good Ew-lambe.
Up I rose, my sheep I mist, and naught but a carcass
Of my Wether I saw, the claws and skuls of an Ewe-lambe.
Out alas I cride, I am undone, spoiled and undone,
Long time amazed I stood, one while false destiny blaming.
And drowsy sleep, who closd mine eyes whilst merciles hu^ters
Suffered hounds my sheep to devour, like Mercury sometimes
On's sleep-aluring pipe who played, while he murdered Argus,
Argus set with an hundred eyes: or like to the Fouler,
Who on a whistle plays most sweetly, whilst he deceives
Foolish birds: thus standing amazed, my neighbor Alexis
Came to me, crying out, stricken also with the same arrow*
He made doleful moan, seven of mine Ewes be devoured,
And the rest are strayed away, sweet Tyterus help me,
Help me (says he) to seek them again, I labored also
Of the same disease, we two went sadly together
Through desert mountains, large fields, and arable pastures,
Seeking our chased herds: at length in a brierie valley,
Between two forests, some of Amyntas his heardlings
Found we lying down, and seeking still for his other,
Under a shade by chance he saw Galatea, he saw her,
And burnt in her love, poor wretch he cried, he sighed,
Making skies resound his sad and pitiful echoes,
And unmindful quite of his heardling, he wholly delighted
In talking of her, and passing by her, I wild him
To reject this love, which would bring beggary with it,
He with a sigh began strait exclame, O happy, thrice happy
Should I be if when, the fates, and destiny calls me,
In her lap mine head might lie, and her pretty fingers
Might close up my key-cold e^es: O wood-mightie Sy^uan,
Keep I beseech thee all sweet herbs, let not greedy cattle
Pluck them up, reserve them til my Lady be buried:
Then let all the ground be straw'd with fauouri^ blossoms,
And write upon her tomb, Here lies a maid, which a goddess^
Would have been to her Love, had she not been o^er-anstere,
Loug thus he lived ie deep despair, al company shunning:
And at length (poor wreth) his days in misery ended.
Back again I returned in an other field then I sought them.
Like one half mad I ran, I found some hard by the milhedge,
Some by the forest side, my notted Ram still I missed:
Him I sent my boy to seek, he wandered al day,
In shady woods till night, and weary thought to return him.
But it was dark, and making have, a trench he fell into,
Made to deceive wild beasts, and could by no means get away thence,
Thus my boy was in hold my Ram was caught in a thicket,
Up next morn I rose, musing where Willie remained,
Forth I went, it was holie-day, I asked of each one,
If they saw my ram, and if they saw little Willy,
Willy no where was found, I sought him through shad'y mountains
Through vast caves and wood, I cride, I shouted, I hollowed,
But it was all in vain, at length a stranger I met with,
Into the pits to look, who was new come to the forest,
Him did I ask also, but he saw not my little Willie:
We two together walked, when we came near to the pitfall,
Hearing us two talk, like a mouse in a cheese he did exclame,
Into the trench we looked, who could not laugh to behold it,
A Fox fallen therein did stand with Will in a corner:
Will did fear the Fox, the Fox did fear little Willy,
Out we plucked him first, his fellow prisoner after.
Glad was Will he was out, and I was gladder I found him,
Home we returnde, and as we returned, lo destiny fawning,
Found I my Ram in a thicket tide, I greatly rejoiced:
Summer it was, it was midday, the Sun was at highest,
Will led home my Ram, I softly followed after,
Will went through the fields, but I went through shady pastures
Shunning Titans beams, but ah unfortunate Heardsman,
Shunning an outward heat, a fire I purchased inward*
Under a tree, by Damons cloase, very many resorted,
Maids and men did thither flock, there merrily piped.
Lucidas on his new bagpipe, then Pollio danced,
Ianus leapt and skipt, then thy young uncle Amyntas
Daunc'd I remember with many more too long to repeat now.
Here I staid, this ^rue I viewd, I spied Alexis
Dance with a Less, a gallant Less, me thought she did exce^
All the rest in beauty, in shape, in com^lie behavior:
Phillida was her name, I thought each joint of her heavenly:
Look what parts lay hid, those I far fairer imagined.
Ah, how she pleased my mind, her cheeks were ruddy like apl^^,
With red streams besprent, her hair as brown as a berrie:
Black were her eyes, her hands did show as was a good huswife,
No want in her I saw, for where she squinted a little,
That did grace her I thought, thus was I caught on a sudden*
Ah, how often I wished my self in place of Alexis,
He to d^llie had learned, to dance I never had used,
And then I shamed to begin. But mark what followed after*
Codra to dance did come, the lusty daughter of Aldus:
Her when Alexis espide, he with all speed Phillida leaving,
Caught he^ by the white hand, at this my Phillida frowned,
She did Alexis love, b^t Alexis Codra desired:
In stepped I to her strait, I wild her not to be sorry,
I will be thy love (said I) care not for Alexis,
I will a woing come, from me she flang in an anger,
And with a scornful look, w^l (says she) some body loves me*
Home then I went dismayed, and si^k, my conntenance heavy,
Sotted were my senses all, my mind v^rie pensive,
One while I laid me down, of such idle fantasies hoping,
That s^^epe would me deprive, therein was I greatly deceived.
No sooner had sleep closde mine ^ies, but Phillida forthwith
Into my mind did come, still I thought she daunc'd with Alexis:
Ah how my mother gree^'d* when she did see me so pensive?
She fetched milk and ale, and for me she made a posset:
She fetched flower and ^gs, and for me she made a pudding^
But no meat would down with me, my father as hea^y,
Unto the wiseman went, he was a physician also,
He said I was in love, some devil had told it him, I think,
Then to me forthwith he came, he charged me with it, he pra^d me
To disclose my mind, and he would do what he could do:
Then confessed I my love, it is (said I) Phillida father,
Philida, Dam^ns daughter it is, whose love thus I burn in,
Be content, my father said, her love will I su^ for,
Well does Damon know Melibeus chests be not empty,
At this I comfort took, rose, went int' field to my cattle,
Both full of hope and ^eare. To Damon went Melibeus*
Told him all the tale, and for his daughter he prayed,
I give my consent, but I fear, quoth he Phillida will not,
She shall like and love, for she has very may rejected.
These news brought to me as I sat alone by mine heardling*
Son, says he, go thy self, speak to Philida, Damon
Will give his good will, if thou can also get her love.
Home forthwith I went, my self I finely b^d^cked,
Combed mine head, I washed my face, my spruse lether ierkin*
On did I put my ruffes, my yellow-lether galigaskins,
Then sull of hope and fear I went, my Phillida spinning,
Sat by the door, I went unto her, I cold her, I kissed her,
Proferd her many gifts, but she refusde many profers:
Craved of her, her good will, but she did flatly deny me,
Wild me leave my suit, and not proceed any further.
Impatient of repulse, her three times after I wooed:
Gifts many pence me cost, three times again she repeld me:
Desperate altogether then with bewitched Amyntas,
Into the woods I went, and merry company leaving,
In uncouth mountains, in deserts and shady valleys,
All my delight I took, I never looked to my cattle:
They for a pray were left to the Fox, to the wolse to the Lion,
And had I not been helped, I should have died with Amyntas.
But now Fortune smilde, with Alexis Phillida daily*
Used to sport and play, unto him she daily resorted,
She brought him conserues, she brought him sugered almonds
He not loving her, but with her flattery moved,
Lay with her, and in time with child poor Phillida proved:
He then fearing least he should her marry by constraint,
Fled from his Uncle in have (for he remained) with his uncle)
Phillida fearing least, she should be mocked of each one,
Looked more blyth on me, as I sat under a Myrtle,
She past by, me thought, and smyled upon me*
Her looks favor showed, then again my suit I renewed,
Went and woed her again, and far more tractable found her:
Next day to Damons house I went, and with me my sire,
There were cakes and ale, and each one greatli^ rejoiced:
Then we were made sure, and wedding day was appointed,
Which at length did come, the time long wished for approached;
We twain were conioynd, that day we merrily passed,
Great good cheer we made, Licida^ and Pollio piped,
All the whole country daunc'd: with credit thus was I wedded:
Which when Alexis heard, with all speed home he returned.
And see Thirsis, I pray, what a quiet wise have I gotten,
She yet never scowl'd she never frowned on Alexis,
But looked mildly on him, though he so greatly abusde her,
Heel now come to my house, and sit with me by the fire,
Heel now sit by my wife, whilst I go look to my cattle:
We two be great friends, and to thee ( Thirsis) I tell it,
Thee for a friend I take, to my biggest boy is he father,
But very few do it know. A large ground now have I plowed,
And it is more than time to unyoke my wearied horses:
Thirsis, I have to thee now declarde the history pleasant
Of my love: Rehearse yours, as you promised erewhile.

Th. Well. I begin to declare't: OP an melodious help me:
But see neighbor I pray, Tyta^ is carried headlong
Into the sea, see, clouds covnite, a storm is a breeding:
And pitchie-night draws on apace, lets hastily therefore,
Divide our cattle, to the cotes lets speedily drive them.

Tyt. Let Us run apace, til again we meet you shall be my debtor.

GLomie Winter reigned as King,
Hoarie frost did nip each thing:
Fields looked naked now and bare,
Fields which like a Chaos were.
Earth of grass was now quite void,
Bor^as each thing destroyed.
Leauelesse trees seemed to lament,
Chirping birds were discontent:
Seeking food in uncouth lanes,
Where they caught their fatal banes.
Philomene did now recant
Woefully sharp winters want:
Progne fled to place unknown,
Somewhere making doleful moan.
Tereus pincht with want did cry,
Justly plagued for villainy,
Fish in deep themselves did hide,
Daring not in foordes abide:
Cattle bleated for their meat.
Cattle found no food to eat.
Titan had his head lift up,
Lulde a sleep in Thetis lap.
When two Swains were newly gone.
Melibeus and Damon,
Hungry flocks to let from fold,
Flocks half starved with want and cold.
Herds had caten mornings bait,
Shepherds met together strait.
Melibeus, men report.
Spoke to Damon in this sort.
Eglogue second.
Damon. Melibeus. GOodmorrow Damon.
^Da. Goodmorrow good Melibeus.
What? your comely daughter, whose love so many desired
Is now wedded I hear to a Citizen, is she so dainty,
That none but Citizens will please her? or are ye so wealthy,
That you scorn us Herds, your mates and fellows? I ^ear me,
Once before she die, sheell wish she had wedded an heardsman.

Mel. Peace Damon, content your self, first hear the desendant,
Ere you give judgment, lets sit down friendly together
On this su^ny bank, whilst Tytans fiery glances
Warm our limbs, and melt hory snowes, I Will tell the beginning
And end of their love, end, midst, and original of it.
When my girl was young, to Cupids fiery weapons
And not yet subject, then had my neighbor Alexi^,
A little son, both borne in a day, the one loved each other:
As brother and sister, as twain of one issue begotten:
And as children use, they two would dally together,
Sport and play, both went to the school, as years came upon the^:
So their love encreast, years made this amity greater:
Age made love in^rease, and still my neighbor Alexis
(As most men are wont) esteeming worst of his own art,
Set his son to the school, to scooles of Apollo:
Wholly in ^oy he lived, what sportes, the country did afford,
What plays, what pastimes, those he used, al labor abhorring,
Time brought choice of sports, each quarter sundry pleasures:
In spring time when fields are green, when every bramble
Looks fresh, when every bush with melody sounds,
Of little birds rising, before bright Tytan appeared,
Into the fields did he go, which then fair Flora bedecked,
With redolent blossoms, O how grateful to the senses
Were the odorifferous smells which when Aurora to Ph^bus
Began to set open her gates, the fragrant flowers affoorded,
O how to hear did he joy the musical harmony, which then
Each little bird did make. He would go then with a spud staff
Unto the leauie vvoods; the dens where Connies had hidden
Their young ones to seek, to find ^ong birds he delighted:
Greatly now did he joy, the lightfooted hare to run after:
With may yelping hounds, the swift-foot (...) by the forest,
To pursue with dogs, with an hawk to encounter a partridg^
At this time the top, the tennis ball was a pastine:
At this time no small delight he took in a foteball:
When Lodi^ Ver had run her race, and Phoebus ascending
Unto the highest, began to scortch with ^iery glances
Flor^s fruits, and Verse gay gifts, when Rye with a sickle
Down to be cut began, and empty barnes to be filled.
Then to the Crystal lake and silver river of Alphus
Used he to go(Good Lord) how greatly to bath him he ioyed
In his running stream, what pleasure company meeting,
Took he to sport on's reedy banks: sometimes with an angle,
And false show of a bait glittering fish craftily taken: (them
Would he twitch from his waves, with nets often times he deceu'd
Now by the mountains high, and forests leauy to gather
Stawberies and Damasens no small delight did he count it.
But why recite I to thee these sports, thou these merry pastimes
Know w^l enough, thou know what ioies the cuntery yields.
W^nter and autum brought not a few ripe apples in autum
Pears and nuts to gather he used, all which he reserved,
Winters want to relieve. When gloomie Winter appeared,
When hoarie frosts did each thing nip, when Isacles hanged
on each house, with milk-white snows when the earth was al hidden
Forth with a fouler he was to the vvelsprings and to the fountains
and to the running lakes, whose ever mooueable waters
Frost never alter could, therefore the long-billed hernshue,
And little Snype did he set snares, with tvvigs craftily limed*
Pitfals now for birds did he make, the musical Ovvs^e,
The little Robbin and the Thrush now greatly bewayling,
winters want with doleful tunes did he strike with a stone-bow.
Cards and dice brought now great sport, sitting by the fire,
Bowls full of ale to quaffe off, ripe pears and mellowed apples
To devour, to crack small nuts, now he counted a pleasure.
But what need many words, least over tedious I should
Unto thee be, many plays, and pastimes here I will omit:
I will omit his gun, I will not speak of his hand-bow:
Which with a twanging string, he so many times has bended
But to be brief, his life, his greatest toil was a pleasure.
And might I speak as I think, I would say boldly that he lived
More in joy than Gods, sprung of celestial issue.
But Fate is perverse, Fortune a friend to none always:
This merry life the gods, the country gods which inhabit
Earthly seats did note,(for to them Jove in Olympus,
Yet vouchsafes not a place) they saw't and murmured at it,
Each one did complain that he so merrily lived*
Each one did complain that he them never adored.
Not far from thence in a wood, in a vast and briery forest,
There is a famous grove, with Oaks and pine trees abounding
which neue^ axe has tucht, whose tops the clouds cut asunder
These no star could pearce, no sunbeam could ever enter:
Here nere came Borea^, here nere came fiery Tytan.
Temperature here always abides, the temperate air
Causes a daily spring, here blossoms daily do flourish:
Herbs are green, which a lake, and crystal stream by the forest:
With myld-sliding waves does nourish with liquid humor,
In midst of this grove the mild Creatresse of all things;
Has by woondrous art a stately palace erected:
And from craggie rocks, great seats has wisely created:
God Sylnanus his haule, it need no carved vpholders,
Nor stately pillars to underprop, his gorgious hanging
Naught but heaven ouerhangs, Atlas himself does uphold it.
Hither all the Gods, hither all the progeny rural
In came, each took a seat, each ^ate by Syluan in order,
At the higher end of the haule in a chair with gems very costly
With leauy wreaths on his head sat great Syluanus adorned.
Next ^ate rustick^ Pan, next him sat beautiful Alphus.
Alphus a river god, next him God Baccbus, all hanged
with red-streamed grapes, next him Lady Ceres arrayed
With ^ary wreaths of wheat: next her dame Flora b^decked
With sweet smelling herbs: then sat nymphs, Fayries and halfgods
Syluans, Satyrs, Fauns, with all the rustical o^spring,
Now giving statutes, now rebels sharply reforming:
And checking sinners, at length they found them agreeued
With sweet Alexis son, that he them never ador^d,
Despisde their D^ities, their gifts that he daily abused:
Forthwith each god agreed to banish him from his empire,
And kingdom for a time. Says great Syluanus, he never
Til seven years be past, my fragrant empire hereafter,
Shall by my leave sport in, thus am I fully resolved
Neither says God Pan, my realms and flourishing empire
Where many flocks do feed, til seven years fully be passed:
Shall he come in by my leave, thus am I fully resolved.
I banish him also fro my banks so ready, says Alphus,
And I (says Bacchus) f^o my fair and beautiful Orchards*
And I (says Ceres) fro my fields and corn-bearing empire*
And sul this seven year shall he be (says Flora) deprived
Of freedom, and shall bear the servile yoke of a master,
And dearly shall he smart for these his wanton abuses*
This the gods decreed, thus firmly was it enacted:
And a day was set. They now inspired Alexis,
And moved him to send his son, his son little Faus^us,
Unto the ci^tie to learn a trade, this he fully believed,
Was done for his good. The Appointed time now approached,
Now the day was at hand, good Lord what pitiful howling,
Made that house, when he did depart, his father Alexis,
Now began sad look, and at this his heavy departure,
These most woeful words with an heart most sorrowful uttered.
THy days green blossoms, thy years young plants do resemble,
but my time imitates Swa^s white and hoary feathers,
To labor and take pains, thy years do will thee, my white hairs
forewarne that death is ready to strike daily:
Now therefore, O my son, these words I charge thee remember,
Which to thee thy father, so duty binds me speaks,
Like little Bees fro their hiues now must thou be banished of Bees
and ants learn, they will teach thee, my son, to labor:
They will teach thee to work, (...) the Be, she gathers honey,
and th'Ant corn* winters pennur^e wisely fearing.
So must thou take pains, whilst time willet thee, for old age
thy body, though now strong, will very quickly weaken,
A raynie day will come, crookedage will (I say) creep upon thee*
^nemies unto work, enemies unto profit.
A trade thou must learn, now must thou dwell in a city,
which has both virtues, and many vices in it:
These thou must ^schew, these must thou g^eedilie follow,
these bring perdition, those ^redit and great honor:
Bu^ first thy maker see that thou serve above all things,
serve him, he made thee, love him, he will thee govern:
Be loy all and gentle, to thy master trusty, thy duty
so requires, be to al a^^able, lowly, loving:
And mark this one thing, detest evil company chiefly:
for it will doubtless lead thee to folly: shun i^.
Shun women's fair looks, Venus is fair but to be shunned:
She Is hurtful, of her slatery see thou take heed:
As to the net with a call small birds are craftily allured,
with false show of a bait, as little fish be taken:
Even so women's looks entrap young nouices often times,
see thou beware they be naught, she the^ I warn thee, fly them
To know men's desire meddle not, but speak well of each one,
so shall thou get same, and love of all thy neighbors:
Shun plays and theaters, go to sermons, here many vices:
there thou shall learn to magnify God thy maker.
Both money and counsel I thee give, set more by my counsel,
Than money, thou shall be rich enough if thou do thus:
More precious it is then gems which Tagus affoordeth,
then golden fleeces which Phasis I Will hap (...) it.
So fare well my son, God bless and keep thee, remember
these things, and God will surely preserve thee* Farewell.
THis once said, he shed many tears* his mother as heavy,
Skreeking out, did bid him adue, my daughter Alind^
Seemed half mad with grief, she skies with do^lorous echoes
Made to resound, among many words, these sadly pronouncing
I will with thee go, I will be banished also,
I Will take also part of thine hard destiny, Faustus,
But now must he depart, time urged his heavy departur^:
Now needs must he go hence, farewell to the watery rivers,
Farwell he said to the fields, to the woods, and greenleaued forest
And to the town who^ he thought surely he should neueragain see
Now was he gone quite away, and at length came to the city,
Where great god Thamasis, with an huge and horrible murmur
Guides his uncouth waves, here was the place where he rested,
Here was he forste to abide the servile yoke of a master,
Here what evils he abode, what misery sufferd, I need not
Tell thee: needless it was to tell thee'^ Damon, imagine
That many gri^fes he abode, much toil and slavery suffered,
Many reproaches he bore, often times my daughter Alinda
Sent priu^e gifts unto him, he greeted her often with a token,
and which was most rare, their love which when they were infants
First began, neither ire of Gods, time an eater of all things,
Nor proud wa^pi^h Fate, able was any whit to diminish,
But the more fate, fretting time, and gods cruel anger
Sought by threatening force, the same to cancel or alter,
More greater it did wax, she sent, I remember a napkin
With needle wrought unto him, wherein this posie she ^eined,
Though time fret, gods chafe, and perverse destiny thunder,
her mind yet never shall thi^e Alinda vary.
This gift he rec^iu'd, and opportunity chauncing
a thing to him rate, this woeful letter he framed.

Faustus to his loyal Alinda.
FAustus, infaustus, forsaken, banished, exilde,
in these sad writings, sends Al^nda greeting.
Soone^ my dear-loue each star^e which shines in Olympus,
each little sand may thou count by the watery seashore:
Each bird which flies, each leaf in woods shady growing,
each sealed fish which swims in a frothy river,
Then half the miseries which thy poor Faustus abides:
Ah, but I fear too much, least thou be grie^ed at it.
What joy? what comfort have I wretch* it is all in Alinda:
Oh but that name often much dolor also causes:
No sooner its named, but joy of sense me depriueth,
no sooner its named, but tears fro mine eyes do trickle.
Joy in that thou standst in such adversity steadfast,
tears in that from thee, dest^nic me so withholds,
But yet though fate frown, though gods pursue me with anger
though Fortune plague m^, penuri^ pinch me daily:
Grieve not Alinda for it, when I was exiled, imagine
then that I died, I say, grieve not Alinda for it:
And if in hope thou lin'st, say dearth sh^l never her^after
take fro me a second love, still will I live a widow,
And it may fall out, gods taking pity, that once I
shall to both our contents unto the^ safclie return:
Then what thing mortal, what thing celestial each where,
shall joyful Faust^s from his Alinda detain it:
Not golden apples, which rich Hisperia Yields,
not little gems where with Tagus in I^d^ flows,
How many mo miseries, poor wretch, how many Caribdis,
hoping to enjoy thee, would I not easily go through.
Be stable and constant, whatsoever destinies happen,
thy Faustus will stand, be still Alinda stable:
No gem I send thee, yet a costly jewel I send thee,
that which I want my self, farewell I send thee my Love,

THis to my daughter he sent, and opportunity fitting,
She this epistle framed, and to him privily sent it.

Know thou my Fastus, by the superscription, or seal
who to thee this doleful and heavy dittie frames:
It Is thine Alinda my love, which in this dittie saluteth*
her Faustus, whose griefs are to thy sorrows equal.
But fear not Faustus, live in hope, Jove does not all times*
thunder, delay will gods cruel anger abate:
In time the Lion his fierce severity leaves,
soft drops of water mollify craggie pibbles:
In time the heifer to the yoke is easly reduced:
the stiffe-neck'd colt does yield to the rusty bridle:
Then fear not Faustus, live in hope, frost does not at al times
each thing nip, time will gods cruel anger assuage.
The trojan Captain, Venus offspring, faithles Eneas,
in time out wore th'ire of great and angry Juno.
I Will be Penelope, be thou my loyal Ulysses,
I Will be Perilla, be thou my trusty Naso.
And be most certain, my mind I will never alter
my fate whos^euer, Destiny please to vary
But fire and water, cold, heat, love and envy, desire
and hate shall first and sooner agree together.
Stream-hounting fishes forsake their waterie channels,
and in green pastures, and shadie meadows abide
Earth shall bea^e stars, heaven shall be cleft with a coulter,
then any but Faustus shall his Alinda cour^*
Faustus adue, to the gods, thy trusty and faithful Alinda,
for thy safe return prays daily. Faustus adue.
This he received, and now the griefs and sorrows he suffered*
though greater and many mo, yet now far lesser he deemed.

TIme now past on apace, hope was their an^hor and haven,
And though great distance of space detaind them asunder:
Often times in letters yet they twain pr^uil^e talked:
And last month his time was spent: to his father Alexis
And to his frinnds he returnde, oh how my daughter Alinda
Joyed at this, amongst friends, as his heavy departure,
Each thing seemed to lament, so each thing joyed his arriual.
Now pr^y thee tell me Damon, who now so sharply reprouedst
Should I remove her love, who was more trusty to Faustus,
Then was Penelope the loyal wife of Ulysses.

Da. O rare ^idelitie, O faith immooueable, worthy,
Worthy to be rehearst to all posterities after:
Should thou remove their love, I t^l the friend Melibeus,
If thou should, thou had deserved with Tantalus endless
Pains to receive. But lo, the withered grass is all hidden
With hoarie ^nowes, our sheep want meat. Mel. Let Us hastily therefore
Go f^tch them fodder, which bleat so gr^d^lie for it.

VVInter now wore away cold with his hoary frosts,
And now sharp Bor^as was made a prisoner:
Now brought in Ladi^ Ver smells odoristerous,
And with blasts very calm Zephirus entered,
Each bird sent merrily musical harmony:
The Cuckoo flew abroad with an ode uniform,
This time euerte thing merrily welcomed,
Swains with their silly truls sat by their herds feeding,
One while telling of ancient histories,
Now playing on a pipe rusticall harmony,
And the ruddie Goddess, her many colloured
Gates had scarce on a time to Titan opened,
When three Swains Coridon, Thest^lis, and Damon,
Having new sro the fields* their greedy flocks let out,
Met by chance on a time under a shady tree,
And who near to the tree stood with his heard alone,
Faustus an aged man, master of harmony,
These three mates when he saw speedily came to them.
Up then rose Coridon, Thestilis and Damon,
And prayed this aged heard to sit upon a turse.
He sat, they sat again, Thestilis and Damon,
And clownish Coridon, each held a pipe in hand,
The Old man left at home his musical instrument
And he much reuerenc'd for his age of the rest,
First of all merrily spoke to the company.
Eglogue third.
Faustus* Coridon, Thestilis, Damon. What great thanks, neighbors, to the gods
cel^stiall owe we
which such goodly weather have sent for our ewes that have eaned
Se neighbors each one, how finely Aurora saluteth
Her loving Tytan, how pale and ruddy she looks,
Our weaklings doubtless this day will mightily strengthen
Co. O, it is a fine weather, a trim batling time for our heardlings,
And less I be deceived, this day will prove ver^e fair too,
What great thanks therefore to the gods celes^^all owe we?

Fa. Yea, Coridon for many mothings we be greatly beholding
Unto the gods, I my self have seen a time when as heardsmen
Could not use their pipes, could not as we do together
Sit thus far fro the flocks, the Wolf which priu^ly lurked
In these woods, the Bear which crastily croucht in a thicket,
Both sheep and herds would the^ devour, yea often from our herdlings
We by force were plucked, and wretches urged to be soldiers,
Seldom now does a Wolf, the bear exilde fro the mountains,
Does never hurt our flocks, the gates of peaceable Ia^^s
Be now barred fast, we heed not ^eare to be soldiers,
Nor fear sould^crs force, we may now merrily pipe here.

Co. Faustus tells us troth, shy sire and grand-site often time^
Told me the same, with many mo things, more mercy the gods
Pan does favor his herds, we may now merrily pipe here. (show

Th. Yea Coridon thou may securely kiss. Galatea,
Under a shade, yea and more than that, if no body see thee.

Co. My Galatea no doubt, before your withered Alice
Shall be preferred, she looks like an old witch scortch'd in a Kill.

Da. Well Coridon, boast not too much of your Galatea, house.
Shortly your ewes will (I fear) take you for a Ram, not a keeper,

Th. No, Coridons sweet pipe, which such brave melody makes
Nill on's head suffer Act^ons horns to he joined.

Co. Ich will pipe with you Damon or Thest^lis ^ither.
And let Faust^s judge whose pipe best hatmony sends.

Fa. These reproachful terms should not be rehearsed among you,
You should not have told him of his wife Galatea:
You should not have told him of the deformity of his wife,
But let these things pass, Coridon even now made a challenge
Will ye with him contend, I will give reasonable judgment.

Both. We be agreed.

Fa. Begin Coridon, you first made a challenge.

Coridors Sonet.
Cupid took wings, and through the field did fly,
A bow in hand, and quiver at his back:
And by chance proud Amyntas did epsy,
As all alone he sat by his flock.
This silly swain so statlie minded was,
All other ^eards he thought he did surpass.
He hated Love, he hated sweet desire,
Equal to him no wight he esteemed:
Many a Less on him were set on fire,
Worthy of his love, yet none he deemed.
Out from his sheath he plucked a leaden dart,
Wherewith he smote the swain upon the heart.
Forthwith he rose, and went a little by,
Leaving his heard, for so would Cupid have:
Fair Galatea then he did epsy,
Under a shade with garland very brave.
Straitwa^es he loved, and burned in her desire,
No ease he found, the wag had made a fire.
He sighed* he burned, and fried in this flame,
Yet silly wretch, her love he never sought,
But pinde away, because he did disdain,
Cupid him stroke with that unlucky shaft
Long time he lived thus pining in despair,
Til's life at length flew into the open air.
Cupid abroad through shadie fields did fly,
Now having stroke proud Aminta^ with his shaft:
Poor Coridon by chance he passed by,
As by his heard he sat of joy bereft.
Sick, very sick was this lowly swain,
Many that he liked, all did him disdain.
Cupid him saw, and pitied him forthwith,
Chose out a dart among a thousand more:
Than which a luckier was not in his sheath,
Wherewith he gave the swain a mighty blow.
Strait rising up, Galatea he espide,
Forthwith he loved, and in desire fride.
Ah how she pleased, pale and red was her face,
Rose-cheek'd as Aurora you have seen:
A wreath of flowers her seemly head did grace,
Like Flora fair, of shepherds she was Queen*
He passed by, and deemed that she laughed,
Her very looks did favor show, he thought.
Therefore in have with rude and homely terms,
He did her woo, her hoping to obtain:
First she denide, at length she did affirm,
She would him love, she could him not disdain.
Thus di'd Amyntas because he was so coy,
Poor Coridon his love did thus enjoy.
Fa. Well, Coridon has done, lets hear your melody Damon.

Da. Help me my cheerful Muse, O Pan melod^ous help me,
And wise Apollo to ^un^ the stately progeny of heardsmen.

Damons dittie.
WHen Jove first broken had the Chaos ancient,
And things at variance had set at unity:
When first each element, fire, air, and water,
And earth immovable were placed as you see:
A plowman then he made, he made a sheep-feeder,
The plowman he made of stoni^ progeny,
Rebelling to the plough, like to the flinty field,
Hard-hearted, full of hate: The noble sheepfeeder
He made of a mild and lowly progeny,
Gentle, and very meek, like a sheep innocent,
Often times he to the Gods sacrifice offered,
One while he gave a Lamb, one while a tidy calfe,
Since that time silly swains and noble sheepseeders
Have been much visited and loved of the gods.
Go to my merry Muse, found out upon a pipe
Shepherds antiquities, and noble progeny,
A shepherd was Abra^, Lot was a sheep-keeper,
Great Angels, from above came many times to these,
Yea Jove omniregent leaving his heavenly seat
Talked with the^, men affirm, as they sat by their herds
Of them sprung valiant and noble nations,
Go to my merry muse, sound out upon a pipe,
Heardsmens antiquity, and noble progeny,
Paris sat with his flock, in Ida redolent,
When he was made a Judge to Venus and Iun^,
And Pallas beautiful three mighty goddesses.
Go to my m^rie muse, sound out upon a pipe
Herdsmens antiquity and noble progeny.
David sat with his heard, when as a Lion huge
And eke a Bear he slew, this little preti^ swain
Killed a victorious and mighty champion,
Whose words did make a king and al his host to fear
And he ^ul many years reigned over Israel.
Go to my merry Muse, sound out upon a pipe*
Heardsmens antiquity, and noble progeny*
Moses fed silly sheep, when like a fiery flame
Jehovah called him out from a bramble bush,
O what great monuments and mighty miracles
In Egypt did he show, and to king Pharao*
Iordans waves back he drive, Jordan obeyed him.
Go to my merry muse, sound out upon a pipe,
Heardsmens antiquitite, and noble progeny.
Angels brought (men afirm) to busy sheepfeeders,
In fi^lds of Bethlehem news of a Savior,
Before Magicians and noble Emperors,
The Infant laid in a crib, Jove's mighty progeny,
Mankinds joy, life, and health cuntrie swains viewed:
Cease now my merry Mnse to tune upon a pipe.
Heardsmens antiquitiy and noble progeny.
Fa. Damons dittie is done, begin you Thestilis also,

Th. Aid me, my pleasant muse, O Pan god musical aid me.
Thestilis Ode.
A Stately scepter in a soil most famous,
Where silver streaming Thamasis resoundeth,
A Princess bears, who with ^u^rduring
virtues abound^th.
With this pipe in her land, O muse, a famous
Dittie rec^te thou: she deserves a Dittie:
Her praises echoes do resound, and tell through
every city.
Nymphs from strange countries, water-haunting Naydes
Leave their fair habits, to behold her honor:
We swains think our selves to be blessed, if we can
but look upon her.
In her land nymphs by Helicons fair fountains,
Make Odes: on Citterne her Appollo cease
Not to extol* Pans pipe by the shady mountains,
Her daily prayseth.
Abroad once walking with a train like Phe^^,
They say that Tytan stood as one amazed,
And as when fair Lencothoe he viewed
on her he gazed.
Then also Juno, Venus and Minerua.
Seeing her walking with a troop so statelle,
Each did her challenge, she by right is mine, says
each noble Lady.
She Is mine, quoth Juno, she is a Queen most royal,
She Is mine (quoth Pallas) sh'ath a wit notable:
She Is mine, quoth Venus, Paris her will give me,
She Is amiable.
Palls at this chaft, Juno fretted and swear,
In heaven proud Paris shall a judge be no more,
He loves fair Hellen, which he loves, he therefore
beauty will adore.
At which words Rose-cheek'd Citherea smiled,
Her face besprenting with a sanguine color:
Then let ^oue says she, be the judge, thine husband,
and noble brother.
With all speed therefore, to the skies the^ they posted
And to ^oues crystal seat in heaven approaching:
Thus spoke great Juno to the mighty Lord and
maker of each thing.
O Jove, for doubtless many times thou have viewed
Albions Princess, sweet Eliza, we three
Contend whose monarch she may be, she is thou know
wise, noble, comely.
Jupiter hereat was amassed and said,
To judge this matter is a thing not ^asie,
But yet needs must it be resolved, or ye will
Fall out I fear me
My sister Juno, thou my daughter Pallas,
And Venus kinned to me three ways,
She Is not thine Pallas, Juno she is not thine, nor
thine Citherea.
But Juno, Pallas, Venus and each goddess
has her indifferent, ye do claim her vainly*
This is my judgment, sweet Eliza, Ladies,
shall be mine only.
O what great and huge miracles Jehovah
Aiding, she has wrought here, many years which pressed us,
From Romish Pharaohs tyrannous bondage, she
safely releasd us.
Since that bright day star shady night expelling,
Which has brought day light over all this Island:
That Moses which her people through the sea led,
As by the dry land.
From craggie mountains water has she made
With manna, nectar, many years she fed us:
Thus has she long time, noble Jove assisting,
mightily led us
O from what Scillas she preserved has
From spanish armies Jove has her protected,
Thy force O Romish Prelate, and wiles has she
wisely detected.
Her realm in quiet many years she ruled
her subjects saftie very much regarding,
Punishing rebels, she reformeth vices,
Virtue rewarding.
The plowman may now reap his harvest in joy,
Each man may boldly lead a quiet life here
We shepherds may sit with our heard in field, and
merrily pipe here.
A Phoenix rare she is on earth amongst us,
A mother us her people she does nourish
Let us all therefore, with one heart, pray Jove that
long she may flourish.
FAustus, our Odes are done, you must give reasonable judgment,
But speak as you think: who made best harmony, Faustus?

Fa. Ye have pip'd all well, and I think, had sacred Apollo
Heard you, he would have praisde your tunes melodious also:
But which of you made best harmony, for me to tell you,
Were but a needless thing, t'wold breed but brauling among you
The^ let this suffice, you have al three pip'd very well now

Co. Well then I see you fear to offend this company Faustus,
Had Coridon pip'd worst, Coridon should hear it I know well.

Fa. Nay not so, but I ^oue to shun contention, I would
Have you agree, for if I should Thestilis harmony commend,
You would at it chafe, and Damon also, so should I
Get me surely two foes, but rather hark to my counsel,
Lets to breakfast go, and lets drink friendly together,
So this strife will end, very bad is hatred amongst us

Co. I am agreed.

Th. And I.

Da. And I will not say against it.

Parcite Pierides, iuueni concedite vestr^
non valet ad varios vnus arator agros:
Musa vale, iuuenique faue, dominoque placere,
and tibi, non valeo, Musaiocosa vale.
FINIS.

