TRVTHE tried, very comfortable to the faithful: but a discomfort to the
enemies of God. Newly set forth by. I. S.

Proverbs. 10. Proverbs. 11. The memorial of (...) shall have a good report,
but the name of the ungodly shall stink, and their hope, shall perish, and the
ungodly shall fall in their own wickedness.

The preface to the Reader.
AS the budding branches of every good material tree, at their due time
thorough the mighty work of God, bring forth fruit pleasant and comfortable
for the contentation and refreshyng of the outward man: although not each
branche or bough replenished with like quantity, So likewise the branches of
the beautiful tree of gods eternal truth thorough his gracious appointment,
brings forth such fruit, as is for the comfort and sustenance of the inward
man, the spiritual soul: and though every branche be not endued with like
abundance, or replenished with like quantity of sweet persuasions, yet not in
the quantity only, but as well in the qualitye, consists the virtue of
each thing. And for as much as we shall render accomptes of the talentes
received, and therefore are admonished, whether they be few or many, much
or little, yet dyligentlye to employe and bestow them, to the advancement of
gods glory, and the edifyeng of our christen brethern. I therefore as one of the
vnprofitablest vnfruitfullest, and most unworthiest the name of a branche of
that tree, yet being desirous to imparte unto others such fruit as God has
endued me with: and to employe my talent to the glory of God, and the comfort
of my brethren: have therefore enterprised this little work, which
although not in that sort and order, as if it had been touched by the hands
of the learned: yet I nothing mystrust, but that the gentill reader will
conceive the best of my good will and meaning. And forasmuch as the manner of
many men, when new works come to their hands, is, to satisfy them selves
with readyng here and there a piece, and being soon weary, their travail to
none effect. I have therefore thought good to require thee gentill reader, not
to think it troublesome to read and again to read over these so few leaves
which unto the godly minded, shall be both pleasant and comfortable: and as
herein thou shall perceive the terrible punishments and just plages which god
has in store, for ye transgressors of his precepts, and neglectours of his
words, to the ruin decay and overthrow of that people and country: so shalt
you likewise behold his unspeakable and inestimable benefits and blessings,
which he of his almighty mercy, most plentyfully and abundantly pours upon
that people and country, where his holy and blessed word, with thankful hearts
is embraced. Of which both) in this realm of England we have had the
experience, as to the reader shall most perfectlye appear. Thus partly for the
declaryng my duty to God, and the zeal I bear unto his truth as also my
hearty desire of ye continual prosperous estate of my country as nature forces
me, I have through the sufferance and assistance of God, symply fynished my
enterprise begone, geuynge him whollye the praise. Amen.

Would god the smart which we for sin,
So late did worthily taste:
Might cause us loath the wickedness,
That now aboundes so fast.
That God may spare our souls from death
And by his mighty power:
Preserve us still from those, that seek,
Our freedom to devour.
For sure if still we dwell in sin,
And live in carelessenes:
Such woeful plages shall soon ensue,
As I cannot express.
Be warned in time, and fear the lord,
And with pure minds and hearts:
Embrace gods truth, follow the same:
Such are the christians parts.
Then those which yet his truth resist,
God shall justly reward:
That neither of the lord, nor yet,
of sovereign have regard.
But stubburnly against the law,
of God and Queen contend:
Whose wylful wickedness at last,
Shall work their woeful end.
And such as fear the lord their God,
Shall certainly be blessed:
And shall after this life enjoy,
In heaven eternal rest.
Truth tried, very comfortable to the faithful: but a discomfort to the
enemies of god. Newly set forth by. I. S. 1562.
Having zelously waied and considered the great benefit and blessing, that god
of his infinite mercy, has again so lovingly and mercifully bestowed upon us,
his people of England, me thought I say my self of duty forced even for
conscience sake, to stir up the minds of others my brethren, by puttyng them
in remembrance of the same, least we again neglectyng and being forgetful of
our bounden duetye toward god, our heavenly father in this behalf should
woorthely feel a greater and more grievous smarte and plage then that, which we
already thorough our late frailtye and forgetfulness have tasted of: call
therefore to mind my brethren, how that of long and many years before the
light of the Gospel appeared, and shyned amongst us here in England, both we
and our fathers were seduced, walkyng blyndly in darkness, and in straye paths
like lost sheep, without their shepherde, we were nouryshed, fed, and
pampered up with foolish fantasies and dotynge dreams of man's invention with
trifles, I say, were we trained in the broad paths that led to pardition,
drawn by the guydes of Antichriste, destroyers as much as in them is, both of
body and soul: Oh cankred caterpyllers thoroughe whose subtle means and
diuelishe delusions we were so blinded, that we neither knew god nor how to
walk in his holy ways: but still kept ignorant from all godly knowledge and
understanding. It would be to tedious to make here a rehersall of the whole
number of the not necessary and nedelesse ceremonies, practiced through the
peuyshnes of Balams balde ones: and therefore I will not but only treat a
little of the woeful worshippyng of images, and the detestable Mass (which
both) they myghtily maintained, contrary to the sacred scriptures, as
manifestly shall appear.

And first, how grievously offended we the majesty of the almighty God,
taking from him the honor only due unto him, and geuynge the same to carved,
graven, and molten images, Psalm 135.
and ydols, having mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, neither having any breath in their mouths, being but stocks and stones,
the works of men's hands: and yet how wickedly worshipped we them, runnyng
and gaddyng on pilgremage to them to make amends for our synful life, sekyng
at their hands remission of sins: which is no where to be sought nor had, but
at the hands of god only: as witnesses the Evangelist Mark, Who (says he)
can forgive sins, Mar. 2. Math. 9. John. 24. Act. 4.
but God only? Christ is the way, truth and life, no man comes unto the Father
but by him, neither is there salvation in any other, nor yet is there any other
name given unto men, wherein we must be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ: and
yet not withstanding, (we) then destitute of this godly knowledge and
understanding, wandered from place to place, from country to country, to
offer, to carry and bring to them that neither, saw nor felt, but yet
receauers they had that refused nothing: al was fyshe that came to the net with
the^: these p^^feryng pilgrimages had that papisticall brood and Romyshe ^able
devised for their own lukers sake which though beneficial to themselves yet
most abominable in the sight of God, and a plain robbyng of God of the
honor and reverence only due unto him: whereof though they were not ignorant,
yet careless.

Secondly, touching the Mass which was their chief staff to stand by, how
were we by them persuaded, coniured, and brought to believe the same to be a
sacrifice, to put away the sins, both of the quick and the dead: and that
by the virtue there of (as they said) they transported souls from purgatory
to paradise, purchased eternal salvation: ye, what sore was it not a salve
for? or what diseases would it not cure? And after the words of consecration
spoken, then no bread nor wine to remain, but were forthwith altered and
turned into the very body and blood of Christ, ye the very same proportion of
body that honge on the cross, to be there forth coming at their
commandment: they had him in a string in such subjection, to pluck him to
them, and put him from them, at their own pleasure: the creator to be subject
to the creature. Oh abominable blasphemye, oh diuelishe detestable and
shameless sacrificers, directly denying the death of Jesus Christ to be only
sufficient. But now behold therefore what they are, and what their own doyngs
declare them to be, even the very enemies of Christ Jesus: they kept the simple
ones ignoraunte, and show themselves to be even they, To. xvi.
whom Paul willed us to be ware of, who with their flatteryng words, and
sweet preachynges deceive the hearts of the innocents: These I say be they,
of that viperous generation, of that filthy brood, that our Savior Christ
warns us of, Math 24. Mar. xiii.
by the holy Evangelist Matthew. * If any man say unto you, to here is Christ,
or there is Christ, believe them not. For there shall arise false Christ's, and
falls prophets shall do great miracles and wonders: in so much that if it were
possible, ye very elect should be deceived. And alas how were we poor selye
wretches and innocents in bondage wretchedly wrapped in captivity, of many
years subject to these gredy whelps of Antichrist who without all shame and
destitute of godly fear, continual lie poured out upon, and in manner drouned
us with innumerable blasphemies and hipocritical superstitious ceremonies
against God and his truth. Thus were we by them led toward destruction of
body and soul: Thus were we through that wicked Romish train still kept from
the bright beams of gods holy word.

And being thus in our chief extremity at an exigent, even at the pytte
brynke of pardition, behold the merciful goodness of our almighty God, the God
of our forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: behold (I say) the great care
of God for his people: who he so derely has bought even with the precious
blood of his son Christ: behold how God here tendered the works of his own
hands: ye and behold the sweet and comfortable promyses of our savior
Christ: most lovingly performed. Nothing (says he) is in secret, that shall
not come abroad, Mar. 8.
nor any thing hyd that shall not come to light and be know^. For lost plesed
our heavenly father of his free mercy then that his word should be a lantern
to our feet, Psalm 119. Man. ^.
and a light to our path wais where as before we walked in darkness, now did
the blind see, and the deaf hear: and to the poor was the glad tidyngs
preached: Psalm 19.
This word gave light and brought forth understanding even unto the very
babes, it offered an everlasting enheritance unto all those that with constaunt
faith did or do embrace it. God stirred up then his faithful ministers to
pronounce the same his will unto us, Psalm. ^7.
to win his people unto himself: Oh how mercifully did god then bless us,
and show the light of his countenance upon us, geuyng us true and skilful
shepardes to guide us, even such as at his hands had received a spiritual
understanding They preached unto us the kingdom of god to be at hand. They
preached unto us ye lost sheep of Israel, the gospel of ye kingdom of god. They
preached repentance, Mathe. ^.
* Freely they received eue^ of the good gift of god: And freely they gave
again: so that thorough the sound and true doctrine of Jesus Christ taught by
them, we were led to the straight and narrow way that leads unto life. Mat.
7.
Note therefore now, gentyl Christian, the great diversity in this point,
beetwene the fantasies, dreams, and inventions of the perilous papists, and
how much they varye and disagre with the truth of god taught unto us by the
faithful ministers of his most holy and invincible word. The Romish brood
taught us, that with gadding on pilgrimage, and offering of money and trifles to
stocks and blocks, our sins were forgeuen us, and that those worm eaten
ambassadors, and painted Idols, were as mediators to take up the matter
between god and us: but S. James says, James. i^^.
that these be liars against the truth, and their wisdom not to descend from
above, but is earthly, natural, and devilish, and therefore to be detested,
abhorred, and utterly despised. But the true pilgremage in deed was taught us
by the trustye messangers of their Master Christ. Pet^er. 2.
And which (of al Christians) ought continually to be observed and followed:
and this it is, Iame, ^.^.
that we abstayn from sleshely lusts, which fight against the soul, to visit
the prisoners and succourles people, the fatherless in their adversity: to
clothe, and cover our nedy naked brethren with some holsom and comfortable
garment. etc. But not to apparel the blunt block, that neither feels heat
nor cold. and how is it then possible they should help us, or do us any
pleasure, that cannot help themselves? ye what need we any other mediator
or intercessour, John, i.
but him whom we have already to be our advocate with the father even Jesus
Christ that righteous one. And thus did those holy men of God teach us, they
taught us, Christ alone to be our intercessour and advocate: and that God
alone, absolueth and freelye forgeueth us for Christ his sake all our sins, if
we earnestly repent and believe, as witnesses Peter: we are says he, 1. Peter 1
justified by faith only in Christ his blood: let this be sufficient in this
point.

And now to the second point, concerning the real presence of Christ to be in
their Mass, which the Papists continually taught earnestly affirmed and with
tooth and nail maintained. Note now I say here, the true understanding thereof
taught us by Christ his ministers, which they learned in the book of life, upon
which foundation the apostles and ancient fathers and doctors of the Church
in this point have builded as upon a most sure and infallible rock, Hebr. ix.
Act. 7.17. Esaias. 66.
Christ (says Paul) is not entered into the holy places that are made with
hands, which are but similitudes of true things, but is entered into the very
heavens for to appear now in the sight of God for us. Every priest is ready
daily ministering and oftentimes offreth one manner offrynge, Hebr. x.
which can never take away sin: but this man after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins, satte him down for ever on the right hand of God, and
from hensfoorth taryeth till his foes be made his footestoole. Ye shall have
poor folk always with you, Math. 26. John 12. Mark. 14. John. 7.
but me shall ye not have. Also Saint John in his vii. Chapter, ye shall seek
me, and shall not find me: where I am, thither can ye not come. Athanasius
likewise in his creed says, that Christ ascended into heaven, and sytteth on
the right hand of God, the father almyghtie: from whence he shall come to
Judge the quick and the dead. And more over in the articles of our faith, the
third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended into heaven, and sytteth
on the right hand of God, and from thence (he shall come to Judge the quick
and the dead:) which judgment of the quick and the dead, if it be already
past, then is Christ really present, as the papystes affirm: But if that
dredful day be yet to com, (as it is the part and duty of Christians to
believe,) although it be not far of, then is not Christ now with us, as in his
humanitye, Mat. 16. Marce. 8. Luc. 9.
but (shall come) in the glory of his father, with his Angels, and then shall
reward every man according to his deeds: at whose coming God grant we may be
found ready and not slepyng. Well then for as much as that one offrynge of
Jesus Christ being all in all, and only sufficient: To what intent or purpose
should we have such and so many daily sacrifices? for what are they but a very
plain denial of Christ crucified, to be a sacrifyce only sufficient for those,
that believe to have salvation thereby? And thus good Christian brethren,
although there be in holy scripture many more places to be alleged, which
might be applied, and aptly serve for ye satysfyeng o^ Christian consciences in
this point, that Christ sits at the right hand of the father, as touching
his humanitye: Yet I pray you, let these for briefnes presently be
sufficient, and hereby may ye now see how the iugglyng Mass Priests have
abused the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, which mystery of all
the faithful, ought thus to be understood: and for this purpose did Christ
our savior institute, ordain, and leave it unto us to be used.

That thou Christian, should come there unto, with a penitent heart, for thy
former offenses, fullye and earnestlye purposyng through the assistance of the
almighty, to put upon thee, the new man, which is created after god in
righteousness, and holiness of truth, and stedfastlye beleuynge, that through
the passion, bloodshed, and death of Christ, upon the Cross, which the bread
and wine as holy signs do represent, thou have, I say, obtained full remyssion
of thy sins. And in this faith, with reverence and humblenes of heart, eat
and drink the mysteries of the body and blood of Christ. And this glorious
work has our almyghtye and gracious God the father, wrought in and by his
son Jesus Christ, our savior, for the salvation of as many as steadfastly
believe the same. And thus is to be understood of this pure and holy
Sacrament: and not that after the subtyl sorcerye and coniuration of ye priest,
being finished, the body of our savior Christ to be forth with there, in ye
full proportion of his humanitye. For as Saint Austen witnesses, the bodily
presence of Christ, (concerning his humanitye) is in some one place of
heaven, but his divine presence was, is, and shall be there, here, and in all
places, where it shall please, him, always ready to assiste those that
faithfully ar gathered together in his name. And again he says, as
concerning the presence of his flesh, The Church had Christ but a few days,
yet now it holds him fast by faith, though it see him not with eyes.
Cirillus, likewise writes, that all though Christ took away from hence the
presence of his body, yet in the Majesty of his Godheade, he is ever here. Also
Gregory affirms, that Christ is not here by the presence of his flesh, and
yet is absent no where by the presence of his Majesty: And this I take to be
so plainly said, to satysfye in this point, as that there needs no more
rehearsal of any other authors: But if this suffyse the not, resort then unto
the golden book of that worthy Cramner, late Archebyshoppe of Canturburye,
where thou may have ground work and sure foundation sufficient to buyld
thy faith upon in this point: and then with an vpryght conscience judge
indyfferently, how much the devilish and erroneous doctrine invented by the
papists, dysagreeth and varyeth from the sacred word of God, and the opinions
and mynds of the fathers, and the Doctors of the primative church. Well thus
were we instructed: thus had we (I say) the truth of god taught and opened unto
us: we were daily fed and nourished with the lively words of god. In the
setting forth and teaching whereof, when the preachers had diligently traueled,
and through their zealous earnestnes in the declaration of their Master Christ
his message they had so instructed and taught us, that thereby we were somewhat
trained from the dangerous and perilous pathwaies of perdition, wherein we
were before blyndly led: and that by the assistance of God through those his
ministers we were brought to some understanding and knowledge of him, and
had some taste and sweetness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is the
pleasant path way, ye leads to eternal salvation: Then seized they not but
continually and louyngly exhorted us, not to be forgetful of the great
mercy that God had so louynglye showed in the reuealynge of his truth unto
us, still puttyng us in remembrance to persevere in ye same, Prove 23,
applying our hearts unto learning, and our ears unto ye words of knowledge,
2, Timo, 3,
to continue in reading ye holy scriptures, which is able to make us wise unto
salvation, through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. Thus were we the^
taught, ye infinite numbers of godly instructions were given us by these
school masters worthy of their office: 1, Peter, 2
These were true instructors, these were they yt Peter speaks of, even ye true
prophets of the chosen generation of the holy nation and peculiar people, yt
showed us the virtues of him, that called the^ out of darkness into his
marvelous light, into ye which through ye great mercy of God and their paynful
travel, industrye, and daily preaching, we were trained, and according to ye
same a while we walked. Alas, in deed but a while, for all to soon we began to
be weary of our welfare: we disdayned well doing, and waxed forgetful of the
great goodness of almighty god toward us: we were unthankful, for the great
benefits, received at his hands, we herkened not diligently to the worde^ of
God, pronounced by his messangers, but necglected our duties, both toward God
and his mynisters: and yet not withstandyng our peruers carelessness then, such
was the pity and mercy of God (tendering us as ye father his children,) yt he
would not suddenly, so sharply deal with us, as our deserts deserved, for so
little regarding so worthy a Iuel (his holy word) but rather louyngly warned
us by the mouths of his seruau^ts, and chosen vessels, to keep us yt we should
not fall from him. They, I say, cried out to us for the amendment of our life,
yt we should leave of sin and wickedness, and follow virtue, that we should
remember the great mercy and wonderful work of god, in reueling his truth
unto us. And yt we should with earnest and zealous hearts embrace it: and while
we had the light, to believe in the light, that we might be the children of
light, least darkness again overwhelmed us. Thus were we then daily taught, and
put in remembrance: Feruente was the love of Gods word in these his chosen,
and careful were these shephardes, for the flock committed to their charge:
but careless we were, and coldly affected, nothing regarding or passing for
their godly admonitions and warnings: which our carelesnes when they perceived,
and that gentle and loving persuasions would not prevail, then thundered they
out the plages, which god had prepared, being then even at hand for us: and
whereof we might assure our selves, unless spedye repentance and amendment of
our former wickedness and dissolute life. And was it not then preached, and
daily by them cried out in our ears, that if we would not hearken unto ye words
of ye lord pronounced unto us by his ministers, and with obedient hearts walk
according to ye same, Deu 28.4
yt then we should go wast, and be made an ensaumple and a jesting stock to all
nations? Ye was it not by the^ most certainly said, that if we continued in
our unthankfulness, God would give us into the hands and government of a
foreign prince: Deute 28 Jeremy 5 Barn^, 4,
and that god would bring a nation upon us from far, whose tongue we should not
understand, which should neither regard ye person of ye old, nor have
compassion on the young? Did they not threaten us in the name of the lord with
sword, hunger, and pestilence, if we considered not the great blessings of
god, being thankful for the same: and framed our lives according to his
gospel? Amos, 8
Did they not with Amos prophecy of the hunger of the word of god to come upon
us, and that we should go from sea to sea, and from the South to the East to
seek it, and should not find it? were not these terrible threatninges dailye
preached and pronounced unto us, the rather to move and stir our hearts and
minds to love and embrace gods truth, and the better to consider the loving
kyndnes of God toward us? But alas, all would not help, the gentle
persuasions, the terrible threatnyngs, as well the one as the other were in
vain. So much were we with carelesnes corrupt, wallowing in wickedness, so
fylthelye infected with vice, so much contemnyng spiritual instructions, so
lustyng after carnal things of this world, so addicte to our own wills, so
puffed up with pride, so little brotherly love amongst us, so altogether care
less, that we neither regard God nor his ministers: we were not obedient to
the voice of our teachers, Pro 5.
nor harkened not unto them that informed us: The warnyng of the Prophets we
took but for wynd, Romans 6.
* we were the servants of sin, and did not obey with heart unto the form
of doctrine, whereunto we were delivered: we were hearers of the word, but not
doers, we deceived our selves: James 1.
for he that hears the word and does it not, is like unto a man that
beholds his bodily face in a glass: for as soon as he has looked upon
him self, he forgets foorthewith what his fashion was: but happy is the
hearer and that does follow: which we did not but wholly neglected, and
therefore did kyndle the wrath of the lord against us: And the lord then
hydyng his face and sweet countenance from us, performed his promise, and
iustelye poured upon us the plages wherewyth he punishes those that disobeye
his godly will, and transgress his holy law and commandments. For did not
then the king of glory and power, whose heavy wrath thorough our perverseness
we had purchased, suddenly take from us our noble and prudent prince king Edward
the vi. so worthy an ympe, so virtuous, so forward, so graciously grounded in
christian religion, so altogether given to advance and set forth the glory of
god, as that the like of him in godly skill, and of so tender years, the earth
did not conteyne: The living god had so blessed him, endued and so
plenteously replenished his princely heart with a spiritual and heavenly
understanding, yt he had made him more meeter to inhabit the holy heavens,
there to he hold ye mighty majesty of god, the^ to continue on this corrupt
earth amongst us wicked wretches, that lived in security and waxed forgetful of
the great benefits and unspeakable blessings of our heavenly father: And
therefore did god take from us our so ioiful a iuel, our pereles prince, and
with him the word of life, the sweet and comfortable gospel of Jesus Christ,
which nourished and was the precious preservative of our souls: And for our
unthankfulness suffered us again to be made drunk with the spirit of error: and
as the lothesome dog to his vomyte, or the filthy sow to her wallowing in the
mire, so were we turned again to our old abominations: we worshipped idols,
we served strange gods of wood and stone, we did the works of the heathen,
whereby we highlye offended the majesty of the almighty: who therefore gave us
over into the hands and government of a strange king and nation, according as
he promised by the mouth of Jeremy, Ierem, 8,
* saying: I will give their wines unto aleantes, and their fields to
destroyers, and so it came to pass: for they who utterly hated us, reigned
over us: we were subject, I say, unto a nation fully infected with filthy
idolatry, and all abominations of the Romish superstitious hipocrisy, (a
nation) with whom for their presumption and pride, not Lucifer him self in
his chiefest arrogancye might compare: a vicious people, which daily devoured
both wives and widows, and defloured maidens, a brood of caterpillars, that
wast consume, and destroy all where they come, a merciles people, and
destitute of the true knowledge of god. What should I say, even a people, hated
and abhorred of us, and of all nations: And yet we were then in subjection to
them: Psalm, 10^
The^ was ye world turned up side down with England, mercy and pitye were fled
the realm, and merciles cruelty supplied the place, iniquity had the ouerhand.
The true teachers and preachers of his word, the ministers and chosen vessels
of Jesus Christ, i, Cori. 4. i. Thessa. 2
were then made as it had been gasyng stocks to all the world, reviled, evil
spoken of, despised, emprisoned, and that only for professing their master
Christ: but happy ye twice happy are they and all such, for the spirit of
god, i, Peter. 4,
and the spirit of glory rests upon them, that he railed upon for the name
of Christ. For such as God has chosen to himself, have been in respect of
the world, wretched miserable, turmoiled with manifold troubles: for so is the
promise of almightye God, John 1^
* Because ye be not of the world, the world does hate you, and all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus (says Paul) shall suffer persecution. Let
therefore the fruits of the late godly ministers, show of whence they were.
For such was I say, their stedfastnes in Christ Jesus, and such was their
feruente zeal, love, and hartye affection toward GOD, and his holy word:
which they so perfectly preached, and faithfully taught, that for the
advancement thereof, and the better strengthening of the faith of their weaker
brethren, 2. Tim. 2.
they were content like constant, faithful, and worthy soldiers of Jesus
Christ their graunde capitayn, not only to suffer hunger, cold, railing,
mocking, buffeting, whipping, and imprisoning: but also to give their body to
the fire, there to be consumed to ashes. Oh terrible time, Oh pitiful spoil,
and Oh miserable murder and destruction of gods household. i. Peter, 2,
* but then was the time come, that judgment must begin at the house of god:
2, Tim, 2,
* They were vessels sanctified unto honor mete for the lord. This did they
through the assistaunce of the holy ghost, for the advancement of gods
glory, 2, Tim, 2,
* and for the electes sake, that they might also obtain the salvation which
is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory: patientlye and meekely, as lambs
received they death, Saplen. 5,
* Whose life of the foolyshe was thought to be very madness, and their end
to be without honor: but they are coumpted amongst the children of God,
Hebr, vi,
and their portion is amongst the Saints. * Though in the sight of the
unwise, they appeared to dye, and their end to be very destruction: yet are
they in rest, and their hope full of immortality. Rom, 8, 2, Cor ^.5 Hebr, xi,
* They confessed theymselues to be as strangers and pylgrems upon the
earth. They were no gredye gapers for prefermente, neither benefice, nor
Bishopryke, nor any other worldly promotion or dignitye: although largelye
offered and promised (if they would have forsaken their master Christ, and his
word) could tempte or overcome them, nor with draw their earneste minds
from God: They would not be fed with eye pleasures, they esteemed not the
tryslyng treasure of this transitorye world, nor the vain and peryllous pomp
thereof, as the vayneglorious beallye god Bishops and woorrieng wolves, who
then sucked their innocente blood, did: but such was the godly
constantnesse I say, of those lambs of God, that they were nothing myndefull
of the country, wherein they then were, but were desirous of a better, that is
to say, Sapie. 3.
a heavenly*. For God had proved them, and found them mete for him self: As
gold in the furnace had he tried them: * They were led by the spirit of God,
Romans 8.
because the spirit of God dwelled in them*: Wherefore God is not ashamed of
them, even to be called their God, and has prepared for them a city, even the
heavenly Jerusalem. Now is the promise of Christ performed in them: James. 1.
* he that endures, when he is tried, shall receive the crown of life,
prepared for them that love him, whereof they are now partakers. for he that
loses his life for my sake, says Christ, Math. 19.
shall find it: even these therefore were of that number that have given their
life for their Master Christ his sake, and in the defense of his truth:
therfore^ have they received the reward of a Prophet, which was increase of
knowledge in this life, and everlasting joy and felicitye in the world to
come whereof God for his mercies sake, make us with them to be partakers.

But Oh England, be myndful how God then of his just justice, revenged the
unmerciful persecution, and bloodshed of those his innocent lambs, Prophets,
Martyrs, and sanctified soldiers, whose blood cried vengeance in ye sight of
god, upon the unthankfulness of his wicked enemies, which even then fell upon
us, and our country: what numbers of plages, the^ followed one in an others
neck, mysery daily increased, the common wealth went to ruin for want of
those, in who^ the fear of god was graffed: who being already murdered, or
for conscience sake, fled their country, or remaining at home, absented
themselves, to avoid the danger of being consumed to death by fire. But in a
miserable state is ye realm, where the guyders of the flock are without
understanding, and where the truth of God is not taught. Whereof ye experience
was then both to well seen and felt: for who in those days were they that
flourished, or who as the term goes, ruled then the roste, in
ecclesiastical causes? But the Romysh race of princelyke prelates, the
monsterous myghterd men, whose ruffle and ravenous procedynges, for want of
Godly skyll, or through a dyuelyshe obstinacye, for lack of good will to
guide their flock, what Christian heart lamenteth not to remember? For in
place of true teachers of the glad tydinges of Jesus Christ, we had
detestable destroyers, poisoned peruerters, and shameless shadowers of ye
same: whose only care, study, and travel, tended to train us up, and keep
us in ignorance and blyndnes, according to their wonted manner, to keep and
mayntaine in full force, the whole rabble of the Romyshe abominations, to
exalte and keep in his pomp ye monsterous Antichrist of Rome, as chief and
supreme head and governor of the Church: which title by the autoritye of the
Scriptures belongs to every prince, within his own dominions, as well in
causes ecclesiastical as temporal, and yet were not they either ashamed, or
afraid of this their wicked procedynges, neither respected they ye glory of
almighty God, nor regarded their due obedience to their prince: wherefore they
declared themselves to be the same, Ierem, 5, 1, Reg, 14
that Jeremy speaks of: Wise to do evil, but to do well, they know not: *
shewinge themselves as rebellious sorcerers, and stubborn wicked Idolatrers,
charmers, and councelers with spirits: they are therefore as in Deuteronomi is
mentioned, Deute, 18
even all corrupt, and made abominable in their studyes: they be even they,
through whose inchauntmentes, Apoc, 18.
al nations were deceived. They left the commandments of God, Mark, 15,
and maintained their own constitutio^s, they made division, and gave occasion
of evil, Rom, 16,
contrary to ye doctrine yt ye have learned. These be those hipocrits ye love
salutatio^s in ye market places, Mat, 23,
which devour widows houses, under pretense of long prayer: they appear
beautiful outward, but inward, are full of filthy hipocrisy and iniquitye:
They deal with lies, says Ieremye: Nevertheless they heal the hurt of the
people very frendlye, Jeremy 8,
saying, peace, peace, where there is no peace at all: Fie for shame says the
Prophet, how abominable things, do they, Ieremi. 9
and yet they be not ashamed* They bend their tongues like bows to shoot out
lies, and take great pains to do myschiefe: they are a deceatfull people,
which for very dissemblyng falseshod will not know me, (says the Lord:)
With their mouth they speak peaceablye to their neighbors, but preuily they
lay wait for him: Oh Jeremy, how truly is thy prophecy fulfilled? what great
and cruel smarte, and torment have the people of god suffered by the means of
this wicked generation, 2, Pete* 2,
* being themselves the bryngers in of damnable sects, deceauers, and begylers
of stable souls: and through their covetousness, make marchaundyse of Gods
people, promysyng liberty, and they themselves the bond slaves of corruption.
These be the presumptuous stubborn ones, that fear not to murmr, speak
ill of, Epistle, Judas.
and despise the hyer power *. These are of those ungodly that were craftyly
crepte in, that turn the grace of God unto wantonness, that deny God to be
the only Lord Jesus Christ. Woe be unto them: for they have followed the way
of Cayne, Genes 4 Number, 16.
and are utterly given to the error of Balam for lukers sake, and peryshe in
the treason of Chore: * They are clouds without water, Epistle Judas.
carried about of wyndes, trees without fruit at gatheryng time, twyse dead,
and plucked up by the roots: they are the ragyng wolves of the sea, fomyng
out their own shame, wandering stars to whom is reserved the mystes of
darkness for ever. Oh how lively and perfectely has our almyghtye God, by
the mouth of his Apostles and Prophets, painted out in their colors the
wicked, deceatful, and detestable nature of this vyperous generation and
bloudye brood: Mat, 23,
at whose hands shall be required the blood of all the Prophettes, which was
shed from the beginning of the world: Marc 22,
* woe unto them therefore, they shall receive greater damnation, so wicked and
dyuelyshe were all their imaginations and deuyses in all their pestilent
procedynges, that what prospered when they ruled: Yea was not the realm a very
wilderness in respect of that it had been before, when the Gospel of Jesus
Christ was preached? What calamitye, what miserye, what scarsitye? was not
akornes in stead of bread a food to a number of our poor brethren in sundry
places in England? Yea how pityfully and myserablye, did numbers both old
and young dye in the streates for want of sustenance? Oh lamentable change
and alteration. Who then saw not in place of plentye and abundance, dearth
and skarsenes, for health, syckenesse? Yea numbers of unknown dyseases: For
peace and quietness, which not long before we quietly enjoyed, dyscention and
war, not a little hurtful both to people and realm: and through famyne,
syckenes, and war, were destroyed and grew few in number, because we
herkened not unto the voice of the Lord our God: Deuteronomy. 28
the blockehouses and bulwarks which should have been a defense to us, and
our country, were spoiled, plucked down, and raced: our realm defaced, and
made ready as a pray for our enemies, who daily gaped for the spoil. And
how suddenly were we dyspossessed of Caliyse? For the which there had been
diverse and sundry secret attemptes before, but never could prevail till
then, and that through the secret treason of some arche enemy of God, more
skylfull to keep the bodies of selye Martyrs bound in chains at a stake,
environed with fyrye faggottes, then with a white stick in his hand to
sauegarde so worthy a town against the force of the armed soldier. But (Oh
England) never dyddest thou, nor shalt understand all the priuye
conspiracies and secret treasons, that by that traiterous train and Romish
retinue has been wrought, so subtle are they in their generation. But now was
England brought to this point, that where as before it was had in
estimation, and feared of forreyne enemies, than was it in fear it self,
Psalm, 9,
and was become a testing stock to al nations. Now therefore my brethern,
whether these were plages which we had worthyly deserved, and we at that time
a wretched and miserable people, in pitiful estate and woeful case or not, I
refer it to the indifferent judgment of those, that either were partakers of
the smart in that perilous and dangerous time, or that saw the misery and
beheld the terrors, which being so few years past, I trust be not, or I would
were not forgoten: but through these plagues which we thus felt, and wherewith
god long before had threatened us by the mouth of his servants, the late
persecuted martyrs: Herein I say, did he declare them to be true prophets. For
what thing in those days happened unto us, as a scurge and punishment for our
unthankfulness and careless living, that was not by those the elect ministers
of Jesus Christ in their life time, Deute, 18
declared unto us, should come. Therefore were they true prophets, and their
doctrine that they taught, sound and agreeable to the will and word of God:
which we regarded not, but neglected: and therefore our wont full and former
myrthe, was turned into sorrow and care then, vytterly bewailing our poor
state, led in captivity: because we had no knowledge and for not regardyng the
law of the Lord of hosts, Esaias, 5,
but blasphemynge the word of the holy one of Israel, Baru, ^,
and for forsaking the fountain of wisdom: wherein if we had still walked,
undoubtedly we had dwelte in rest upon the earth: Then famished our souls
for want of the lively food of gods sacred word: Amos 8,
but better had it been for us never to have known the way of righteousness,
then after we knew it, 2, Peter, 2
to turn as we did from the holy commandment given unto us: which then we
passed not for, we understood not the worthiness thereof, we knew not that by
virtue thereof, we had health, peace and plenty: we knew not yt it was the
preserver of us, and our country, from our enemies: we knew not how precious
a jewel it was, and how sweet a refreshing to our hungry souls, til we
hungered and thyrsted for it, and could not have it, but in steed thereof,
were fed and crammed with the most detestable and Antichristian food of Rome,
wherein was no smacke or taste, no heavenly sweetness, no spiritual comfort,
but rather bytternesse and rank poison, corrupting both body and soul: and
therefore at those days, might we justly by woeful experience say, where the
preachers of gods word fail, there perish the people: Prou, 25,
for then perished the poor selye flock for want of the good shephardes,
John, ^0,
which had given their life for their sheep: and we poor wretches straying and
wandryng shepherdles, were in danger of every wolf and bloudye shepebyter,
left as outcastes, and as a people forsaken, void of comfort, without hope,
without help, save only at the hands of our omnipotent god, the great
shephard. To whom we were then forced to fly, as to our only refuge: Then
began we to behold the frailtye of our wicked nature: then considered we the
heavy displeasure of god, who for our unthankfulness had so lovingly corrected
us: and of whom in the time of our prosperity we we most forgetful, not
regarding him, till being rocked in the cradell of care, and as it were in
manner overwhelmed with the waves of adversity and sourges of sorrow, which
then caused us to confess our wickedness, and to acknowledge the eternal God
to be our only help: Then called we to remembrance the sweet blessings
of God which we in the triumphante time of the gospel had received: and for
neglecting whereof, we had now felt and tasted the bytternesse of his
displeasure, who yet more mercifully and lovingly delte with us, then our
deserte deserved. Then began we with the prodygall child, to return from
the swyne troughe, and submytte our selves to the hands of our heavenly
father. Then cried we, Lord deliver us from the tyrannous and merciles
bloudye brood, that dailye persecute thy people. Then cried we, lord lay to
thy hands, for thy ennemies have destroyed thy law: Then desired we the Lord
to deliver us, and release us out of the extreme bondage and captivity,
wherein we were miserablye wrapped: and to be restored to our former fredome
and liberty: whereof thorough our unthankfulness we were dispossessed: The^ he
sought we the lord that his word might once again be a lantern to our
feet, and that we might once again walk according to his holy laws. Thus
in the trouble some and tyrannous time of persecution, in the chiefest of our
calamity and miserye (such was then our song.) This can God do, and this
work had god wroughte to make his forgetful children know him, and the
rather to be myndefull of the great and merciful kyndnesse of so gracious a
lord. Oh blessed, ye twice blessed and happy were we that it thus pleased
our heavenly father, to lay his cross upon us, which doubtless is as
necessary for the Christian soul as material food for the body: it made us
know him, whom before thoroughe our frailtye we had forgotten, and caused
us to humble our selves to him, in whose hands our only help consisted, who
then of his endelesse goodness, and whose mighty mercy was such, seeing
that in our hearts we were turned unto him, and beholding our inward and
hartye repentance for so grievously offendyng his divine majesty: of his
unspeakable love, most carefully and louinglye tendering us, as the father his
children, had then compassion upon us, and turned his favorable countenance
toward us: and though for a while he had suffered us to be evil entreated
thorough tyrauntes, Psalm, 107,
whom he used as instruments of his wrath, to corrcet us, yet lo, at the last
he hard the mournyng voices of us poor captyues, and helped us out of
miserye, and showed himself to be as he is, a mighty god of mercy, and even
the only strength of his people, Psalm, 28,
and the defender of the health of his anointed: which he wonderfully
declared, when we being in our chief distress, thraldom, and slauerye to
them that dailye pursued us: Then he in twincklyng of an eye by his mighty
power delivered us from that miserable bondage, out of that troublesome and
dreadefull sea of sorrow wherein we were, even as he did the children of
Israel, through the red sea from the evil Pharao, whom with all his train,
in their chiefest arrogancy, as God by his omnipotente power in the same sea
overwhelmed and drouned: So has he likewise meruelouslye overthrown our
enemies: who in their chiefeste pride, he has smyten down before our
faces: and plaged them that hated us, Psalm. 5^,
* and put the lying lyppes to silence, which cruellye disdaynfullye, and
despightefullye resysted the truth of God. This marvelous work has our
almightye God wrought and brought to pass by his elect and chosen servant,
and handmayden, our most gracious queen Elizabeth: God I say the worker, and
she the instrument, whom God had raised even as it were from the grave, to
overthrow his and her enemies, which by all possible means most traitorously
sought her overthrow, destruction, and death. But ye god that delivered Peter
forth of prison, and by whose means the chains wherein he was bound fell from
him: Acts, 1^,
and before whom the iron gates opened of their own accord, that Peter might
escape the hands of his ennemies, would have the Romish Herodes understand,
that there is no prison or forte of that force, nor tower of such terror, or
keeper of such cruelty and circumspection, that can hold or keep captive
those whom God will have at liberty. Well, now has Judith through Gods
assistance, cut of the head of Holofernes, the siege is raised, the soldiers
being fled, Judith with the inhabitants of Bethulia, joyfully triumph,
praisyng god for the victory. Thus has our God, the lord of hosts
disappointed that butcherly and bloody brood of their mischeuous purpose,
which their wicked hearts had imagined whose serpentlyke tongues stirred up
strife, Psalm, 14
and under whose flattering lyppes lay hid the poison of adders, and has
delivered us from their tyranny, even as the bird from the foulers snare, and
has defaced their abominable wicked and Romish hipocriticall devises, and
displaced their false and lothesome gods of wood and stone. And of his
mighty mercy has restored his word unto us, which plentifully is taught
and preached unto us, by those which are spronge out of the ashes of them,
that with fire were consumed: by whom also the Sacraments are duly and
truly ministered: Now have we for chafe, corn, for darkness, light, for
rank poison (a preservative) even the blessed word of God, to heal us from
destruction, his holy word, I say, the lively food and precious preservative
of our souls, which has brought us quietness with forreyne enemies, and
domestical peace, plenty health and al things necessary. Oh, how mercifully
has the Lord dealt with us, that of miserable bond slaves, in mysery, in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, has made us free men to have and use
the liberty and freedom of our conscience, which is a treasure of treasures.
Now has god comforted us after the time that he punyshed, and plaged us, and
for the years wherein we have suffered adversity, he has showed unto us his
mercy, and to our children his glory: Oh that men would therefore praise the
goodness of the Lord, Psalm, 107,
and the wonders, that he does for the children of men, who of his mere mercy
has delivered us from those yt robbed and spoiled us, and were to strong for
us, and has satysfied the emptye soul, and filled the hungry soul with good:
wherefore my good brethren, as our merciful and gracious God has so done his
marvelous works, that they ought to be had in remembrance, and as in the day
of our trouble, we called upon the Lord for help, who has now delivered us,
and given us our hearts request: so should we likewise now, with earnest hearts
and willing minds perform that, which we the^ promised unto ye Lord our God,
which was amendment and newness of life, which I heartily wyshe and desire of
God may be, and the which also the Lord does look for at our hands, and he
will not be mocked with all: But alas, that notwithstanding, I see rather a
forgetfulness in our selves, and sin and wickedness, rather most shamefully
to abound, then any amendmente of life or reformation of our wicked manners.
What pride what whoredom, what theft, what, drunkenness, what blasphemye and
swearyng, what vsurye, what gredye and insatiable covetousness, what untrue
dealyng, is daily used? no regard of word or promise, no skante the bonds
or hand writings with seal upon seal is auaylable or sufficient, without
trauais in the law, and expense of money: Sin I say is made but a sport,
for pride is accounted for cleanlines, whoredom, for a pange of youth,
theft, a shifter, the drunkard a good companion, the desperate swearer, a
lustye courtier, the gredye couetuous usurer, a ware thriuyng manne, the untrue
and subtle dealer, pregnaunt and fine wytted. Thus sin is accoumpted none
offense, and as it appears, there is neither regard or care, for the
punishmente of the magistrate, nor fear of the plage of God for the same. But
my brethern, do not these abominable, filthye, and corrupt things which
stynke before the face of GOD, and declare that we think in our hearts there
is no god. Shall we dwell in the tabernacle of the Lord, or rest upon his
holy hill, that live thus carelessly, carnallye, and beastly? (No) but he that
leads an incorrupt life, that does the thing that is right, and speaks
the truth from his heart, that uses no deceyte in his tongue, and does no
ill to his neighbor, but perfourmeth that he promyseth unto him, and that
sets not by the ungodly: but makes much of them that fear the Lord: that
gives not his money upon vsurye, nor takes reward against the innocent: and
that in all their doings have the fear of the Lord before their eyes. And
these be they that GOD will bless upon the earth, and in the world to
come, they shall be partakers of eternal glory.

But how grows this carelesnes and impudencye of life amongst us, which
now so shamefully abounds? Truly thoroughe neglectyng to hear the word
of God preached, and not beleuynge it, when we have hard it: which when we
had not, then we hungered for it, and now that it has pleased God to give
it again unto us, we begin again not to care for yt: But my brethren, be
not so unthankful for the great benefyte of GOD. Consider, be myndefull and
think upon the doleful days passed, forgette not the terriblenesse thereof,
remember I say, the manifold Godly admonitions and warnynges: for the
amendment of our wicked and dissolute life, in the last time of the Gospel,
the great myserye, and pitefull plages that were pronounced and foreshewed by
the elect ministers of Jesus Christ to come upon us, onles then spedye
repentance and amendment: But how littel regarded we the same, til crueltye
had catched us and that the flame of fyrye faggottes flewe about our ears.
Let not therefore that merciles and tyranous time, (the smarte whereof so
latelye felt) be already forgotten, but let the same rather provoke and move
us like Christians, to give better head now unto the sweet lessons, Godly
admonitions, and daily warnynges of Gods messangers, which he of his loving
kyndnes and great mercy has thus once again sent amongst us, to declare
his will unto us: who daily cry out, repentance, repentance, in the Lords
name: who most louyngly and fatherly, pityeth our destruction, if his warnyng
may help, which alas, preuayleth nothing as appears: For we are as ill,
nay rather worse, then we were before: but my brethren, if ye be so careless
that ye respect not the embassage and fatherly warnynges of the almyghtye,
pronounced by his elect and chosen ministers: Yet be not so diuelishe
desperate, so lightly to regard the marvelous and strange doing and work of
the Lord himself: even the almighty, who truly is not pleased, but hyghly
offended with our heathenyshe manners: whereof let the fearful fire from
heaven, which so suddenly consumed that huge and mighty monument and temple of
Poules (be witness) and let the sundry strange procreation and monstrous
shape as well of children, as also of beasts (bear record) of our monstrous
and beastly life: remember also the very heavens, heavily bewailyng our woe and
misery to come, whose late daily droppyng showers, dolefully preached unto us
the heavy wrath of god, for our wickedness to be at hand, ye hanging over our
heads, unless betime we turn unto the lord what christian conscience quaketh
not to think upon the premysses, turn therefore, and let amendment of life
appear in time, or else to heavy will the burdeyns be for us to bear, which
God for our disobedience and wickedness will lay upon us: I therefore exhort you
for Christ's sake, that for as much as in our conversation and living we have
swarued from god, thereby deseruynge his heavy wrath and displeasure: so we
may endeavor our selves ten times to turn again and seek the lord even
from the bottom of our hearts with weeping, fasting, and prayeng: and for as
much as nothing is better than to fear God, and nothing sweter than to have a
respect unto the commandments of the lord, Syrach. 23
let us be meke and lowely to hear the word of god, the glad tidings of
Jesus Christ preached, and not slack to believe it. * For where no knowledge
of gods word is, Syrach. 5 Prouer. 15
the soul is not well: and vain are all those, in whom no knowledge of god
is. Let us therefore take heed to our selves, Sapi, 22
and keep well our souls, that we forget not the things that our eyes have
seen: let our living be agreeable unto the doctrine which we profess, that we
give not the ennemies of the Lord, a cause to rail: for happy is he that
reads, and they that hear the word of god, and keep those things that are
written therein: Reuela, 1,
and otherwise we are but slanderers of the gospelle. And therefore let us take
away our evil thoughts out of the sight of God, cease to do evil, seek
judgment, help the poor oppressed, Esaias, 1.
be favorable to the fatherles, defend ye widow, and then shall our sins as
red as scarlet, be made as white as snow: and then as God of his mightifull
mercy has brought down and suppressed the stout mountains and high rocks,
Baruch. 5. Psalm ^^, 17.
the enemies of his truth, which maintained their own welthines with
oppression, and who also have long been glad and reioysed at our late decay,
so shall he likewise force them (whose joy is now turned to sorrow, still to
mourn in their own destruction, and we shall increase and not diminishe, but
still quietlye inhabit enjoy and peaceablye possess our sweet and blessed
land ye flows with milk and honey, which god has given us to our unspeakable
comfort and the great glory of our almighty and heavenly father: with whom
after this transitorye life ended, we shall be partakers of his heavenly
kingdom. To that immortal god therefore, with his only son, our savior Jesus
Christ, and to the holy ghost, that sweet comforter, be al praise and glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

Finis quod I. S.
A prayer or giving of thanks for our delivery, from the hands of our enemies,
and restoryng unto us the fredom of our conscience.
MOst puisaunt mighty and everliving God, the god of all consolation, the
comforter of the comfortles, the helper up of such as were fallen, the
merciful and free forgeuer of the penitent sinners, we sorrowful and sinful
wretches, thy poor and sely creatures, acknowledge and confess our grievous
offenses, ye we protest before thy majesty against our selves, our
disobedience, our abominable detestable and wicked sins, which we most
grievously against thy divine majesty have committed, in transgressyng thy holy
commandments, neglecting thy sacred word, and despisyng the godly admonitio^s
and warnings of thy ministers, the preachers and teachers of the same, (for the
which) our most heinous and horrible crime, as of thy just justice it
pleased thee to take from us, and worthily to dispossess us of that heavenly
treasure and inestimable dwelling, the only substance of our souls thy
lively and everlasting word, thorough want whereof we daily decayed, pitifully
perished, and grew more and more into sundry and manifold miseries, ye both
we and our country in danger of utter destruction, till of thy only goodness,
and heavenly clemency: according to the multitude of thy mercies and not of our
desert, turning thy face from our sins, forgetting our unworthiness and rather
carefully pitieng our woeful and miserable state it pleased the again to
restore unto us the fredome of our conscience: and in time to lay to thy hand
for the defense of thy people against their enemies, who thorough their
violence had oppressed their flock, and trodden thy truth under foot and
did deliver us from the raging madness and tyranny of that mercycylesse,
gredy, ravenous, and Romyshe bloudsuckers, even as thou by thy myghtie power
delyueredst Danyell forth of the den from the hungry lions, thereby cuttyng our
sack of sorrow in pieces, turning our misery to mirth, our woe to wealth, and
clothing us with joy and gladness, and haste also gathered together the
remnant of thy flock dispersed in sundry countries to feed now with us,
together, upon the wholesome pleasant and sweet pastures of thy sacred word,
here in our native, blessed, and fruitful countreye of England, which we
through thy unspeakable and great mercy, to the praise of thy holy name and our
comfort, do quietly and peasibly possess: So now must gracious and eternal
God, and heavenly father, we selye wretches of our selves most vile and void
of all goodness, without thy assistaunce and fatherly care for us, prostratyng
our selves before thy majesty, do with unfeigned hearts most humbly beseech
thee that this cherefull light of thy countenance may continually shine upon us
and our country: and that it may please thee more and more to pour out thy
holy spirit upon us, that by the assistance thereof, we may be folowers of
the sweet and comfortable doctrine now daily pronounced and taught by thyn elect
and chosen ministers, and never herafter go back again, nor fall from thy
truth, but embrace it, and still go forward in ye same, according to our
profession, that our virtuous life may be an example to the wicked, yt sinners
may be converted unto thee: be still favorable O'lord, be now and ever a defense
unto thy people of England, and else where soever thy gospel is taught, and let
no more thy heritage of England be brought to confusion: give us no more over,
nor suffer us never hereafter to be a reprofe among our ennemies, neither
suffer any more such as be strangers to thy truth to govern us, that the
blood of innocents be no more spilt: but good lord for thy mercy sake,
mollyfie the stony hearts of those wilful ones that in time they may mekely
taste the sweetenes of thy glorious gospel, learn to know the, and become of
the number of the flock of thy fold: that we may be glad and rejoice at their
conversion but if they shall still frowardly and obstinately persist in their
wilful and wicked blyndnes, despise thy holy laws, disdain the truth,
crokedly contend, and rebelliously resist the godly religious procedinges of
our most gracious and soueraign princess queen Elizabeth, to whom we humbly
beseech thee to grant a long, ioiful, and prosperous reign, to the more
magnifiing and extolling of thy glorious name and the comfort of this thy
realm and people of England, by thee committed unto her government: and whom
also thou haste appointed, and by thy holy word autorised chief and supreme
governor. Then lord we pray the and reverently request thee, as thou art an
enemy to the wicked doers, abhorrest the blood thyrstye and deceitefull, and
brought their pomp and power to naught: So let their wickedness fall upon their
own heads, and pour out thy indignacion upon them, that they may perish
together in our sight, to their utter confusion: and never more be able to rise
up nor rebel against thee and thy Christ, nor preuail against or molest thy
flock: but be thou our heavenly shepard, ever in the myddest of us, that we
always may, being as one flock of one fold, drawing together by one line,
with godly and zealous hearts, christianlike professyng one truth, even thy
gracious gospel, and plentifully yeldynge forth the fruits of the same, may
continually receive thy heavenly venediction upon us, and our country: that our
pastures may be ^^^ne, and the earth bring forth and yield her increase:
that in due time we may with thanks geuynge, reap and gather the fruits
thereof to our comfort, joyfully making our boast of thy praise, and all the
dais of our life serve thee (our Lord and God) in holiness and righteousness.
To whom with the son and the holy ghost, one only and eternal God, be all
praise, glory and majesty for ever and ever. Amen.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by Henry Sutton for Edward Sutton dwelling in Lumbarde
street at the sign of the Cradell. The.xxi. day of December, in the year of
our Lord 1562.

Perused and allowed according to the Queen's majesty's injunctions.


