A Terrible Sea Fight: RELATED IN The Copy of a Letter sent to I. M.
Counselor, Pensioner, and Bailiffe to the City of BATAVIA.

CONCERNING The great fight between nine East India ships of the Hollanders,
and three great Gallions; which happened about Goas Bare in the East Indies,
the 20.30. of September, 1639.

GOD IS MY HELPER


LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Nathaniel Butter. 1640.

With Privilege.

A true relation of a great Sea Fight between the Hollanders and Spaniards.
AFTER that we had set out sail from Batavia's Rode, the 15.25. of July, 1639.
we have speedily performed our voyage (God be thanked) as far as to the
Baixos de Padua, which are very dangerous rocks and sands; but by the
negligence of the Captains and Masters of the Pinaces, little Rotterdam and
David, (which were sent out before to cast out every hour the lead) we were
led wi^h the whole Fleet toward the said rocks; insomuch that our Commander,
looking out by day, upon the bank behind the Gallerie, perceived a great
alteration of the water; wherefore he charged his Pilot to cast out the lead;
which having done, found first of all fourteen, afterward nine, and at last
six fadomes of water, that we could see some of the rocks lie under water. The
Admiral perceiving this, made three or four shots, to give warning to the
Fleet, and that the Pinnaces should come back again: And thus sailed back
again from thence, as they came thither, thanking God Almighty for his
gracious keeping and protection. From thence we set our course toward the
Malabaerish coasts; which having got in sight, about Cananor, and Mont Fremosa,
we sailed along the wall; where, in diverse tides, we met with two small
Vessels of Black-moores, but they had free pass of the Directour Barent
Pieters, one whereof was bound for Cananor, and the other for Calicut, which
advertised us, that Daman and Dieu, being two strong Forts, and belonging to
the Portugals, were besieged by the great Mogoll, and they believed that Daman
was surrendered already.

After that the foresaid Vessels had departed from our Commander, we went on
again in our voyage, and the 18.28. of September, about evening, came in sight
of us about Goas Bare, the Pinnaces Armuyen and Valkenburg, which at night came
aboard of the Admiral, relating unto him the news, which they had received
upon Wingurla; because they had arrived upon Wingurla about eleven or twelve
days before our coming. The next day after our Commander calling together the
general Counsel, communicated unto them that same, what he had understood by
the Principalls of the aforesaid Pinnaces; namely that three Gallions lay in
the Bay of Goa Veille, under favor and safeguard of the Fort Mormagon, being
not yet ready to go to sea and fight. Further, he desired the Council to
consider upon, what was best to do for the good and profit of the Company.
After many disputations and consultations, the Council departed again from
aboard in the evening, with order, that when the Commander, two or three hours
before day light, did light again a candle, they, together with the military
Officers, should come aboard again of the Admiral. Having met together again,
they unanimouslie resolved to surprise the enemy without delay* that he lay
with the Gallions under the protection and favor of the Fort Mormagon, the
greatest difficulty was, that we knew not the depth or situation of the
harbor: wherefore order was given, that the Pinnace David should betake it
self to the right, and the Pinnace little Rotterdam to the left hand, sail
forward, and cast continually out the lead: Having come close to the walls,
some boats were set out to cast out the lead continually in like manner, and to
give warning unto us.

Afterward order was given, that the ship Ziericksea should sail out before:
upon which the Commander himself went: him followed Armuyen, Valckenburg,
Franiker, Bredamme, and the ships New Harlem, and Middelburg, should come as
nigh as possibly they could; because the enemy lay so close under the wall,
and the depth of the harbor was unknown unto us; and the said ships drew so
deep water, and had also in them the Cargozoen for Wingurla.

In this order about noon, with the sea wind, we sailed toward the enemy
(being under sail, the Vice-commander William Tiberius, who died the same
morning, was set without the ship) having come under the Fort, they shot most
fiercely out of the Fort, upon the Fleet: but we answered them in like manner.
Seeing those of the Fort very perplexed, and timorous, (because we were not
above a Musket shot from the Fort) we sailed to and fro along a wall or trench,
which was drawn toward another small Bulwark, from whence they made likewise
some shots. Being come near unto the ships, we found them to be the three
great Gallions; namely, Bon Jesus, Bon Ventura, and S. Sebastian: Bon Ventura
lay ready for to fight, but not ready for sailing: The other two had none or
few Canons in them, lying yet without carriages, because they expected us not
so soon: yet afterward we heard, that many free men, together with some
volunteers, came out of Goa to afford their aid and help in the making ready
of the aforesaid Gallions, thinking to come out against the Pinnaces Armuyen
and Valkenburg, which they had first perceived, but missed of it.

Zierick-sea sailing out before, passed by the Forts; and the ships Armuyen and
Valckenburg in like manner. The Commander with his boat departing from the ship
Zierick-sea, gave order, that Franiker and Bredamme should make toward the
Gallion, Bon Ventura carrying about 80. brass pieces of Ordnance, let their
Anchors fall; from which Gallion they shot fiercely upon us, having come on the
side of him, and being not half a Musket shot from it, they shot cross through
and through our Pinnace, that it looked like a window where the glasses are
beaten out: And thus we continued above three hours long, shooting against the
said Gallion; insomuch that the Pinnace Franiker received more shots then the
whole Fleet together: All the Row horses, and pieces of Ordnance in the stern
were shot in pieces; insomuch that we could not make one shot more from the
stern against the enemy, what care soever I took, and what encouragement
soever I gave to the remainder of our men (because I my self in person went
continually to and fro, and the shipper was upon the deckes) for we had in that
Pinnace about 20 men killed, and about 40 wounded; insomuch that after the fight,
we had not men to man the boat: whereupon presently afterward were sent unto
us to aid us, 20 men from other ships. Amongst the dead were diverse of our
Officers; as namely, the upper Pilot, high boats-man, the Cook, the Cooks
mate, Gunners mate, one or two Quarter masters: and all the other officers for
the most part, wounded: Our shipper was hurt in his belly, in the head, and in
one of his hands; but God be thanked) he has recovered, and is now well
again; I escaped free with a blew blow, and some other small hurts, I cannot
give sufficient thanks unto God Almighty for his gracious protection and
keeping. Bredamme next to us received the most shots, the shipper John Symons
Symein was in the first beginning killed with a shot through his body.

Yet after this bloody fight God Almighty by his gracious help and assistance
granted unto us the victory, unto whom is due all glory, praise, and
thanksgiving now and for evermore.

The Pinnace little Rotterdam, whilst we were shooting against Bon Ventura,
laid aboard the Gallion Bon Jesus, which lay before Bon Ventura, mastered the
same, and set up the Princes Flagges; because very few men were in her. Our
Commander seeing this, went into the Gallion called Bon Jesus, and called to
the Portugals in Bon Ventura, that they should have good quarter, if they would
yield: whereunto they, as stout soldiers, would not condescend nor hear of it
upon no terms, but answered the Commander, that he should do his best:
Whereupon our Commander gave order, that the Cable of Bon Jesus should be chopped
off, which drove directly to the belly of Bon Ventura, so that his blind mast
turned cross our Bon Jesus. The Admiral asking them the second time, whether
they would yield, or else he would fire them both; namely, Bon Jesus, and Bon
Ventura. Whereupon they answered, that they would not yield: whereupon the
Commander gave order, that Bon Ventura and Bon Jesus should be set on fire;
notwithstanding they desisted not with their fierce shooting, till at last the
fire got into the^r Gunpowder, and was blown up. Bon Jesus after that it was
on fire, drove a little off from the other.

Whist all this passed, the Gallion Saint Sebastian was likewise fired by the
ship Armuyen: so that all three together at once were on fire, without the
loss of any of our Pinnaces or ships, that the General and Council of India
had ordained the Pinnaces, Bredamme, little Roterdam and David for fire ships.

I am of opinion, if we should have lain with the Pinnace Franiker twenty
paces nearer to the Gallion, it would likewise have been in danger to be blown
up, because our foremast, and some ropes were likewise blown up into the
air; all our ropes and cords are spoiled, tha^ they hung like cut yarne.

After that Bon Ventura was blown up, some boats have been in the Ferry-water,
to knock the Portugals in the head that lay in the water: yet after that they
had killed some of them, our Commander bid them to give quarter; insomuch that we
got prisoners above 100 men, about 50 white, and 50 Negroes, amongst which were
two or three Priests, and four Lords of the Cross, or Fedalges: the Captain
of the Gallion was likewise taken up: our Commander entertaines the said Lords
and Patres at his own table in the Cabinet.

At night we took up again our Anchors, and sailed again out of the Bay close
under the Fort Mormagon, out of which diverse shots were made, because they
could very well see us by the flame of the burning Gallions: yet at last we got
out of their shot, and cast Anchor within two or three leagues of the wall.

The upper Merchant, Peter Bad-neighbour is chosen by the Council
Vice-commander in place of the deceased Tiberius.

The second of October, new style, sailing toward Wingurla, we met two sail
of ships, after which we pursued with the whole Fleet; but being our ships were
so battered and spoiled, we were feign to desist from pursuing any further
after them; and order was given that we should go with the Pinnace Franiker
toward Wingurla; where we arrived the fourth of October. Afterward came news
that the Pinnace Bredamme had driven a small vessel to the wall; out of which
the Portugals fled and made the vessel to leake: yet the Bredammes boat
coming in haste to it, got into it, and kept it above water with pumping, till
all the goods, consisting of Ivorie, or Elephants teeth, and other goods, were
taken out of it, which were brought aboard of the Commanders ship. Another
Gallion was pursued after the 2.12. of October, by the Pinnace Armuyen, which
the same night overtooke the Gallion; and after that our Pinnace had fought a
good while with it, it gave the slip again, and escaped. By nine prisoners
taken by the Pinnace Armuyen with the boat of the said Gallion, we understand,
that it had in her above 80 dead, but was manned with above 400 men, being the
Gallion which went last year toward Daman: The other vessel that was chased
to the wall, came out of Mosambique. The 10.20. of October the ships
Middelburg, Armuyen and Bredamme, received order to go toward Cotcheyn to
cross there, and to lie in wait for the enemies vessels, which by this present
might pass by Goa* The Viceroy within Goa, is departed out of this life; in
whose place by election, succeeds Don Antonio Teles, who last year was
Admiral of the enemies Fleet The said Viceroy reports, that he will come
with all his Fregats about 60 in number to visit us, which we long to see.

There has diverse been aboard of the Admiral, a Priest borne at Antwerp, to
treat about the releasing of the prisoners; but hitherto he has effected
nothing, what further herein will be done, time will show* After the departure
of the D. Caen, came hither upon Wingurla, a Mogoller, who was hired by the
Portugals to massacre the great Governor Mameth Radia, together with all the
Hollanders, and some of the chiefest Merchants; for the execution whereof, he
should be rewarded with eleven or twelve thousand Pageden, who ended his life
as follows: The aforesaid Mogoller, with a train of 25 persons, coming into
Wingurla himself, together with another Mogoller, sitting on horseback, came
before the lodging of the great Governor Mameth Radia, who, at that time, was
come to Wingurla to view his Fregats: The Mogoller asking for him, was answered
by the Mameths servants, that he lay and slept. At which the Mogoller replied,
that he himself must see it; who going with another toward his chamber,
(because he was well known, and had been always very familiar with the
Governor) opened the curtains, and found him playing with his child. The
Mogoller drawing his Sable, chopped off one of his hands, thinking to turn off
the blow with it, as also gave him a great wound in the neck; insomuch that he
presently after died: From thence the Mogoller rode toward the lodging, to
massacre the Netherlanders; he was twice beaten back from the moat: In the
mean time an Alarm rose amongst the Governors people, which flockt together
about four hundred strong, killed fifteen or sixteen of the Mogollers men, took
prisoners three or four. The Mogoller betook himself to flight; after whom
they pursued with their naked Sables: whereupon the said Mogoller leaping with
his horse into the water, thinking to swim over the river, was seen by some of
the Governors servants, which were in a house not far from the shore; they
seeing their fellow soldiers run with their naked Sables after him, stopped him,
and shot him with a piece down from the horse, the rest gave him many cuts and
blows after he was dead.

Given at Wingurla, the 11.21. of October. 1639. A. S.

Imprimatur.

Philip. Minutolius.

Printed for Nath. Butter, August. 8. 1640.


