A Christian exhortation taken out of the holy Scriptures, for the great
comfort of every faithful person being in the agony of death, before whom
it must be oftentimes red and recited (if need be) eue^ to his last breath.
Whereunto is joined in the end a singular Prayer for the party grievously
afflicted by sickness, dravving tovvard his death. Therewith is a brief
Catechism, which is not only to instruct the sick, but also to refresh his
memory with the great mystery of our redemption.

Printed at London by Henry Bynneman. Anno. 1579.

Mathewe. 24.51. The careless and negligente seruante shall be surprinsed and
cut off, and have his part with the hypocrites, there shall be weeping and
gnasshing of teeth.

Death is the end and beginning of life.

Ecclesiasticus. 18.18. Before sickness use medicine, and before thou come to
judgment examine thy self, and in the sight of God thou shall find favor.

Apocalips. If thou do not vvatch, I vvil come upon thee as a thief, and
thou know not at what time I will come upon thee.

Apocalips. 16. Blessed is he which watches and keeps his garments least
he walk naked, and that men see his filthynesse.

Matthew. 24. Luke. 12. Be ye ready, for ye know not in what hour the son
of man shall come.

To the very Honorable his singular good Lord the Earl of Lincoln, Lord
Clinton and Say, Lord high Admiral of England, Knighte of her Majesty's
order, and one of the Lords of her Highness most honorable privy Counsel.
THe great and cunning workemaister, yea, the master of all mischief Satan,
has not ceased, even from the first creation of man, to molest and persecute
the same, lying ever in wayt to destroy him, as is plainly seen in his
assaults, delivered to our first parents Adam and Eve, very shortly after
their creation: he never left them, until such time as he had caused them
to transgress the commandment of the Almighty, whereby they purchaced to
themselves, and to all their posterity eternal damnation. He continually
puts his cunning and Stratagemes in use against seely poor man: Sometime by
open battle, as causing him to commit murder, adultery, theft, extortion,
and such like gross offenses, against the commandments of the second
Table. Another time, he solliciteth him to pride, Idolatry, blaspheming,
unbelief, lothing the word of God, contempt of the same, rebellion against
God, unthankfulness toward God, and such like, against the commandments of
the first Table: whereby he delivers unto us terrible and dangerous
assaults, othertimes he dresseth against us surprinses, as when by mean of
the ingraffed corruption which dwells in us, he raises in us horrible
motions, thoughts, affections, and consentes, yea, and that which most
dangerous of all is: he has so banded our eyes, that the greatest number of
men do think filthy motions, unclean thoughts, corrupt affections, and
detestable consents to be no sin, unless the act do ensue. But indede the
Eternal, which has created the heart, sees all these things in us, and
abhors and condemns them, he is the searcher of the raines, which knows
the thought before it be hatched in us. Wherefore, we have great cause, to beg
of God, his grace, that we may understand and know the ruzes and deceiptes of
Satan, whereby to avoid them, and when he shall at any time solicit us to
any of the above named things, or such like, let us then know that the enemy
is at hand, that he dresseth his scaramuches against us: and that he places
his ambushes to cut between us, and our salvation: wherefore, it behooves us
to be always armed with the armor of God, whereof Saint Paul speaks in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, 6. Chapter, and to be well acquaynted with the
perfect use of our weapon: for our enemy is both strong and skillful, and
would soon make an end of mankind, if that God did not hold him in bridle:
his cunnings are in manner infinite, he can transfigure himself sometime into
the likeness of an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 12.13.14.
yea, into the likeness of Christ himself, and allege the Scriptures unto
us, but it shall be altogether to cast us down with the weight of our sins,
into desperation, and so to damn us: for he will allege unto us the justice
of God, the horror of our sins, and the Law, clean contrary to Christ,
for Christ is the nouriture, medicine, and consolation of afflicted souls, he
will not break the bruzed reed, nor quench the smoking tow, wherefore we must
beware of this false and counterfetted Christ, he can make this day, that
which is horrible sin to seem to me to be no sin, and to morrow that
which is no sin, to be horrible sin: thus can he amplify and swell the
least evil thing that is, and make it to seem as great and huge as a mighty
Mountain. I have spoken some thing of this cunning adversary, which the
sacred Scripture calls the great Leuiatha^ and the red Dragon: to the end
we might beware of him, and avoid his snares which he lays above and beneath
us, before and behind, on every side, and within and without us, to the end,
that when we shall feel our selves in any sort solicited by him* we may
forthwith repair to our Panacea and most wholesome medicine for all diseases,
which is the word of God, in the which we shall find all comfort: and having
found it we must lay sure hold on it in all humility and Prayer, the which
word does even repulse and chase Satan from us. It is a light which
lighteneth to our feet, it is a most pure thing, it co^uerteth souls, it is a
faithful witnesle, yea, it is the power of God to salvation to all believers.
Saint Paul calls it the Sword of the Spirit, the which wo^udeth and
puts Satan to flighte: it is that Sword, without the which we may not
fight the battle with that strong and mighty enemy, with whom we must
every one of us fight a battle, either in the time of our health, or else
in the article of our death, for then begins he to play sharply the accuser,
then sets he forth unto us the Lord Christ, as a lawgiuer and exactor, then
makes he every sin to seem twenty, to the end he may make us to dishonor
God through unbelief, and so to fall into desperation: our answer must be to
him, Satan thou can not speak truth except it be to get credit, whereby
afterward thou may the more boldly tell millions of lies: but know thou, Hebr.
1.10. and 14.
that my Lord Jesus Christ has paid my debt more than abundantly, for with
one only offering, he has consecrated for ever the^ which are sanctified.
Now God is just, yea justice it self, wherefore he is content with one (more
than sufficient) paymente, for one thing, wherefore thou can in no wise hurt
me, if he can not in this sort prevail. Then comes he in another likeness;
with his fair face, with flattering and entising words, to lift us up into
pride and vain glory, and would persuade us that we have deserved Heaven and
eternal life by our works, unto whom we must answer in this sort, O thou
horrible enchanter, thou bear me in hand that I am a Saint, to the end
thou might make me a Devil. Who is he that does that which is commanded him
to do? none; no not one, where are then my deserts? I will show thee Satan, my
Lord Christ has taken from me all my sins, and has nailed them to his
cross, 2 Cor. 5. d. Romans 8. 1. Cor. 15. g. Ephesians. 1.19. Ephesians. 2.1.13 Coloss.
1.20. and 2.14.15
and has cancelled the obligation which was against me, yea, he has done
more for me, he has given me all his deserts, to wit, his obedience,
justice, righteousness, and innocence, as to a member of his body, wherefore
I (being a member of his body) can no more be damned than my Lord Christ
may. Now when he sees himself thus answered and proved a liar by the sacred
Scriptures of God, which are the only weapon wherewith to put him to flight,
he then yields all lost, therefore we may easily see how needeful it is to be
armed against Satan with the most blessed word of God, wherewith to quench all
his fiery darts, and to repulse all his assaults. Wherefore I have turned this
exhortation into our english tongue, the which was written in the French by a
reverend, worthy, learned, and godly father, to a noble, martial, and
Christian Gentleman of France, his good Lord and friend, wherewith in the
time of his quietness he might fit his armoure and weapons in such sort, as
by battle, he might valiantly fighting: obtain a glorious and victorious
Crown For as your honor knows, he that will be a good Souldioure, must enter
timely into the wars, therefore I say, I have turned into the English the
same exhortation, for the profit of the Church of God here in England. And
albeit that the words be not many, they be of singular value and effect, the
which I have published under your honors name, doubting not, but that you will
take my poor travel in this behalf in good part. I have added in the end of
it a Table of certain consolatorie passages of Scripture, which I have
gathered out of the old and new Testament, for confirmation of our faith, in
the most sweet and comfortable promises of the almighty. For when we shall
come to the battle, the which we must once sight, either in the time of our
health, or else in the article of death (for none is crowned that fights
not, and a Christian life is a continual war) by the grace of God this
short exhortation shall greatly help as many as shall make the same familiar
unto them, toward the obteyning of the victory against the aforesaid
trained, experimented, cunning, mighty, and cruel enemy. In London the
twentieth of March. Anno Domini. 1579.

Your honors humble ever to command. (I. S.)

To the faithful Reader salvation.
Friend Reader, take in good part the exhortation the which I have here
written, for the great comfort and profit of al persons which fear God,
vvherevvith to serve them at need, when it shall please the Lord to call
them. But note you, that to use this well, that of these three letters B. S.
N. the first letter signifies brother, if the party be a man, the second
Sister, being a woman, and the third signifies the propre name of the person
vvherby he must be named. For we may not then honor them by names of vvorldlye
honor and dignity, but to stand firmly against Satan in the virtue of the
Lord. We must name the^ by their proper names, which they have received at
the holy Sacrament of Baptism. This doing, thou shall obey God, whom I
beseech to be merciful unto thee in the secret day of his coming.

To my Lord, my Lord of Senarpont, Knight of the Kings order, Captain of
fifty men at arms, and his Lieutenant general in Picardie.
MY Lord, having oftentimes considered the beginning, the continuance, and the
end of ma^s life: I have plainelye known, as by an ordinary experience, that
men are more curious and careful for the entertaynement and conservation of
this their life: than to prepare themselves to a more happy end according to
God: for man being in this bodily prison, as blind, and not perfectlye
regenerated, do the better love the darkness of such an earthly prison, than
he does the heavenly light: for the which cause it is written, that he
that is of the earth, John. 3.
speaks of the earth. As being like the sons of Agar, which sought the
wisdom of this world, Ba^^c. 3. 2. Cor. 1. Eccles. 41.
the which is foolishness before God. How many be there at this day, unto
whom the remembrance of death is very unpleasant, yea rather detestable, so
delighting themselves in their worldly pleasures, that they seem to have
forgotten God, not caring any thing at all for Religion, Psalm. 52.72.
nor for the vengeance and judgment of God, terrible and fearful to all
those which have their names written in the earth, being scraped out of the
book of life. Wherefore my Lord, to the end you walk not in the large way
which brings to destruction, Psalm. 68. Math. 7. Eccles. 7.
being taught by the wise man saying: In all thy works, see thou do remember
thy latter days, and thou shall never sin. I have thought good to draw out
of the holy Scriptures a Christian exhortation, to be recited with a loud
voice before every faithful person, the which approaches to this bodily
death (covered with a casual life) passing on to one much better, and more
happy. For having this done, I will attribute to my self nothing, for I am
but earth and dirt: yet notwithstanding, I do not think to have labored in
vain, considering that the Lord Jesus Christ do the admonish us, Luc. 12.
Math. 24. 2. Pet. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Psalm. 2.
that we should be always ready, not knowing the hour: for the day of the
Lord will come suddenly as a thief in the night. O how happy then shall they
be, which shall put themselves into his safeguard. Wherefore my Lord, I do
present you this little Christian exhortation, very humbly beseeching you to
keep the same to serve you at your need, at what time it shall please the
Lord God to call you. I know well, that when the same time shall come, you
shall have good means to have with you some man learned, and furnished with
holy letters, to declare unto you the word of life, yet for all that, not
knowing the time, nor the place, ne yet the opportunity that we may have, I
dare boldly say without beast, that hearing this exhortation red with a loud
voice, being in mortal agony, it may be unto you as wholesome as the
Christian consolation of the best learned Doctor of the Religion, for they
might preach no more unto you than the Prophets and Apostles do preach unto
you in the said exhortation; the which I beseech you to receive, with as good
heart, as I do desire the supreme governor to give you the grace my Lord, to
glorify him as well in your life, as in your death, and in the mean time,
that it may please him to make you to prosper from good to better, and to give
me to persevere in your service, as your very humble and very obedient servant
for ever: (*)

A Christian exhortation, the which must be recited with a loud voice
before every faithful person being in the agony of Death.
HE that is of GOD, let him hear the word of GOD, John. 8. Math. 7.
and let him not only hear it, but let him keep it, and put it in execution:
Esaias. 40.
for all things shall have an end, and shall wear as a garmente, but the
word of the Lord GOD remains eternally.

Now seeing it is so, that by one man sin is come into the world, Romans 7.
and by sin death, and consequentlye all afflictions and adversities depend
of the same, therefore justly the life of man is nothing else, but a continual
battle upon the earth, in such sort, that the flesh sighteth against the
spirit, and the spirit against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, which
are the enemies of our souls. Note.
But following the counsel of the Apostle, to obtain victory in that
spiritual battle, you must constantly resist by Faith: for the victory
which overcomes the world, it is our faith, the which is a true and steadfast
knowledge of the love of God toward us, Hebr. 11.
according as by his Gospel he declares himself to be our father and
savior, by the mean of Jesus Christ. Having then such a steadfast Faith for
your principal foundation, acknowledge and confess without fayning, before the
Majesty of God, that you are a poor and miserable sinner, conceived and borne
in iniquity and corruption, Psalm. 51. Psalm. 142.
prompte to all evil doing, unapt to any good thing, and that by your vice
you have transgressed without end and without ceassing, the whole
commandments of God. In which thing doing, you have drawn by his just
judgment, ruin, and destruction upon you: yet for all that you are
displeased in your self, that you have offended him, and do condemn your self
and your vices with true repentance, desiring, that the grace of God do help
your calamity. Pray then in such steadfast faith: if you can not with your
mouth, pray with your heart, that God, our very loving and most merciful
father, do not enter at all into judgment, nor into account with you, but
that he will have pity upon you, in the name of his son Jesus Christ our
Lord, and that it may please him to blotte out our vices and spots by the
merits of the death and passion of the same Jesus Christ, in whose name
present you to him his holy Prayer, the which he has taught us, in saying
with a pure heart, Our Father which art in Heaven, thy name be hallowed. Thy
Kingdom come. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day
our daily bread. And pardon us our offenses, as we pardon them which have
offended us. And lead us not at all into temptation, but deliver us from the
evil. For thine is thy Kingdom, the power, and the glory, throughout all
ages. So be it.

B. S. N. Acknowledge with all your heart your injustice, Math. 3. Tit. 3.
Ephesians. 2. Psalm. 51. Romans 8. Romans 1. Math. 1. Philip. 2.
be forse for your sins, repent you continually, and the Kingdom of God shall
draw near unto you: acknowledge that there is no justice nor innocence, nor
any good works of you or in you: but as a child of wrath, Acts. 3. Math. 27.
Esaias. 53. Apocal. 1. Hebr. 9.
conceived and borne in the sin of the old Adam, you do deserve eternal
death and damnation. Yet for all that, let not the same, nor all the sins of
the world, if you should have committed the^, fear you at al: for Jesus
Christ, the true and eternal son of God, is made very man, conceived by the
holy Ghost, borne of a holy Virgin. To sanctify and to cleanse you, he has
suffered under Ponce Pilate many afflictions, injuries, 1. Pet. 1.
and outrages, making himself a seruante and captine, to set you into full
liberty. Jesus Christ was crucified upon the woodde of ye Cross, to deliver
you from the eternal curse. Jesus Christ dyed in sheding his precious blaud
for your redemption, to deliver you fully from death, Romans 6. Mark. 16.
from Hell, and from the power of Satan Jesus Christ was buried in the
Sepulcher, to bury all your sins, the which he has borne and blotted out.
Jesus Christ is descended into the lower parts, 1. Cor. 15. Acts. 1. Coloss.
3. Hebr. 7. Math. 25. Psalm. 61.
in suffering an extreme anguish, to deliver you from all pains and griefs
of death. Jesus Christ arose again from the dead, to make you to rise again
in your proper body, and glorious immortality. Jesus Christ is gone up into
Heaven, to make you to go up after him. Jesus Christ is set at the right hand
of God his father almighty, being your advocate and intercessor toward him,
and ye appointment of all your sins. We a wait for him, that he shall come
to judge the living and the dead, to yield to every one according to his
works: but to his faithful ones which believe in him, he will not impute at
all their sins, but having justified them by his grace, will make them to
reign for ever with him in his heavenly throne.

B. S. N. Such is the great mystery of our redemption, the which by the help
of the grace of the holy Ghost, you ought steadfastly to believe to baue bin
wrought for your salvation. And doubt not at all, but that by the merit of
Jesus Christ the head of his Church, you are made a member incorporate to the
same, yielding him thanks in great humility, that he has given you the
grace to have lived in the communion and company of his faithful, having
nou^ished you with hyword, with his body, and with his blood: acknowledging as
well assured, the great mercy of God, Romans 8. Math. 25. Ephesians. 1.
by the remission of all your sins, the which he has given you by Jesus
Christ, who will make you to rise again at the latter day, to reign with him
in the life eternal, the which he has promised to all those which believe in
him, being baptized in his name. Math. 4. 1. Cor. 11. An excellent gift. Romans
5. 1. Cor. 15.


Now B. S. N. seeing that you have this Faith, doubt not at all to receive the
promise of Faith: for God is true, he is not a liar as man is, rather Heaven
and Earth shall pass, but the word of God remains for ever. God is your
father and creator, Mark. 16. Romans 3. Math. 24. Esaias. 40. Genes. 1. 1. Tim. 2.
Tit. 3. 1. Tim. 1. Acts. 4. Apocal. 1.
you are his creature, and the work of his hands, he has not made you to
destroy you, for he is the savior of all men, and wills not the death of a
sinner, but that he convert and live: wherefore I declare unto you, in the name
of God, that of his great goodness and mercy he gives you full pardon, and
remission of all your sins, by the only merit of his son Jesus Christ
our Lord, in the sheding of his precious blood, for he is the propitiation,
not only of all your sins, but of all the sins of the whole world.

B. S. N.
Jesus Christ says with his own mouth, that all things are possible to him
which believes, believe then without any doubt, that Jesus Christ, taking to
him our flesh, became very man: wherefore he dyed for you, having borne all
your sins in his body, 1. John. 2. Math. 17. Romans 1. Philip. 1. 1. Pet. 2.
Romans 3.
to blotte and put them out. Present unto God the precious death of his son
Jesus Christ, and by the merit of the same death and passion, ask him mercy,
in saying from the bottom of your heart in great humility and repentance:

LOrd God Almighty, be merciful to me poor wretched sinner, for the love of
thy son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. And for the merit of his death
and passion, it may please thee to receive my soul, the which I recommend
into thy hands.

B. S. N. Put your strong trust in God, for seeing that he is for you, none
shall be against you: for Jesus Christ, John. 14. Math. 26. Psalm. 30. Romans 8.
which is the Lamb without spotte, has overcome all for you, he offered
himself once only for you, and by the same only oblation, has wholly wiped
out all your sins, he has made of none effect your folly, Esaias. 55. Math.
11.
imustice, abomination, with this good Lord Jesus Christ, God the father has
given you all things.

B. S. N. Fortify your self in Jesus Christ, the which calls you; and
iuuiteth you by his Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, to address your
self freely to him, saying, all you which have thirst, come to the great
fountain, Come to me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you.

B. S. N. Believe steadfastly, that Jesus Christ has set you free from all your
sins, and has reconciled you to God his father, to whom in great humility
and repentance, 1. John. 5.
say you from the bottom of your heart.

LOrd God Almighty, be merciful unto me poor wretched Sinner, Romans 3. John.
14. Math. 26. Psalm. 30. Mark. 16.
for the love of thy son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. And for the
merit of his death and passion, it may please thee to receive my Soul, the
which I recommende into thy hands.

B. S. N. Be of good cheer, for undoubtedly he will receive your soul as
his, for the love of his son Jesus Christ our Lord, which is the Savior
and Redeemer of all those which believe in him. Deuteronomy. 18. Psalm. 2. Esaias. 53.
Genes. 3.3.
Moses and all ye Prophets have borne witness, that all people shall receive
salvation and blessing by Jesus Christ.

The Apostles and Evangelists witness, that Jesus Christ is not come to call
the just, but the sinners te repentance, and to give his soul for the
Redemption of many: for he has shed his blood for the remission of sin.
Math. 9. John. 10. Luc. 22. Hebr. 1. Ionh. 5.
Believe then and doubt not at all, for Jesus Christ has made the purgation
of all your sins, having promised, that all those which shall believe in him,
and in his father, which has sent him, shall have eternal life, and shall not
come at all into judgment, but shall pass from death into life.

Go to now B. S. N. rejoice in Jesus Christ, for he has loved you, and
washed you from al your sins in his blood. Esaias. 53. Apocal. 1.
Take this strong faith wherewith to fight valiantlye against the adversary,
have none other buckler to defend your self withal, but this precious blood
of Jesus Christ, Romans 7.
the which by the virtue of his death and passion, has reconciled you to God
his father, unto whom, from the bottom of your heart, in great humility and
repentance, present this Prayer.

LOrd God Almighty, Romans 3. John. 14. Mark. 26.
show mercy unto me poor wretched sinner, for the love of thy son Jesus
Christ my Lord and Savior, and for the merit of his death and passion, it
may please thee to receive my soul, the which I commend into thy hands.

B. S. N. Hold fast this hope, and steadfast fasth, that thy good God, full of
all mercy, will receive your soul as his, into his hands, Psalm. 30. John.
10. Acts. 4. Romans 8. Romans 10.
for the love of his son Jesus Christ, for there is none other name under
the Heaven given to men, by the which we may be saved, and there is no
salvation in any other, than in Jesus Christ: arm you then well with this good
Jesus Christ, for he has done all for you, he has fulfilled the Law for
you, he has overcome all for you.

Now go too B. S. N. rejoice you in God, stand always fast in this lively
faith. Hebr. 11.
Follow and imitate the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, which are all
saved in this faith, who do all assure you, that the adversary can in no wise
hurt you, for your cause is won by Jesus Christ, John. 5. 1. John. 2.
which is your Judge and your advocate both together, wherefore say always
in this steadfast faith, Albeit I should walk in the midst of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, Psalm. 22.
for thou Lord God art with me.

B. S. N. Be you also never weerie, to say from the bottom of your heart, in
great humility and repentance:

Lord God Almighty, be merciful to me poor wretched sinner, for the love of
thy son Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Romans 3. John. 14. Math. 26.
And for the merit of his death and passion, it may please thee to receive my
soul, the which I commend into thy hands. So be it.

A singular Prayer, for one which is greatly afflicted with sickness, the
which is more like to dye, than to live.

With a little Catechism made of purpose, to instruct the sick person, and
to cause him to behold by Faith the great mystery of our Redemption.

Ecclesiasticus. 18. Before the sickness use medicine, and before thou come to
Judgment examine thy self, and in the presence of God thou shalt find
favor.

Now the Lord admonishes us to pray always, chiefly, when we are touched
with his rods. Math. 26.
Wherefore, all the faithful parents and friends, which visit the sick
person, should not only visit and comfort the body, but also should search
and enquire for spiritual medicine for his soul, which thing should be
done by good Prayers, confession of sins, and Christian exhortation,
according to the word of God, without the which man can not live, but is dead
being yet living. And to the end that all these things may be done in good
order, and with zeal, first it is needful to prostrate themselves before the
Majesty of God, and to pray unto him, beginning in this sort:

Our help is in the name of the Lord. etc. Then to present unto him the
general confession of sins, and consequently this present Prayer as
follows.

O Lord God Almighty, Math. 18. John. 14.
and father of all mercies, we are ae^ssbled in the name of thy well-beloved
Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in the favor of whom we are bold
to present our selves unto thee, to call upon thy most blessed name, having
our only resuge to thy sovereign goodness, the which we do not desire to
feel and taste in our selves only, but also in the necessity of thy poor
creature, being afflicted both with bodily sickness, and affliction and
calamity of the spirit. James. 5. 1. Cor. 11.
We know O Lord that thou do justly visit and chastise him with thy rods,
to cause him to understand thy fatherly affection: but thy great mercies,
which thou have used toward our fathers, Psalm. 74. Math. 26.
are not yet quenched and consumed: for thou art the great eternal God,
favorable and merciful, Psalm. 102. John. 14. Hebr. 7.
which never changest. Thy holy word teaches us very plainly, that all the
earth is full of thy mercies, the which do far surmount thy Justice:
wherefore, appease thy rigor toward thy creature, have pity and compassion
of him, for the love of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord. Look not upon his
sins, but behold the face of thy Christ, who has sufficientlye satisfied
for the same, in offering to thee upon the Cross, the great Sacrifice of his
body, we beseech thee then most loving and merciful God, to make him to feel
thy grace, the which thou never denyest to thy Children. And for so much as
thou art our eternal father, Math. 6.
which know well what is necessary and expediente for our salvation, we
do not pray thee to prolong or to shorten his life, for we do repose our
selves upon thy holy will, the which we do only desire to do. Thou art wise,
Romans 11.
not needing council, to dispose of thy creature according to thy good
pleasure, but if it please thee to call him, who is he that may resist? and if
thou will send him health, Romans 8. John. 1.
which is he that may control thee? For all things are in thy hand, and
nothing is done without thy will and holy Providence. Yet notwithstanding O
Lord, if of thy mercy thou do prolong his days, thy scourge shall serve
him for chastizemente, to amend, and to turn to thee, and we with him shall
yield unto thee thanks and praises. But if thou have determined to pass him
into a better life, we beseech thee, for the love of thy son Jesus, to
forget all his faults and offenses, the which thou have willed to be blotted
out, and washed in the shedding of his precious blood. That it may please thee
for the merit of the death and passion of thy son, to receive his soul into
thy hands, when thou shalt call him out of this World. O Lord God, Psalm.
30. Psalm. 71. Psalm. 51.
despise not the workmanship of thy hands, for behold here thy poor
creature, in manner utterly beaten down, the which calls upon thee from the
deapth of all his evils, presenting unto thee his sorrowful and penitente
heart, the which we beseech thee to have for acceptable, Iohh. 14.
for the love of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, for whose sake thou have
promised us to hear our requests. Wherefore O Lord, Math. 6.
we beseech thee to receive us into thy holy conduct, lightning our hearts and
understandings, to address us toward thee, and to call upon thy name, so as
thy son Jesus Christ our Lord has taught us to pray for all our
necessities, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Lastly O God, and
most merciful Father, that it may please thee ever to sustain us by thy
grace and power, to the end that through the weakness of our flesh, we fall
not. And for so much as of our selves we are so feeble, that we are not able
to stand fast the space of one minute, may it please thee to fortify us by
thy holy Spirit, and to arm us with thy graces, to the end that we may
constantlye persevere in thy Faith, without the which, it is not possible to
please thee, it may please thee to confirm us daily in the same, Hebr. ^^.
whereof we will make confession both with heart and mouth, saying:

I believe in God the Father Almighty. etc.

The Prayers being ended, they may see how the sick person does, and enquire
how he feels himself, with Christian and gracious speech: but if they see
that he decline, and that within short time after no token of recovery do
appear, they may chose some mete time to speak to the sick person, and to
ask him if he do desire to hear speech of God, and to hearken to his word,
whilst he has yet good remembrance. John. 8.
For if he be of God, they may then begin this little Catechism, which
follows. (*)

A short Catechism, which is not only to instruct the sick, but also to
refreshe his memory, with the great mystery of our Redemption: for the good
understanding and remembrance whereof, in his latter days, Eccles. 18.
he ought to make confession of his faith, before the company of the faithful,
of the which one (in the absence of the Minister) hold demand of him as
follovveth.
The Minister. B. S. N. Every man which knows well himself, and is not
ignorante of his estate and quality, Genes. 1. Psalm. 51.
certaynely ought to acknowledge, that albeit he is created to the image and
likeness of God, yet notwythstanding, he is conceyned and borne in the sin
of the old Adam, whereby he is made a poor and wretched sinner, Ephesians. 2. Romans
5.
ignorant, inconstant, and full of iniquity: and consequentlye, subject to
all miseries, afflictions, adversities, and lastly to death, the cause whereof
is sin, the which God not willing to leave it unpunished, does afflicte us
daily, and to speak it plainly, he chastises us in this world, to the end we
should not be damned with the world. Wherefore B. S. N. be patiente in your
sickness, 2. Cor. 11. Psalm. 31.
and you shall possess your soul in spiritual joy: acknowledge your sin,
and accuse your self before the Majesty of God, whom you must look upon
and behold by Faith, making confession of the same, both with heart and mouth,
before the whole company. For it is written, that man believes with his heart
to justice, and confesses with his mouth to salvation. Romans 10.
Harken then to the demaundes which now I will make unto you, and answer me
faithfully according to the understanding that you have received of the Lord.
But if you can not, because of your weakness and impeachment of your
sickness, I will answer for you, and it shall suffice us that ye give us to
understand by some token your heart, and constancy of faith, in the which you
must live and dye.

Now I ask of you.

For what cause and to what end were you created in this world?


The sick. For to know God. Genes. 1.



Minister. Was it necessary for you to know God?


The sick. Yea truly, Psalm. 26.
for so much as he is my sovereign goodness, without the knowledge of him
I should be more miserable, than the brute beasts.


Minister. Seeing that you know God, Genes. 1. 1. John. 1. Luc. 1. 1. John. 5.
Genes. 18.
you know well that he is an infinite power, wisdom, and goodness, one only
God in three persons, father, son, and holy Ghost. It is the only God, which
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did worship in spirit and truth. It is the only
eternal God, which has created Heaven and Earth, as all the things which
are in them: the knowledge of GOD which you have, is it not such?


The sick. Yes.


Minister. But could such a simple knowledge of God bring you well to
eternal life?


The sick. Very hardly: for it is eternal life, John. ^7.
to confess and know one only God, and him whom he has sent, his only
eternal son, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.


Minister. For what cause is it necessary for you to confess and know the
Lord Jesus Christ?


The sick. Because I must recover in Jesus Christ, all that which I have
lost in my self, Romans 5. Psalm. 51. Luke. 24. Psalm. 21.
by mean of the sin of the old Adam, wherein I was conceived and borne.
Wherefore, it was needful for my salvation, that Jesus Christ, very God and
very man, being clothed with our flesh, should of his free liberality and
grace, give me all that which I had lost in Adam.


Minister. It is very well said: that is the cause why Jesus Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost, Romans 1^. Math. 1. Luc. 12. Ephesians. 2. Psalm. 51.
Romans 8.
and borne of the Virgin Marie, to purge and sanctify you, for clean
contrary to him you are, conceived and borne in sin, and of sinful parents,
wherefore, do not you confess that without Jesus Christ you should have
remained a poor and wretched sinner in eternal death? Romans 5.



The sick. Yes verily, but I believe and confess, that this good Jesus Christ
has reconciled me to God his Father.


Minister. Yea, but how has he reconciled you to God his father?


The sick. By his death and passion, in the sheding of his precious blood,
Math. 26.
for to deliver me from eternal pains. Hebr. 7. Acts. 3.
This good Jesus Christ has suffered for me under Ponce Pilate many
afflictions, injuries, and troubles. It is Jesus Christ which was crucified for
me, as accursed upon the woodde of the Cross, to deliver me from the eternal
curse, whereunto Adam had bound me. This my faniour Jesus Christ was indeed
buried, to bury all my sins with him, to the end they should not be
imputed unto me before God. It is my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ which is
gone down into the lower parts, suffering an extreme temporal anguishe, to
deliver me from an eternal.


Minister. All this which you have now confessed of Jesus Christ, was it
sufficient to save you?


The sick. No, but that the holy Scriptures should be in every jot fulfilled:
for what is it that Jesus Christ should have profited me, to have bin borne,
crucified, dead, buried, and gone down into the lower parts for me only,
without being risen again. Wherefore, Bray. 53. Math. 26. Mark. 16. 1. Cor.
15.
I believe and confess, that my Lord, my head and Savior Jesus Christ, is
risen from the dead, to make me to rise with him, as one of his little members,
into eternal life.


Minister. Consequently it is written, that he is gone up into the Heavens,
Acts. 1.
being now set at the right hand of God his Father. But what does this
ascension profit you?


The sick. My Lord, my head and Savior Jesus Christ, is gone up into the
Heavens, to make me to go up after him, for there where the head is, the
members are also, and I believe, that being set at the right hand of God his
Father, Coloss. ^.
he is mine Advocate, intercessor, and only mediator toward him, very well
assuring me, that none may be able to hurt me, seeing that Jesus Christ is
mine advocate and my judge together, 1. John. ^ Romans 8. John. 5.
wherefore, I have no occasion to fear the day of his judgment, when he shall
come to judge the living and the dead, for I believe and confess in steadfast
Faith, that there is no judgment nor condemnation against those which are
faithful members in Jesus Christ. Romans ^.



Minister. Who has given him the grace to understand and know all these
things?


The sick. It is by the grace of the holy Ghost, 1. John. 5.
one only God with the Father, and the son, by whose mean we receive all
the good things and gifts which are offered unto us in Jesus Christ.


Minister. Seeing that you have already confessed, that you are a member of
Jesus Christ, it follows then that you are also incorporate to his Church,
the which ye ought to believe to be holy, Catholic, and universal.


The sick. I believe certaynely the holy Church universal, washed and cleansed
in the precious blood of Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 5.
wherefore, I do most humbly thank him, that he has given me the grace to be
one of the little members of his Church: and being baptized in his name, he
has made me to live in the communion, unity, and charity of the same, having
instructed me with his holy word, and nourished me with his true body, Math.
4. 1. Cor. 11.
having given me to drink of his most precious blood, in hope of the eternal
life.


Minister. Now seeing that you are so well founded upon ye lively Rock which
is Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 10.
and knowing your self well, you must confess and acknowledge ye principal
good things which you have received of this Lord Jesus Christ.


The sick. It is very meet, for I will not be ingrate, to acknowledge the
good things and gifts that I have received of God, wherefore I consesse, that
I wretched and miserable sinner, have infinitely, and without ceassing,
Psalm. 51. Luke. 17.
offended the goodness and justice of God, having transgressed his holy
commandments. In doing whereof, I have deserved eternal death and damnation.
Notwithstanding, I appealing to the mercy of God, 1. Tim. 1. Acts. 4.
do ask him mercy, and believe and confess undoubtedly, that my sins are
fully and wholly forgiven me, by the only merit of the death and passion of
my Lord and savior Jesus Christ, Apocal. 1. Math. 26.
in the sheding of his most precious blood, wherein I do assure my self, to
be sufficientlye, and fully washed and purged, which is the greatest
co^tentation, and good thing, that ever I might receive, and such is my faith,
in the which I will live and dye, Math. 10.
by the grace of the holy Ghost.


Minister. Seeing that you have received so great a good thing of God, by the
mean of his son Jesus Christ, Mark. 11.
it behooves you also to do his commandementes, for even as he has pardoned
and forgiven you all your sins, even so likewise must you freely, and with a
good heart, forgive all those which may have offended you, other wise, Math. 5.
you shall not walk according to God.


The sick. Herein have I known the Law of Jesus Christ, Math. 16.
to be the only holy and perfect law, commanding us to love our neighbors,
both friends and enemies, as our selves: wherefore, I beseech all those, whom
I may have offended, either in word or deed, to forgive me with as good a
heart, Luke. 23.
as I do forgive all which have offended me, desiring to do them pleasure
and service, as to my good breethren and friends.


Minister. Now seeing that it is ordained of God, that all men shall dye, we
may not resist his ordinance, but we must continually conform our selves to
his holy will: Hebr. 9. Genes. 3.
wherefore my brother, you may not find it strange, if I do declare unto you
that which the good Prophet Esaias did declare to the King Ezechias, Esaias. 38.
saying unto him from the Lord, Give order to thy house, for thou shall die,
and shall live no longer. This good council should stir you up, to dispose
your self spiritually well in your conscience. Esaias. 55.
It is first to turn your self to God, and to bewail your sins, as this
good King did, to implore his mercy in asking him forgiveness, and saying
always in your heart: O Lord God be merciful and have pity upon me wretched
sinner, for the love of thy son Jesus Christ my Lord and savior.

This done, you may not forget your house and family, the why he you ought so
well to ordeyne, and dispose by good festamente, or other last will, that it
may be after your deceasse, in peace and quietness: but to show you the
better to understand how to give order, and to dispose of your house: it is
that you give unto every man that which is his due, without deceyuing any
man: that you leave your wife, heir, your children, and kinffolke, in good
agreement and quietness, to the end, that after your deceasse, they have no
occasion to be divided. This done, you must forget all the cares and griefs of
this world, the which passes away, with all his concupiseence, but he that
does the will of God remains eternally. Touching your children, you are only
their natural father for a time: but God is everlastingly their spiritual
Father, (...).
having them in his holy keeping and protection, to keep and nourish them, and
to preserve them from all evil, Math. 6.
provided, that they will walk in his ways. For the rest, seeing that you are
a Christian, regenerate at the holy Sacrament of Baptism, it is long since
that you did know, that we have here no permanente city, for we look for a
better, which is everlasting, wherefore I pray you, in the name of God, trouble
not your self at all with any kind of worldly grief, for we are here but
strangers as our fathers were, Psalm. 38.
when then our Lord God shall have ordained, that you shall dislodge and march
before us, will you not then submit your self to his holy will and
ordinance? Also, if he see it expedient for your salvation, to prolong your
life, as he did to his good King Ezechias, will not you be contented we it,
Esaias. 38.
ye it shall please him to dispose of you? yes certainly, for he is Lord and
master, you are but a servant: he is your creator, you are his creature, and
the work of his hands. Even so then will he dispose of you according to his
will, whereunto you should humble and conform your self, saying with a good
heart, O Lord God, thou know my necessity, if it be thy pleasure to prolong
my life, thy will be done, if it please thee also to call me unto thee, thy will
be done, for thy creature O Lord nathe none other will, but thine.

Now my brother, comfort your self in God, who if he have ordained to call
you, your calling shall he happy, for you must believe and trust with a
strong faith, that he will make you to rise in your own body in a glorious
immortality, to cause you to reign with him in the eternal life, 1. Cor. 15.
Apocal. 1.
the which is won and given to you, in the virtue of the most precious blood
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whose name, the Lord God bless and
conserve you, and cause his countenance to shine upon you, and be merciful unto
you. The Lord God turn his face toward you, and maineteyne you in good
estate. So be it.

This being done, if they see the sick person to impair, and to draw near
his death, as willing to tend to his appointed end, forthwith in his mortal
agony, fail ye not to recite with a loud voice before him the Christian
exhortation, the which is placed here before, thus doing, God will give him
grace well and faithfully to dye in him. So be it.

I Would desire here to say something more, but there is I can not tell what
grief in my heart, which makes me to hold my peace in the midst: of my
purpose, when I think upon the blindness, and horrible darkness of the time
passed. For the Monks and Priests, refusing in this last necessity the
comforts that the Scripture gives, and the confirmations against the fear of
Death, they brought forth of the one side, and of the other, I can not tell
what trash? First behold the fair exhortation which they gave to those
which were upon the pittes brinke, to trust in ye Popes Bulls, wherein they
did promise them forgiveness of their sins, and took from them all fear of
the fire of Purgatory. Now all this, what was it, other than to lean against
a wall that was ready to fall, or to trust to a broken reed. Further, they
exhorted the poor sick persons, to communicate, and to take part of ye good
works which should be done in all their order, as fastings, abstinences,
watchings, Prayers, and other such like dayne things, and to have their part
therein: they might in no wise spare any silver, no, if they would save
their soul. For it is in this forte, that these furred paws, and hooded
beasts, have accustomed to set forth their works of superabundance that they
might sell to others, leaving always that which was prositable and necessary
to obtain salvation. And of this matter, men may yet at this day, bring
forth fair obligations passed, which shall give testimony of these things.
Note this blasphemy.
The sick persons then being near death, were admonished to think, how
great merits they had, for so much as Heaven was due unto them, how many
good works they had, with the multitude whereof they were clean covered, in
such forte, as a man could not know whether they had offended God or no.
Beho^d there the goodly comforts which they were wont to give to poor
languishing persons, and such as they do give at this day under the Popes
rain. And above all the holynesses, behold this great superstition which has
place, that if any man did dye, being clad with the habit of a Friar, the
Devil should have no power over him. Among the which, many Italians have bin
drunken with this foolish superstition, yea men of renoune, and of great
wisdom, the which would be received before they departed out of this world,
into the family of S. Frances, and after their death, would be bursed in his
habit. Now I speak not here at all of Obsequies, Vigilles, Anniuersaries,
Peligrimage, taken in hand for the salvation of the dead, nor of other
suffrages of the living, nor of merits, satisfactio^s, and good works, wherein
they did put their only hope and trust, to obtain salvation. And to avoid
the pains of Purgatory. I will not speak of the other things, which these
idle bellies were wont to set forth, to poor sick persons, to prepare them to
death, I leave to spoke of these blasphemies. When they shaped this goodly
hunne to the Virgin Marie in ye Article of death. Marie mother of grace,
mother of mercy, defend us from the enemy, and receive us at the hour of
death. Now let us acknowledge the inestimable benefits of our only God, and
heavenly Father, who in our days has restored the doctrine of the Gospel,
and has stirred us up to serve him in all pureness, in true reverence and
honor, and has drawn us out from the deadly darkenasse, to bring us to the
knowledge of his son our Lord and only savior Jesus Christ. And even as the
good old m^n Simeon (of whom S. Luke makes mention) after that he had seen
according to the promise made Luke. 2.
unto him Jesus Christ, whom he had waited for, and desired of long time,
blessing and praising God, did say, Lord thou let go now thy seruante in
peace, according to thy word, for so much as mine eyes hane seen thy
salvation, the which thou have prepared before the face of all people, a
light for the lightening of the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel,
Even so we, after that we have known the son of God our mediator and
Advocate, after that we have seen him with the eyes of our says, with the
good old Simeon, yea, he which is the Christ and anointed of the Lord, let us
give thanks with joy and gladness, to the great living God, and let us sing
very Christian songs, praises, and himites, in the holy company of the
faithful, and let us depart from this life willingly, and with a glad heart,
at what time soever it shall please this good heavenly father, yea, and being
in good health, let us desire with S. Paul to be separated from this body,
and to be lest in peace with Simeon, to the end, that we may lastly come to
that only and eternal joy of Angels and of men, which is Jesus Christ, after
whom, the faithful do languishe with a burning zeal, to enjoy his so amiable
company with all the Saints, God the author of every good thing and blessing,
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, make us partakers of this holy
grace, unto whom be praise everlastingly. So be it.


Hebr. 13. Remember those which are afflicted, as being your self of the same
body, and subject to endure as much.

The end of the Catechismes
Here follow certain consolatorie sentences concerning the love of God
toward man, and of the benefits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
bestowed upon us, taken out of holy scripture, for the comfort and confirmation
of the afflicted in mind, whom Satan by all his cunnings would draw into
desperation: and he that would escape comfort of this small collection, must
have the Bible by him, and turn to the sentences herein written, and not
only read the sentences here cyted, but also that which goes next before
it, and that also which follovveth next after is. (*)
FIrst, God is the God of love and peace. 2. Cor. 11. God delivers us from
ouil, Esa. 3. a. 63. and ye know ye he appeared ye he might take away our sins,
and in him is no sin, Ioh. 3. b but God sets out his love toward us,
seeing that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us. To. 5. b. for those
which he has predestinate to be made like to the image of his son, to the end
he should be the first born amongst very many brethren. To. 8. f. and that
which I live now in ye flesh, I live in the faith of the son of God, who has
loved and given himself for me. Gala. 2. d, and walk in love eue^ as Christ
bath loved us, and has given himself for us to be an offering and a
sacrifice of a smeet smelling sauoure to God, Ephe. 5. a. Grace and Peace be
unto you, from him that is, that was, and that is to come, and from the seven
spirits, which are before his throne, and from Jesus Christ, which is a
faithful witness, the first borne of the dead, and Prince of the Kings of the
earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us in his blood from our sins. Apoc.
a. b. for the Lord does chastise him that he loves, even as the father does
the child, in whom he delights: my son despise not ye chastning of the
Lord, neither fainte when thou art rebuked, for whom the Lord loves, he
chastneth: and he scourges every son, that he receives. If ye endure
chastizeme^t, God offers himself unto you as unto sons, for what son is
he? etc. Hebr. ^ i. b. c. Prouer, ^ b. But Sion (said ye Lord) has forgotten
me: can a woman forgette her child, and not have compassion of the son of
her wombr? though they should forget, yet I will not forget thee. Esaias. 49.
d.e. I have sound thee says the Lord, with an everlasting love, therefore with
merry have I drawn thee, Iere. 31. a. b. What shall we then say to these
things, if God be on our side, who ca^ be against us? who spared not his own
son, but gave him for all to death, how shall he not with him give us all
things also. Romans 8. f. So we do therefore love him, because he loved us
first. John. 4. d. as my father knows me, even so know I my father, and I
lay down my life for my Sheep. Ioh. 10. b. c. the false Prophet, which
would draw us from the love and perfect trust that we ought to have in God,
ought not to be heard, but slain. Deuteronomy. 13. a. b. c. Call upon me in the day
of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.
c. for O Lord thou art good and merciful, and of great kindness unto all
the^ which call upon thee. Psalm. 80. ^. The Lord is full of compassion and
mercy, flow to anger, and of great kindness, he will not always chide, nor
keep his anger for ever. Ps. 103. a. The Lord is gracious and merciful, flow
to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to al, and his mercies are over
al his works. Psalm 102. At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his
sin from ye bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my
remembrance (says the Lord) Ezechiel 18. g. A sorrowful spirit is a
sacrifice unto God, despise not O Lord humble and contrite hearts. Ps. 51. Seek
the Lord whilst he may be sound, call upon him whilst he is near, let ye
wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return
to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and to our God, for he is very
ready to forgive. Esa. 55. b. c. Then shall ye cry unto me, and ye shall go
and pray unto me, and I will hear you, and ye shall seek me and find me,
because ye shall seek me with all your heart, and I will be found of you
says the Lord, and I will turn away your captivity. Ierem. 29. c. Grace
be unto you, and peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for our sins, to deliver us from this present wicked
world, according to the will of God dure Father, to whom be glory for ever.
So be it. Galath. i. a. Amend your lives, for the kingdom of God is at hand.
Math. 4. c. I am not come to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance,
Math. 9. b. Come unto me all ye that are laden and weerie, and I will ease you.
Math. ^^. d. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of ye whole world. 1. John. 2. a. (*)

The End.

