A View of Valyaunce. Describing the famous feats, and Martial exploites of
two most mighty nations, the Romans and the Carthaginians, for the conquest
and possession of Spain. Translated out of an ancient Record of Antiquity,
written by Rutilius Rufus, a Roman Gentleman, and a Captain of charge under
Scipio, in the same Wars. VERY DELIGHTFVLL to read, and never before this
time publyshed.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas East. 1580.

To the Right worshipful, Sir Henry Lee, Knight, Master of the Armarie, and
Leash, unto her most excellent Majesty.
SIr, if I were to yield a reason of my present presumption for thus boldly
offering unto your worshipful view this little hystoricall Abridgeme^t of
Martial exploits, by sundry most famous warriors and renowned Capitaines
long since achieved: I think besides many other allegations, I might
answer, and that justly, (wherein also I am persuaded, that the general
consent of your Country, will join in opinion with me) that the title of the
book, bearing the name of Valyaunce, and the matter or argument therein
comprised, entreating of warlike affairs, and knightly prowess, does (as it
were) by peculiar choice challenge your favorable patronage. For, omitting the
large Seas of your sundry other deserved comme^dations and praises, which I
know (such is your Christian modesty) you love not to hear to your own face
emblazed, and which I am far unmeet and unable fully to decipher: what
invincible courage in the cause and quarrel of your Prince and Country
harbors within your undaunted breast: what dexterity, with shocke and
lance follows your vigorous arm: what prompt readiness and alacrity to
march against the enemy has appeared in you abroad: what courtesy,
affability, bounty, and heroical generositie at home: both Court
resoundeth, and Country plausibly attestifieth. According whereunto, I know, I
need not to dwell upon any curious, suit unto your Worship for the cheereful
acceptaunce heere-off: but rest very assured of your accustomed goodness:
wherein I beseech the Almighty long to continue you, with daily increase of
the same.

At Butley in Chesshyre, the. 20. of June. 1580. Your Worships humble, Thomas
Newton.

To the Reader.
WHat gain grows to studious Readers by diligent pervsing of Hystories, as
there is none (I think) so insensate who feels not: so, after so many worthy
clerks which have from time to time displayed the profit, the pleasure, the
use, yea the necessity thereof, I deem labor needelesse, and persuasion
superfluous. Only by the way, and even at a word, it may suffice to say, that
by the benefit hereof, the practices and pollices, the drifts and dealings, ye
aduauncements and calamities, the victories and overthrows, the welfare and
decay, the alteration and continuance, the good state and the badde, as well of
great Monarchies, kingdoms, States, and Seignidries, as of the affairs of
private persons, and inferior subjects are manifestly laid open unto the
perfect view of our eyes, and without the leauell of any danger plainly
discovered and presented unto our considerations. For they, without either
fear or favor; affection or parcialitie, do effectually describe unto us
the order and means how Commonweals began, how they grew, how they
continued, how they flourished, and how they fall into decay and final
declination: what ways advanced their honor, what wennes and disgraces
emblemished their estimation, and what disorders eclypsed their majesty's: how
worthy persons for their worthy service have been worthelye invested with
titles of honor: and how drousie drones and carpet capitaines, lulled in the
cradle of ease, and dandeled in the lap of sensual security, have in the
end condignely had their memoryes obscurely raked, and buried with their
bodies in the pit of Oblivion. Finally, how virtue has been notablye
rewarded, and vice shamefully reproached. All which be good inducements, to
train our minds to the due consideration of their ends: and may serve for
ready directions (as it were) with the finger to point us to the embracing of
honesty, and means to terrify us from pursuing of looseness and villainy.
To this end do all hystories generallye tend: and to this effect affoordeth
this little Book, plentiful stoare and variety of delectable matter: and the
same so compendiouslye couched together, ye within a small room it caryeth as
great substance of memorable acts, and venturous exploytes, as many
(perhaps) that bear a bigger volume, and brag it out with a loftier
countenance. Among other praises worthily due unto it, this (surely) is none of
the least, that it is a Monument of great antiquity, and now of late by a
studious Gentleman of this our country in his travail into Italye there
happilye found, and by him sensiblye translated. The copy whereof, being unto
me (upon trust) long ago committed to peruse, and my simple advise therein
required, I could do no less, at the request of my friend, but both peruse
the book, confer the matter with other Hystroriographers, enlighten it with
some needful marginall Notes, and finally with the glaunce of my poor pen,
commend the same, as a new found treasure unto thy courteous consideration.
Friendly therefore, and thankefully accept it, that the pains here-in taken and
sustained in thy behalf, may be thought well bestowed. Farewell.

Thomas Newton.

THE VIEW OF Valyaunce.
THe ancient name of Spain, was sometime called Hiberia: A province of such
largeness, as has been thought incredible. Containing by the old
account.xij.C.L. miles, as well in length as breadth. It has the same Confines,
that it has ever had, vz. ye Pyrenaei Mountains to the North Occean, and the
Tyrrhene Sea, to the Pillours of Hercules.

The first inhabitaunce of it is diverse, as of al Countries: of the which to
make much a do, I do not intend: saving yt I will not omit, how yt the
Phoenicians traded Merchandise and took up place of habitation there, and that
Arganthonius King of Tartesso, gave certain Grecians that came to visit him,
convenient ground to dwell in. After some he lived but* 120. and after some
300. years.
Which king, as stories tells us, lived an C.L. years. This Region so rich
and abundant, the Carthaginians, coueted to possess before the Romans, and
vexed them so continually that the Romans were called of one part to give them
aid. Amilcar of Carthage, surnamed Barcha, was the first yt did any great feat
in Spain, who being accused at home for his doings abroad, and afraid to come
to answer, immediately after the war of Africa, which was caused of his
untruth, not keeping promise with ye soldiers, yt served him in Sicily, he went
with his army into Spain, and spoiled ye country which had not offended.
Wherefore the Lords and princes of Hiberia, co^federed together, and slew him
after this sort. In ye front of their host, they had placed certain carres of
wood, which went before, and they followed in order. The Carthaginians not
knowing what they meant, made a laughter at ye matter: but when they began to
buckle, ye Hiberians set the carres a fire, which made the Oxen so in rage, yt
they drove upon ye Africanes, and brake their battle, by which occasion, the
Spaniards killed many of them, A milcar slain.
with their Captain Amilcar. But the Carthaginians finding a sweetenes in
Spain, sent an other army thither, and made Asdrubal son in law to Barcha,
General of ye same, There we sundry of this name vvhereoft one was natural
brother to Annibal.
and made Annibal, his brother in law, his liuetenant, which afterward
achieved, so great a fame of Chiualrye. And these two, won all the country
unto ye river Iberus, wheroff it had the name, and divides it in the midst.
The Saguntines, The Zacynthiane builded Sagunt.
a generation descended of the Zacynthians, inhabited in ye midst of ye
mountains, and the River, with certain other people of Grecia. These being
afraid of ye Carthaginians power, sent four Ambassadors to Rome to have
their help. The Senate sent their Orators to Carthage, where it was concluded,
yt the confine of ye Carthaginians dominion in Spain, should be the river
Iberus, and that ye Romans should not pass the hither side of the same, nor
ye Carthaginians go beyond it, and that ye Saguntines and other Greek people
should remain free. Shortly after this agreement, Asdrubal slain by a slave.
to revenge the death of his master.
Asdrubal was slain of a slave, ye reue^ged ye death of his master, whom ye
same Asdrubal had cruelly murdered. And the army there, made young Annibal
Barcha their General, of whom they had conceived great hope. This Annibal had a
privy malice against the Romans, being thereto incensed of his father when
he was a child, and made to swear upon the Altar of the burning Sacrifice,
that he should be perpetual enemy to the Romans. The inward grudge and Old
malice of Annibal toward the Romans.
He thought long to pick a quarrel against them, and persuaded the
Torboletanes, neighbors to the Saguntines, to come unto him and complain of
injuries yt they should do them.

They did so, and he sent their Ambassadors to Carthage, and with privy
letters procured his friends to fall out with ye Romans, which thing taking
place, he caused the Torboletanes, once again to come unto him, and complain
of ye Saguntines, in ye which they also obeyed him. He, upon this pretense,
sent to the Saguntines, that they should appoint xv. discreet men to treat of
this controversy: whom being come to his presence, he commanded to show their
matter: they answered, they would leave that, to the judgment of the Senate
of Rome.

Annibal made no more words, but the same night passed the River with all his
Camp, and spoiled the country even to the walls of Sagunt, Sagunt besieged.
and after laid siege to the city. The Saguntines sent for aid to the
Romans, who after their manner, sent Ambassadors to Annibal, to record unto
him the chapiters of accord. When they were come into Spain, he sent them
word, they should come no nigher him, wherefore they went to Carthage, where they
had but small enterteinment. And so with the debating of the matter, and
deferring to send help in time, the poor Saguntines were driven to extreme
desperation. For Annibal held them so straight, that they had oppression of
famine, and all kind of lack. Wherefore entending to dye valyauntlye, they
brought all their corn into the market place, and corrupted it, and then
issued out in the night and assaulted the watch of the Camp, Valiant
stomachs of the Saguntines.
and killed many of their enemies, and in the end they were all slain. Which
when ye women in the town perceived, some lepte from the top of their houses,
some choked themselves, some killed first their children, and then they
followed, Sagunt conquered.
and this end had this noble and rich city of Sagunt. Annibal entered the
city, and in it planted inhabitaunts of his own country, and named it Carthage
Spartagena. The Romans were much abashed at the loss of this city, and sent
Ambassadors to Carthage, to have Annibal delivered unto them, as a breaker of
league and accord. The Carthaginians, made light of them, and dalyed at the
matter: Wherefore the Roman Ambassador, took up a quarter of his gown, and
folded it together, saying: In this lap I have peace and war, Open
d^fiaunce betvveene Rome and Carthage.
choose which you will. Nay (quoth they) offer which thou list, I offer war,
(quoth he,) and we take it (quoth they) And upon the same, they wrote to
Annibal ye he should range over al Spain, sparing no country, and so he did,
and either by fair means or foul, brought it to his devotion.

Now had Annibal that he would have, all whose desire was to invade Italy, and
prepared for it accordingly, allying himself with the Frenchmen, and leaving
his brother Asdrubal in Spain. The Romans who thought ye war would be
hottest in Spain and Afrike, sent their power thither, not once thinking, that
the Carthaginians would have come into Italy. Tiberius Sempronius Longus took
his voyage into Afrike, with C.lxii. ships, and two Legions. And Publius
Cornelius Scipio came into Spain, with.lx. ships, x M. footmen, and vii.C.
horsemen, and his Brother Gneus Cornelius Scipio was his Liuetenaunt. Publius
by the way understood of the Merchaunts of Marsilios, that Anniball was
passed the Alps: Wherefore he fearing that the Italians should be taken
napping, left the government of the Army to his brother, and with one Galley,
went into Tuscaine, to make preparation against Annibal. After a while this
Publius, returned into Spain as Vice-generall, and with his brother kept
war with Asdrubal.

It chanced that Siphax King of Numidia, Called new Barbary.
made such invasion upon the Carthaginians, yt they sent for Asdrubal and a
part of his army to come home, in whose absence, ye.ii. Scipioes by their
pollycie, got wonderfully in Spain. Wherefore when the Carthaginians were
accorded with Siphax, they sent again Asdrubal into Spain, with more men, and two
new Capitaines, Mago and Asdrubal Gisgo: after whose return, the Romans
had enough to do, and yet seemed to have the better hand.

Publius Cornelius Scipio and his brother slain with too much hardiness.
When they were in Winter camp, news came to Publius Scipio, ye Asdrubal was
coming toward him: he went with a few men to espy his doing, and being
somewhat too hardye, was caught in a train, and he and al his men slain.

His brother understanding the fray, and not knowing the chance, came forth
with his light horsemen to aid him, but ye Carthaginians encountered him with
such a multitude, yt he was driven into a Tower, and there, with all his men
destroyed. Thus perished these two worthy Capitaines, men of noble courage.

This was heavy tidings at Rome, and by and by Marcellus and Claudius were sent
into Spain, with.ii.M. horse, x.M. men, and a Navy, and money convenient. They
did no great good there, insomuch as the Carthaginians encroached so far as
the Mountains.

The Romans were in great agony, for if they should have given over Spain, they
looked for double war in Italy, and yet had they so much a do at home, yt
they could spare no power abroad: Notwithstanding to avoid the worst, they
appointed a day for the creation of a fit Captain into Spain. There was no
man would take the matter in hand, till Cornelius Scipio son to Publius
that was slain in Spain, A patterue of a most valiant tovvardly and victorius
Cap^^aine.
being scarcely.xxiiii. year of age stood up, and lamenting the death of his
father and uncle, whose reue^geme^t he said, apperteined to him, spoke with
such vehemency, as a man rapte of God, insomuch that the people were
wonderfully glad of him, and chose him Captain general into Spain. But the
ancient fathers said, he was too rash, and to great an auauntour, and doubted
of his proceedings. Wherefore he came again, and spoke as he did before, and
yet (he said) he would be loath, his youth should be any let to ye majesty of
the People of Rome, therefore if any man would take the enterprise in hand, he
would willingly give place, but for all their words, there was no man would take
the thing upon him, but he and so there were appointed x.M. men, v.C. horse,
and xxviii, long ships, no more could be spared for fear of Annibal. When he
was come into Spain, he mostrued his men and purged the host, and spoke with
such vehemency unto them, that he was thought to be sent of god, which opinion
when he knew, he confirmed it by his polytique devices, and pretended to do
all things by divine inspiration. For he used many times to go into the Temple
alone and to shut the door after him and therevppon was thought to have
co^fere^ce with Iuppiter. Numanda besieged and vvonne by Scipio.
When he had learned that the enemies were encamped in diverse places* and that
Mago was at Sagunt, now called new Carthage, with x.M. men, he determined to
give the first onset there, as well for ye small number, as for ye commodity of
ye place, without the which, ye Romans should have but hard landing in Spain.
He took his journey before night, and in the morning was at Carthage, and
immediately laid his siege and entrenched it, whereat the Carthaginians were
astonished. The next day he intended to assault it, and appointed scaling
ladders and engines for every part, except one, where the wall was low and not
warded, being defensed with a standing water and the Sea.

When all things were furnished, and the ships at the mouth of the port, before
day he commanded his soldiers in part, to give the assault from the engines
to annoy them above, and in part with other engines for ye purpose to batter
the wall beneath.

Mago had appointed his men likewise, partly to break out at the gates and to
fight beneath with their swords, because it was too narrow for the pikes, and
partlye with stones, and fire, and other devises to defend from the wall. There
was an hot assault, there was no courage vnshewed, there was no device to
seek. The Romans that stood at the battery beneath, were sore handeled of
them that issued out with short weapons: but they whose hearts even increases
in danger, so manfully behaved themselves, yt they drove the enemy in. They
that defended the Battlements, began also to shrincke, so that the Romans
began to take hold with their scaling ladders: But they that had fought
without, mounted the walls, and repulsed the Romans very valyauntly. Scipio
did the office of a good Captain, encouraging his Soldiers, and continuing
the fight, till ye time came yt he had appointed, and made no man privy.
Secrecy and wise dealing in a polytique
At middaye the water that was on one side of ye wall, was so low, that a man
might wade over by the mid-legge. General of great force
Wherefore he took the occasion, and cried unto the^: Now is the time
(valiant soldiers) now is ye time, wherein God has appointed you to win
this city. The Sea and the fresh water makes you way, bring your ladders,
follow me, and all is yours. He took a ladder, and entered the water, and his
band of men followed, he was the first that set the scale to the wall to have
gone up, but certain of his Guard and other stayed him, whiles the Soldiers
brought their ladders and scaled. Relief came unto this side, with great
tumulte on every part, and the fight continued long and sharp, till at length
the victory was the Romans, who first got certain little Touers, upon ye
which Scipio made the Flutes and the Drums to go, to encourage the rest of the
Romans: at the which sight, some of the City fled, as all had been taken,
and some abode by it manfully, til certain of the Romans lept down and
opened ye gates to Scipio, who entered with all his army: and then every man
fled, some this way, some that way. Mago with a good band a while kept the
Market place, and after his men were slain, and he could not hold out, he fled
with a few into the Castle, where, for lack of all things, he yielded shortly
after. When Scipio had taken this, so rich and mighty a city in one day, and
the iiij. after his coming into Spain, every man thought him to do all things
rather by divine inspiratio^, tha^ by ma^s policy, which opinion, he all his
life maintained, by such means as he used, which was many times, to enter alone
into ye high Temple of Rome in ye Capitol, and to shut ye doors to him, as
though God had there taught him his lesson. Wherefore in Triumphs al other
Images are taken out of ye Common place, but ye Image of Scipio is taken out of
ye Capitol. When he had got this city, which should be as a receipt and
munitio^ as well in peace as in war, he sacrificed to god, praised his host,
and reco^forted ye inhabitants, recording to the^ the memory of his
ancestors. The riches of ye City was infinite, for there was abundance, and
great store of armure, artillery both for ye land and sea, vittaile and corn,
Iuory, gold, and silver, coined and uncoined, the pledges and prisoners of
Spain, and all other things before taken from ye Romans. The prisoners he set
free, to win frie^dship of their countries. He most bountifully rewarded him, A
worthy vvarrior to encourage his soldiers revvardeth each according to their
valyant service.
ye first boldly scaled the wall, and half so much to ye second, and ratably
to ye rest. Al yt precious things he sent to Rome, where sacrifice was made iij.
days together. Now began ye Carthaginia^s and al Spain to tremble at ye feate
of this Scipio, as a thing passing man his reason. Immediately upon ye fame of
this victory, a country in Spain called Betica took ye Romans part, Which
is now the country of Granada.
and Mago one of the contrary Capitaines invaded that Region. Scipio hearing
thereoff, made speed thether-wards, and with little labor, enforced him to
forsake the ground.

Asdrubal, Mago and Massimissa, united their forces together, and Scipio took
his place a mile off, or little more. They had in their camp above.lxx.M. me^,
and v.M. horsemen, with.xxxvi. Elephants. Scipio had not the third part, and
therefore durst not come to fight, but spent the time in skirmishing. And when
he saw his vittailes failed him, and thought it reproach to depart, he made
sacrifice, and assembled the soldiers in convenient place to be heard, and
with countenance changed, like a man inspired of God, he told them that his
accustomed Angel had appeared unto him, and given him courage to fight,
forasmuch, as victory did rather consist in the aid of God, then in the number
of men. And that they might believe him the better, he caused the Masters of
the Ceremonies and sacrifices, to report what they saw in the same. And whiles
he was about this matter, behold a number of birds, came flying over him, which
being wont to be taken for a luckie token, he did not let it pass, but
turned his body and sight toward their flight, and as a man in fury, cried to
the army to behold this token of victory. At the sight whereoff, every man
turned himself as he did, and required that they might go fight: A wise
captain lets no occasion slip, that may any reayes further his affairs.
When he perceived his devise to take place, he said he would follow the signs
of heaven, and ordered his men for the battle. And when the soldiers had
taken repast, he committed the horsemen to Sillanus, and the footmen to
Laelius, and Martius.

When the Capitaines of the enemies saw this sudden assault, they armed
themselves with great confusion, having yet taken no repast. The onset was
given on both parts at once, as well by the horsemen as footmen. The
Numidians that were there with Massimssa used to come fearsely upon their
enemies, and spend their Darts, and then retire, and when they had a while
fled, they would return as fearsly again. Scipio had devised that the
Romans should follow the^ so near with spear in rest, that their launching
tools should stand them in little steed. And so they had ye worst in that
fight, but the footeme^ of the Romans were so ouerlayd with the multitude of
the others, that all the day they had the worst, although Scipio never ceased
to encourage and refresh them, til at the last he left his horse and taking a
tergate from a soldier, stepped into ye midst of them and cried, now Romans
help your captain, help your Scipio in this danger, at the which, partly
for shame, and partly for fear of their capitain they thrust upon the enemies
wc such vyolence, yt they could not endure their force for yt they were with
long fighting and lack of sustenance very faint, being now neigh night, and
having cate^ nothing all ye day. This was ye battayl at Cerbona. Battle of
Cerbona.
Where ye victory was a great while doubtful, of ye Romans viii.C. and of the
Carthaginians x.M. five C. were slain. After this loss, the Carthaginians
retired more and more, til Scipio drove the^ to a place, where they were
conveniently strong, and had relief of all things: Wherefore Scipio left
Sillanus to beseage them, and he himself went further into Spain. Sillanus did
so well with his enemies, that they recoiled still, till they came to the streict,
and passed over to Gades. Annibal had sent for his brother Asdrubal, yt was
providing me^ at North Spain, to come to him into Italy: And because he would
deceive Scipio, he took his way Northerly by ye mountains Hyrenaei. In this
mean time Liuius was come from Rome, to succeed Scipio and told him yt the
Senate minded to se^d him into Africa against Carthage, which enterprice he
had long desired, and was glad of it. He sent Laelio into Barbaria to Siphax with
many gifts, requesting him of aliance, if he came into Afric, for ye former
love yt had been with him and his auncesters, Siphax promised so to be, receiving
ye gifts, and sent likewise to Scipio. When the Carthaginians understood this,
they also made out Asdrubal to Siphax to require him of confederacy: The
ve^turous enterprise of Scipio.
which when Scipio heard, he thought to prevent him, and wc two Galleys,
sailed to Barbary: when he was coming ye galies of Carthage, yt were before
him lay in wait for him, but by yt benifite of the wynd he escaped, and got ye
port. Siphax gave gentle entertainme^t to the^ both, and privily concluded
leage with Scipio, and sent him away: The Carthaginians had laid for him
again, but yet by good fortune he again escaped. A number of the inhabitants
beyond the river, Now called Biskay.
called Celtiberians, were in Camp with Hanno, whom Martius drove to such a
strait, that they were forced to send him messe^gers to treat of accord: he bad
them first deliver their Captain, and the fugitives and then expound their
message: they took their captain and the fugitives, and brought the^ to
Martius: he required also the prisoners, and they brought the^: then he
commanded them to deliver him their money, and come down to the plain, for it
was not meet that they which sewed for pardon, should keep a place of
strength.

When they were come down, he said unto them, Although ye have deserved to
die, having forsaken your country that obeys us, and served our enemies, yet
I am content to let you all go safe, if you will leave your armor. At the
which word, they were so agreeued, that they cried out and said, they would
rather die then so to do, whereupon began a cruel fight, in the which the
half of the Celtiberians were manfullye slain. Sillanus went to receive a
city called Castace, but when he came there he was repulsed, whereof he sent
word to Scipio, who made ready to come unto it, and by the way assaulted the
City of Illiturgo: This city when the Scipiones were alive, was friend to the
Romans, but after their death played a traitorous part, and delivered the
Romans, to the Carthaginians. Scipio remembered this injury, Illiturgo
utterly razed, and all the inhabytauntes slain.
and in four hours destroyed it, and although he were wounded in the neck,
yet he gave not over til he had ye victory: wherefore the soldiers without any
commandment, despising al spoil, killed men, women, and children, and laid ye
city to the ground. Being come to Castace he Marshalled his camp in iii.
several places, and refrained from fight, to see what they would do. The
citizens renouncing ye gariso^ of the Carthaginians delivered the city to the
Romans, where Scipio left a man of their own, to govern it. There was a
city called Astapa, which had continued in faith with ye Carthaginians, and
was beseiged of Martius. They of the city considering, that if they were
taken* they should be sold as slaves, caused al their riches and substance,
to be brought into the market place, and laid a stacke of wood about it, and
set their wives and children upon it. Desperate and invincible courage of the
Astapians.
Then did they choose fifty of their best men, and bound them by oath, that if
their city were taken, they should first kill their wives and children, and
than themselves, having first set al on fire: when they had called ye Gods into
witness of their purpose, they came out and assalted Martius yt looked for
nothing less, and at the first brunt put ye light horsemen to flight: the
battle of footeme^ made resistance and fought it out. The Astapians showed
great prowess, and though they were inferior in number, yet were they nothing
inferior in valor: And being deuoide of hope, fought without stop, till they
were al killed. When ye fifty of the town perceived yt, they dispatched the
women and the children, and set the wood a fire, and killed themselves.
Martius, had their noble hearts in admiration, and refrained from ruin of
their houses.

It chanced that Scipio fell sick, Mutiny of Soldiers against their
captain.
and left the charge of all the camp to Martius, wherefore such soldiers as
had spent their gains upon pleasure, and thought they were not sufficiently
rewarded, and that Scipio did attribute their travails to his glory, were not
content but rebelled against Martius. They ca^ped by themselves, they made
their own captains and governors, they provided all things, and swear to hold
together. Many of ye country took their part, and Mago sent money to them, to
allure the^ to their sids. They always took the money, abode still together.
Discipline and policy of a noble captain.
Scipio wrote his letters to them that were occasion of this mutiny, excusing
the matter and saying, yt his sickness had been cause, why he had not condignly
rewarded them according to their deserts, and yt he would do it immediately upon
his recouerye. Some of them with fair words he caused to be entreated, and
generally wrote to them all, to leave their opinion, and come to him to receive
their relief: some had ye letters in suspect, and some thought good to give
credit, and so by accord they went toward Carthage. When Scipio understood
their coming, he commanded the chief Gentlemen to accompany them, that were
the Capitaines of the riot, and under pretense of entertainment, to have them
into their tents, and make them sure. He also gave order to the Liefetenants
and Marshals of the army, that the next morning they should be ready with their
trusty men, and if any made any business while he spoke, forthwith to
dispatch them. He betimes in the morning, called them to ye assembly, and had
al things accordingly. The soldiers were scarsly up, and made them ready with
have, being ashamed, that their sick Captain should be up before them, and
came unarmed and unready. He lamented at their fact, and said: I will with
your help, chastise the causers of your offense. Then he caused way to be
made, that the gentlemen might bring in the Capitains, who cried to the
Soldiers for help, and by and by ye Marshals dispatched the^. When the
multitude saw this, and how they were naked and enclosed with harnessed men,
they were heavy and sad. He caused all the remnaunt of the chief and heads, to
be beaten at the pale, Rebellious soldiers executed.
and after beheadded, and to the residue he proclaimed a free and general
pardon. And thus he redressed his Army.

There was a Prince of Spain, that had to name Indibilis, and was in league
with the Romans. King Indibilis rebelled and being ouerthrovvn in battle
entered into new league and was pardoned.
Scipio went against him, and he refused not to fight, but having lost twenty
thousand of his men, he was compelled to ask peace, which was granted him,
upon payment of certain sums of money. Massimissa came to Scipio to confeder
with him, moved by a displeasure wrought against him at Carthage. Massinissa
becomes a most faithful confederate with Scipio and the Romans.
He was brought up in the City, and espoused to Sophonisba, daughter unto
Asdrubal, yt was General of the Army. King Siphax also was in love with the
same Gentlewoman, whose beauty was renoumed over all Africa, and because he
saw an other man preferred, he took disdain, and allied himself with yt
Romans. The Carthaginians considering what a loss they should have of such a
prince, sent him word, yt if he would return again to them, they would give
him Sophonisba to his wife. He took ye condition, Siphax married to Sophonisba.
and forsook ye Romans, they married her to him, in ye absence of her father
and her former husband, not making the^ privy to it. When Asdrubal heard of it,
he thought to bear with it, because it stood with ye benefit of his country*
and would not tell Massinissa of it, who was with him in camp, but yet he had
privy intellygence of it, and secretly went to ye Romans, with whom ever after
most faithfully he continued. Then Mago that was Admiral, perceiving that
Fortune began to lowre and frown upon them, left the streightes of Gades,
and went into France and Liguria, and so the Romans took it, and after that
time sent yearly Officers to govern the country. Scipio reduced the
Zanthianes into the form of a City, and of yt name of Italy, called it
Italica, The country of Traiane and Adriane Emperors.
which was the country of Traiane and Adriane that after were Emperors of
Rome. He returned to Rome, with a great Navy and a rich pray, and there
triumphed to yt admiration of all men. When Scipio was departed to Rome,
Indibilis rebelled again, and the presidents of the country to withstand him,
made an army of such gariso^s as were there left, and of such other help as
took part with the^, and had ye day against him, where he was slain, ye rest
of the country was punished according to their deserts. Indibilis slain.
This was ye end of ye first expeditio^ ye Romans made into Spain. After a
seson, when they had to do with Philip of Macedon, more trouble began in Spain,
and Se^pronius Tuditanus, M. Claudius, and Minutius, were successively sent
thither, Cato a most stout Captain and vehement Orator won more cities in
Spain than he abode days
and did no great good. Wherefore at length Cato went in person, a young man in
deed, but a severe and painful Captain, and an eloquent Orator, insomuch
that he was worthily compared to Demosthenes. When he was come into Spain, he
had an army of xl.M. men, whom he continually trained in feats of arms, and
when he was appointed to fight, he sent away his Navy to Marsyles, declaring
to his soldiers that only victory must be their refuge, which stands not
in huige multitudes, but in valiant courages. And so when he had used such
words unto them, as men use rather in reproves, than in exhortations, he
began the fight, and in every place encouraged his men valyantly. The field
continued equal, till the evening: he with three bands of men went up to an
hill, to behold in every place how the battle went, and saw that in the
midde battle his men had the worst: wherefore he ran thither with such a
fury with his fresh men, that he himself was the forwardest in the conflict,
crying and fighting so fiercely, that the enemies were put to flight, whom he
chased all the night, and took their Camp: and all the whole army attributed
ye enterprise and thanks only to him as the chief and first author of the
victory: he divided the spoil among his men, and required pledges of the
cities. He sent his letters to every city, commanding the messengers so to
appoint their iourneyes, that although they were sent several ways, some to one
city and some to an other, yet they might arrive, and debate their letters
all in one day.

The letters commanded every Magistrate of the said Cities, A notable
pollycie of Cato.
that immediately upon the sight thereoff they should beat down the walls of
their Cities, and they yt did not obey, should look for all extremity. They
having no time to consult with their neighbors, and supposing it had been but a
several commandment, afraid of a further inconvenience, were compelled to
obey, and so in one day, all the cities about the river Iberus, were defaced by
the policy of the Captain, and continued quiet a long time after.

In process of time, for lack of competent ground to occupy, there was a new
tumult among the people, for the appeasment whereoff, Fuluius Flaccus was sent,
who drove ye people to their holds: but one great rout kept to-gether at
Complega, which was well fortified and newly builded: Flouting and mockery
requited.
They greatly molested the Romans, and sent a message in mockery to Flaccus,
that he should leave a Jack, an Horse, and a Sword, for so many as he had
killed, and fly out of Spain, before he had any more hurt: he sent them
word, he would shortly bring amongs them, many more Iackes than they should
vouchsafe well to think well off, and incontinent laid siege to their City.
They nothing aunswerable to their late bravery, and lustiness, ran their way,
and he spoiled all the country. Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus succeeded Flaccus,
Biskay.
when the Celtiberians had besieged the City of Carabia, friend to the
Romans, ye city was at point to be rendered, and because the siege was so
straight, Gracchus could not send them word of his coming, wherefore he devised
with a Captain of his called Cominius, which could speak yt country
language very well, Great care and policy used by Gracchus for the succouring
of his besieged friends.
and clad him with a Spanish Jack, who got among them that went a forraging and
so from the Camp fled into the City, and told the selye besieged, that the
Romans were at-hande: wherefore they endured the siege, and in three days by
the coming of Gracchus were delivered of the same. Out of the City of
Complega, there issued xx.M. with branches of Olyue in their hands, in token of
supplycation, and being come nigh the Romans, they set fiercely upon the^,
They that mean mischief many times fall into mischiefs themselves.
and put them to great trouble. Gracchus of purpose forsook his camp, and
feigned to fly away, and whiles they were about the spoil, he returned upon
the^, and slew so many of them, yt he got ye town, wherein after he had staid a
certain while, he gave the lands of the country to such as had need of ground:
who^ upon certain conditions and bonds, he confedered with the people of
Rome, which capitulatio^ did good service, in all the wars that followed, and
by this mean, the name of Gracchus was notable in Spain, and also in Rome,
where he had Triumph.

Certain years after, there arose a cruel war in Spain by this occasion.

A City of Celtiberia, called Segeda, Sharp war renewed.
being comprised in the articles of Gracchus, allured certain towns to them,
and reedified their walls, whose example induced the Tithians another nation of
Celtiberia, to do the like. The Senate forbad them the buylding of the Walls,
and required the tribute, and their service, according to the composition of
Gracchus, They answered that they were forbidden ye building of any new
cities, but not the repairing of their old, and that the tribute which they
were bound to pay, was after forgiven of the Senate, and so it was in deed:
but all such privileges, were understand for ye time, that they continued
faithful to the people of Rome: wherefore Quintius Fuluius Nobilior, was chosen
captain against them, with an army of xxx.M.

When the Segedanes had knowledge of his coming, because their walls were not
finished, they fled to ye Arasthianes desiring them to be received with their
wives and children, and they were content: And chose one Carus a Segedane,
their general captain, a man expert in feats of war. He iii. days after he
was captain, laid an ambushment of xx.M. in a place for the purpose, and
assalted the Romans as they passed: The fight continued doubtful, but at
length Carus had the victory, Great slaughter of the Romans.
and killed vi. thousand of the very Romans borne, which was a great loss:
but in following the chase rashly, the horsemen of the Romans, that warded
the carriage, set upon him, and slew him, fighting most valyauntly, the murder
there was great, and greater had been, if the darkness of the night had not
stayed the same. This was done the next day after the feast of Vulcan in Rome,
at which time the Romans would never after take any battle in hand.

The Arastianes assembled in Numantia, a strong city, and chose Arathane, and
Lencone, for their capitaines. Nobilior went thither with-in three days, and
camped three mile off. Massinissa sent him iii.C. horses of Numidia, and x.
Elephants, with the which he made order for to fight, and placed the Elephants
behind, with a devise, that way should be made for them: And when the onset
was given, away was opened for the Elephants, which so afraid the enemies and
their horse, that they fledd. The Roman captain followed to the hard
walls, Discommodity of Elephants in vvarres.
and did very well, till one of the Elephants had a blow on the head, with a
stone, that was cast from the wall, with the which he became so froward and so
raging, that he turned upon his frindes and beat down all that was in his
way, and the other affraide with his roaring, did the like, thrusting* and
throwing the Romans to ye ground. And this is the discommoditie of
Elephantes, which when they begin to rage, there is no rule with them, and
therefore be they called common enemies. The Romans by this occasion fled
with such disorder, that the Numantines issued out and slew iiii.M. of them,
and took three Elephants, and many ensinges, when Nobilior had recovered
himself, he went to beat the City of Apenio, which was a great relief to
the enemies, but he did nothing there, but returned by night with loss to his
camp. Lovvring luck of Nobilior and his company.
He sent Blesius captain of the horsemen, so confeder with a country for
succor of horsemen: who in his return fell in an Ambushment, where his
friends forsook him, and he very manfully fighting was slain, and all most
all the Romans. And upon these daily losses, the City of Ocile, where the
Roman munition and treasure, was rendered to the Celtiberians, wherefore
Nobiliar was driven to such shift, as he lay all that winter in the field, and
sustained such disease with hunger and cold, that many perished pitifully.

The year following Claudius Marcellus came in his place, bringing with him
viii.M. men, and v.C. horse, and where his enemies had laid ambushment for him,
he avoided it, and with all his host, laid seage to Ocile, and at the first
assalt took it. And upon the receipt of certain pledges and xxx. Talentes of
gold, he pardoned the City.

The Nertobriganes sent unto Marcellus to know his pleasure what they might
do to obtain peace, he bad them send him an hundred horse and they should
have it: they were content, and appointed ye number which followed the tail of
the army, and did evermore some hurt to the caryage, and when they were come
in Marcellus sight, they offered their service, and excused ye offense to be
done by the^ that knew not the accord, but Marcellus detained still with him
the men as prisoners, and sold their horses, and made a rode into their
country, and laid seage to ye city, which when they saw, they sent an haralde
with a Wolfes skin in steed of a rod, to demand pardon. Marcellus said,
Double deling of Marcellus.
if the Arbaceanes, Bellanes, and Tithianes would in treat for them, they
should have their request. They were content so to do, and desired Marcellus
that they might have a moderate punishment, and be contained in the conditions
of Gracchus: But some there were, ye would not agree to it, because there had
been variunce between them, wherefore Marcellus sent them Ambassadors of both
parties to Rome, to dispute their cause before the Senate. He wrote private
letters, exhorting to accord. When they were come to Rome, ye Ambassadors of
their friends were lodged within the city, and they which were of their
enemies, without. The Senate was not disposed to peace, and gave them none
other answer, but that Marcellus should declare unto them the will of the
Senate, and appointed a new army, of the which Lucius Lucullus was captain.
And the^ was the first time that the soldiers were taken up by hap, and not by
election, as was wont to be, wherefore many citizens were offended. The
Leifetenant of the army was Lucius Cornelius Scipio, which afterward took
Carthage, and Numantia. Marcellus protested war against the Celtiberians, and
yet kept still with him the Ambassador that had been at Rome, and all was to
make an end of the war before the coming of Lucullus. Certain people of
the Arbaceanes took Nertobridge, and made their chief resort to Numantia,
whither he marched, and camped within v. mile of the city. VVilfulnes and
covetousness of Lucullus.
The capitain of the Numa^tines called Lintenone, desired to speak with
Marcellus, which being to him granted, they concluded that ye Bellanes,
Titthianes, and Arbaceanes should remain and be lest free, whereupon money and
pledges were received, and so the war of this people, was ended, before the
coming of Lucullus.

Now began ye time of ye Romans declination from their ancient purity and
state: for notwithstanding ye peace was made by the Roman co^sull, yet
Lucullus for desire of glory, and covetous of money, invaded the Vacceanes, who
had never offended the Romans. He passed the river Tagus, Now called Taio.
without any commisson from the Senate, and camped at Cancea: they of the town
came forth to know the cause why he lay there, he answered to reueng the
Carpentanes, who^ they had iniuried, and with this answer they returned. And
when the Romans went a foraging, they lay in a wait, and set upon them, and
slew many of them, and drove ye rest to their camp, wherefore he came out
against them in order, Stout courages with out skill and order, soon
ouerthro^en.
and they a long time had the better hand, but when they had wasted their
shot, and not expert in firm battle, they turned their backs, and at the
straightness of the gate, thrusting one another, very many were slain.

The next day the old men of the town came out to know what they might do to
be friends with the Romans: Lucullus bad them to bring unto him pledges,
and an C. talents of gold, and to serve him in the wars. They granted all:
than he required his garrison to be received, and they were likewise content:
Then put he in two M. picked men, Wicked and shameful dealing of Lucillus.
and commanded them to be sure of the gats, and the walls: which being done* he
entered with all his host, and gave commandment to kill man and child,
without respect: so were they cruelly murdered and slain, calling the Godds to
witness of their injury received at the Romans hands: Lucullus sacked the
City, and for reward wan to the Romans a perpetual slander.

The other people drew together into strong places, and burned all such things
as they could not carry, because they would leave nothing for Lucullus: he
made a long voyage in desert places, and at length came to a City called
Endecacia, where xx.M. were assembled. Than he like a fond man moved them to
accord: Cruelty gets hatred at all hands.
they objected unto him the calamity of the Causeanes, demanding if he would
bring them to like amity. Wherefore he being in a rage, (as al men be, that
have done evil, who rather ought to repent) spoiled all the country, and then
laid siege to the City: They of the town came out, and skirmished, and so
kept him occupied. There was one among them of a goodly stature, and fair in
arms, that came many times forth, and challenged any Roman to fight hand to
hand, and because none took the defense, he flouted and scorued the Romans
and went his way. Combat betvveene Scipio and an other big chalenger of huge
stature.
Thus he used long time, till Scipio, a man of small stature, could no longer
stay himself, but would needs fight with him, and by good fortune killed him,
as great as he was.

There was a company of the City that were gone for a convey of vittayle,
before Lucullus came, and because they could not enter the City, they came by
night, and gave alarm to the Camp, and they of the City did the like, so ye
they were sore troubled in the host, and besides this, they were not accustomed
with the meats of ye country, having neither salt, oil, nor vinegar, they
eat all things fresh, whereby they were sick of the flux, and many of them
died. When the ramperes were finished, Lucullus untruth and breach of promise
made him and all his to fare the worse.
they battered the wall, and entered the city, but by very fine force, they
were repelled, and in the retire, fell into a fenne, and the more part perished.
They of the City repaired the wall by night. In continuance of time, their
want wared so great, that they were not able to hold out, and yet would not
yield for the untruth of Lucullus. Wherefore Scipio took the matter in hand,
and promised, that in the accord, no fraud should be used: Just deling and
virtue is beloved even of the enemies.
They were content to trust him, because of ye great fame and renown that was
generallye reported of him. They were content to give to the Romans x.M.
Iackes, fifty pledges, and a number of Cattaile. Lucullus that sought for
nothing but money, required gold and silver, thinking to find plenty there,
but he was deceived, for those people did not care so greatly for it, and had
none to give him.

After this league, he went to the city of Pallantia, which was of more
strength, and better defenced with men, and all other things necessary, he had
counsel not to meddle with it, but yet he had hope to be enriched by it, his
expectation failed, for the Horsemen of the Pallantines kept him always so
from vitaile, that he fell in lack, and was forced to depart, and they
followed him to the river Orio, which he passed, and took places, for his
Winter herborow

There was an other Country of Spain, called Lusitania, Portugal.
which lived after their own laws, and under a Captain of Africa, they did
much hurt to the Romans, they ouerthrewe Caliphurnius ^iso, and Manlius, and
killed vi.M. Romans, and besieged a nation that obeyed the same, called
Blastophenitianes, which had that name, because Hannibal had mingled certain
Africans with them. Their Captain had a blow on the head with a stone, of
the which he dyed, and in his place they made one Cessacrone. He encou^tred
with Mummius that was come from Rome with a new army, and was put to flight.
Mummius chased him without order, which he perceiving stayed his men, Romans
through their own folly overthrown.
and returned upon the Romans disparsed, and killed x.M. of them, recovering
his own Camp that was lost, and gayning the Romans, with all their arms
and ensigns, which he showed abroad in Spain, for a brag and glory of his
victory. Mummius with five. M. that were left, kept himself in a sure place,
being afraid to come out into the plain, and watching the time, when the
enemy sent away their spoil, he suddenly set upon them, and flew many of
them, recovering again all his loss.

An other sort of the Lusitanes beyond the River Tagus, molested the Romans,
and besieged the City of Ocile. Mummius followed them, and at diverse times
killed xv.M. of them, and took their pray from them, and divided it to the
Romans, and that which could not be carried, he sacrificed to the Gods after
the fashion of war. And for these feats, Mummius had Triumph when he came to
Rome.

After him succeeded Marcus Attilius, which destroyed a great City called
Ostrace, and brought all the country to accord, but he was no sooner gone to
winter camp, but they rebelled again, and anoyed the Romans.

Seruius Galba that succeeded Attilius, intending sodeinly to surprey and take
them unawares, marched in a night and a day, about l. mile, The chance of
war diverse.
and immediately upon his coming embattayled his weary Soldiers, and with
the sodeine assault, put the enemies to flight, but in the chase using little
discretion, and not considering the weariness and faintnes of his soldiers,
which were compelled to rest them many times by the way, the other gathered
together, and set upon them being scattered and weak, and slew vij.M. Galba
with the remnaunt of the horsemen fled to Carmena, where he assembled all them
that were fled, and when he had renewed his army to the number of xx.M. he
went to Winter in Cuuestagi.

Lucullus who had made war upon the Vacceanes, without commission, would
not go home for fear of judgment, but remained with the Capitaines of the
army, and coming with his men into Lusitania, did much hurt in one part of
the country, and Galba sacked the other. Many of the people sent unto him to
renew the accord made with Attilius and he fained to be content saying: that
he knew well, poverty and lack of living made them to offend, and therefore
he would give the^ a plentiful ground to inhabile, and they being glad of his
promise, came to him with all their goods, whom he divided into three parts, and
appointed a Plain for them to stay, till he had assigned their place, where
they should build their city. Then he came to ye former, willing them to
leave their harness, because they were friends, and caused the^ to be
entrenched, and they were content: which wen he had brought to pass
through-out, he sent his soldiers among them, and killed them every one, they
calling and crying upon ye Gods, as witnesses of perjury and cruelty. So he
punished falsehood with falsehood, as a Barbarian, and not as a man worthy the
name of Rome. Uery few escaped from this murder, of ye which Viriatus was one,
which after was a Capitain, and did many notable feats, as shall be showed.
Galba gave a few trifling things to the Romans, and kept the rest to
himself, for he was more covetous than Lucullus, Neither barrel better Hering.
and more rich tha^ any Romain, but of such nature as well in peace as war, yt
for his profit, he passed neither for perjury nor lies, and although every man
hated him, and though he was many times accused, yet for his riches he always
escaped. For in his days, the Romans began to set more by money than by
truth.

An other company of the Lusitans, made an head, and ranged the countries of
the Romans. M. Ventidius, was sent from Rome with an army, who drove them
from the field, and made them take a Castle: where being in desperation of al
things, they were forced to send to Ventidius, to have peace and ground to
inhabit, which he promised them. But one Viriatus who (as before is said, had
escaped the cruelty of Galba, recorded unto them, the unfaithfulness of the
Romans, and how often they had been oppressed, under pretense of an oath and
atonement, which the Romans no longer regarded than they lusted, Viriatus a
stout warrior and worthy Captain
and repeated to them the example of Galba and Lucullus, and promised them to
convey them safe, if they would be ruled by him. They were moved with his
words, and made him their Captain.

He placed in the front of the army his Horsemen, as though he would fight,
and gave warning, that as soon, as he took his Horse, they that were a foot,
should fly by diverse ways, as well as they could, to the city of Tribola,
and there abide him. He kept with him, them that were most meet for Horsemen,
and when he mounted on horseback, they fled their way with all have.
Ventidius doubted to follow them in so many parts, and abode to see, what
Viriatus would do that stood still. He skirmished with the Romans all the
day, and the next, too and fro, and when he thought the foote-men to be past
danger, he went his way by night, with such speed, and by such ways, as the
Romans could not tell how to follow. This feate got him great fame in all the
country, and every man ran to him, wher-by he kept war a great while with
ye Romans, and did them much hurt. Ventidius followed til he came to Tribola,
Viriatus laid an ambushment for him in a place full of wood, and when he espied
his advantage, he with the company that he had, feigned to fly, till Ventidius
was past the train, than returned he, and the bushment discovered, and so
beset the Romans, that they were either slain or taken prisoners, and
Ventidius himself was one, Ventidius slain, and his army discomfited
but because he was not known, being an old fat man, he was cut in pieces,
and of xx.M. Romans, scarcely x.M. escaped to a City of the Coast, called
Carptesso, which (I think) was sometime called Tartesso, where the old King
Arganthonius lived. The Tresurer of the Camp, took the charge upon him a
fresh, and gathered v.M. of of the country about, which he sent to keep
Viriatus back, and he so laid for them, that one escaped not to bring news.
The Treasurer stood close in the town and durst do nothing til he heard from
Rome, Profperous success of Viriatus.
Viriatus invaded the rich country of Carpentania, and without all fear,
spoiled at his pleasure.

Caius Plantius came from Rome, with x.M. me^, and a M.iii.C. horse. Tha^
Viriatus pretended to fly, after whom he sent iiii.M. men, which were almost
all destroyed and slain. He passed the river Tagus, and camped in an hill full
of Olives, although it were called Venus Mount. There Plantius came upon him,
and made have to recover his dishonor, and after a sore fight he was
discomfited, and compelled shamefully to fly, with great loss of his men: and
the rest of the Summer he kept within towns, and durst not come forth.
Viriatus went abroad the countries, requiring payment for the saving of their
Corn.

When these news were known at Rome, they sent Q. Fabius Maximus Emilianus,
son of that Emilius, that overcame Perseus king of Macedonie. They gave him
authority to take what men he would, he to give respite to the old
soldiers, took up young men of the first beard, having no practice in war,
and came to Orsone a City of Spain, with xv.M. men, and ii..M. horse, but he
durst not enterprise to take any battle in hand, till he had trained his men
in feats of arms, and been at Gades to Sacrifice to Hercules. Viriatus met
with a company of his men that went a forraging, and killed the most part, whom
being again set in arraye and order by their Leader, the same Viriatus
discomfited the second time, and took a great pray from them. When Maximus
was come, he durst not fight in open field, but kept his men in exercises, and
gave them leave to skirmish, to prove their hearts, and to epsy the advantage
of his enemies doings. When he went for vittayle, he warded the Dimilances with
men of arms, that scoured the country, as he had seen his father Paulus do
in Macedonia. After the Winter he came forth to battle, and overcame
Viriatus, and put him to flight, and of two Cities that he kept, he took the
one, and burned the other, and drove him to an hold called Vecor, and then
went to herborow at Corduba.

Now was Viriatus nothing so brag as he was wont to be, but sought help, and
induced the Arbaceanes, Titthianes, and Bellanes, al warlyke people, that had
kept war of themselves, to take his part, which was an occasion of great a
do. Viriatus was in an other part of Spain, and fought with Quintus Pompeius,
that was an other Captain of the Romans, and had the loss, and from thence
fled to Aphrodisio, Venus Hill, and from thence came sodeinly upon the
Romans, and put them to flight, and took some of their Standards, and chased
them into their Camp, and then drove away the garrison and Ward from Vtica,
and sacked the country of the Basetanes, Quintus sending unto them no aid,
for lack of knowledge and courage: but remained in house, till Summer was
ended.

The year after, Fabius Maximus brother to Emilianus succeeded Quintus, and
had two Legions of the Romans, and other of their friends, that there was
xviii.M. men, and a.M.vi.C. horse. He wrote to Micypsa king of Numidia, that in
have, he should send him succor of Elephants, and with a part of his army
went toward Vtica, and by the way, Viriatus gave him alarm, with great
shoutes, and terrible behavior, but he repulsed him without loss. When
x.Elephants were come from Africa, he camped in a large field, and fought with
Viriatus, and put him back, but at one time, when the Romans chased with out
order, he turned upon them, and killed three. M. and drove the rest within,
and followed so hard that he found few or none in the way toward the Camp,
but they were fled into their Cabbins, out of the which, the Capitaines had
much a do to draw them, and had it not been for Fannius, Fannius praised.
son in law to Laelius, who showed yt night great wisdom and manhood, the
Romans had been utterly destroyed.

Viriatus ceased not, neither by the dark of night, nor by the heat of day,
to molest them with all device, till Emilianus had moved his camp to Vtica.
Viriatus being distressed for lack of vittayle, and having a small army,
burned his Camp by night, and went into Lusitania. After whose departure,
Emilianus spoiled the country, and five Cities that had succored him, and
from thence he went by Cunea, and so into Lusitania against Viriatus.

By the way, two Kingleaders of Roman thieves, did him much displeasure,
which were called Curious, and Apuleius, Curious was afterward slain, and
Emilianus recovered his loss, and took diverse Cities, of the which some he
spoiled, and some he pardoned, and of x.M. prisoners, he beheaded five
hundred, and killed the rest.

This done, he passed over the Winter and went to Rome, having been two year
in Office.

His brother Maximus Emilianus, took a Captain of thieves by yielding, and
pardoned him, and cut off the hands of the other. He followed Viriatus, and
laid siege to Frisana, into the which, Viriatus got in by night, and the next
day came so sodeinlye and fiercely out, that first the Pieners and then the
Soldiers fled: whom he drove to such barrein and wild Mountains, that
they had no hope of escape.

Viriatus was not too proud of this victory, but thought that now he had a
good occasion, The Romans and Viriatus friends and lovers.
to make an honorable peace with the Romans: And so upon treaty it was
concluded, that he should be taken, as the Romans friend, and al they that
were under him, should remain Lords of such possessions as they had. Thus had
this war an end by ye benefit of a Romain enemy. But it did not long
continue: For Cepio, Brother to Emiliane, thought it dishonorable to the name
of Rome, and not to be ratified. The Senate was content, that he should seek
new matter to fall out with him: But he ceased not writing, till the league was
openly rejected. Wherefore by this authouritie Cepio went against Viriatus, and
took the city of Arsa, which Viriatus had forsaken, and was retired because
he had no convenient power. He over took him at Carpentania, and had far
greater power than Viriatus had, wherefore Viriatus would not fight with him,
Viriatus his policy
but sent away ye most part of his men by a privy path, and placed the rest
upon an hill, in order of battle: and when he knew them to be come to the
place which he appointed, he set spurs to the horse with such speed, and
celeritie, that ye Romans might cast their cappes at him, and so with ye
scorn of his enemy, he saved himself.

Cepio sacked the Vettones and ye Callecianes, in Portugal, many followed ye
example of Viriatus, and lived of Robbing* Sextus Julius was sent against them,
who found more a do than at the first he supposed, the country was so great
and the rivers so many, as Taio, Linia, Leca, or rather Lima, Duero, and Gauda
Loquitur, Betis, all Nauigable, that they might escape at their pleasure.
Wherefore Brutus considered that it was impossible to join with them all, and
a rebuke to let them continue, and small glory to overcome them, wherefore he
thought best to assault their holds, thinking when every man was driven to
defend his own, their brood should be the sooner broken. So following this
devise, he beat down all he could meet. The women were in the war with
their husbands, and showed such manlye hearts, Manlye hearts in women.
that when they were killed, they did not cast forth one word. Many fled
into the mountains, and for lack of food, required pardon, which he freely
gave them, and took their pray.

When he had thus done, he passed the River Orio, and raunged over the
country, taking pledges of them that accorded with him. And he went over the
flodde Lima, where no Roman had done so much, and from thence to the River
Niben, Now Rio Cauado, Braga in Portingale.
and led his army against the Braccarianes, because they had stopped vitaile
that came unto him.

These be people, with whom their wives goes to war, and dye valiauntly
without any shrinking, or scryking, and when they fight they never flee, nor
any whit lament when they die: Many of these being taken, the women to avoid
captivity, killed their children, and afterward themselves, choosing rather
to dye worthily, than to live wretchedly. Thus, Brutus wan much, and came to a
city called Labrica, which had many times broken promise with him, and once
again they desired pardon, and rendered themselves, he required all the
fugitives of the Romans, all their armor and certain pledges, and last of
all, that they should forsake their city, which when it was done, he called
them to a Parlaiment, in the which he reproved them of their often rebellion,
and breaking of their promise, with so sharp words, that they feared some
grievous punishment, being on each side enclosed with all the army, but he rested
satisfied with repeting them with this reproach, and refrained from further
vengance, And when he had taken their corn, and their common treasure from
them, contrary to all men's opinion, he let the^ dwell in their own city.

Things being thus ended it fell out that he must return to Rome. And before
he went, it chanced that Viriatus sent to him iii. Ambassadors Aulace,
Ditalcone, and Minuro, to treat of accord, which Ambassadors by fair promises
were corrupted, and did agree for a some of money, and other things, to kill
their tapitaine the valiant Viriatus. Description of Viriatus and how he was
traiterouslye murdered.
This Viriatus was a man of very small sleep, though his travail were never
so great. And for the most part, slept in in his harnes, because he might be
ready at all assayes. And it was lawful for any soldier to come and speak
with him by night, which use the traitors knew, and at the first sleep
entering into his tent as though they had had some matters of weighty
importance, they cut his throat, for otherwise they could not hurt him, being
so well armed, after which villainous deed, they went their way safe, no man
suspecting the^ or hearing any noise: When they were come to Cepio, they
demanded their reward for their fact. He granted them all their possessions,
and for the rest sent the^ to Rome, in ye morning they of the camp marueiled
ye Viriatus came not forth, and thought he had reposed himself to some ease.
But in the end when they heard nothing of him, certain of them went in, and
found him dead. Whereupon throughout the whole army, there was great dolor
as might well be, and no marvel, considering the loss of so good and valiant
a captain, and the case that they presently stood in: and one thing greatly
grieved them, that they could not find the murderers.

They burned his body after the manner, upon a great stack of wood with many
ornaments, and great sacrifices, and with their bands of horsemen, rode about
it, magnifying and praising him. When the fire was quenched, and the exequies
done, they made a goodly sepulcher in his honor, and set forth Iusts, and
attorniaments with most solemn pomp, and chalengies, man to man, so great was
the love and desire that every man had of him. Praise of Viriatus.
And surely he was a man most expert in government, most circumspect and wary
in peril, and most bold and hardy, in dispising the same, in division of any
pray or booty, he observed such justice, as has not ben heard: he would have
no more for his part the^ any other common person had. And though they desired
him to take preferme^t he would not, and that also which fell to his share, and
portion, he gave away always to them that were forward men, and valiant,
wherefore he might say yt which none other captain could, for his army
being gathered of a mixture and rifraff of all sorts, continued in obedience
under him viii. years with out any mutiny in yt world, and at all dangers were
most ready to serve him.

After him they chose Tantalus to their captain, who took upon him to assalt
Sagunt, which was now Carthage, Cartagena.
but being repelled from thence, and weary of his wandering, he was content to
yealde unto Cepio: he took their armor from them and gave the^ ground to
inhabit, because they should refrain from robbery and pillage. After Cepio
came Cecilius, Metellus, and subdued the Vacceanes.

There were two strong cities that would not give over, Termantia, and Numantia,
of the which Numantia was situate in a rocky place, divided with two ryuers,
fensed with mountains, and compassed with thick woods, Numantia now called
Soria.
and only on one side had way to the plain which was fortified with many
ditches, and pillaires overthwart. They were good men on horseback and a
foot, and might make viii.M. fighting men, the which small number, for their
worthy valor wrought the Romans much a do. There was of the Romans xxx.
thousand men, and two thousand horse, well trained and practiced in war.
Pompeius lay at the seage at Numantia, and went forth on a time to view a
certain ground: the Numantines came from the hill, and killed his horsemen,
whereupon he with such me^ as he had marshalled his host, and came into the
plain to fight. The enemies descended down, and affronted them, and after as
they had been afraid fled up to the hill, whither if the Romans followed,
they were sure to be lost. And so Pompeius every day had the worst in these
skirmishes, although his number were a great deal more, wherefore he brak up
seage, and went to Termantia, Pompeius and his men for laid unto by the
Numa^tines and Terma^tines,
as to a more easy enterprice, but he found it of the same nature: For at ye
first onset, he lost 7.C men, and a captain of x. thousand that brought a
conuaye of vittaile, was put to flight, and three times encountered in one day,
and at length driven to the Hills and Rocks, where many miserably perished,
both Horse and man, and all that night took no rest, and in the morning, were
assailed again, and fought all day till night divided the fight, where-fore
Pompeius forsook the field by night and went to the city of Malia, in the
which was a garrison of the Numantines. They of the town at the coming of
Pompei secreatly killed the garrison by craft, and received him.

From thence he went to Sweditania, which place a captain called Tangino,
haried and oueranne with spoil, with whom Pompeius fought, and him
discomfited, taking many of his men prisoners. Desperate dealinges.
And such generositie was in the hearts of those thieves, that they rather
chose to dye then to live slaves, some killed their Lords, and then their
selves: some killed themselves only, and being put in ships to be conveyed
away, they made such ports and holes, that they sunk their ships, and
drowned themselves, and all the residue of the company.

Now Pompei returned again to Numantia, with an intent to turn the course of
the river another way, and so to famish the city. They of the town came
fearcelye out in a brunt without any noise of trumpet, and beat away the
laborers: and laid a wait for a captain that guided vittaile, and slew
him and most part of his men. And an other time issued out upon the Romans
that made a trench, and slew about a M.iiii.C. with the captain.

Because of these losses, diverse Senators with more help was sent to Pompei.
And he was driven to lie the Winter in the field, where his soldiers for the
cold and watch, were much troubled, the air also vexed them, and the water,
and engendered the flixe among them, of the which many dyed.

A number appointed went on a time for vittaile, for whom the Numantines had
laid a stacke, and other with their weapons of shot, molested the Romans,
and reproched them, with villanouse words, which they could not abide, but
marched to fight with them, when suddenly they of the Ambushment discovered
and killed many of them, as well Gentlemen as other. Pompei greatly troubled in
mind for his losses, and mishap at the siege of Numantia.
Pompeius was much troubled and greatly netled with these losses, and by the
counsel of the Senators went to lie with his camp the rest of winter in
cities. And because he looked for a successor, and feared to be accused, he
began to practice a privy peace with the Numantines. They of the town also
having lost many of their best capitaines, and thereby brought to extreme
want, sent Ambassadors likewise to treat of peace. Pompei in open audience
said, yt they must commit themselves to ye Romans discretion, for otherwise
he knew no way of accord, but privily he concluded with them to have again the
fugitives to receive pledges, and 30. tale^ts of silver, al ye which was
fulfilled, and half the money paid down.

When time came, Marcus Popilius arrived in Spain to be successor unto
Pompeius, by whose coming Pompeius was now delivered from fear, Double
dealing of Pompei with the Numa^tines
and so when the Numantines brought ye rest of ye money, he denied the accord,
and said he ne^ consented to such dishonorable league, the Numantines affirmed
it, and took witness of the best men in his camp. Where-fore Popilius sent
them both to Rome, to plead their matter before the Senate. They were both
hard, and yet the Senate was disposed to continue the war against the
Numantines. Popilius tarried out his year in Spain, and went his way without
any great honor. In his place came C. Ostilius Ma^cinus, who was diverse times
overcome and driven to his lodging. And because their was a voice that the
Cantabranes, and the Vacceanes came to aid the enemies, he fled by night in
the dark, without making any fyres, and got to an old forsaken camp which
Fuluius Nobilior had made, and stayed there without any fortification in the
world, being beseaged of the Numantines, that manased utter decay to him and
all his. Wherefore to a void further inconvenience, he made such reasonable
leage with them as he could? Which thing when it was heard at Rome, it was not
lyked, and Emilius Lepidus was sent captain thither, and Mancinus called home
to judgment. And after him went the Ambassadors of Numantia.

While the matter was debated at Rome, Emilius was wearye to stand still idle
in Spain, and therefore picking a quarrel against the Vacceanes, invaded
their country, he laid seage to Pallantia that had committed no fault. And
sent his son in Law Brutus into other parts of Spain. Wherefore the Senate
sent two Ambassadors unto him, meruailing that he would seek new occasion
of war, seeing the loss had been so great of late. He showed reasons ye all
Spain would have the Romans in contempt, if the war should be left now, and
that the Numantines would thereby wax so strong, that it would be hard
hereafter for the Romans to bridle or annoy them, and so sent away the
Ambassadors without conclusion. Devise of Flaccus to save himself and his men
Flaccus one of his capitaines was gone for vittaile, and by the way was caught
in a train, who seeing himself in such extremity and danger, sodeinly eryed
out, Pallantia is taken: at which words his soldiers made such shoutes, as
men be wont in victory, insomuch that the enemy afraid of themselves,
retired, and so he saved himself and the vittaile, only by ye devise of one
word.

The seage continued long at Pallantia, and the Romans lacked vitaile, they
had eaten already their and beasts, Famine and mortality, able to dant even
the stoutest.
and began to die of hunger. Emilius and Brutus sustained famine and disease
long, but at length they were forced to give over, whereupon the capitaines
went about the camp, commanding to depart before day, leaving behind them
all things, even their wounded fellows, and sick soldiers, which pitifully
embrased the^, Vnnaturale and more the^ brutish unkindness, to leave our
friends and companions in extremity.
and desired their help, but for all that they departed like men conquered,
with tumult and disorder. The Pallantines issued out upon them and did them
much hurt, following the chase from morning till night: The Romans being thus
scattered, hither and thither, shifted away, and ran some hither, some
thither, as hap lead them: So, that if by the purueyance of God, the
Pallantines had not retired, they had been utterly confounded. When this was
heard at Rome, they deprived Emilius of his office, and condemned him in a
sum of money. Audience was given in the Senate house, to Mancinus, and the
Ambassadors of the Numantines. They alleged the Chapiters of accord, and he
laid all the blame in Pompei that was captain a-fore him: but he was
pardoned before, and therefore this blame depended upon him. And so the
Romans, by decree gave Ma^cinus into ye hands of ye Numantines, Mancinus
^eprochfully used.
because with out their consent, he had dishonourably concluded with them,
following the example of their ancestors, that gave their Consul into ye power
of the Sanuites, because he had made a shameful peace.

The Numantines would not take him, wherefore Furius led him into Spain,
naked, and spoiled of all things. The charge of the army was committed to
Calphurinus Piso, who entered the dominion of the Numantines, and after that he
had a little ranged, and trauersed the ground of the Pallantines without doing
any harm, but spent the rest of his time in harborough at Carpetane. The
people of Rome were weary of this tedious war, The noble and victorious
Scipio.
and determined to create Cornelius Scipio, Consul, as he who only (as their
hope was) could dispatch this enterprise, but because he could not be
consul by reason of his young years, ye senate was content ye people should
repeal ye law for one year. And so he was made Consul, and came into Spain.
He took up no soldiers by order, but such as would go with him of good will,
and such as came to him from Cities and Kings confederated, he took to supplye
the number, many slaves, and made one band of such as were his assured friends
and companions, which band he called Philonide.

These soldiers to the number of four M. he took to his cousin Buteo to
lead, and he went before in haste to Spain, where he found the army lost and
effeminated with riot and seditition: he considered well, that he should never do
no feat with his men, except he had them in awe and order, and therefore he was
no sooner come, but he banished al Merchants, Whores, The vvarlyke discipline
of Scipio.
and Southsayers: For now the Soldiers were so frayed with the former losses,
that they would do nothing but with Prophecies, he assigned few servant and
Pieners, he sold al beasts of Carriage, except such as were needful, he would
have no Cooks in the army, nor instruments of the kitchen, but a spit and a
pot, and took an order for their diet, which was no more than sufficient.

He would not suffer them to have any beds, and he him self was the first
that slept upon a couch of straw. He forbad the soldiers in the way to ride
upon the beasts of carriage, saying, there was no great hope of his travail,
who could not walk a foot. He reproved them that had servants to rub them
in the bathe, saying: that Mules without hands, had need of some to clawe them.

He by this means, brought the army, again to temperaunce, and obedience,
and accustomed them to reverence and fear, and was hard to entreat, except it
were in matters just and honest. He used to say, that gentle Capitaines were
profitable to their enimyes, and hard Capitaines were profitable to themselves.

When he had brought them to good order, yet durst he not venture in any
assaye, till he had trained them further. Wherefore he made every day new
Camps, one after an other, to keep them occupied, and cast great Ditches, and
fill them again, builded high walls, and pulled them down again. And he in
person was there from morning till night, to encourage the Laborers.

In his way, he marched evermore in a square Battle, and would suffer none
to go out of their place: He rode about the army, some time before, some
time behind, and made the sick Soldiers to ride in steed of the Horsemen.
The Mules that were ouerladen, he caused to be lyghted, and divided the burden
among the footmen.

When he camped in Summer, he would have the Horses that had been abroad
by day, to rest at night, and have other go in their place. Every thing was
appointed to every manne, who to appoint the place, who to dig the Trenche,
who to build the wall, and who to set the tents, to all the which was a time
and measure assigned.

When he perceived the army to be in good discipline, and of lusty courage,
he removed toward Numantia, and by the way made no great business, but kept
himself close, least otherwise he should grow into contempt among his
enemies, if at the beginning, he should receive any loss: therefore
considering well the state of the thing, and the importance of the Empire, he
thought he would come with all force at once, upon the Numantines, he wasted
every thing, and cut down the Corn, before it was ripe.

There was two ways to Numantia, one short and plain, which they persuaded him
to take: he answered that he must think as well of his Retire, as of his
March, and considering the enemies were armed light, and had the City on
their backs, they might so trouble him with his heavy carriage, that all his
labor should be in vain: for if he did overcome, he should get no profit, and
if he were overcome, he should have great loss. He said further that he was an
evil Captain, which would adventure to fight without great advantage, and
he was a sage Captain, that would not fight, but when mere necessity
compelled him: even as wise Physicians, refrain from cutting and searing, till
they have proved al other medicines and salues. Wherefore he gave order to go
the longer way about, and to wast the land of ye Vacceanes, from whence the
Numantines had relief.

The Pallantines had laid an ambushment in certain hills, and with an other
company molested them that cut down the Corn. The Author of this history
Scipio sent a Captain of his, named Rutilius Rufus, (who wrote this
Pamphlet) with four Troops of Horsemen, to refrain their incursions, Rufus
did his Office, and encountered with them, who of purpose fled to the
Mountains, and he followed them too boldlye, but when he suspected fraud, he
made his men leave the chase, and only with their staves keep them off. When
Scipio saw him approach too nigh the Hills, doubting of the train, he came
forward to help him, and divided his men into two parts, to assail the
enemies, and by encountering and retiring not hastelye, but with the use of
their shot, he saved all the other. After this he levied his camp, and went
forward.

There was a deep river, dangerous to wade, and full of mire, about the
which, the enemies were ambushed, which when he perceived, he took an other
way about, going night and day, and for lack of water made wels, in many of the
which was found bitter water. And in the end, the men passed safe, although
with pain, but of his Horses and Moyles, there dyed a great number.

Marching through the country of the Cauceanes, upon whom Lucullus had made
iniust war, he proclaimed by his Herald, that they should not doubt, but
return every man home to his country to do his business. Than went he
forward into the country of Numantia to lie there the Winter, till he had.xii.
Elephants, and a band of Archers and slingers sent him from lugurth, Nephew to
Massinissa, and as he was about a spoil, he fell on a time in an ambushme^t
nigh a town, the greater part where-off, was environed with a fenne and
marsh, and the other with a sharp Hill and a thick Wood, in the which the
bushment lay. The host of Scipio was divided, and one part was gone into the
Wood, to seek their pray, and had left their ensigns without, an other
company of Horsemen not very many, were gone on for raging and ranging about,
and were affronted of the bushment. Scipio himself remained with the ensigns,
and called forth the soldiers with a Trompe, and before they were returned, a
company of a thousand in an heap, went to succor the Horsemen, which began
to shrink. And with the other, whom he had set in martial arraye, he himself
went forth and made his enimyes to fly, yet would he not pursue them.

After this, having planted two Camps before Numantia, the government of the
one he gave to his Brother Maximus, and the other governed himself.

Polllcie of Scipio to win the city by famine.
The Numantines came many times out, and provoked the Romans to fight, but
Scipio made light of it, not intending to try the matter, with such desperate
people, but rather to conquer them by famine. Wherefore he builded seven
Bastiones, and sent to the Nations his confederates there-abouts, appoynting
what men they should send him, over whom he appointed several Capitaines, and
them he commanded to entrench the town.

Numantia was three mile about, and the trench was as much again, and every
part had his Governor, with order that when they were molested of the enemy,
they should make a token with a red cloth upon a long spear, and if it were
by night, they should make a fire.

After the first trench was made, he caused an other to be begone, and to lay
a foundation for a wall, ye breadth whereoff was viii.foot, and the height x.
beside the battlements: and at every Arches breadth, was a tower, and because he
could not keep the proportion of the wall for a standing water that was there,
he made a thick rampire to serve in place of ye wall. This Scipio was the first
(as I think) that entrenched a Camp, before that City which refused not to
fight.

There was a River called Duero, which did the Numantines much ease, as well for
the conueyance of vittaile, as for the privy passage of men, where off some
diued under the water, and some with small Uessells, when the wind was great,
The river Duero cha^ned over.
passed through at their pleasure. And because he could make no bridge over it,
for the swiftness and Carriages of the water, he made two Fortes at either
side, and from the one Fort to the other, he tied long Beams with Ropes,
overthwart the River, to the bottom of the water, and in the Beams were
pricked swerd blades, and all kind of sharp poynted fools, the which
tourning up and down with the stream of the water, kept the enimyes from
passage, as well by ship as by swimming. This was the thing that Scipio most
desired, to keep them from all out-going, and receiving of any thing in. Upon
the towers of the wall, he placed engines to shoot darts and stones, and the
walls were fully furnished with cast and shot, and the Forts stoutly warded
with Archers, and slingers. And beside this, he gave order, yt a number of men
should be always ready to signify from one to another, what chanced, and that
they of the Towers should, in any lack set up a banner, where the thing was,
and that the other should follow the same.

And this was to know every sodeine accident, but in such cases, as were to be
precisely and secretly declared, other wise he ordained, that the message
should be brought by mouth.

He divided his army into two parts, which was of the number of forty
thousand persons, one part kept the Walls, and the other served to fight
abroad, of the which, twenty thousand were ordinarye, and twenty thousand
in relyefe. All these had their place appointed, from the which they might
not pass, but with license, and repaired to the same, at the sight of a token.

Of the other side the Numantines ceased not to assault the Ward, some-time
on one side, and sometime on an other, but the defense was so meruaylous and so
sodeyne, and the multitude of Standerdes so great, and the number of men so
many, which at the sound of a Trompe, even as it were in a moment, came to
the wall and the noise of the drommes so terrible, that many times the
Numantines remained amazed. This enclosure, that compassed six mile and more,
Scipio every day and every night, paced and went over in his own person, to
see what was done. The enemies being thus shut from al hope of relief, could
not long continue.

There was one Ritogenes, one of the chief of the City, Valiant enterprise of
Ritogenes.
who with five companions and as many servant and horses, in a dark night,
passed from the Town to the Trench, and with Ladders for the purpose skaled
the same, taking the watch a sleep, and with their devices conveyed over their
horses, and went to the City of the Aruaceanes, and as humble suitors besought
them to help the poor Numantines their kinsmen and neighbors. The Aruaceanes
did them no hurt, but for fear, charged them to depart.

From thence they went to Lucia, a strong City, where the youth was enclyned
to favor them: But the ancients sent word of it to Scipio, and he in the
night went forth, and by break of day, had compassed the City, and required
the heads of the young men to be given him: they answered, that they were
fled and gone. He menaced to sack their Town, except they were delivered.
Punishment of willful and vvilde young heads.
Wherefore for fear they brought them forth, to the number of four hundred,
whose hands Scipio cut off, and went his way.

The Numantines oppressed with the misery of famine and penury, Hunger makes
the stoutest to stoop.
sent five men to Scipio, to know what clemency he would use with them if they
did render. The chief of the five stood greatly upon his honor, and
magnified the purpose of the Numantines, who so valyauntly had stood to ye
defense of their liberty, wives, and children, and affirmed that it should be
a thing convenient to the noble nature of Scipio, to take pity of so noble a
people. Wherefore (quoth he) receive us to thy mercy, with convenient
punishment, or come and fight with us, that we may dye like men.

Scipio, who knew well enough how it was with them, required that they should
simply render themselves to his discretion, which answer when it was reported
to the Numa^tines, like men mad and furious, they killed the v.messengers, as
bringers of evil news: so fierce was their nature by continual calamity, not
accustomed to obey.

And after they had spent all their beasts, The miserarable and lamentable
state of the Numantins.
and fed upon Lether suppled in water, last of all they fell to eating of
dead men's flesh, which they either found decayed or killed them selves,
where upon their nature was become like the noriture that they took, and at
length conquered with famine, and pestilence, they yealded to Scipio.

He commanded them to bring forth all their armor, and come themselves,
into a place appointed.

But they deferred the day, because some desired to end their lives by famine,
in the liberty of their country.

Such high courage was in this little City, that so many times had driven the
Romans to make such accord with them, as they never did, with any other
Natyons.

Every man knows what a Captain this Scipio was, that lay at the siege,
with threescore thousand men, and yet they with their eight thousand, provoked
him many times to fight.

But surely he was more expert than any other Captain, and by his long
experience in wars, knew that it was a thing bootelesse, and would not
avail, to fight and deal with such savage people any other way, than to
subdue them by hunger, which is remediless, and the only thing, that could
ouer-throwe the Numantines, as it did in deed. They that determined to dye
in the space of three days dispatched themselves, some one way, and some an
other. The other came forth at the place appointed, Numantia conquered by
Scipio.
all deformed and horrible to see, their bodies were foul, and their hair
long, their nails ouergrowen, and full of filth, their garments ill favored
and worse sauoured, and the whole feature of their body ugly and terrible,
their countenance strange and fierce, their affections cruel and beastly,
being by their diet turned from the nature of men.

The Romans were asronished at the sight, with marvel at their disposition
of body and mind, they considered the penury, the dolor, and the pain that
they had taken, they abhorretd he remembrance of their feeding, being driven
one to gnawe another flesh: their infected air, their perishing by hunger,
their decay by sword, made the Romans heavy in that their time of joy.
Scipio reserved some of them for the triumph, and sold the others.

This captain that had overthrown two mighty cities, and hard to be taken,
reserved Carthage, that was so great, and had Empire both by sea and land, and
destroyed Numantia from the foundation, that was but little, and of small
receipte, which he did either because it was so expedient for the Romans, or
because he was a man of cruel nature to them whom he took by force, or (as
some men think) because he thought his glory should grow by the quantity of
their affliction, and therefore he is called Africanus, and Numantinus of the
calamities that he wrought these two cities. When he had divided the country
of Numantia to the next cities, and quieted the suspected places, with payment
of money, he went home by ship.

After him came other capitaines and did no great feats, saving only Didius,
slew a xx.M. Aruaceanes, and made ye Citizens of Termeto to leave their strong
situation, and dwell in the plain. He also took Colenda, ix. months after he
had beseaged it. And in one thing followed the cruel^te of Lucullus, for he
made a number of Celtiberians believe, that he would give them land to
inhabit, and apponted them to come to a place assigned with their wives and
children. And when they were come in deed, Cruelty and falshod of Lidius.
he made his army to kill them every mothers son. After him came Flaccus,
and killed xx.M. of them, and at the city of Belgida the people was disposed
to rebel, and caused the Senators to consult what was best to be done, and
because they were long or the could conclude, they set fire on the place and
burned them all. After the which time there was no great a do, till Q.
Sertorius, a noble man of Rome, and of the faction of Cinnia, made much a do
in Spain against the Romans, against whom Cecelius Metellus, and Gneus
Pompeius were sent, and after that Certorius was traitorously slain by
Perpenna, one of his own sort: Pompey made an end of the war, and slew
Perpenna. After him Caius Caesar had somewhat add with Pompeies children, who
were favored in ye country, and last of al Octauius Caesar subdued them that
disobeyed, and made an end of them. All the which things because they were done
of the Romans against Romans, in the time of civil war, they be declared
in the books appropriate to the same. And when the Emperor of Rome had the
Lordship of all the world, and every land was at his commandment, than Spain
was compelled to receive such government as he did appoint, which (...)
president of justice, and a (...) war. And after the decli^^ (...) of the
Roman Empire, they r^^^uered liberty, and grew into kingdoms, as other
countries did.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Thomas East. 1580.


