A Jewel for Gentry.

Being an exact Dictionary, or true Method, to make any Man understand all the
Art, Secrets, and worthy Knowledges belonging to Hawking, Hunting, Fowling and
Fishing. Together with all the true Measures for Winding of the HORN.

Now newly published, and beautified with all the rarest exper^m^^ts that are
known or practiced at this Day.

depiction of a few men hunting

Printed at London ^or ^ohn H^^^^, and are to be ^old at his shop in St.
Duns^anes Churchyard in Fl^^t^^reet. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Mr. John Took, one of the Auditors of his Majesty's
Courts of Wards and Liueries.
SIR: Books that in times past were accounted the Noblest Tributes which could
come to the hands of Virtue, are now either in themselves so disfigured, or by
ignorance so slightly esteemed, that Goodness is half afraid to appear
before great men; yet I that know the measure of your temper, ever ready to
adorn any shadow of modest and good proportion, am bold, out of my best love,
to solicit you with this presentment, in which is matter worthy your ear,
being indeed those absolute parts of Music which make perfect the harmony of
a true Gentleman. I do not offer it as a disturber of your more serious
Meditations, but as an attendant, to wait the leisure of those good hours,
when you shall unbend your mind from the troubles of grauer business, then to
recreate and erect your spirits with the exercises of these wholesome and
well-allowed pleasures. I need not run into any gloss or commendations of
their natures, since the use and allowance thereof (being seldom or never
accompanied without virtue) are Letters Patent of such strength as no malice,
or strictness of life can infrindge or make of less value then an ample
goodness. What ever they are, yours they now are, and with them my self ever
to be disposed by you.

Your Worships ever at command. T. S.

To the Reader.
THis Collection (Gentle Reader) how ever in former Impressions dismembered and
robbed of his best lynaments by an unskillful Register, or a more ignorant
workman (both being far to seek in the Arts, and in the Antiquity of the
the Phrase) was notwithstanding in it is first birth the child of the most
excellentest Father that ever begot, in memory, any work of this nature, and
was for the glory thereof the first book that ever was Printed in this
Kingdom, as may appear by the record of Books then Printed at Saint Albons.
Now for as much as the defects were so gross that Trestram himself would
hardly have known so near a kinsman, I have for the worlds general
satisfaction reduced it so truly to the natural beauty of his own Parents,
that not the seuerest, but with much content would willingly embrace it. And
whereas the alterations, and begettings of times have brought forth many
notable and famous experiments, unknown or assayed by our first Ancestors, I
have also gathered them together, and so made to their excellent grounds the
rare distance of latter wits, that the most curious shall not need to seek
further for any necessary knowledge in any of these several recreations: for
he shall learn hereby both absolutely to do and speak whatsoever beseemes
the person of such a professor: Therefore as it has been gathered with Care,
embrace it with Love, and I will wish thee what I would have heaven give me;
The name of a good man.

A Jewel for Gentry. Being an exact Dictionarie, or true Method, to make any
man understand all the Art, Secrets, and worthy knowledges belonging to
Hawking, Hunting, Fowling, and Fishing, together with all the true measures for
the winding of the Horn.
FIrst, to entreat of Hawks from their beginnings: First understand they be
Eggs, then after they are disclosed, Hawks, but Goshawkes be commonly
disclosed as soon as Choughes, and in some places sooner, according to the
temperature of the Country, and timely breeding. You are to understand that
Hawks, do eyrie, and not breed in Woods: and further, that Hawks do draw,
when they bear timbring to their nests, and not that they build, or make their
nests: and in time of their love, they call, and not kanke, and you must say
that they tread, and when they be unclosed and begin for to feather any thing
of length, by kind they will draw out of their nests, and come to the bows,
and come again to their nests, and then they be called Bowesses or Branchers:
and after S. Margarets day, they fly from tree to tree: and then they are
called Branchers only, then it is time for to take them: and seven days after
S. Margarets day, is the best taking of Sparrowhawkes. Yet there be some
Faulconers which will take them within seven days after they be disclosed, at
which time the white down is not come from them, nor any pen-feather (except
upon the wings) to be discerned, and such Hawks are called Iesses: they be
most familiar and loving to the man, very ha^^y, and not apt by any means to
be lost, only their excessive crying is much troublesome.

How you shall behave you in taking of Hawks, and with what Instruments, and
how you shall Ma^e them.
HE that will take Hawks, must have Nets which are called Vrines, and those
must be made of good small thread, and it must be dyed either green or blew,
that they be not espied, and you must take with you needle and thread, to
inseele the Hawks that are taken, and in this manner they must be inseeled:
Take the needle and thread and put it through the upper eye lid, and so of the
other, and make them fast under the beak that she see not: when she is
inseeled, bear her home, and cast her on the Perch, and let her stand there a
night and a day, and the next day take and cut the thread away softly for
breaking the eye lids: then gently begin to reclaim her, and deal easily with
her, til she will sit upon thy fist, for fear of hurting her wings, and the
same night after the feeding, wake her all night and all the next day, then she
will be easy enough to be reclaymed and the first meat that she eats let it
be hot, and give her enough thereof. Now there be Faulconers of latter and
better knowledge which will not seele their young Hawks at all, but rather
Male them, which is less painful and dangerous to the Hawke, and it is in
this manner: you shall take an handkercher, and knitting the two corners
together so straight that the Hawke can but only put forth her head, which
forcing her to do you shall draw the rest of the handkercher over all her
body, and fold it so close about her, that by no means she can stir her
wings, which done, you may carry her home without any trouble, and there
vnmayling her, cast her on the Perch.

How your Hawke may be drawn to be reclaimed, and the manner of her diet.
BEfore you cast your Hawke upon the Perch, you shall put upon her a Rufter
hood, which must be wide and easy, then by rubbing warm meat upon her feet,
and tickling her so as she may look downward, and sometimes by touching her
beak with the meat, and then putting it to her feet again, you shall make
her learn to feed, which after she has taken a bite or two she will do
willingly: then you shall begin to watch her, and not suffer her to take any
rest till she be so gentle and patient that she will suffer you to take off her
hoode, and put it on again, and will feed bare fac'st, without taking any
offense or bating: then being hard penned, she may be drawn to be reeclaymed:
for while she is tender penned, she is not able to be rclaymed: and if she be a
Goshawke or Tercell that is reclaimed, ever feed her with washed meat at the
drawing, and at the reclaiming, but let it be hot, and in this manner wash it:
Put the meat into the water, and strike it up and down in the water, and wring
the water out of it, and feed her therewith, if she be a Brauncher: and if it
be an Eyes, you must wash it cleaner then ye do to the Brauncher, and with a
linen cloth wipe it and feed her: and evermore the third day when she is
flying give her casting, and if she be a Goshawke or Tercell, in this manner:
Take new Blanket cloth, and cut fine morsels, and with a knives point make a
hole in every morsel, and put in the pellets of cloth, and put them in a
fair dish of water, then take the Hawke and give her a morsel of hot meat,
the quantity of half her supper, then take that which lies in the water and
feed her for all night.

How you shall feed your Hawke, and to know her infirmities, and of the
diversities of them.
IF your Hawke be a Sparhawke, ever feed her with unwashed meat, and look that
her casting be plumage, then look it be clean under the Perch, for the next
day you shall find her casting under the Perch, and thereby you shall know
whether she be clean or not: for some pieces will be yellow, and some green,
and some clammy, and some clear: and if it be yellow she ingendreth the
Frounce, which is an evil that will rise in the mouth, or in the cheek: and
if it be green she ingendreth the Rye: the condition of this evil is this, it
will arise in the head, and make the head swel, and the eye will be heavy and
dark, and if it be not helped it will fall down into the legs, and make them
ranckle, and if it go into the head again, then the Hawke is lost: if it be
clammy the ingendreth an evil called the Cray, which is when she may not
mutise or mute.

Mark well your Medicines here following.
FOr the Frounce in the mouth, take the small end of a silver spoone, and put
it into the fire, till it be hot, then open the beak and burn the sore, and
anoint it with the marrow of a Goose, that has lain long, and it will help
her: if the Frounce be great, then there is a gurb in it, which you must cut
with a Raser, hold the Hawke and slit the place where the sore is, and you
shall find in it as it were the maw of a Pigeon, take a pair of sheeres and
snip the sore, and make it as clean as you can with a linen cloth, and
anoint the sore four days with Balm, and afterward with Pampilion till it
be whole: The Frounce comes when a man feeds his Hawke with Porke or
Horseflesh four days together.

For default of hot meat the disease of the Rye comes, and the best cure
therefore is to let her tire much upon sinewic and tough meat, as the ^umps of
Mutton, Beef, or such like, and with the same to mingle ever a handful of
Parcelie, that as she tears the meat she may tear it also.

How the Cray comes.
THe Cray comes of washed meat, which is washed with hot water, for lack of
hot meat, and it comes of threeds which is in the flesh that the Hawke is fed
with, and though ye pick the flesh never so clean, ye shall find threeds
therein. And the best cure is with a little warm oil of Roses to bath and
cleanse her tuell or fundament, and then to give her the scowring of Selladine
roots dipped in Oil of Roses also.

When your Hawke shall bathe her.
EVery third day let your Hawke bathe her during Summer, if it be fair
weather, and once in a week in Winter, if it be warm, and not else, and when
you bath your Hawke ever give her some hot meat unwashed, although she be a
Goshawke, and the best hot meat is Sparrowes or other small birds, and next
them the Pigeon, Rooke, or Chicken.

How you shall make your Hawke fly with a good courage in the morning.
IF you will have her fly in the morning, feed her the night before with hot
meat, and wash the same meat in urine, and wring out the water clean, and that
will make her have a lusty courage to fly after the best manner.

How you shall guide your Hawke if she be full gorged, and that you would
gladly have a flight.
IF your Hawke be full gorged, and that you would speedily have her fly, take
four corns of Wheat, and put them in a morsel of flesh, and give it her to
eat, and she will quickly cast all that is within her, and after that she
has cast, look that you have some hot meat to give her. Yet use this but
seldom for fear it bring your Hawke to such a weakness of stomach that the
will not be able to indue any meat at all.

Another medicine for the Rye.
TAke D^^e leaves and stamp them in a Mortar, and wring out the juice, and
with a pen put it into the Hookemares once or twice, when the Hawke is small
gorged, and anon after let her lyre, and she shall be as whole as a fish.

Also, and you give your Hawke fresh Butter, or Marrow of Hogs that is in the
bone of the leg of Porke, it will make her cast water at the mares: but it will
make her haughty and proud.

Another medicine for the Cray.
TAke and chafe the fundament of your Hawke with your hand and warm water a
good while, and after that take the powder of Saxifrage, or else the powder of
Rue, and a quantity of May Butter, and temper them well together, then put it
in a little Box and stop it close, and every meal when you feed your Hawke
anoint her meat therewith, and for the love of the ointment she will eat her
meat the better. This experiment will keep her from the Cray, and many other
sicknesses that often engender in Hawks. Also take the whole heart of a Pigge,
and feed her therewith two days, and it will make her whole.

Also take Porke and put it into hot Milk, and feed your Hawke therewith, and
that will make your Hawke mute after the best manner: And Porke, with the
Marrow of the Leg of Porke will make her do the like. Also use her to fresh
Butter and it will do the same. Also one or two meals of a Pigs liver hot
will make her mute, but let her not have too great a gorge thereof, for it is a
perilous meat. Also take the white of an Egg, and beat it that it be as thin
as water: put the same in a vessel, and steep the meat therein all the day
before you give it her, and at night feed her therewith, and that which shall
be for her dinner the next day, let it lie in steep all night: but in any wise
see that you have fresh whites of Eggs, and if her feeding be of Porke it is
the better. This is proved.

The perfect rules or terms for Faulkners, belonging to Hawks.
THe first is hold fast at all times, and especially when she bateth: it is
called bating, for she bateth with her self most often causeless. The second
is, rebate your Hawke to your fist, and that is when your Hawke bateth, the
least moving that you can make of your fist, she will rebate again on your
fist. The third is, seed your Hawke, and not give her meat. The fourth, she
smites or seweth her beak, and not wipeth. The fist, your Hawke souketh, and
not sleeps. The sixth, she pruneth, and not perketh: and she pruneth not but
when she begins at her legs, and fetches moisture like Oil at her tail,
and bawmeth her feet, and stroketh the feathers of her wings through her
beak: it is called the Note, when she fetches such oil. A Hawke would never
be let of her pruning: for when she pruneth her self she is lusty and of good
liking, and when she has done she will rowse her self mightily: and sometime
she countenanceth as she picketh her, and yet she pruneth her not, and then you
must say she reformeth her feathers, and not pick her feathers. The seventh
your Hawke collyeth, and not beaketh. The eight rouseth, and not shakes her.
The ninth, she stretches, and not claweth nor scratcheth. The tenth, she
mantelleth, and not stretches: when she puts forth her legs from her, one
after another, and her wings follow her legs, then she does mantell her, and
when she has mantelled and brings both her wings together over her back,
you must say she warbleth her wings, and that is a term fit for it. The
eleventh, your Hawke mutesseth, or muteth, and not shiteth. The twelfth, you
cast your Hawke upon the Perch and not set her upon the Perch.

For special terms belonging to Hawks, when you shall have any cause to
commend them for diverse of their properties.
FIrst, you must say she is a fair Hawke, a huge Hawke, a long Hawke, a short
thick Hawke: and not to say, a great Hawke: Also she has a large beak, or a
short beak: and not call it a bill: and a huge head, or a small head, fair
seasoned. You must say your Hawke is full gorged, and not cropped: and your
Hawke puts over and endueth, and yet she does both diversely. You shall say
she is a Hawke of an excellent piece, when her proportion is square and broad
between the Pinions, you shall say she is of a fair malye, either sandy,
blew, or white, which are the extremest circles or tips of her feathers.

How your Hawke puts over.
SHe puts over when she remoueth her meat from her gorge into her bowels:
and thus ye shall know: when she has put it over, she trauerseth with her
body, and specially with her neck, as a Crane does, or other bird.

When you shall say she endueth and embowelleth.
SHe never endueth so long as her bowels be full at her feeding, but as soon
as she is fed and rests, she endueth by little and little: and if her gorge
and her bowels in any thing stiffeth, you shall say she is embowelled, and has
not fully endued: and as long as you may find any thing in her bowels, it is
very dangerous to give her any meat.

Mark well these terms.
SAy your Hawke has a long wing, a fair long tail with six bars out, and
stands upon the seventh. This Hawk is interpened, that is to say, where the
feathers of the wings be between the body and thighs: this Hawke has an huge
leg; or a flat leg, or a round leg, or a fair enfered leg.

To know the mayle of an Hawke.
Hawks have white mayle, Canuas mayle, or red mayle, and some call red mayle,
iron mayle: which mayle is soon known. Canuas mayle is between white mayle
and iron mayle, and iron mayle is very red.

Plumage and cast your Hawke.
A Goshawke nor Tercel, in their sore age have not their mayles named, but is
called their plumage: and after that coat it is called their mayle: And if
your Hawke fly for, or reward to any Hawke by countenance to fly thereto, you
shall say cast your Hawke thereto, and not fly thereto.

Noumed or seized.
ANd if your Hawke noume a foul, and the foul break from her, she has
discomfited many feathers of the foul, that is broken away: but in kindly
speech you shall say, your Hawke has noumed or seized a foul, and not taken
it.

Wherefore a Hawke is called a Rifler.
OFtentimes it happens with a Hawke, that for eagerness when she should
noume a Foul, she seaseth but the feathers, and therefore such Hawks be
called Riflers if they do often so.

The names of all the members of your Hawks, with their convenient terms.
FIrst, Cleys behind that streyneth the back of the hand, ye shall call them
Talons.

The Cleys within the foot, you shall call them her pounses.

But the Cleys that are upon the middle stretchers, you shall call them the
long sengles.

And the uttermost Cleys, you shall call them petty sengles, and the leg in
general is called the beam.

The Key or closer.
THe long sengles are called the Key of the foot, or the closer: for what thing
soever a Hawke streineth, is upon the sengle, and the strength thereof
fortifieth all the foot.

Seres of watery or waxie colors.
YOu shall understand, that the skin about the Hawks legs and her feet, is
called the Seres of her legs, and her feet whether they be watery or waxy
color are yellow, yet some be more bluish or inclining to a sea-greene, which
is the best of all, for it shows valor, and that the Hawke is bred in a
hard, cold, and strong Erie.

The beam feathers.
A Hawke has twelve feathers on her tail, and one principal feather of the
same in the midst, and in a manner all the rest are covered under the said
feather, and that is called the beam feather of the tail, and there is black
bars overthwart the tail, and those bars will tell you when she is full
summed or full fermed: for when she is full barred she stands upon seven,
and then she is perfect ready to be reclaymed: as long as a Hawke stands
under the number of seven bars, and she be in her sore age, you may say she
is not full summed, for so long she is but tender penned, whether she be
Brauncher or Eyes: And if she be a mewed Hawke and stand within seven bars,
you may say she is not full fermed, for she is not able to be reclaymed,
because she is drawn too soon out of the mew, for she is not penned no harder
then a sore Hawke: or you shall say her feathers are in blood, which is a
general warning or caveat that you may in no wise draw or reclayme your Hawke
till she be hard penned.

Brayles or Brayle-feathers.
AN Hawke has long small white feathers, hanging under her tail from her
bowels downward, and it is called the Brayle-feather: and commonly every
Goshawke, and every Tercels brayles be sprinkled with black specks like
armines, but for all that, they be accounted never the better: But if a
Sparrowhawke, be so armined upon the brayles, or any Musket, you shall say she
is degouted to the uttermost brayle, and it betokens great hardness.

Breast feathers, Plumage, Barbe feathers, Pendant feathers.
THe feathers above the former part of a Hawke, be called breast feathers, and
the feathers under the wings are Plumage: the feathers under the beak be
called Barbe feathers: the feathers that be at the joint of the knee, that are
hanging and sharp at the ends, those be called the Pendant feathers.

Flages or flagge feathers.
THe feathers at the wings next to the body, be the flages, or flagge feathers.

Beam feathers of the wing.
THe long feather of the wing is called the Beam feather, and the feather that
some call the pinion of other fowls, of an Hawke it is called a sercell: and
if she be in mew, the same feather will be the last that she will cast, and
till that be cast she is never mewed. I have heard some say that she has cast
that first, but the other rule is more common: and when she has cast her
sercel in mew, then is it time to feed her with washed meat, and to begin to
ensayme her.

Ensayme.
ENsayme of an Hawke is the grease, and if that be taken away with feeding of
washed meat (as it is declared hereafter) she will gender a panell, which will
be her utter confusion, if she fly therewith and take cold thereupon: for
indeed it is only moderate and temperate exercise which best ensaymeth a
Hawke, for that breaks and dissolueth the grease most naturally, which
afterward you must force her to avoid by gentle scourings, and after taking of
stones and casting, the one being an excellent color, and the other a most
perfect cleanser of the gorge and other unclean places where the glut
remains.

Couerts, or covert feathers.
THere be feathers upon the Sercelles, and those be called couert-feathers, and
so all the feathers be called that be next over the beam feathers, or the
flagge feathers of the wings: the foremost out-bearing feathers of a Hawke are
called the breast feathers, the feathers under the wings are called plumage,
those under the beak are called the barbe feathers, and those which are at the
joint of the Hawks knee, hanging downward, be called the pendant feathers.

Back feathers.
THe feathers upon the back, half be called back feathers.

Beak, Clap, Nares, Sere.
THe Beak of the Hawke is the upper part that is creeked: the neither part is
called the Clap of the Hawke: the holes in the Hawks beak be called the
Nares: the yellow between the beak and the eye is called the Sere.

Cryuets.
THere be long small black feathers like hairs about the Seres, and those be
called Cryuets of the Hawke.

Sore age.
YOu shall understand that the first year of an Hawke, whether she be a
Brancher or Eyesse, the first is called her sore age, and all that year she is
called a sore Hawke: and if she escape that year, with good feeding she is
like to endure long, and then she is called an Entermewer: the third year she
is a white Hawke, the fourth a white Hawke of the first coat, and so doubling
till her end.

To reclayme a Hawke.
IF you will reclayme your Hawke, you must divide one meal into three, until
that she will come to reclayme: and when she will come to reclayme, make her
that she sore not, nor plane: for though she be well reclaymed, it may fall out
that she will sore so high, that ye shall never see nor find her: And if your
Hawke fly to the Partrich, look that ye ensayme her before she fly, whether
she be a Brauncher, Eyesse, or mued Hawke.

When a Hawke is called an Eyesse.
A Hawke that is called an Eyesse, is for her eyes: for a Hawke that is brought
up under a Buzard or Puttocke, (as many are) have watery eyne: for when they be
disclosed and kept in form till they be full summed, ye shall know that by her
watery eyes, and also her look will not be so quick as a Braunchers is: and so
because the best knowledge is by the eye, they be called Eyesse: ye may know an
Eyesse by the palenesse of the Seres of her legs, or the sere over the beck:
also by the taintes that be upon her tail and her wings: which taintes come
for lack of feeding when they be Eyesses. This is an other opinion of Eyesses
but that which is formerly declared is most usual, common and oftest within
our practice, for in these latter days, of better knowledge, men will not so
mispend the eggs of good Hawks as to suffer them to be disclosed by Buzards, or
any unworthy fowls.

What a Taynt is.
A Taynt is a thing that goes overthwart the feathers of the wings and of the
tail, like as it were eaten with worms, and it begins first to breed at
the body in the pen, and the same pen shall fret a sunder, and fall away
through the same Taynt, and then is the Hawke desparaged for all that year.

Medicines to Ensayme your Hawke.
TAke the root of Rasne, and put it in clean water, and lay your flesh
therein to temper a great while, and give it to your Hawke to eat: and if she
eat thereof, dread not but it will abate her grease, but in three days she
will not greatly abate. Also take Puliall and Garlic, and stamp it well
together, and wring out the juice in a dish and then wet the flesh therein, and
feed your Hawke therewith: Ensayme your Hawke within four days, but look
every day that you make new juice, and when you feed her, wet your meat
therein: Also take juice of Marsley mores, otherwise called Persley roots, and
the same of Isope, and wash your flesh therein, and your Hawke shall be
ensaymed kindly, and no great abate to the Hawke. Some use to lay their flesh
in water almost a day, and give the same to the Hawke at supper, and let that
lie all night to give her in the morning, and thus to feed them in the mew, or
ere they be drawn, about a month or six weeks, and to ensayme them ere they
come on the fist, and as soon as they cast their sercell, then is it time to
feed them so.

How your Hawke ensaymeth.
YOu shall further understand, that so long as your Hawks feet look black
and rough, she is full of grease, and ever as she ensaymeth, her feet will wax
yellow and look smooth.

How you shall behave your self when your Hawke is ready to fly.
When you have ensaymed your Hawke and reclamed her, and that she is ready to
fly to the Partrich, you must take a Partrich in your bag and go into the
field, and let your Spaniells find a couie of Partriches, and when they bvp
and begin to scatter, you must mark them and couple up your Spaniels: and when
you have so done, let him that has the Partri^h in the bag take a pair of
creance to the Partrich leg, and cast her up as hie as you can, and as soon
as your Hawke sees her she will fly thereto: and if your Partrich sease upon
her above, give her a reward thereupon: this done, go to the Partriches that
you have marked, do as hereafter follows: and if you have a chastised
Spaniell that is rebuked and is a retriuer, uncouple him alone and go and
single out one of the Partriches of the couie, and go as nigh to the rising of
him as you can, and if your Hawke have a desire cast her to it: and if she take
it, then your Hawke is made for that year, and of the same Partrich that she
slays you must thus reward her as follows. There be other latter Fawlkners
which for the making of a young Hawke, will take a Partrich and seele it, then
coming into the field, in a place which is both most likely for the haunt of
Partriches, and also most convenient for the making of your slight: take the
Partrich and lay her down close in some furrow, and cover her with a Hat, so
as she cannot spring up, then having a long line fastened to the Hat, let one
stand a far off from the Hat, and hold the line in his hand, all which when
you see well prepared, then cast off your Hawke, and after she has flowne
about or two, seeing her head to be turned inward toward the game, you shall
cause him that has the string to pluck away the Hat, upon which discovery
the Partrich will spring, and the Hawke will stoop and pursue it, which
as soon as she has taken, you shall very well reward her upon it, as with the
head, neck, intrailes, and at the least one of the legs, only you must
remember, that before you give your Hawke this train, you must make her very
willing to foot any hand Partrich whatsoever.

How you shall reward your Hawke.
TAke the Partrich, and cut the head and neck from the body, and (...) the
skin from the neck, and give it her to eat, and cover the body of the Foul
with a hat, and lay the said head and the neck thereupon, and if she will
forsake the Foul that she plumeth on and come to the reward, then secretly
take away the Partrich, and reward your Hawke with the brain and the neck,
but beware that she eat no bones, for it will make her unlusty for to fly:
and thus must you serve her of as many as she flies at, but let her reward be
the less, or else she will be quickly full gorged, and then she will not fly
a good while.

How your Hawke shall rejoice her self.
When your Hawke has slain a Foul, and that you have rewarded her as
before, let her fly no more till she has rejoiced her: that is to say, till
she has sewed, feakt, or snited her beak, or else rouzed her: and when she
has done any of all these, go and retriue more, and she will noume plenty.

When your Hawke has noumed a Foul, what you shall do that you rebuke not
the Hawke.
Learn this thing when she does noume a Foul, stand good way from her, and
take away your Spanieles for rebuking of her, for diverse Hawks con not abide
the Spaniels, and when your Hawke plumeth, come softly toward her nearer and
nearer, and if she leave pluming and look upon you: stand still and chearke her
and wistell her, until shd plume again, and serve her thus until you be nigh
her, then softly fall on your Knees, and privily while she plumeth, set your
hand, and be sure of the Iesse, and then ye may guide all things as you will,
and if you do the contrary, she will for fear carry away the game, or let
it go quick, which is loss both to you and to your Hawke also. Besides, rash
coming in to a Hawke, makes her take dislike at a man's face and countenance,
and that toy once conceived, she will never after endure to look upon him at
liberty, as we daily see by experience of many good Hawks at this day, from
whom the best Fawlkners cannot take away that infirmity: therefore the safest
way of prevention, is to do nothing about her rashly, but with great
temperance and a countenance cheerful, and amiable.

A Medicine for an Hawke that is lousy.
TAke quicksiluer, and put it into a Basin of Brass, and put into it Salindine
and Ashes, and mingle it well together till the quicksiluer be dead, and put
thereto fat of bones, and annoint the Hawke therewith, and it will kill the
Lice: also powder of Orpement blown upon the Hawke with a quill will kill the
Lice.

The opinion of Ostregiors.
AFter the opinion of many Ostregiors, if you feed your Hawke continually with
Porke, with Iayes or Pyes, or carry her much in raynie weather, she will be
lousy.

Ostregers, Speruiters, Faulkners.
BEcause I spoke of Ostregers, you shall understand that they be called
Ostregers that keep Goshawkes or Tercels of Goshawkes, and those that keep
Sparrowhawkes and Muskets, be called Speruiters, and keepers of all other
Hawks be called Faulkners.

You shall call the long Line wherewith you call your Hawke, your Creance,
whatsoever it be.

A medicine for an Hawke that casts her flesh.
PVt the flesh that you feed your Hawke withal in fair water, and feed her
therewith three days, and it will keep her in flesh.

A medicine for an Hawke that has lost her courage.
YOu may know when your Hawke has lost her courage, for when you cast her to
the Foul: she flies awayward, as though she knew not the Foul, or else she
will fly a little after her, and then give her up: and this is a very good
remedy for such a Hawke. Take Oil of Spain, and temper it with clear Wine
and the yolke of an Egg, and put into it some Beef, and give her thereof five
morsels, and then set her in the Sun, and at night feed her with an old hot
Culuer, and if you feed her thus three times: your Hawke was never so lusty
and jolly before, as she will be after, and come to her courage again.

A Medicine that an Hawke shall not lie in Mew for vnlustinesse.
TAke Fearne roots that grow within an Oak, and Oak apples, and make juice of
them, and wet her flesh therein that she eats, and feed her three or four
times, and it will make her leave that.

A Medicine for an Hawke that has the Tanie.
A Hawke that has the Tanie, a man may soon know if he take heed: for this
is her manner, she will pant more for one baiting then some will do for three
or four, and if she should fly a little while, she would almost lose her
breath: whether she be fat or lean, and she will be always heavy, and this
is the remedy. Take a quantity of the redness of Hasell, and a little of the
powder of Rosen, of Pepper, and somewhat of Ginger, and make thereof with fresh
grease three pellets, and hold your Hawke to the fire, and when she feels the
heat, make her swallow the three pellets by force, and knit her beak fast
that she cast it not out again, and this do three times, and she shall be
safe.

Also take Alisander, and the Roots of Primroses, and the root Grongnaulles,
and sees them in Butter, and give her three morsels every day, until she be
whole, and look that she be empty when ye give the medicine.

How you shall take your Hawke from the Erye.
Who so takes his Hawke from the Erye, it behooves him to be wise in bringing
her easily, and to keep her from cold, and from hurting of her bones, for they
be tender, and she must have great rest, and they must have as clean air as
can be, and always give her clean and hot meat, and give her a little and
often, and change her meat often, and cut her meat into small morsels, for
they should not tire on bones: and then when she begins to pen, and plumeth,
and pruneth, and picketh her self, put her into a close warm place where no
Vermin may come in to her, and let the place be close from wind and rain,
and then she will some her self: and evermore give her good hot meats, for it
is better for a man to feed his Hawke while she is tender with good meat, and
to make her good with some cost, then to feed her with evil meats to make
her unthrifty with little cost: and look when she begins to some, then
give her bathing.

A Medicine for worms in a Hawke, which sickness is called the Fylanders.
BEware of this sickness: the remedy for it is this. Take an herb that is
called Neppe, and put it into the gut of a Capon, or of an Hen, and knit it
with a thread, and let her receive it whole, and she will be whole and safe.

Thus you shall know when your Hawke has worms in her belly: look when she
has cast, and then ye shall find one or two about her casting place, if she
has within her any.

A Medicine for an Hawke that casts worms at her fundament, and what worms
they be.
TAke the lymayle of iron, and mingle it with the flesh of Porke, and give it
two days to the Hawke to eat, and she shall be whole.

A Medicine for an Hawke that has a sickness called the Aggersteyne.
When you see your Hawke hurt her feet with her beak, and pulls her tail,
then she has the Aggersteyne: For this disease, take the dung of a Dove, and
the dung of a Sheep, and strong Vinegar, and mingle them softly in a brazen
basin, and mingle them welll together to serve for three days after, and give
her flesh of a Culuer with Honey, and with powder of Pepper, and set her in a
dark place nine days, and when you see new feathers on her tail, wash her
with Verose nine days, and she will be whole.

A Medicine for an Hawke that has the Crampe in her wings, and how it comes.
TAke a white Loaf of bread, somewhat colder then it comes out of the Oven,
and hold the Hawke softly for hurting, and cut the Loaf almost through, and
display her wing easily, and hold it between the two parts of the Loaf, and
let it be held so the space of half an hour, and it will help her.

The Crampe comes to an Hawke by taking cold in her youth: therefore it is
good for an Hawke to keep her warm, whether she be young or old.

Let not your Hawke be put into mewe to fat, but in this manner as follows,
if ye love her.
Keep her well, and put her not late in mew: for who so for covetousness of
flying, loses the time of his Hawks mewing, and withholds her too long
from it, he may after put her in mew at adventure, for then a part of her
mewing time is past. Who so puts his Hawke in mew in the beginning of Lent,
if she be kept as she ought to be, she should be mewed in the beginning of
August, which is the best time of all other.

How you shall dispose and ordain your mew.
SEt and dispose your mew in this manner, so that no Wesell nor Pole^t, nor no
other Vermin annoy it, nor that it be windy or cold, nor that it be over hot,
let one part of it stand toward the Sun, so that the most part of the day
the Sun may come to it Also you must look that she be not troubled with
noise or the singing of men, and that no man come to her but only he that
feeds her: you must let her have a feeding stock in her mew, and a long
string to bind her meat, or else she will carry her meat about the house and
beray it with dust, and peradventure she will hide it till it stink and then
feed on it: which if she should do, it would be her death. And therefore when
it is bound to the feeding stock, then she will neither at feeding, neither at
tyring, nor at lighting down, nor at rising hurt her self: and when she has
fed, take away that she leaves, and look that she have fresh at every meal:
for of stale and evil meats she will engender many diseases, and look that
you never go to the mew but when you carry her meat or water to bath her.
Suffer no rain to wet her at any time if you may: and as for her bathing, that
will nothing hinder her mewing. This mew would notwithstanding the warmth and
closeness, have a convenient place from some window built above a yard
outward, and at least a yeard and a half square, which would be only lathed
of an indifferent wideness without any loome, so as the air might freely come
in thereat, for this must be the place where your Hawke in the heat of Summer
may weather her self, which is as comfortable as any meat whatsoever: Besides
your mew must never be without store of Hawks stones of all fises, of sand,
gravel and green tuffes, for it is both wholesome and natural for a Hawke to
feed upon the green grass, yet they must be often changed, and so must the
water in which she batheth, the tubbe being large and not above five inches in
depth at the most.

The manner how a man shall put his Hawke into the Mew: and is proved.
ONe thing you must beware of, that she have no sickness before you put her
in Mew: for as I have proved, a sick Hawke shall never mew well, but though
she mew she shall not endure: but when she is great and fat, for at the bating
of her estate, she will no longer endure. Sometime without any medicine many
men devise how they may mew their Hawks: for some put them in at high estate,
and some when they be very low, and some when they are empty and lean: but it
makes no matter for that, if she be sound: nevertheless, you shall hear mine
advise as I have seen and proved.

Whosoever puts a Goshawke, a Tercell, Sparhawke or any other Hawke into
Mew, so high that she may be no higher, she will hold her long ere she leese
and leave any feathers: and who so puts her into mew, lean, it will be long
ere she remount: and who so puts her into mew too lean and hungry, if she
have meat at her will, she will eat too much, because of hunger, and she is
likely to kill her self therewith, as has been often seen: but who so will
have his Hawke endure and mew kindly, my counsel is that she be neither too
high nor too low, nor in distress of hunger, but as she should best fly: but
take heed the first day of too much eating, till the time that she be stanche,
and after you may give her such meat as I shall describe you hereafter.

In what manner you shall feed your Hawke in your mew.
Look what meat she has been most used to be fed with, and feed her
therewith eight days together, and give her Birds enough morning and evening,
and let her plume upon them well, and take casting of the plumage, and that
will cleanse her well, and cause her to have good appetite, and it will cleanse
her bowelles well, and when she is well cleansed, you may give her what meat
you will, so it be clean and fresh. But the best meat to make her mewe
soonest without any medicine, is the flesh of a Kid, of a young Swanne, and of
a young Chicken, and of a young Goose: for such meat is hot of it self: a Rat
also is excellent.

Also take pieces of great fresh Eeles, and especially that next the navel,
and wet it in hot blood of Mutton, it is good to make her to mew, but
especially it will make her white after her sore age. These said fleshes be
good to mew a Hawke, and to keep her in state, but look that she have plenty
every day, that she rather leave then lack, and every third day let her bathe
if she will: and when she is waxed nere somed, then let her eat Hens and fat
Porke: and of a Hound is passing good. For to speak the truth, and as long
experience teaches us, there is no meat generally so good for a Hawke that is
in any good and perfect state of body, as dogs flesh is, so it be given warm
or not too stale.

To make a Hawke mew quickly, without any hurting of her.
THe experiment is thus approved. Take an Adder that is red of nature, and also
there be Snakes of the same kind, and they be very bitter, take two or three
of them, and smite off their heads and their tails: then take a new earthen
Pot that was never used, and cut them in small pieces, and put them into the
Pot to sees, and let them sees at leisure, and let the Pot be covered close
that no air come out of it, nor no breath, and let them sees so long that the
pieces turn to grease, and put it into a clean vessel, a^ as often as you
feed your Hawke, annoint her meat therewith, and let her eat as much as she
will, and that will mew her at your will.

Also if you take Wheat and Barley and boil it in the broth that the Adders
were sodden in, and when you see it begin to break, take it out, and feed
Henns and Chickens therewith, and with those hens or chicknes feed your
Hawke. This medicine is well approved amongst all our late Faulkners.

Who so would have his Hawke mew, and that her feathers shoud not fall.
TAke powder of Canel, and the juice of Franckecoste, and the juice of Paranie,
and take three or foue morsels of meat, and wet them therein, and make your
Hawke swallowe them, and serve her so many times.

Also take the skin of a Snake and of an Adder, and cut them into small
pieces, and temper it with hot blood, and make your Hawke to eat thereof, and
she shall not mew.

For the Gowte in the throat.
When you see your Hawke blow many times, and that it comes of no bating,
you may be sure she has the Gowt in her throat: and for that disease, take
the blood of an Peacocke, Incense, Myrabolana, and cloue Gilly flowers and
Canel, and Ginger: and take of all these every evening, and mingle them with
Peacockes blood, and sees it till they be thick, and thereof make morsells,
and give the Hawke at morning and noone.

For the Gowte in the head and in the reins.
When you see your Hawke may not endue her meat, nor remove her estate, she
has the Gowte in the head and in the reins. Take Momie, (among the
Apothecaries you may have it,) and the skin of an Hare, and give it to your
Hawke to eat nine times with the flesh of a Cat, and if she hold the meat she
shall be safe.

A medicine for the Crampe in the thigh, in the leg, or in the foot or an
Hawke.
When you see your Hawke lay one foot upon an other, then she is taken with
the Crampe, then draw her blood, both upon the foot that lies on the other
foot, and upon the leg, and it will help her.

For the Cough, or the Pose.
TAke powder of Bays, and put it on the flesh of a Dove, and give it often to
your Hawke, and it will help her.

A medicine for the sickness within the body of any Hawke, if it show not
outward, how she shall be helped and in what manner.
A Man may know by the countenance of an Hawke partly her infirmities: but it
is strange to know many diseases, when he knows not whereof nor how it
comes: For this desease feed your Hawke well of an Hen, and then make her
fast two days after, that she may empty her body: the third day take Honey and
sees it, and fill her full, and bind her beak that she cast it not out
again, and then set her out of the Sun, and when it draws toward night
feed her of a hot Foul: and if this will not help her, never look for
other medicine.

For the passion that Goshawkes have fasting.
TAke the root of small Rushes, and make juice of them, and wet her meat
therein, and make her eat thereof.

A medicine for the Falera.
When you see your Hawks Tallents wax white, then it is a sign she has
the Falera, the cure is: take a black Snake and cut away the head and tail,
then take the middle and fry it in an earthen Pot, then take the Grease and
save it, and annoint the flesh either of Pigeon or Hen therewith, and let the
Hawke feed thereon eight days together: and at the end of eight days, feed
her with warm Birds.

For the Podagree.
When your Hawks feet are swelled, then we say she has the Podagree: the
cure whereof is, take fresh May Butter, and as much of Oil Olive, and of
Allome, and chase them well together at the fire, and make thereof an ointment,
and annoint her feet four days together, and set her in the Sun, and give
her the flesh of a Cat, and if you see it avail not, sees the cutting of a
Viue and wrap in it about the swelling, and let her sit upon a cold stone, and
annoyt her with Butter till she be whole.

For Hawks that be wounded.
TAke away the feathers about the wound, and take the white of an Egg, and
Oil of Olive, and mingle them together, and annoint the wound, and keep it
with white wine, until the time that you see dead flesh, and then put into the
wound Escompe, until the time that the dead flesh be wasted: after take
Incense, and take as much of the one as of the other, and mingle them together
and when you will annoint the sore, heat your ointment, and annoint it with a
pen, till the time the skin grow again: and if you see dead flesh about it,
and that you would have it away, wash it with Vinegar, and then annoint it with
this ointment aforesaid, and she shall be whole.

A medicine for an Hawke that has the Arteticke.
When you perceive that your Hawke is fat about the heart, you may trust to it
she has the Arteticke, therefore let her blood in the original vain, and
after that, give her a Frogge to eat, and she will be whole.

A Medicine for an Hawke that is troubled in the bowels.
When your Hawke is troubled in her bowels, you shall know it by her eyes, for
her eyes will be dark, and she will look drowsily, and her mutising will
defile her fundament, then take the Hawks meat, and annoint it with the
powder of Camomile or Fern, and give it her to eat, and she shall be whole.

A Medicine for an Hawke that has the Gout.
Feed your Hawke once or twice with an Irchin, and it shall help her.

A Medicine for an Hawke that has Mytes.
TAke the juice of Wormwood, and put it where they be, and they will die.

A Medicine for an Hawke that has the Stone.
Annoint her Fundament with Oil, and put in the powder of Allome with a hollow
straw into her fundament: Also take an herb called Castis Larder, and annoint
her mouth therewith, and she will be whole. Also if you take small Flamis
roots, and Polepodie of the Oak, and the Nerves of Spinach, and grind them
well, and feeth it in Butter, and strain it through a cloth, then make three
Pellets as big as a Hassell Nut, and put them in your Hawks mouth in the
morning, and look that she be empty, and then let her fast till evening, then
feed her by little and little till she be sound.

A Medicine for Vermin.
TAke the juice of the root Fennel, and put it where the Vermin be, and they
will die, or if you bathe her in a decoction thereof, it is the surer way.

A Medicine for the Rewme that Hawks have.
When you see your Hawke close her eyes, and shake her head, give her Lard of
a Goat the first day, and the second day give her Epaticke, with the flesh of a
Chicken, and she shall be whole.

A Medicine for Hawks that be dry and desire to drink, to keep them moist.
TAke the juice of Horehound, and wet the Hawks meat therein, and feed her
therewith once or twice, and she shall be whole.

A Medicine for diseases in the Entrayles.
A Hawke whose intrayles are payned is more then ordinarily sick, for if she
hold not her meat but cast it, it is a token of a foul glut or surfait of
feathers taken in her sore-age, and appears when she comes to much labor: the
signs are, she will have much desire to rest, and will sleep when she puts
over her meat, and the flesh which she has in her gorge, if she cast it,
looks as it were sodden: she will many times assay to put over her meat but
cannot, wherefore if she cast it she may be helped, if not, she dies: The cure
therefore is to take the yolks of Eggs raw, when they be well beaten
together, put to it Spanish Salt, and as much Honey, and wet therein the Hawks
meat, and feed her therewith three days together: and if she make dainty in
eating of it, then make her of force to swallow three or four morsels a day,
and presently she shall be whole. Yet I will tell you another thing: Take Honey
at the change of the Moon, and a sharp Nettle, and make thereof small
powder, and when it is well ground, take the breast bone of an Hen, and another
of a Culuer, and make it small with a knife, and do away the skin, and put
powder thereon, and all hot with the powder, feed her three days and she will
be whole.

For sickness of swelling.
IF a Fellon be swollen in such sort that a man may heal it, then thus a man
may help her and lengthen her life, but the Hawke will be very eager and
grievous of sickness: therefore you must take the roots of Comferye and of
Sugar as much, then sees it in fresh grease, with the third part of Honey, and
then draw it through a fair cloth, and then often give it to the Hawke, and she
shall be whole.

A Medicine for Blaynes in Hawks mouths, called Frounces.
THe Frounce is a fearful disease, and draws her to death, and withholds
her strength, and it comes of cold: for cold does a Hawke much harm. To cure
her, take Fennel, Mariall and Kerses alike much, and sees them, and strain
them through a cloth, and sometimes wash her head therewith, and put some on the
roof of her mouth, and she shall be safe, otherwise for the most surest way to
cure any Frounce in general, for indeed they be no other then common Cankers
in the mouth, engendered by extreme heats and foul feeding: you shall take
Allome and bray it into a very fine powder: then mix it with the strongest
wine-Vineger, and make it as thick as Puddle, then with a fine Cambricke rag
dipped therein, rub the sore till it bleed, and so continue till the Canker be
killed, and that the flesh look red and clear, then heal it with a little
life-Honey.

A Medicine for an Hawke that casts her flesh.
Sees Raysons in water and wet her flesh therein when it boyleth.

A Medicine for the Agrum.
WHen you see your Hawke have blobed cheeks, then she has this disease called
Agrum: therefore take a Needle of Silver, and heat it in the fire, and burn
the Narres throughout, then annoint it with oil Olive.

A Medicine to make a Hawke fat.
TAke a quantity of Porke and Honey, and Butter alike much, and clarified
grease, take away the Skin, sees them together, and annoint the flesh
therewith, and she will increase exceedingly.

For botches that grow in a Hawks iaw.
CVt the botches with a Knife, and let out the matter, and cleanse it with a
silver Spoone, or else fill the hole with the powder of Arne Melit, burned into
powder, and upon the powder do a little cloth bespred with hot wax, and so
it will away.

A Medicine for an Hawke that will not come to reclayme.
TAke fresh Butter, and put into it Sugar, and put it in a clean cloth, and
reclayme her to that, and keep it in a box, and put it into your bag.

A Medicine for Hawks that be refrayned.
When you see your Hawke to Neese, and to cast water through her Nostriles,
then doublesse she is refrayned: for this disease take the graynes of
Shaffelgree, and of Pepper, and grind it well and temper it with strong
Vinegar, and put it to the roof of her mouth, and give her flesh to eat, and
she shall be whole.

A Medicine for Hawks that have pains in their Croppes.
TAke fair Morfumum, and powder of Gilouer, and mingle them together and give
it her to eat, and if she hold it past the second day after, she shall be
whole.

A Medicine for the Stone in the fundament.
When your Hawke cannot mute, then she has this disease called the Stone: and
for this sickness you shall take the heart of a Swine, and the grease of a
Swine, and cut it with the flesh of the heart, and she shall be whole.

A Medicine for the dry Frounce.
FOr this sickness, take the root of Polipode that grows upon Oaks, and
sees it a great while, then take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be
lukewarm, then wash your Hawks flesh therein three times when you feed her,
and it will help her.

A Medicine for worms called Anguellis.
TAke pressure of a Lamb that was eyned before his time, and make thereof
three morsels, and put it into the gut of a Culuer, and feed her therewith,
and look that the Hawke be empty when you give her the Medicine, or else take
the juice of Dragons and fill the gut of a Pigeon, and then cut it as the Hawke
may swallow it, and knit his beak for casting it up again, and give her the
doussets of a Bucke as hot as they be cut out, and make powder of the pissell,
and cast it upon the flesh, and she shall be whole.

Proper terms used in keeping of Hawks.
A Hawke tyreth upon Rumps, she feeds upon all manner of flesh, she gorgeth
when she fills her gorge with meat, she beaketh when she wipeth her beak,
she rouseth when she shakes all her feathers, and her body together, she
endueth when her meat in her bowels falls to disgestion, she muteth when she
auoids her ordure, she percheth when she stands on any Bough or Perch, she
Ioyketh when she sleeps, she puts over when she auoids her meat out of her
gorge into her pannell, she pruneth when she fetches Oil with her beak out
of her tail, and annoynts her feathers. She plumeth when she pulls off the
feathers of any Foul, or any thing, and casts it from her: she warbleth when
she draws her wings over the midst of her back, and softly shakes them,
and lets them fall again: she mantelleth when she stretches out one wing
alone, and afterward the other wing, and most commonly she does that before
she warbleth her.

The names of Sparhawkes, as Ostregers and Speruiters have determined.
THere is a question asked whether a man shall call a Spear or a Sparhawke, or
an Asper Hawke, and Ostregers and Speruiters say, she may be called all three
names: for these reasons, she may be called a Sparrehawke, for of all Hawks
that are, she is most spear, that is to say, most tender to keep: For the
least misdieting and evil tending of her, kills her, and she may be called
an Asper Hawke of sharpnes of her courage, and of her looking quick, and also
of her flying. For she is most aspere and sharp in all things that belong unto
her. Of all Hawks she may be called a Sparehawke, for two reasons: one is, she
spares Goshawkes and Tercels until the time they be reclaimed to fly, and
till they be fully mewed and clean ensaymed, for all the while they be unable,
the Sparhawke occupies that season, and flies the Partrich wall, from Saint
Margarets day until it be Lammas, and she will sley young Feasants, Hichcokes
in the beginning of the year: and I have seen them slay the Teale, the black
bird, the Woodcocke and the Thrush, although the Woodcocke be combrose to kill:
and therefore when you come to a Grove of Trees, or Thicket of Bushes, cast your
Sparhawke into the tree and beat the bushes, and at the rising of the Foul
she will be sure to have her. Further, if that there were a ship fraught full
of Hawks, if there were but one Sparhawke amongst them, there should be no
Custom paid for any of them, and therefore she is in diverse respects, a
Sparhawke.

How a Hawke flies.
AN Hawke flies to the river diverse ways, and she slays the foul diversely,
that is to say, to the view, or to the beak, or the toll: and all is but one,
as ye shall understand hereafter. She slays also to the querre, to the
creep, and no more ways but those three, and she nimmeth foul at the far
Iute, or at the Iuttie far.

Now ye shall know the meaning of these terms, Randon, Creep, Emewed.
YOur Goshawke or Tercell that shall fly to the view, to the toll, or to the
beak: in this manner she must be taught. You must find a Foul in the River,
or in the Pit, and set your Hawke a good space from you upon a Molehill, or
upon the ground, and creep softly to the foul, and when you come near where
the foul lies, look backward to the Hawke, and with your hand beck your
Hawke to come to you, and when she is on wing, and comes low by the ground,
and is almost at you, then smite your Hawke pole and cry hue, hue, hue, and
make the foul rise, and then the Hawke will nime her.

And now, if your Hawke nime the Foul on the far side of the river, or the
pit, from you, then she slaies the Foul at the far Iute, and if she slay it
upon that side ye be on, as it may hap diverse times, then you shall say she
has slain the Foul at the Iuttye far. If your Hawke slay the Foul aloft,
ye shall say she took it at the mount, or at the four.

And if the Foul rise not but fly along after the River, and the Hawke nime
her, then ye shall say she slew it at randon. And if your Hawke flies at or to
the Creep, when you have your Hawke on your fist, and that you creep softly to
the River or to the Pit, and steals to the brinke thereof, and then cry hue,
and then by that mean nime the Foul, then is she slain at the Creep, at the
far Iutte, or Iuttie far: and if it happen, as it does often, that the
Foul for fear of your Hawke will rise and fall into the river again, or ere
the Hawke see her, and so lie still and dare not arise, then you shall say your
Hawke has enued the Foul into the River, and there be more Fowls in the
River then your Hawke pimmeth, and they dare not arise for fear of your Hawke.

A Theffe.
YOu shall understand that your Goshawke must not fly to the River with belles
in no wise: and therefore a Goshawke is called a Theffe.

Querre.
YOur Hawke flies to the Querre, when there be in the stumble time, Sardes of
Mallards in the field, and when she espieth them and comes covert her self,
and fly privily to the hedges or low by the ground, and nime one of them are
they rise, then you may say that the Foul was flame at the Querre. But the
general use in these days of the word Querre, is when you first enter your
Hawke: the first Foul she slays, is slain at the Querre: and the Hawke
that so slays, is said to be Querried, as much as to say, the first seeking
out, or finding of the Foul.

Mark this term, Draw.
SOme misuse this term Draw, and say that their Hawke will draw to the River:
and that term draw, is properly assigned to that Hawke that will slay a
Rooke, or a Crow, or a Raven upon the land sitting: and then it may be said
that such an Hawke does draw well to a Rooke.

If you will make your Hawke to the Querre, you must use her in this manner.
TAke a tame Mallard and set him in a plain field, and let him go where he
will, then set your Hawke upon your sist, and go to that plain, and hold up
your hand a pretty way off from the Mallard, and look if your Hawke can epsy
it by her own courage: and if she have found the Foul and desire to fly to
it, let her kill it, and plume well upon it, and serve her so three or four
times, and then she is made to the Querre.

I have known Gentlemen that when they have seen any tame Ducks, that if
their Hawks have desired to fly at them, they have let them fly, to the
encouraging of them another time, and so have woone them to the Querre.

A pretty device to take a Hawke that is broken out of Mew, and all manner of
other Fowls that sit in trees, or that has taken up their perch all night in
any place.
YOu must in the night do it. Climb up softly, with a Skonce or a Lantern,
and you must have but one light in your hand, and let the light be toward the
Hawke or Foul, that she see not your face, and you may take her by the legs or
any other place of her as you list. This is approved: for I have known diverse
that have taken many Fowls after this same manner.

Of the Bells of the Hawks.
Look that the Bells that your Hawke shall wear that they be not too heavy,
nor that they be above her power to bear, and that they be not one heavier
then another, but that they be both of a weight: also look that they have a
good sound and shrill, and not both of one sound, but that one be of a seemy
time above the other, and that they be whole and not broken, especially in the
sounding place: for if they be any whit broken, they will sound fully.

Of Sparhawkes belles there is diverse choice, and little charge of them, for
there is plenty of them: and for Goshawkes, the bells of Millame were counted
the best, and they are very good: for commonly they are founded with Silver,
and therefore they are sold thereafter. There are now used of Dutchland bells,
made in a town called Dordright, and they are excellent good bells, for they
are well sorted, and well sounded, very good in ringing, of Shrilnesse, and
passing well lasting.

How to reform Hawks that will carry away their Pray.
Diverse Hawks, partly by being scarred by the indiscreete rashness of
unskillful Faulconers, and partly by being accustomed to pray upon small birds,
will when they have slain any thing, carry it away up into trees or other
places, where gorging themselves they will neglect their due obedience to their
feeder, which to prevent you shall not at any time let your Hawke feed upon
quick Birds, unless the creance be fixed thereunto, so that when she would
carry she must loose her pray, this will ch^cke her, and make her forbear:
Besides you shall not at any time cast her forth any food, Pigeon, or other,
but you shall first tie it fast to a heavy lure, such as she cannot raise from
the ground, and if notwithstanding she be still apt to that evil, you shall
then make a big round button of leather, and fire it under the ball of her
foot, in such sort that she cannot by any means trusse any thing, and thus
you may at your pleasure fly her without any fear of carrying.

Here ends the Book of Hawking, and hereafter insueth the names of all
manner of Hawks, and to whom they belong.
THese Hawks belong to an Emperor, and these be their names: an Egle, a
Bautere, a Melion: the simplest of these three will slay a Calfe, a Fawn, a
Roe, a Kid, a Trane, a Bustard, a Storke, a Swanne, or a Fox on the plain
ground: and these are not in lure, nor reclaimed, because they be so ponderous
to the Perch portatif: and these three by their nature belongs to an Emperor.

These Hawks belong to a King.
A Gerfaulcon, a Tercell of a Gerfaulcon, are due to a King.

For a Prince.
THere is a Faulcon gentle, and a Tercel gentle, and these be for a Prince.

For a Duke.
THere is a Faulcon of the Rock, and that is for a Duke.

For an Earl.
THere is a Faulcon Perigrine, and that is for an Earl.

For a Baron.
THere is a Basterd, and that is for a Baron.

Hawks for a Knight.
THere is a Sacre and a Sacret, and those be for a Knight.

Hawks for a Squier.
THere is a Lauer, and a Laueret, and those be for a Squier.

For a Lady.
THere is a Merlion, and that Hawke is for a Lady.

An Hawke for a young man.
THere is a Hobbie, and that is for a young man.

And these be Hawks of the Tower, and be both illured, and be called and
reclaymed.

FINIS.
The Book of Hunting: whereunto is added the measures of Blowing, very
pleasant to be read, for all those that have delight in the Art of Venerie.
AS in the Book of Hawking is discoursed and noted the proper terms
belonging to that Gentleman like exercise: So in like manner is showed in this
Treatise of Hunting, for all sorts of beasts of Venerie, and also is showed
all convenient terms, as well of Hounds as of Beasts, or any other that
appertain to the Art of Venerie.

Of Beasts of Venery there be four sorts.
THe Heart, the Bore, the Wolf, and the Hare.

Beasts of Chase there be five kinds.
THe Bucke, the Roe, the Martyron, the Fox and the Do: and these are the five
beasts of Chase, and if you chance to find any other, you shall call them
Rascal.

Of the Age of an Heart.
THe first year he is a Calfe, the second year a Broket, the third year a
Spayd, the fourth year a Stagge, and the fifth year a great Stagge, and at the
sixth year he is an Heart.

To know the head of an Heart.
YOu shall call the head of a Heart, Anteler, Riall, and Surriall, and when you
may know him by the top, you shall call him forked a Heart of ten, and when he
bears three in the top, you shall call him a Heart of twelve, and when he
bears four you shall call him summed, a Heart of sixteen, and from four
forward you shall call him summed of so many as he carries, how many so ever
they be.

Of a Heard, a Beuie, a Sounder, or a Rout.
OF Heart, Hind, Bucke, and Do, you shall ever say a heard, of Roes you shall
ever term a Beuie, of wild Swine a Sounder, and of Wolves a rout.

Of Herds, and their several kinds.
Either of red Dear, which only are Hearts or Hindes, or fallow Dear, which
are Bucke and Do, you shall call upon the view, twenty, a little heard,
forty a middle heard, and eighty a great heard. Now you shall understand that
a Bucke is the first year a Fawn, the second a Pricket, the third a Sorrel,
the fourth a Sore, at what time he will serve for a warrant, and the fifth a
Bucke of the first head.

Upon the view of a Heart, if he be a goodly Dear, you shall not call him
fair, but a great Heart, or a great Hind, or a great Bucke: But a Do you
shall call a fair Do, these are the true terms of a perfect woodman.

Of Roes.
Six Roes or under is a small Beuie, fenne is a middle Beuie, twelve is a
great Beuie, and still the greater the number, the greater is the Beuie.

Of wild Swine.
Twelve is a small founder of wild Swine, sixteen a middle sounder, and
twenty a great sounder.

Of Hunting the Roe, and the rights thereunto.
When you shall Hunt the Roe, you shall say, he crosses, and trauersses
before the Hounds, or if you say he doubles, it is not much amiss, although by
the laws of Sir Tristram, it is hardly permitted. You shall not say, this is a
great Roe-bucke, but a fair Bucke, and a fair Do. Dressing or breaking up of
a Roe, is called the Herdling of a Roe, which you shall perform in this sort,
you shall lay the head between the two forelegs, then take the two hinder
legs, and crossing them, put them, ore the two contrary fore legs, fastening
them by the loosening of the former joints, only taking out the bowels and
the blood, and cutting off the feet, wherewith you shall reward your Hounds,
dividing each foot into four pieces with your wood-knife, and putting them
amongst the bowels and blood, give it the Hounds, for this is their reward
only.

Of the Bore, and his rights.
TO speak first, of the age of the wild Bore, he is called the first year a
Pigge of the Sounder, the second year he is a Hog, the third year, a
Hog-stere, the fourth, a Bore, for then (if not before) he departs from the
Sounder, and then he is called a singler. Now, when you have slain the Bore,
you shall undo him, first: taking off the skin, and in dressing him orderly
divide the flesh into two and thirty bredthes, as it is termed amongst
woodmen. If he be slain by the strength of the Hounds, you shall give them the
bowels upon the ground in the same place where he was killed, which also is
called a reward.

Of the Hare, and her rights.
THe Hare is the King of all the beasts of venerie, and in Hunting makes the
best sport, breeds the most delight of any other, and is a beast most strange
by nature, for he often changes his kind, and is both male and female: and
this is a strange thing in the female, and only peculiar to this beast of all
other: after she has taken the Bucke, and comes to kindle, she brings
forth two Leuerits, rough, and in perfect shape, and retains two other in her
still, which she brings forth before the two first be well able to relieve,
and she is knotted for her third Leuerit, and all this at one time. We term
the place where she fitteth, her Form, the place through which she goes to
relief, her Muset, and when we find where she has gone, we call it the
pricking out of the Hare, except it be in the Snow, and then we call it the
trayning out of the Hare: her deceits, and shifts, before the Hounds, we call
her doubling, and her feeding, we call her relief. The Hare bears sewet, and
grease, she fimasheth, crottises, and ranges, although amongst the Huntsmen of
these latter times, these terms be worn out of use, only we say she
crottisses. When the Hare is gone to her Form, we say ever she is gone to her
seat, and we say the Hare sits, whereas, speaking of other beasts, we say
they lie, and the reason is, because she ever buckleth upon her legs, as
though Nature had taught her to have her feet ever in readiness, being of all
other beasts the most watchful: and she naturally desires to run up the
hill, because her legs be shorter before then behind, and the sewet, or
grease, which she bears, lies over the loins, between the chine and the
tail, yet we do not say the Hare is fat, but the Hare is white.

Now if you go about to Hunt this nimble and delicate chase, you shall when
you come to the kennell (in the morning) to couple up your Hounds, first gibell
once, or twice, to awake and stir up the dogs, then opening the kennell door,
the Huntsman shall use some gentill words of rattling, least in their have
coming out, they should hurt one another, to which the Frenchman uses this
word Arere, Arere, or as we say in English, soft, soft, ho, ho, ho, ho, once or
twice redoubling the same, coupling them as they come out of the kennell: and
being come into the field, and having uncoupled, the Frenchman uses to say,
Horse de coople auaunt, auaunt, once or twice, with So-how three times together.
We use to gibet once or twice to the dogs, criing a trayle, a trayle, there
dogs there: and if it be in a Bushie place, to beat the Bushes with your
Hunting-Pole, and cry, Hup wat, hup, which makes the dogs in trailing to hold
close together, crying often So-how. And if the Hounds have had rest, and being
ouer-lustie, do begin to fling about, the Frenchmen use to cry, Sweft amies,
Sweft, redoubling the same, or else, Arere amies, ho ho, and we in English use
to the same purpose, Soft ho, ho, here again ho, ho, doubling the same:
sometimes calling them back again, with a gibet or hallow, pointing with your
Hunting-pole upon the ground, and crying So-how.

Now, if some one of the Hounds, light upon a pure sent, so that by the manner
of his eager spending, you perceive it is very good, you shall cry There, now
there, or that's it, that's it, and to put the rest of the cry into him, you
shall cry Auaunt auaunt, ho, list a Talbot, list there, list, to which the
Frenchman uses Oles, a Talbot, le Vailant oies, oies troue le coward, in the
same manner with little difference: and if you find by your Hounds where a
Hare has been at relief, if it be in the time of green Corn, and if your
Hounds spend upon the traile merrily, and make a good cry, then shall the
Huntsman wind three motes with his Horn, which he may sundry times use with
discretion, when he seeeth the Hounds have made away, a double, and make on
toward the seat. Now, if it be within some field or pasture, where the Hare
has been at relief, let the Huntsman cast a ring with his Hounds to find
where she has gone out, which if the Hounds light upon, he shall cry, There
boys there, that, tat, tat, hoe, heck auaunt, list to him list, and if they
chance by their bramesicknesse to over shoot it, he shall call to his Hounds,
ho, again ho, doubling the same twice, and if undertaking it again and making
it good, he shall then cheer his hounds and say, There to him, there, that is
it, that tat tat, blowing a Mote. And note that this word so how, is generally
used at the view of any beast of Chase or Venery, but indeed the word is
properly, sa ho, and not so how, but for the better pronunciation and fullness
of the same, we say so how, not sa ho. Now the hounds running in full Chase,
the Frenchmen use to say ho ho, or Swef, alieu, doubt alieu, and we imitating
them, say, there boys, there, auant there, to him there, which terms are
indeed derived from their language. Now we find the old and ancient huntsmen
had diverse terms upon the view of the pricking of the Hare, which although I
find not very needful yet for the Love I bear unto antiquity, I will not
omit, as when the Hare has gone over some grassie place where her pricks
cannot be seen but only by stayning the grass, or by breaking some loose
mould, we say she sorths or resorths, but these terms I will leave to the
indifferent opinion of the skillful huntsman.

Now the reason why they say the Hare fumaces and crots or crottises is this,
we say the Hare fumayes, because she bears sewet, and she crottiseth because
she bears grease, and because she croucheth on the houghs when she lets it
go: So that we say all beasts which bear tallow, and stand upright fumayne as
they go, all that crouch or stoop do not.

The Hounds reward from the Hare.
WHen your hounds by fierce and good hunting have killed the Hare, you shall
reward them with the shoulders and the sides, with the head and all the
intrails, excepting only the gall (for it is precious and medicinal) which
reward being dealt them is called the Hallow of all good huntsmen. But the
hinder loins being excellent meat, and if the dressing be answerable, as
dainty venison as any can be, it shall be necessary to preserve them, and
bear them home for your own reward. Now there is another beast which goes to
relief as well as the Hare, which is a thing of especial good note amongst
all good huntsmen, and that is the Stag, who from the Annunciation of our Lady,
till Saint Peter's day, is ever said to go to relief as well as the Hare.

Of flaying and stripping of Beasts.
WHen beasts are slain, which shall be flayed, and which stripped, according to
their natures and kinds: know that all which bear sewet, and raunge, according
to the old English terms, shall be said to be flayed, the Hare only
excepted, which shall be said only to be stripped, or cased, and so of the
Otter or Badger, and generally so all beasts that go to relief.

More of the Roe, and his rights.
THe Roebuck is the first year a Kid, sucking on his Dam, the second year he
is called a Gerle, the third year a Hemale, the fourth year a Roe-bucke of
the first head, the fifth year a Roe-bucke: he uses to cast his horns at S.
Andrews tide, and his nature is to hide them in some Moore, or in some Marsh
ground, so that they are very seldom found, at Saint James tide he ever goes
to the Roe, which when he does, we say he goes in his turn. Now if you kill a
Roe-buck which is high in grease, you shall dress the venison of it as of a
Heart or a Hind: we use to say in rutting time that a Stag Bellows, a Bucke
groynes, and a Roe-bucke Kels, which they use in the time of their rut, and we
use to say the Fox and the Wolf do bark and houle.

The season of all sorts of Venerie.
THe time of grease begins at Midsommer day, and continues till Holy-rood
day, and then is the Stag, Bucke, and Sore in season.

The season of the Roe-buck is from Easter til Michaelmas.

The season of the Fox is from the Nativity till the Annunciation of our
Lady.

The season of the Do or Roe, is from Michaelmas till Candlemas.

The season of the Hare is from Michaelmas til Midsomer.

The season of the Wolf is as the season of the Fox.

The season of the Bore is from the Nativity till the Purification of our
Lady.

Now in the hunting of the Heart or Stag, being of all the most princely and
royal chase, it gives an exceeding grace unto a huntsman to use the terms
fit and proper unto the same, which I will here set down as received from
antiquity.

First when we see where the Heart has gone, we use to say, here he breaks,
or here appears his slott, and when the Heart enters a River or Poole (which
we call the soil) we say he descends, and when we find where he lept into
the River, we say he profereth, because we are uncertain whether he goes out
at some other place, or returns the same way again. And if he turn the same
way again, we say he Reprofereth and when we find where he has come out of
the other side of the river we call it the soil, and being come out of the
water, which filles his footsteps, we call it defoulling.

How you shall undo, or breake-vp a Heart.
AFter the fall of the Heart or Stag, and that the huntsmen are come in
together, and have winded the death of the Heart, you shall lay him upright upon
his horns which is called suing of the Heart, then let the best man in the
company, or some personage of account take the assay before the assembly, which
done, then first cut off the cods, then begin at the Jaws, and slit him down
to the assay, and so directly down to the cods: which being done, begin first
to slit the left leg before, and next the left leg behind, which you must not
forget in any hand before you go to the right side, which you must perform
next in the same manner: the which being done, begin at the cheek on the left
side, from which directly take off the skin down to the breast, and so down
to the assay, and to the place of the end: then begin at the other side, and
do the same in like manner, but cut not the tail of the beast (which we call
the single) away in any hand, but cutting off the skin let it remain to the
hanches, then spreading the skin abroad, let the body be laid upon the same,
very open, and begin first to make the Arbor, which is the conduit which
leads unto the stomach, guts and bag, and must be made fast and close by a
round knot, then cut out the shoulders, which must be done with a very long
broad poynted knife, wherein you must observe to keep the outside of the inner
skin whole, and lay it close to the side: then open the belly, and take out the
sewet: which is most excellent and needful for Surgions, then putting in your
hand under the breast bone, pull down the Arbor, and turning out the panch,
take away the rate, filling it with the blood and sewet, having a needle, and a
thread ready to sow it up with: then searching into the small guts, take out
the maw, and next the liver, laying them upon the skin, next after these take
out the bladder, then going to the vmbles, first loosen the aduancers which do
lean to the neck, and taking the throat or wessand, loosen the fillets very
circumspectly, which falls to the vmbles, and must be gathered and stripped upon
the wessand with the same, with the naues and sewet, and the flesh along the
midriff from both the sides, and so like a huntsman make up the vmbles with all
these together, only keep the lights upon the skin: This being done, slit the
skin wherein the Heart is infolded, and take away the hairs which grow about the
same, and in caruing the Heart you shall find a bone therein, which has the
virtue to cure the malady called the passion of the heart, then cutting away
the loose skirts, fill them with blood to save the melting of the grease: then
cut away the neck from both the sides, and take the head away from the neck,
taking out the tongue and the brain, laying them with the lights, the small
guts, and the blood upon the skin, to reward the hounds, which is called the
Querrie. The left shoulder of the Heart is, his fee which dresseth him, and so
is the skin and the right shoulder the Forresters fee.

The names of the several parts which make up the vmbles of a Dear.
THat part of the vmbles which cleave unto the throatbole is called the
aduancers, and the hindermost part of the vmbles be called the Forchers, the
other are called the crookes of the vmbles: Now in the Heart the chief part and
substance is called the Gargilon, and the other parts are called the crookes
and rundell.

The undoing or dressing of the wild Bore.
AS has been before said, you shall make two and thirty breadths of a wild
Bore. The first is the head, the next to that is the collar, which is the best
of the Swine, then two shields, and the two shoulders, and divide each side of
the swine into three parts, the pestell and the gambones, accounting a two,
then the two fillets, the legs and the feet divided into eight parts, dividing
the chine into four sundry pieces, then put the grease of the Bore into his
bladder and preserve the same as a thing passing medicinable.

Of the Vantlay, the Lay, and Relay, with Forloyning, and such like terms.
THis is properly called a Vauntlay in hunting, when the hounds are in the
chase of a Heart, and that you either doubt their speed, or find them far
cast behind, you do uncouple fresh hounds, and hallowing them in to the
Dear, force him to more speed then before, which may be a means to cast off
the other hounds which be behind. Now a Lay is this, when the Heart is in full
chase, you lying near to some covert, do there shake off some fresh hounds
into the cry, to supply and make it the stronger, if some ouerhaled Dogs
should happen to sink in the latter end of the chase. A Relay, is when you
shall uncouple some fresh hounds and cheer them, when as the rest of the Dogs
be already gone away with the Heart, and almost out of the hearing of the cry,
and this is called a Relay: Now for forloyning, it is, when you find any chase
within some covert, and some mute or light running hounds fall in with the
same, being stolen out of the covert: this is of huntsmen called Forloyning,
for they drive the chase so fast on before, that the huntsmen cannot lay the
rest of the cry in with the same.

Of the Horns of a Bucke.
THee Horns of every fallow Dear must be summed: or ever he be a Bucke he
must have two palmed Branches, and four and twenty Espelers, which when he
has, you may very well term him a very great Bucke: and this we see in
common experience, that often in Hunting of the Hare, or the Bucke: the Hounds
toward the fall of the chase, hold together, and come strongly, the reason
being threefold which makes them continue, and incourageth them much: the
first is, that when the Heart, or Bucke, begins to be imbosted, he casts
out of his mouth a froth, which is wonderful sweet to the Hounds, which he
leaves upon the herbs and Bushes: the second is, when he sweateth, the sweat
runs down from his body to his cleys, which the Hounds finding, know well
he sincketh: the third is, that by reason of his weariness, and toil, the
sewet is very strong, and hot, and easily enters the noses of the dogs,
which meruaylously encourages them to his death.

Beasts of the Chase of sweet foot and of stinking.
ANd those are the Bucke, the Do, the Bear, the Rayndeere, the Eylke, the
Spikerd, the Ottor, and the Martron.

There be beasts of the Chase, of the stinking foot: the Roe-bucke, and the
Roe, the Fulmard, the Iches, the Baude, the Gray, the Fox, the Squirrell, the
white Rat, the Sotte, and the Polcat.

The names of diverse Hounds.
FIrst there is a Greyhound, a Hound, and a Spanyel, a Bastard, a Mungrell, a
Mastiffe, a Lemor, Raches, Kenets, Terrors, Butchers Hounds, Dunghill dogs,
Trindle tails, and prick-eared Curres, and small Lady Puppies, that bear
away the fleas and diverse small faults.

The properties of a good Greyhound.
HEaded like a Snake, necked like a Drake, footed like a Cat, tayled like a
Rat, sided like a Breame, and backed like a Beam: The first year he learneth
to feed, the second year to field him lead, the third he is fellow like, the
fourth year none sike, the fifth year good enough, the sixth year he shall
hold the Plough, the seventh year he will avail great Bitches to assail,
the eight year lick ladle, the ninth year cart saddle: and when he is come
to that year, have him to the Tanner:

For the best Greyhound that ever you had,

At the ninth year he is full bad.

The proper terms and names of companies of Beasts and Fowls, with others.
AN heard of Hares. An heard of all manner of Dear. An heard of Swannes. An
heard of Craines. An heard of Curlewes. An heard of Wrenes. An heard of
Harlots. Any of Fesants. A Beuie of Ladies. A cete of Greyes. A Berry of
Conies. A Riches of Matrons. A Besenes of Firets. A brace of Greyhounds.ij. A
lease of Greyhounds.iij. A couple of Spaniels. A couple of running Hounds. A
litter of Whelps. A Kindle of young Cats. A Beuy of Roes. A Beuy of Quails. A
siege of Herons. A siege of Bytours. A sore or a suce of Mallards. A muster of
Peacockes. A walk of Snites. A congregation of people. An exalting of Larkes.
A watch of Nightingales. An host of men. A fellowship of Yeomen. A cherme of
Goldfinches. A cast of bread. A couple or pair of Bottles. A flight of Doves.
An unkindness of Ravens. A clattering of Choughes. A dissimulation of Birds. A
route of Knights. A pride of Lions. A sloth of Bears. A draught of Butlers. A
proud showing of Tailors. A temperance of Cooks. A stalk of Fosters. A host
of Soldiers. A laughter of Ostlers. A glosing of Tauerners. A malepertnes of
Pedlers. A thraue of Thresshers. A squat of Dawbers. A fighting of Beggars. A
singular of Bores. A drift of tame Swine. A harrase of Horse. A ragge of
colthor or a rake. A Baren of Mules. A trip of Gotes. A gaggle of Geese. A
brood of Hens. A badling of Duckes. A nonpatients of wives. A state of
Princes. A thought of Barons. A prudence of Vicaries. A superfluity of Nuns.
A school of Clerks. A doctrine of Doctors. A converting of Preachers. A
sentence of Judges. A damning of Jurors. An obeisance of servants. A seat of
Vshers. A tygenes of Pyes. A host of Sparrowes. A swarm of Bees. A cast of
Hawks of the Tower, two. A lease of the same Hawks. A flight of Goshawkes. A
flight of Swallows. A bilding of Rookes. A murmuration of Stares. A route of
Wolves. An untruth of Sumners. A melody of Harpers. A poverty of Pipers. A
subtlety of Serieants. A tabernacle of Bakers. A drift of Fishers. A
disguising of Taylers. A bleach of Souters. A smere of Curriours. A cluster of
Grapes. A Cluster of Churles. A ragge of Maidens. A raufull of Knaves. A blush
of Boys. An vncredibilitie of Cokolds. A couie of Partriches. A spring of
Teles. A desert of Lapwings. A fall of Woodcockes. A congregation of Plouers. A
covert of Cotes. A dule of Turtles. A scull of Friars. Abominable sight of
Monks A scale of Fish. An example of Marters. An observance of Hermites. An
eloquence of Lawyers. A faith of Merchants. A provision of Stewardes of houses.
A kerfe of Panters. A credence of Sewers. A leap of Lybards. A shrewdnes of
Apes. A sculke of Foxes. A nest of Rabites. A labor of Moles. A mute of Hounds.
A kenell of Raches. A suit of Lyam. A cowardnes of Curres. A sourd of wild
Swine. A stod of Mares. A pace of Asses. A drove of Nete. A flock of Sheep. A
gaggle of women. A peep of Chickens. A multiply of Husbands. A pontifica of
Prelates. A dignity of Chanons. A charge of Curates. A discretion of Priests.
A disworship of Scots.
Here follows the proper terms belonging to the breaking up or dressing of
diverse kinds of Beasts, and Fowls, and Fishes.
A Dear broken. A Goose reared. An embruing of Caruers. A safeguard of Porters.
A blast of Hunters. A threatening of Courteours. A promise of Tapsters. A lying
of Pardoners. A misbeleeue of Painters. A lash of Carters. A scolding of
Gamesters. A wondering of Tinckers. A waywardness of Hawards A worship of
Writers. A never thriuing of Iuglers. A fraunch of Myllers. A feast of Brewars.
A goring of Butchers. A trinket of Coruisers. A pluck of Shooturners. A
dronken ship of Cobblers. A cluster of Nuttes. A roge of teeth. A rascal of
Boys. An Egg tired. A Friar trimbred.
Of Fishes.
A Salmon chined. A Pike splated. A Hadocke sided. A Cheuin finned. A Sole
loyned. A Gurnard chined. A Tench sawsed. An Ele trouchened. A Breame splayd. A
Barble tusked. A Trout gobbetted. A Pigge headed and sided. A Capon sawsed. A
Cheuin frushed. A Conie vnlased. A Craine displayed. A Curlew v^ioynted. A
Fesant alete. A Quail winged. A Plouer ^uinsed. A Pigion thied. A Brawne
leched. A Swanne lift. A Lamb shouldered. A Kid shouldered. A Hen spoiled. A
Mallard vnbrased. A Heron dismembered. A Peacocke disfigured. A Butter vntached.
A Partrich alet. A Rail breasted. A Woodcocke thied.
You shall say thus.
A Heart harboreth. A Quire loggeth. A Tyman beddeth. Shouldring or leaving. A
Woodcock breaking. A Bucke lodges. A Roe bedeth. An Hare in his form. A Conie
sitting.
The true and perfect measure of Blowing
FIrst when you go into the field, blow with one wind one short, one long,
and a longer.

To blow to the coupling of the Hounds at the Kennell door, blow with one, one
long and three short.

The second wind, one long, one short, and a shorter.

To blow to the field.
BLow with two winds: with the first one short, one long, and two short.

With the second wind, one short, one long, and a longer.

To blow in the field.
With two winds, the first two short, one long and two short.

The second, one short, one long and a longer.

To uncouple thy Hounds in the Field: three long notes, and with three winds.

To blow to seek
TWo Winds: The first a long and a short, the second a long.

When the Hounds hunt after a game unknown, blow thus.
BLow the Veline, one long, and six short: the second wind, two short and one
long: the third wind, one long and two short.

To draw from Covert to Covert.
THree winds, two short, one long, and two short. The second, one long and a
short. The third, one long.

To blow the earthing of the Fox when he is couerable.
Four notes with four winds. The releife, one long, six short.

To blow if the Fox be not couerable.
TWo winds, one long and three short. The second wind long.

To blow the death of the Fox in field or covert.
THree notes, with three winds, the rechate upon the same with three winds.

THe first wind, one long and six short. The second, one short and one long.
The third, one long and five short.

The death of the Fox at thy Lords gate.
TWo notes, and then the relief three times.

The death of the Bucke, either with Bow or Hounds, or Greyhounds.
ONe long Note.

The knowledge upon the same.
TWo-short and one long.

The death of the Bucke with Hounds.
TWo long notes, and the rechate.

The price of an Heart ryall.
NIne Notes with three restes. The Rechate with three winds. The first, one
long and five short. The second, one long and one short. The third, one long
and six short.

To blow the call of the keepers of any Park or Forest.
ONe short, one long, and a longer. If the keeper answer you, blow two short
with one wind, and draw toward him. And after that blow one short.

When the game breaks covered.
Four with three winds, and the Rechate upon the same.

The stent when the hounds can hunt no further.

With three winds, the first, one long and six short. The second, one long and
one short. The third, one long.

Where the Fox is earthed blow for the Terriers after this manner.
ONe long and two short. The second wind one long and two short.

Note this, for it is the chiefest and principallest point to be noted.

Every long contains in blowing seven quauers, one Minome, and one quauer.

One Minome contains four quauers.

One short contains three quauers.

The end of the measures of blowing.
A Brief Treatise of Fowling.

Wherein is contained diverse proper Devises both of Baytes and others: with the
making of Bird-lime, the manner and order in using of it on your Lime-rods:
with many other special points, appertaining to that Exercise.

LONDON: Printed for John H^lme, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1614.

A Treatise of Fowling: Wherein is contained diverse proper Devises both of
Baytes and others: with the making of Birdlime, the manner and order in using
of it on your Lime-rods: with many other special points, appertaining to that
Exercise.
AS to the ornament of the Air belongs Birds and Fowls, (as Beda says)
which I mean in this Treatise to set forth. Birds be called Aues, as it were
divide without way: (as Pliny says) for their ways in the air are not
distinguished in certain, and birds with moving of their wings divide and
depart the air: but anon after the flight the air closes it self, leaving
no sign or token of their passage and flight. And Fowls be called Volucres,
and have that name of Volary to fly: for Birds fly with wings, (as Isidore
says) and therefore they be called Alites, as it were Alates: that is, moving
and rearing up themselves with wings: for they fly not without wings, nor
areare themselves from the earth up into the air without the benefit of their
wings or else a Bird is called Ales, and has that name of Alendo, feeding: for
he is fed of himself that feeds birds and fowls of heaven, and gives meat
to all flesh (as Isidore says.)

The condition and properties of Birds be known by diverse things, by their
substance and complexion: for the substance of birds and fowls be made of two
middle Elements that be between the two Elements that be most heavy and most
light: for in their compositions and making, Air and Water has most mastrie:
and therefore they have less of earthly heaviness, and more of lightness of
the Air then Beasts that go on land and swim in water. By lightness of the
substance they be boren into the Air (as Isidore says) and the Air that is
closed in the hollownes of pens and feathers, makes a Bird light, and
disposes and makes him able and helps him to mount upward. Also the
condition of Birds is known by generation, for they have a feminal virtue of
kind plight in them, and by virtue thereof they be kindly moved to increase
their kind by deed of generation, and to keep their kind in order: As it is
said of Aristotle, all Birds (says he) and Fowls when they bring forth Birds
lay Eggs, though it cannot be seen in all for scarcity: and the beginning of a
generation of a Bird, as it is said, it comes of the white, and his meat is
the yolke: and after ten days of the generation a Bird is full shapen in all
parts, and the parts be openly distinguished and known, but then his head is
greater then all his body: and if the Egge-shell were then broken, the head
should be found bowed upon the right thigh, and his wings spread upon the head.

When the generation of all the members is perfectly made, and liniation and
shape of the members, the shel breaks sometime the eighteenth day, or the
twentieth day, as it fares in Hens, and then the Chickins come out of the
shell alive, being full shapt, and sometime twain out of one shell. Among all
Beasts that be in order of generation, Birds and Fowls be most honest of
kind: for by order of kind Males seek Females with business, and love them
when they be found, and fight and put themselves in peril for them, and be
joined to them only, as it were by covenant and wedding, love and nourish, and
feed only the Birds that they get, and so kindly they deem and know between
sex and sex, male and female, except few (whose kind goes out of kind) as
Aristotle shows an example of the Partrich, that forgets his sex, that
is, to understand the dissolution of male and female, and so he says, that the
male leapeth upon the male, and the female upon the female. But of the Eggs
that come of such treading come no Birds, but they be as winde-Egges, and take
an evil savor of such treading, and an evil stinch. And Birds and Fowls
ingendering, keep couenable time, for in spring time when the generation
comes in, Birds cry and sing, males draw to company of females, and desire
each other of love, and woe with beakes and voice, and build Nests, and lay
Eggs, and bring forth Birds, and when the Birds be gendered, they feed and
nourish them, and bring them up, but when the office off generation is full
ended, then they cease off song, and depart from each other, and come not
together till the time of generation comes again.

Also Birds and Fowls be known by the places that they dwell in, for some
Birds and Fowls, as me seems, love company, and dwells nigh men, as Hens,
Geese, Sparrowes, Storkes and Swallows, and some dread and fly and be afraid
of conversation with men, as Fowls of woods, of mountains and marries, for by
their diverse complections they seek and challenge diverse manners of places to
inhabit in.

As we may see in our own country of England, some Fowls use some sheires
more then other some, and in some sheires there come none of some Fowls at
all: as they do in other sheires. For those that be cold and moist of kind,
use marshes and Rivers for gathering of meat, and making of Nests, for sitting
abroode, and for to bring up and nourish their young. Birds and Fowls that be
of more hot and dry kind, dwell on Mountains and on high Rocks and stones,
as Birds and Fowls that live by pray: as Eagles and Fawlkons, and other such,
to the which, kind gives crooked Claws and strong feet.

Also some wood-Fowles use to dwell in Woods and thick tops of trees, and some
of those be more mild then other, as Birds that sing in summer time with
sweet notes in Woods and Trees.

And other birds there be that live only in fields, and use to be therein, and
get their meat, and eat continually of the fruit of the earth, as Cranes and
Geese both wild and tame, and such Fowls love to dwell together, both on the
ground and in the air, and go and fly together in herds, and love their
own kind, and make a King among them.

Seeing I have declared the nature and property of Fowls in the air, I
thought good to set down some rules belonging to Fowling, to help to further
some in that practice, which would feign learn and has no teacher: which both
to the pleasuring of them, and small labor of my self, I have done my good
will.

First of Fowling with Limetwigges, and how we should set our Limetwigges for
sorts of Foul. You must choose Limetwigs of those twigs that grow on the body
of the Tree, and not of bow twigges, for that they be brittle and will not
hold, but will snap a two, but the twigs that grow on the body of the Tree, are
young bending twigs: and you must have to your whole set, a thousand lust.
There is also diverse other manners of Fowling, as with Nets, Springes, baits
and snares, with diverse other. But to speak first of Fowling with Limetwigs,
as some are set low and some high, and that is as we know the haunt of the
Foul that uses to that place, whether they be Geese, Duckes, Snipes, or
Hearnes, or Craines, or any other manner of Foul that uses to the place that
you set your Limerods in. If you set your Rods for wild Geese, you must
stick them in a manner upright, and half a yard a sunder, which is almost
narrow enough for a Snipe: if you should stick them any closer, there would no
Foul venture in at all, for the wild Goose is the subtilest Foul of any: for
when she lights, she lights most commonly in the deepest waters for fear
of deceit, and if she come out of the water to land, she will spy to see if
she can spy any thing before her: if she spy any thing, she will into the
water again: but ever when you stick your Rods, stick them so that the
tails of your Rods may be toward the water, (if you stick them by any River
side) and the heads of your Rods stooping from the River, that the Foul may
come with the Rods: for there is no Foul that will come against the Rods, nor
is able almost if they would: but being your Rods turned from the River, they
will be the bolder to go onwards, and then they can no way escape. And so
likewise set your Rods about the whole plat that you set, with their tails
outward, and their heads stooping inward, for the Foul will be the bolder to
go amongst your Rods, if they chance to light beside them: but you must give
good attendance upon your Rods, least that the Foul which is tangled do pick
themselves and get away again: but you must lie very close least that the
Foul do chance to spy you: but if it be somewhat darkish that you cannot
espy whether there be any Foul lighted among your Rods, then go to your Rods
and give ashue, and if there be any they will flutter straight and fly upward:
and if that there be none, then take your staff and beat the Rivers and Lakes
within half a mile compass once or twice, if you be able to compass it, or
more, and then shall you have them resort to your Limerods very thick: for he
that minds to catch any, must so travel that he leave no Lakes or Springes
unsearched, and see that your Limerods be set somewhat low, round about at the
very entering, for that is good for all manner of Foul: but if that they be set
high within, it is good reason that the Foul does shut her wings before she is
altogether at the ground, and see that you do set your Rods within one
another, about three quarters or half a yard a sunder almost: and if it freeze
hard, you must trim them with a little new Lime and Goosegrease mingled
together, and that will keep them long from freezing. And if there be any
special place which Fowls do resort to, as in deep waters and running
Rivers, and that the River is deep that you cannot set your Rods in, then take
a pole or a cord, and a long hay-rope that will wind round about the length of
the pole, then take your Lime-rods, and stick them very thick and loose
withal, and then lay your pole or poles over the River, and thrust the end of
your pole within the bank, and tie the other end of your pole next to you to
the bank side, and see that your pole be a pretty way within the water, and
that the heads of your Rods do stand close to the water: and thus may you set
as many poles or cords as you think the place does desire, and stick your
rods very loosely that they may go with the foul as soon as they touch them.

Good Spaniell a treasure to Fowler sure is,
To help him sometime, else often should he mis:
For water and land, it is a good thing
A Spaniell to have, his game for to bring.
Also there is another manner of way to catch in the water, with small cords
being tied overthwart the water, and lime them as you do Lime-rods with good
water-lime (as we call it) though indeed it is but Bird-lime, but it is
tempered to hold within the water, which it will do if you let the cords be
but a little within the water that it may scarce cover it: and if the water be
broad, then take a Cork or two and tie them to your Line to hold it up. This
is a pretty way and not to be suspected.

How to make Bird-lime very pure.
FIrst pill the bark from the Holly-tree about Midsomer, then boil the same
bark, till the utter rind will pill from the green bark, which will be
within one day, then lay the same inner bark so pilled in some close place on
the ground, and cover the same with some green weeds or docks till it be well
rotten, which will be within nine days or there about, then either beat it in
morters, or grind it very small, and then in some quick stream wash it very
clean: then put it in a pot of earth, and it will spurge within three days,
then take off the scumme twice or thrice, for if there be any filth left in it,
it would rot the Lime. After this keep the Lime very close till you have need
to occupy it, mingle a little Hogs grease with it, and so may you work your
Rods with it. Therefore as it is mentioned of of the Poet, the Wosell or Robin
is a great cherisher of the Holly-tree, as Terence says, Turdus cacat sibi
malum, he makes a Rod for his own tail, for the doung of the Wosell
cherishes much the Holly-tree, which afterward turns to his own sorrow.

A rare secret to catch Foul, as Geese, Duckes, or Birds.
NVxe vomica, otherways called in English the Spring Nut, being a pretty deal
of that sod in a pecke of Barley, or as little as you think good, or Fetchis,
or Wheat, and being strowed where wild Geese, or wild Duckes come, and as
soon as they eat of this, they will sound, and you may take them with your
hand. Also the powder of Nuxe vomica is good to kill Kites, Ravens, Pyes,
Crows, or any other carronous foul. Also take a piece of flesh and lay it in
the field, and make holes in it, then put in the powder of Nuxe vomica in every
hole, and so soon as any foul eats of this, they will be overcome, and then
they will fly, boult upright, and fall down to the ground straight again,
and so you may take them.

Another pretty way to make Birds drunk that you may take them with your Hand.
TAke Wheat or Fetches, or any other seed, and lay the same in steep in lees
of wine, or in the juice of Hemlocke, and straw the same in the place where
Birds use to haunt, and if they eat thereof, straightwaies they will be so
giddie that you may take them with your hand.

An excellent way to make a bait to catch wild Geese, and wild Duckes, and
all other sorts of Foul.
TAke the seed of Belenge, and the roots also, and steep them in water the
space of a day and a night: then sees the said seeds and roots in the water
that they were steeped in, so that the seeds may well drink and soke up the
water, then lay the said seeds or grain in the places where wild Duckes and
wild Geese are wont to resort, and they will eat this grain or seed so
prepared, and thereupon will sleep as they were drunk, and in the mean time
you may take them with your hands: but there must be a pretty quantity of
this, especially for wild Geese. This may also serve to take all other manner
of Foul that go together in sholes or companies. If you sees this grain in
Brimstone, and lay it in the places where Birds and Fowls are wont to feed,
and all that eat of it will fall down and die: but to keep them that they
die not, you must give them to drink Oil Olive, and shortly after they will
revive again. This is approved.

Of fowling with Lime-bush.
TO speak of Lime-bush there can be but little said, for it is commonly known
and practiced of all both in Winter and Summer. In Winter it is used with
Lime-bush, which we call Bat-fowling, along by hedges to catch those Birds that
rest in hedges, one to carry a light and another to beat the hedge: as also
the Lime-bush is used at house ends, Houels or Ricks: the Lime-bush is of
little cost, and is good for all times of the year. In Summer you may call
Sparrowes with a whistle to your bush. There is another pretty way to catch
Birds with your Lime-bush, if you can get but an Owl and set her upon an
hedge, and set a bush or two of one side of her, and when the Birds epsy her
they will flutter about her, and you shall catch good store of Birds. In Winter
you have many other ways good.

How to foul with Nets.
THere is another more certain, and more plentiful manner of fowling, which
is nothing at all paineful or unwholesome, the pleasure and neatness being
compared with the labor, and that is to foul with Nets, of which there be
diverse and sundry kinds: of which I count the Day-net to be the most
principal, both because the use is neat, gentlemanly, and mixed with a
moderate exercise, such as keeps the body warm without excess of heat,
and quickneth both the eye and understanding with a sharpness and vigilance
to observe the advantages and motions which beguile the poor innocent Birds,
these Nets likewise are most in use from the latter end of August, at what time
the corn is carried away, till Christmas, and the time of the day is from the
first appearance of the Sun till his declination: for you shall understand
that the days which are scouling, windy, rainie or mistie are in no wise for
this exercise. To speak of the shape of these Nets, they must be two distinct
and several Nets of one length, breadth, and wideness of mash, the length
would be about four fadome, and the breadth a fadome and somewhat better, the
mash would be inch and a half compass, and the substance thereof the best and
strongest browne-threed which can be made, look how broad your Nets are so
long at the full you must have four poales, which with a strong round cord
that runs all the length of your Nets you must fasten at both ends of your
Nets very strongly and stiffly, which being done, you shall see your Nets carry
out their true proportion, in the full shape and manner as they were knit,
rising and falling as if they were of one substance, which done, you shall lay
them on the ground if it be level and smooth, so as they may join edge to
edge and no more, and that when you will cast them open they may rise like a
gate with two leaves or doors, and fall each ^om other just their own
quantities, lying upon the ground flat, smooth, close, and as it were
unperceived, but if you shall lay them in the corn fields upon lands, then you
shall lay them so as they may either fall close together in the furrow, or else
upon the top of the land ridge, and when they open or divide that they may lie
flat and close either to the ridge or to the furrow, according to the advantage
of the ground. When you have carefully ordered this, and laid your Nets in such
sort as you would have them lie when they are drawn inward, then you shall
stake fast down to the earth with four little stakes, the four outmost
corners of your two Nets, so that the Nets may rise upon those stakes, to open
and shut as upon so many pair of hinges. This done, you shall lay the Nets
open one from another, so that those corners which was inmost may be outmost,
and from the two farthermost corners which shall be from you, have two lines
of strong round cord of two fadom and a half in length a piece, and joining
both the ends together, stake them down straight and fast at their uttermost
length as near as you can guess with your eye in the midst between your two
Nets, which done, you must have two other cords of the same length at the other
ends of the Net next unto you, and join those ends likewise together with a
knot or loope but by no means stake them down, but let them remain loose,
then to the knot or loope you shall fasten a single cord of twenty yards in
length, and your self going to the uttermost end thereof sit you down upon a
little low hassocke or stool made of straw or flags, not above a foot hie,
(which you must have provided for the purpose, to keep you from the cold
earth) and being so set, with all your strength pull the single cord unto you,
and you shall see the two Nets arise, and fall inward one to another so close
that they will join and kiss together, thus when you see they do yarely,
nimbly, and at ease, you shall then arise and throw them open again, and then
taking a live Lark, or Bird, but the Lark is the best, which we call the
Stale, and fixing her fast to a long stick mortessed in a stake, which you must
fasten in the ground, yet so as the stick may move up and down, and at every
motion the Lark may flutter with her wings. This Stale you shall place in the
midst between your Nets, and having a long string fastened to the stale,
which may reach to your own seat: you shall lay it by you, and ever and anon
with one of your hands pull it up and down to make the Lark flutter: which
done, you shall have a long Pole, hung about with shittle-cocks of feathers,
which you shall place within thirty or forty paces of your Nets, so directly
in the mouth of the Wind, that they may wherle and turn about with a
ceaseless motion: this will gather about you abundance of Larkes, and all sorts
of Birds: which being perceived, you shall go to your seat, and when you see
any Larkes, or other Birds stoop or play about your Nets, or but come flying
over your Nets, close-by the ground, you shall pull your line, and all within
the compass of your Net is your own, so you pull quickly and surely: then
must you run and take them out, and cast your Nets open again: and thus if
the weather be seasonable, you shall have sport at your pleasure: for I have
seen seauenteene, and eighteen dozen of Larkes taken in this manner in one
morning. These Nets are most proper for the taking of Larkes, and other small
Birds, the Merlyn and the Hobby.

There is another Stale belonging to these Day-nets, which is very proper and
excellent, chiefly at the latter end of the year, when Birds are least apt to
play: and that is a three-square piece of wood, a foot in length, and three
inches each square: it must be painted red, and be all inlaid with square or
round pieces of looking-glass, it must have a foot in the midst, which must
go into a wide socket of wood, made in a strong stake, which must be stricken
into the earth, then to the foot must be fastened a packthread, which being
wound many times about the foot, and issuing through a little hole of the
Stake, must come to your seat, so that when you pull it, the wood will turn
so round, that it will give a strange reflection, and so continuing the
turning, it will entice the Birds to play wonderfully: the place where you
shall set it, shall be by the stale your Lark, so that you may use one string
after another.

Of taking Plouers with Nets.
IT is the nature of the Plouer, especially the gray, which is ever the best,
and most daintiest, to fly together in shoales or companies, and for the most
part they will after feeding, haunt one place. The Nets wherewith you shall take
them differ nothing at all from the Day-nets, either in shape or manner of
laying, only they must in quantity be full as big again every way as the
Day-nets are: therefore when you have found the morning or evening haunt of
Plouers, you shall lay your Nets in the self same manner as I showed you for
the laying of the Day-nets, and as your Nets are larger, so your distance from
your Nets, must be big and longer, and your self must lie closer, for if you
can endure it, it is best to lie flat on your back, with your hands on your
lines between your legs: your stale must be a quick Plouer. The hour for the
laying of your Nets, is a little before day, in the morning, and a little before
the day be gone, in the evening: for the flight of Plouers, is at the spring of
day, and at the closing up of the day, when you may only see and no more. I
have seen at one pull a dozen, and sometimes two dozen taken, they come so
close and thick together. As for the green Plouer, he is easy to be taken,
either with Limetwigs, or any other ginnes, as has been formerly showed unto
you.

How to foul with other Nets.
ALso there is another manner of way to foul which is with Nets, but the use
of them is in the night, and the darkest night the better: and first of Fowling
with Nets, which we call in England most commonly Bird batting, and some call
it lowbelling, and the use of it is to go with a great light of Cressets, or
rags of linen dipped in Tallow that will make a good light, and you must have
a pan of plate, made like a Lantern, to carry your light in, which must
have a great socket to hold a great light, and carry it before you on your
breast, with a Bell in your other hand of a great bigness, made in manner like
to a Cowbell, but of greater bigness, and you must ring it always after one
order, with two to go with Nets one of each side of him that carries the Bell,
and what with the light that so does amase them, and the Bell that so does
astonish them, they will, when you come near them, turn up their white
bellies, which you shall quickly perceive, then lay your Nets on them and take
them: but the Bell must not stint going: for if it cease, then the Birds will
fly up if there be any more nigh. This is a good way to catch Larkes,
Woodcockes, and Partriches, and all other land-Birds.

To go with a Trammill.
TO go a trameling with a Net it is a good way, for two may go a broad with a
Trammill and catch store. You must have your Net seven yards of length, and
five in breadth: then take a couple of Poles or long rods, so long as your Net
is, and tie your Poles to your Nets all along the length of your Nets, one of
one side, and the other of the other side, then may you take your Pole in your
hand, and pluck out your Pole out of breadth, and one go in one through of the
land and another in the other through, and go along in lands, and carry your
Net as far forwards as you can, and when they hear you tread, then will they
flutter up into your Net, which you shall quickly hear, then let down your
Net to the ground, and gripe them, and take them from under your Net: but if it
be in a very dark night, that you cannot see them, you should have a little
close Lantern, that one may perceive no light, but when it is opened to see to
take them, but we commonly make shift without.

To set Springes.
ALso some use to set Springes, which is made with a running knot, and a stick
in the ground to yerke up with another stick which the Foul must tread on,
which is in manner like to a trap or running knot which is made of hairs,
which is good to be set in frost time, in springs, for Woodcockes and Snipes,
or any other Foul if they come where that springes be set, or you may set them
in Lands in the very through for Woodcocks, where you know that they haunt, and
in Summer you may set them in bushes either for Woodcocks or any other Birds,
and you must look that the stick that they tread on be somewhat round and
brown, for if it be white, they will fear to tread on it: and your nouse must
be made of horse hair, and the blacker the better.

The end of Fowling.
A Brief Treatise of Fishing: with the Art of Angling.

Wherein is contained the perfect making of all manner of Implements
appertayning to that exercise: the diverse and several Baytes for every kind
of Fish, with the best times of the year for the taking of them.

LONDON: Printed for John Helm, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstanes Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1614.

A brief Treatise of Fishing, with the Art of Angling: wherein is contained
the perfect making of all manner of Implements appertayning to that Exercise:
The diverse and several Baytes for every kind of fish, with the best times of
the year for the taking of them.
AS the wise man says, a good spirit makes a merry and flourishing age, and
causes a man to live long, and truly in my opinion, these three things are a
medicine and a preservative for the same. The first of them is a merry thought.
The second is labor not outrageous. The third is, diet measurable. The first,
if a man will evermore be in a merry thought, and have a glad spirit, he must
eschew all contrarious company, and all places of debate, where he may have any
occasion of melancholy, and he must eschew all places of Riot, which is
occasion of surfeit and sickness, and he must draw him to places of sweet
air, and eat nourishing meats and delectable.

As now I mean to discribe these disports and games, to find the best of them
as truly as I could, and although the right Noble and worthy Duke of york,
late master of the game, has described this Art of Fishing, and the rest of
these pleasures and disports. For hunting in mine opinion is laboursome, for
the Huntsman must follow his hounds, sweating full sore, he blows till his
lips blister, and when he thinks he has a Hare, full often it is a Hedgehog.
Thus he chaseth up and down, and knows not sometimes at what. He comes
home at night rayne-beaten and pricked, and his clothes torn all to pieces,
wetshed and all myrie, and some of his hounds lost and some surbated. Such
griefs and many other happen unto the huntsman, which for displeasing of them
that love it I dare not report: thus truly me thinks it is not the best game,
and disport of the four.

Hawking is labourous and troublous: for as often the Faulkoner loses his
Hawks, as the Hunter his Hounds, then is his game and disport gone, yea, and
full often he cries and whistleth, till he almost loses his wind, his Hawke
sometime takes about, and gives no mind nor sight to him, for when he would
have her fly, then she will bathe: with mis-feeding she will have the Frounce,
and many other diseases that brings to souce. Thus by proof, this is not the
best disport and game of the said four. In my opinion the game of Fowling is
the simplest: for in winter in cold weather, the Fowler can do no good, but in
the hardest and coldest weather, which is grievous: for when he would go to his
ginnes, he cannot for cold: many a devise he makes, and yet in the morning his
fortune is hard, when he is wet up to the wast. Many discommodities I could
show, but for offending I let them pass. Then since it is so, that Hawking,
Hunting, and Fowling be so laborous, that none of them may be a mean to a
merry spirit, which is the cause of long life, unto the sayings of the wise in
his Parables: doubtless then it must follow, that Fishing with the Angle is
most delectable, for all other are troublesome and laborous: For in some kind
of fishing it makes the Fisher, through wet, so cold, that many and sundry
times there ensues diverse infirmities through the same: But the Angler he has
no cold, no disease, no impediment, except it be through himself: for he can
lose but a Line or a Hook at the most, which he may make again at his own
leisure, as he shall be taught hereafter: so then, is not his loss grievous if
the fish break away with his Hook, that is the most: for and he fail of one
he hitteth of another: and if he quite fail, yet he has his wholesome walks,
his pleasant shades, the sweet air, the excellent smells of the sweet Meddowe
flowers, which makes him hungry: he hears the melodious Harmony of Birds
and other Fowls, which he thinks is better then the noise of Hounds, the
blast of Horns, or all the cry that Hunters, Faulkners, or Fowlers can make:
and if the Angler do take fish, then has he a merry sper it, and a glad
heart. But who so will use this exercise he must rise early, which is
profitable to man for the health of his body: For as the old English Proverb
is, who so does rise early shall be holy, healthie, and happy. Thus I have
showed in this Treatise, that this disport and game of Angling, is the very
mean to induce a man to a merry spirit. And to the content of all those that
have delight in these exercises, I have collected this Treatise following,
which you may use at your pleasure. But yet before I proceed to this Art of
Angling, I will speak something of the use of Nets, and how fish are to be
caught therewith, for as Angling is for pleasure and delight, so this is for
profit and use for the Commonwealth, furnishing Markets, and families, with
such provisions as are necessary for the food and sustenance of man. And of
Nets you shall understand there be diverse kinds, as the great draught Net, the
flewe Net, the shooue Net, the pursse Net, and the leap Net, of all which I
will give you a little short taste or assay, yet such as shall be large enough
for your understanding and benefit: and first of the draught Net.

The use of the draught Net.
THe draught Net of all other is the largest, for it is for Rivers, Ponds or
large Waters: some are of thirty fadomes, some twenty, some fifteen, and some
ten: it is made of the strongest packthread, with a very small and narrow
mash, in the midst it draws strayter and strayter down, like a pursse of a
fadome and a half long, and gathered together exceeding close in the last end,
at which must be fastened some heavy stone or other poysse, which may make it
sink to the bottom: it must be in breadths a fadome and a half or better,
which is the depth of any ordinary Pond or River, the nether side must be all
plummed with lead very thick, to make it sink, and the upper side must be
full of floates, made of light Sallow such as will not sink: at the two
outmost ends, you must have two strong Poles, full as long as the Net is deep,
to whose ends you must stretch the ends of the Net, and then casting it into
the Pond, or River, by strong cords, which must be fastened to each end of the
Net, see you divide the Net to each side of the Pond or River, drawing it with
great leisure and constancy, being sure that you neither pull the leads from
the ground, nor suffer the floats to sink under the water, then you shall have
diverse men with long Poles or staves, that shall go on each side of the River
before the Net, and beat up the Fish, leaving none in any holes sedges, bushes,
or such like, but driving them into the midst of the water: then being come to
the end of the Pond, or to the best landing place of the River, those with the
poysse, beating the water that the fish may not pass by them, he on the
contrary side, shall bring over his lines, and bring the two Net Poles close
together, then casting the floate a side from you, and drawing the plummed side
to you, you shall stoop down and close by the ground, leasurely draw in the
plumd side of the Net, another likewise with more leisure drawing in the floats
after you: then be assured, that what fish soever was within the compass of
your drawght, you shall find it in the Rod of your Net, which as soon as you
have taken out, and clenced your Nets, well and sufficiently, you may then if
you please, cast it in again: and thus you m^ fish down any River as many
miles as you please, or have liberty so to do, or else you may draw as many
Ponds as are to your liking.

Of the flewe Net, and of his use.
THis flewe Net is a Net of some two fadome and a half in length, and one
fadome in depth, made of a very straight mash, and with a long rod in the
midst, the nether side plummed and the upper side floated: it is most proper
for small brokes or little rundles, and the manner to fish with it, is in this
sort. You must first have a stop Net, which is a plain Net, without any rod,
only plummed, floated and polde at both ends, and this putting into the brook
make it fast to each side of the bank, then go down the River from it some
threescore or fourscore yards, and there cast in your flewe, then make it
likewise fast to each side of the bank, so as you may be sure that the
plummets are at the bottom, and that there be a good place for the landing of
your Net: then take your poysse, and go to your stop Net, and there begin to
beat, and so continue beating down, till you come close to your flew, then
whilst one beats still, let the other on the contrary side let loose the
slew, and throwing the cords over unto you, draw the slew leasurely in, and
land it as you did your drawght-Net, and look what fish was within that
compass of water, you shall find it in the rod of your flewe Net, then taking
up your stop Net, put it in where you took up your flew and so fish forward,
and thus you may do the whole length of a Brook if you have time and leisure.

Of the Shooue-Net, or Pursse-Net.
THe Shooue-Net and Pursse-Net, are much what of one shape and making, being of
a small compass, made round and fastened to a great Bow of Wood set to a long
Pole, they have long rows going from the Bow, which like a pursse, are
gathered together in the nether end, the use of fishing with them, is most
commonly in Pits, blind dikes or other small standing waters, into which much
fish is got by reason of inundations and ouerflowes of water. If therefore in
any such pits or little dikes you shall epsy any fish you shall take your
shooue-Net and thrusting it down to the bottom before the fish, you shall
with your poy go behind him and beat the water, and as soon as you see him
shut you shall ierke up your Net, and be sure to find the fish in the rod
thereof: if you draw your shoue-Net along any dike to that end which is stopped,
or if there be no end stopped, then to some other person who stands a pretty
way from you beating the water with a poy, be sure all the fish within that
compass will be in the rod of your Net: This is a good Instrument for the
poore-man, and often gets him food when he wants it.

Of the Leape-Net.
THe Leap net is a square long Net set out with wood, having in it many rods
or purses which are distinguished from the outward Net with round hoopes of
wood, it is most commonly fastened to a leap, and laid in Mill dams, or in
straight waters, after any fall of great rain which makes a white water: it
is most proper for the taking of Eeles, but because it is to lie still all the
night or all the day, and thereby has in it small exercise or practice, I
think it not meet to trouble your memory much therewith, but now to ret^^ne,
and pursue my discourse in land of the excellent Art of Angling.

IF you will be perfect in this Art of Angling, you must first learn to make
your Implements: that is to say, your Rod, and your Lines of diverse colors:
This done, you most know how you must angle, and in what place of the water,
how deep, and at what time of the day, and for what manner of Fish, and what
weather, how many impediments there be in fishing, and specially in Angling,
and what bait belongs to every Fish every time of the year: And how you
shall make your baytes breed, where you shall find them, and how you shall
keep them for the most part: How you shall make your Hooks of Steel, and of
Osmond, some for the Dub, some for the Flote, and for the ground. And here I
will teach you how you shall make your Rod: you shall cut it between
Michaelmas and Candlemas, of an ell and a half long, being the arm of a great
Hasell, Willow or Aspe, and beth him in a hot Oven, and set it even and
straight, and let it cool a month: then take a cord, and bind it fast about,
and bind it to a form, or to a piece of square timber: then take a Plummers
wire that is even and straight, and sharp the one end, and heat it in a fire
of Charcole, and burn the hole quite through in the pith, beginning at both
ends, and go on to the middle: you may burn the hole with a Bird-broch, but
let the last broch be bigger then any of them before, then let it lie and cool
two days, unbind it and let it lie in the smoke, or the roof of a house,
till it be through dry. In the same season cut a yard of green Hasell, and
death it even and straight, and let it dry with the staff: and when it is dry
make it fit for the hole in the staff, unto the half length of the staff:
and to fill the other half of the crope, take a fair shute of black Thorn,
Crab tree, Medler, or else of Juniper, cut in the same season, and well bethed
and straight, and set them fit together, so that the crop may enter all into
the said hole, then shave your staff and make it Taper-wise, then hoope the
staff at both ends with long hoopes of iron, or latten, after the cleanliest
manner, and a pike in the neather-end fastened with a running wire to take in
and out of your staff, and set your crop a handful within your upper end of
your staff, in such wise that it be as big there as in any other place
above, then arm your staff down to the fret with a Line of six hairs, and
double the Line and fret it fast on with a piece of a bow: And thus you shall
make you a staff to walk with, and no man shall think that you have such
Implements about you: It will be very light and nimble to fish with at your
pleasure, and is always very ready and necessary.

AFter you have thus made your Rod, you must learn to color your Lines of
hair after this manner. You must take of a white horse tail the longest
hairs you can get, and the bigger and rounder they are the better it is,
depart them into six parts, and color every part by himself in diverse
colors: as yealow, green, tawnie, brown, russet, or duskie color: And for
to make your hair take a good green color, you must take a quart of Ale, and
put into it half a pound of Allom, and put your hair and all together in a
little Pan, and let them boil softly half an hour, then take out your
hairs, and let them dry, then take a pottle of fair water, and put it into a
Pan, and two handfuls of Waxen, and press it with a Tyle stone, and let it
boil softly the space of an hour: and when it is yealow on the scumme, put
therein your hairs, with half a pound of Copperous beaten into powder, and
let it boil the space of going of half a mile, and then set it down and let
it cool the space of five or six hours, then take out the hair and dry it,
and it will be the best green for the water that can be, and the more that you
put of Copperous to it the better it will be.

For to make your hair yealow.
Dress it as before with Allom, and after with Oldes, or Waxen, without
Copperous or Verdigrease.

To make another yealow.
TAke a pottle of small Ale, and stamp thereinto three handfuls of Walnut
leaves, and put it together, and then put in your hair till it be as deep as
you will have it.

For to make Russet hair.
TAke a pint of strong Lee, and half a pound of Sote, and a little juice of
Walnut leaves, and a quart of Alom, put them altogether in a Pan, and boil
them well, and when it is cold put in your hair till it be as dark as you
will have it.

To make your hair brown.
TAke strong Ale and Salt, and mingle them together, and put your hairs two
days and two nights, and they will be a perfect color.

For to make a tawnie color.
TAke Lime and Water, and put them together, and then put your hairs therein
four or five hours, then take them out, and put them into a Tanners Ose one
day, and it will be as fine a tawny color as can be for your purpose.

The sixth part of your hair, you shall keep still white for lines, for the
double hook to fish for the Trout, and for small lines to lie for the Roch and
the Dace.

When your hair is thus collected, you must know for which waters, and which
seasons they shall serve, the green color for all clear waters from April
until September. The yealow color in every clear water from September to
November. For it is like the Weeds and other kind of grass that is broken in
the River. The russet color serves all the Winter until the end of April,
as well in Rivers as in Pooles or Lakes.

The brown color serves for the water that is blackish in Rivers or other
Waters: the tawny colors, for those Rivers or Waters that be heathy or moorish.

Now you must make your lines after this order, First you must have an
instrument for the twisting of your line. Take your hair and cut a handful at
the end, because it is not strong enough, then turn the top to the tail over
each alike, and make it into three parts, and knit every part by himself, and
knit the other end altogether: then put that end fast into your instrument into
the clift, and make it fast with a wedge, four fingers shorter then your
hair, then twine your warpe one way alike, and fasten them in three clifts
alike straight, then take that out at the other end, and let it twine that way
that it desires, then strain it a little, and knit it for undoing, and that
is good.

So when you have so many links as will suffice for a line to make it long
enough, then must you knit them together with a water knot, or a Dutch knot,
and when your knot is knit, cut off the void shore ends a straw breadth from
the knot, thus shall your lines be fair and even: and also sure for any manner
of Fish.

The finest practice is in making your hooks, and for the making of them you
may have your several kind of tools that you may do them artificially. A
seemy clam of iron, a bendor, a pair of long and small tongues, and a knife
somewhat hard and thick, an Anuill, and a little Hammer.

And for a small Fish you shall take the smallest quarrel Needles that you can
find of Steel: and you shall put the Quarrel in a fire of Charcole till it
be of the same color that the fire is, then take it out and lay it to cool,
and you shall find it well alaide to file, then raise the beard with your
knife, and make the point sharp, then alay him again, or else he will break
in the bending, then bend him as he will serve for your purpose: you shall make
them of great Needles, as Shoomakers Needles, Taylers Needles, or Imbroderers
Needles: but look that they will bow at the point, or else they be not good,
and when you have beaten flat the end of the hook, fyle him smooth that it
fret not the line, then put it into the fire, and give it an easy red heat,
then suddenly quench it in water, and it will be hard and strong. And for to
have knowledge of your Instruments that be necessary, without the which you are
not able to accomplish your desire, that is, your Hammer, Knife, Pinson, Claem,
Wedge, File, Wrest, and a Needle.

When you have made your hooks, then you must set them on according to their
strength and greatness. First take small red silk, and if it be for a great
hook then double it and twist it, and for a small hook let it be single, and
therewith fret the line whereas you will have the hook stand, a straw breadth,
then set to your hook and fret it with the same third the two parts of the
length that it shall be fret in all, and when you come to the third part, then
turn the end of your line up again double, to the other third part, then put
your third in at the hole twice or thrice, and let it go each time about the
yard of your hook: then wet the hook and draw, and look that your line lie
evermore within your hooks, and not without, and then cut of the lines end,
and the third as nigh as you can, saving the fret.

Thus you know with how great hooks you shall angle to every Fish, now I will
tell with how many hairs you shall angle for every Fish. First for the Menow,
with a line of one hair: for the waring Roch, the Bleake, the Gudgeon, and the
Ruff, with a line of two hairs: for the Dace and the Roch, with a line of
three hairs: for the Perch, the Flounder, and Bremet, with a line of four
hairs: for the Cheuin, the Breame, the Tench, and the Eele, with six hairs:
for the Trout, and the Grasing, Barbell, and the great Cheuin, with nine
hairs: for the great Trout, with twelve hairs: for the Salmon, with fifteen
hairs, and for a Pike, with a chalk line made in the color aforesaid, armed
with a line, as you shall hear hereafter. When I speak of the Pyke, your
lines must be plumed with lead, and the nerest plumbe to the hook, be a foot
off at the least, and every plumbe of the quantity of the bigness of the
line. There be three manner of plumbes: for a ground line, renning, and for the
flote: set upon the ground line lying, ten plumbes, all joining together on the
ground line, renning, nine or ten small: the floate plumbe shall be heavy,
that the first pluck of any Fish may pull it into the water, and make your
plumbes round and smooth, that they stick not on stones and weeds.

THen you shall make your flotes in this manner. Take a piece of a Cork that
is clean without holes, and bore it through with a small hot iron, and put
thereinto a quill or pen even and straight: always note that the greater the
hole, the bigger the pen, and shape it great in the midst, and small at both
ends, and especially sharp in the nether end, and make them smooth on a
Grindstone, and look that the flote for one hair be no bigger then a Pease,
for two hairs as a Bean, for twelve hairs as a Walnut, and so every line
must have according to his portion. All manner of lines that be not for the
ground, must have flotes: and the renning ground line must have a flote, and
the lying ground line must have a flote.

NOw I have taught you to make your hairs, hereafter I mean to show you the
Art of Angling. You shall understand that there is three manner of anglings:
the one is at the ground for the Troute, and other Fish: an other is at the
ground at the Arch or stang where it ebbeth and flows, for Bleake, Roch, and
Dace: the third is with a flote for all manner of Fish: the fourth, with a
Menowe for the Trout without plumbe or flote: the fifth is renning in the same
for the Roch and Dace with two hairs or one hair, and a fly: the sixth is a
dubbed hook for the Troute or Grayling. And for the first and principal point
in Angling, look that you keep you from the sight of the Fish, either stand
close on the land, or behind some Bush: for if he see you, then your sport is
marde, for he will not bite, and look that you shadow the water as little as
you can, for it is that which will make him be gone: for if the fish be fraide,
he will not bite a good while after. For all manner of Fish that feed by the
ground, you must Angle for them to the bottom, so that your hook shall run
and lie on the ground: and for all other Fish that feeds above, you shall
Angle for them at the midst of the water, or above the midst, or below the
midst whether ye will, for the greater the Fish, the nearer he lies to the
bottom of the water, and evermore the smaller the Fish, the more he swimmeeh
above. The third good point, is when the Fish biteth, that you be not too
hasty to smite nor to take: for you must abide till the bayte be far in the
mouth of the Fish, and then tarry no longer, and this is for the ground: and
for the flote when you see it pulled into the water, or else carried softly upon
the water, then smite, and look that you never ouer-smite the strength of your
line for breaking: and if it be your fortune to smite a great Fish with a small
line, then you must lead him in the water, and labor him there till he be
drowned and ouerc^^e, then take him as well as you can, and ever take heed
that you strain him not over the strength of your line, and as much as you can
let him not go past your lines end from you, but keep him ever under your
Rod, and hold him as straight as your line will sustain, and bear his leapes
and his plunges as well as you can with your Crope and your hand.

Here I will declare unto you, in what place of the water you shall angle,
either in Poole or standing water, and according to the deepenes of the said
water.
THere is no great diversity in any place of a Poole, so it be deep, for it
is a prison to all fishes, and therefore the sooner taken: but in the River the
best Angling is where it is deep, and clear by the ground, as gravel or clay
without mud or weeds, and especially if there be any whirling in the water, or
a covert, as a hollow bancke or great roots of Trees, or long weeds fleeting
above the waters, where the fish may hide themselves at certain times when
they list. Also it is good to Angle in stiff streams, and also in valleys of
waters, and in flood gates, and Mill pits, and at the bank where the stream
runs, and is deep and clear by the ground, and in any place where the fish
haunt and have any feeding.

Now you shall understand the best time of the year, and the best times of the
day, from the beginning of May to September. The best time of their biting is
from four a clock in the morning until eight a clock, and from four in the
afternoon till eight at night: but it is not so good in the afternoon as in
the morning: and if it be a cold wind and a lowering day, it is much better
then a clear day: and the Poole fishes will bite best in the morning.

And if you see at any time of the day the Trout or the Grayling leap, angle
for him with a Dub, according to the season of the year, and where the water
ebbeth and flows: the fish will bi^e in some place at the ebb, and in some
place at the flood, after they have had resting behind Stanges and arches of
Bridges, and other such places.

The principal time to angle in, is a lowering day, when the wind blows
softly: for in Summer when it is very hot then it is naught: from September
until April in a fair sunny day, it is very good angling, and if the wind at
that time have any part of the Orient weather, then it is naught: and when it
is a great wind and that it snoweth, rayneth, or hayleth, or is a great
tempest, as Thunder or Lightning, or a swolty hot weather, then it is naught
for to angle.

You shall further understand that there be twelve empediments, which cause a
man to take no fish, as it does most commonly hap. The first is if that your
harness be not fit and well made. The second is if your baytes be not good and
fine. The third is, if you angle not in biting time. The fourth is, if the fish
be fraid with the sight of man: The fifth, if the water be red, thick, and
white, of any flood lately fallen: the sixth, if the fish stir not for cold:
the seventh, if the weather be hot: the eight, if it rain: the ninth, if it
hail or snow: the tenth, if it be a tempest: the eleventh, if it be a great
wind: the twelfth is, if the wind be in the East, and that is worst, for
commonly neither in Winter nor Summer, the fish will bite if it be in the East:
the West or the North is good, but the South is best of all.

And now I have taught you to make your harness, and how you shall fish
therewith in all points. Now there rests to show you what baytes be best for
every kind of fish, for all times and seasons of the year, which is the
principal part of this Art: without the knowledge of which baytes, all the
rest before were to no purpose: for there is no man can make a fish to swallow
the hook without the bayte, and therefore I have set you down every fish with
his proper bayte belonging to the time, and best time to catch them as
follows.

And because the Salmon of all fish is the most Stateliest, therefore I mean
to begin with him the first.
THe Salmon is a very gentle fish, but he is troublesome to take, for commonly
he is in deep places of great Rivers, and for the most part he will keep him
in the midst of it, that you may not come at him, and he is in season from
March until Michaelmas: in which season you may angle for him, with these
baytes, if you can get them. First with a Red worm in the beginning and ending
of the season, and also with a Grub that breeds in a dunghill, and especially
there is a sovereign bayte that breeds in a water Dock, and he biteth not at
the ground, but at the flote: you may take him when he leapeth, in like manner
as does a Trout or a Graling, and these are approved bayts for the Salmon.

The Trout, because he is a dainty fish, and also a very fervent biter, he is
the next that I mean to show you the time to catch him. From March until
Michaelmas he lies on the gravel, and in a stream you may angle for him
with a line, lying or running, saving in leaping time, and then with a Dub, and
early with a running ground line, and in the day time with a flote line. You
shall angle for him in March, with a Menow hanging on your hook, by the
neathernesse without Flote or Plumbe, drawing up and down the stream till you
feel him fast. Also it is good to angle for him with ground lines, and with
red worm, for the most part, and in April take the same baytes, as also the
Canker that breeds in a great tree, and the red Snaile, you may take the
Bob-worme under the Cowtord, and the silk worm, and the bayte that breeds
on the Fern leaf. In June take a red worm and nip off his head, and a
Cod-worme, and put it on the hook. In July take the Cod worm, and the Red
worm together. In August take a flesh fly, and fat Bacon, and bind them
together about the hook. In September take the Red worm and the Menow. In
October take the same. These be specially for the Trout at all times of the
year. From April until September the Trout leapeth: then angle for him with
a dubbed hook, according to the mouth: which dubbed hooks you shall find in
the end of this Treatise, and the mouths with them.

The Grayling, of some so called, of others Vmbre. It is a right delicate fish
to man's mouth, and you may take him as you do the Trout, and these are his
baytes. In March and in April the red worm, in May the green worm, a little
braised worm, the docke canker, and the Hawthorne worm. In June the bayte
that breeds between the bark of an Oak. In July a bayte that breeds on
the Fern leaf, and the great red worm, and nip off the head, and put it on
the hook, and a Codworme before. In August the red worm and a Docke worm,
and all the year after a worm.

The Barbell is a sweet fish, but he is a very queasie meat, and very
dangerous to eat: for commonly he brings an inconvenience to the Febres, and
if he be eaten raw, he may be the cause of man's death, which has oftentimes
been seen, and these are his baytes in March and in April. Take fresh
Cheese, and lay it on a Trencher, and cut it in small pieces, the length of
your hook, then take a Candle and burn it on your hook till it be yealow,
and then bind it on your hook with Fletchers silk, and make it rough like a
Welbede, this bayte is good all the Summer season. In May and in June take the
Hawthorne worm, and the great red worm, and nip the head off, and put a
Cod-worme on your hook before, and this is a very good bayte. In July take the
red worm for the chief and the Hawthorne, together with the waterdock leaf
worm. In August and for all the year, take the tallow of a sheep, and of
soft Cheese, each of them alike, and a little Honey, and temper them together
till they be tough, and then put a little Flower into it, and make it in small
pellets, and that is a good bayte to Angle with at the ground, and look that
it sink in the water, or else it is not good for that purpose.

The Carpe is a dainty fish, but there is no great plenty of them, and
therefore I write least of him, but he is a very subtle fish to take, for he is
so strong in the mouth that there is no weak harness will hold him: and as
touching his baytes I have little knowledge thereof, and therefore I would be
loath to write more then I know and have proved: but I am sure the red worm,
and the Menow are good baits for him at all times, as I have heard diverse good
Fishers report.

The Cheuin is a stately fish, and his head is a dainty morsel, there is no
fish so strongly enarmed on the body with scales, and because he is a strong
biter he has the more baytes, which are these: In March, the red worm at the
ground: for commonly then he will bite there at all times of the year, if he
be any thing hungry: In April, the Canker that breeds in the tree, the worm
that breeds between the bark of the tree of Oak, the red worm, and the
young Froshes when the feet be cut off: also the Stone Fly, the Bob under the
Cowturd, the red Snaile: In May, the bayte that breeds in the Ozier leaf,
and the Docke canker put on the hook, and a bayte that breeds on the Fern
leaf, the Redworme, and the bayte that grows upon the Hawthorne, and a bayte
that breeds on the Oak leaf, and a Silk worm, and a Codworme together: In
June, take the Creker and the Dorre, also a Red worm the head being cut off,
and a Codworm before, and put them on the hook: also a Grub that breeds in
the dunghill, a great Grasshopper, and the Humble Be in the Meadow: Also young
Bees and Hornets, and the Fly that is among the Pismires hills. In August, take
Wort worms, and Maggots, till Michaelmas. In September, the Red worm, and a
young Mouse not haired, and the House comb.

The Breame is a noble fish and a dainty, and you shall angle for him from
March until August with a Redworme, and then with a Butterflye, and with a
bayte that grows amongst green Reed, and a bayte that breeds in the bark
of a dead tree: and for Bremets take Maggots, and from that time forward all
the year take the Red worm: and in the River, brown bread.

The Tench is a good fish, and heals, in a manner, all other fish that be
hurt, if they may come to him, he is most parts of the year in the mud, and
stirs most in June and July, and in other seasons but little: he is an evil
biter, and his baytes be these: For all the year, brown Bread tosted with
Honey, the likeness of a bantred loaf, and the great red worm, and take the
black blood in the heart of a Sheep, and Flower and Honey, and temper them
all together, so make them softer then paste and annoint the Red worm
therewith, both for this fish and for others, and they will bite much the
better thereat at all times of the year.

The Perch is a dainty fish, and passing wholesome, and a great and earnest
biter: In March, the Red worm, the Bob under the Cowtord. In April and May,
the Slowthorne worm, and the Cod worm. In June, the bayte that breeds in an
old fallen Oak, and the great Canker. In July the bait that breeds on the
Ozier leaf, and the Bob that breeds on the dunghill, and the Hawthorne
worm, and the Cod-woorme. In August, the red worm and Maggots, and all the
year after take the red worm for the best.

The Roch is an easy fish to take, and if he be fat and penned then is he good
meat, and his baits are these. In March take the red worm. In April, the
Bob under the Cowturd. In May, the bait that breeds in the Oken leaf, and
the Bob on the dunghill. In June, the bait that breeds on the Ozier, and the
Cod-worme. In July, the House-flyes, and the bait that breeds on an Oak, and
the Not-worme, and Mathews maggots, until Michaelmas, and after that the fat
of Bacon.

The Dace is a gentle Fish, and is very good meat: in March his bait is a red
worm, and in April the Bob under the Cowturd. In May the docke canker, and
the bayte on the Slowthorne, and that on the Oken leaf. In June the Codworme,
and the bait on the Ozier, and the white Grub on the dunghill. In July take
house flies, and the flies that breed in Pismire hills, the Cod-worme and
Maggots till Michaelmas, and if the water be clear, you shall take fish when
other shall take none, and from that time forth do as you would do for the
Roch: for commonly their biting and their baytes be a like.

The bleake is but a feeble fish, yet is he wholesome. His bait from March til
Michaelmas be the same that I have written for the Roch and the Dace, saving
all the summer you may angle for him with a house fly, and in Winter season
with Bacon, and with other baits, as hereafter you shall learn.

The Ruff is a very good and wholesome fish, and a free biter: but subtle
withal, and you must angle for him with the same baits and the same seasons
of the year as I have told you of the Perch: for they be like in fish and
feeding, saving the Ruff is less, and therefore you must have the smaller
baits.

The Flounder is a wholesome fish and free, but a subtle biter, in this manner:
for commonly when he sucketh his meat, he feeds at the ground, and therefore
you must angle for him with a ground line lying, and he has but one manner of
bait, and that is a red worm, and that is most chief for all manner of Fish.

The Gudgeon is a good fish of his bigness, and he biteth well at the ground,
and his baits for all the year is the red worm, Cod-worme and Maggots, and
you must angle for him with a flote, and lot your bait be near the bottom,
or else upon the ground.

The Menow when he shines in the water is bitter, and though his body be but
little, yet he is a ravenous biter and eger, and you shall angle for him with
the same baits that you do for the Gudgeon, saving they must be small.

The Eele is a queasie fish, and a rauenor and a deuourer of the brood of fish,
and the Pyke is also a deuourer of fish, I put them both behind all other fish
for to angle. For the Eele, you shall find a hole in the ground of water, and
it is blew and blackish, there put in your hook till it be a foot within the
hole, and your bayte shall be a great angle with a Menow.

The Pyke is a good fish, but that he is a deuourer of all fish as well of his
own brood as of other, and therefore I love him the worse: and for to take
him ye shall do thus. Take a Roch or a fresh Herring, and a wire with a hook
in the end, and put it in at the mouth, and down by the ridge, to the tail of
the Herring, and then put the line of your hook in after, and draw the hook
into the cheek of the fresh Herring, then put a plumbe of lead on your line a
yard from you hook, and a flote in the midway between, and cast it in a pit
where the Pykes use, and this is the best and surest way to take: and three
manners of taking him there is. Take a Frosh, and put it on your hook,
between the skin and the body, in at the neck, on the back half, and put on
the flote a yard thereto, and cast it where the Pyke haunteth, and you shall
have him. Another way: Take the same bayt and put it in, safe tied, and cast it
into the water with a Cork, and you shall not fail of him: And if you mind
to have good sport, then tie your cord to a Goose foot, and you shall see good
haling beweene the Goose and the Pyke, who shall have the better.

Now you know with what bayts and in what seasons of the year you shall angle
for every kind of fish, now I mean to tell you how you shall keep and feed
your quick bayts. You shall keep them all in general, and every one several
by himself, with such things as they are bred in, and as long as they be
quick and new they be fine: but when they be in a slough or dead, then they
are naught: Out of these be excepted three broodes: that is, Hornets, Humble
Bees and Waspes, which you shall bake in bread, and dip their heads in blood,
and let them dry. Also except Maggots, which when they be bred great with
their natural feeding, you shall feed them furthermore with Sheep tallow.
And take heed that in going about your disports you open no man's gates, but
that you shut them again. Also you shall not use this sport craftily for
covetousness, to the increasing and sparing of your money only, but
principally for your solace, and for the maintenance of your bodily health. For
when you purpose to go on your disports in fishing, you will not desire
greatly many persons with you, which might let you of your game, and then your
mind may be well given to the serving of God, as in prayer or otherwise, and
in so doing you shall eschew and avoid many vices, as Idleness, which is the
principal leader to vice, and it is commonly seen that it brings diverse to
their utter destruction. Also you must not be too desirous of your game, but
with discretion, that you mar not other men's game, and your own to, as too
much at one time, which you may lightly do, if in every point you fulfill this
present Treatise: but when you have a sufficient mess, to content your self
for that time. Also you shall apply your self to the nourishing of the game,
and in destroying of such things as shall be the deuourers of it.

FINIS.

