BRITAINS BVSSE. OR A COMPVTATION as well of the Charge of a Busse or
Herring-Fishing Ship. As also of the gain and profit thereby.

With the States Proclamation Annexed unto the same, as concerning
Herring-Fishing.

By E. S.

LONDON, Printed by William Iaggard for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at
his shop at the South entry of the Royal Exchange. 1615.

Britains Busse.
Diverse Treatises have been published here in England, some long since, some
very lately, all of them inviting to the building and employing of English
Fishing ships, such as our neighbor Hollanders call Busses, Principally to
fish for Herrings, with which kind of Fish (Almighty GOD of his rich bounty,
blessed be his name therefore) has abundantly stored his Majesty's Streams,
on the coasts of England, Scotland, and Ireland, above all the known parts of
the world.

Four Books I have seen of this Subject.

One called the British Monarchy, written An. Dom. 1576. which is nere 40
years past.

The second entitled Hitchcocks New-yeares gift, printed about 30 years since.

The third, named Englands way to win wealth, and to increase Ships and
Mariners, published within these 2. years, whose Author* (I have heard) was
trained up from his youth: and very expert both in Navigations and Fishing.

The fourth styled the Trades Increase, now newly come abroad.

In all which four Books, but especially in the two last, the Necessity,
Faculty, Profit, and Use of that Fishing trade is proponed and handled.

After I had read three of the former Books, and before the fourth and last
came to light, I was much affected with the business. And the more I consider
it, the more is my affection confirmed and increased. And out of vehement
desire to see this work, which I conceive to tend so much to Gods glory: To
the honor of our noble King: To the general strength, safety, and commodity
of all his Majesty's large Kingdoms and Dominions: And to the private and
peculiar benefit and advancement of every private Undertaker therein. I say
out of vehement desire to see this work in hand, and the prosperity thereof, I
enquired as often (as conveniently I could) what Busses or Fishing Ships were
in building on our Coasts, or were bought or used by any English.

At length I was informed (and that very truly) that one Roger Godsdue
Esquire, of Bucknam Ferry in Norfolk, had begun to apply himself to this
worthy work, and had on the Stocks at Yarmoth five Busses; whereof I
understand one is since that time launched, and that the other four are in
good forwardness. But when upon enquiry after the Gentleman, I heard him to be
a man of such undoubted honesty and integrity, besides his other virtues and
worth, Methought I did see God beginning this good business in a good hand.

Soon after I heard that another worthy gentleman, namely Sir William Haruie
Knight had on the Stocks at Lyme-house in the yard of M. Steuens, Shipwright,
another very fair large Busse near as big as any Flemish Busse: which Busse I
did after see my self when she was in launching; and she is now in the Thames
before Radcliffe.

But beside these two Gentlemen, I have not yet heard of any English that have
yet applied themselves that way.

Now because after many considerations of that matter, I perceived that none of
the four Treatises before mentioned, had set down in very plain particulars
the exact charge of Building, Manning, Victualling, and furnishing of such a
Busse; and of the gain or profit, which by Gods blessing in probability may
redounde yearly to the particular Owner and Aduenturer of such a Ship.

And conceiving Hope that the publication of such particulars, might be some
furtherance of the Action.

I resolved to bestow my best labors to get such Particulars; and to that end
I travailed and conferred with such both Ship-wrights, Mariners, Fishermen,
Netmakers, and others, as I thought to be able to inform me in the Premises,
that so I also might bring Straw or Mortar to that noble Building. Or that I
might pick or teaze Occam, or do somewhat, that am not able to do much.

And for that upon conference with some experienced in this Herring Fishing, I
am informed that a Busse of thirty five Last, that is, of seauenty Tun, is of
a very good and meet size or scantling, wherewith in a four months fishing
yearly to make the gain or profit by Herring only; Hereafter in particular
set down, besides her employment yearly also Cod-fishing, etc.

I have therefore here imparted such Instructions as I could attain unto.
1. FIrst, of the precise dimentions or proportions of such a Busse of 35 Last.
That is of 70 Tun.

2. Secondly, the uttermost Charges of such a Busse, and the particular of all
her Mastes, Yardes, Sails, Flagges, Pullies, Shiuers, Tackling, Cables and
Anchors, together also with her cock-boat and oars.

3. Thirdly, the particulars of her Carpenters store, and of her Stewards
store, and of her weapons, and the charge of them all.

4. Fourthly, the particulars of her Herring Nets, and of the VVarropes and
other Ropes, Cords and lines, Cork, Pynbols or Buys belonging to those Nets,
with the particular charges of them all.

5. Fifthly, the particular Tools and Implements used in dressing and packing
of the said Herrings, and their particular prizes.

6. Sixthly, the charge of one hundred Last of Herring Caskes or Barrels, and of
Salt needful for the packing of C. Last of Herrings.

7. Seventhly, the particular charge of four months victuals for 16 persons to
serve in the said Busse: and the particular charge of Physic and Chirurgerie
helps for those xvi. persons.

8. Eighthly, the particular utmost wages of the said xvi. persons for the
said four months.

9. Lastly, the gain or profit (by Gods blessing) hoped for, by such a four
months Herring-fishing.

Afterward is also set down the yearly Charges of repayring the said Busse:
and of her apparel and Furniture. And also of the said Nets, etc.

Together with the rest of the second years Charge and Gain.

By which second years Charge and Gain, you shall see the charge and gain of
every year following so long as the Busse lasts: which (by Gods blessing and
good usage) may well be twenty years at least.

HE that will give a probable estimate of any Charge, must tie himself to some
particular proportions, which he must admit as the very just allowances.

But I would have none to imagine that I intend these particulars to be such as
may not be varied.

If any be so vain to make scornful constructions, I holdsuch fellows not
worth the thinking on.

A Busse of 35 Last, that is of 70 Tons, must be on the Keele in length 50
foot And on the Maine beam 17 And her Rake on the Stem forward 16 And her Rake
on the Sterne-post Eastward on 7 And her wast from her lower edge of her
Deckledges unto her Ceelings 13

li s d Such a Busse with her Cabins, Cook-roome and other rooms fitted for
the sea, and to this fishing service, together with her Ruther, Ironwork, bolts
Chaine*bolts, Shroud-chaines, Nails, etc. and her Cockboat and Oars will cost
at most 260. li All her masts and yards will cost at most 8 0 0 The making and
fitting her said masts and yards 2 0 0 Her pullies and Shiuers at most 2 0 0
Her rigging or Tackling ropes of the fittest sizes or scantlings, will come to
at most 8 C. wai. of ropes which will cost at most 30 s a C. which comes to 12
0 2 Her Maine-saile and two Bonnets must be 11. yards deep and 16 clothes
broad of Ipswitch Poledauis, which comes unto 176 yardes of poledauis, which at
ix d. a yard will cost 6 12 0 Her Maine top sail must be 8. yards deep, and
eight clothes broad at the yard, and sixteen clothes broad at the Clewes,
which takes 96. yards of Bungy Canuas, which at eight pence a yard will cost 3
4 0. Her foresaile, the Course, and two Bonnets must be x. yards deep and 12
clothes broad, taking up 120 yards of Ipswitch Poledauis, which at ix. d. a
yard comes to 4 10 0. Her Mizen or Backsaile must be 4 clothes broad and 5
yards deep, which takes 20 yards of Bungy cloth, which at 8 d. a yard comes to
0 13 4* So as all the Sails take 420 yardes of Saile-cloth of both sorts,
which 420 yards (at 28 yardes to a bolt) make almost 15 bolts of cloth. And the
Sailemaker will have for his work ^ s. a bolt which comes to 3 15 0 Boltropes
for all the said Sails. And Twine etc to make the said: Sails withal, will
cost at most 1 15 8 304 10 0

li. s. d Two flagges or Fannes to observe the wind by with their Staves, at
ii. s. a piece 0 4 0. Two or three hand pikes of Ash at most 0 2 0 Two
Waterskeits to wet the Sails at xviii. d. a piece 0 3 0 Two Water-buckets at
vi: d. 0 1 0 Six Maps to cleanse the Busse vvithal, at vi. d 0 3 0 Compasses and
boxes 2. at x s. a piece at most 1 0 0 Houre-glasses 3 or 4 at most at xviii, d
0 6 0 A Lantern for the poope 0 10 0 Two other lanthornes at xviii d. a piece
0 3 0 Fenders or long poles 4. at ii. ^ 0 8 0 Long Oars vi. at iii s. iiii d 1
0 0 An Iron Crow of 15 li. at iiii d 0 5 0

Cables. 4. One Cable of 9 Inches about, and C fadome, that is CC yardes long,
will weigh about xviii. C 81. 0. 0 A second Cable 8 Inches about, and of the
length abouesaid will weigh about xv. C. A third Cable 7 Inches about, and of
like length will weigh xi. C. The fourth Cable 7 Inches about, and of like
length, will weigh x. C. So all the four Cables will weigh about 54 C weight,
which 54 C. weight of Cables at 30 s. C will cost Ancors 4 One Anchor to weigh
about iiii. C 18 0 0 A second to weigh about iii. C A third to weight about ii.
C. A fourth to weigh about ii C Four Ancor stocks and the fitting of them at
x s. a piece ii l. So all the 4. Ancors waighing xii. C weight at xxvi s. viij
d a C. will cost xvi. li. And so the 4 Anchors and their four stocks will
come to

li. s. d. stewards store.
Short Iron pothangers two at 12 d 0 2 0 pothookes 2 pair at x. d 0 1 8 A
large Iron peaze pot of 5 or 6 Gallons 0 10 0 A large copper fish kettle about
32 li. wa. at xv. d per li. 2 0 0 A wodden scummer or two 0 0 4 Wodden Ladles 2
or 3 0 4 A Gridyron at most, 0 2 6 A frying pan 0 2 6 Pipkin two or three, 0 0
6 A Chasing dish of Iron 0 2 0 A small fire shouell and a pair of Tongs 0 2 6
A pair of Bellows 0 0 8 Trayes 2 at xv d. a piece 0 2 6 Trugs 2 at ix d. a
piece 0 1 6 Wodden platters 12 at iiii. d 0 4 0 Wodden Pottagers 24 0 2 0
Trenchers 4 dozen at iii. d 0 1 0 Baskets for Mes-bread 6. at 4. d 0 2 0
Beere-cans bigger and lesser 12 0 6 0 Taps and Fawcets 4 or 5. 0 0 2 wodden
Butter-seales a pair 0 1 0 Leaden waights, 4 li -- 2 li -- 1 li -- li -- q li
-- at ii d 0 1 4 Tinder-boxes 2. furnished well 0 2 6 Candles at most for 16
weeks xxx li. at iiii d 0 10 0 Candlestickes with Iron wyers 6. at 8 d 0 4 0 A
Candlebox with lock and key at most 0 5 0 5 8 0.

li. s. d Carpenters store
Iron Essles to mend the Shrowd-chaines withal if any should chance to
break-10-of 1 li. a piece at 4 d. a pound 0 3 4 Fids or Hammers two at 12 d 0
2 0 Orlup Nails 3 C. at xvi d. a C. 0 4 0 Scupper nails ii C. at vi. d. 0 1 0
Spikes v li. at 4 d. a pound 0 1 8 Six penny nails iii C 0 1 6 Four penny
nails ^ C 0 1 0 pumpe nails 3 C. at ii d. a C 0 0 6 A Saw 0 3 0 Sum 0 18 0
Weapons, etc.
Half pikes 10 at ii. s 1 0 0 Muskets with Bandaleers, Rests and Molds 6 6 0 0
Gunpowder 6 li. at x d. 0 5 0 Leaden bullets 6 li. at iii d 0 1 6 7 6 6

The Busse aforesaid must have fifty Nets.
li. s. d Nets with the Appurtenances.
EAch Net must be 30 yards, that is 15 fathom long upon the rope. 3 1 3 Each
net must also hang full and not stretched on the rope. Therefore each net
before it come to be fastened to the rope (being stretched out) must be 35 yards
long. Each Net must be in depth 7 deepings. Each deeping must be a fathom, that
is two yards deep. So as each net of 7 deepings, takes 7 times 35 yards of
Lint or netting (of 60 Masks or mashes or holes deep) which comes to just 245
yards of Lint or netting, of a fathom breadth or depth. Which 345 yards of Lint
or netting (ready made or knit) will cost iii d. a yard, which comes to for
one net -- 3 li. 1 s. 3 d. Each net must have a net-rope on the top of the net.
So each net much have 15 fathom of net-rope. 0 2 0 This net-rope must not be a
stiff tarred rope but lithe and gentle, and is best made of old ropes. This
15. fathom of net rope for each net will cost, ii s. Round about the head and
two sides of each net (but not on the bottom) must be set a small cord about
the bigness of a Bow-string which is called head-roping or nostelling. 0 0 9. So
each net takes 15 fathom, and 7 fathom and 7 fathom, which comes to 29 fathom
of head-roping. There is twenty fathom of this headroping in a pound weight of
it. So each net takes almost a pound and of this head roping, which is sold for
6 d. a pound. So the pound and costeth,

The 7 deepinges of each net are to be sowed each to other altogether with a
small thread called Twine Masking. 0 0 6. Each net takes a pound of this
Twyne-masking, which is sold for Each net is to be fastened to her ropes with
short pieces of Cords or lines of two foot long a piece called Nozzels. 0 1 0.
These Nozzels are tied very thick, viz. at 4. mashes or holes asunder. So each
net takes 150. Nozzels. These Nozzels are sold ready cut out for viii. d. C. So
150 nozzels cost Each net must have a rope 5 or 6 Fathom long and an Inch
through, that is 3 Inches and better about called a Seazing to fasten the net
unto the Warroape. This Rope will cost iiii. d. a fathom. So for the said six
fathom 0 2 0. The seaming or sowing together of the said seven deepings of
each net, and the head roping of each net as aforesaid, And the bringing of
each net to the rope or setting on the Nozzels, All this I say, is usually done
by a woman working it at 4 d. a day meat and drink, or x d. a day at most
finding her self, which woman will so dispatch at least two or three nets in a
day. So each net so finishing, will cost at most 0 0 5. Every net must be
tanned in a Tanfat which will cost at most 0 0 10.

li. s. d Nets: Warropes etc.
All the said 50. Nets being finished must be hanged al arow upon a strong
large rope called a Warrope, which must be in bigness 4. inches about. 0 18 2
This Warrope must be as long as all the said 50. Nets, that is fifty times 15.
fathom long, that is, 750. fathom of Warrope. So each Net takes up 15.
fathom of Warrope. An C. weight, that is, 112. li. of this rope is sold for at
most 30. s. that is almost iii. d. q a pound. An C* fathom of this rope will
weigh near CCCC. weight. At which rate each fathom will weigh almost iiij.
li. which at iii. d. q a pound will cost xiiij. d. ob. a fathom. So for each
Net 15 fathom at xiiij. d, ob. will cost Each Net must have half a pound of
Legorne Cork placed all along the Net at half a yard asunder: At which
distance each Net takes 60. Corkes, or 60. half pounds of Cork, that is, 30.
pound of Cork at ii. d. ob. a pound, that is 23. s. 4. d. a C. will cost 0 6 3
Those 60. Corkes must have 60 Corke-bands to tie them to the Net: each
Corkeband must be a fathom long. 0 1 6 These Corke-bands are made of the
aforesaid head-roping line, whereof 20. fathomes weigh a pound as aforesaid.
So the said 60 fathomes will weigh 3. pound, which at vi. d. per pound will cost
For every two Nets there must be a Pynboll or Bwy hooped, which will cost viii.
d. So to each Net allow for half a Pynboll or Bwy 0 0 4 Each Pynboll or Bwy
must have a Rope of a yard long, to faste^ it to the Warrope, which yard of
rope will cost at most vi. d. So to each Net allow for half such a rope 0 0 3

li. s. d. So it appears by the particulars aforesaid, that each Net with
Warropes and all other her appurten^nces, will cost, 4, 15, 3, 238. 2. 6. And
^o ^h said ^o Nets at 4. 15. 3, a piece will cost in all

li. s. d. Tools and Implements used indringe and packing of Herring.
Gipping or Gilling knives 14 at 4 d. 0 8 0 Roaring baskets or scuttles 24 at
vi d 0 12 0 Addesses for Coopers work 6. at ii. s 0 12 0 Drifts to beat down
hoops 12. at i d 0 1 0 Irons to pull up barrels heads 6. at 4 d 0 2 0 Iron
pipes to blow and try Caskes, whether they be tight or no 3. at 8 d. 0 2 0.
Bended hoopes to supply such as shall chance to break or fly off, for an C
Last, that is of 12 C barrels 24 C of hoopes at ii. s. a C 2 8 0. Iron marks
or letters to brand the barrels withal, viz. A B. for the best, S for the
second, W. for* the worst, at 8 d. a piece at most, 0 2 0. 4 7 0 Caske.
Herring barrels, an hundred Last, that is twelve hundred barrels, which
contains two and thirty Gallons a piece, will cost fifteen shillings a Last,
that is xv d. a piece, which comes to 75 0 0 Salt.
A water Bushel, that is 5 peckes of Spanish salt, will salt a barrel of
Herrings. 60 0 0 So to salt the said Clast, or 12 C. barels of Herrings, must
be 12 C bushels of salt, that is at 40. bushels of salt to a weigh) just 30
weigh of salt, with at 40 s. a weigh, that is xii d. a bushel, will cost*

Memorandum. A Flemish Busse does often take seven or eight Last of Herringes
in a day. But if God give a Busse one day with another but two last of
Herringes a day, that is, twelve Last of Herrings in a week.

Then at that rate a Busse may take, dress, and pack the said whole
proportion of an C last of Herrings (propounded to be hoped for) in eight
weeks and two days.

And yet is herein allowance made for victualles and wages for xvi. weeks, as
after follows.

Of which 16 weeks time if there be spent in rigging and furnishing the said
Busse to sea, and in sailing from her port to her fishing place; if these
businesses I say spend two weeks of the time, and that other two weeks be
also spent in returning to her port after her fishing season and in vnrigging
and laying up the Busse. Then I say (of the xvi. weeks above allowed for)
there will be xii. weeks to spend only in fishing the Herring.

Victual and Fuel for xvi. Men and Boys, serving in the Busse aforesaid, for
the Herring-fishing time, and the time of her setting out: and of her return
home, viz. from the 24 of May, until the 21. of September, which is 112.
days, that is xvi. weeks, that is four months.
li. s. d Beer.
TO allow for every Man and Boy a gallon of Beer a day (which is the allowance
made in the Kings ships) that is for the said 16 persons, 16 Gallons, that is
just half a Herring Barrel full a day, that is, for the whole voyage or xvi.
weeks, or C xii. days, 56 such barrels of Beer, Seven of these herring
barrels contain a Tun of Beer: so as the said 56 herring barrelles full of
beer, do make just 8 Tun of beer, which at 40. s a Tun comes to 16 0 0.
Biscuit.
To allow for every man and boy (as in his may. ships) a pound of Biscuit a
day, that is for every man and boy for the said 4 months or 112. days, an C
weight of biscuit, that is for the said 16 persons, 16 C weight of biscuit,
which at 13 s 4 d. a C. will come to 10 13 4 Oatmeale or Peaze
To allow amongst the said 16. persons a gallon a day, that is half a pint a
piece every day, that is 112. gallons for them al, for the said 112 days or 4
months, which comes to just 14 bushelles, which at 4. s. a bushel will cost 2
16 0 Bacon.
To allow also for each Man and boy 2 li. of Bacon for 4 meals in a week, that
is for each person for the said 16. weeks 32 li. that is 4 stone of bacon, and
so for the said xvi. persons 64. stone of bacon, which at 2. s. 2 d. a stone,
will come to 6 18 8. Freshfish.
They may take daily out of the Sea, as much fresh-fish as they can eat, 0 0
0. Butter.
To allow every Man and boy (to butter their fish or otherwise to eat as they
like) a quarter of a pound of butter a day, that is, for each person ^ 8 li. of
butter, that is half a firkin of Suffolkbutter, and so for the said 16. men 8.
firkins of butter at 20 s. the firkin 8 0 0. 44 8 0.

li. s. d Cheese.
To allow every of the said 16 men and boys, half a pound of Holland Cheese a
day, that is, for each person 56. pound, that is, half a C. weight of Cheese.
And so for the said 16. persons to allow viii. C. weight of Holland Cheese,
which at ii. d. ob. the pound that is, 23 s. 4. d. the hundred will cost 9 6 8
Vinegar.
To allow amongst the said 16. persons three pintes of Vinegar a day, that is
for the said 112. days, 42 Gallones, that is a Teirce of Vinegar, which at vi.
li. a Tun, Caske and all will cost 1 0 0 Fuel.
To allow for the dressing and boiling of their victual, viii. C. of Kentish
Faggots, that is seven Faggots a day, and 16. Faggots over in the whole time,
which viii. C. of Faggots at viii. s. a C. coms to 3 4 0 13 10 8

li. s. d. Sum of all the said 4. months victual is 57 18 8

I am informed that the Dutch Busses have not half so much allowance of
Victualles: But take almost al theirs out of the Sea.

li. s. d Physic and Surgery helps
Sperma Caeti and a box for it 0 3 4 Stone pitch and a box for it 0 1 4
Aquauita 16 quarts is 4 gallons, at iii. s. 0 12 0 Zant-oyle 16 pintes is 2
gallons, at vi. s. 0 12 0 Honny, 16 pintes is 2 gallons, at v. s. 0 10 0 Sugar
4 pound, at i. s. 0 4 0 Nutmegges a quarterne of a pound 0 1 0 Ginger a pound 0
0 6 Pepper 16 oz. that is a pound 0 2 0 Wages to the sixteen men
Balsome and other Salues and old Linen 0 10 0 Syzers a pair 0 0 6 A Steel
Pleget to spread playsters 0 1 4 A Chest with partitions for all these things 0
12 0 3 10 0 To a Master for the said 4. months at v. li. a month that is, i.
li, 5, s. o a week, or 4, s. ii. d. a day for 6 days or iii. s. ob, q a day
for seven days. 20 0 0 To two Mates at 24 s, a month a piece 9 12 0 To six
other men at 20 s. a piece per month 24 0 0 To six other men at 16 s, a piece
per month 19 4 0 To a boy at 6 s, a month 1 4 0 74 0 0 Sum of all the Stock
and charge of one entire Busse, etc. the first year will be about 935 5 8.

The difference or odds between Charge and Adventure.
IT appears before in particulars, That a New Busse with her Nets and other
appurtenances, together with all the first years Charge of Salt, Caske,
Victuals, Wages, etc. will come to -- 934-5-8 But it is to be observed, that the
owner and Aduenturer of such a Busse, shall not be out of purse, nor Adventure
so much money the said first year, by -- 171 -- 10 -- 0 For the Wages
aforesaid is never paid till the return of the Ship or busse; which if it
should never return (as God forbid) then is no wages paid. So wages is part of
the Charge, but no part of the Adventure. And so the wages is spared from
Adventure, which comes to as before in particulars 74 0 0. Also it is to be
observed, that the busse can conveniently stow at once but 34 Last of Cask,
which is but the third part of her said C. last of Caske in Charge, and so is
also spared from Adventure two third parts of her cask, which is 66. last of
Caske, which at xv. s. comes to 49 10 0 Likewise the Busse cannot conveniently
stow at once above ten waighe of Salt, which is but a third part of her Salt
in charge. And so is also spared from Adventure of her said Salt, which is 20
weight of Salt, which at 40 s. a weigh comes to 40 0 0. Neither can the busse
conveniently stow at once above (...) her said 8 Tons of beer in Charge.
And so also is spared from Adventure the one half of her said beer, which is
four Tun, which at forty shillings a Tun comes to 8 0 0. Total spared from
Adventure 171 li 10 0. Which 171 li-10 s-0-being deducted out of the said
Charge of 934-5-8. There rests to be adventured the first year only 762 15
8.

The first years gain in hope and likelihood.
ABout a month after the Busses are gone out to sea, a Yagar which is a Caruell
or a Merchants ship (employed to seek out the said Herring-Busses, and to buy
of them their Herrings upon the first packing.) This Yagar I say (whereof are
diverse so employed) comes to the said Busse (amongst others) and buys all
such Herrings as she has barrelled (which barrels upon the first packing are
called Sticks.) And in part of payment for her said Herring Sticks, delivers
such Salt, Caske, Hoopes, Nets, Beer, and other Necessaries as the busse
shall then want; (wherewith the said Yagar comes always furnished) the rest
the said Yagar pays in ready money to the Busseman. In this manner comes the
Yagar to the busses two or three times or oftener in a Summer-Herring-fishing
time. So as the said Yagar buies of the said Busse (if God give them to the
busse) all her said C Last of herring Sticks. 1000. li. For which said C. last
of Herring-stickes, if the Yagar do pay but after the rate of x li. a Last,
that is xvi. s. viii. d. a barrel, then are the said hundred last of
Herringsticks sold for just

So (by the grace and blessing of God) the very first years herrings only, may
bring in to the Aduenturer or owner all his whole both Stock and Charges of --
934 -- 5 -- 8. aforesaid. And also -- 65 -- 14 -- 4 -- over and above.

And so the said Aduenturer or Busse master, is like by Gods blessing, to
gain clearly the very first year. -- The Busse aforesaid with all her
apparel and furniture, together with her Nets, etc. And -- 065 li -- 14 s --
4 d. in money over and above, toward the use or Intrest of the said -- 762 --
15 -- 8 -- which the said Aduenturer disburseth the first year out of Purse,

Which is almost -- 9 li -- 0 -- 0. in the hundred also for use.

The second years Charge.
li. s. d. Calking or carrying the said Busse yearly will cost about 5 0 0
Repairing the Tacklings (which cost at first xii li. as before) 6 0 0 Repairing
the Sails which cost at first xx li, x s 10 0 0 Repairing the pullies Shiuers
and other petty things about 1 0 0 Repairing the Cables (which cost at first 81
li.) about 24 0 0 Toward the reparations of the Anchors (which cost at first
18 li,) allow 3 0 0 Repairing the Carpenters store (which cost at first 15 s.)
about 0 12 0 Repairing the Stewards store (which cost at first 5 li, 8 s. 0)
about at most 2 8 0 Renewing shot and powder, and scowring the Muskets etc,
about 0 10 0 Repairing of Nets with the appurtenances, with 50 new deepings,
and a C fathom of Warrope, etc. 77 0 0 (Which cost first as before in
particulars, 238-2-6) the third part whereof is just 79-7-6. Renewing of Tools
to dress and pack Herrings with all, (which cost at first 4-5-0 2 0 0
Renewing the whole C Last of Cask at xv s. 75 0 0 Renewing the whole 30 waighes
of Salt at 40 s. 60 0 0 Renewing the whole proportion of victualles aforesaid
57 18 8 Renewing part of the Physic and Surgery helps (which cost at first
3-10-0) 1 11 4 Wages as at the first 74 0 0

li. s. d Sum. Tot. of the Charge of the second years Herring Fishing will be
as appears about 400 0 0 But the second years Adventure and Disbursement,
will be less then the said Charge, (as it was for the first year) by 171.
10. 0 And so the Second years Adventure will be only about -- 228 -- 10 -- 0.

Toward which adventure and Charge, there is before accounted to be gotten in
money by the first years Herring fishing as before appears -- 65 -- 14 -- 4.

So then the second years Charge, besides the said 65 -- 14 -- 4. before
gained, will be but 334 -- 5 -- 8.

But the said second years Adventure, besides the said gain, will be but 162
-- 15 -- 8.

So it appears, That if the busse be only employed in fishing the Herring,
and in that but only one four months in every year: and that the Busse lie
still in her own port all the rest of the year: that is nine months in
every year idle, yet she gains clearly every year in that four months
(only) the sum of 600. li -- o s -- o d. If God give her in that time, but the
said C. Last of Herrings, which being sold but at ten pound a Last, yield
1000. li. -- o s -- o d. Out of which deducting the said second years Charge
of 400. li. aforesaid, there rests as gained clearly -- 600 li. -- o -- o
yearly by the said Busse.

Memorandum, If the Aduenturer of such a Busse will also hire a Yagar by the
Last, to take in his Herrings, and carry them into Danske-Meluyn, Sweathland,
France, or elsewhere: Then the Charge and gain of that course, will be as
follows, or thereabouts, viz:
li. s. d. YOu may hire a Caruill or other Merchants ship for a Yagar to carry
your He^ings from the Busse into Dansk, Meluyn, etc. and to stay there for
re-lading 14 or 20 days, and then to bring back to London such Wares or
Merchandise as you shall there fraught her withal, for which fraught outward
and stay there, and fraught home back again, the said ship will have at most
-- 2 -- 10 -- 0 a last, that is 25 s. a Tun in and out. So the fraught of C
Last of Herrings into Danske, and fraught of another C Last of Pitch, Hemp,
Flax or Corn, etc. back again to London will cost at most at -- 2 li -- 10 s
-- o d. 250 0 0. Toll at Elsanor will cost out and in about 3 0 0. I think no
Custom is paid for Herringes in the Eastcountry, yet suppose for Custom iiii
s. a last, that is 4. d. a barrel, at which rate the C. Last of Sticks comes
to 20 0 0. For Cranage, there allow at most is. a Last, which for the said
Clast of Herrings is 5 0 0. For Wharfage there allow also after the rate of 12.
d. a Last, 5 0 0 For Warehouse-roome there till the Herrings be sold allow at
most 2 0 0. The repacking of the Herrings by the sworn Coopers of that place,
and for new hooping 75 Last of cask, which will be filled with the said C Last
of Herring sticks, alowing 25. Last that is a fourth part of the Clast to be
shrunk away, that 75 last repacking and hooping at most at viii. s. a Last will
cost 30 0 0. Sum -- 315 li. -- o s -- o d. which never goes out of purse, but
is paid when the Herrings are sold.

li. s. d So if the said C. Last of Herring so sent from the Busse to Danske
do shrink a fourth part, then will rest to be sold in Danske, Meluyn, etc.
75. Last of full repacked Herrings, which 75. Last will be there sold for at
least 18 li. 12. s. o. d. a Last, that is 31. s. a Barrel, which is iiii. s.
i. d. a C. which is more then 2. Herrings and a penny, by 7. Herringes in a
hundred. And so the 72. Last of Herrings will be sold for 1395. 0. 0

Which is for the Herrings 1000 0 d Besides there may well be gained by the
return of 139. li. worth of corn or other Merchandise, at least 120. more. and
for the fraught in and out, 315 0 d And so is gained outward only 80 0 d

Besides, the said Herring-fishing which is performed in four months as
aforesaid, the same Busse may be also employed the same year (presently after
the said herring season) in fishing for Cod and Ling.

For the Herring fishing being begun yearly as before is showed (about the 24.
of May, and the Busse being returned home again about the 21 of September,
which is 16. weeks after: then the said Busse and her men may rest in Port
about 10. weeks, viz. from the 21. of September, until S. Andrews tide, or
the first of December after; and then set sail again furnished with Hooks,
Lines, Salt, caske, and all other things (hereafter particularly mentioned)
needful for the VVinter Codfishing, which may by Gods blessing be dispatched
and the Busse at home again in her own port by the first of March, which is
thirteen weeks after, that is, in 91. days.

And so between the said first of March and the 24. of May, which is just
eight weeks, the said Busse may be carined or calked, and repaired and
victualled and provided of all things against the second or next years
Herring-fishing. And so is the whole year ended and spent as aforesaid.

Now the Charges of the said first Codfishing in the Busse aforesaid, with
the 16 Men and Boys aforesaid during the aforesaid time of 13. weeks or 91.
days will be as follows, viz.
Tools and Implements.
EAch man fishing for Codde and Ling, uses at once 2 Kip-hooks, so 16 men may
use at once 32 of those hooks: but because they lose their Hooks sometimes,
therefore allow for every of the men a dozen of hooks, that is 16 dozen of
Kip-hooks, which at most will cost 12 d. a dozen* that is, 0 16 0 Stringes for
each Man six, that is, for the 16 men eight dozen of stringes, every string
must be fifty fathom long and about the bigness of an Iackline, and it must
be tanned. Every such string will cost about 12 d. and so the said eight dozen
of strings will cost 4 16 0 Chopstickes for every man four, is in all 64
Chopstickes. A Chopsticke is an Iron about the bigness of a Curtain Rod, and
a yard long, and upon this Iron is an hollow pipe of Lead 8 or 9. Inches long,
and waighes about 4 pound, and the Iron waighes about a pound, which Iron and
lead will cost about 12 d. a piece, so 64. Chopstickes at 12 d. will cost 3 4
0. For every man two Garfangle-hookes. Total two and thirty Garfangle hooks.
This Garfangle hook is an Ashen-plant 6 or 8 Foot long with an Iron hook
like a Boat-hook at the end of it, one of these Garfangle hooks will cost 6 d.
So the 32 Garfangle hooks will cost 0 16 0 Four Heading knives like Chopping
knives at xii. d. 0 4 0 Four spliting knives like mincing knives at 12 d 0 4 0
Six gutting knives at 4. d 0 2 0 A Grindstone and Trough 0 5 0 Whetstones two
or three 0 3 0 Some of the old Herring Nets, to get Herringes to bait their
Hooks. Or else to buy a Hogshead full of Lamprils which is the best bait for
Cod and Ling. There is store of Lamprils to be had at Woolwitch, Norwitch, and
Hull, which may cost about 2 10 0 Baskets some of those before bought and used
for the dressing of Herring and 12. other great Baskets at ii. s. 6. d a piece
1 10 0 14 10 0

li, s. d Caske.
For barrelled Cod to provide 35. Last of Barrels, which are the very same
every way, with the Herring barrels aforesaid, so the said 35. Last of Caske,
at xv. s. a Last, will cost 26. li -- 5. s. As for the Linges (in hope) there
is no Caske used for them, but they are only salted and packed one upon
another in the ships hold. And if they take any Ling, then they must bring home
the less Cod, and then also they save some of the said Caske 26 5 0. Salt.
Each barrel of Cod will take a bushel of Salt upon salt. So 35. Last of Cod
aforesaid takes just 420. Bushels of Salt upon salt, that is, 10 waighes and a
half of salt, which at 3. li. a weigh, that is 1^. d. a bushel will cost 31.
10. 0 Physic and Chyrurgerie helps.
To allow as before is allowed for the Herring-fishing time, which (besides
the Chest) will cost as before in particulars 2 18 0. Stew store Carp store
The Stewards store and Carpenters store aforsaid, will serve this voyage. So
for them needs no allowance 0 0 0. 60 13 0.

Victual and Fuel for 16. Men and Boys, to serne in the said Busse for the
said Cod fishing time, and the time of setting out, and Return home, viz. from
about the first of December, unto the first of March, which is just 13. weeks,
that is, 91 days.
li. s. d Beer.
TO allow every person a gallon of beer a day (as in the Kings ships) that is
for the said 16 persons 16. gallons, that is just half a Herring-barrell a
day, that is for the whole voyage, 91. half barrels, that is almost 46. of
those Herring barrels full of beer. Seven of these herring barrels contain a
Tun of beer: so as the said 46. barrels contain six Tun and a half of beer,
which at 40. s. a Tun will cost 13 0 0. Biscuit.
To allow for every person (as in his May. ships) a pound of Biscuit a day,
that is for all the said 16. persons 112. li. that is an C. weight of Biscuit a
week, that is for the said 13. weeks 13 C. of Biscuit, which at xiii. s. -- 4.
d -- ^ C. will cost 8 13 4. Peaze.
To allow for every person half a pint of peaze a day (to be watered and eaten
with butter or else with bacon) that is a Gallon a day amongst them all, that
is in all 91. gallons, that is 11 bushels and a pecke and a half of Peaze,
which at 4. s. a bushel, will cost 2 5 6. Bacon.
To allow for every person 2. li. of Bacon a week for 4. meals in every week,
that is for the said 16. persons 32. li. that is 4. stone of Bacon a week
amongst them all, that is for the said 13. weeks, 52 stone of bacon, which at
2. s. 2. d. a stone, will cost 5 12 8. Freshfish.
Fresh-fish they may take daily out of the Sea as much as they can eat 0 0 0.

li. s. d Butter.
To allow every person a quarter of a pound a Butter a day, that is, 4 li. of
Butter a day amongst them all. So for the said 13. weeks or 91. days must
be 364 li. of Butter, that is just six firkins and of Suffolk Butter, which at
xx. s. a firkin will cost 6 10 0. Cheese.
To allow every person half a pound of Holland cheese a day, that is 8 li. a
day among them all. So for the said 13 weeks or 91 days, 728 li. of cheese,
that is 6 C weight of Holland cheese (...) at 2 d. ob. a li. that is 1 li. 3 s.
4 d. C. will cost 7 11 8. Vinegar.
To allow amongst them all three pints of Vinegar a day, that is, for the said
91. days almost 34. Gallons, allow a Teirce, which at 6 li. a Tun Caske and
all, will cost 1 0 0 Fuel.
To allow also 8. Kentish Faggots a day, which for the said 91 days will come
to 7. C. and a quarterne of Faggots, which at 8. s. a C. will cost 2. 18. 0

li. s. d. Sum of all the said 13 weeks victuals and fuel, will come to as
appears 47. 11. 2

Wages.
To a Master for these 13. weeks at 5. li. a month that is 25. s. a week a
piece, is for both 16 5 0. To two Mates at 24. s. a month, that is vi. s. a
week a piece, is for both 7 16 0 To six other men at 20. s. a piece per month,
is 5. s. a week a piece 19 10 0 To six other men at 16. s. a piece per month,
is 4. s. a week a piece 15 12 0 To the Boy at 6. s. a month, that is xviii. d
a week. 0 19 6 60 2 6.

Sum of all the Charge of the first winters Cod-fisning, will be as before in
particulars about 182 16 8

li. s. d But here is to be remembered that the wages is no part of the
Adventure (though it be part of the Charge. 122. 14. 2 at most. And so the
Aduenturer shall be out of purse for this first Codfishing voyage, but only Now
if it please God in this voyage to afford unto this Busse the filling of her
said Cask, that is 35. Last of Cod only, that Cod will yield at least 20. s. a
barrel, that is but 12. li. a Last: So the said 35 Last, will yield at least,
420. li -- o s -- o d.

Of the Lyuors of those 35. Last of fish, may well be made 5. Tun of Train
oil, worth at least 12. li. a Tun, that is but 12. d. a gallon, at which rate
5. Tun of oil will yield 60. li.

So by the blessing of God this Codfishing may bring in to the Aduenturer, as
before in particulars just 480 0 0

li. s. d Out of which 480. li. deduct the Charge abouesaid of 182-16-8, and
then rests to be cleared yearly by the said Cod-fishing 297 3 4 And so it
appears that there may be gained yearly by one Herring Fishing and one Cod
Fishing in such a Busse yearly, the sum of 837-3-4. all Charges borne, and
without any stock after the first year 897. li. 3 s 4. d

BY that which is before set down, it appears, that one Aduenturer or diverse
Partners, buying or building and furnishing such a Busse, and aduenturing her
to sea as aforesaid, shall disburse before and in the first Herring voyage, the
sum of 762 -- 15 -- 8. out of purse.

And that the same 762 -- 15 -- 8. is clearly inned again, together with all
other charges, and 65 -- 14 -- 4. over and above within less then a year, and
so the Busse with her Nets and furniture, and the said 65 -- 14 -- 4. in money
is gained clearly the first voyage.

And that if the Busse do also that year make a Cod-fishing voyage as
aforesaid, then I say, within the space of the said first year, the
Aduenturer or the said Partners shall have all their stocks into their purse
again as aforesaid, and shall also have in purse gained clearly the said
first year 362-17-8 which gain is more then is to be disbursed the second
year in repayring the said Busse, with her appurtenances, etc. And also in
furnishing her with new Herring Cask, Salt, Victual, etc. for the second years
Herring fishing.

And that the said Aduenturer or Partners, after the said first year, shall
never be out of purse any money at all.

But that the first years clear gain will stock him or them so sufficiently
for the use of this Busse, as by the same they may get clearly after the said
first year, by two such voyages in that busse, yearly over and above all
charges.

li. s. d. 897 3 4.

And that if the said Aduenturer or Partners will make but only one Herring
voyage yearly, then by that one only Herring voyage yearly, the said busse
may get clearly per annum, as is before declared.

600 0 0 Over and above all charges.

I Confess the private gain to every Undertaker before propounded, may seem
too great to be hoped for: but before any conclude so, let them read the
Proclamation concerning this business, made by those thriuing-States of the
united provinces of the Low Countries, and let them consider what should move
those States in that public proclamation, to call this Herring fishing, the
Chiefest-Trade, and Principal Gold-Mine of those united provinces, and to show
such Jealousy, and provide so very carefully for the preservation thereof, If
the gain thereby were not exceeding great and extraordinary.

That Proclamation translated out of Dutch into English, is affixed to the end
of the Book before mentioned, called Englands way to win wealth: and is here
also again annexed to these presents, as a thing to be often seen and
considered of us.

And for my self, I say that I know, that No man may do evil, that good may
come of it: Therefore I would not devise a lie to persuade any to a work how
good soever; nor commend that to others, which my own heart were not first
strongly persuaded to be commendable: yet as I deny not but that I may err in
some of so many particulars: so I disdain not, but rather desire to see such
errors, honestly and fairly corrected by any that out of more skill, and
desire of perfecting and furthering this good work, shall find out any such
errors.

And whether this Fishery be Necessary for this Commonwealth or no, let the
present condition and estate of our shipping and Mariners, and Sea Towns, and
Coasts, which (as the means) should be the walls and strength of this Ilandish
Monarchy; I say let them speak. I will say no more to this point, as well for
other reasons, as also because this matter is but for a few alas: namely for
those only that prefer the Common wealth to their own private: and they are
wise, and a word is enough to such.

If any be so weak to think this Mechanical Fisher-Trade not feasible by the
English people: to them I may say with Solomon Go to the Pismire look upon
the Dutch thou sluggard, learn of them, they do it daily in the sight of all
men at our own doors, upon our own coasts. But some will needs fear a Lion
in every way, because they will employ their Tallents no way, but lie
unprofitable at home always.

The difficulties that Unwillingness has objected, Consists in want of Men, of
Nets, of Caske, of Timber, and Plank, of Utterance or Sale, and of the fear of
Pirates, of every of which a word or two.
THE 16. Men and boys before admitted to serve in the said Busse, may be
these: (viz.) A Master, a Mate, four ordinary Sailors, and four Fishermen,
there is ten, and then six Land-men and boys to be trained up by the former
Ten men in the Art of Sailing, and Craft of Fishery.

By which means every Busse shall be a Seminary of Saylors and Fishers also,
for so shall every busse breed and make six new Mariners: and so every 100.
busses breed 600. new mariners to serve in such other busses as shall be
after builded, which is also no small addition to the strength of this state.

Mariners.
Now if there were 100. busses presently to be builded, I would make no doubt
(as hard as the world goes) but before they could be fitted for the Sea, there
may be gathered up about the Coast-Townes of his majesty's Dominions at least
an C. able Masters to take Charge of them. And another C. of Mariners to go
with them as their Mates: and four C. Saylors to serve under the said C.
Masters, that is in all but 600. Mariners and Saylors. For I find in the 35.
page of Englands way to win wealth (the Author whereof was a Yarmouth man) that
the last winter but one, There were in that one Town of Yarmouth 300. idle men
that could get nothing to do, living poor for lack of employment, who most
gladly would have gone to Sea in Pinkes, if there had been any for them to
go in. I have reported his own words.

Fishermen.
And for the four hundred Fishermen to serve in the C. Busses, they would
soon be furnished out of those poor Fishers in Small boats, as Traules,
Cobbles, etc. which fish all about the Coasts, which poor men by those small
vessels can hardly get their bread, and therefore would hold it great
preferment to be called into such Busses where they may have meat, drink, and
wages as before is liberally propounded for such. Besides, which if need be
there are too too many of those pernicious Trinker-men, who with Trinker-boates
destroy the River of Thames, by killing the Fry and small Fish there, even all
that comes to Net, before it be either meat or Marketable. Which Trinkermen
(if they will not offer themselves) may by order and authoriry of our State be
compelled to give over that Evil, and to follow this good Trade.

Landme for a Seminary.
But for the said 6. C. Land-men to serve in these C Busses we need not study
where to find them; if such should not seek for service in these Busses, the
very streets of London and the Subburbs will soon show and afford them, if it
were so many thousand I think. Idle Vagrants so extremely swarm there as all
know. So much for men.

Nets.
Nets will be the hardest matter to provide at the first; yet I understand
that the before named Knight, Sir William Haruey, had in few weeks or months
provided all his Nets for his great Busse. And my self was offered Nets for
half a dozen Busses, if I would have had them the last Summer: and if there
were now 100. Busses in building, I am informed of one that will undertake to
furnish them all with Nets. And after these Busses shall once be seen, many
for their own gain will provide for Hemp, twine, and all necessaries to the
making of Nets enough. And doubtless Scotland and Ireland will presently afford
good help in this behalf.

Caske.
Caske will be plentifully served by Scotland and Ireland, though we should
make none of English Timber.

Timber and Plank.
And for all the great and pitiful waste of our English VVoods, yet will
England afford Timber and Plank enough for many Busses: but (to spare England a
while) Ireland will yield us Busses enough besides many other good Ships, if
need be; and Scotland will help us with Masts, but if we would spare so near
home, we may help our selves out of Virginia and Sommer-Islands. I wis the
Dutch who have no Materials in any Dominions of their own, have made harder
and deerer shifts for their multitudes of Ships of all sorts: If they had
shifted off the building of Ships, because they had no Timber or other shipping
stuff of their own in their own Lands, what a poor, naked, servile people,
had that free people been ere this day?

Touching Utterance and Sale of Herrings when we Vttera^ce or Sale.
shall have them: I am informed that there is yearly uttered and spent in his
Majesty's own Dominions, at least ten thousand Last of Herrings, which being
served by our selves, will keep in the Land abundance of Tresure, which the
Dutch yearly carry out for the Herrings which they catch on our own coasts,
and sell to us. Now, if such a Busse as aforesaid get yearly C. Last of
Herrings, as aforesaid: then an hundred Busses taking yearly C. Last a piece,
do take in all ten thousand Last of Herrings. So then his Majesty's own
Dominions will utter all the Herrings which C. Busses shall take in a year. And
then if we shall have 500. Busses more, I am persuaded we may in France, and
in Danske, and in other foreign parts, have as good and ready sale for them,
as the Dutch have for theirs; for I hear that the Dutch could yearly utter
double so many as they do sell if they had them. But if that should not be
so, surely it were too great poverty for English minds (like Horses that know
not their own strength) to fear to set foot by the Dutch, or by any other
people under Heaven, or to fear to speed worse in any Market or place then
they: and yet not be driven to beat down the Markets neither, except the Dutch
should prove more froward and food then I can yet mistrust: but if they
should, I will not be persuaded to think, but that the worser part would fall
out to their share at last.

If there will be employment but for 1000. Busses, me think they should
thank us, (as for many other benefits, so for this,) that we will be
contented that they share with us, by using only 500. Busses, and to fish
friendly in consort, as it were with other 500. Busses of ours. But if they
should allege, that they now having a thousand, shall have (in that case)
employment for the other 500: why then perhaps we may in friendly manner
cope with them, and buy of them the other 500. of the said Busses.

I thank God I neither hate nor envy the Dutch; nay (for good and due
respects) I prefer them to all other foreign Nations in my love; and they
acknowledging us as they ought, we shall I hope do them no wrong, and they
must do us right.

I have herein bin longer then I meant, only because there came even now to my
mind some reports that I have heard, (but do not believe) of very foul and
insolent dealing of their Busse-men with our poor weak Fishermen upon our
Coasts. But if it were true, as I doubt it at least; yet I would not hate nor
speak evil of a whole State for the saucy presumptions of a particular man,
or of a few men, and those perhaps provoked thereto, by our own Double-Beere
of England.

Pirates and Enemies.
It is too true that all seas are too full of Pirates, and that amongst them
(which we have great cause to lament) our English abound, who are too ready to
justify their lewd errors with the want of employment. It is true also, that
men are not to get their living by sinful* violent, and unlawful courses; yet
I would they were stripped of that color and pretense, (which a good fleet of
Busses would do:) Beside, such a fleet of Busses will (by Gods grace be soon
able to maintain about them a guard of strong warlike ships well appointed to
defend them. And in time of need also to serve his Majesty, and offend his
enemies: and such a guard will be very requisite, although God has so laid and
placed the Herrings, as our Busses shall seldom need to lie or to labor out
of the sight of our own shores. So much of the facility.

Lastly, touching the use of this famous Fisher-trade, I will only commend
unto your considerations, that which is written thereof in all the four Books
before mentioned: namely, in the British Monarchy, and Hitchcocks
New-yeares-guift, and in Englands way to win wealth etc. and in the Trades
increase. The Dutch have thereby as by their only or chief means curbed and
bearded their adversaries; what then may we do by it, if God please, we I say
to whom he has vouchsafed multitudes of other helps (which Dutch*land has
not) to second this; this trade sets awarke all their idle, it keeps their gold
and silver in their dominions and multiplies it.

And I see not why the same trade should not be of the same use to us.

1. NOw Aboard our Busses again, which once well established and followed, will
in short time I hope by Gods blessing set many Ploughmen here on work, to
sow Hemp and Flax, both in England, Scotland and Ireland.

2. And will convert our Idle bellies, our Beggars, our vagabonds and Sharkes
into lusty Hempbeaters, spinners, Carders, Rope-makers, Net-makers, Coopers,
Smiths, Shipwrights, Calkers, Sawyers, Sailors, Fishermen, Bisket-bakers,
weauers of Pole-dauis, Sayle-makers, and other good laboring Members.

3. And will more warrant and encourage our Magistrates to punnish the Idle,
the sturdy beggar, and the These, when these Busses shall find employment for
them that will work.

4. And will be a means that the True, poor, aged, and impotent shall be
better and more plentifully, yet more easily and with less charges relieved,
when only such shall stand at devotion, and no valiant Rogues shall share in
the Alms of the charitable as now they do.

5. And will help to bring every one to eat their own bread.

6. Yea, and will supply his May. Armies and Garrisons in time of need with
many lusty able men insteede of our Barebreeched Beggars and nasty Sharkes,
that are as unskillful and as unwilling to fight as to work.

7. And will keep and bring in abundance of Gold and Silver.

I know and confess that it is not in Man to promise these or any of them
peremptorily, but all these are the evident effects of this Fishery amongst the
Dutch.

And therefore I may conclude, That we are to hope for like blessing, by our
like lawful and honest endeavors in this trade of fishery which almighty God
has brought home to our doors to employ us in, whereby he also gives us a
comfortable calling to the work.

TO begin withal, if but some of our Noblemen* and some of our Gentry* and
some Citizens and others of ability, each man for himself, would speedily
provide and employ at least one Busse a piece, so as some good store of Busses
may (amongst them in that manner be speedily provided and employed, to join
with Sir William Haruey, who is already entered the field alone. No doubt but
his Majesty will be pleased (at their humble suite) to encourage and
incorporate them with privileges, immunities, and authority; and so they may
choose amongst themselves, some meet officers and overseers, and make meet
laws and orders for the due and seasonable taking, curing, packing, and
selling of the said Herrings, etc. As the French and Straights Merchants who
being so incorporated, yet have every man his own ship, or the ship he hiers:
and each man by himself or by his Factor, goes out, returns, buys and sels,
not transgressing the private laws and orders of their respective companies.

But if at the first entrance there will not be any competent number of Busses
so provided, and Adventured as abouesaid. If his Majesty will be pleased so to
incorporate some fit for this work; and (out of that corporation) a sufficient
Treasurer, and other needful officers be here chosen and made known; then may
all that please, (of whatsoever honest condition) bring in (by a day to be
assigned) what sum of money any shall like to Adventure herein, from 5. pound,
upwards.

And when there shall be brought in 70. or 80. thousand pounds, then presently
the said Officers to provide an hundred Busses, which with that money will be
royally built and furnished, and all their first years charge defrayed.

And as more stock shall come in, so also more Busses to be so provided and
added to those former, etc. All which may be (as in the now East India
company) the joint stock and Busses of the company.

Of which Joint stock and Busses, every aduenturer according to the proportion
of his said Adventure, may yearly know, give, and receive his proportion, as
it shall please God to dispose of the whole fleet and business. But whereas in
the said East India company, and others such like, as have a common Treasury,
whereinto every Adventure is promiscuously put, the said Adventures once
brought in, are there still continued in bank, and often additions called for.
In this Fishing company, every Aduenturer shall but only (as it were) lend the
money he aduentureth for one year or there abouts, as before is showed.

Now for the good government and sincere disposition of this Joint stock, etc.
It would be specially provided (amongst other ordinances and provisions) that
all Officers be only annual; and that those be freely chosen and yearly
changed by the more voats of the company, yearly to be assembled for that
purpose. And that whatsoever gratuities, or rewards, or fees, shall be yearly
given to such Officers, may (not only in gross, but) in particular be
distributed or set down by the more part of voices of the company so assembled;
and not one gross sum given, be divided or distributed by any one man* for so
may the company with their own money arm and enable one man, (first thereby
made proud) to overrule and keep under themselves, by binding his fellow
officers to himself, to the neglect of the generality, whose proper gifts they
be, though by that ill means it be not acknowledged, besides many other
mischiefs and inconveniences, which may come by the ouerweening of one or few
men, whilst others of better deserts perhaps are neglected and not looked on,
to the moving of much offense, murmur, and envy in some; and of pride,
insolency and arrogance in others.

By this last mentioned promiscuous course of Ioyntstocke, after the rate of
Adventure and charge and gain, before in particulars set down, it appears:
That Every Aduenturer of C li. may gain clearly per annum. 75 0 0 Every
Aduenturer of xl li may gain clearly per annum 30 0 0 Every Aduenturer of xx.
li may gain clearly per annum. 15 0 0 and every Aduenturer of v. li. may gain
clearly per annum 3 15 0

Surely I hope this famous City (ever forward for the kingdoms good) will for
their part provide and furnish the first C. of Busses at the least, and thereby
according to their former noble examples, (as the cresset of the kingdom) give
light to the rest of the land to follow them by.

And I think the East India company will liberally further this work: for
that thereby some of their greatest wants are like to be supplied.

I speak as I think without insinuation, which I hate as much as railing.

And I neither hope for, nor desire any other gain hereby, then my share in
the common good that all this land shall by Gods blessing reap by this
business, and the proportionable gain of mine Adventure therein.

THE States Proclamation translated out of Dutch
THE States general of the United Provinces of the Low countries unto al those
that shall see or hear these presents greeting. We let to weet, that whereas
it is well known, that the great fishing and catching of Herrings, is the
chiefest Trade and principal Gold*mine of these United Countries, whereby many
thousands of Households, Families, Handi-crafts trades and Occupations are set
on work, well maintained and prosper, especially the Sailing and Navigations,
as well within as without these Countries, is kept in great estion. Moreover,
many Returns of Money, with the increase of the Means, Conuoyes, Customs,
and Reuennues of these Countries are augmented thereby and prosper: and
forasmuch as there is made from time to time many good Orders, concerning the
catching, salting, and beneficial uttering of the said Herrings to the end, to
preserve and maintain the said chief Trade in the United Provinces; which
Trade, by diverse encounters of some that seek their own Gain, is enuyed, in
respect of the great good it brings to the united countries. And We a^^
informed, that a new device is put in practice to the prejudice of the Trade,
to Transport out of the United Countries into other countries, Staves for
Herring-barrels made here, and half Herring-barrels, put into other Barrels
and Nets, to cross the good Orders and Policy here intended to them of these
Countries, for the catching, salting, and selling the Herrings, dressed in
other countries, after the order of these Countries, whereby this chief Trade
should be decayed here, and the Inhabitants of these Countries damnified, if
that we make not provision in time against such practices. Therefore We, after
mature Judgment and deliberation, have forbidden and interdicted, and by these
Presents do forbid and interdict, all, and every one, as well Home-borne and
Inhabitants, as strangers frequenting these parts, to take up any
Herring-barrels, or half ones prepared, or any kind of nets in any Ship,
Town, or Haven of the united Provinces, to be sent into other Countries or
Places, upon pain of confiscation of the same, and the ship also wherein they
shall be found, besides a penalty of 200. of Netherlandish silver Royals for the
first time, and for the second time above confiscation of Ship and Goods, and
400. of the said Royals of silver, and for the third time, above confiscation
of ship and goods, and 600. of the said Royals of silver* and corporal
punishment: all which confiscations and penalties shall be distributed, one
third part to the profit of the Plaintiff, one third part to the poor, and one
third part to the Officers where the said confiscation shall be demanded: and
not only they shall incur this penalty, which after shall be taken with the
deed, but they also, that within one year after the deed shall be convicted:
and that none may pretend ignorance, and that this order may be in all places
duly observed, and the offenders punished according to justice: We will and
require, our dear and well-beloued Estates, Governors, Deputies of the
council, and the Estates of the respective Provinces of Gilderland, and the
county of Satfill in Holland, West-Freesland, Zeland, Vtricts, Freesland,
Merizel, the Town of Groyning, and the circumiacent places: and to all
Justices and officers, that they cause to be published in all places, and
proclaimed where the usual Proclamation and Publication is made: We do charge
also the Chancellors and Provincial council, and the council of the
Admiralty, the Aduocatisticall and the Procurators general, and all other
Officers, Judges, and Justices of these United Provinces, and to all general
Colonies, Admiralles and Vice-admirals, Captains, Officers and Commanders, to
perform, and cause to be performed, this order and commandment, and to
proceed and cause to be proceeded against the Offenders, without grace,
favor, dissimulation or composition; because we have found it necessary for
the good and benefit of the said united Provinces. Dated in Hage this 19. of
July.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader, correct these few escapes with thy pen.
In the 4. page of A. lin. 2. for Faculty r Facility, for Godsdue r. Godsalue,
ibid. p. 8. for Eastward r. Aftward. Page 3. B. for Essle s r. Esses. C. p. 7.
l. ^. carrying, r. carryning. In the Marg. of the 7. p. of B. For dringe r.
dres^ing.


