THE PVRITAINE Or THE VVIDDOVV of VVatling-streete.

Acted by the Children of Paul's.

Written by W. S.

Imprinted at London by G. ELD. 1607.

The Puritaine Widow.
ACTVS PRIMVS.
Enter the Lady Widdow-Plus, her two Daughters Frank and Moll, her husbands
Brother an old Knight Sir Godfrey, with her Son and heir Master Edmond, all
in ^oorning apparel, Edmond in a Cypress Hatte. The Widow wringing her
hands, and bursting out into a passion, as newly come from the Burial of her
husband. Widow. OH, that ever I was borne, that ever I was borne!


Sir Godfrey. Nay good Sister, dear sister, sweet sister, be of good
comfort, show yourselfe a woman, now or never.


Wid. Oh, I have lost the dearest man. I have buried the sweetest ^usba^d that
ever lay by woman.


Sir God. Nay give him his due he was indeed an honest, virtuous, discreet
wis^-man, -- he was my Brother, as right, as right.


Wid. O, I shall never forget him, never forget him, he was a man so well
given to a woman -- oh:


Sir Godf. Nay but kind Sister, I could weep as much as any woman, but alas
our ^eares cannot call him again: me thinks you are well read Sister, and
know that death is as common as Homo a common name to all men; -- a man shall
be taken when he is making water, -- Nay, did not the learned Parson Master
Pigman tell us even now, that all Flesh is frail, we are borne to dye, Man
has but a time: with such like deep and profound persuasions, as he is a
rare fellow you know and an excellent Reader: and for example, (as there are
examples abundance,) did not Sir Humfrey Bubble dye the other day there is a
lusty Widow, why she cried no^ above half an houe-for shame, for shame:
then followed him old Master Fulsome the Usurer, there is a wise Widow, why
she cried nere a whitte at all.


Wid O rank no^ me with those wicked women, I had a Husband out-shinde 'e^
all.


Sir Godf. I that he ^id I^aith, ^e out-shind 'em all.


Widd. Do thou stand there and see us all weep, and not once shed a tear
for thy fathers death? oh thou ungracious son and heir thou:


Edm, Troth Mother I should not weep I Am sure; I am past a child I hope, to
make all my old School fellows laughe at me; I should be mocked, so I should;
Pray let one of my Sisters weep for me, I Will laughe as much for her another
time?


Widd. Oh thou past-Grace thou, out of my sight, thou graceless impe, thou
grieuest me more then the death of thy Father? o^ thou stubborn only son?
had thou such an honest man to thy Father -- that would deceive all the world
to get riches for thee, and can thou not afforde a little sa't water? he that
so wisely did quite ouer-throw the right heir of those lands, which now you
respect not up every morning betwixt four and five so duly at Westminster
Hall every Tearme-Time, with all his Cards and writings, for thee thou wicked
Absolon -- oh dear husband!


Edm. Weep? quotha? I protest I am glad he is Churched? for now he is gone I
shall spend in quiet?


Fran. Dear mother; pray cease, half your Tears suffize,
It Is time for you to take truce with your eyes,
Let me weep now?

Widd. Oh such a dear knight! such a sweet husband have I lost, have I lost?
-- if Blessed be the coarse the rain raynes upon, he had it pouring down?


Sir Godf, Sister? be of good cheer, we are all mortal our selves, I come
upon you freshly, I near speak without comfort, here me what I shall say;
-- my brother has left you wellthy, you are rich.


Widd. Oh!


Sir Godf. I say you are rich? you are also fair.


Widd. Oh!


Sir Godf. Go too you are fair you cannot smother it, beauty will come to
light; nor are your years so far enterd with you; but that you will be
sought after; and may very well answer another husband; the world is full of
fine Gallants, choice enough Sister, -- for what should we do with all ou^
Knights I pray? but to mar^y rich widows, wealthy Citizens widows; ^usty
fair -- browd Ladies; go too, be of good comfort I say (...) snobb^^g and
weeping -- yet my Brother was a kind he^^ed man -- I would not have the Elfe
see me now? -- come pluck up a woman's heart -- here stands your Daughters, who
be well estated, and at maturity will also be enq^ir'd after with good
husbands, so all these tears shall be soon d^yed up and a better v^o^ld then
ever -- what? Woman? you must not weep still? he is dead he is buried -- yet I
cannot choose but weep for him!


Wid Marry again! no! let me be buried quick then!
And that same part of Quire whereon I tread
To such intent, O may it be my grave;
And that the Priest may (...) his wedding prayers,
Even with a breath, to (...) all dust and ashes;
Oh, out of a million of millions, I should nere find such a husband, he was
unmatchable, -- unmatchable? nothing was ^o hot, nor to dear for me, I could
not speak of that one thing that I had not, beside I had keys of all, kept
all, received all, had money in my purse, spent what I would, went abroad when
I would, came home when I would, and did all what I would? Oh -- my sweet
husband; I shall never have the like?


Sir Godf Sister? nere say so; he was an honest brother of mine, and so, and
you may light upon one as honest again, or one, as honest again may light
upon you, that is the properer phrase indeed?


Wid. Never? oh if you love me urge it not,
Oh may I be the byword of the world,
The common talk at Table in the mouth
Of every Groom and Wa^ter, if e're more
I entertain the carnal suite of Man?

Mol. I must kn^ele do^ne for fashion too?

Franck. And I, whom never man as yet has scalde
Even in this depth of general sorrow, vow
Never to marry, to sustain such loss
As a dear husband seems to be, once dead?

Mol. I loved my father well too; but to say,
Nay now, I would not marry for her death?
Sure I should speak false Lattin; should I not?
I Would as soon vow never to come in Bed.
Tut? Women must live by the quick, and not by the dead.

Wid. Dear Copy of my husband, oh let me kiss thee:
How like him is their Model? their brief Picture
Drawing out her husbands Picture. Quickens my tears: my sorrows are renewed
At their fresh sight?

Sir Godf. Sister --


Wid. Away,
All honesty with him is turned to clay,
Oh my sweet husband, oh --

Franck. My dear father?


Exeunt mother and daughters. Mol. Here Is a puling indeed! I think my Mother
weeps for all the women that ever buried husbands: for if from time to time
all the Widdowers tears in England had been bottled up, I do not think all
would have filled a three-halfe-penny Bottle; Alas a small matter bucks a
hand-kercher, -- and sometimes the spittle stands to nie Saint Thomas a
Watrings; well, I can mourn in good sober sort as well as another? but where I
spend one tear for a dead Father, I could give twenty kisses for a quick
husband.

Exit Moll.
Sir Godf. Well, go thy ways old Sir Godfrey, and thou may be proud on it,
thou have a kind loving sister-in-lawe; how constant? how passionate? how full
of April the poor souls eyes are; well, I would my Brother knew on it, he
should then know what a kind wife he had left behind him; truth and twere
not for shame that the Neighbors at th next garden should hear me* between
joy and g^iefe, I should even cry outright!

Exit Sir Godfrey.
Ed^^nd. So, a fair riddance, my fathers ^ayde in dust his Coffin and he is
like a whole-meate-pye, and the worms will cut him up shortly; farewell old
Dad, farewe'l. I Will be curbed in no more, I perceive a some and heir may
quickly be made a fool and he will be one, but I Will take another order; -- Now
she would have me weep for him for-sooth, and why? because he cozn'd the right
heir being a fool, and bestowed those Lands upon me his eldest Son; and
therefore I must weep for him ha, ha; Why all the world knows as long as it was
his pleasure to get me, it was his duty to get for me: I know the law in that
point no Attorney can gull me; Well, my Vncle^ an old Ass, and an (...)
Cockscombe, I Will rule the Roast my self, I Will be kept under ^o more, I know what
I may do well enough by my Fathers Copy: the Lawe's in mine own hands now: nay
now I know my strength, I Will be strong enough for my Mother I warrant you?

Exit.
Enter George Py-bord a scholar and a Citizen and unto hi^ an old soulder,
Peter Skirmish. Pie. What Is to be done now? old Lad of War; thou that went wont
to be as hot as a turn-spit, as nimble as a fencer, and as lowzy as a
schoole-maister; now thou art put to silence like a Sectarie? -- War sitts now
like a Justice of peace, and does nothing, where be your Muskets, Caleiuers and
Hotshots? in Long-lane, at Pawn, at Pawn; -- Now keys, are your only Guns,
Key-guns, Key-guns, and Bawdes the Gunners, -- who are your centinells in
peace, and stand ready charged to give warning; with hems, hums, and
pockey-coffs; only your Chambers are licenc'st to play upon you, and Drabs enough
to give fire to 'em.


Skir. Well, I cannot tell, but I am sure it goes wrong with me, for since the
cessure of the wars, I have spent above a hundred crowns out a purse: I have
been a soldier any time this forty years, and now I perceive an old
soldier, and an old Courtier have both one destiny, and in the end turn
both into hob-nayles.


Pie. Pretty mystery for a beggar, for indeed a hob-naile is the true emblem of
a beggars shoo-soale;


Skir. I will not say but that war is a bloud-sucker, and so; but in my
conscience, (as there is no soldier but has a p^ice of one, tho it be full of
holes like a shot Ancient, no matter, twill serve to swear by) in ^y
conscience, I think some kind of Peace, has more hidden oppressions, and
violent heady sins, (the looking of a gentle nature) then a professed war.


Pie. Troth, and for mine own part, I am a poor Gentleman, and a Scholar, I
have been matriculated in the University, wore ^ut ^ixe Gowns there, seen
some fools, and some Scholars, some of the City, and some of the Country,
kept order, went bare-headed over the Quadrangle, eat my Commons with a good
stomach, and Battled with Discretion; at last, having done many slights and
tricks to maintain my wit in use (as my brain would never endure me to
be idle,) I was expeld the University, only for stealing a Cheese out of
Jesus College.


Skir. Is It possible?


Pie. Oh! there was one Welshman (God forgive him) pursued it hard; and never
left, till I rnmde my staff toward London, where when I came, all my friends
were pitt-hold, gone to Graves, (as indeed there was but a few left before)
then was I turnde to my wits, to shift in the world, to tower among Sons
and Heirs, and Fools, and Gulls, and Ladies eldest Sons, to work upon
nothing, to feed out of Flint, and ever since has my belly been much
beholding to my brain: But now to return to you old ^kirmish. I say as you
say, and for my part wish a Turbulency in the world, for I have nothing to
loose but my wits, and I think they are as mad as they will be: and to
strengthen your Argument the more, I say an honest warte, is better then a
bawdy peace: as touching my profession; The multiplicitie of Scholars, hatched,
and nourisht, in the idle Calmes of peace, makes 'em like Fishes one devour
another; and the community of Learning has so plaide upon affections, and
thereby almost Religion is come about to Fantasy, and discredited by being
too much spoken off -- in so many and mean mouths, I my self being a Scholar
and a Graduate, have no other comfort by my learning, but the Affliction of my
words, to know how Scholler-like to name what I want, and can call my self a
Beggar both in Grecke and Lattin, and therefore not to cogg with Peace, I Will not
be afraid to say, it is a great Breeder, but a barren Nourisher: a great-getter
of Children, which must either be Thieves or Rich-men, Knaves or Beggars.


Skirmish. Well, would I had been borne a Knave then, when I was borne a
Beggar, for if the truth were known, I think I was begot when my Father had
^euer a penny in his purse.


Pie. ^uh, faint not old Skirmish, let this warrant thee, Facilis Descensus
Auer^i, it is an easy journey to a Knave, thou may be a Knave when thou will; and Peace is a good Madam to all other professions, and an arrant Drabbe
to us, let us handle her accordingly, and by our wits thrive in despite of
her; for since the law lives by quarrelis, the Courtier by smooth
God-morrowes, and every profession makes it self greater by imperfections, why
not we then by shifts, wiles, and forgeries? and seeing our brains are ou^
only Patrimonies, let us spend with judgment, not like a desperate son and
heir, but like a sober and discreet Templer, -- one that will never march
beyond the bounds of his allowance, and for our thriuing means, thus, I my
self will put on the Deceit of a Fortune Tellers, a Fortune Tellers.


Skirm. Very proper.


Pie. And you of a figure-caster, or a Coniurer.


Skir. A Coniurer.


Pie. Let me alone, I Will instruct you, and teach you to deceive all eyes, but
the Devils.


Skir. Oh I, for I would not deceive him and I could choose, of all others.


Pie. Fear not I warrant you; and so by those means we shall help one
another to Patients, as the condition of the age affoords creatures enough for
cunning to work upon.


Skir. Oh wondrous new fools and fresh Asses.


Pie. Oh, fit, fit, excellent.


Skir. What in the name of Coniuring?


Pye-boord. My memory greetes me happily with an admirable subject to graze
upon. The Lady-Widdow, who of late I saw weeping in her Garden for the death
of her Husband, sure she as but a watrish soul, and hal^e on it by this time is
dropped out of her Lies: device well managde may do good upon her: it stands
firm, my first practi^e shall be there?


Skir. You have my voice George?


Pye-boord. She Has a gray Gall to her Brother, a fool to her only son, and
an Ape to her youngest Daughter; -- I ouerheard 'em severally, and from their
words I Will derive my device; and thou old Peter Skirmish shall be my second in
all slights.


Skir. Nere doubt me George Pye-boord. -- only you must ^each me to conjure.


Enter Captain Idle, pinioned, and with a guarde of Officers passes over the
Stage. Pie. Push, I Will perfect thee, Peter:
How now? what is he?

Skir. Oh George! this sight kills me,
It Is my sworn Brother, Captain Idle.

Pie. Captain Idle.


Skir. Apprehended for some fellonious act or other, he has started out, h'as
made a Night on it, lackt silver; I cannot but commend his resolution, he would
not pawn his Buffe-Ierkin, I would either some of us were employde, or might
pitch our Tents at Usurers doors, to kill the slaves as they peep out at the
Wicket.


Pie. Indeed those are our ancient Enemies; they keep our money in their
hands, and make us to be hanged for robbing of 'em, but come letts follow after
to the Prison, and know the Nature of his offense, and what we can steed him
in, he shall be sure of; and I Will uphold it still, that a charitable Knave, is
better then a soothing Puritaine.


Exeunt. Enter at one door Corporal Oath, a Vainglorious fellow, and at the
other, three of the Widow Puritaines Seruingmen, Nicholas Saint-Tantlings,
Simon Saint-Mary-Oueries, and Frailty in black scuruie mourning ^oates, and
Books at their Girdles, as coming from Church. They meet. Nich. What
Corporal Oath? I am sorry we have met with you ^ext our hearts; you are the man
that we are forbidden to keep company withal, we must not swear I can tell
you, and you have the name for swearing.


Sim. I, Corporal Oath, I would you would do so much as forsake us sir, we
cannot abide you, we must not be seen in your company.


F^ail. There is none of us I can tell you, but shall be soundly whipped for
swearing.


Corp. Why how now? we three? Putitanicall Scrape-shoes, Flesh a good Fridayes?
a hand.


All. Oh.


Corp. Why Nich^las Saint-Tantlings, Simon Saint Mary Oueries, has the De'ele
possessed you, that you swear no better, you halfe-Christned Katomites, you
vngod-motherd Varlets, does the first lesson teach you to be proud, and the
second to be Cocks-combes; proud Cocks-combes? not once to do duty to a man
of Mark.


Frail. A man of Mark, quatha, I do not think he can show a Beggars Noble.


Corpe. A Corporal, a Commander, one of spirit; that is able to blow you up
all dry with your Books at your Girdles.


Simon. We are not taught to believe that sir, for we know the breath of man
is weak?


Corporal breaths upon Frailty. Frail. ^oh, you lie Nicholas; for here is one
strong enough; blow us up quatha, he may well blow me above twelue-score off
an him? I warrant if the wind stood right, a man might smell him from the top
of Newgate, to the Leads of Ludgate?


Corp. Sirrah, thou Hollow-Booke of Waxe-candle.


Nicho. I, you may say what you will, so you swear not.


Corp. I swear by the --


Nicho. Hold, hold, good Corporal Oath; for if you swear once, we shall all
fall down in a sown presently.


Corp. I must and will swear: you quiuering Cocks-combes, my Captain is
imprisoned, and by Uulcans Lether Cod-piece point --


Nich. O Simon, what an oath was there.


Frail. If he should chance to break it, the poor man's Breeches would fall
down about his heels, for Venus allows him but one point to his hose?


Corpor. With these my Bullye-Feete, I will thumpe open the Prison doors, and
brain the Keeper with the begging Box, but I Will set my honest sweet Captain
Idle at liberty.


Nich. How, Captain Idle, my old Aunts son, my dear Kinsman in Capadochio.


Cor. I, thou Church-peeling, thou Holy-pa^ing, religious outside thou? if thou
had any grace in thee, thou would visit him, releive him, swear to get
him out?


Nich^. Assure you Corporal indeed-la, it is the first time I heard on it,


Cor. Why do 't now then, Marmaset? bring forth thy yearly-wages, let not a
Commander perish!


Simon. But, if he be one of the wicked, he shall perish.


Nich. Well Corporal, I Will even along with you, to visit my Kinsman, if I can
do him any good, I will, -- but I have nothing for him, Simon Saint Mary Oueris
and Fraylty, pray make a lie for me to the Knight my Master, old Sit Godfrey.


Cor. A lie? may you lie then?


Fray. O I, we may lie, but me must not swear.


Sim. True, we may lie with our Neighbors wife, but we must not swear we did
so;


Cor. Oh, an excellent Tag of religion?


Nic. Oh Simon, I have thought upon a sound excuse, it will go current, say
that I am gone to a Fast;


Sim. To a Fast, very good?


Nic. I, to a Fast say, with Master Ful-bellie the Minister.


Sim. Master Ful-bellie? an honest man: he feeds the flock w^ll, for he is an
excellent feeder?


Exit Corporal, Nicholas. Fray. O I, I have seen him eat up a whole Pigge,
and afterward falls to the pettitoes?

Exit Si^on and Fraylty.
The Prison, Marshalsea. Enter Captain Idle at one d^r^, and old soldier at
the other. George Py-boord, speaking within. Pie. Pray turn the key.


Sker. Turn the key I pray?


Cap. Who should those be, I almost know their ^oy^es? O my friends?

Entering. Ya're welcome to a smelling Room here? you newly took leave of the
air is it not a strange savor?


Pie. 'As all prisons have, smells of sundry wretcher;
Who tho departed, leave their sents behind 'em,
By Gold Captain, I am sincerely sorry for thee.

Cap. By my troth George I thank thee; but pish, -- what must be, must be.


Skir. Captain, what do you lie in for? is it great? what is your offense?


Cap. Faith, my offense is ordinary, -- common? A Hie-waye, and I fear me my
penalty will be ordinary and common too, a halter.


Pie. Nay prophecy not so ill, it shall go heard'
But I Will shift for thy life.

Cap. Whether I live or die, th^^ art an honest George (...) tell you -- silver
stou'd not with ^^ee, as it had done, (for now the tide runs to Bawdes and
flatterers) I had a start out, and by chance set upon a fat steward, thinking
his purse had been as pursey as his body; and the slave had about him but the
poor purchase of ten groates: notwithstanding being descryed, pursued, and
taken, I know the Law is so grim: in respect of many desprate-vnsetled
soldiers, that I fear me I shall dance after their pipe for it.


Skir. I am twice sorry for you Captain: first that your purchase was so small,
and now that your danger is so great.


Cap. Push, the worst is (...) death, -- ha you a pipe of Tobacc^ about you?


Skir. I think, I have there abouts about me!


Cap blows a pipe. Cap. Here Is a clean Gentleman too, to receive?


Pie. Well, I must cast about, some happy slight,
Work brain, that ever did thy Master right?

Cor. Keeper? let the key be turn'dl


Corporal and Nicholas Nic. I, I pray Master keeper gives a cast of your
office? within.


Cap. How now ^ more Visitants? -- what Corporal Oath?


Pie. Skir. Corporal?


Cor. In prison honest Captalne? this must not be?


Nic. How do you Captain Kinsman?


Cap. Good Cocks-combe? what makes that pure -- starched fool here?


Nic. You see Kinsman I am som-what bold to call in, and see how you do, I
heard you were safe enough, and I was very glad on it that it was no worse;


Cap. This is a double torture now, -- this fool by the book
Does vex me more then my imprisonment?
What meant you Corporal to hook him hither?

Cor. Who he? he shall releive thee, and supply thee,
I Will make him do it;

Cap. Fie, what vain breath you spend! he supply? I Will sooner expect mercy
from a Usurer when my bonds forfetted, sooner kindness from a Lawier when my
mony's spent: nay sooner charity from the devil, then good from a Puritaine?
I Will look for releife from him, when I^^cifer is restored to his blood, and in
Heaven again!


Nic. I warrant my Kinsman's talking of me, for my left ear burns most
tyrannically?


Pie. Captain Idle? what is he there? he look; like a Monkey upward; and a
Crane downe-ward.


Cap. Pshaw; a foolish Cozen of nine; I must thank God for him.


Pie. Why the better subject to work a escape upon; thou shall even change
clothes with him, and leave him here, and so;


Cap. Push, I published him even now to my Corporal, he will be damned, ere
he do me so much good; why I know a more proper, a more handsome device then
that, if the slave would be sociable -- now goodman Fleere-face?


Nic. Oh, my Cozen begins to speak to me now, I shall be acquainted with him
again I hope,


Skirmish. Look what ridiculous Raptures take hold of his wrinckles,


Pie. Then what say you to this device, a happy one Captain?


Capt. Speak low George; Prison Rattes have vvider ears then those in
Malt-lof^s.


Nic. Cozen, if it lay in my power, as they say? -- to -- do;


Cap. Twould do me a^ exceeding pleasure indeed that, but ^ ere talk fo^der
on it, the fool will be hanged, ere he do it.


Cor. Pax, I Will thump 'em to it.


Pie. Why do but try the Fopster, and break it to him bluntly.


Cap. And so my disgrace will dwell in his Jaws, and the slave slauer out our
purpose to his Master, for would I were but as sure on it as I am sure he will
deny to do it.


Nic. I would be heartily glad Cozen, if any of my friendships, as they say,
might -- stand, ah,


Pie. Why, you see he offers his friend-ship foolishly to you already?


Captain. I, that is the (...) on it, I would he would offer it wisely?


Nich. Verily, and indeed la, Cousen? --


Cap. I have took note of thy steeres a good while, if thou art minded to do
me good? as thou gapst upon me comfortably, and give me charitable faces?
which indeed is but a fashion in you all that are Pu^itaines? wilt soon at
night steal me thy Masters chain?


Nich. Oh, I shall sown!


Pie. Corporal, he starts already!


Cap. I know it to be worth three hundred Crowns, and with the half of that,
I can buy my life at a Brokers, at second hand, which now lies in pawn to 'th
Law, if this thou re^suse to do, being easy and nothing dangerous, in that
thou art held in good opinion of thy M^^ster, why it is a palpable Argument thou
holdst my life at no price, and these thy broken and unjointed offers, are but
only created in thy lip, now borne, and now buried, foolish breath only? what;
woult do it? shall I look for happiness in thy answer?


Nic. Steal my Masters chane quo 'the? no, it shall nere be said that
Nicholas Saint Tantlings committed Bird-lime!


Cap. Nay, I told you as much; did I not; tho he be a Puritaine yet he will be
a true man?


Nich. Why Co^zen? you know it is written, thou shall not steal?


Cap. Why, and fool, thou shall love thy Neighbor, and help him in
extremities?


Nich. Mass I think it be indeed, in what Chapter's that Cousen?


Cap. Why in the first of Charity, the 2. verse.


Nich. The first of Charity, qua tha, that is a good jest, there is no such
Chapter in my book!


Cap. No, I knew it was torn out of thy Book, and that makes so little in thy
heart.


Pie. Come, let me tell you, ya're too unkind a Kinsman in faith; the Captain
loving you so dearly, I, like the Pomwater of his eye, and you to be so
uncomfortable, fie, fie.


Nic. Pray do not wish me to be hanged, any thing else that I can do, had it
been to rob, I would ha don't, but I must not steal, that is the word the
literal, thou shall not steal, and would you wish me to steal then?


Pie. No faith, that were to much, to speak truth: why woult thou nim it from
him.


Nich. That I will?


Pie. Why enough bulhe; he shall be content with that, or he shall ha none;
let me alone with him now! Captain, I ha dealt with your Kins-man in a
Corner; a good -- kind -- naturde fellow, me thinks: go too, you shall not
have all your own asking, you shall bate somewhat on ^he is not contented
absolutely as you would say to steal the chain from him, -- but to do you a
pleasure he will nim it from him.


Nich. I, that I will, Cousen.


Cap. Well seeing he will do no more, as far as I see I must be contented
with that.


Cor. Here Is no notable gullery?


Pie. Nay I Will come nearer to you Gentleman? because we will have only but a
help and a mirth on it, the knight shall not loose his chain neither, but be
only laid out of the way some one or two days?


Nich. I, that would be good indeed? Kinsman?


Pie. For I have a farther reach to profit us better by the missing on it only,
then if we had it outright, as my discourse shall make it known too you? --
when thou have the chain, do but convey it out at back-dore into the Garden,
and there hang it close in the Rosemary banck, but for a small season; and by
that harmless devise, I know how to wind Captain Idle, out of prison, the
Knight thy Master shall get his pardon and release him, and he satisfy thy
Master with his own chain and wondrous thanks on both hands.


Nich. That were rare indeed la^pray let me know how?


Pie. Nay it is very necessary thou should know, because thou must be imploide
as an Actor?


Nich. An Actor? O no, that is a Plaier? and our Parson railes again Plaiers
mightily I can tell you, because they brought him drunck vpp'oth Stage once, --
as he will be horribly druncke.


Cor. Mass I cannot blame him then, poor Church-spout?


Pie. Why as an Intermedler then?


Nich. I that, that.


Pie. Give me Audience then? when the old Knight thy Master has radge his fill
for the loss of the chain, tell him thou have a Kinsman in prison, of such
exquisit Art, that the diuill himself is french Lackey to him, and runs
bare-headed by his horse -- belly (when he has one) whom he will cause with
most Yrish Dexterity to fetch his chain, tho twere hid under a mine of
sea-cole, and nere make Spade or Picka^e his instruments, tell him but this
with farther instructions thou shall receive from me, and thou shoust thy self
a Kinsman indeed.


Cor. A dainty Bullie.


Skir. An honest -- Booke-keeper.


Cap. And my three times thrice hunnie Cousen.


^Nich. Nay grace of God I Will rob him on it suddenly? and hang it in the
Rosemary banck, but I bear that mind Cousen I would not steal any thing me
thinks for mine own Father.


Skir. He bears a good mind in that Captain!


Pie. Why well said, he begins to be an honest fellow faith.


Cor. In t^oth he does.


Nich. You see Cousen, I am willing to do you any kindness, always saving my
self harmless?

Exit Nicholas.
Captain. Why I thank thee, fare thee well, I shall requite it.


Exit Nich. Cor. Twill be good for thee Captain, that thou have such an
egregious Ass to thy Coozen.


Cap. I, is he not a fine fool Corporal?
But George thou talkst of Art and Coniuting,
How shall that be?

Peb. Puh, be it not in your care,
Leave that to me and my directions;
Well Captain doubt not thy delivery now,
E 'en with the vantage man, to gain by prison,
As my thoughts prompt me: hold on brain and plot,
I aim at many cunning far events,
All which I doubt not but to hit at length,
I Will to the Widow with a quaint assault,
Captain be merry.

Capt. Who I? Kerrie merry Buffe-Ierkin?


Pie. Oh, I am happy in more slights, and one will knit strong in another --
Corporal Oath?


Corp. Hoh Bully?


Pie. And thou old Peter Skirmish, I have a necessary task for you both.


Skir. Lay't upon George Pye-boord.


Corp What ere it be, we will manage it.


Pie. I would have you two maintain a quarrel before the
Lady Widows door, and draw your swords in the edge of the
Evening: clash a little, clash, clash.

Corp. Fuh.
Let us alone to make our Blades (...) noone,
Tho it be after Supper.

Pie. Know you can;
And out of that false fire, I doubt not but to raise strange belief -- and
Captain to countenance my device the better, and grace my words to the Widow,
I have a good plain Satin suit, that I had of a young Reueller the other night,
for words pass not regarded now a days unless they come from a good suite of
clothes, which the Fates and my wits have bestowed upon me. Well Captain
Idle, if I did not highly love thee, I would nere be seen within twelve score
of a pris^^, for I protest at this instant, I walk in great danger of small
debts ^^owe money to several Hostisses, and you know such lill^ (...) be upon
a man's Jack.


Capt. True George?


Pie. Fare thee well Captain. Come Corporal and Ancient? thou shall hear
more news next time we greet thee?


Corp. More news? I; by you Bear at Bridge-Foote in heaven shall thou.


Exeunt. Capt. Enough: my friends farewell,
This prison shows as if Ghosts did part in Hell.

Enter Moll youngest Daughter to the Widow: alone. Moll. Not Marry: forswear
Marriage? why all women know it is as honorable a thing as to lie with a man;
and I to spite my Sisters vow the more, have entertainde a suter already* a
fine gallant Knight of the last Fether, he says he will Coach me too, and
well appoint me, allow me money to Dice with-all, and many such pleasing
protestations he sticks upon my lips; indeed his short-winded Father in the
Country is wondrous wealthy, a most abominable Farmer, and therefore he may
doo^e in time: troth I Will venture upon him; women are not without ways ^now to
help themselves* if he prove wise and good as his word, why I shall love him,
and use him kindly: and if he prove an Ass, why in a quarter of an hours
warning I can transform him into an Ox; -- there comes in my Relief again.


Ent^^ Frail^i^. Frail. O Mistress Moll, Mistress Moll.


Moll. How now? what is the news?


Frail. The Knight your ^uter, sir John Penny-Dub.


Moll. Sir John Penny-Dub? where? where?


Frail. He Is walking in the Gallerie.


Moll. Has my Mother seen him yet.


Frail. O no, she is -- spitting in the Kitchen.


Moll. Direct him hither softly, good Frailty, -- I Will meet him half way.


Frail. That Is just like running a Tilt; but I hope heel break nothing this
time.


Enter Sir John Penny-Dub. Moll. It Is happiness my Mother saw him not:
O we come good Sir Ioha.

Penny-dub. I thank you faith, -- Nay you must stand me, till I kiss you:
it is the fashion every where I-faith, and I came from Court enough?


Moll. Nay the Fates forsend that I should anger the fashion?


Penny. Then not forgetting the sweet of new ceremonies, I first fall back,
then recovering my self; make my honor to your lip thus: and then accost it.


Moll. Trust me, very pretty, and moving, you are worthy on it sir, --
O my Mother, my Mother, now she is here,
Kissing: Ent. Widow and Sir Godfr. We Will steal into the Gallery.

Exeunt. Sir Godf. Nay Sister, let Reason rule you, do not play the fool,
stand not in your own light, you have wealthy offers, large tendrings, do not
with-stand your good fortune: who comes a wooing to you I pray? no small fool,
a rich Knight ath City, Sir Oliver Muck-hill, no small fool I can tell you:
and furthermore as I heard late by your Maide-seruants, (as your Maide-seruants
will say to me any thing I thank `em) both your Daughters are not without
Suitors, I, and worthy ones too? one a Brisk Cou^tier, Sir Andrew Tip-staffe;
suter a far off to your eldest Daughter, and the third a huge-welthie Farmers
son, a fine young Country Knight, they call him Sir John Penny-Dab, a good
name marry, he may have it coynde when he lackes money: what blessings are
these Sister?


Wid. Tempt me not Satan.


Sir Godf. Satan? do I look like Satan? I hope the Deuill's not so old as I,
I tro.


Wid. You wound my senses Brother, when you name,
A suter to me, -- oh I cannot abide it,
I take in poison, when I hear one named,
Enter Simon. How now Simon? where is my son Edmund?

Sim, Ve^ily Madame, he is at vain Exercise, dripping in he Tennis-court.


Wid. At Tennis-court? oh, now his father's gone, I shall have no rule with him;
oh wicked Edmond, I might well compare this with the Prophecy in the
Chronicle, tho farte inferior, as Harry of Monmouth woone all, and Harry of
Windsor lost all, so Edmund of Brist^^ that was the Father, got all, and Edmond
of London that is his son now, will spend all?


Sir Godf. Peace Sister, we will have hem reformd, there is hope on him yet, tho
it be but a little.


Enter Frailty. Frail. Forsooth Madam? there are two or three Archers at
door, would very gladly speak with your Ladyship.


Wid. Archers?


Sir Godf. Your husbands Fletcher I warrant.


Wid. Oh,
Let them come near, they bring home things of his,
Troth I should ha forgot 'em, how now?
Villain, which be those Archers?

Enter the suitors Sir Andrew Tipstaffe, Sir Oliver Much-hill, and Penny-dub.
Frail. Who do you not see 'em before you, are not these Archers, what do you
call 'em Shooters: Shooters and Archers are all one I hope.


Wid. Out ignorant slave.


Muck Nay pray be patient Lady,
We come in way of honorable love.

Tipst. Penny. We do.


Muck. To you.


Tipst. Penny. And to your Daughters?


Widow. O why will you offer me this Gentlemen? indeed I will not look upon
you; when the Tears are scarce out of mine Eyes, not yet washed off from my
Cheeks, and my dear husbands body scars^ so cold as the Coffin, what reason
have you to offer it? I am not like some of your Widows that will bury one
in the Evening, and be sure to another ere morning? pray away, pray, take your
answers good Knights, and you be sweet Knights, I have vowed never to marry;
-- and so have my daughters too!


Penny. I two of you have, but the thirds a good wench!


Muck. Lady, a shrewde answer many; the best is, it is but the first, and he is
a blunt wooer, that will leave for one sharp answer.


Tip. Where be your daughters Lady, I hope they will give us better
encouragements?


Wid. Indeed they will answer you so, take it a my word they will give you the very
same answer Verbat^m cruely la;


Penny Mum: Molls a good wench still, I know what she will do?


Muck. Well, Lady, for this time we will take our leaves, hoping for better
comfort.


Wid. O never, never? and I live these thousand years; and you be good
Knights do not hope; twiil be all Vain, Vain, -- look you, put off all
yours suites, and you come to me again.


Fray. Put off all their suites qua tha? I, that is the best wooing of a Widow
indeed, when a man's Nonsuted, that is, when he is a bed with her.


Going out, Muckhill and sir Godfrey. Muck. Sir Godfrey? here is twenty Angels
more work hard for me; there is life int yet.

Exit Muckhill.
Sir Godf. Fea^e not Sir Oliver Muckhill, I Will stick close for you, leave all
with me.


Enter George Py-boord, the scholar. Pie. By your leave Lady Widow.


Wid. What another suitor now?


Py. A suitor no I protest Lady? if you^de give me your self
I Would not be troubled with you.

Wid. Say you so Sir, then you're the better welcome sir.


Pie. Nay Heaven bless me from a Widow, unless I were sure to bury her
speedily!


Wid. Good bluntness: well your business sit?


Pie. Very needful; if you were in private once?


Wid. Needful? brother pray leave us; and you sit?


Fray. I should laugh now, if this blunt fellow should put 'em all by side the
sti^rop, and vault into the saddle himself, I have seen as mad a trick.


Exit Frailty. Enter Daughters. Wid. Now Sir? -- here is none but we --
Daughters forbear.


Pyb. O no, pray let 'em stay, for what I have to speak imports equally to
them as to you?


Wid. Then you may stay.


Pyb. I pray bestow on me a serious ear,
For what I speak is full of weight and fear?

Wid. Fear?


Pyb. I ift pass unregarded, and vneffected,
Else peace and joy: -- I pray Attention?
Widdowe? I have been a mere stranger for these parts that you live in, nor
did I ever know the Husband of you, and Father of them, but I truly know by
certain spiritual Intelligence, that he is in Putgatorie?


Wed. Purgatory? tuh; that word deserves to be spit upon; I wonder that a man
of sober tongue as you seem to be, should have the folly to believe there is
such a place.


Pyb. Well Lady, in cold blood I speak it, I assure you that there is a
Purgatory, in which place I know your husband to recide and wherein he is like
to remain, till the dissolution of the world, till the last general Bon-fire:
when all the earth shall melt into nothing. And the Seas scalde their finnie
laborers: so long is his abidance, unless you alter the property of your
purpose, together with each of your Daughters theirs, that is, the purpose of
single life in your self and your eldest Daughter, and the speedy
determination of marriage in your youngest.


Moll. How knows he that, what, h'as some Devil told him?


Wid. Strange he should know our thoughts: --
Why but Daughter have you purposede speedy Marriage?

Pyb. You see she tells you I, for she says nothing. Nay give me credit as you
please, I am a stranger to you, and and yet you see I know your determinations,
which must come to me Metaphisically, and by a super-naturall intelligence.


Wid. This puts Amazement on me?


Franck. Know our seacrets.


Mol. I Would thought to steal a marriage, would his tongue
Had dropped out when he blabt it.

Wid. But sir, my husband, was too hon^st a dealing man to be now in any
purgatories --


Pie. O Do not load your conscience with untruths,
It Is but mere folly now to guild hem ore:
That has past but for Copper; Praises here,
Cannot unbind him there? confess but truth,
I know he got his wealth with a hard gripe:
Oh hardly, hardly?

Wid. This is most strange of all, how knows he that?


Pie. He would eat fools and ignorant heirs clean up;
And had his drinck, from many a poor man's browe,
Even as their labor brewde it?
He would scrape riches to him most unjustly;
The very dirt between his ^ailes was Il-got:
And not his own, -- oh
I groan to speak on it, the though it makes me shudder? -- shudder?


Wid. It quakes me too, now I think on it -- sir, I am much gr^eu'd, that you
a stranger should so deeply wrong my dead husband!


Pi^. Oh?


Wid. A man that would keep Church so du^y; rise early, before his servants,
and even for Religious have, go vngarterd, vnb^ttend, nay sir Reverence
untrust, to Morning Prayer?


Pi^. Oh vff;


Wid. Dine quickly upon hie-dayes, and when I had great guess, would even
shame me and rize from the Table, to get a good seat at an afternoon Sermon?


Pie. There Is the diuill, there is the diuill, true, he thought it Sanctity
enough, if he had killed a man, so^ tad been done in a Pue, or undone his
Neighour, so ta'd been nere y^ough to the Preacher, Oh; -- a Sermon's a fine
short cloak of an hour long, and will hide the vpper-part of a dissembler, --
Church, I, he seem^d al Church, and his conscience was as hard as the Pulpit!


Wid. I can no more endure this.


Pie, Nor I widow
Endure to flatter.

Wid. Is this all your business with me?


Pie, No, Lady, it is but the induction too'te,
You may believe my strains, I strike all true?
And if your conscience would leap up to your tongue, your self would affirm
it, and that you shall perceive I know of things to come; as well as I do of
what is present, a Brother of your husbands shall shortly have a loss!


Wid. A loss, marry heaven for-fend, Sir Godfrey, my brother!


Pie. Nay keep in your wonders, till I have told you the fortunes of you all;
which are more fearful, if not happily prevented -- for your part and your
daughters, if there be not once this day some bloodshed before your door,
wheerof the human creature dies? two of you the elder shall run mad?


Mother and Franck. Oh.


Mol. That Is not I yet!


Pie. And with most impudent prostitution show your naked bodies to the veiw of
all beholders!


Wid. Our naked bodies? sie for shame:


Pie. Attend me: and your younger daughter be s^rocken dumb?


Mol. Dumb? out alas: it is the worst pain of all for a Woman, I Would rather be
mad, or run naked, or any thing: dumb?


Pie. Give ear? ere the evening fall upon, Hill Bogge, and Meadow, this my
speech shall have past probation, and then shall I be believed accordingly.


Widow. If this be true, we are all sham'de, all undone?


Mol. Dumb? I Will speak as much as ever I can possible before evening?


Pie. But if it so come to pass (as for your fair sakes I wish it may) that
this presage of your strange fortu^es be prevented by that accide^t of death
and bloud-shedding which I before told you off: take heed upon your lives; that
two of you which have vowed never to marry, seek you out husbands with all
present speed and you the third that have such a desire to outstrip
chastity, look you meddle not with a husband.


Moll. A double torment.


Pyb. The breach of this keeps your father in Purgatory, and the punishments
that shall follow you in this world, would with horror kill the Ear should
hear 'e^ related.


Wid. Marry? why I vowed never to marry.


Frank. And so did I.


Moll. And I vowde never to be such an Ass, but to marry. what a cross
Fortune's this?


Pyb. Ladies, tho I be a Fortune Tellers, I cannot better Fortunes, you have
'em from me as they are reueald to me: I would they were to your tempers, and
fellows with your bloods, that is all the bitterness I would you.


Widow. Oh it is a just vengeance, for my husbands hard purchases.


Pyb. I wish you to be-thinke your selves, and leauem.


Wid. I Will to Sir Godfrey my Brother, and acquaint him with these fearful
presages.


Franck. For Mother they portend losses to him.


Wid. Oh I, they do, they do,
If any happy issue crown thy words,
I will reward thy cunning.

Pyb. It Is enough Lady,
I wish no higher.
Exit.
Mol. Dumb, and not marry, worse,
Neither to speak, nor kiss, a double curse?
Exit.
Pyb. So all this comes well about yet, I play the Fortune Tellers, as well as
if I had had a Witch to my Grannam: for by good happiness, being in my
Hostisses Garden, which neighbors the Orchard of the Widow, I laid the hole
of mine ear to a hole in the wall, and heard 'em make these vows, and speak
those words upon which I wrought these advantages; and to encourage my forgerie
the more, I may now perceive in 'em a na^urall simplicity which will easily
swallow an abuse, if any covering be over it: and to confirm my former presage
to the Widow, I have aduizde old Peter Skirmis^ the Soldier, to hurt
Corporal Oath upon the Leg, and in that hurry I Will rush amongst 'em, and in
stead of giving the Corporal some Cordial to comfort him, I Will power into his
mouth a potion of a sleepy Nature, to make him seem as dead; for the which the
old soldier being apprehended, and ready to be borne to execution, I Will step
in, and take upon me the cure of the dead man, upon pain of dying the
condemneds death: the Corporal will wake at his minute, when the sleepy force
has wrought it self, and so shall I get my self into a most admired opinion,
and under the pretext of that cunning, beguile as I see oc^asion: and if that
foolish Nicholas Saint Tantlings keep true time with the chain, my plot will
be found; the Captain delivered, and my wits applauded among scholars and
soldiers for ever.

Exit Py-boord.
Enter Nicholas Saint Tantlings with the chain. Nic. Oh I have found an
excellent advantage to take a way the chain, my Master put it off even now to
say on a new Doub^et, and I sneak't it away by little and little most
Puritanically! we shall have good sport a non when has mist it, about my
Cozen the Coniurer* the world shall see I Am an honest man of my word for now
I Am going to hang it between Heaven and Earth among the Rosemary branches.

Exit Nich.
Actus 3.
Enter (...) and Frailty. Frai. Si^rah (...) Saint? my Mistress sends away a^l
her suitors and puts ^^eas (...) ears?


Sim. Frailty? she dos like an honest chaste, and virtuous woman? for widows
ought not to wallow in the puddle of iniquity.


Fra. Yet Simon, many widows will do it, what so comes on it.


Sim. True Frailty, their filthy flesh desires a Conjunction Copulative what
strangers a^e within, Frailty?


Fra^. There Is none (...) but Master Pilfer the Tailer: he is above with Sir
Godfreie pra^^ing of a Doublet: and I must trudge anon to fetch Master Suds
the Barber!


Simon. Master Suds, a good man, he washes the sins of the
Beard clean.

S^ir. How now creatures? what is a clock.


Enter old Skirmish the soulders. Frai. Why do you take us to be Jack at'h
Clock-house?


Skir. I say again to you what is a clock?


Sim. Truly la, we go by the clock of our conscience, all worldly Clockes we
know go false, and are set by drunken Sextons.


Skir. Then what is a clock in your conscience? -- oh, I must break off, here
comes the corporal -- hum, hum! -- what is a clock?


Enter Corporal. Corp. A clock? why past seventeen.


Frai. Past seventeen? nay has met with his match now, Corporal Oath will fit
him.


Skir. Thou do not bawke or baffle me, do thou^ I am a Soldier -- part
seventeen.


Corp. I, thou art not angry with the figures art thou? I will prove it unto
thee, 12. and 1. is thirteen ^ hope, 2. fourteen, 3. fifteen, 4 sixteen,
and 5. seauenteene, then past seauenteene, I will take the Dyals part in a just
cause.


Skir. I say it is but past five then.


Corp. I Will swear it is past seauenteene then^ do thou not know numbers,
can thou not cast?


Skir. Cast? do thou speak of my casting in the street? Dr^^.


Corp. I, and in the Market place.


Sim, Clubs, clubs, clubs.


Simon runs in. Frail. I, I knew by their shuffling Clubs would be Trumpe;
mass here is the Knave, and he can do any good upon 'em: Clubs, clubs, clubs?


Enter Py-boord. Cap. O villain, thou have opend a vain in my leg.


Pyb. How now, for shame, for shame, put up, put up.


Cap. By yon blew Welkin, 'twas out of my part George to be hurt on the leg.


Enter Officers. Pyb. Oh peace now -- I have a Cordial here to comfort thee.


Offi. Down with 'em, down with em, lay hands upon the villain.


Skir. Lay hands on me?.


Pyb. I Will not be seen among em now.


Cap. I Am hurt, and had more need have Surgeons,
Lay hands upon me then rough Officers.

Offi. Go carry him to be dressed then:
This mutinous Soldier shall along with me to prison.

Skir. To prison, where is George.


Offi. Away with hem.


Exeunt with Skir. Pyb. So*
All lights as I would wish, the amazd widow,
Will plant me strongly now in her belief,
And wonder at the virtue of my words:
For the event turns those presages from em
Of being mad and dumb, and begets joy
Mingled with admiration: these empty creatures,
Soldier and Corporal were but ordaind,
As instruments for me to work upon,
Now to my patient, here is his potion.
Exit Pyboord.
Enter the Widow with her two Daughters. Wid. O wondrous happiness, beyond
our thoughts:
O luckie fair event, I think our fortunes,
Were blessed even in our Cradles: we are quitted
Of all those shameful violent presages,
By this rash bleeding chance; go Frailty run, and know,
Whether he be yet living* or yet dead,
That here before my door received his hurt.

Frail. Madam, he was carried to the superior, but if he had no money when
he came there, I warrant he is dead by this time.

Exit Frailty.
Franck. Sure that man is a rare fortune-te^ler, never looked upon our hands,
nor upon any mark about us, a wondrous fellow surely.


Moll. I am glad, I have the use of my tongue yet: tho of nothing else, I shall
find the way to marry too, I hope shortly.


Wid. O where is my Brother sir Godfrey, I would he were here, that I might
relate to him how prophetically, the cunning Gentleman spoke in all things.


Enter Sir Goldfrey in a rage. Sir Godf. O my Chain, my Chain, I have lost my
Chain, where be these Villains, Varlets?


Wid. Oh; has lost his Chain.


Sir Godf. My Chain, my chain.


Widow. Brother be patient, hear me speak, you know I told you that a
cunning man told me, that you should have a loss, and he has prophicied so
true.


Sir Godf. Out he is a villain, to prophe^y of the loss of my chain, it was
worth above three hundred C^ownes, -- besides it was my Fathers, my fathers
fathers, my Grandfathers huge grandfathers? I had as live ha lost my Neck, as
the chain that hung about it; O my chain, my chain.


Wid. Oh brother, who can be against a misfortune, it is happy it was no more.


Sir Godf. No, more! O goodly godly sister, would you had me lost more? my best
gown too, with the cloth of gold-lace? my holiday Gascoines, and my Ierkin set
with pearl; no more?


Wid. Oh, Brother! you can read. --


Sir Godf. But I cannot read where my chain is, -- what strangers have been
here? you let in strangers! The eues, and Catch-poles; how comes it gonne?
there was none above with me but my Tailor; and my Tailor will not -- steal I
hope?


Mol. No he is afraid of a chain!


Enter Fraylty. Wid. How now sirrah, the news?


Fray. O Mistres, he may well be called a Corporal now, for his corpse are as
dead as a cold Capons?


Wid. More happiness.


Sir Godf. Sirrah, what is this to my chain? where is my chain knave?


Fray. Your chain sir?


Sir Godf. My chain is lost villain.


Fray. I would he were hanged in chains that has it then for me? Alas sir,
I saw none of your chain, since you were hung with it your self?


Sir Godf. Out varlet? it had full three thousand Linck^,
I have often told it over at my prayers:
Over and over, full three thousand Lincks.

Frayl. Had it so sir: sure it cannot be lost then; I Will put you in that comfort.


Sir Godf. Why why?


Frayl. Why if your chain had so many Lincks, it cannot choose but come to
light.


Enter Nicholas. Sir Godf. Delusion? now long Nicholas where is my chain.


Nich. Why about your Neck, is it not sir.


Sir Godf. About my neck Varlet. My chain is lost,
It Is stole away, I Am robbed.

Wid. Nay Brother show your self a man:


Nic. I if it be lost or stole, if he would be patient Mistres I could bring
him to a Cunning Kinsman of mine that would fetched again with a Sesar^ra.


Sir Godf. Can thou? I will be patient, say where dwells he?


Nic. Marry he dwells now Sir, where he would not dwell and he could choose: in
the Marshalse^ sir; but he is an exlent fellow if he were out, has trauyld all
the world ore, he, and been in the seven and twenty Provinces: why he would
make it be fetched Sir if twere rid a thousand mile out of town.


Sir Godf. An admirable fellow what lies he for.


Nic. Why he did but rob a Steward of ten groats the other Night, as any man
would ha done, and there he lies fort.


Sir Godf. I Will make his peace, a Trifle, I Will get his pardon,
Beside a bountiful reward, I Will about it,
But fee the Clearkes, the Justice will do much;
I will about it straight, good sister pardon me,
All will be well I hope, and turn to good,
The name of Coniure^ has laid my blood.

Exeunt* Enter two seriants to arrest the Scholar George Pyeboord. Put. His
Hostesses where he lies will trust him no longer, she has feed me to arest him;
and if you will accompany me, because I know not of what Nature the Scholar
is, whether desperate or swift, you shall share with me Seriant Rauen-shaw, I
have the good Angel to arrest him.


Raven. Troth I Will take part with thee then, Sariant, not for the sake of the
money so much, as for the hate I bear to a Scholar: why Seriant it is Natural
in us you know to hate Scholars: natural (...), they will publish our
imperfections, Knaueryes, and Convey (...) upon Scaffolds and Stages.


Put. I and spightfully to; troth I have wounderd how the slaves could see into
our breasts so much, when our doublers are buttond with Pewter.


Raven. I and so close without yielding; oh their parlous fellows, they will
search more with their wits then a Cunstable with all his officers.


Put, Whist, whist, whist, Yeoman Dogson, Yeoman Dogson.


Dog. Ha, what says Sariant?


Put. Is he in the Pothecaryes shop still,


Dog. I, I.


Put. Have an eye, eye.


Raven. The best is Sariant if he be a true Scholar he wears no weapon I
think.


Put. No, no, he wears no weapon.


Raven. Mass, I am right glad of that: 'tas put me in better heart; nay if I
clutch him once, let me alone to dra^e him if he be stiff-necked; I have been
one of the six my self, that has dragd as tall men of their hands, when their
weapons have bin gone as ever bastinadoed a Sariant -- I have done I can tell
you.


Dog. Sariant Puttocke, Sariant Puttocke.


Put. Hoh.


Dog. He Is coming out single.


Put. Peace, peace be not to greedy, let him play a little let him play a
little, we will ^erke him up of a sudaine, I ha fisht in my time.


Raven. I and caught many a fool Seriant.


Entet Pyeboord. Pie. I parted now from Nicholas: the chains coucht,
And the old Knight has spent his rage vpont,
The widdowe holds me in great Admira ion'
For cunning Art: among joys I am 'een lost,
For my device can no way now be crossed,
And now I must to prison to the captain, and there --

Put. I arrest you sir.


Pie. Oh -- I spoke truer then I was a ware, I must to prison indeed.


Put. They say your a scholar, nay sir -- Yeoman Dogson, have care to his
arms -- you will rail again Sariants, and stage 'em: you, tickle their vices.


Pie. Nay use me like a Gentleman, I Am little less.


Put. You a Gentleman? that's a good Jest in faith; can a Scholar be a Gentleman,
-- when a Gentleman will not be a Scholar; -- look upon your welthy Citizenes
sons, whether they be Scholars or no, that are Gentlemen by their fathers
trades: a Scholar a Gentleman.


Pie. Nay let Fortune drive all her stings into me, she cannot hurt that in me,
a Gentleman, is Accidens Inseperabile to my blood.


Raven. A rablement, nay you shall have a bloody rablement; upon you I warrant
you.


Put. Go, Yeoman Dogson before, and Enter the Action 'ith Counter.


Pie. Pray do not hand me Cruelly, I Will go, Exet Dogson. Whether you please to
have me,


Put. Oh he is tame let him loose seriant.


Pie. Pray at whose suit is this?


Put. Why at your Hostisses suite where you lie, Misters Cunnyburrow for bed
and board, the sum four pound five shillings and five pence.


Pie. I know the sum to true, yet I presumde,
Upon a farther day; well it is my stars:
And I must bear it now, tho never harder.
I swear now, my device is crossed indeed.
Captain must lie bite: this is Deceytes seed.

Put. Come, come away.


Pie. Pray give me so much time as to knit my garter, and I Will a way with you.


Put. Well we must be paid for this waiting upon you, this is no pains to
attend thus.


Making to tie his garter. Pie. I am now wretched, and miserable, I shall nere
recover of this disease: hot Iron gnaw their fists: they have struck a Fever
into my shoulder, which I shall nere shake out again I fear me, till with a
true Habeas Corpus the Sexton remove me, oh if I take prison once I shall be
pressed to death with Actions, but not so happy as speedily; perhaps I may be
forty year a pressing till I be a thin old man, that looking through the
grates, men may look through me; all my means is confounded, what shall I
do? has my wit served me so long, and now give me the slip (like a Traynd
servant) when I have most need of 'em: no device to keep my poor carcass fro
these Puttocks? -- yes, happiness, have I a paper about me now? yes too, I Will
try it, it may hit, Extremity is Touchstone unto wit, I, I.


Put. Sfoot how many yards are in thy Gatters, that thou art so long a tying on
them? come away sir.


Pyb. Troth Seriant I protest, you could never ha took me at a worse time, for
now at this instant, I have no lawful picture about me.


Put. Slid how shall me come by our fees then.


Ra^. We must have fees Sir.


Pib. I could ha wished in faith, that you had took me half an hour hence for
your own sake, for I protest if you had not crossed me, I was going in great joy
to receive five pound of a Gentleman, for the Device of a Mask here, drawn in
this paper* but now, come I must be contented, it is but so much lost, and
answerable to the rest of my fortunes.


Put. Why how far hence dwells that Gentleman?


Rau. I, well said seriant, it is good to cast about for money.


Put. Speak, if it be not far --


Pyb. We are but a little past it, the next street behind us.


Put. Slid we have waited upon you grievously already* if you will say you will be
liberal when you have, give us double ^ees, and spend vpon's, why we will sho^
(...) that kindness, and go along with you to the Gentleman.


Rau. I well said still seriant v^ge that.


Pyb. Troth if it will su^^ice, it shall be all among you, for my p^rt i will not
pocket a penny, my hostis^e shall have her four pound five shillings, and bate
me the five pence, and the other ^^fteene shillings I Will spend upon you.


Rauinsh. Why now thou art a good Scholar.


Put. An excellent Scholar In Faith; has proceeded very well alate; come, we will
along with you.


Ex^unt with him passing in they knock at the door with a Knocker with inside.
Ser. Who knocks, whose at door? we had need of a Porter.


Pyb. A few friends here? -- pray is the Gentleman your master within.


Ser. Yes, is your business to him?


Pyb. I, he knows it, when he see's me:
I pray you have you forgot me.

Ser. I by my troth sir, Pray come near, I Will in and tell him of you, please
you to walk here in the Gallery till he comes.


Pyb. We will attend his worship, -- worship I think, for so much the Posts
at his door should signify, and the fair coming in, and the wicket, else I
neither knew him nor his worship, but it is happiness he is within doors, what
so ere he be, if he be not too much a formal Citizen, he may do me good:
Seriant and Yeoman, how do you like this house, is it not most wholsomly plotted?


Raven. Troth prisoner, an exceeding fine house.


Pyb. Yet I wonder how he should forget me, for he nere knew me: No matter,
what is forgot in you will be remembered in your Master.

A pretty comfortable room this me thinks:
You have no such rooms in prison now?

Put. Oh dog-holes toote,


Pyb. Dog-holes indeed -- I can tell you I have great hope to have my Chamber
here shortly, nay and diet too, for he is the most free-hartedst Gentleman
where he takes: you would little think it? and what a fine Gallery were here
for me to walk and study, and make verse^,


Put. O it stand^ very pleasantly for a Scholar.


Enter Gentleman. Pyb. Look what maps, and pictures, and devices, and things,
neatly deli^ately? mass here he comes, he should be a Gentleman, I like his
Beard well; -- All happiness to your worship.


Gentle. You're kindly welcome sir.


Put. A simple (...).


Raven. Mass it seems the Gentleman makes great account of him.


Pyb. I have the thing here for you sir.


Pyb. I beseech you conceal me sir, I Am undone else, -- I have ^he Mask here
for you sir, Look you sir, -- I beseech your worship first to pardon my
rudeness, for my extremes makes me boulder then I would be; I am a poor
Gentleman and a Scholar, and now most unfortunately fallen into the ^angs of
unmerciful officers, arrested for debt, which tho small, I am not able to
compass, by reason I Am destitute of lands, money, and friends, so that i^ I
fall into the hungry swallow of the prison, I am like utterly to perish, and
with fees and extortions be pincht clean to the bone: Now, if ever pity had
interest in the blood of a Gentleman, I beseech you vouchsafe but to favor
that means of my escape, which I have already thought upon.


Gent. Go forward.


Put. I warrant he likes it rarely.


Pyb. In the plundge of my extremities, being giddy, and doubtful what to do;
at last it was put into my laboring thoughts, to make happy use of this paper,
and to bleare their unlettered eyes, I told them there was a Device for a Mask
drawn int', and that (but for their interception,) I was going to a Gentleman
to receive my reward for it: they greedy at this word, and hoping to make
purchase of me, offered their attendance, to go along with me, 'my hap was to
make bold with your door Sir, which my thoughts showde me the most fairest
and comfortablest entrance, and I hope I have happened right upon
understanding, and pity: may it please your good Worship then, but to uphold
my Device, which is to let one of your men put me out at back-doore, and I
shall be bound to your worship for ever.


Gent. By my troth an excellent device.


Puttock. An excellent device he says; he likes it wonderfully.


Gent. A my faith I never heard a better.


Rauenshaw. Hark, he swears he never heard a better, Serieant.


Put. O there is no talk on it, he is an excellent Scholar, and especially for a
Mask.


Gent. Give me your Paper, your Device; I was never better pleased in all my
life: good wit, brave wit, finely rought, come in sir, and receive your
money sir.


Pyb. I Will follow your good Worship, --
You heard how he likte it now?

Put. Puh, we know he could not choose but like it: go thy ways thou art a
witty fine fellow in faith, thou shall discourse it to us at Tavern anon will thou?


Pyb I, I, that I will, -- look Seriants here are Maps, and prittie toys, be
doing in the mean time, I shall quickly have told out the money, you know.


Put. Go, go little villain, fetch thy chinck, I begin to love thee, I Will be
drunk to night in thy company.


Pyb. This ^entlemen I may well call a part
Of my salvation, in these earthly evils,
For he has saved me from three hungry Devils.

Exit George. Puttock* Sir^ah Seriant, these Mappes are prittie painted things,
but I could nere fancy 'em yet, ^mee thinks they are too busy, and full of
Circles and Coniurations, they say all the world's in one of them, but I could
nere find the Counter in the Poultrie.


Rave. I think so: how could you find it? for you know it stands behind the
houses.


Dogs^n. Mass that's true, then we must look ath' backside fort; Sfoote
here is nothing, all is ba^e.


Raven. I warrant thee that stands for the Counter, for you know there is a
company of bare fellows there.


Put. Faith like enough Seriant? I never marked so much before? Sirran Seriant,
and Yeoman, I should love these Maps out a cry now, i^ we could see (...)
peep out of door in em, oh we might have em in a morning to our Breake-fast
so finely, and nere kn^^ke our heels to the ground a whole day for em.


Raven. I marry sir, I Would buy one then my self.
But this talk is by the way, where shall's sup to night,
Five pound received, (...) talk of that,
I have a trick worth all, you two shall bear him to 'th Tavern, whilst I go
close with his Hostisse, and work out of her, I know she would be glad of
the sum to finger money; because she knows it is but a desperate debt, and
full of hazard, what will you say if I bring it to pass that the Hostisse
shall be contented with one half for all; and we to share the other;
fift-shillings bullies.


Put. Why I would call thee King of Seriants, and thou should be Chronicled
in the Counter book for ever.


Ra. Well put it to me, we will make a Night on it faith.


Dog. Sfoote I think he receives more money he stays so long.


Put. He tarries long indeed, may be I can tell you upon the good liking ont
the Gentleman may prove more bountiful.


Ra That would be rare, we will search him.


Put. Nay be sure of it we will search him! and make him light enough.


Enter the Gentlemen. Ra. Oh here comes the Gentleman; by your leave sir.


Genesis God you god den sirs, -- would you speak with me;


Put. No, not with your worship sir, only we are bold to stay for a friend of
ours that went in with your worship.


Genesis Who? notthe scholar?


Put. Yes even he and it please your worship?


Genesis Did he make you stay for him? he did you wrong then why, I can assure
you he is gone above an hour ago.


Ra. How? sir?


Gent. I paid him his money, and my man told me he went out at back-dore.


Put. Back-dore?


Genesis Why, what is the matter.


Put. He was our prisoner sir, we did arrest him.


Genesis What he was not? you the Sheriffs Officers -- you were to blame then,
Why did you not make known to me as much:
I could have kept him for you, I protest
He receiude all of me in Britain Gold
Of the last coining;

Ra. Vengeance dog him with it.


Put. Sfoote has he guld us so.


Dog. Where shall we sup now Serieants?


Put. Sup (...) now, ^ate Porridge for a month;
Well, we cannot impute it to any lack of good will in your Worship, -- you
did but as another would have done, it was our hard fortunes to miss the
purchase, but if ere we clutch him again, the Counter shall charm him.


Ra^e^. The hole shall rotte him.


Dog. Amen.


Exeu^t. Gent. So,
Vex out your Lungs without doors, I am proud,
It was my hap to help him, it fell fit,
He went not empty neither for his wit*
Alas poor wretch, I could not blame his brain,
To labor his deliu^rie, to be free,
From their v^pittying sangs -- I Am glad it stood,
Within my power to do a Scholar good.
Exit.
Enter in the Prison, meeting George and (...), George coming in (...). Cap.
How now, whose that? what are you?


Pyb The same that I should be Captain.


Capt. George Pie- board, honest George? why camst thou i^ half fac^ d.
mu^^^ed so?


Pyb. Oh Captain, I thought we should nere ha laughed again, never spent frolic
hour again.


Capt. Why? why?


Pyb I coming to prepare thee, and with news
As happy as thy quick delivery,
Was traced out by the sent, arrested Captain.

Capt. Arrested George.


Pyb. Arrested, guess, guess, how many Dogs do you think I Would upon me?


Capt. Dogs, I say? I know not.


Pyb. Almost as many as George Stone the Bea^e,
Three at once, three at once.

Capt. How did thou shake 'em of then?


Pyb. The time is busy, and calls upon our wits, let it suffice,
Here I stand safe, and escaped by miracle,
Some other hour shall tell thee? when we will steep
Our eyes in laughter: Captain my device
Leanes to thy happiness, for ere the day
Be spent toth' G^rdle, thou shall be set free,
The Corporal's in his first sleep the Chain is mist,
Thy Kinsman has expressed thee, and the old Knight
With Pali^y-hams now labors thy release,
What rests, is all in thee, to Coniu^e Captain.

Cap: Conjure: sfoote George you know the devil a coniuring ^ can conjure.


P^b. The Devil of coniuring nay by my fay, I Would not have thee do so much
Captain as the Devil a coniuring: look here, I ha brought thee a circle
ready characterd and all.


Capt. Sfoote George, art in thy right wits, do know what thou say? why
do talk to a Captain, a coniuring, did thou ever hear of a Captain
conjure in thy life, do cal't a Circle, it is too wide a thing my thinks: had
it been a lesser Circle, then I knew what to have done.


Pib. Why every fool knows that Captain: nay then I Will not cogge with you
Captain, if you will stay and hang the next Seffions you may.


Capt. No by my faith George, come, come, lets to coniurring, lets to coniuing.


Pib. But if you look to be releasd, as my wits have took pain to work
it, and all means wrought to farther it, besides to put crowns in your purse,
to make you a man of better hopes, and where as before you were a Captain or
poor Soldier, to make you now a Commander of rich fools, (which is truly the
only best purchase peace can allow you) safer then Hig-wayes, Heath, or
Cunny-groues, and yet a far better booty; for your greatest thieves are
never hanged, never hanged, for why they are wise, and cheat within doors, and
we geld fools of more money in one night, then your false tailde Gelding will
purchase in a twelue-moneths running, which confirms the old Beldams saying,
he is wisest, that keeps himself warmest, that is, he that robs by a good
fire.


Capt. Well opened in faith George, thou have pulled that saying out of the husk.


Pib. Captain Idle, it is no time now to delude or delay, the old Knight will be
here suddenly, I Will perfect you, direct you, till you the trick on it: it is
nothing.


Capt. Sfoote George, I know not what to say toot, conjure? I shall be hanged
ere I coniute.


Pyb. Nay tell not me of that Captain, you will nere conjure after your hanged, I
warrant you look you ^ir, a parlous matter? sure, first to spread your circle
upon the ground, then with a little coniuring ceremony, as I Will have an
Hackney-mans wand siluerd ore a purpose for you, then a^riuing in the circle,
with a huge word, and a great t^mple as for instance: have you never seen a
stalking-stamping Player, that will raise a tempest with his tongue, and thunder
with his heels?


Cap. O yes, yes, yes: often, often.


Pyb. Why be like such a one, for any thing will blea^e the old Knights eyes,
for you must note that heel nere dare to venture into the room, only perhaps
peep fearfully through the Key hole, to see how the Play goes forward.


Capt. Well I may go about it when I will, but mark the end o^t, I shall but
shame my self in faith George, speak big words, and stamp and stare and he
look in at Keyhole, why the very thought of that would make me laugh
outright, and spoil all, nay I Will tell thee George, when I apprehend a thing
once, I am of such a laxatiue laughter, that if the Devil himself stood by,
I should laugh in his face.


Pyb. Puh, that's but the babe of a man, and may easily be hushed, as to think
upon some disaster, some sad misfortune, as the death of thy Father ithe
Country!


Cap. Sfoote that would be the more to drive me into such an ecstasy, that I
should nere lin laughing.


Pib. Why then think upon going to hanging else.


Cap. Mass that is well remembered, now i will do well I warrant thee, nere fear
me now: but how shall I do George for boisterous words, and horrible names.


Pyb. Puh, any fustian inuocations Captain will serve as well as the best, so
you rant them out well, or you may go to a Pothecaries shop, and take all the
words from the Boxes.


Cap. Troth and you say true George, there is strange words enough to raise a
hundred Quack-saluers; tho they be nere so poor when they begin? but here lies
the fear on it, how in this false coniuration a true Devil should pop up
indeed.


Pyb. A true Devil, Captain, why there was nere such a one, nay faith he
that has this place, is as false a Knave as our last Churchwarden.


Capt. Then he is false enough a conscience in faith George.


The Cry at Marshalsea. Cry prisoners. Good Gentlemen over the way, send your
relief,
Good Gentlemen over the way, -- Good s^r Godfrey?

Pyb. He Is come, he is come.


Nich. Master, that's my Kinsman younder in the Buff-Ierkin -- Kinsman, that's
my Master yonder in the Taffetie Hatt -- pray salute him entirely?


They salute: and Py-boord salutes Ma^ster Edmond. Sir God. Now my friend.


Pib. May I partake your name sir.


Edm. My name is Master ^dm^^d.


Pyb. Master Edmond -- are you not a Welchman sir?


Edm. A Welshman, why?


Pyb. Because Master is your Christen name, and Edmond your sir name?


Edm. O no; I have more names at home, Master Edmund Pius, is my full name at
length.


P^b. O cry you mercy (...)?


Whispering. Cap. I understand that you are my Kinsmans good Master, and in
regard of that, the best of my skill is at your service: but had you fortunde a
^eere stranger, and made no means to me by acquaintance, I should have utterly
denied to have been the man; both by reason of the Act past in Parliament
against Coniurers and Witches, as also, because I would not have my Art
vulgar, trite, and common.


Sir Godf. I much commend your care therein good Captain Coniurer, and that I
will be sure to have it private enough, you shall doote in my Sisters house, --
mine own house I may call it, for both our charges therein are proportiond.


Capt. Very good sir -- what may I call your loss sir?


Sir Godf. O you may called a great loss sir, a grievous loss sir, as goodly
a Chain of gold, tho I say it, that wore it: how say thou Nichol^s?


Nich. O 'twas as delicious a Chain a Gold, Kinsman you know, --


Sir God. You know? did you know it Captain?


Capt. Trust a fool with secrets? -- Sir he may say I know: his meaning is,
because my Art is such, that by it I may gather a knowledge of all things. --


Sir Godf. I very true.


Capt. A pax of all fools -- the excuse stuck upon my tongue like Ship-pitch
upon ^ Mariners gown, not to come off in have -- ber-lady Knight to loose such
a fair Chain a gold, were a soul loss; Well, I can put you in this good
comfort on it, if it be between Heaven and Earth Knight, I Will have it for you?


Sir God. A wonderful Coniuter, -- O I, it is between heaven and earth I
warrant you, it cannot go out of the realm, -- I know it is some-where above
the earth?


Capt. I nigher the earth then thou worst on.


Sir Goaf. For first my Chain was rich, and no rich thing shall enter into
heaven you know?


Nich. And as for the Devil Master, he has no need on it, for you know he has
a great chain of his own?


Sir Godf. Thou say true Nicholas, but he has put off that now, that lies
by him.


Capt. Faith Knight in few words, I presume so much upon the power of my Art;
that I could warrant your Chain again.


Sir Godf. O da^ntie Captain?


Capt. Marry it will cost me much sweat^e, I were better go to sixteen
whot-houses.


Sir Godf. I good man, I warrant thee.


Capt. Beside great vexation of Kidney and Liver.


Nich. O twill tickle you here^abouts Coozen, because you have not been used
toot.


Sir Godf. No, have you not been vsd to it Captain?


Capt. Plague of all (...) -- indeed Knight I have (...) used it a good while,
and therefore twill strai^e me so much the more you know.


Sir Godf. On it will, it will.


Cap. What plunges he puts me to, were not this Knight a fool, I had been
twice spoyld now; that Captay^es wo^se then accursed that has an ass to his
Kinsman -- Sfoote I fear he will driuell't out before I come toote. -- Now
sir -- to come to the point in deed -- you see I stick here in the iawe of
the Marshalsea, and cannot do it.


Sir Godf. Tut tur I now thy meaning, thou would say you are a prisoner, I
tell thee you are none.


Cap. How none? why is not this the Marshialsea?


Sir Godf. woult hear me speak, I hard of thy rare cuniuring My chain was
lost, I sweat for thy release, As thou shall do the like at home for me,
Keeper.


Enter Keeper. Keep. Sir.


Sir Godf. Speak is not this man free?


Keep Yes at his pleasure sir, the fee's dischargd;


Sir Godf. Go, go, I Will discharge them I.


Keep. I thank your worship


Exet Keeper. Cap. Now trust me yar a dear Knight kindness unexpected, oh
theirs nothing to a free Gentle man. -- I will cuniute for you sir till Froath
come through my Buffe-ierkin?


Sir Godf. Nay then thou shall not pass with so little a bounty, for at the
first sight of my chain again, -- Forty fine Angels shall appear unto thee.


Cap. Twill be a glorious show, in faith Knight a very fine show, but are all
these of your own house? are you sure of that fir?


Sir Godf. I, I, no, no, what is he younder? talking with my wild Nephew, pray
heaven, he give him good counsel;


Cap. Who he he is a rare friend of mine, an admirable fellow Knight, the
finest fortune tellers.


Sir Godf. Oh it is he indeed that came to my Lady sister, and foretold the loss
of my chain, I am not angry with him now, for I see it was my fortune to loose
it; by your leave M. Fortune Tellers, I had a glimps on you at home at my
Sisters the Widows, there you prouisied of the loss of a chain, -- simply
tho I stand here I was he that lost it.


Pie. Was it you sir?


Edn. A my troth Nunckle, he is the rarest fellow, has told me my fortune so
right; I find it so right to my nature.


Sir Godf. What is it? God send it a good one?


Ed^n. O it is a passing good one, Nuncle: for he says I shall prove such an
excelent gamster in my time, that I shall spend al faster then my father got it,


Sir Godf. T'here^s a fortune in deed,


Edm. Nay it hits my humor so pat.


Sir Godf. I that will be the end ont. will the Curse of the beggar prevail so
much, that the son shall consume that foolishlie, which the father got,
craftily, I, I, I, twill, twill, twill.


Pie. Stay, stay, stay


Pyebo^rd with an Almanac and the Captain. Cap. turn over George.


Pie. (...) Iutie, here Iulie that's this month, Sunday thirteen, yester day
forteene, to day fifteen.


Cap. Look quickly for the fifteen day, -- if within the compass of these
two days there would be some Boystrous storm or other, it would be the best,
I Would defer him off till then, some tempest and it be thy will?


Pie Here Is the fifteen day -- hot and fair.


Cap. Puh, would t'ad been hot and foul.


Pie. The sixteen day, that's to morrow, the morning for the most part fair
and pleasant.


Cap. No luck.


Pie But about hye-none-lighning and thunder.


Cap. Lighning and thunder, admirable, best of all, I Will conjure to morrow just
at hie none George.


Pie. Happen but true to morrow Almanac, and i will give thee leave to lie all
the year after.


Cap. sir I must crave your patience, to bestow this day upon me, that I may
furnish my self strongly, -- I sent a spirit into Lanck^shire the other day, to
fetch back a knave Drouer, and I look for his return this evening -- to
morrow morning my friend here and I will come and breake-fast with you.


Sir Godf. Oh you shall be both most welcome.


Cap. And about Noone without fail, I purpose to conjure.


Sir Godf. Mid noone will be a fine time for you.


Edm. Coniuting, do you mean to conjure at our house to morrow sir?


Cap Many do I sir ^t is my intent young Gentleman.


Edm. (...) troth, I Will love you while I live sort, o rare, Nicholas we sna^^
(...) coniuring, to morrow,


Nic. Puh I, I could ha told you of that.


Cap. Law he could ha told him of that, fool, cockscombe could ye.


Edm Do you hear me sir, I desire more acquaintance on you, you shall earne
some money of me, now I know you can coni^re, but can you fetch any that is
lost?


Capt. Oh any thing that's lost.


Edm. Why look you sir, I tel't you as a friend and a Coniurer, I should marry
a Poticaries daughter and it was told me she lost her maiden head at
Stonie-statford; now if you will do but so much as conure fort, and make all whole
again. --


Cap That I will sir.


Edm. By my troth I thank you la,


Cap. A little merry with your sisters son sir.


Sir Godf. Oh a simple young man, very simple, come Captain, and you sir, we will
even part with a gallon of wine till to morrow breake-fast.


Tip. Cap. Troth agreed sir.


Nic kinsman -- Scholar?


Pie. Why now thou art a good Knave, worth a hundred Brownists.


Nic. Am I indeed la: I thank you truly la.


Ex^unt. Actus. 4.
Enter Moll, and Sir John Penny-dub. Pen. But I hope you will not serve a
Knight so: Gentlewoman will you: to casheere him, and cast him off at your
pleasure; what do you think I was dubd for nothing, no by my faith Ladies
daughter.


Moll. Pray Sir John Pennydub, let it be deferd awhile, I have as big a heart
to marry as you can have; but as the Fortuneteler tolld me.


Penny. I ax a'th Fortune Tellers, would Derecke had been his fortune seven
year ago, to cross my love them: did he know what case I was in, why this
is able to make a man drown himself in's Fathers fish pond.


Moll. And then he told me more-ouer Sir John, that the breach of it, kept my
Father in Purgatory.


Penny. In Purgatory? why let him purge out his heart there, what have we to
do with that? there is Physicians enough there to cast his water, is that any
matter to us: how can he hinder our love, why let him bew changd now he is
dead? -- Well, have I rid post day and night, to bring you merry news of my
fathers death, and now --


Moll. Thy Fathers death? is the old Farmer dead?


Penny. As dead as his Barn door Moll.


Moll, And you will keep your word with me now, Sir John. that I shall have my
Coach and my Coachman?


Penny. I faith.


Moll. And two white Horses with black Feathers to draw it?


Penny. Too,


Moll. A guarded Lackey to run befor't, and pyed liueries to come trashing
after't.


(...) Penny. Thou shall Moll.


Moll. And to let me have money in my purse to go whether I will.


Penny. All this.


Moll. Then come, what so ere comes on it, we will be made sure together before
the Maids a'the Kitchen.


Exeunt. Enter Widow, with her eldest Daughter Franck and Frailty. Wid. How
now? where is my Brother Sir Godfrey? went he forth this morning?


Frail. O no Madame, he is above at breake-fast, with sir reverence a Coniurer.


Wid. A Coniurer? what manner a fellow is he?


Frail. Oh, a wondrous ra^e fellow Mistress, very strongly made upward, for he
goes in a Buff-ierkin: he says he will fetch Sir Godfreys Chain again, if it
hang between heaven and earth.


Wid. What he will not? then he is an exlent fellow I warrant. how happy were
that woman to be blessed with such a Husband, a man a cunning? how does he look
Frailty: very swartlie I warrant, with black beard, scorcht cheeks, and
smokie eyebrowes.


Frail. Fooh -- he is neither smoake-dryed, nor scorcht, nor black, nor
nothing, I tell you Madame, he looks as fair to see to, as one of us; I do
not think but if you saw him once, you d^ take him to be a Christian.


Frank. So fair, and yet so cunning, that is to be wonderd at Mother.


Enter Sir Oliver Muck-hill, and Sir Andrew Tip-staf^e. Muck. Bless you sweet
Lady.


Tip And you fair Mistrisse.


Exit Frailty. Wid. Coades? what do you mean Gentlemen? fie, did I not give
you your answers?


Muck. Sweet Lady?


Wid. Well, I will not stick with you now for a kiss,
Daughter kiss the Gentleman for once.

Frank. Yes for^ooth.


Tip. I Am proud of such a favor.


Wid. Truly la, sir Oliver, y are much to blame to come again, when you know my
mind, so well deliuerd -- as a Widow could deliver a thing.


Muck. But I expect a farther comfort Lady.


Wid. Why la you now, did I not desire you to put off your suit quite and
clean, when you came to me again, how say you did I not*


Muc. But the sincere love which my heart bears you,


Wid. Go to, i will cut you off. and Sir Oliver to put you in comfort a far off,
my fortune is read me, I must marry again.


Muck. O blessed fortune!


Wid. But not as long as I can choose; -- nay I Will hold out, well.


Muc. Yet are my hopes now fairer.


Enter Frailty. Frail O Madam Madam.


Wid. How now, what is the have?


In her ear. Tipst. Faith Mistrisse Francis I Will maintain you gallantly. I Will
bring you to Court, weane you among the fair society of ladies poor Kinswome
of mine in cloth of silver, beside you shall have your Monckie, your Parrat,
your Muskat, and your piss, piss, piss.


Frank. It will do very well.


Wid. What dos he mean to conjure here the? how shall I do to be tid of these
Knights, -- please you Gentlemen to walk a while ith Garden, go gather a
pinck, or a Iilly-flower.


Both. With all our hearts Lady, and count us favored?

Exit.
Si. Go. Step in Nicholas, look, is the coast clear.


within Sir Go. Nic. Oh, as clear as a Cattes eye, sir.


Sir Go. Then enter Captain Conisurer? -- now -- how like you your Room su?


Enter Sir Godf. Capt. Pyb. Edm. Nick. Cap. O wonderful convenient.


Ed^^. I can tell you Captain, simply tho it lies here, it is the fairest Room
in my Mothers house, as dainty a Room to Coniute in, me thinks, -- why you
may bid, I cannot tell how many diuills welcome in it; my Father has had
twenty here at once!


Pie. What diuills?


Edn. Diuills, no Deputies, and the welthiest men he could get.


Sir God. Nay put by your chattes now, fall to your business roundly, the
seskewe of the Dial is upon the Chrisse-crosse of Noone, but oh: hear met
Captain, a qualme comes ore my stomach?


Cap. Why, what is the matter sir?


Sir Godf. Oh, how if the diuill should prove a knave, and tear the hangings.


Cap. Fuh, I warrant you Sir Godfrey:


Edm. I Nuncle, or spit fire vpp'oth feeling!


Sir Godf Very true too, for it is but thin playsterd, and twill quickly take
hold a the laths, and if he chance to spit downeward-too, he will burn all
the boords.


Cap. My life for yours Sir Godfrey?


Sir Godf. My Sister is very curious and dainty ore this Room I can tell and
therefore if he must needs spit, I pray desire him to spit ith Chimney.


Pie. Why assure you Sir Godfrey, he shall not be brought up, with so little
manners to spit and spaule a'th flower.


Sir Godf. Why I thank you good Captai^e, pray have a care I, fall to your
Circle, we will not trouble you I warrant you, come, we will in to the next Room,
and because we^le be sure to keep him out there, we will bar up the door with
some of the Godlies zealous works.


Edm. That will be a fine device Nuncle, and because the ground shall be as
holy as the door, I Will tear two or three refaires in pieces, and strew the
leaves about the Chamber? oh, the devil already, -- runs in --


Thuxaiers. Py. Sfoote Captain speak somewhat for shame; it lightens and
thunders before thou will begin, why when?


Cap. Pray peace George, -- thou wilt make me laugh anon; and spoil all.


Pie. Oh now it begins again, now, now? now? Captain?


Cap. Rumbos-ragdayon, pur, pur, colucundrion, Hois -- Plois.


Sir Godf. Oh admirable Coniurer? has fetched Thunder already:


Sir Godfrey through the keyhole? within. Pie. Hark hark again Captain?


Cap. Beniamino, -- gaspois -- kay -- gosgothoteron -- umbrois.


Sir Godf. Oh, I would the devil would come away quickly, he has no
conscience to put a man to such pain?


Pie. Again!


Cap. Flowste -- Kakop^^pos -- dragone -- Leloomenos -- hodge -- podge.


Pie. Well said Captain.


Sir Godf. So long a coming? oh would I had ner^ begun't now, for I fear me
these roaring tempests, will destroy all the fruits of the earth, and tread
upon my come -- oh, ith Country.


Cap. Gog de gog, hobgoblin, huncks, houseslow, hockley te coome park.


Wid. O brother, brother, what a tempests ith, Garden, sure there is some
coniuration abroad.


Sir Godf. It Is at home sister!


Pie. By and by, I Will step in? Captain?


Cap. Nunck -- Nunck -- Rip -- Gascoynes, Ipis, Drip -- Dropite.


Sir God. He drippes and drops poor man? alas, alas.


Pie. Now I come?


Cap. O Sulphur Scoteface --


Pie Arch-coniurer, what would thou with me?


Sir Godf. O the diuill sister, ith dyning Chamber, sing Sister,
I warrant you that will keep him out, quickly, quickly, quickly. goes in.

Pie. So, so, so, I Will release thee, enough Captain, enough, allow us some
time to laughe a little, they are shuddering and shaking by this time, as if an
Earthquake were in their kidneyes.


Cap. Sirrah George, how wast, how wast, did I do it well enough.


Pit. woult believe me Captain, better then any Coniurer, for here was no
harm in this, and yet their horrible expectation satisffied well, you were
much beholding to thunder and lightning at this time it gra^st you well I can
tell you?


Cap. I must needs say so George? sirrah if we could ha conuoide hither
cleanly a cracker or a fire-wheele t'ad been admitable.


Pit. Blutt, blutt theirs nothing remains to put thee to pain now Captain.


Cap. Pain? I protest George my heels are sorer, then a Whitson Morris-dancer.


Pie. All Is past now, -- oncly to reveal that the chains ith
Garden where thou know it has lain these two days.

Cap. But I fear that fox Nicholas has reueald it already?

Pie. Fear not Captain, you must put it to the venture now
Nay it is time, call upon them, take pity on them, for I believe
some off 'em are in a pitiful case by this time.

Cap. Sir Godfrey? Nicholas, Kinsman-Sfoot they are fast at it still George, Sir
Godfrey?


Sir Godf. Oh, is that the diuils voice? how comes he to know my name.


Cap. Fear not Sir Godfrey all is quieted.


Sir Godf. What is he laid?


Cap. Laid; and has newly dropped, Your chain ith Garden.


Sir Godf. Ith Garden! in our Garden?


Cap. Your Garden?


Sir Godf. O sweet Coniurer? where abouts there?


Cap. Looke-well about a banck of Rosemary.


Sir Godf. Sister the Rosemary banck, come, come, there is my chain he says.


Wid. Oh happiness, run, run.


Edn. Captain Coniurer?


supposed to go. Ed^ at keyhoole. Cap. Who? Master Edmond.


Edm. I Master Edmond may I come in safely, without danger think you.


Cap. I uh long ago, it is all, as it was at first.
Fear nothing, pray come near -- how now? man.

Edm. Oh this Rooms mightily hot in faith, slid my shirt sticks to my Belly
already, what a steame the Rogue has left be hind him' foh this room must be
ayrd Gentlemen it sinells horribly of Brimstoone -- lets open the windows.


Pie Faith ma^ster Edmond it is but your conceit,


Edm. I would you could make me believe that in faith why do you think I cannot
smell his savor, from another: yet I take it kindly from you, because you
would not put me in a fear in faith, a my troth I shall love you for this the
lo^gest day of my life.


Cap. Puh, it is nothing sir, love me when you see more.


Edm. Mass now I remember I Will look whether he has singed the hangings or no.


Pie. Captain, to entertain a little sport till they come; make him bele^ue,
you will charm him invisible, hes apt to admire any thing you see let me alone to
give force too'te.


Cap. go, retire, to yonder end then.


Edm. I protest you are a rare fellow, are you not.


Cap. O master Edmond, you know but the least part of me yet, why now at this
instant I could but flourish my wand thrice ore your head, and charm you
inusib'e.


Edm. What you could not? make me walk invisible man; I should laugh at that
in faith, troth i will requite your kindness and you will do it good Captain coniurer.


Cap. Nay I should hardly deny you such a small ^indnesse Master Edmond Plus,
why look you sir it is no more but this and thus and again and now yar invisible!


Edm' Am I faith, who would think it.


Cap. You see the fortune tellers yonder at farther end ath chamber go toward
him, do what you will with him he shall nere find you.


Edm. Say you so, i will try that in faith, --


Iustles him. Pi^. How now? Captain, whose that iustled me?


Cap. Iustled you? I saw no body.


Edm. Ha, ha, ha, -- say it was a spirit,


Cap. Shall I^ -- may be some spirit that haunts the circle.


Pie. O my nose, again, pray coniur^ then Captain.


Pulls him by the Nose. Edm. Troth this is exlent, I may do any knavery now and
never be seen, and now I remember me, Sir Godfrey my Uncle abusde me the other
day, and told tales of me to my Mother -- Troth now I Am invisible, i will hit him
a sound wherrit ath' ear, when he comes out ath' garden, -- I may be reuengd
on him now finely.


Enter Sir Godfrey, Widow, Franck, Nicholas with the Chain. Sir God. I have
my Chain again, my Chaine's found again,
O sweet Captain, O admirable Coniurer. Edm. Strikes him.
Oh what mean you by that Nephew?

Edm. Nephew? I hope you do not know me Uncle?


Wid. Why did you strike your Uncle sir?


Edm. Why Captain am I not invisible?


Capt. A goodiest Georg:, -- not now you are not Sir,
Why ^id you not see me when I did un channe you?

Edm. Not I by my troth Captain:
Then pray you pardon me Uncle,
I thought I Would been invisible when I struck you.

Sir Godf. So. you would do it? go, -- you are a foolish Boy,
And were I not ore-come with greater joy,
I Would make you taste correction.

Edm. Correction, push -- no, neither you nor my Mother shall think to whip me
as you have done.


Sir Godf. Captain my joy is such, I know not how to thank you, let me
embrace you, hug you, O my sweet Chain, Gladness 'een makes me giddy, rare
man: it was as just in the Rosemarie bauck, as if one should ha laid it there --
oh cunning, cunning!


W^d. Well, seeing my fortune tells me I must marry; let me marry a man of
wit a man of parts, here is a worthy Captain, and it is a fine Title truly
(...) to be a Captains Wife, a Captains Wife, it goes very finely. beside
all the world knows that a worthy Captain, is a fit Companion to any Lord,
then why not a sweet bedfellow for any Lady. -- I Will have it so --


Enter Frailty. Frail. O Mistress, Gentlemen, there is the brauest sight coming
along this way.


Wid. What brave sight?


Frai. Oh, one going to burying, and another going to hanging.


Wid. A ruefull sight.


Pyb Sfoot Captain, I Will pawn my life the Corporals coffind, and old Skirmish
the soldier going to execution, and it is now full about the time of his
walking; hold out a little longer sleepie potion, and we shall have exlent
admiration; for I Will take upon me the cure of him.


Enter the Coffin of the Corporal, the soldier bound, and lead by Officers,
the Sheriff there. Frail. Oh here they come, here they come!


Pyb. Now must I close secretly with the Soldier, prevent his impatience, or
else all is discovered?


Wid. O lamentable seeing, these were those Brothers, that sought and bled
before our door.


Sir Godf. What they were not Sister?


Ski^m. George, look toote, I Will peach at Tyburne else.


Pyb. Mum, -- Gentles all, vouchsafe me audience, and you especially Master
S^^iffe:

Yon man is bound to (...),
Because he wounded this that now lies coffind?

Shir. True, true, he shall have the law, -- and I know the law?


Pyb. But under ^auour Master Sheriff, if this man had been cured and safe
again, he should have been releasde then?


Shir. Why make you question of that Sir?


Pyb. Then I release him freely, and will take upon me the death that he
should dye, if within a little season, I do not cure him to his proper health
again.


Shir. How Sir? recover a dead man?
That were most strange of all.

Frank comes to him. Frank. Sweet Sir, I love you dearly, and could wish my
best part yours, -- oh do not undertake such an impossible venture.


Pyb. Love you me; then for your sweet sake I Will do it:
Let me entreat the corpse to be set down.

Shir. Bearers set down the Coffln, -- this were wonderful, and worthy Stoes
Chronicle.


Pyb. I pray bestow the freedom of the air, upon our wholesome Art, -- mass,
his cheeks begin to receive natural warmth: nay good Corporal wake betime,
or I shall have a longer sleep then you, -- Sfoote if he should prove dead
indeed now, he were fully reuengd upon me for making a property on him, yet I
had rather run upon the Ropes, then have the Rope like a Tetter run upon me,
oh -- he stirs -- he stirs again -- look Gentlemen, he recouers, he starts, he
rises.


Shir. Oh, oh, defend us -- out alas.


Pyb. Nay pray be still; you will make him more giddy else, -- he knows no body
yet.


Corp. Zounes: who am I? couerd with Snow? I marvel?


Pyb. Nay I knew he would swear the first thing he did, as soon as ever he
came to his life again.


Corp. Sfoote Hostess -- some hot Porridge, -- oh, oh, lay on a dozen of
Fagots in the Moon parler, there.


Pyb. Lady, you must needs take a little pity of him in faith, and send him in
to your Kitchen fire.


Wid. Oh, with all my heart sir, Nicholas and Frailty, he'pe to bear him in.


Nich. Bear him in, qua tha, pray call out the Maids, I shall nere have the
heart to do it indeed la.


Frai. Not I neither, I cannot abide to handle a Ghost of all me.


Cor. Shloud, let me see, where was I drunk last night, heh --


Wid. Oh, shall I bid you once again take him away.


Frai. Why, we are as fearful as you I warrant you -- oh --


Wid. Away villains, bid the Maids make him a Cawdle p^esently to settle his
brain, -- or a Posset of Sack, quickly, quickly.


Exeunt, pushing in the corpse. Skir. Sir, what so ere you are, I do more then
admire you.


Wid. O I, if you knew all Master Shiriffe, as you shall do, you would say
then, that here were two of the rarest men within the walls of Christendom


Shir. Two of them, O wonderful: Officers I discharge you, set him free all is in
tune.


Sir Godf. I and a banquet ready by this time Master Sheriff, to which I most
cheerfully enuite you, and your late prisoner there? see you this goodly
chain sir, mun, no more words, it was lost, a dis found again; come my
inestimable bullies, we will talk of your noble Acts in sparkling Charnico, and
in stead of a Iester, we will ha the ghost ith white sheet sit at upper end a'th
Table.


Sheriff. Exlent merry man in faith.

Exit.
Franck Well, seeing I am enioynd to love and marry.
My foolish vow thus I casheere to Air
Which first begot it, -- now love play thy part;
The scholar reads his lecture in my heart.

Actus 5. Scen. 1.
Enter in have Master Edmund and Frayltie. Ed. This is the marriage morning
for my mother and my sister.


Frail. O me Master Edmund we shall ha rare doings.


Ed. Nay go Frayltie run to the Sexton, you know my mother will be married at
Saint Antlings, hie thee, it is past five, bid them open the Church door, my
sister is almost ready.


Fra. What al ready Master Edmond.


Ed. Nay go hie thee first run to the Sexton, and run to the Clarke and then
run to Master Pigman the Parson, and then run to the Millanor, and the^ run
home again.


Frail. Here Is run, run, run --


Ed. But hark Frailty:


Fra. What more yet?


Edm. Has the maids remembered to strew the way to the Church.


Frail. Fagh an hour ago I help 'em my self.


Ed. Away, away, away, away then.


Frail. Away, away, away then

Exit Frailty:
Edm. I shall have a simple Father inlawe, a brave Captain able to beat all
our street: Captain Idle, now my Lady Mother will be ^itted for a delicate
name, my Lady Idle, my Lalie Idle, the finest name that can be for a woman,
and then the Scholar Master Pie-boord for my sister Francis, that will be
Mistress Francis Pie-bo^rd, Mistress Francis Pie-boord, theill keep a good table
I warrant you, Now all the knights noses are put out of joint, they may go to a
bone setters now. Enter Captain and Pie-boord. Hark, hark oh who comes here
with two Torches before 'em, my sweet Captain, and my fine Scholar, oh, how
bravely they are shot up in one night, they look like fine Britains now me
thinks, here is a gallant change in faith slid they have hired men and all by the
clock.


Cap. Master Edmund, kind, honest, dainty Master Edmond.


Edm. Fogh, sweet Captain Father inlaw a rare perfume isayth.


Pie. What are the Brides stirring? may we steall upon 'em think thou
Master Edmond.


Edm. Faw, there even upon red dines I can assure you? for they were at there
Totch even now, by the same token I tumbled down the stairs.


Pie. Alas poor Master Edmond.


Enter musicians. Cap. O the musicians I prce the Master Edmond call' em in
and licquour 'em a little.


Ed. That I will sweet Captain father in law and make each of them as drunck
as a common fiddeler.


Exeunt omnes. Eneter Sir John Penidub, and Moll above lacing of her clothes.
Pen. Whewh Mistress Mol, Mistress Mol.


Mol. Who Is there?


Pen. It Is I. Mol. Who Sir John Penidub O you are an early cock ifayth, who would
have thought you to be so rare a stirrer.


Pen. Pree the Mol let me come up.


Mol. No by my faith Sir John, I Will keep you down, for you Knights are very
dangerous if once you get above.


Pen. I Will not stay in faith.


Mol. In Faith you shall stay, for Sir John you must note the nature of the
Climates your Northen wench in her own Country may well hold out till she
be fifteen, but if she touch the South once, and up to London, here the
Chimes go presently after twelve.


Pen. O the art a mad wench Moll, but I pree thee make have, for the Priest is
gone before.


Moll. Do you follow him, I Will not be long after.


Exeunt. Enter Sir Oliver Muck-hill, Sir Andrew Tip-staffe, and old Skirmish
talking. Muck. O monstrous vn-heard of forge^ie.


Tip. Knight, I never heard of such villainy in our own country, in my life.


Muck. Why it is impossible, dare you maintain your words?


Skir. Dare we? even to their wezen pipe;, we know all their plots, they cannot
squander with us, they have knauishly abusd us, made only properties on's to
advance their selves upon our shoulders, but they shall rue their abuses, this
morning they are to be married.


Muck. It Is too true, yet if the Widow be not too much besotted on slights and
forgeries, the reue'ation of their villainies will make 'em loathsome, and to
that end, be it in private to you, I sent late last night to an honorable
personage, to whom I am much indebted in kindness, as he is to me, and
therefore presume upon the payment of his tongue, and that he will lay out
good words for me, and to speak truth, for such needful occasions, I only
preserve him in bond, and sometimes he may do me more good here in the
City by a free word of his mouth, then if he had paid one half in hand,
and took Doomesday for to other.


Tip. In troth Sir, without soothing be it spoken, you have published much
judgment in these few words.


Muck. For you know, what such a man vtters will be thought effectual and to
weighty purpose, and therefore into his mouth weel put the approved theme of
their forgeries.


Skir. And I Will maintain it Knight, if she will be true.


Enter a servant. Muck. How now fellow.


Seru. May it please you Sir, my Lord is newly lighted from his Coache.


Muc. Is my Lord come already; his honnours early,
You see he loves me well up before seven,
Trust me I have found him night capt at a eleven,
There Is good hope yet; come Iee relate all to him.

Exeunt. Enter the two Bridegromes Captain and Scholar after them, Sir
Godsrey and Edmond, Widow change in apparel, mistress Francis led between two
Knights, Sir John Penny-dub and Moll: there meets them a Noble man, Sir Oliver
Muckil, ^^d Sir Andrew Tip-staffe.


Nob. By your leave Lady.


Wid. My Lord your honor is most chastely welcome,


Nob. Madam tho I came now from court, I come not to flatter you: upon whom can
I justly cast this blot, but upon your own forehead, that know not ink from
milk such is the blind besotting in the state of an vnheaded woman that's a
widow. For it is the property of all you that are widows (a hand full
excepted) to hate those that honestly and carefully love you, to the
maintenance of credit state and posterity, and strongly to dote on those, that
only love you to undo you who regard you least are best regarded, who hate you
most are best beloved, And if there be but one man amongst ten thousand
millions of men that is accursed disastrous and euilly planeted whom Fortune
beats most, whom God hates most, and all Societies esteem least, that man is
suere to be a husband -- Such is the peevish Moon that rules you bloods. An
Impudent fellow best woes you, a flattering lip best wins you, or in a mirth
who talks roughliest is most sweetest, nor can you distinguish truth, from
forgeries, mistes from Simplisity, witness those two deceitful monsters that
you have entertaind for bride-groomes.


Wid. Deceitful.


Pie. All will out.


Cap. Sfoote who has blabd George? that foolish Nicholas.


Nob. For what they have besotted you easy blood withal, wear naught but
forgeries, the fortune telling for husbands, the coniuring for the chain, Sir
Godfrey heard the falshod of al: nothing but mere knavery deceit and eoozenage.


Wid. O wonderful, indeed I wondered that my husband with all his crast could
nor keep himself out of purgatory.


Sir Godf. And I more wonder that my chain should be gone and my Tailor had
none of it.


Mol. And I wondered most of all that I, should be tied from marriage having
such a mind to it, come S. John Pennydub, fair wether on our side the moon
has chaingd since yester night.


Pie. The Sting of every evil is with-in me.


Nob. And that you may perceive I feign not with you, behold their fellow
actor in those forgeries who full of Spleen and envy at their so sudden
aduancements reveled all there plot in anger.


Pie. Base Soldier to reueall us.


Wid. Is It possible we should be blinded so and our eyes open


Nob. Widow will you now believe that false, which to soon you believed true.


Wid. O to my shame I do.


Sir Godf. But under favor my Lord my chain was truly lost and straingly
found again.


Nob. Resolve him of that Soldier,


Sir. In few words Knight then, thou were the arch-gull of all.


Sir Godf. God How Sir.


Skir. Nay i will prove it: for the chain was but hid in the rosemary bancke all
this while, and thou gotst him out of prison to Conture for it who did it
admirably fustianly, for indeed what need any others when he knew where it was.


Sir Godf. O vilainty of vilanies, but how came my chain there


Skir, Where Is truly la, in deed la, he that will not swear, but lie, he that
will not steal, But rob: pure Nicholas Saint Antlings.


Sir Godf. O Villain one of our society,
Deemd always holy, pure, religious,
A Puritan? a thief, when wast ever hard?
Sooner we will kill a man then Steal thou know,
Out flane I Will rend my lion from thy back -- with mine own hands.

Nich. Dear Master, oh.

Nob. Nay Knight dwell in patience,
And now widow being so near the Church, twer great pity, nay vncharity to
send you home again without a husband, draw nerer you of true worship, state
and credit, that should not stand so far of from a widow, and suffer forged
shapes to come between you, Not that in these, I blemish the trne Title of a
Captain, or blot the fair margent of a Scholar; For I honor worthy and
deserning parts in the one, and cherrish fruitful Virtues in the other. Come
Lady, and you Virgin bestow your eyes and your purest affections, upon me of
estimation both in Court and Citry, that has long woed you, and both with
there hearts and wealth sincearly love you.


Sir Godf. Good Sister do: Sweet little Frank, these are men of reputation,
you shall be welcome at Court: a great creddit for a Citizen sweet Sister.


Nob. Come her scilence doos consent to it.


Wid. I know not with what face,


Nob. Pah pah why with your own face they desire no other.


Wid. Pardon me worthy Sirs, I and my daughter have wronged your lo^es.


Muck. It Is easily pardoned Lady,
If you vouch safe it now.

Wid. With all my soul,


Fran. And I with all my heart,


Moll. And I Sir John with soul, heart, lights and all.


Sir I oh. They are all mine Moll.

Nob. Now Lady?
What honest Spirit but will applaud your choice,
And gladly furnish you with hand and voice,
A happy change which makes even heaven rejoice,
Come enter into your loyes, you shall not want,
For fathers now, I doubt it not believe me,
But that you shall have hands enough to give.

Exeunt omnes. Deus dedit his quo^ (...)
FINIS.

