AN ADMIRABLE METHOD TO LOVE, SERVE AND HONOR THE B. Virgin MARY.

With diverse practicable Exercises thereof. Al enriched with Choice Examples.

Written in Italian by the R. F. ALEXIS DE SALO, Capuchin. And Englished by R.
F.



By John Cousturier.

M.DC.XXXIX.

Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae


TO THE NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY the Lady Audley.
MADAM,
I present you with this translation, not to remain in your hands, but
through them to pass unto the public. So shall it doubly be aduantaged: First,
more gratefully accepted of, coming immediately from one so worthy as your
self, and next be believed worthy the acceptance, that J dare offer it to
your sight, so well verst in at the Original Languages. So, Madam, go my
obligations multiplying to the Jnfinite, whilst J cannot think of paying you
one curtesy but I receive for it two; The whilst I must ever remain.

Your most obliged, R. F.

A SVMMARY of the whole contense of this present Book, for the Readers better
comprehension thereof.
THE whole scope of this present Treatise is no other then to teach in a devout
and excellent manner how to Reverence and adore with profound Inclinations our
B. Lady and mistrisse the Queen of Heaven; as a preparatiue to which, we have
indeauoured to declare, her heroical virtues, greatnesses, excellencies and
sublime prerogatives: And by the way is to be considered that although
Adoration be peculiar to God alone, yet according to divines distinction
thereof, it also may be appropriated to the B. Virgin, to Angels, and other
Saints and thereby become common to God and Man. As we may clearly gather from
diverse passages of the holy Scripture as namely in Paralip. chap. 26. when it
is said; And they inclined and adored first God, and afterward the King.

These Adorations then admit a three-fould distinction of Latria, Dulia, and
Hyperdulia, where of the first is proper unto God alone, in regard of his
infinite and increated Greatness; the second has reference to such creatures as
advance in sanctity and glory above the rest, which sanctity and glory arriving
in any on to more sublimity (as in the B. Virgin) with the more sublime honor
of Hyperdulia, consequently we are to reverence them: But before we proceed to
the exercise of this Adoration we prefix an exhortation to devotion toward
her, and declare five Privileges, her servants are endowed with all, setting
down (as preamble to the work) those conditions and qualities which are
requisite in her deuots. Then we pass to the explication of these Adorations, in
the first Chapter, declaring their excellency, in the second how grateful and
acceptable they are to the B. Virgin, and in the four following ones, four
forcible arguments are established to prove her deserving that adoration. The
first deduced from her being the Mother of Almighty God. The next for her being
elected above al other Saints, and all the Quires of Heaven. The third for her
sovereign power and authority, over al Creatures: And the fourth and last for
her being an affectionat Mother unto us al. Then we come to the practice of
these Adorations, (or Genuflexions) showing how they are devoutly to be
performed, as well in the interior as exterior, and heervpon we take occasion
to enlarge our discourse touching the Adorations due to God, to his Blessed
Saints and Angels, etc. Employing the remain of the following Chapters, in
setting down diverse practical ways of honoring the B. Virgin applying to
every on its proper Reverence and Adoratio^s: but principally we insist upon
those twelve sublime prerogatives of hers, prefigured by the twelve Stars, in
her crown of which S. John in his Apocalips make mention.

Now this advertisement is given to all that although the choice of many
exercises of adoratio^s be proposed in this present work, notwithstanding they
are only to fix on, which they may find most gust and comfort in, and
especially to beware-of entergiuing to much at once least they become thereby
but more negligent in performance of them, and a too precipitious desir of
coming soon to end, make them but have too much upon the way, and perform
them without fruit and devotion.

Wherefore we council rather to make choice of some few we may perform with
mediocrity of devotion, then of many with danger of tepidity and distraction.
Notwithstanding when any feast occurs, unto which we have a particular devotion
(as those of our Blessed Savior his Mother or the like) we may then multiply
our Genuflexions to a hundred a day, (for example) or a thousand distributed
equally to several days or nights of the octaue as we please, as we shall more
largely declare in the following Treatise by the assistance of Almighty God,
and the favor of his holy Mother, al which we dedicat to the praise of God
from whom al Good proceeds, to the Blessed Virgin his most holy Mother, and to
Saint Francis our Glorious Patriarch.

A TABLE OF THE Chapters contained in this Book.
OR pious exhortation to be devoted to the queen of heaven.
The first Privilege. How affectionnat the Blessed Virgin is to aldeuout
Christians who serve and honor her with humble reverence, page. 1. The second
Privuiledge. Is that the B. Virgin is most Liberal and accustomed to bestow
frequent graces and favors on her servants, page. 19. The third Privilege.
How the B. Virgin helps and comforts her faithful servants in their
afflictions, page. 39. The fourth Privilege. Of the devoted to the B. Virgin,
which is to have her in heaven for their assured Aduocats page. 55. The fifth
Privilege How the mother of God saues her devout servants, and renders them
worthy of eternal life, page 73. Of the second condition, which the devout
servant of the B. Virgin ought to have, which is chastity, page. 117 The third
Condition: which is requisite in the honourers of the B. Virgin, of cleanes and
purity of mind, page 43 The fourth Condition, requisite in the servants of the
B. Virgin, for the conservation of this purity of heart, which is the
frequentation of the Sacraments, especially of that of Confession, page 173 Of
the excellency of those Reuerences we are to exhibit in honor of the Queen of
heaven, page 222 How acceptable to the B. Virgin these reuerences and a
dorations are, page. 235 That the quality of Mother of God obliges both men and
Angels to the adoring of her, page 250 How we ought to reverence and adore the
B. Virgin in regard of sublimity of her glory above al other Saints, page. 266
That we ought to adore the B. Virgin, for that she is the sovereign Lady of al
creatures both in earth and heaven page. 282 Of the great honor we owe to the
B. Virgin for her being our most dear and merciful Mother, page. 303 How the
aptest time for the exercise of these devotions, is the particular feasts of
our B. Lady, p. 332 Of the feasts of our Savior Christ, page. 342 Of the
feasts of Saints page. 354 Of the adoration of the Angels, page. 362 The
practicing of honoring and reuerencing the Angels. saying as follows, page
384 Of the honor and reverence we owe unto our Angel Guardian, page 391 In
what manner we are to proceed in the exercise of those Adorations, vvorthily to
honor the Mother of Alm. God, page. 415 How in the like manner we are to
reverence God, as also the Saints in Heaven, page. 424 How, these genuflexions
may devoutly be exercised before any Image of our B. Lady, page. 433 The
Reuerences we are to make in saying our Beads, page. 448 Remarkable
Instructions how to say the Beads, extracted out of the second Tome of Nauarrs
Commentaries, and others Authors page. 462 How alternatim, or, by turn, we
may say our Beads, page. 467 Of the most excellent devotion, of the Rosary
page. 472 Twelve most notable Adorations to be made in the honor and memory of
twelve dignities and privileges bestowed on the blessed Virgin by Alm. God
answerable to the twelve Stars, which go to the composing of a crown for her
most sacred Head, p. 497 The declaration of the first Starr page 490 The second
Starr declared, p. 494 The declaration of the third Starr, p. 499 The fourth
Starr declared, p. 504 The declaration of the fifth Starr, p. 521 The sixth
Starr declared, p. 527 The declaration of the seventh Starr, pa 534 The eighth
Starr declared. 529 The declaration of the ninth Starr, pa. 537 The tenth Starr
declared, p 545 The declaration of the eleventh Starr, pa. 552 The twelfth
Starr declared, 560 Another sort of Adoration, which for the greater variety of
the devout servants of the B. Virgin, I have here annexed, pa. 566 Twelve
Reuerences correspondent to the B. Virgins 12. prerogatives, pa. 569 An
excellent way of adoring the B. Virgin in remembering the joys which she had
here, p. 579 Of the interior Reuerences we are to exhibit to the glorious.
Queen of heaven, and of the place, time, and occasion of exercising them, page
590
AN ADMIRABLE METHOD TO LOVE, SERVE and Reverence the Glorious Virgin Mary our
B. Advocate.
Or a pious Exhortation to be devoted to the Queen of Heaven.
EVERY faithful Christian is to Endeavor to his vtermost to become deuot and
duly resighned to the service of the Glorious Queen of Heaven whom the Angels
serve the Archangels adore, the Thrones honor, the Cherubins and Seraphins
respect, and in fine the highest adua^ced in the Court of Heaven account it
their Glory to make Court unto Knowing how aduantagious her favor would be to
them, for if a Courtier here accounts it for so high a felicity, to have the
glory of possessing the heard of some great Princess as promissing himself
great honors and dignities from thence, and how much more, if besides all this
he were assured of that dearer place in her memory as she could refuse him
nothing but if he chanced to fall into disgrace, would undertake his defense
and reconcile him with his Prince again free him from the punishments he had
merited, obtain his repeal if he were banished from the Court, and not only
restore him to his former estate again, but advance him higher then ever he
was before, what a blessing what an excess of Joy would this fortunat fauourit
receive from thence what would he do, or rather what nor do in gratitud for so
great an obligation? what means what sort of services would he most invent to
honor her withal! assueredly both night and day, he would have no other
thought then how to express his thankfulness to her in some particular manner,
and then would be no danger so great, no service so painful he would not, go
through with all, to maintain himself in her better graces still.

And yet far more happy a thousand times are the servants and fauourits of the
Queen of Heaven, in that they are assured she is perpetually mindful of them
that she bears them an vnequald love, that they may hope the Greatest of
favors from her and that she cannot be wanting to them in their afflictions
that as a faithful Advocate she does Embrace their protection in all
occurrences, that she preuails her self of al occasions to render the Eternal
king her B. Son propitious to them, and what is most of al delivers the^ from
eternal pains, and brings them in fine to the possesion of the glory and
happiness of the Kingdom of Heaven.

From al which we may gather five rare Privileges those truly deuote unto the
Mother of God Enjoy thereby the first is that she loves them with a profound
and cordial affection; the second that she honors them with diverse particular
favors; the third that she is always ready to assist them in their
necessities as after as they implore her aid; the fourth that as a most
careful Advocate with particular solicitud she undertake their deffence and
renders them propitious the eternal King of Heaven, reconciling them into him,
when they have offended him; the fifth and last that she delivers them from
eternal damnation. Let us consider then and examine them on by on which great
exactnes to animat every soul to the affection of so dear and great a Lady.

THE I. PRIVILEGE.
How affectionat the B Virgin is to al devout Christians who serve and honor
her with humble reverence.
ALTHOUGH it is true the sacred Virgin being al love and charity loves al, and
like the Sunn says the devout Saint Bernard) displayes a like the beams of her
sweetness and benignity over all the world. Yet certain it is withal she
beholds those with a more dear regard who love her and render her the most
dutiful services and are most assidual in reuerencing her. And most laudable
and holy is that obsequiousnes by whose exterior signs is manifested the
interior affections of the heart, for so (as S. Gregory says) the proof of the
affection is the performance of the thing. Now how reciprocal the B. Virgins
love is to us again, her self declares in those words attributed to her by the
Holy Ghost; those who love me, I love; as much as to say, I have a particular
love for those who affect me with all their heart and soul, and endeavor to
render such honor as they imagine the most acceptable; and what sort of love
it is her self declares in another passage of Scripture where she says: I am
the mother of beauteous love; signifying the love she affects her servants
with, to be firm, complete at al parts, and truly worthy so divine and loving
a mother.

This glorious Queen tenders us as her own Children, in that she is our
Mother, and so near and strait a bond ties us together, as her being a
desce^dant from our generation, flesh of our flesh, blood of our blood, bone of
our bone, for which reason she cannot but affect us much, especially if we
endeavor to deserve it by our constancy and fidelity in serving her. She is
the Mother of Jesus Christ true God and Man, God is our Father: Our Father
which art in heaven: his Son Jesus Christ our brother: Go to my brothers,
(says he to Mary Magdalen: Oh infinite sweetness of love!) Go to my brothers and
tell them, I ascend to my father and your father, to my God and yours. The
Blessed Virgin is then our Mother, Jesus Christ the increated Word our brother,
and the Eternal father our father.

Conform to this, S. Bernard on these words, Ecce matter tua, behold thy
Mother, argues thus: If Mary be thy mother, O man, (says he,) then Jesus
Christ is thy brother, his father thine, his Kingdom thou have right to, and
Consequently the grace of Mary is thy riches, since the mother Usually lays up
for the Children, so thy necessities go unto her heart; for the mother for
these wants of her Children is moved at heart; O take her then for thine. Thus
S. Bernard: that eloquent Doctor. And certainly our condition is most great
and highly aduantag'd above al others, to have the Mother of God, Empress of
the Universe, for Mother, and her only son, the King of glory, glory of
Kings, and our true God for brother. An honor the Angels could never glory
in; For when or where (says S. Paul) did God ever say to them as he said to
man, speaking to our Savior Christ? Thou art my son, to day I have begotten
thee.

These spirits, as happy as they are have never an Angel of them al, invested
with their Angelical nature, they can say is God; whilst we invested with our
humane have the God of Angels himself we cannot only say is man but even our
brother too; nor do we find it was ever said to any of the^ as it was to man;
Behold thy Mother, in the person of S. John, who (according to the Doctors)
personated and stood at the foot of the Cross for all mankind, whilst the
Savior of us al delivered him the precious treasure of his Mother in trust.
Let us conclude then, that her love is generally toward al; but in a more
particular manner toward those who assume her for their Mother, and by most
affectionat ways seek out her safeguard and protection.

Moreover we must conclude this glorious Queen has showed more affection to
men, then ever she did to Angels: In imitation of the eternal Father, whom in
her actions, she of al others, most nearly imitats: and for proof that his
love is more to us then them, but consider with what precious gifts he has
honored us, for so the greatness of the presents given by the lover to its
beloved manifestly declares the greatness of its affection to it; and what
gifts are those the eternal Father has bestowed on the sons of the earth!
Let the Angels hark, and the Archangels lend an ear, and all the heavenly
Hierarchies remain astonished at so wondrous a liberality. Behold the infinite
present, the infinite gift with God has given and presented the world withal,
never to be enough vallued never to be aequalled. God has so loved the World,
as for it he has given his only son; out of his excessive love to free it
from the misery in which it was; and what on the Angels has he bestowed the
whilst? nothing but their eternal beatitud merited (as the Divines hold) by one
sole act of their Will; another thing it is, and of other valuation which he
has bestowed on men, to give his own Son to save them, then his giving the
Angels their eternal beatitud; so says S. Bonauenture, To give his only Son
for the impieties of men was a greater matter, then to the merits of Angels to
give eternal life. Let us grant then and freely acknowledge the love of God and
his holy Mother, more sple^didly shinning on men then Angels, since more
admirable have been the effects produced of it, toward them then these, and
more obliging to repay them reciprocally again.

But this is not al, nor does our gracious Mistress stay here, to repay
affection with affection, but by the transport of her love she passes to
honor her servants, sometimes with her visits, sometimes to comfort them with
her own dear presence and her Blessed sonns.

An example of which, amongst an infinity of others, we have in the new
reformed Mirror of Examples, and it is this: There was a young Virgin some. 14.
years of age, so devoted to the Mother of God, as she employed in her service
almost al her days and nights; in which her pious exercises she continued for
almost seven years space, ever beseeching her dear mistres, and patroness
so to favor her, as she might behold her B. Son just as she had brought him
into the world; until at last one night) and it is believed to have been
Christmas night) retiring her self into an Oratorie she had in her fathers
house, and there with prayers and tears iterating her petition, behold
suddenly there appeared unto her the Queen of heaven, accompanied with Myriads
of Angels, who graciously reaching her, from her own arms to hers, her
heavenly Infant, said: Behold here my dear daughter, what you have so much
desired; take him, embrace him, and at your pleasure solace you with him; at
this the devout Virgin took him in her arms, and embracing and kissing him,
used all the tendernesses a devout love could express an affection in; when in
the heat of her kisses and embraces, the divine Infant darting a look at her,
had been ableto have pierced a far harder heart, the^ hers asked her if she
loved him? that I do, said she, and confirmed it with a thousand new
blandishme^ts: but how much do you love me? more then my body; and how much
more? more then my very heart; yet, how much more then that? alas, said she,
it is impossible to tell you that, let it speak for me, and so with a profound
sigh she concluded the dialogue, and with that her life, her heart bursting in
the midst, unable to contain so much of love was in it, when (we may piously
imagine) the B. Virgin took her white soul in her arms, and delivering it
into the hands of Angels, they with sweet and melodious harmony conducted it
to heaven. At sound of which celestial music, those of the house accurring and
forceing open the Oratory door, found the dead corpse extended on the ground,
and exhaling so much sweetness, as it seemed all the most precious perfumes of
the world had gone to the embalming it. Amongst the rest, two Fathers of S.
Dominicks Order were present, who, as they dissected her, to find out he cause
of so sudaine and strange a death, perceived her heart inscribed with these
words in golden letters: O my Jesus, I love thee more then my self, for
having Created, redeemed, and adopted me by thy holy grace. Whereby we may
perceive, how great was the love she bore to the sacred Mother and her Son,
and how greatly they are aduantag'd by it, who love them with such tenderness of
affection.

I am invited by this so excellent an Example, to the recital of one other no
less excellent, taken out of the first part of our Chronicles of S. Francis,
one of the most Exemplar patterns of devotion to the B. Virgin as ever was.
This holy Saint in visiting a certain Convent somewhat remote, had appointed
him for companion one of raw years and rawer experience in Religion. They
being arrived at their iourneys end, the Saint after some light refection,
retired himself somewhat more early then ordinary to his repose, the bitter
to rise at the accustomed hour of Mattins with the rest. Mean while his
Companion singling out one of the Co^uent of as little spirit as himself, began
with bitter inuectiues to inveigh against the Saint, saying (by way of mockery)
that he could eat, drink, and sleep with the best of them, and even to
passion seek his own commodities, the whilst he kept them short enough, and
slinted them as he listed; and after many such idle and misbe seeming speeches,
resolved at last to watch him narrowly that night; whither he rose at the
nocturnal Hours with the rest or no, and so he did. When behold, about the
second Vigil of night he might perceive him rise and take his way toward the
adjoining Wood, and following him still with his observation, at last he saw him
fall prostrat on the ground directing many a sigh to heaven and many a prayer
winged with the fire of love unto the Queen of heaven, beseeching her of the
favor to let him see her B. Son just as he was infanted into the world:
scarce had he vtter'd this, when the B. Virgin al environed with celestial
light appeared unto him and with incredible sweetness presented him from her
own arms with her B. Son. The Saint rauish't with so high a favor, and
rendering al possible thanks for it, began to vie kisses and regards of him, to
the emulatio^ of his mouth and eyes, whether should take the more delight in
him. This amorous duel lasted til break of day (not only to the exceeding
consolation of the S. himself, but of that Religious too;) when being
constrained to restore his precious burden to his Mothers arm again, the
vision ravished. At sight of this so divine a miracle, the poor imperfect
Religious man was so moved and edified, as he threw him self presently at S.
Francis feet, beseeching him of forgiveness for his fault which he humbly there
confessed, and dying afterward to his imperfections, became to live a perfect
Religious man consummat in all virtue and perfection.

From these two examples results an infallible proof of this first privilege,
and the B. Virgins exceeding love to those who hold dear her memory, and
employ themselves for her sake in works of piety, whilst they become each day
more faithful and fervent in serving her. And these are those she most
especially does regard; these are those she most particularly does protect,
never abandoning them (unless they abandon her) until she has happily guided
her to heaven. Al with the devout S. Bernard in these few words does
comprehend: It is impossible for you B. Lady to forsake him, who places his
Confidence in you, since you are the Mother of mercy it self. Who would not
endeavor then, to the utter most of his forces, to be devout to her? who, to
gain the favor of such a Queen, would not count it honor to seek out al
occasions of serving her? it is no small one, I grant, to ingratiate ones self
with an earthly Queen; but with the Queen of heaven it is the greatest that can
be imagined; an honor not only to be preferred before all the greatnesses of
the earth but al we can receive from any Saint in heaven. And thus much may
suffice for the first Privilege.

THE II. PRIVILEGE.
Js that the B Virgin is most liberal, and accustomed to bestovv frequent
graces and favors on her servants.
LOVE that is true and perfect (as daily experience teaches) is never
satisfied in cherishing the thing beloved, and obliging it by gifts and
favors, even to dispoile it self of al it has most precious, to give unto
it. So, Ionatha^s love to David was so great, as the scripture says of him:
Jonathan loved him as his very soul; he plucked off his richer garments and
gave to him; and to paint his freindship forth in more lively colors it adds:
He gave him even his sword, his cincture; and his bow. Now if worldly love has
such force over the hearts of men, what has the divine over the hearts of the
Saints in heaven, especially of the B. Virgin, who excels al men and Saints
together in the perfection of love? Let us unanimously say and acknowledge
then, that she is so affectionat to those who honor her, as she never
cease showring on them the heavenly deaw of the most precious gifts and
richest treasures there; for which reason she is deservedly styled by our holy
Doctors, the Treasuresse of all the riches in heaven, and dispensatrix of all the gifts of God: A dignity to which his divine Majesty has exalted her in
heaven; an honor to which above al his subjects he has preferred her. The
keys of everlasting riches are in her hands, the coffers of Paradise full
fraught with divine treasures are at her command, of which she is nothing
sparing; but liberally gives to all that will, to all that ask, to all that can
pretend least right unto them; she being most rich and powerful, and her will
equaling her power both in heaven and earth.

To you al power is given (says the mellifluous Doctor devoutly discoursing
with her): both in heaven and earth, so as you have ability to do what you will,
and so her self auowes how rich she is in divine treasures where she says:
The grace is in me of al way and truth, in me al hope of virtue and of life.
And knowing how much they import us, her self inuites us to demand them of
her: Come to me al, says she, who are desirous of me, and be replenish't
with my generations. See how ready our rich celestial Mistress is, to make us
participant of her celestial riches, and see how much she affects our good, who
offers us so bountiously those goods and honors, as are neither beholding to
Time, nor fortune. Why do we tarry then? why are we then so slow, why shake
we not off this dulnes that possesses us? do we fear perhaps a disdainful
repulse from her? a difficult access? a fastidious regard? ah no, she is so
far from it, as she is very sweetness, meeknes it self, and there is nothing,
in earth or heaven more affable, more courteous, then she; as S. Bernard
testifies of her, where he says. What humane fragilitie is it, that fears to
approach and have access to the Virgin Mary, in whom is nothing austere or
terrible, but she is al humanity, al full of charity and courtesy toward al.

Let us then with the common opinion of Doctors hold for certain, that
whosoever has, recourse to her in their necessityes, and duly implore her
aid, are never by her frustrated of their hopes. O sweet Lady (says the
ancient Theophylact) you are a powerful protectrix of man; for O immaculat
Virgin, who ever placed his hope in you, and was confounded, or who amongst
men, has implored your clemency, and been abandoned?

Free then from doubt and assured of the truth, let us have recourse in our
necessities to this most powerful and pitiful Lady, and make our selves worthy
of those high favors and prerogatives she so bou^tiously rewards her faithful
servants. Withal she is, as we have said, the Treasuresse and dispensatrix of
all the gifts of God; she is the neck (said S. Hierom) by which our Savior
who is the head, infuses into his body the Church all that spiritual sense and
motion, by it is animated and sustained; she is the body of the tree by which
the root imparts life unto the boughs, producing flowers, leaves, fruit, and
all that in the tree excels either for orname^t or use; She is the Concaue of
the fountain which first receaues plenty of its living waters of grace, and
after distributs them to several pipes according to their several capacities.
Wherefore S. Bonauenture most maturely says: it is wonderful what a collection
there is in the Virgin of all the pleintines of grace, and how from thence it is
derived to others, as from its proper source so abundantly as S. Bernard
affirms, all the Citizens of heaven, all the men in the world, all the souies in
Purgatory, nay even in Hell itself, do homage to her as to their sovereign
Lady, bowing their knees before her in submissiue and beseeming reverence. So
there is no profession nor estate, but is subordinate to her, especially
Religious the glory and richest ornament of the Church, which is ever sheltered
under the protection of her wings, whose founders have in particular manner
still been devout unto her, by which means they have obtained for them and
their spiritual children particular favors still.

Who is not astonished at the admirable love of that great Patriark Saint
Dominick to the B. Virgin from whom next to God, his Order acknowledges a
dependency, and to have received al its luster and conservation. For what
remarkable graces and favors has he not received by her intercession? Of this
love unto her service, although there were no other proof, yet that of the
invention of the Rosary were sufficient.

For how many thousand sorts may we imagine has this holy Saint led by this
excellent devotion to the honor and service of the Queen of heaven? how many
Princes and Monarkes of the world, how many Queens and Ladies of worth and
honor, how many of al sorts and professions, even whole people and whole
worlds, (as witness the new World Antipodes to ours?) neither can we pass in
silence the surpassing affection S. Francis bare to her, which was so great, as
he would often in amorous passion compose verses to her praise, and either sing
them himself, or cause them to be sunge by his Religious. From whence it came,
that he still obtaine'd whatsoever favor he demanded of Alm: God, for himself
in particular, or his Order in general, by the intercession of this beloved
Virgin.

One amongst the rest for its raritie I cannot but recount, and it is one of
the greatest and most stupe^dious miracles of the world, by which such an
infinity of souls have been delivered and daily are from the very torments and
pains of Hell it self; And this is that great and admirable Indulgence granted
at the request of S. Francis by our Savior Christ in the presence of the B.
Virgin and innumerable blessed spirits, to the Church of Assisium commonly
called Our Lady of Portiuncula; which by reason al Christendom is so much taken
with the devotion, as also it being full of rare mystery and worthy of general
notice, we will briefly make you the narration of.

S. Francis once fervently praying for the salvation of souls, an Angel
appeared to him and summoned him to the Church, where it said our B. Savior
and his mother, with a world of Angels were expecting him. At this, he ran
thither, where, being arrived he saw our B. Savior seated on the high Altar.
in a maiestike seat, accompanied by his Mother, and incircled by multituds of
Angels; When falling prostrat at his feet, he was soon excitated by this
comfortable voice of his most gracious Lord: Know, Francis, thy prayers are
arrived unto mine ears, and for that I know the affection and solicitud of you
and your Order for the salvation of souls, demand of me what grace you please
for their avayle, and I will grant it you. S. Francis at first al trembling at
sight of such a majesty, by the sweetness of these words secured at last
waighing the importance of them, thus answered: O Lord, not but that I am
conscious of my great unworthiness to obtain any grace from you, much-lesse so
great an one, but that you are pleased to add this to the number of my
innumerable obligations besides; I accept your gracious offer, and humbly
beseech of you for the good of every Christian; that al who visit this Church,
having first duly confessed and communicate; may obtain a plenary pardon and
Indulgence of al their sins: And you O glorious Virgin and gracious aduocatrix
of every Christian, I beseech you join your powerful intercession with my
Petition for it; when in concurrency with it, converting her self toward her
B. Son she said: My dearest son, whom I once had the honor to bear in
this womb of mine, grant I beseech you this his petition to your faithful
servants, since the salvation of souls (then which there is nothing you more
esteem) is so much concerned in it. Grant it to my Temple here, to your honor
and the edification of your holy Church. When his divine Majesty casting a
gracious eye toward S. Francis there prostrat before his throne, say unto
him: Francis, though what thou demand'st be much, yet thy desire merits much
more, in being so conform to mine; wherefore I grant thee the Indulgence thou
desire, with this condition that thou have recourse unto my sovereign Vicar,
who has the free dispose to bind and loose al here on earth, and of him demand
from me the grant of it. So the vision vanished; when early the next day S.
Francis took his journey toward Perugia where Pope Honorius then resided with
the Court of Rome; and there humbly kissing his feet he declared how al had
past, and the occasion of his coming there. At hearing of which, the Pope
granted him a Plenary Indulgence (in manner before said) for one day in the
year, though as yet what day in the year, was undetermined, it having neither
been presixed by his divine Majesty nor his Holiness, until al last upon this
occasion:

S. Francis returned to his Convent, was once at midnight in deep
contemplation in his Cel, when the Angel of darkness transformed in shape and
voice appeared to him like an Angel of light, and said: Poor Francis, why are
you such a Tirant to your self? why will you destroy nature with your
superfluous watchings thus? Do not you know the night was ordained for man to
rest, and that sleep is the principal stay and support of life? Alas, you are
yet in the April of your years, have a care then of your self and be ruled by
me, if not for your own sake, at least for your Orders, whose safety wholly
depe^ds on yours; you are of a strong and robustious complexion promising a
long life, if you shorten it not by your indiscret austerityes, believe it,
these extrauagant devotions are infinitely displeasing to Alm: God, who in all
things is most delighted with mediocritie. The Saint hearing this, and by this
discovering the malice of the wicked Enemy to delude him by a false
suggestio^, suddenly, started up, and al naked ran to the adjoining wood,
where he so long rolled him self among the sharp thorns and bristy thistles
til the blood issued amain from every part of him; when in mockery of his
body, now (said he) had it not been better for you, to have attended still to
the sufferings of your God, then to suffer this, for attending to the Enemy.

He had no sooner vtter'd this, but instantly behold a clear light spread
itself over all the wood, and chasing darkness thence; on the one side he saw
the ground al icye (for it was in the heart of winter) and on the other close by
the thorns (he embrewed in his blood) the white and red rose freshly
springing; whilst the Angels in multituds made a lane for him from that place
unto the Church, singing in triumphant manner as he went: Go, happy Francis,
go where thou art expected by the King and Queen of Heaven; and he knew it was
no illusion, by their so miraculously reuesting him a new; then gathering four
and twenty of those Roses mixed of either sort, he went toward the Church
treading on rich tapistry all the way, the Angels (as we said before) making a
lane for him on the right hand and on the left; where being arrived, he beheld
our Savior seated and accompanied as in the former apparition; when with all
low submission casting him as his feet; Most sacred Majesty: (said he)
before whom both heaven and earth do homage, it pleased your goodness to grant
me formerly a plenary Indulgence, in that manner (as I desired it) now my
petition is, you would appoint a certain day for the obtaining of it, and this
for your most dear and gracious Mothers sake: Our B. Savior thus answered
him. Francis, thy deserts are such I can deny thee nothing, wherefore I grant
thee thy petition, and appoint the first of August to be it; then the Saint
rendering him al possible thanks replied; but how, O Lord, shall this be
divulged unto the world, or on whose faith will they take on trust so great a
miracle: For that (said our Bl. Savior) be it my care to provide, in the mean
while have you recourse again to my Vicar here on earth, carrying with you
eye-witnes of this apparition one of your brothers with some of those Roses you
have gathered there, and fear not, you shall see your desires accomplished. In
this amiable sweet, and admirable manner was granted to Holy S. Francis the
famous Indulgence of our Lady of Portiuncula, by the soueraige Monarch of
Heaven and earth, a grace so great, a favor so sublime, as never was heard of,
never mortal man received the like. By which, and the fore mentioned
Institution of the Rosary by the great Patriarch Saint Dominick, whereby his
Order has been so much ennobled, may clearly be perceived, how extraordinarily
this bountious Lady recompenses them, who serve her affectionally and
faithfully.

THE III. PRIVILEGE.
How the B. Virgin helps and Comforts her faithful servants, in their
afflictions.
THE third Privilege this heavenly Lady honors her fauourits which is: never
to be wanting to them in their afflictions, a thing which neither ought nor can
be doubted of. For if she loves them, and if she loves by effects to show it,
what greater effects of it, then in their most necessitous times to receive and
succor them, or when is the time to declare ones love and affection, if not
then? A true friend loves at al times (says the holy Ghost) and a brother is
tried in affliction; and can we think any in heaven or earth more true to
those she loves then the B. Virgin is? or that in her affection she serves the
times, and loves not so well in poverty as in riches, in sadness as in mirth, in
adversity as in prosperity? Oh, no, A true friend always loves, but especially
in time of affliction, for that is the touch stone of true freindship indeed,
and then she shows hers most. What a happiness, what a felicity is it then, for
those who love and serve her faithfully to have so powerful a friend as she who
when the burden of misery lies heauiest on us can lighten us, when we are
deserving more of pity then of love, out of pity loves us more; and who
lastly in the dark passage of death, where so many leese their way, leads us
safely out of it, and not forsakes us then, when all the world besides forsakes
us, but comforts us on our deathbeds, when al in this life turns to our more
discomfort which we did most affect; and stands unto us, when whole legions of
devils are beseidging our souls, sheilding us from every harm, now defending
us from impatience by assuaging our griefs, or fortyfijng our minds against
it, now from sorrow, with the joy she brings us, now from despair with the
assured hope of our salvation, and finally with a new re-inforcement of Angels
puts al our Infernal enemies to flight.

The glorious S. Antony of Padua (as is recorded in his life) when he was
assalted with any temptation, used no other weapon then to repeat this Hymn
of hers: O gloriosa Domina, etc. when presently he should come off with
victory. As it happened one day when being at his prayers, the devil (at
defia^ce still with all good works) set so furiously on him, and strayn'd his
throat so cruel hard, as he had almost strangled him, til the Saint having
recourse to his accustomed arms, enforced him to leese his hold. In like
manner all the article of his death being prepared unto it before with all the
sacraments, and saying with his brethren the seven penitential Psalms, he
concluded al Devotions with that, to which he was ever so devout: O gloriosa
Domina, etc. when behold, the B. Virgin appeared unto him, infinitely co^forting
him with her apparition, and adding to the Consolation of it, the sight of her
dear son and his dear Lord; at which with incredible joy he delivered his
soul into his Bl. hands. Go read al histories, search into al records, see if
you can find any that ever trusted her with their confidence, and were
deceau'd; who inuoked; her in their necessities and were not releiued by her?
so as we may well apply those words of the Wise man to her, and say: Behold al
ye nations of men and Know, that none has placed their trust in this
sovereign Lady; and been Confounded. And could we but see rising from their
sepulchers al those who have been devoted to her and could Demand of them where
ever she had fayld' them at their need or no? Infallibly they would al with one
accord say with S. Bernard co^uerting themselves toward her. Let him be silent
O Bl. Virgin, who can say you were ever wanting to them when they inuoked you in
their necessityes.

We will add another Example taken out of Scala caeli, of a high miraculous
strain, exemplifying this privilege to the life, and so conclude it.

A certain Matron of excelcellent endowments, and much devoted to the Queen
of heaven, sending her son to serve a certain Prince, in whose service his
father had spent his life, charged him before he went by all the ties by which
Heaven and nature had obliged him to her, to be devout unto the B. Virgin, in all his necessities to implore her aid, and never omit daily, at least to say
unto her honor an Aue Maria, with that short prayer: O B. Virgin, be
propitious to me at the hour of death This he faithfully promised, and being
at Court inuiolably observed, though for the rest, Youth easily falling into
disorder, and the Court being a place most slippery, this young Gentleman
frequenting the societies of some deboished ones, soon took the taint of
their societies, and became as deboish't as they; and (as there is no stay in
wickedness when one is falling once) at last he was so deeply plunged in it, as
the Prince when no admonition would serve the turn first banished him his
presence then his Court, and last of al his territory. Impatient for this
disgrace; and converting that was intended for his cure, unto his great
malady, what did this desperate youth but associat himself with certain
thieves, who harboring in the woods infested all the Provinces about, and was
soon chosen their Captain; when having a more spacious field to exercise his
wickedness in, he soon became so ingeniously fierce, so wittily cruel, as in
fiercenes and cruelty he excelled them al, sparing no humane creature, and no
sort of inhumanity. But see Heavens instice, which comes with the greater force
upon us, the greater turn it makes ear it comes at us. He reigned some years
thus, in his wickedness, til at last it was his fortune to be taken and
delivered up bound hand and foot to the public Magistrate by them to prison,
where the same day he was condemned to die; of this having secret intelligence;
(strait as if the mask of his wickedness were but then taken off) he began to
perceive the vglines of it, so as to detest it, be wayle and curse his fortune,
and even wax desperate for the grief and shame it had brought upon himself and
his family. When behold while he was in this dispose of mind, there entered
dungeon a man of mighty stature and horrible aspect, who addressing himself
unto him, Offered, if he would be ru'ld by him, to free him thence; and who are
you (said he) almost freed by his promise from the fear of his appearance, I am
the devil (said he) sent hither by my Prince to deliver you; obey but his
commands; at hearing this, without any long delay, the prisoner (as it is
ordinary with wicked men, to prefer the safety of their bodies before their
souls,) answered; What-so'ere you are, you will oblige me by so great a benefit
to what soever you demand; then first (said the devil) you must renounce Jesus
Christ, his merits; and all the principality he has over you; I do (said he)
and it suffices to have found a Prince of your Master so ready, to pleasure
me; next you must renounce all the Sacraments and communion with his Church: and
that too, answered he. Then to Mary his mother, and al your hope of favor and
assistance from her; at this he demurred, and entering into himself called al
his thoughts together in consult of what he had promised his Mother, and what
he had performed til then; when resolved at last he answered? that he would
never do, far be it from me (said he) how near soever my life be co^cern'd
in it, to offer such an affront to my dear Patroness, and so to iniure her
who so has obliged me: No, rather I offer her my self (if she daine to accept
it) whether she would have me live or die, to be wholly and absolutely at her
dispose. Confounded with this his resolution, the devil vanished, when he
touched unto the quick with a repentance for his heinous offenses against his
Lord and Savior, at first began to weep and sigh most bitterly, then had his
recourse to the ordinary refuge of sinners the Mother of God saying unto her
with a sobbing voice, a thousand times interrupted by his grief: O most sacred
Mother of mercy, have pity on me miserable sinner, and do not quite reject me
from before your sight; I ask not of you deliverance from my bonds, I beg not
of you to save my life, for that considering the heinousnes of my crimes) were
too much for me to ask and you to grant; I only humbly crave you would obtain
for me pardon of my sins of your B. So^n, and assist me as I have often
petitioned you at the hour of my death: in this sorrowful and devout manner he
past al night, and the day was no sooner come, but he sent for a Confessors
and confessed him of al his sins; this done, he was led forth to execution; the
poor soul upon his way ever calling upon the Blessed Virgin his Patroness to
assist him at that time of need; On the way it was his chance to pass by a
little Chapel, where was erected a statue of our B. Lady, which he beholding
vehemently cried out sighing in most dolorous manner: O thou hope of sinners
help me; the Image at this advanced a little, and in sight of all the people
favorably beckened unto him with the head; which he perceiving besought the
Magistrate he might be suffered to approach unto it, and kiss its feet in
thankfulness for so great a favor; which being granted him behold just as he
bowed down to kiss its feet, the Image laid hold of him, and held his arm
so fast as all the force the Officers used could not take him thence, the people
beholding so great a miracle, presently al cried out, a pardon, a pardon, and
delivered him whether the Magistrate would or no; in presence of whom he made
the full relation of al his passed life, praising and glorifying God in his B.
Mother for it, whence returned into his Country, he became so reformed a man,
as he became as remarkable afterward for goodness and virtue, as he had been
before for vice and wickedness.

From this History we may understand, that the Mother of God is never wanting
to her servants in their necessities, that she is our refuge, our safeguard, our
comfort, and remedy of al our pains, greefs and afflictions; for which reason
S. German Patriarch of Constantinoble uses these words speaking unto her: There
is none saved without you (says he) O Blessed Virgin, none delivered from
their greeua^ces but by you, none but by your mediation receaues any gift from
God, none but at your suite obtaynes forgiveness of their sins; O Virgin
worthy of al glory and praise, who next to your son takes such an especial
care of humane kind, as you; who defends them more affectionatly then you? who
succors them more readily then you, when they are assalted by temptations? who
extenuats their faults with greater charity? excuses them to God, and exempts
them from punishment due to their offenses.

Wherefore (in continuation of his discourse) says this holy Patriarch; Let
the afflicted have recourse to you, let those who are lost upon the Sea of this
worlds misery in danger to be wrack't, look toward you as to their
Pole-starr, that shall safely direct you to their Port. Thus this pious Saint;
By which, and that which has been said before, this third Privilege is enough
illustrated which the devout servants of the B. Virgin have. Let us pass unto
the fourth.

THE IV. PRIVILEGE.
Of the devoted to the B Virgin, which is to have her in Heaven for their
assured Advocate.
CERTAINLY it is a great comfort for poor Widows and Orphans, and such
afflicted souls, when their business lies at Court on which depends the safety
of their lives or estates, to be assured of the favor of some great one who
has the Princes ear; but if the Queen her self should take their affayre so
to heart, as to employ her whole authority therein, an unspeakable comfort
would it be to the^? Now how much more cause of Comfort have we poor
despicable creatures, Knowing we have in heaven for Advocate to Alm: God the
Queen of Heaven her self, who defends our causes, undertakes our protections,
procures faithfully our faluations, and omits no diligence in fine to render
our sovereign Judge propitious unto us. O assured hope, miserable sinners have
in such an Advocate with Alm: God, so as the Church styles her in her Antiphon:
Eia ergo aduocata nostra etc. who having in her hands the manage of our
affairs, we cannot but she will expedite al to our advantage, which made the
elegant Cassian Say: All the help of human-Kind Consists in the multitud of the
favors and graces of the Blessed Mary.

The holy Church to our no small co^forts with suffrage of the common opinion of
Saints, attributs to the B. Virgin certain Epithets of honor in expression of
the good offices she does us, callig her Mother of sinners, Mother of mercy,
the universal hope and refuge of al, Aduocatrix of mortals, as also Redemptrix,
Pacifier, and Mediatrix betwixt God and man. Nor needs there any other proof
then experience it self, how much al sorts and conditions of Christians are
devoted to her; the Pilgrims call her their Mother, the Pupils their Tutrix, the
sick their Phisician, the seafaring men their haven, the Culpable their
Advocate, the Trauaylers their Guide, the Captains their deliverer, the
forsake their refuge, the desperats their Hope, the afflicted their Comfort,
the oppressed their Releife; In fine, all the world acknowledges her, and calls
her the only Refuge of the miserable, and the aim to which al Christian people
commonly direct their vows and ardentest desires; knowing for certain she can
do al she will, and she will do nothing but what may be best for us.

For which reason al sorts have recourse to her as to their chief treasure in
Heaven, the source whence al their graces spring, and the gate at which they
never knock in vain; In so much as from the midst of the vastest wilderness,
from the bottom of the deepest sea, from the jaws of death, served upon the
earth bed to it, to be devoured, from execution and the very stroke of the
hangmans hands, she has delivered al those who have duly inuoked her, and
miraculously feed them from the dangers they were in; so sure and gracious a
friend she is at need to the afflicted and distressed.

So she incessantly makes suite and instance for us, at that great Tribunal,
where her B. son presides as sovereign Judge for it (as S. Bernard says)
these three requisite parts of a good Advocate First, a great repute in the
Court she pleades in; and the favor of the Prince or Iudge'; next the
sufficiency to plead; and lastly such an affection to the cause she
undertakes, to go through with it what ere it cost.

Now to declare unto the full, the B. Virgins authority with her son, not Only
exceeds my capacity; but the capacities of al men and Angels. Wherefore let it
suffice to say (least in offering at more we should incurr but the repute of
presumption) that she is Mother of God; from whence by Consequence we may
gather that she is of unlimited power with him, and that the least intimation
of her desire carries with it (as I may say) the force of a Command. And so
the holy Church desires no more of her but, Monstra te esse matrem; show thy
self a Mother; And in another prayer we say: Grant he may ear our prayers,
who Was borne for us, and daigned to be thine. So in our ordinary litanies we
supplicats her thrice to intercede for us, as one who has more power and
authority, with the Blessed Trinity, then all the other saints. S. Gregory of
Nicomedia in his Sermons to her praise, calls her Omnipotent in her aduocation;
And S. Peter Damian addressing his speech to her; It manifestly appears (says
he) O B. Lady; Quod Dominus fecit tibi magna: how great things God has done
for you in giving you al Power in this world and the next, even to be able to
afford the most desperate a full assurance of their salvation; for the Omnipotent
taking flesh of you, how can you be less then omnipotent with him? and in
continuation of his discourse he says; you approach, O Powerful Lady, to the
Altar of our humane reconciliation, not in suppliant wise as do the other
Saints, but with the authority of a Mother to a son, which is but to ask and
have.

Touching the second Condition of her Capacity of the charge in rightly
understanding our necessityes, besides that she is styled the Mother of mercy
and our Aduocat, both, which suppose her abilities for it, this example may
suffice out of the Chronicles of the Friars Preachers, whose Order in a special
manner is devoted unto her.

In the City of Marcels there ws a devout Virgin endowed with all Saintly
virtues: who on a certain day being present at Compline in the Church of the
Dominicans, while they were singing the accustomed Antiphon, Salve Regina, was
ravished in ecstasy, during which she saw four things of singular remarke: The
first, that when they pronounced these words: Spes nostra salve; hayle our
hope; the Blessed Virgin with a gracious Countenance returned them their
salutation: The second, that at these word; Eia ergo aduocata nostra: O
therefore thou our Advocate with a lowly inclination to her B. Son she seemed
to intercede for them: The third, that at these words: Illos tuos misericordes
oculos ad nos Convert: Behold us with those merciful eyes of thine: she cast
upon them a most dear and sweet regard: And the fourth these words: Et Iesum
benedictum fructum ventris tui nobis post hoc exilium ostende: and show us
hereafter Jesus the blessed fruit of your womb: she by turns presented him
there present in her arms to all the Religious: This vision, returning from her
ecstasy, she declared to her Confessor, a man both holy, learned, and discreet,
with great feeling of devotion and temdernes. Which example may move us, often
to have recourse unto this our heavenly Advocate, supplicating her by this
devout Antiphon of hers, in which she seems to take so much delight and
complacence.

The third Condition requisite in a good Advocate, is faithfully to acquit them
of their charge; and it is impossible for us to comprehend, how faithfully and
carefully the Mother of God negotiats for us our affairs in heaven, or to
conceive the admirable effects thereof. So as she has al these requisite
parts of a good Advocate. Mary wa^ts not power (says the devout S. Bernard)
nor right address to obtain what she Petitions for; for she is the Mother of
Wisdom; nor the will to employ her self to the uttermost in our affairs, for
she is the Mother of mercy. To which last, in being our Aduocat, she is (in
manner) bound; For so the Iurists hold they are bound, faithfully to negotiat
the cause they undertake. Besides being so good as she is, and so affectionat
toward us, how is it possible she should not take to heart an affair of such
consequence as is that of our salvation; and above al, being our Mother too, as
well as his, to whom she interceds for us: a strange circumstance that she
should be both Mother of the King, and suitor, of the Judge and Criminal, of
God and Man; which must needs render her much concerned in the affair to make
an atonement betwixt God and us; and (as S. Bernard, says) be even impatient
til she have performed it. In being our Aduocat then we must suppose her
incessantly pacifying her sonns anger toward us, and mediating a reconcilement
for all those, who have recourse unto her and implore her assistance: which may
be clearly perceived from this following Example recorded by John Grithi of the
Order of the Minorits.

There was (says he) a soldier, a man of most wicked life, and violater of al
things sacred and profane: whose wife not withstanding (a holy and pious
woman) had obtained of him, by solemn vow to fast in honor of the B. Virgin
every Saturday, and say an Aue Mary as often as he beheld her picture which he
did, nor ever omitted to do. One day, (more to a void the vehement heat
abroad, then for any heat of devotion he had within) he entered the Church:
where beholding an Image of the B. Virgin, he began to do as he was
accustomed. When behold, he had an apparition of our B. Lady on the Altar
holding in her arms her B. son al covered over with wounds and the abundance
of blood that issued out of them: Moved to pity at the sight of so pitiful a
spectacle, the Soldier (divinely inspired) drew nearer, and had the boldness to
ask our B. Lady who had so wounded her B. son? Thou, and such sinners as
thy self, (replied she with an angry countenance) who exercise more cruelty on
him with your daily crimes, then ever the barbarous Jews who crucified him.
These words struck the Soldyer into so lively repentance for his sins, as he
replied with a sorrowful heart and weeping eyes: O B. Lady, it is true indeed,
I have been as great a sinner as you affirm; yet do but obtain for me of your
B. son a full pardon and remission of what is past, and I here vow unto you to
be as obsequious hereafter to him, as I have been rebellious heretofore,

No, said the B. Virgin, I am resolved to hear you no more, nor be any more
deceived by you; for whilst you sinners call me the Mother of mercy, you make me
with your sins the Mother of al greef and affliction: Oh B. Lady (said he) be
not so inexorable I beseech you to my prayers, but remember you are the Aduocat
of sinners, and have (in a manner) contracted by it, an obligation to intercede
for them, and consequently for me the most grievous of them al, and most
needing your intercession: Here the B. Virgin moved to pity with his words,
cast a pitiful eye toward her son and said: Pardon then I beseech you, O my
son, this poor sinner who so humbly petitions you; no, said the sacred
Infant, his offenses are too great to be forgiven; but she persisting still to
conjure him by all the charms she thought most powerful to move him; at last
seeing his anger so resolutly bent nothing would move it, she arose and placing
him on the Altar went down ready to cast her self upon her knees before him;
which when her B. Son beheld, suspecting her intention, he ask't her what she
meant to do? why, say she, to cast my self here prostrate at your feet, and
never rise til you have granted me my petition; O mother, say the tender
Infant, you know the force your will has with mine; For your sake, I pardon
this wicked wretch and in lieu of satifaction admit him, to kiss my wound;
encouraged all this by the B. Virgin, the soldier drew near, and whilst with
incredible Consolation, he kissed wound after wound behold, under the touch of
his mouth they al heald up. The B. Infant thus recovering, the vision
vanished, when the soldier presently having home; distributed al his goods unto
the poor, and then by common consent, he and his wife separated, and entered
into Religion. O happy souls the while, and happy Conversion which I would to
God al sinners would imitate. To cunclude then, since we have so powerful an
Advocate in heaven of the B. Virgin; let us make no delay but prefer our
supplications to her, expose our necessityes, and petition her for a redress
of them; the mean while, more to interest her in our affairs, let us be
assiduous in honoring her, and ingenious in finding out the way to do it best,
omitting neither day nor night to salute her with humble reverence, always
remembering that a little of feruorous devotion is better then a great deal
negligently performed.

THE V. PRIVILEGE.
How the Mother of God saues her devout servants, and renders them worthy of
eternal life.
THE glorious Queen of Heaven is not contented yet, to cherish her servants
after a dear manner, to enoble them with singular prerogatives, to succor
them in their necessities, and espouse the care of their affairs; but with all
she delivers them with her prayers from merited punishment, and directs them
unto heaven; which sovereign favors ought to oblige us perpetually to serve
her, especially this last which I esteem the principal'st of al, and worthiest
of greatest admiration, in that according to the common opinion of Doctors,
it is in a manner impossible, that any one should be damned who lives and dies
deuote unto her, be they never so far gone in wickedness, but they recover at
last, and through the mercy of God (as we have a daily experience) make a happy
end. Now if any object, that this cannot be without a praeuious dispose of
Grace and a sufficient sorrow for their sins; I answeer, it is true, but this
the incessant prayers of the B. Virgin obtains for them too, whose power is
so great with her B. Son, as by virtue of that, she obtaines for them a
perfect Contrition, and entire remission of their sins. And this, the devout S.
Ambrose in these words affirms: O B. Mary, says he, you embrace with a
maternal affection the poor sinner despised by all the World, and never forsake
him til God pacified by your prayers has received him unto Grace.

Let us Confirm this verity by the example of a common Curtezen converted by
the intercession of our B. Lady. We read in the great Marial, of a lewd woman
wholly abandoned to vice and licentiousnes; who not with standing never omitted
daily seven times to bow down in reverence of the B. Virgin, and to say an
Aue Maria in honor of her; Now amongst her frequent prostitutions, it happened
one of principal quality haunted her company, whose wife being a virtuous Lady
and one singularly devoted to the Queen of Heaven; did bear her husbands il
demeanor so impatiently, as one day prostrating her self before an Image of
the B. Virgin she said: O most sovereign Lady, mirror of al purity, how can
you suffer this, to see one so shamefully abused, and an impudent woman thus
glory in my injury? I beseech you punish her so exemplarly, that she may be a
terrible warning hereafter for all the rest; Grant this request O sovereign
Lady, if not unto the deserving of my prayers, and heat of my services, Yet at
least to the pity of my Cause, and the intolerables of my iniurye. When behold
a wonder, the Image thus answered her; dear servant, it is impossible for me
to satisfy your desire, I know your wrongs and the just cause you have to be
offended at them; but know whital, she is so devout to me, in midst of al her
wickedness, as I cannot proceed against her as you desire; only this I will do,
for your comfort, I will petition my Son for her, that he would turn her
heart, and that she may turn unto amendment; which was done, for within few
days after there happened a miraculous Change in both the Adulterers, both he
and she reforming of their lives, and living chastely and exemplarly ever after.
And is not this a rare privilege then, of those devoted to the Queen of
Heaven, that let them be never so deeply plunged in the abyss of sins, yet she
can deliver them thence? I call it a privilege, since for their particular
devotion to the Queen of Heaven they are particularly exempted from the law of
other finners.

This affectionat devotion besides to the B. Virgin is a probable and
experimented sign of predestination, I say only a probable one, because it is
true, none knows whether they be worthy of love or hate, and an infallible one
in this life there is none.

With what contented hearts then should we live, did we but exercise our selves,
in good works and frequent acts of devotion toward the B. Virgin? and what
hope of eternal felicity should our minds be raised unto free from al those
doubts and fears of their salvation, which those who walk not in the way of
God and the service of his B. Mother, do meet withal so often? And from hence
proceeded the firm Confidence of Saints, grounded on the knowledge they had of
the excessive liberality and promises of Alm; God, to Conquer as it were the
Kingdom of heaven by the force of Christ's merits and their own cooperations,
by which they were so encouraged in the midst of their most grievous
sufferances, as nothing could daunt or discourage them.

S. Bernard in his sermons on Septuagesima said, that although it is true no man
knows for certain whether he be in the grace of God or no, since in this life
no man has an infallible knowledge of his salvation; Yet (says he,) (and it is
a saying of unspeakable comfort those who are perseuerant in good) we are not
to be disanimated, nor give over the working of our salvation with an anxious
fear, since we have for our comfort a hope of it arising from so many evident
signs of it, as it seldom or never deceiues our trust. Hear himself: le'ts
never trouble our selves (says he) with any such doubt as this, for we have
such certain marks and manifest arguments of our salvation, as in those who
have them, there is no doubt at al.

The Example of S. Hilarion comes well to the Confirmation of this; drawing
toward his end, and being affrighted with the apprehensions of death in this
manner encouraged himself; Go out my soul, said he, What fear thou? it is
seauenty years since thou begon'st to serve thy God, and now art a feared of
death? Behold what an assurance and firm hope of salvation a virtuous life can
give to the servants of God, and how clear and evident the marks are of
eternal salvation to those who live virtuously. Let every Christian then
endeavor to live so, and he shall feel in himself the contentment of this
security, which is so great, as it exceeds all the other Contentments we can
have in this mortal life. Which S. Francis well experienced, when having had a
revelation, how he was predestined to be saved, through excessive joy for a
long time he could utter nothing else, but Blessed be God, blessed be God. And
if these signs of Predestination are to be seen in any, in a most particular
manner are they to be seen in those who are devoted to the B. Virgin; which
from this following Example will be made manifest.

S. Anselme in his book of the miracles of our B. Lady, recounts this story:
how the Devil (who out of his inueterat hate to man, seeks al means possible
to ruin him) once putt himself in service to a noble man, having first taken
on him a humane shape; whose humor he knew so well to comply withal, as in
short space he had all the care of his family committed to his charge; and
pursuing the advantage he had over his will and his affections, he was still
suggesting some mischeife or other to him, now counseling him to wrong this
man, now to murder that, so as no day past in which he made him not guilty of
some notable wickedness; now it happened one day, this nobleman walking in his
woods accompanied with his crew of ruffians, encountered with a certain holy
Priest, whom he violently laid hands on and carried prisoner to his Castle; at
night the Priest signified to him he had a secret to impart unto him, in which
he was much concerned, but it must be in presence of al his servants; the
nobleman with a longing desire to know what it was, assembled them al together
except this devil, who retired himself, and took for an excuse some
indisposition of health: the Priest by divine revelation knowing the craft of
the wicked enemy, told the nobleman his presence was so necessary among the
rest, as without it, there could be nothing done. How would you have him come
answered the nobleman, since you hear them say he cannot stand on his legs he
is so ill? All Is one for that, replied the Priest again, some means must be
found out to bring him here. The nobleman seeing him so resolut, commanded
two of his servants notwithstanding al his excuses to see him brought, which
was don, and he came counterfaiting the sickman unto the life; when the
holy-man before them al, Coniured him presently in the name of Alm. God to
declare who he was, and to what end he had put himself in service to that
nobleman? At this, the devil casting toward him such a look, was able to make
tremble the boldest there, answered plainly he was the devil, and his end of
serving his Master was, to procure his destruction which he had long since
effected, had not the B. Virgin interposed her self: and wherefore, said the
Priest? why only for a certain custom this wicked wretch had (said he) daily
to salute her humbly on his knees seven times both morning and evening, and as
often rehearse in her honor the Angelical salutation. Which if I could have once
persuaded him to omit, as I endeauored often, I had presently killed him, and
taken his soul to hell, and having uttered this in shooting himself like
lightning out of the room, he presently dis-appeared, with his hideous roaring
leaving them al in horrible affright, of which the holy man taking his
advantage, exhorted them al to penance and bitter life, and especially the
nobleman, with whom he prevayled so much, as he wholly converted him and made
him as exemplar in goodness, as he had been in wickedness.

By this example we see this Privilege, and the exceeding value of this
interior and exterior reverence exhibited unto the Queen of Heaven. And if
this happened unto one so wicked a man as he, how much more special care will she
have of al those, who serve her in holiness and purity of life? with what a
Dear tenderness will she under, take the protection of those? and what a
watchful eye will she have to defend them from the assalts of the Enemy?

Let us then conclude this holy and profitable exercise with our duly honoring
the B. Virgin both with exterior and interior reverence affered up with all
becoming obsequiousnes; so shall we ingratiate our selves, with our most dear
and bountious Lady, by whose means we shall obtain that quiet and repose of
heart, which is to be preferred before al worldly things.

The Conditions requisite in a servant of the B Virgin, and first of Humility.
AS those who are entettain'd in service of any earthly Prince to obtain their
favors, endeavor to appear endowed with all those virtuous: parts and
qualityes by which they are taken most: so those who would be favored by the
Queen of Heaven, must whilst they serve her, endeavor to be qualified with
those virtues she is chiefly delighted in; which are principally those she
exercised her self in, whilst she was conversant in this mortal life, as namely
Humility, Corporal chastity, and purity of heart, to which we may add our
diligent frequenting and receiving the Sacraments, the only means to conserve
us in internal purity and to begin with humility, which is the foundation of al
other virtues.

It is certain, no other virtue was more perspicuous in her then that of
humility, though she had all the rest in their highest exaltation; and this
appears by the account which she made of it, testified by these words of hers:
Because he has regarded the humility of his handmayed: therefore al
generations shall call me blessed: as much as to say; that God only in regard of
the lowlines of her humility, had elected her to that high dignity, of being
his Mother. And if to be humble of heart (according to S. Dorotheus) is to
account abiectly of ones self and prefer al before them, of what excellency
was this virtue in the B. Virgin, who from those words of her, Because he has
beheld the humility of his handmaide; we may suppose (as F. Arias well observes)
she had so humble an opinion of her self, as she reputed her self of al other
creatures the most contemptible.

This virtue then shining so resplendantly in her, we may suppose to have been
that, most took the eyes of her B. Son, and made him soonest chose her for
Mother, as a son in this world if it lay in his choice would soonest make
election of her for mother, whom he saw endued with those graces and qualities
which were most in account with us; and this seems to be inferred by these
words of the text: For he has beheld the humility of his handmayd; and as if
she would say; the son of his heavenly Father has cast a favorable eye on
me his humble seruante, and thought me worthy of his love; not because I am
nobly borne, wise, prudent, conversant in the scriptures, and the like; not for
any beauty or corporal perfection, but only because of my humility. For so
although al her other virtues were most exceeding grateful to Alm. God, yet
that of her humility was most of al, it being as it were the foundation of all the rest. In so much as according to Lyr'as interpretation, it was in her the
principal disposition to the conceiving of the son of God; and so says S.
Hierom. God was rather moved to be incarnat in her womb by her humility then
another virtue else. In this virtue it was (as S. Mechtild understood by
revelation) she so exercised her self and labored so carefully, as she
atteined the height and perfection of it; by this she came to so absolute a
knowledge of her self; by this she would lessen her own proportion compared
either unto God or man. And disclaiming wholly from her own deserts; by this
she came to attribute all the favors she received to the sole benignity of Alm.
God, and rendered him thanks for them accordingly; by this in fine she came
never to utter word in her own praise, or to give willing ear to others
praises, never to take vainglory in any thing, but to attribut all the glory to
Alm: God, incessantly magnifiyng and praising him, with rendering him infinity
of thanks for his great favors toward her; and so she begins her Canticle; My
soul does magnify our Lord, and my spirit exults in God my Savior. And to
the model of this excellent virtue of hers, are al her devout servants to
conform their actions, and express the portraiture of it in their souls;
when how grateful will thy appear in the eyes of this glorious Queen, when
they present themselves before her in this rich equipage. Certainly there is
none has any understanding or discourse in him, that will not humble himself
unto the ground and think him the most abject of al other things, who shall but
consider how profoundly humble the B. Virgin was even in that exalted state of
hers of being Mother of God, more holy then the Angels, and more pure then the
very sunbeams themselves. And who considering his own vileness and extraction
only from a little earth, his being subject to such a world of faults and
imperfections, his becoming through sin enemy to God, and companion of the
devil, will not in imitation of the B. Virgin cast themselves into the bottom
of humility, from the topp of pride and presumption, whereon they stand

A great and near Imitator of this humility of hers, was her great servant S.
Francis, who was ambitious of nothing so much on earth, as to be accounted the
most abject of al his brethren and for his own part he esteemed himself no
better then a collation of all the abominable vices in the world, and one of
the most grievous sinners as ever was; which in one so great a Saint and in
whom so many virtues were assembled, was the more rare, and worthy the greater
wonder and imitation.

And although this in general might suffice to affect us to this excellent
virtue, yet I will set you down in particular a Method for the attayning it,
given by B. Tecelam a Religious of the third Order, to a certain friend of
his: who demanding of him by what means the virtue of Humility was to be
acquired, he answered; Contemn thy self, and al thou have in the world;
esteem every one more perfect then thy self; and have a slight opinion of
none; make great esteem of thy faults, and little of thy virtues and
perfections: count little all the good thou do to others, and the harm thou
do for great; and thou shall be in a fair way to Humility. To this we may
add S. Bonauentures advice for the attayning this holy virtue; Abase thy self
as lowly as thou can (says he): Imagine al men thy betters, and thy self
hardly worthy to be their? slave, and so thou shall arrive to a tranquillity of
mind, and never be molested with offense or moved to impatience. By which
excellent documents we may learn to find out true humility and the ways that
lead unto, a Journey so profitable for our souls which our B. Sauionr perswads
us to undertake saying: Learn of me to be meek and humble of heart. And those
servants of the B. Virgin: who are so indeed, especially women-kind are to show
it in their exterior comportments as they go abroad in public, showing
neither pride nor vanity in their looks nor apparel, and compasing both
according to the exact rules of virtue and decency For what an unworthy thing
were it in them, to appear in the B. Virgins sight less virtuously adorned or
decently behaved, things which she in her self so much abhorred as S.
Epiphanius testifies of her together with diverse others, that her own habit
was ever plain and simple without al affectation of riches or novelty, and
(which is an evident sign of her own purity (never subject to any spott or
stayne, but still the more whit (as it were) for her wearing it, This humility in
their habits then let women learn of her, even for the love of our B. Saiuiour
Christ who died naked on the ignominious Cross for us, and let not such vanity
unworthy of a Christian appear in their habits and exterior garb.

Surius in the life of S. Elizabeth daughter of Andreas King of Hungary and
wife of the Lantgraue of Turing, recounts a story that comes well to purpose
here. She (says he) one day attired in her Maiestick robes in all her pomp and
bravery entered the Church, where beholding just at the entrance a Crucifix, she
suddenly made a stand, and in great bitterness and compunction of heart, began in
this manner to enter into comparison of her self with it; Shall, my Lord and
Savior, remain al naked nailed to this hard Cross, and shall I miserable
sinner as I am, go at pleasure vested in these costly robes, curiously
embrodered with gold and precious stone? Shall my sweet Redeemer have these
divine hands of his fastened to the Cross with cruel nails, and shall I wear
on mine, all the delicacies that can be got? O my Jesus, shall I see thee, the
only Spouse of my heart, have thy head transpearc't with those sharp thorns;
and shall I with such magnificence wear a crown on mine? Alas, and can I
behold him abandoned by all his friends, and inhumanely left for a prey, to the
outrageous usage of his enemies, and set up as a mark for them to shoot
their horrible blasphemies at; whilst I my self go with so great a train,
waited upon and honored at every turn? O miserable, most miserable as I am,
is this the love I bear to my Savior Christ, are these my acknowledgment and
gratitud for all his benefits? And in saying this a sudden palenes, ouercast
her face, and a grievous fainting cast her in a trance: when returning out of
it, she firmly purposed never to admit of superfluity again in any thing she
wore, and de facto ever after she went so mortified in her apparel, as most
commonly she had under it a rugged hair cloth, and as often as the Dukes
occasions absented him from her, she would be so coursly attired, as no poor
woman but went better clad.

And certainly it is a deplorable thing ever with tears of blood, to see what
excess of apparel and voluptuousnes reigns amongst women now a days, so as
they seem to place al their their felicity (as it were) in a newfangled
fashion or attire. I would they knew or considered how displeasing it is to
Alm: God, or how many souls their vain curiosities and foolish pride have
precipitated and cast down to Hell, and what lamentable harms have had their
origin from thence; for they are not only the cause of their own sins, but
also of others participation with them, whilst in regarding them the bayte has
been but laid by the Enemy to draw thousands unto hell. Which perhapps we should
hardly Credit, did not the holy Ghost it self affirm it: Turn away thy face
(says he) from a woman Curiosity adorned, for many have been taken by the
beauty of women, and become reprobate; a horrible thing to imagination. And how
many Religious men have we seen drawn by the attraction of beauty, first to
insinuat themselves into their familiarityes under the pretense of sanctity and
spiritual converse, and after by degrees so deeply engaged in their societies,
as without hazard of their saluations they have never been able to get out. The
whilst with a deaf ear they have neglected all the inspirations of heaven,
flattering themselves with certain pernicious. Maxims grounded upon I know
not what imaginary show of good manners and curtesy; For what (will they say)
should we turn our backs to them? and what were that but to give them cause
to think us Clownes, and justly to accuse us of discurtesy and inciuility. But
happy is the soul the whilst that reiects these vain fears, in a matter in
which their salvation is so much concerned, and prefer their souls immortal
good before al other humane respects. Let women therefore take warning and leave
off in time, al affectation and superfluity in their behavior and attire least
they incurr as great or greater punishment then she did, whose story I will here
relate, out of the second part of the Chronicles of the Frier-Minors.

A Religious man of the Province of Sicily, praying one day in the Church of
his Convent, had the apparition of a woman al naked presented before his eyes,
whom he coniuring in the name of God, to declare unto him what she was, she
answered with great shame and confusion; I was (said she a woman of fashion and
quality in my days, and of plentious fortune, al which I abused so, to his
offense who gave it me, as in all my life I had no other thought, than how to
adorn me in most curious manner, and follow still the fashions of the time,
till coming to die it, was God Almightyes mercy to me, I should repent me of my
sins, and with true Contrition make an entire Confession of them, by which
means I had them al forgiven me on this condition that I should for penance of
my former vanity, off attire, wander in this manner naked up and down the
world; and having said this, she dis-appeared. Where is to be noted, that
although the poor soul for its greater Confusion imagined she was a spectacle
to al, yet none saw her but those whom God Almighty pleased to reveal this
his secret judgment unto, in whom it excited rather a holy fear of the severe
punishments of Alm. God, then any unlawful imagination or desire.

Let those then who desire to render themselves acceptable in the eyes of the
B. Virgin endeavor with all their might to become humble both in the exterior
and exterior humility being the only virtue on which God bestows his most
abundant favors. God resists the proud (says the holy Scripture) and gives
his grace to the humble. And the most sure and infallible way to heaven is true
Humility. Humility (says S. Augustine) is the Queen of virtues, the destruction
of vice, the mirror of Virgins, and the throne of the holy Trinity.

In fine, humility is that, which best teaches us both to Know the deceipts of
the devil, and to avoid them, being known; as was revealed to S. Anthony, when
beholding one day in vision all the world set with snares about, he cried out;
O Lord, how is it possible for one to escape al these? and he was answered by a
voice from heaven; by being humble, Anthony; for only Humility stoopes so low,
it is never entangled by them. And so we read, how the devil once appeared to
S. Macarius with a mighty scithe in his hand, threatening him as if he would
have mowed him off, and crying out against him; O Macarius, what a cruel strife
is there betwixt us two, and yet how impossible it is for me to overcome thee:
I do all that thou do and more, for thou watchest sometimes and I never
sleep; sometimes thou fastest but I never eat; I think as obiectly, and set
as light as by the worlds vanities as thou; only one thing there is in which
thou surmountest me, which is that profound humility of thine. We see then,
what admirable force this Christian Humility has, to overthrow pride, and
triumph over the stratagems and forces of the Enemy; a force so great, as the
very mention of it is enough to put all the armies of Hell to flight; which I will
confirm by an example taken out of the Friar Minors Chronicle, and it is this.

In the Convent of Perusia the Province, where S. Francis was borne, there was
a Guardian of an austere life, endowed with all the virtues of a good Religious
man; now it happened that a noble man of the Country on Christmas-Eue sent an
express messinger to desire him to send one of his Religious the next day to
say Mass for him, and it happened just at the instant that two of his Religious
returning from a long journey, weary with trauayling and almost dead with cold
and hunger, he presently commanded them to satisfy the desire of the
Nobleman; which they as presently undertake without once murmuring and
repyning at his command or alleging for their excuses their great
necessities; Going then with great humility and obedience, behold they were
scarce half way on their journey, but they were overtaken by night and
involued in so thick a darcknes that they could not see their way; which
incommodity joined to that of their hunger and cold, made their case the more
commiserable; when seeing themselves so destitut of al humane help, they had
their ordinary recourse to the divine help beseeching Almighty God, to succor
them in their so great necessity, and in the mean time going on, though
whether right or no they could not tell; at last they hard the ringing of a
Bell, and their ears directing their steps, at last they arrived at a
Monastery (as it seemed;) where having knocked, the gate was presently opened,
and all the Religious in flock came to salute them; from thence they conveyed
them to their chamber, where they had al things prepared for their rest and
refreshment with great diligence; At last the Religious departing from them
exacted of them a promise to make them some short exhortation before the next
days Matins. Well, the morning being come, and it ringing to Matins, the
Religious were al assembled, and one of these good Fathers an excellent
Preacher began to make them an exhortation taking for his text these words of
the Prophet Esaias: A child is borne unto us, and a son is given us; on which
he discoursed most divinely of our Saviors humility in descending so low to
take upon him our humane nature, and whilst he was in the heat of his
exhortation he might perceive all the Religious one after another slinking away
till at last there was only left the Abbot in the Quire. When al amazed
demanding of him the reason why his Monks had left him so? your self are the
cause, said he, how is that possible answered the good man again? Why (said
the Abbot) you have discours't in such manner of I know not what humility of
the son of God, as they neither would nor could endure to hear it praised
and extolled so much: for to discover the truth unto you, we are not (as we
seem) Religious men but devils, who in reward of your prompt obedience to your
Superior have been, co^strayn'd to give you that assistance you have received
of us to night, and having, said this, both he and the Monastery and al
dis-appeared, leaving the good Religious men mightily astonished at sowondrous
an accident and in the same place where they first hard the Bell, from whence
they took their journey toward the Nobleman, all the way thanking and
glorifying God for his great favors and benefits bestowed upon them.

Many other examples of this great virtue I could recount, and especially that
of the B. Virgin, who when the Highest had chosen her for his mother professed
her self the lowlyest of his servants, and in her greatest honors went in
visitation of S. Elizabeth, and served her for three space months; then with
what greater humility can be imagined? besides how lowly did she match her
self, only to a poor Artificer, to whom she continued dutiful and obedient
even to death, comforting her self always with those who were most poor and
humble; as we may gather by the marriage she was present at of that poor couple
at Cana in Galilee, neither refusing her company to the most grievous sinners
such as was S. Mary Magdalen and the like; and all this humility in one, who was
exalted to so high a dignity, as to be mother of God, and Queen of heaven and
earth, was so much the more admirable and rare, that she should never boast her
of any honor she had, nor be the more exalted in her mind for being so high
exalted in dignity; but neither on this nor any other example for the present
will I further enlarge my self, not to exceed the limits of that breuity I have
proposed to my self.

Of the second Condition which the devout servants of the B Virgin ought to
have, which is Chastity.
AND if the servants of the B. Virgin be so grateful and acceptable unto her by
reason of their Humility, how great must needs her favor be toward those, who
add to this virtue that of Chastity too, which so purifies and embellishes a
soul? in how singular recommendation must she needs have them, and how
tenderly cherish them? Humility and Virginity were so equally in this Blessed
Lady, as to which to give the pre-eminence we do not know; so happy was her
Virginy in being adorned with such humility, that admitted of no vain
presumption of it, and so happy was her humility in having the honor of such
virginity, which defended it from al misprision and contempt; and what clearer
testimony can there be of this holy Virgins immaculate Chastity then these
words of hers; How can this be, seeing I know not man? And of her humility on
the other side, then those which presently follow: Behold the handmayd of our
Lord; be it don unto me according to thy word. O what a marriage was here of
these two virtues in the B. Maid, where chastity became so humble, and humility
so chaste? what higher dignity could there be, then to be Mother of God, and
yet she professed her self his humblest servant, aba-sing her self as low as he
had exalted her, so as S. Antoninus had just cause to say, that it was chiefly
the attraction of her humility, which drew the son of God from heaven, to
make in her womb another heaven on death.

Al then, but chiefly those of her own sex, are to imitate this B. Virgin in
her Angelical purity, who is proposed a pattern and example unto al. It wa's
she; that first advanced the standard of Virginity, under whose white colors
so many since have fought, and first ledd the way, which so many Virgine-soules
have followed since, of consecrating their virginities unto God by vow; in
doing which (says S. Anselme) she sauoured more of divine then mortal: neither
did the name of Mother any thing derogat from the dignity of a Virgin, but
rather dignified it the more, adding the fruit of a mother to the flower of
virginity in a divine and admirable manner. Where fore with good reason she is
styled Virgin of Virgins; who began a pattern to all the rest, of Consecrating
their virginityes to God; a work so grateful to him and acceptable.

O happy and thrice happy Virgins, then, who perpetuate their Virginityes by
vow unto Alm. God, in spite of al resistance the world does make; seeing
besides the many prerogatives they have above those who are wedded to men; they
enjoy by it such a Consolation of mind, as surpasses all the Comforts in the
world.

In confirmation of which, I will relate the excellent discourse of Nereus and
Achilles to S. Domitilla in commendation of virginity when they persuaded her
to Christianity. These seeing her curious in adoring her self, took occasion
from thence to dispose her mind: Madame (said they) if you were but as
sollicitous to adorn your soul with virtues, as you are in setting your body
of, with these superfluous ornaments to please your spouse Valerian, without al
doubt you would take the eyes of Jesus Christ with it, a far more noble spouse
then he, and one who would far more deserve of you, with whom you should live
still in an increase of beauty: whilst your other would only live upon the
spoils and the decays if it; To whom she answered, (yet vnskild in Christian
perfection, and one that knew nothing but what the world and flesh dictated
unto her) what can be more happy said she, then the state of marriage, which
comprises in it all that is of honor and felicity? Alas, Madame, said Nereus
again,) you know no more then the vain pleasures which vanish with this blast
of life, and are ignorant as yet (it seems) of those everlasting ones in the
other life, and waighs the commodities of marriage al if, you putt not its
incommodities in the other scale, which I would have you carefully do, before
you loose, a good can never once lost be recovered again; And what good is
that, say she? your liberty, answered he, which with the little of Virgin you
must forgo, changing it for a servile estate and slavish obsequiousnes unto
one whose humors you know not and which perharps may be such, as out of pure
Iealousy he may interdict you the company of your nearest friends, and those
who^ you most esteem, behauing himself so harshly toward you, as no slave
but should live a more contented life then you. All this, half smiling she
ask't him, whither his general rule had no exception; for (said she) I grant
you Iealousy is a vice but too ordinary in men, which my mothers sad experience
renders but too manifest, yet is it not so fatal to all the kind, but there is
some so happy to be exempted from it, and amongst the rest, the excellent
dispose of my Aurelian promises him to be one. Achilles to this replied, Madam,
(said he) be not to confident, for these young lovers in the heat of their
poursuite, the easier to attain to their desires, dissemble their natural
inclinations, and appear more mild and gentle then they are; but those once
attayn'd, off goes the mask of their dissimulation, and then you shall see how
jealous they can be, how harsh and cross in their dispositions, how injurious
to you in words, and not seldone also in deeds. But suppose them of a more
temperat humor and more gently inclined, what privilege enjoy they by it? If
you shall give me leave, I will tell you what: To bear a painful burden in the
womb nine months together, to wax lean and pale with it, to be subject to a
thousand languors and disguifts the while if you have no Children. Lord what
discontents, what repinning at it? If you have with what danger? and how often
in giving their life do Mothers loose their own? what care and trouble in
their education? What fears least al their labors should be lost, and death
make his harvest of what they had sown with pain? then what disconforts do
they bring their parents with their lewdnes and untowardness; some living so as
they wish they had neuerben borne; others dying so, as they wish-they had never
lived; so as both a live and dead, they seem only borne, for their Parents
affliction. At this; Nereus crossing his arms and lifting up his eyes like one
in ecstasy, concluded thus: O happy then the state of virginity which exempts
us from al these miseries and unites the soul that is honored with it, to Alm.
God O most rich and incomparable treasure, whose possession exceeds al
esteem, and repaires al loss; and O Divine love, and more then humane
fortitude, by which a weak woman can subdue the flesh, and with a generosity
above the weakness of her sex, wage war with the world, overcome her
appetites, and vanquish the forces both of death and hell itself; for which they
shall one day enjoy a Crown, with which none in heaven shall be honored but
they. With these speeches of her devout servants, but much more with those
which heaven spoke to her inward heart, the Lady was so moved, as she presently
consecrated her Virginity to God, for whose love unto the palm of Virginity
she after added that of Martyrdom.

Now we are to note, there are three sorts of Chastitys in the Church, by
either of which the B. Virgins devout servants may become grateful unto her.
The first is Matrimonial Chastity, when man and wife loyally observe their
Coniugal faith to one another: The second is Vidual Chastity, when Widows free
from the observance of man, live afterward in perpetual continency, and this
excels in excellency the first degree, as S. Paul says speaking of widows;
Yet they are more happy so, says he, If you will Credit me. The third is
Virginal Chastity, more excellent then both the other more perfect and more
meritorious; and this is, when we co^serue our selves in our integrity of body
and mind dedicating our virginities to Alm. God, which, oh, how grateful how
acceptable it is to the B. Virgin, who preferrs it before al other oblatio^s.
Seeing then al these three sorts of Chastity are with proportion both good and
laudable, and with the B. Virgin of precious esteem, let those that are
devoted to her, be they maid, widow, or wife, endeavor in their several
degrees, to present her with this grateful offering, to which end they are to
resolve to fight manfully, for the Enemies that oppugn it, are both many and
powerful, their Arts full of al ambushes, and their endeauours incessa^t for the
ouercoming of us: so as S. Augustine considering the difficulty of the fight,
and rarenes of the victory, with good reason said: Amongst all the wars the
Christians had, that of Chastity was the most sharp, and pressed us most;
where the Combat lasted always, and an entire victory was never got attained
unto; and those that naturely ponder it find it true. For but consider how few
they are, that fight it manfully indeed, in compare with those who cowardly
yield unto the Enemy, and we may truly say, the devil gains by nothing more
then this; for how many of al ages and conditions, of either sex, does the
Enemy precipitate into this vice, who for the rest stood firm enough? To which
purpose S. Augustine has a fearful saying: Excepting Infants (says he) this
only sin is the occasion that so few of the rest are saved. Who at hearing of
this, is not astonished? and conceiues not a pity of our miserable estate, to
see how headlong al run unto this vice. And as for the servants of the B.
Virgin, what excuse can they pretend for their excesses herein? what ways they
to please her, whilst they displease her here? Do they think, that saying
their beads frequently will do it? or their fastings on Saturdayes and the like?
Alas, no, they do but deceive themselves, and the vsurpi^g such an honorable
title as to be her servants, whilst they are such? Does but more increase their
damnation, whilst they abuse that name to the dishonor of Chastity by which
ought to be chiefly honored, and while they put on the face of wearing her
livery, but wear the badge of her Enemy in their hearts. Alas, how many may we
imagine now in hell, who were once devoted to the B. Virgin as well as we, till
with a foolish presumption of their salvation, they with a deaf ear past over
her saving and divine suggestions and fell: to which if we desire to be saved
indeed, we must lend an attentive ear banishing from our hearts, al motions of
sensuality, and entertaining al chaste ones in their place, or else we leese her
favor, and it will be woe with us.

But above al for conservation of our Chastity, it is necessary to fly al
occasions and inducements to the contrary, for this is such a kind of victory,
as is best gained by flight, and they that frequently expose themselves to
danger in it, are overcome at last. Wherefore let none enter into an
ouer-wening of themselves or their forces for any former victory, for they may
easily leese in a moment what they have been in an age a getting, and slight
occasion may ravish from them that, which many difficult ones went to the
obtaining of; and let no humane or nice respect, make them be wanting here, to
the care they ought to have of their chastity; for many out of punctillios of
honor have stood so long upon it, till they have fallen, and many by dangerous
familiarities have been deceived. Rather let them fly carefully the aspect and
haunt of those, whose companies may endanger them, following the Counsel of our
Savior in it; If thy hand or feet scandalize the, cut them off, etc. or if
thine eye, pluck it out: which counsel some Saints have followed so near, as S.
Bridget in particular, not only avoided in her self al occasions of sinning in
this particular, but to avoid it also in others, she prayed to Alm. God, he
would convert all the virtue she had into deformity: Others there have been,
that have disflgured themselves rather then to give cause to any temptation;
and others rather then suffer the effect of it, have willingly departed with
their proper lives. Which I will confirm by an example taken out of the second
part off the FF. Minors Chronicle.

A Burgundian Gentelman had a daughter so affected to the service of the Mother
of God, that secretly from her tender years she vowed her virginity to her.
This virgin had a corporal beauty, joined to the beauty of her soul, so
taking, as it attracted to her the hearts of al. Among the rest, a servant of
her fathers was one, who omitted no arts not industries to oblige her to a
reciprocal affectiou to him; But this not taking, his love grew desperate, and
at length engaged him in as desperate a course; For his Lord and al his servants
being gone a hunting, he secretly, returned home, when his daughter was either
not accompanied at al, or else slenderly only by her maids; and taking that
opportunity to execut his wickdnes, went and found her out, where in the
Chapel she was prostrat at her devotions before a picture of the Queen of
heaven: into which he entered audaciously and without any reverence to the
place, or respect to the person, told the reason of his return, and how
desperately he was in love with her, coniuring her by all the force of a wicked
eloquence to the accomplishme^t of his desires. Whereat the Virgin was so
struck at the first, what with the impudence of the fellow, what with the
horror and vnexpectednes of his demand as she remained a while deuoyd of speech
and sense, til at last rowsing her spirits up, with a just disdain and bashful
anger, she answered him; Get hence thou impudent villain, and seek out some
others more fit to hear and grant thy suite then I: and whence is this
insolence in thee? have you ever seen any thing in me, that should thus
embolden it? but cease your boldness and your insolence, or I know the way to
bring you to dear repentance of it the fellow at this, grown wholly desperate;
and rageing no less for anger then for love, drew out his sword, and fixing
the point against her throat, told her there was but one way with her, either
to resolve to die, or to satisfy his desire; thy desire (said she?) rather then
by me such a wicked desire shall be ever satisfied, had I a thousand lives I
would willingly loose them al; but you consider better (said he) for assure
your self I am not in jest; Be in what mind thou will, replied she, do thy
worst, and when thou have done, go vaunt to such as thou art, how thou have
traitorously murdered thy Lords daughter in his own house in defense of her
Chastity. This put him wholly into the hands of furye and desperation, and made
him at one blow cut off her head. When flying instantly to the Vicar of the
place who was his Uncle, he made him acquainted with what he had done; Who
being much troubled at it, advised him to lie concealed in a secret place which
he showed him, til he had don Mass and had further advised what course to take
with him. Mean while behold a stupendous miracle. An Angel sent from heaven
presently united the trunk of our be headed Virgin so properly to the head
again, as there only remained a red streake about the neck in memory that it
was once cut of when she restored to life again, had presently recourse to
Church to hear Mass, and render thanks to Alm: God for that miraculous
favor; Being there, it happened the Curat at the Offertory descending from the
Altar, with much astonishment espied her, and believing it rather some
phantasme come to fright him, then her returning to life again, suspended his
astonishment and his fears, til after Mass, when he repaired unto her more
fully to inform himself of what she was; Then she reconted from point to
point, all that had happened to her, grievously a complaining of his Nephews
barbarousnes, and in particular of his irreuerence toward God and his B.
Mother: The good man lost in admiration of the accident, as soon as he had
found himself, was al in tears, beseeching her to keep secret this heinous
offense of his Nephew, and pardon it. For my particular, said she, I do from
my heart; but how Heaven will pardon him; I know not; For that, said the Curate,
I trust in the infinite mercy of Alm. God, only yours was al my fear, and
there upon he produced his Nephew, who on his knees shedding abundant tears
besought her of pardon; when she raised him up, and as if she had forgotten
how much he had offended her, in this mild manner spoke unto him: My friend,
said she, I have already past my promise to your uncle that I will forgive you;
only procure by penance to purchase the forgiveness of Alm. God, and his B.
Mother, or I assure you, a more rigorous punishment then this world has any, is
in store for you: Sweet Mistres, said he, (making profou^d reverence unto her,
and declaring by his sighs; and tears a more profound grief and sorrow) how
good and gracious you are, not only to preserve my temporal life, (which if you
pleased to take it; were forfaited unto you) but to take such care of my
eternal on; yet besides this favor I must needs beg another, which is, that
from that mouth, which for so grievous a trespass has pronounced my pardon, I
may hear what penance I shall perform for it Since you will (said she) you
shall; only take it by way of council not of command, and it is this, That you
become a Friar Minor, and before you are so, Confess your self wholly and
entirely of al your wickedness: This the sorrowful soul willingly accepted of:
and having punctually performed what she inioined him, in short space made such
progress in Religion, as he became an example of perfection unto al. And by
this we may perceive; how succourable the B. Virgin is, to those who for the
Imitation of her, preserve this virginity so carefully, as rather to depart
with it, they chose to depart this life.

The third Condition, which is requisite in the honourers of the B Virgin, Of
cleannes and purity of mind.
THE sacred Virgin being not only a bright shining mirror of Humility and
Chastity, to its perfection, but also of incomparable purity of mind, we who
make profession of being her servants, ought to have her example always before
our eyes, to the end the continual Contemplation of these three excellent
virtues in her, may excite us to an affectionat desire of them, especially that
of purity of mind, it being the most exquisit beauty of the soul, and an
ornament which most of al illustrats it. Now this purity of mind is nothing else
(according to Albert the great, as he alleged by S. Antonine) but a recession
from al impurity, which is sin, and an accession to God the sovereign purity
and in this consists the true sanctity of the soul, for the more we weed it of
imperfections, the more place is left for perfections to spring up in it; and
so S. Dionyse defyning sanctity says, that it is a perfect purity abstracting
from al sin, and cleansed from al impurity; whence we may well conclude, that
purity is no other thing, then an exemption from al imperfection.

Let the pious Reader then imagine the purity of the B. Virgins mind, who of all the Children of Adam was not only exe^pted from al actual sin, but also from
original; and that because of the conueniency (as S. Anselme would have it)
that she who was the Mother of God should next to him have al imaginable
purity; which could not be, if she had not been preserved from original sin.
Besides, God having predestined her to a degree of honor, the highest that
any creature could be capable of, it followed consequently he should endow her
with a purity above al other creatures, and so all the faculties of his power
wisdom and goodness, (we may imagine) were at once employed in enritching her
with such gifts and supernatural preparations, as rendered her of al creatures
the most eminent; in such manner as those who had but the eyes of spirit open
to penetrat into the beauty and perfection of her glorious soul would
infallibly more admire Gods workmanshipp, and see more admirable effects of it
in her; then in the fabric and creation of the Universal. Never any thing came
immediately out of the hand of God, but it was pure, perfect and complete; he
created the Angels from the purest of the Heavens perfect and pure, he created
man likewise so, of the most pure-parts of the Earth, and Eve from the purest
flesh and bone of Adam, whilst he was yet in the state of Innocence was created
pure; and the reason is, because the nigher to the principal of purity a thing
is, ever the more pure it is. This being so, what can be more resplendent
(says S. Ambrose) then she in whom purity it self close to abide? what
finally more unblemished, then she whom the Son of God chose to inuest
himself withal? And if God has favored other creatures with that high
prerogative to be borne in grace and exempt from sin, who can doubt but she
in a special manner was borne so, and exempted above the rest? For what
incongruency else were it to have the mother inferior to her Children the Queen
to her subjects and. Seeing then the Angels, and both Adam and Eve more created
in grace and in the state of innocence, why should we deny the Queen of
Angels, and the repairer of Adam and Eues offenses, the life prerogative? Yet
let us pass farther, and affirm the B. Virgin excelling in purity by infinite
degrees not only al men and women in the world, but also al Angels, Archangels,
and the highest Seraphins in heaven. For this, S. Hilarion affirms of her
addressing himself unto her in this devout manner. O souerainely happy Virgin
above al women, and surmounting even the Angels themselves in purity.

Her sanctity then being so great, we may well conclude of her, that there was
never in her any blemish of sin, nor the least shadow of imperfection. Let us
consider her then, being so immaculate as she was, as an Idea framed by God, of
al Chastity, as a lively pattern of perfection in women, model of supreme
purity and finally school of al Virtues, Virgin both in mind and body, humble
of heart, grave in discovery, prudent in action, never stirring abroad til
invited by necessity sober and mortified, wearing always in her Contenance a
holy bashfullnes, her gate well ordered and composed, simple in Clothing,
moderat in her voice, never laughing but weeping often, sparing of speech,
always well employed, having still in hand some profitable book, assiduous in
prayer, during which she seemed still in ecstasy; more abhorring sin, then all the men of the world together as one who better then them al together knew, how
hateful and detestable it was to Alm. God: she was of a spirit perpetually
attentive to the exercise of virtue and holy life, holding in a generous
dis-esteeme all the honors dignityes and riches of the world, as knowing how
contemptible they were al, in compare with those of heaven, whose sovereign
Queen and Empress she was to be: how was it possible then she should ever
fall into any sin, being of so excellent a soul, and it being replenished
with so many divine graces and perfections? and From whence (says Dionyse the
Carthusian thusian) we may imagine these beams proceeded, which shooting from
her countenance rendered her so resplendent and venerable to all that regarded
her; al which were nothing yet in compare with the inward rays that
illustrated her mind, which gave light unto the Angels of light themselves; her
regard was such according to S. Ambrose and S. Bonauenture) as her bare sight
was sufficient to reclaim even those that were furthest gone in sin; but that
which was most, admirable in her, and which most rauishes in astonishment both
men and Angels, was her being at once both Mother and Virgin, virgin in purity,
and Mother in fecundity; A prodigy of al others the most stupendous, and a
prerogative only appropriat to this rare Phoenix of perfection; for to whom else
were attributed ever these supreme titles of honor, Virgin before childbirth,
Virgin in childbirth, and Virgin after it? Yet? it is an Article of says, and
al doubt thereof interdicted by the holy Church; for the Consummation of which,
we will here relate a Miracle happening to B. Giles one of the first Companions
of S. Francis, and it was this.

A Religious Divine of the Order of S. Dominick, being once vehemently tempted
by the Devil sworn Enemy to the B. Virgin) to call in doubt her vndubitable
Virginity, and not sufficing by his own forces to shake it off, was resolved
to use the help of some other, and hearing the fame of B. Giles for sanctity,
resolved it should be he. Being on his way toward the Convent where the holy
man resided, who by divine revelation understood the cause of his journey,
behold he was ready to meet him, and embrace him with all the freindly
expressions of a Religious charity; and e're ever the other opened his mouth to
communicate with him of his temptation, he said unto him; Brother and friend,
assure your self, she was a virgin before childbirth; when raking the ground
with a little wane he had, one Lilly presently sprung up, then converting
himself to him again; so assure your self, said he. she was a virgin in
childbirth, and a second Lilly sprung up in confirmation thereof; finally, the
third time addressing himself to him he said, assure your self lastly (said
he) that she was a virgin after childbirth too; and this by the springing up
of a third Lilly, being confirmed also, the Divine remained delivered from his
temptation and rendered infinite thanks to Alm. God, for his so miraculous
delivery.

Let this suffice for a more ample confirmation of the sovereign Purity of the
Queen of heaven. Let those then who desire with a due purity of heart to serve
this glorious Virgin, endeavor withal their forces to imitat her, in her
admirable purity and Innocence of life, that is, to have a heart untainted, and
free from al contagion of sin, especially such as are mortal, since, as the
Angelical Doctor teaches us; The farther that purity is removed from sin,
the purer still it grows; so shall we have part in the benediction: Blessed are
the pure of heart, for they shall see God. And to come yet nearer to particulars,
those are pure of heart, whose consciences are free from mortal sin; those
more pure, are likewise free from venial; but those most of al, who accompany
this freedom from sin, with the assidual practice of virtue, and this
according to S. Christsostom, is to be pure of heart. S. Hierome defines it, to
have a conscience that can accuse us of no sin, at al, such an one as that of
our B. Ladies was, who according to S. Bonauenture, was so pure from sin, as
it was revealed to a certain person, as her conscience understood not what it
meant. O happy and a thousand times happy are such as those, whose breast being
pure, and invested with these white robes of purity, do serve in that livery
the sovereign Queen of heaven; for these are truly her servants, these truly
her fauorits, and such as in the next life she peculiary honors and aduances
above the rest.

We read of S. Lewis Archbishop of Toulouse, who issue from the Royal blood of
France, and was once a Frier-Minor; how he in his life never committed mortal
sin; this holy Saint dying at the age of 80 years, a certain Frier-Minor
far from the place of his death, and ignorant of his infirmity, had a vision
just at the instant of his departure of innumerable Angels bearing his soul to
heaven, and singing melodiously on the way; So are they rewarded who serve God
in purity and chastity of heart; and for his chastity and purity we have the
attestation of all that conuersed with him, that al his actions and words
sauoured of nothing else.

And as vehemently is the B. Virgin displeased with the contrary vice, as with
this virtue she is pleased; as witnesses this following story recounted by
the learned Pelbart; A young Gentleman of a debaushed life, exercising some
devotions in the honor of the B. Virgin, she one day whilst he inuoked her
aid (being straied in a wilderness and almost famished) appeared unto him
accompanied with a glorious train of Virgins, bearing in their hands al sorts
of delicat meats, but served in so foul and loathsome dishes, as although his
hunger was most urgent, yet for very loathing he would not eat a bitt; which
the B. Virgin perceiving, aptly took occasion to reprehend him saying; even
such are your devotions you offer up to me; Good in themselves, but coming from
one so foul with sin, my heart serves me not to accept of them; so she
vanished, and left him so stricken with this reprehension by the bitter slain
of his former life, as for the time to come he wholly amended it.

Let those then, who have the honor to be styled the servants of the B.
Virgin, that their services may be the more acceptable to her, endeavor to
keep up, to the highest point of this perfection of purity of heart, that is,
to be so far from the conscience of any mortal sin, as even to decline
venial as far as it is possible; from the which the farther they are, the
nigher they approach unto perfection, and the more they increase in grace and
holiness of life. Happy is that soul then, which growing daily perfecter in
this purity of heart, shall find a ready way to every grace and perfection it
shall be desirous to obtain, and merit to have Alm. God amply communicate them
unto us, whose property it is to be most bountious of his favor to the pure,
to impart himself unto them in a particular manner, and enrich them with his
divine Consolations. And this Heart of ours being a thing of such perfection,
each least defect in it, appears to be deformity, it being (as Bro. Giles was
used to say) like a bright mirror which the least breath would set a
blemishon; For which reason the Wiseman so earnestly recomends unto us the
Custody of it. Look Carefully to thy heart, says he, for thy life depends on
it. And so we see, how little a thing diminishes of its merit and purity; an
idle or ridiculous word a little leuity in our actions, a frivolous Curiosity, a
less modest regard, immoderate laughter, or such like, which we account of as
things light and indifferent. Now the better to conserve this purity of heart,
we must be most careful of our Exterior senses, our eyes, ears, smell,
touching, tasting, etc. least the Enemy prevail himself by them against our
selves.

To express the danger of which F. Iacopen of the holy Order of B. Francis,
has an apt similitude; There was (says this holy man) a Virgin of excellent
beauty, having for her dower a Jewel of inestimable price, who had five
brothers al poor and necessitous; the one a Musician, the other a Painter, the
third a Perfumer, the fourth a Cook, and the fifth a setter of others
chastityes to sake One day the Musician addressed himself, unto her, and with an
accent, as charming, as it was pitiful, desired her of pity in his extreme
necessity, if ever Charity, said he, were dear unto you, or if ever you knew
what pity meant, declare it now in your assisting me; give me your Jewel to
redeem me from my wants; it is a bold request I grant, both in regard of the
greatness of its value, and the smalnes of my deseruings, but the greater honor
will be yours, with so vn-interessed a Charity, to assist a brother in his
necessity, and the greater will be my obligation; and here so paused a while, as
if his grief had stopped the passage of his speech; But she remaining Inexorable
to his prayers, answered him thus: My dear brother, I would do much for you,
but satisfy your demand I cannot; for the same Charity which obliges me to
benefit others, first of al obliges me to benefit my self; what a folly were
it in me then, by my enriching others, to make my self for ever poor, you know
I have nothing but it to maintain my life, and to depart with it were to
expose my life te extreme necessity; Well (answered the Musician) then, since
you will not give it me, at least sell it me: and what will you give me for it? I
will take my Lute, said he, and sing you two of the newest Airs at Court at
this she laughing, ask't him, when they were done, what remains for her to
live upon? no, no, said she, brother you shall pardon me, I will not sell so
precious a Jewel for so slight a thing. After him the Painter came unto her
with the same request, offering one of his best pieces, in exchange, but she
refused him as she had don the former. Then the Cook, and the Perfumer came
next, this profering for it, one of the delicatest perfums he had, the other
the most sauory dishe he could invent; but they as the former failing of their
pretenses; the fifth lewd Companion, addressing himself unto her, who knew well
the arts of persuasion, and how to instill his words into the mind, offered her
for it, after a world of smooth and soothing word, her choice of a hundred
Paramours; But being as the rest rejected, it happened not long after, that a
mighty King moved by the fame of this rich Jewel, came to demand it of her,
off ring to marry her on the condition that he might have it, and give her for
dowry his Immortal Kingdom; when she overcome by the greatness of his offers,
but much more by the goodness of the Offerer, thus answered him; My Lord, it
were Impudence in me to refuse you, wherefore behold I freely give it you,
without any reserve at al, and desire no other recompense for it, but that you
would vouchsafe to accept it; and excuse the smalnes of her merit that gives it
you. This similitud the holy man would explicat in this manner; The Virgin is
the soul, the Jewel, the Free will she has; her five brothers, her five
Corporal senses; the King, Alm. God; as for the rest, is obuious enough.

And here I could take occasion to inveigh against those, who would beheld
devout (forsooth) to the B. Virgin, and have no Care the while of bridling
their senses, but let them run on to al licentiousnes; nay, which is worse they
continue so, til the end of their lives, without any remorse, out of a vain
presumption they shall be saved because of some odd devotions they exercise, then
which what greater folly can there be, what greater blindness? not to see how
the devil draws them as it were bound hand and foot to hell. For example, you
shall see many, (I speak it with grief and shame enough) so addicted to the
devotion of the Annunciat, as they would not omit it for a world, (and it is
commendable in them) but mark how they abuse it; the miraculous effects which
they so spread of it, makes them presume the like; for what will they say: never
tell me of Hell nor of the pains thereof, though I sin never so much, I serve
a Mistres who has both will and ability to help me out of it, and let me but
Confess my sins at the hour of my death, and I am sure of heaven; see how
these miserable wretches talk; drawing a wrong consequeuce from an Antecedent
most true, that the B. Virgin both can and will succor her servants: but they
must be such as make due use of her favors, and employ the^ in working their
salvation: such indeed she sometitimes helps so efficaciously, as in
shipwreck she keeps then from perishing in the sea, and frees them from al
dangers on land of enimyes, thieves, and Murderers, and all this to bring them
to amendment of their lives: But those who rather grow worse by it, or out of
presumption of it seek not to amend at al, for my part I hold their safeties
desperate. Then there is a difference of sinners, for some sin of deliberat
will, and make not due use of their devotion to the B. Virgin, nay, as I have
said before, even abuse it to greater licentiousnes of life, and such are in a
most dangerous estate. Others only sin, out of humane frailty, and by giving
too much liberty to their senses, doing it with a remorse of Conscience, and
grievous desire to amend their faults, though they be neigligent to put their
good desires in excution: and for such, it is easier for them to dispose them
selves for grace, and prevail themselves of those Inspirations the B. Virgin
procures them for the amendment of their lives, themselves, both the one and
the other are to honor the B. Virgin, and reverence her with all becoming
reverence, that she may obtain for them of her B. son condign penance for
their sins, and amendment of their life. Let them like wise endeavor to make
themselves partakers of that laudable devotion of the Annunciat, since those
who have been of it, have been in fine recompensed for it, and I exhort as well
the Just and those of better life to this, as also sinners and evil livers;
sithence if these find such benefit of it, how much more must they, who are
intimate friends as it were to God and his B. Mother; as those who are in
deadly sin, are capital enemies, as this story taken out of the Cronicles of
the Friars Minors does manifest.

A certain Friar Minor of holy life, using to recommend himself unto the
prayers of every one he met; it happned he entering once into a town; met a
woman there of evil fame, and indeed of as evil life, and desired her likewise
to remenber him in her prayers to Alm: God and his B. Mother; At which, quite
astonished, she answered him, Alas father! what good will my prayers do you, who
am the wickedest sinner in the world? be what you will, said he, your prayers
will do me no hurt I am confident. When behold a miraculous accident, the woman
entering into the Church, and Kneeling before an Image of the B. Virgin to say
an Aue Maria for him, was rauish't in ecstasy, and behold the mother of God
humbly supplicating her son for him; and he demanding of her why she would
harken to the prayers of an Enemeys, although it was for a friend she prayed,
Be therefore merciful to her (said she again) and for your friends sake
receive her to friend ship also. The poor woman returning from her ecstasy,
hastened to find out the Religious man, to whom with great wonder she recounted
what had past, and having made a general Confession of al her sins, she lived
there after a most exemplar life in the service of that great Patroness of
sinners the Queen of heaven.

Let al who serve her then, if they desire to please her, carefully avoid al
mortal sin, and preserve their hearts pure and innocent; so shall they
likewise obtain the favor of Alm: God, since as the holy scripture says,
they who love purity of heart, infallibly shall have the king for friend.

The fourth Condition requisite in the servants of the B. Virgin, for the
conservation of this purity of heart, which is the frequentation of the
Sacraments, especially of that of Confession.
ALTHOUGH the profession of being servants to the B. Virgin, be a great stay
unto us from falling into sin; neuerthiesse, standing on such slippery
ground, with this weight of flesh on us inclining us to fall, we cannot but
sometimes do it, and contract some blemish by it, and may need the wiping away
of it. As for Mortal sin, by the grace of Alm. God we may preserve our selves
untouched by it; as many good Religious do even to the uttermost period of
their days; but for venial, it is impossible, nor is there any of Adams
descendants, that at some time or other have not fallen into it. The Apostles
themselves although adorned with richest sanctity, were not exempted from it,
only the B. Virgin has had this singular privilege above the rest, as the
holy Church conceiues of her in her Office; You are all fair O B. Mary, and
there is no spot in you. Now our B. Savior for the cleansing us from the
staynes both of venial and mortal sin has provided us of the remedy of the
Sacrament of Confession. And so S. Bernard says: Ama Confessionem, si affectas
decorem. Love Confession, as thou love to be fair; meaning that it is the
imbellishment of a soul, and so certainly there is nothing that more
efficaciously purges the soul from vice, then to frequent quent this holy
Sacrament.

All the Sacraments of the Church, according as the Council of Trent defines,
were instituted by our Savior Christ himself, and had their first origin from
his sacred side, at what time both blood and water came issuing forth, and are
so many rindets as it were, by which his abundant grace is derived unto us.
Let them therefore who frequent them, make account (especially this of
Confession) that they have recourse by it, to the over: flowing fountain of
our Saviors precious blood, by virtue of which their souls are washed and
cleansed from the foulnes of their sins: which the Apostle S. John does
insinnuat where he says: The blood of our Savior Christ purges us of our
sins. O how merciful and gracious has God ben to us the whilst? how
excessive his love, to give us so precious a remedy, by which as often as we
please we may be purged and cleansed from our sins: and as often as we are
dead in mortal sin, we may be revived and raised to life again, passing from
the death of sin unto the life of grace, from vice to virtue, from eternal
pain unto eternal bliss.

Of al deformities, mortal sin is that, which renders a soul most deformed,
in so much as could we but see a soul in state thereof, we should even die for
horror, it would be a sight so fearful and hideous: whereas no sooner it has
been cleansed by the sacrament of Penance, but it produces again a new beauty
and for mosity. So S. Gregory the great says: Could we but see a soul made to
the resemblance of God, even in puris naturalibus, we should admire it to
adoration, and believe the Creatours beauty himself hardly superior to it.
For which reason (says the learned Tilleman) God has enclosed it in this
corpse of clay, least it beholding itself, should be in danger of that
Luciferian pride, which was so many Angels perdition. And for this cause those
ancient Fathers of the Egyptian deserts in eleuating their minds to their
souls high (...), and taking the true altitude of their creatio^s, were as it
were alienated from themselves; In so much (as we read of S. Antony) as often
as he was called on to pay the debt of nature either in food or sleep, or any
such corporal necessity, he even blush't for shame, that so noble a substance
as the soul, should be interessed in such base reckonings. Now if a reasonable
soul be of it-selfe so beautiful, what great addition must it needs receive
from the Sacrament of Penance, which restoring it to its native luster, add to
it besides, that of God Almighties supernatural grace? Certainly there is no
eloquence in the world can speak it sufficiently, no living imagination can
conceive the hundredth part of its excellence. The Sun (says S. Chrysostom)
with his clear rays does not so illuminat the world as the Grace of Alm. God
can do a soul. Which that of S. Catharine of Sienna well declares; who hearing
a Preacher once discoursing of the excellency thereof, and how exceedingly it
beautifyed a soul, conceived an ardent desire to behold a soul in Grace, and
aduantaged with all the beauties thereof; Full of this desire, she was no sooner
departed from the sermon, but she hard a voice from heaven saying unto her:
Catherine, presently thou shall see the fruit of thy desire; and retiring her
into her Oratory, she there besought God for the performance of his promise,
and suddenly beheld a person of incredible Majesty al Circled about with light
and shining with clear splendours; at the sight of which, she was so rapt in
admiration and reverence, as she presently prostrated her self before its
feet with intention to adore it, had it not with these words prohibited her:
Catherine for bear for I am not God, as thou imaginest? and who then? answered
the Saint; I am, said it, the soul of a certain Murderer you prayed for not
long since in seeng me ledd to execution who being new cleansed in the fire of
Purgatory, and going al purified to heaven, after I shall have left you
satisfied of your desire by the commandment of Alm. God. And after this time,
the holy Saint had a particular in fight by Alm. God bestowed upon her, of the
natures of each soul, and she was wont to affirm unto her Glostly, Father,
that if he saw but the beauty of a soul, she was assured, he would: spend
1000. and 1000. lives for the saving of one.

The grace of this holy Sacrament of Penance has a wondrous virtue, not only
to purify the soul confessant from the stains of finne, but also to beautify
it with good inclinations, and from a slave of sin and unapt for good, to
render it free and expedite; which we will declare by an example out of
Caesarius. There was a learned Divine (says he) exemplar in all virtue called
Thomas, who approaching to his end, saw in a corner of his chamber the devil
appearing in a fearful shape; to whom he with an undaunted couragc thus spoke;
What art thou there cruel beast, said he? tell me, I conjure the, what amongst
Christians is the thing which afflicts the most? but he forbearing to answer
him, the holy man iterating his admiration, in the name of God charged him to
speak: when at last the devil thus answered him; Know (said he) there is
nothing in the Church of God afflicts us more then the frequenting the
Sacrament of Confession, seeing when a man is in mortal sin, he is as it were
bound hand and foot, wholly disabled from doing any good, and when he repayres
to Confession those bonds are broken, and he is restored to liberty again; and
so certainly sins are nothing else but so many chains which tie us as it
were unto the gates of hell, and so the Priest in the act of Absolution says: I
absolve thee from thy sins; and a mighty power the Confessors has, or
rather a mighty love our Savior has of us to instruct and furnish them with
so great a power as they have. We see, say the holy Fathers, when a Criminal
confessed his sins unto an' earthly Judge, he is condemned for it, but the
contrary happens at the Tribunal of the Church, where the Priest presides and
represents the person of our Savior Christ himself: For those who confess,
go away wholly acquitted and absolved.

Al good Christians then, as soon as they are fallen into mortal sin, are
presently to procure to purge themselves of the foul stain of it at the
fountain of Confession; and if we be so careful when the least spott appears
upon our garments, to wash it out; how much more careful ought we to be to
wash out the blemishes of our soul? for the which, although Contrition may
suffice accompanied with a firm purpose of Confession, not with standing who
can secure his Conscience whether he has had true Contrition or no, or that
rather it has not been a grief less perfect for his sins proceeeding
rather from the fear of punishments then a true love of God Almighty, as it
ought to do; such as the Divines call Attrition, neither sufficient of it self
to deliver us from our sins, nor constitute us in the state of Grace, nor
consequently to free us from damnation should we dye in that state of mind;
whereas but join it with Confession, and it is abundantly sufficient, the
Sacrament supplying all that was wanting to it of true Co^trition. Who sees not
then the virtue of this Sacrament, and how necessary it is for our salvation?
For which cause, the servants of Alm. God were ever exceeding careful to
Confess them even of their lightest faults, especially (...) the (...) of
their deaths, at which time, although they had led such Saint-like lives, as it
has pleased God to testify it even by miracle; yet being to approach to the
sovereign purity, they imagined could never be pure enough And so a certain
learned Author says, that a soul in Grace at its separation from its body if
it should but see the least blemish of venial sins adhearing to it, would be
so ashamed of it, as rather the^ to appear with it before the face of Alm.
God, it would volu^tarily plunge it self into Purgatory there to be cleansed
from it; nay, which is more, wonderful, he says that should an Angel descend
thither unto it while it were suffering the sharpest and most exquisite
torments there, and putt it to its choice to go to heaven with some blemish of
sin upon it, or remain there purging from it til the day of doom; the soul
without any demurr upon it, would make election of the last, thereby to render
it self more worthy the sight of God whom it loves so well, who cannot endure
any object of impurity. The purity of heart then being a thing of so singular
recommendation with the Queen of heaven, let al who profess themselves her
servants seek to purchase it, and purchasing it once embrace it with all their
might; to which end let them know, that according to the opinion of al, there
is no more efficacious way to do it, then that of the Sacrament of Confession;
the benefits of it are so many, that they are impossible to be reckoned up; For
those who confess often, heap grace upon grace, purity on purity, beauty on
beauty, and make themselves the greatest treasure of it in heaven; those who
confess often, have a more vigila^t eye to the co^seruing of their conscience
in purity, which in the fountain of penance they so lately purified, those who
Confess often have a special care, not to fall into those sins for shame, from
which so lately their Confessors helped them out; those who confess often,
make more easily the examen of their Consciences, and go with less difficulty
to Confession, and are better disposed to the receiving of our Savior Christ
in the Sacrament of the Alas. In fine; those who confess often enjoy both day
and night great tranquillity of mind which only accompanies a pure Conscience,
and is the greatest blessing in the world.

This the sacred Catechism confirms where it says; Those who holily and
religiously receive this holy Sacrament acquire by it a great tranquillity of
Conscience, accompanied with as great content of mind and heart. But what needs
other testimoneis of this, than experience it-selfe? How unwillingly they go to
Confession, who have their conscience charged with a long reckoning of sins?
how full of sadness and anxiety? how heavy the burden of them seems to be, til
being lightened of it at last by Confession, how great Consolation do they
feel then in their souls? how cheerful they are? and how embraced with the
love of God for which now they could be content to die, who before cared not to
live for it! and if the practice of this do often occurr, Oh! how happy do
they lead their days on earth even as they were in another heaven: to
participat of this so great a benefit no Christian if he rightly considered it;
but would go a thousand and a thousand miles, rather then want so great a
commodity, how much the greater shame is it then for those, who vouchsafe not
to stir four or five paces out of their way, to discharge themselves of the
burden of their sins. And yet in how far worse estate are those, who
remain five or ten years without this benefit, how may we imagine do the
Angels in heaven deplore so great a retchlesnes? of this sort how many wicked
livers are there, who pretend some devotion to the B. Virgin, as saying their
beads, fasting on saturdayes in her honor, and the like: who for the rest
never think of heaven, or of timely repenting them for their sins.

Of whom what should we say, and of their cruelty to their own souls, whose
chiefest contentment they so lightly prize? Certainly we could wish they would
at least (since they make profession of serving her) beseech the B. Virgin
amongst their other devotions, to obtain for them of her B. Son a true
knowledge and contrition for their sins; which if they do with a sorrowful
heart indeed, without doubt she will grant them their request, and it will be
amain disposition for them to obtain the divine Grace, seeing (as the Divines
affirm) the works of charity although done in mortal sin, have yet the
force to dispose the sinner unto Grace, and Consequently unto eternal life. An
example of which, it being full of rare document befides, out of the second part
of the Friar Minors Chronicles we thought good to record.

Two Frier-Minors going from the Convent of Paris in the depth of winter, were
besides the dirty ways so incommodated with continual showers of rain, as the
elder of the two toward the evening wholly tired out, said unto his Companion;
My dear brother, what shall we do? I am so weary that I am scarce able to stir
a foot; alas, Father, said the other, we cannot remain here in the midst
of this foul weather and fowler ways; why? answered the father again) it
seems to me I spy a house some quarter of a league hence, where perhaps we
may be lodged for God Alms sake; I know it well, said the father, but it will be
ill coming thither for us, the Master of it being a wicked man, no friend to
God, nor to his servants, and such an enemy to himself, as for these 30.
years (as the report goes) he has never been at Confession; howsoever (said
the Father) let us go, for there is no remedy now, and God is never wanting to
his servants at such necessitous times as this; So they set on toward the
house, where being arrived, and asking a lodging for God Alms sake, the Mistres
of the place moved with compassion to see them in such pitious plight, told
them her husband was forth a hunting, and for her self she was desirous to
accommodat them with all her heart, but if her husband came to have notice of it,
either of them should incurr his grievous displeasure by it, she for receiving
them, and they for being received, but come what would she durst not deny them
for God Alms sake, and had rather then fall into his displeasure, incurr her
husbands by it a thousand times; so she entertained them in a more remote part
of the house, with the greatest secrecy and charity she could; In the mean
time; her husband returning from the chase, finding al things prepared against
his coming home, sat down to supper, where he was plentiously served, whilst
the goodness of his appetite equaled the goodness of the provision; his wife
considering the wants of the poor Religious men, in comparison of the plenty
which was there, could not but express some sorrow for it in her countenance;
which her husband observing, asked her wherefore she was so sad? and she a
while excusing her self, at last he more and more importuning her, she plainly
told him, upon his promise he would not be offended with it; how she had
entertained those poor Religious men in their extreme necessity for God Alms
sake, preferring by it the fear of God before the fear of him, and how whilst
they by the fire side were plentiously feasting it, those poor souls pinched
with hunger and cold were ready to starve to death, the compassion of whose
incommodities with reflection on their commodities the while, made her so sad
and sorrowful in her mind: and having this discovered with tears in her eyes,
her husband was so moved thereat, as he presently arose from the table, and
commanding they should be fetched into the room, he himself went out to meet
them, and welcomed them with such signs of affection, as for his own mother
he could not have expressed more, this moved the wonder of all that were present
there, but much more that which follows; when he seeing their garments hang
al frozen stiff about them, and their feet and legs chapt through the
extremity of cold, was so moved thereat, as he presently seating them by the
fire caused a bath of hott water to be brought, and he himself washed their
feet: then after he had a while refreshed them there, he commanded a chamber
next his own to be prepared for them; whither having conducted them he
addressing himself unto the father said; My good father, resolve me I beseech
you in curtesy; whether one who has lived al his life a grievous sinner, and
yet has never Confessed him his sins, may possibly be saved? There is no doubt,
Sir, answered the Religious man, but whosoever with requisite penance for his
sins satisfies the justice of Alm. God, may arrive at last to his salvation,
for so God has said; At what time soever a sinner shall repent him of his
sins, he should live: If it be so, replied the Gentleman, for Gods sake
oblige me so much as to hear my Confession; the good father exceeding weary
and oppressed with sleep, considering it a work of much time, to hear the
Confession, of such a one as he, encouraging him in his good desires, desired
him to deferr it til morning, when he might at better leisure examine his
Conscience, and consider more maturely of what he was to do; but who can assure
me, answered the Gentleman, to live til the morning? but for that, as it
pleases God, and so he retired him to his rest; mean while the Religious man
moved with an extraordinary solicitud of this his new Converts salvation, was
no sooner at priuacy in his chamber, but casting himself upon his knees, he
besought Alm. God to dispose all that concerned him for his greater good, and
thereupon be took himself to his bed; where in the profoundnes of his sleep,
he beheld in vision, the Angels and devils at great debat about the soul of
this Gentleman newlly deceased; the one challenging it to be theirs, the other
denying it; the devils alleging for their side the many and grievous crimes
he had committed in his life; the Angels for theirs, some slight and few good
works which he had done, but with so little success as the Judge was even
upon the point of giving judgment for his condemnation, when his Angel
Guardian interposed and said: I beseech your divine Majesty, remember (what I
had almost forgot) the charitable entertaiment he gave to those Religious men
but yester-night; and I trust it will more then incite you to pardon him; at
this the Judge demurring, at last in consideration of this one act of his, he
gave sentence for his salvation, and so his accusers departed frustrat of their
intents. Here the vision vanished, and the Religious man starting out of his
sleep, called to his Companion saying: My brother, my brother, the Gentleman
of this house is dead, and which is more, is saved; and here he related to him
the whole progress of his vision. Hereupon they both rose and calling to them
of the house, advertised them of what had happened, telling them for certain
that the Master of the place was dead: at this, al were wonderfully amazed,
and his wife the most afflicted woman in the world, not so much for his
temporal death, as his eternal, which withgood cause she feared, til the
Religious assured her that he was saved, and that by the same means he came to
the knowledge of his death, by the same he understood of his eternal life; So a
great part of her sorrow being taken away, the rest she bestowed upon his
Obsequies, all that either knew his life or death, admiring in it the wonderful
meroies of Alm. God.

From this Example let sinners take Instruction, to be always charitable to
the poor; and though their sins be never so many, yet never to despair of
the sweet goodness of Alm. God, but chiefly let them learn from hence, to
correspond to the Inspirations of Alm. God, and prevail themselves of the
occasions offered them by favorable heaven, for their conuersions and eternal
good: for so did this Gentleman both in will entreating the Religious by the
Inspirement of Alm. God, and in conceiving a firm purpose for the Confessing
of his sins, which nothing but death could hinder the performance of.

The Continuation of the Fourth Condition; which is the frequentation of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.
AS the servants of the B. Virgin then to preserve their hearts and minds in
purity, ought often to Confess: so likewise to increase it in their souls,
the more to illustrate their minds, and unite their hearts more near to Alm.
God, ought they to frequent the Sacrament of the Eucharist, where God is
gloriously and full of al sweetness imparting of himself, no otherwise then he
does unto the B. souls in heaven. And who can imagine the hundredth part of the
greatnesses, maruailes, and superabundant advantages, which accrue to those who
receive this ineffable Sacrament, much less express it in their discourse and
words? for the other Sacraments, conferr grace it is true, to those who
worthily participat of them; but this is the fountain of grace, from whence it
springs, which consequently in more plentious manner is communicated hear; the
others come from God, but in this is God himself, the Author of al grace and
of all the Sacraments, and the source of al our good; others are means to bring
us unto God, but this is the End and brings God unto us; all the sanctity of the
rest only helping to dispose to the sanctity of this. With good reason then S.
Dionysius the Areopagite, styles it, the perfectiue and conseruatiue Sacrament,
seeing it is the perfection and consummation of all the rest.

Amongst all the motives that should incite us to the frequentation of this B.
Sacrament, none, me thinks, should be more efficacious, then our B. Ladies so
often frequenting it, by which with a zeal incredible she daily (as it were)
en-wombed her B. Son again; according to the great Albert, S. Antonine,
Sotus, and the learned Suarez; nor can any without strange temerity call it in
question, who but considers her (as she was indeed the light and pattern of
those primitive Times, in which the B. Sacrament was so frequented, as Saint
Luke writes of them; They perseuered in the Temple in prayers and the Communion
of breaking bread.

And as for the Apostles, 'its certain they al were Priests and Bishops
ordained and established by Jesus Christ and Consequently according to their
functions consecrated and received the Body of our Lord: I have received of our
Lord that which I have given you, (says the great Apostle S. Paul of himself;
And S. Andrew answered resolutly to the Proconsul exhorting him to Idolatry: I
sacrifice daily to the God omntpotent, who is the only true God; not the smoke
of incense, nor the flesh and blood of beasts, but the immaculat Lamb, of whose
flesh and blood all the faithful do eat and drink that which was immolated, yet
remaining entire and alive. S. Albert a devout servant of the B. Virgin
descends more to particulars, and says, that S. John was her ordinary Priest,
from whose hands she communicated and received the Sacrament, that she
continued this devotion al her life, and at her death procured to have
ministered, unto her. But who can imagine the excessiuenes of her devotion in
receiving it? Since if some Saints were so devout when they came unto it, as
they ravished the beholders in an admiration, can we doubt but she surpassed
them in it, who surpassed them by such infinite degrees in the lively
apprehension and understanding of the thing. S. Catherin of Sienna when she
would express to her Confessarius the ardent desire she had to communicate of
this Sacrament, would only say she hungered, and he understood her meaning
strait, and having received it according to her desire, she would remain some
five or six hours afterward in ecstasy. Our S. Francis did so burn, nay
ever dye with the desire thereof, as those who beheld him in the Act of
Communicating, were astonished at his fervor in it, and none could behold him
without having the fire of devotion enkindled in themselves the while he seemed
so inebriated with it and transported with the joy, and so great was his
reverence of it, as only it was that, which made him abstain from Preist-hood,
when once beseeching Alm. God by ardent prayer to declare unto him what his
pleasure was in that particular, an Angel appeared unto him with a violl in his
hand full of pure and christallin liquor saying unto him; Behold, Francis, those
who duly administer the B. Sacrament, ought to be as clean in heart, and as
free from blemish in their souls, as this liquour is from al foulnes and
impurity. With which apparition he was so confirmed in his humility as they
could never induce him to any further Orders then he had.

And S. Clare of the same time with him, had no less devotion to this
Sacrament; as it appears in that she never approached unto it, but with her
eyes drowned in tears, whilst her heart was burning in devotion. But what
wonder that men go to it with so profound submission and reverence, when even
the Angels and devils adore and reverence it.

The B. Brother Stephen (as it is recorded in the Chronicles of our Order,
celebrating Mass one day with great gift and devotion, the Acolothite who
assisted him falling a sleep, having been ouer-watched the night before; Two
devout women being present at Mass, beheld at the time of Elevation two Angels
in most beauteous shapes with torches in their hands performing the Office the
while of him that slept; and when the Elevation was done, after their most
profound reuerences they disappeared; This to their great admiration these
devout women observed.

But what wonder if the Angels honor and reverence their eternal King, when
even the Devils themselves even do it, as is manifest in they storye following:
In Germany there was a certain Virgin possessed by the Devil, who before this
lamentable accident, was of rare virtue and singular piety; It happened once as
she was issuing forth of the Church with diverse others, a Priest passed by,
bearing the B. Sacrament to the sick, when all the people fell on their knees
reverently adoring it, except a certain Jew who was there amongst the rest;
which this Virgin spying she approached unto him, and striking him said; thou
wicked miscreant, why do thou not adore the Creator and Lord of al? The Jew
replied (moved with the indignity of the thing,) we are obliged to the
acknowledgement but of one God a lone, and why then would you have me reverence
this, of which there are, as many as there are Hosts consecrated in the world?
the possessed person hearing this, took a Sieve, and holding it before his
eyes, bidd him regard the Sun, and then ask't him, how many Suns he saw? when
there as many as there were beams that came through the sieve, or only one, from
whence al those beams were derived? think me not so simple, said the Jew, as
not to know there is but one only Sun; more simple thou art then, answered
she again, to believe that we have more Gods then one, though so many Hosts as
thou see every where derive themselves from his divinity; and at this the Jew
confounded left the place.

The B. Virgin not only adored this B. Sacrament, on earth, but now in heaven
actually Continues her Adoration; which we may confirm by a storye taken out
of Vincentius his Mirror Historial the. 17. book, confirmed by diverse other
Authors of worthy credit: There was, says he, a Curat of evil life, addicted
to his pleasures, and one who studied more to flay and kill his flock, then to
feed them; It happened in his parish at the same time there-fel sick a rich
Gentleman of prime quality, and a poor widow of a virtuous life; the Vicar
choosing rather to visit the Ge^tleman (as one from whom there was some what to
be hoped for) left the widow without help abandoned: and after he had
dispatched with him, slightly hearing his Confession and administering the other
Sacraments, yet he remained lingering there so long impertie^ntly flattering
the Gentleman with hope of life, though he even saw death in his Countenance,
(only in hope of some temporal benefitt) until the widow mindful of her eternal
good; sent for him being almost in her last Agony: but he sticking fast there,
in hope of gain, could not be drawn from thence: which his Vicar perceiving,
moved with compassion; alas Sir, said he, suffer not this poor woman to dye
thus destitute of help, but at least send me thither: if you will not go your
self: Go, if you will, said he, for my part I will not leave this Gentleman
where there is hope of some what to be got, to visit a beggar where there is
nothing but misery: hereupon the Vicar went with the B. Sacrament for her
Viaticum, to visit this infirm creature, poor indeed of worldly riches, but
rich in heavenly, without which al is poverty: and he was no soener arrived at
the door, where the poor soul lay only upon a little straw, but he beheld the
glorious Queen of heaven, accompanied with innumerable troops of Angels and
Virgins, assisted at her happy departure, at the sight of which the Vicar
suspe^ded in his thoughts a while, whether he should enter or no, at last
reflecting from his own unworthiness on the dignity of him who was in the
Sacrament which he brought with him, he confidently entered in, when the B.
Virgin and al her Glorious train with humble reverence adored it, and
presently vanished away. When the good Vicar in extreme consolation approached
to the Couch where the poor widow lay, and having heard her Confession and
communicated her, the happy soul presently loosened from its mortal bones,
took flight immediately to heaven.

In the mean while, things succeeded clean contrary at the rich man's house;
whither the Vicar was no sooner returned, but he beheld the Gentleman's bed, al
incircled in with ougly black spirits, with horrible noise, skreekings, and
roarings affrighting of his soul, whilst he cried out in horrible dismay:
help, help, my friends, these wicked spirits are haling me, and with their
gripes they even press me to the heart: alas! I am a lost and miserable man:
and at last, whilst the Curat and the rest were laboring in vain to comfort
him, his aching soul weary of those momentary and painful gripes, issuing out
of its body was received by those Feinds, and carried where was nothing but
eternal torments.

Imagine but what impressions the whilst the concurrancy of these two Visions
made in the heart of the good Vicar, and how devoutly afterward he reverenced
the B. Sacrament, having seen with what devotion the B. Virgin did it, and al
her heavenly train; At least, the professed servants of this B. Virgin ought
to make their profitt of this Example, and learn from thence to reverence the
B. Sacrament; and also to have the often receiving of it in high esteem; not
withstanding the frivolous opinions of some, who hold it an irreuerence the
often frequenting of it; not considering that it is styled our daily bread;
that S. Luke and S. Denis the Areopagite affirms it to have been the Custom
of the Primitive Christians, to receive it daily with incredible Consolation.
For their better instruction, let them hear Saint Ambrose exhorting to the
frequent receiving it: The servants of Alm. God, (says he) receive this bread
daily, since daily thou have need of it for thy Comfort refreshment, and
purging thee from thy sins; And the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas says, That
whosoever experienceth an increase of grace and devotion by their often
receiving it, both may and ought to frequent it still, and that although it be
Commendable sometimes for humility to abstain from it, Yet it is more
Commendable out of love to receive it often. As witnesses that example of S.
Bonauenture, who in his younger years at his first entrance into the Order of
the Frier-Minors, out of the profoundnes of his humility would oftentimes
forbear to communicate; until hearing Mass one day, it pleased Alm. God to
send him a particle of the Blessed Host by the hands of Angels to communicate
withal, by this singular favor both rewarding his humility, and encouraging
him to more frequent receiving it.

And here we will cease all further Discourse of these Conditions requisite in
the servants of the Blessed Virgin, and treat of the due reverence which we
owe to her; and first we will declare the Excellence thereof.

Here ends the first Part.

The second Part.
Of the Excellency of those Reuerences We are to exhibit in honor of the
Queen of Heaven. CHAPITRE I.
AMONGST all the most noble and excellent services appertaining to the divine
honor, that Adoration which the Divines call Latria, and which is only
appropriat to God in regard of the infinities of his Majesty: holds the first
rank and place. This adoration according to S. John Damascene, consists in an
interior Act by which the Creature testifies his submission unto his Creator,
by some exterior sign either of uncovering the head, bowing the knee,
inclining the body, or the like. With this supreme sort of Adoration the three
Kings adored the Infant Jesus in his Mothers arms; And entering the house
(says S. Matthew) they found the Infant with Mary his mother, and falling on
the ground, they adored him words which excelle^tly well declare the greatness of
this adoration; by which the Kings and Monarks of the earth humbly bow the head
and knee unto the King and Monarke of the heavens.

Now to speak of the adoration proper to the B. Virgin, the next degree to
that of God, himself, the Divines distinguish it by the name of Hyperdulia
from the rest by which al creatures both in heaven and earth count it as honor
to adore the sacred Queen of heaven.

According to the opinion of some Divines, God had no sooner created the
Angels, but he let them understand, how his B. Son was one day to become man,
and this man should be their God.

Whereupon the B. Spirits with regard unto the time, honored him as such, and
consequently (as Suares says in following Saint Thomas his opinion) they
odored his Mother as her who was to inuest him in mortal flesh.

And it is an approved verity of all the Doctors and the chief of them al S.
Paul; that the Son of God being come into the world, all the Angels came to
adore him. So (says he) when he sent his first borne son into the world, he
said; Let all the Angels of God adore him: And S. Bonauenture and other devout
writers say, that when the Infant Jesus was borne in the Stable, all the Angels
in their several Quiers came to adore him, and that perhaps visibly in humane
shapes, the more to honor his Humanity; After which they did their several
reuerences to his B. Mother, the one and the other singing divine and melodious
Canticles of praise.

Now if the B. Spirits with such profound reverence adored the B. Virgin while
she was yet resident in the world, what excessive honors may we imagine do
they render her now in heaven, where next to God she holds the second place?
invested with incomparable glory at the right hand of her B. Son? For my
part I am of opinion, that their most ordinary exercise is to honor the Son
and Mother with incessant adoration; and so we read how S. John ravished in
extasye beheld the Angels incircling the Throne of God, and falling on their
faces before it adoring the B. Trinity, and the sacred Virgin, daughter of the
Eternal Father, Mother of the Son, and spouse of the holy Ghost: by which
does clearly appear the excellency of this adoration, both Latria, and
Hyperdulia, exhibited by all the Court of heaven unto their King and Queen.

If then these glorious spirits honor with so sovereign and magnificent a
kind of Adoration the Mother of Alm. God, with greater reason ought we to
honor her, by how much greater her favors and graces have been to us, then to
them. Let us then honor her with all possible reverence, to show our selves
grateful unto her for her benefits: Of which we read a rare and excellent
Example in Scala caeli; and it is this. A certain holy Monk in England being
much devoted to the Queen of heaven, and amongst other his devotions using
often to salute her with profound reverence, and bow down as often as he hard
her name pronounced, this holy name through extremity of age becoming so feeble
as he scarce could move himself or so much as stir him in his bed, the Abbot
assigned him one to attend on him in his chamber; but he not being able to be
always present to his occasions, it happened that once in his absence he
desirous to remove himself, and having twice or thrice attempted it in vain,
at last having recourse unto his prayers beseeching the B. Virgins assistance,
behold she suddenly appeared to him, waited on by a fair train of Virgins,
two of which by appointment set him in that posture which he desired; when the
B. Virgin, after she had most sweetly comforted him (as a pledge of her dear
acceptance of his devotion) added unto his term of life twenty years, and
restored him to his perfect health again. A strange favor, which co^ferr'd
not so much unto the corporal vigor of the man, as it did to his spiritual in
devoutly serving her.

But in the laudable exercise hereof, we are not so much to regard the otward
comportment of the body, as the inward disposition of the mind in framing a
devout conceit of the B. Virgin, imagining her present as often as we exhibit
to her any corporal reverence, and beholding us the while with a dear regard,
whereby this one devotion will become more familiar to us, and our remembrance
of her more dear and cordial, so as we shall take pleasure to speak with her
and of her, on al occasions, and more confidently prefer our petitions to her
in our necessities; And this affection whosoever shall conceive of her in his
mind, is in a most happy estate and may well presume of his salvation, and to be
one of the number of the elect; whence he cannot but experience an incredible
joy of mind, since (according to a certain grave Author:) If thou feel in
thy heart (says he) a singular affection and devotion to the glorious Virgin,
it is a sign of thy Praedestination to eternal life, and thou may well be
glad and rejoice at it.

These holy motions and pious affects of love and reverence were found in that
devout woman, of whom it is recorded in Scala celi; That being of noble birth,
though fortune were wanting to her nobility; and having two daughters, whom
she carefully had educated in devotion to the B. Virgin and the service of
Alm. God; It chanced at last that their poverty was so great, as they had
nothing to sustain their life, nor defend them from the extremity of poverty;
at which the mother exceedingly afflicted, had recourse one day unto the
Church, where before an Image of the B. Virgin devoutly kneeling down, she with
a voice often interrupted with her sobs and sighs, in this manner devoutly
supplicated her: O most holy Virgin, the refuge of such miserable creatures as
my self; behold my two daughters here which it has pleased Alm. God to bestow
on me being brought unto extreme necessity, whom now I resign over unto your
care and motherly Providence, since mine no longer can avail them; accept them
then, and provide for them as you see best, since al humane protection fails
me. Having finished her supplication, and being ready to depart the Church;
behold a young man of rauishing feature (we may well imagine some Angel sent
from heaven) presented her with a hundred pounds saying; This money, Lady, I
have long owed to your deceased husband, pardon my so long delaying the payment
of it; So he departed, and she unto her home; where, with the money she made
provision what was necessary for the adorning her daughters according to their
quality; which made the world (ever inclined to imagine and speak the worst)
report them to have by less chaste ways arrived at that plenty which it saw
they had: the noble mother no sooner had notice hereof, but with tears in her
eyes, calling her daughters to her, she said unto them; My daughters, go to the
B. Virgin, under whose patronage you are, and commend your fame and reputation
unto her, who now is more concerned in it then I, to fetch you fair and
clearly off again; they did so, and with all the attestations as devotion could
suggest, they beseeched their divine Mistress, to releive them in their fame,
as she had in their poverty; neither was it in vain, for in short time after,
they became so virtuously reported of, as the Prince of the country moved by
the common fame that went of them, constituted them Abbesses of two several
Monasteries of his foundation.

How acceptable to the Blessed Virgin these reuerences and adorations are.
CHAP. II.
THERE is none so ignorant that does not know, that the more we honor where it
is deserved, the more we ingratiat our selves with the honored. This supposed,
we having in the precedent chapter declared the B. Virgins meriting in the
highest kind, this sort of Adoration which we call Hyperdulia, consequently our
honoring her thereby cannot but be most grateful and acceptable to her. It is
an exercise, as we have insinuated, practiced by the Angels themselves in
heaven and who soever practices it on earth, becomes (as it were) by it, equale
unto them; Angels of earth in honoring and reuerencing the sovereign Queen
of heaven. Neither are we to imagine that honor we exhibit unto her here,
less grateful unto her, then that which they do there; nay, perhaps there are
some men on earth so zealous in her service, who acquit them so well of their
devotions and with such vigor of spirit go reuerencing her, that their
services to her here, are more grateful then theirs here, and consequently in
their reward of glory also they shall out strip then far.

Dul-sighted as we are then, not to see of how great glory we deprive our
selves, when we endeavor not in all we may, to please the B. Virgin in
honoring her. Certainly, to fast, to watch, to wear hayrcloth, say our Beads,
Offices, or such devotions, are very meritorious and pleasing unto her; but it
is impossible for all the learning and eloquence of the Quire of Seraphins, to
express unto the life the infinite gladness and extreme pleasure she receaues
from these Adorations proceeding from the interior of the mind, and
accompanied with the respective comportment of the exterior.

Besides, all the Angels and the Celestial Court do take particular contentment
in the honor and reverence exhibited to their sovereign Queen; for if
earthly Courtiers rejoice when any new honor redounds unto their Prince, how
much more rejoicing may we imagine to be in heaven, when they see their
Princess so honored here? and of this rejoicing the B. Trinity has its
part, when it beholds her reverenced, in whom they have lodged al their supreme
and singular delights; the Father reioyces to see his daughter so honored, the
Son his Mother, and the holy Ghost his Spouse.

Let al men then, of what estate, sex, or condition they be, with all diligence
and solicitud procure to honor the Glorious and ever B. Virgin Mary, with all
becoming reverence; especially since the honor due to her, redounds unto her
B. Son, as the honor done to Saints does to God who made them so. In
honoring the B. Virgin then, as the most excellent of creatures, we honor God
her Creator, confessing al those excellencyes we honor her for, proceeding
from his liberality unto her, and thanking and praising him for making a
creature of our own Condition so worthy and excellent; besides, the honor and
services done unto the Mother for the Sonns regard, the Son takes as done to
him, and proceeding from the love and respect we bear him, nay, which is more,
the devotion toward the Mother increases the devotion toward the son, in
that she (as most true unto his honor (referrs al unto it that is offered her,
and lead them unto him, who address themselves unto her. Just so then, as in
honoring and glorifiing the B. Virgin, we do but honor and glorify God, so we
in placeing our Confidence in her, but place it in God himself, for what is it
to confide in him, but to confide in those means which he has provided us for
our salvation; and amongst all the means one of the most efficatious is to
Commend our selves unto her patronage, as we are instructed by the holy Church
in that her Antiphon: Spes nostra salve: eia ergo aduocata nostra illos tuos
misericordes oculos ad nos convert: Hail O our hope, and O our advocate
Convert your eyes of mercy toward us. And that great light of the Church S.
Augustine. says to the same effect: You are the only hope of sinners, and from
you, o Glorious Virgin. We expect pardon of our sins, and recompense for our
good works.

Knowing then for certain, that in honoring the B. Virgin, we do but honor
God, we are often to procure to honor her, and both day and night offer up
unto her our reuere^ces, especially in the night when the time is more silent
and more fit for our devotions. This how grateful it is unto her, she her self
declared to a certain Capuchine of our order, one most devout unto her. This
good Religious man had a laudable custom profundly to incline unto her a
hundred times a day, til having some special charge of the Convent, the
performance of which exacted much time of him, not able to Comply with both, he
cutt-off one half of his devotions, and diminished them unto fifty times: Now
it happened that one day whilst he was busily employed in his pious exercises,
the B. Virgin appeared unto him, invested with most glorious ornaments, wearing
a rich mantle over them, with only one half of it embroydered with stars;
and addressing her speech unto him she said, how comes it, my son, thy love
is grown so cold in thee? that having begun to imbellish this mantle with so
many bright shiuing stars, thou have given over and left the rest undone? it
is a work so grateful unto me the performance of it; as nothing can be more
ungrateful unto me then the neglect of it; wherefore as you respect my love,
finish your devotions as you have well begun, and so vanished away leaving the
good Religious man making his profit of her so mild reproof, and renewing his
ancient devotions again, he exercised them unto the end of his life, in that
full number he began withal.

And let none imagine this a devotion only for women or the simpler and vulgar
sort, for all are equally obliged to honor her, of what sex, estate, or
condition soever they be; the Patriarchs and Prophets (as the Divines affirm)
acknowledged her worth, and reverenced her for it thousands and thousands of
years, before she was borne into the world: But what do I talk of Patriarchs
and Prophets, when the Angels them selves at the first instant of their
creation, beholding her in the Eternal Word, humbly reverenced and adored her,
as one that should one day be their Queen in heaven, and be the mother of
their King on earth. And what should we say more? even God himself become man
was obedient unto her commands, and observed her with all filial love and
reuence.

To descend now to the Christians of the Primitive Church, the Apostles
reverenced her dedicated Temples to her service, erected Altars to her, and
according to the opinions of some consecrated to her the famous house of
Loretto. But omitting these, let us come to the Potentates of the world; how
many Emperors, Kings, and sovereign Bishops have there been, who have
reverently taken their Crowns of their heads, and offered them at her feet?

What titles of praise and honor by the Doctors of the Church have anciently
been bestowed upon her by S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, and
innumerable others? how Divinely has S. Thomas spoken in her praise? how
devoutly S. Bonauenture? and how affectionatly Albert the Great, in humble
acknowledgement of the learning which hereceiued from her? Let us fix upon
Alexander de Hales amongst the rest, as one singularly devoted unto her, and
recount the motive he had to leave the world, and inrol himself in the service
of our Savior Christ under the banner of s. Francis of Assisium.

This Alexander of Hales being English by nation, was of a sublime spirit, and
of singular erudition, the first professor of Theology in the University of
Paris, and one so affectionatly devoted to the B. Virgin, as he made a vow,
never to refuse any thing that should be asked him in her name; A certain
Gentle woman understanding this, persuaded the Bernardines to make their use of
it by winning him to their Order, and illustrating it by so great a light of
learning, which they resolved to do, and repairing to him they made their
approaches a far off, discoursing of learning and devotion; but God Alm.
permitted not, that at that time they should come nearer to him; the Gentle -
woman understanding what was done, had recourse unto the Friar Preachers next,
animating them and putting them in the way to make him one of their Order as
she done the Bernardines before; which was attempted also by them, and just as
they were putting him to his vow, by chance two Friar Minors coming in, one of
them divinely inspired thus said unto him; Alexander, it is high time for you
to with draw your self from those vanities which have abused you so long;
wherefore in the name of God and his B. Mother I conjure you to take the habit
of S. Francis, for I know his Order has need of such as you are; Alexander
touched with these words as by the finger of the holy Ghost, and remembering the
vow he had made, answered him presently, Go you hence good fathers, and I will
instantly follow to the full effecting of your desires; and so he did, taking on
him the holy habit, til being in his probation he was grievously tempted to
cast it off again, by reason of some austerities he could not undergo so well;
and just as he was upon the point of doing it, behold S. Francis appeared unto
him in his sleep, bearing on his shoulders a heavy Cross, with which he
endeavored to clime a stipe hill; at which he was so moved with compassion, as
he offered him his service to help him up with it; whereupon the Saint
beholding him with an angry eye, go offer thy service (said he) to such
weaklings as thy self; for if thou can not carry thine that is so light, how
can thou help me to bear my heavier one? the Novice perceiving strait his
mind from this his reprehension, resolved to continue in the Order, not
withstanding all the difficulties thereof, and concluded there was no other way
to heaven, then by bearing the Crosses which are offered us.

That the quality of Mother of God obliges both men and Angels to the adoring
of her. CHAP. III.
AMONG al dignities, graces, greatnesses, and prerogatives, with which Alm. God
has honored the B. Virgin, there is none more high and sublime, then that of
being Mother of God, it surpassing al of which any creature can be capable;
surmounts the heavens, and the celestial Hierarchies, comes near to divine,
immense, and incomprehensible, and in fine goes beyond all that can be expressed
by words, or conceived by any Angelical or humane thought. This S. Augustine in
the beginning of his book of the B. Virgins Assumption, does intimate, where he
says: There is no heart that conceive, or tongue that can express the effect
of this grace and dignity. And S. Bernard in diverse places and diverse manners
aims at the expression of this great dignity. S. Anselme in his Treatise of
the B. Virgins magnituds says; that next to the being God, there is no dignity
in heaven or earth can equal hers: To say only (says he) of the B. Virgin,
that she is Mother of God, is a thing that exceeds al sublimity, which next to
God can be said or imagined. From hence the holy Fathers infer, that the title
of being Mother of God, is the fountain from whence do flow al her other
graces and prerogatives; for so, say they, whence was it, that from al eternity
she was in a particular manner predestinat; because she was to be the Mother of
God. Why was she sanctified by the holy Ghost in her Mothers womb? to be the
more worthy receptacle of the Son of God. Why in her Conception was she
exempted from original sin? that the eternal Word might from her body take
immaculat flesh. Why was she exalted above all the Thrones and celestial
Hierarchies? but because she was the Mother of God, who is the sovereign King
of heaven and earth. Whence in fine, is it, that the Princes of heaven and
earth, nay, even of Hell it self, bow down and do reverence at mention of her
name, but only because she is Mother to the supreme Lord of al, to whom al do
homage, and in whose presence all the great ones that are, shrink up to
nothing, and not appear at al. O wonderful greatness of this high and
excellent dignity bestowed upon a simple Virgin! Who is not astonished, who is
not alienated from his senses with admiration? to be at once a mother, and a
Virgin! to contain in the narrow enclosure of her womb, him whom the heavens
with all their height and latitud can not contain! to be Mother of the most
dear delights of the Eternal Father, and the most glorious objects of Angels,
and finally (which is the most prodigious of al) to have produced her Creator,
and brought her Father forth. These are things above al capacity, rauishing
nature with astonishment and wonder, so as with good reason the holy Church
says of her: Nature admired, when you brought forth that holy one, who brought
forth you.

The B. Virgin then merits in being Mother of God, al imaginable honor from
one creature to another, and in particular that which the Divines entitle
Hyperdulia, which also admits of a subdiuision, according to Suarez, into
superior and inferior; with the Inferior those are honored, who have some
particular excellence above the rest, as to S. John Baptist, and the Apostles,
for their eminency of place, to S. Francis for the singular testimony of his
sanctity given by Alm. God in the impression of the sacred Stigmats: but with
the superior, the Mother of God alone, who only had the honor to bear, bring
forth, nourish, and educat the only Son of the only Eternal God.

And in regard of this high and most eminent dignity of hers, al Creatures in
heaven and earth reverence her, and acknowledge her for their sovereign Lady
and Queen, and at her name the greatest Potentats on earth bow down their
knees, and do humble reverence; so al generations of the world praise and
honor her, as she in her Canticle divinely presaged: Behold from henceforth al
generatio^s shall call me blessed; and de facto, what people, what nation is
there on the earth, so irreligious and barbarous, who have her not in honor
and reverence? Even the Jews, and their Rabbis have written in her praise,
and the most obstinat of them have experienced and acknowledged her most
powerful aid in their necessities.

As witnesses this maruay lous story recorded by the learned Pelbert in his
Stellary of the B. Virgin; of a Iewish-woman, who being in the pains of
childbirth, and nearer going out of the world, then bringing a child into it,
some Christians (who charitably came to visit her) exhorted her to inuocat the
B. Virgin for her deliverance; the poor woman did so and lifting up her eyes
and voice to heaven in a languishing manner; O most gracious Virgin (said she)
I beseech you to have pity on me though I be of the unhappy race of those who
so crucified God your Son and consequently unworthy of your favors) yet
notwithstanding if you shall vouchsafe me your assistance in this extremity; I
do here vow to relinquish the error of my Religion, and together with the
fruit of my womb (as soon as it shall be borne to light) to receive the holy
Baptism, and live and die at your devotion: she had no sooner pronounced this,
but suddenly behold her safely delivered of a son, which according to her vow
within some few days (together with her self) she procured to have baptized;
which her husband (who then had undertaken a Journey) understanding at his
return, he was so mightily ince^sed at it, and in so furious a rage, as he
presently in his mothers arms murdered the innocent child; whereupon she out
of fear of her own death, and horror of her child's, fled instantly crying all the way she went, in such a vehemencye, and in such affright, as the people
flocking about her, and understanding the reason of her laments, rann al
toward her home so violently bent against the Murderer, as infaillibly they
had torn him in pieces had they encountered him; but he, (what with the horror
of his crime, and fear of punishment) prevented them, and fled toward the
City gates which finding shut, he was forced to take sanctuary in a little
Chapel of the B. Virgins then open by chance, where having leisure to look
about him, he espied an Image of our B. Lady in Relieve, over the high Altar,
at sight of which he was so stricken with shame and repentance, as casting him
on his knees with a dolorous accent; Too great (said he) too great, O sacred
Virgin, is your beingnity to me, who have so grievously offended you, to
Protect and conceal me in this my flight; but I see it is true what I have
often hard, that your Clemency is the greatest maruayle in the world, and that
but regard it, and it is unmeasurable every way: I implore then that sweet
clemency of yours no^t to save my life, for the horriblnes of my Crime, has
asweltaken from me the desire, as the deserving of it, but to forget it, and to
forgive and wash it away in the fountain of my tears, and withal to accept
his deed of gift of mine to your B. Son and you, of my heart and al I am, who
now have no other desire, then to be al, and wholly yours.

He had prosecuted his speech, but the Officers entering the Chapel, interrupted
him, and seapel, interrupted him, and seazing on him, they carried him prisoner
to the Provost of the place; where he was no sooner come, but falling on his
knees before him, he said unto him with a resolut countenance; I do not this to
move you to Compassion of my crime, and save my life, but only to beg this
favor of you, that I may have the happiness to be baptized before I dye.

The Provost no less rejoicing then wondering at his demand, gladly granted him
his request, and having received him from the Font himself, that Ceremony,
being over, he proceeding to the examination of his fact, not letting the
pleasure of the one, hinder the displeasure of the other. But behold, while
this was in agitation, the mother pouring forth her affection in laments over
the murdered carcass of her Child, by degrees perceived it stir, and fix
its eyes upon her with a gracious smile, and being in a transport of joy and
admiration thereof, at the same instant was brought her the news of her
husbands Conversion; whereupon she instantly took her child, and presented it
alive before the Provost, no mark nor sign remaining that ever it had been
dead, but only a little starr where he had given the wound. The Provost
beholding this supendious miracle, absolved the Criminal as one who already was
absolved from heaven; who being a learned man and a great Rabby in the Jewish
law, afterwars wholly converted his tongue and pen to the setting forth the
praises of the B. Virgin and the Christian law, which he strongly defended
against the errors of that sort.

Nay, even the Turks themselves, and impious Moors concur in honoring the
sacred Virgin; and reuerencing her as Mother of God, as appears by the
grievous penaltyes imposed by their Alcoran, on any whosoever shall blaspheme
her name. But what should we say of the honor exhibited to her amongst the
Christians, when scarcely is any so poor a village or hamlett, where she is
not honored; by some place of devotion dedicated unto her? and her Images and
pictures are in such veneration, as who has not part in the worship of them?

A young Scholar (as Vincentius in his historial Mirrors recounteth it) being
so devoted to her, as he used on his knees, as often as any Image of hers
occurred, to salute her in this devout manner. Hail Mary etc. or this: Blessed
is the sacred Virgin; womb that bore the Eternal fathers son, and blessed
the breasts that gave him suck, etc. But as God oftentimes scourges those
most, whom he loves dearest, it happened this young man fell into so violent a
freinzie, as he would tear and bite his books and every thing he could lay
his hands upon; One day amongst the rest being in his furious fitts, behod a
young man of incomparable beauty, and shining with resplendant light (no doubt
but his good Angel) was seen by his beds side, making for him this pious
prayer: O B. Lady, see, see your poor servant here, who so devoutly and often
has prayed unto you; and given a thousand testimonies of his devotion; behold
him now in how pitious a state he is, so destitut of al humane Comforts, as
even inhumanity it self would commiserat his case; this is the mouth, these
are the lips that have so often pronounced your praise; and is it not pity
to see them now, the instruments of rage and furye only, which were once only
of devotion and piety? O therefore have mercy upon him, who of none with more
right can expect it then of you, and restor' him to that health he so well
employed in your honor hertofore; This said, he dis-appeared, and the young man
felt instantly the effect of his prayers by his recovery, which was so speedy
and miraculous, as acknowledging the B. Virgins particular favor in it, he to
gratify her for it, entered into an austere Religion, where he lived and died
as became one, who held his life on such a pious tenor of his good Angel, and
his better Advocate.

How we ought to reverence and adore the B Virgin, in regard of the sublimity
of her glory above al other Saints. CHAP. IV.
SEEING the Saints which are now in heaven, in possession of their eternity of
happiness, are to be honored with that fort of reverence which the Divines call
Dulia, which is the lowest sort of reverence appropriated to any Saint, and the
higher they are in dignity, with the more high and particular reverence are
they to be honored; what supreme honor may we imagine due, unto our
sovereign Lady and Queen of heaven, who by so many degrees of dignity is
preferred before them al, seated at the right hand of her B. Son, so near
and dear unto him as she is, and whom the rest of Saints, only a far off
reverence and admire? And if it be true, that each ones glory bears a
proportion with the grace they have, and the more their grace on earth the more
their glory in heaven; how excellent in glory must she be above them al, who
was so far superior to them in grace? for who knows not, how from the very
instant of her Conception, when she was sanctified in her Mothers womb, God
went heaping more and more graces upon her still, until her death when the
accumulation was Complete, and how in all times she cooperated with him in all
her actions, in all occure^ces, still meditating how to add unto it, accompanying
al her exterior works with the interior intention of the mind; Which Albert
the great exemplifies very well in that treatise of his, de beata Virgin; and
S. Bernard more particularly where he says. This Virgin and mother of the
highest, not only waking but even sleeping had the fruition of heavenly things
in Contemplation, no earthtlye affair being so forcible, as to interrupt her
Commerce of thought with heaven, in so much as even in her sleep she was
busyed more in Contemplation then the rest of the Saints when they were most
perfectly awake. Who then, of what intelligent a spirit soever they be, can
comprehend the immensity of the grace and merits of the glorious Virgin, and
consequently the infinite glory she had in recompense, seeing as the same
Doctors affirms; The more she excelled others in grace on earth, the more
glory she obtained in heaven. Let us conclude then, that her glory there, is
incomprehensible, and surpasses by infinite degrees that of all the Saints and
Angels; Conformable to that saing of S. John Chrysostom: What is there more
holy than the B. Virgin (says he;) neither the Prophets Apostles, Martyrs,
Patriarcks Angels, Trones, Dominations, Seraphins, nor Churubins; in fine,
there is no visible nor Created thing more great or more excellent then she.

And S. Anselme; Ineffable (says he) and euer-more admirable is the grace and
greatness of this Virgin: And in prosecuting his discourse: And what, O B. Lady:
is there more to be said? when but Considering the immensity of your grace,
glory; and felicity, I am destitut of forces; and my Voice fails me. And yet
not only from the abundance of Grace which was in her, but much more from her
humility may we argue the greatness and dignity which she has in heaven; for it
being an approved verity to all the world that the more we abase our selves on
earth, the more shall we be exalted for it in heaven; as is testified by verity
it self: Who humble themselves, shall be exalted, etc. And that great light of
the Church S. Ambrose says: The more abject we are on earth, the more we
shall be exalted for it in heaven: And he adds; That by so many degrees of
humility we descend on earth, by so many of glory we shall ascend in heaven.
Since no creature ever thought so humbly and abiectly of her self as this B.
Virgin did, we may well imagine, that by this precious virtue she so wonn the
heart of God, and got such hold of his affections, that she even obliged him by
it to descend from heaven to earth into her womb, and choose her for his
spouse and mother, which she in that Canticle of hers Confesses of her self:
Because he has regarded the humility of his handmaid, etc. Which shows the
excellency of her humility. And S. Bernard says of it, that when the Angel
saluted her, her answering him in that manner so humble, and resigning her
self entirely unto the Will of God: Behold the handmaid of our Lord, etc. Was
more grateful unto God, and meritorious for her, then all the actions of men and
Angels put together, and that by it alone, she merited, the being Mother of our
Savior Christ: Never (says S. Bernard) had she been exalted above the Angels,
if she had not humbled her self before.

And if some Saints, as namely S. Francis, have merited by their humility, to
be ranged amongst the Seraphins the chiefest Order of Angels and next to the
Divinity; to what immensitie of glory are we to imagine the B. Virgin is
exalted, for the profoundnes of her humility, which descended lower then ever
any Saints could do? In consideration of which, we may well imagine, that her
glory and felicity as far surpasses that of al other Saints, as the heavens
do a little point, the clear light of the Sun a candle the Ocean a small drop
of water, or all the earth the least grain of sand.

With good reason then, since she is exalted to such a height of dignity, we
are to honor her, as the sovereign Queen and Empress of men and Angels; and
as eminent as she is in dignity so is she in beautye and amability, able to
obscure with the brightness of its splendor, not-only al humane eyes, but even
those of the Angels themselves, as appears by this story recorded by Herod
Religious of the Order of S. Dominick.

There was a young scribe (sayeshe) much devoted to the B. Virgin, who being
somewhat conversant in the holy Scriptures where her excellent beauty is
commended with such Encomiums, he at last grew passionatly desirous to see her
in that beauty she appeared with in heaven, and praying for the accomplishment
of his desires, he heard a voice reprehending him for it, in that he ask't a
thing above his capacity and which his eyes were too weak to behold, nor could
it cost him less then his sight the beholding it; but he willing to put it to
the venture, persisted still in his Petition, yet at last upon more mature
reflection, he resolved, if the favor were granted him, to reserve on eye at
least whilst only with the other he regarded it; And so it happened that she
appearing unto him in a most glorious and resplendent manner, that one eye with
which he regarded her, being overcome with the excellency of the object, became
wholly blind; but so far was he from ever repenting it, as with iterated
petition he be sought her, to appear but unto him in that glory once again,
and he would be also willing to forgo the other eye; the B. Virgin to content
his devotion, did as he desired her, but was so far from inflicting that
penalty upon him which he did expect, as she restored him his other eye again,
where with we may imagine how contented a man he was.

Neither does she exceed all the Angels and Saints in beauty and splendor only,
but also in joy and felicity, which with out doubt she has in as supereminent
degree above the rest, as her glory above the rest is more high and eminent;
And for that there are diverse Doctors who affirm, that she alone has more
glory then all the Saints together; this being so, imagine of what joy and
felicity she is possessed the while, the quality of which is so exceedingly
rauishing, that S. Augustine doubts not to affirm of it, that one dropp of
heavenly felicity but falling into hell, would sweetenal its torments. O strange
expression of the wo^drous sweetness and deliciousnes thereof: if one dropp of
it could work such effects in hell, what must whole torrents of it work in the
hearts of those who are possessed of it? The Apostles upon an arid and barren
mountains topp, saw but only a little glimpse of the glory of heaven in our
Saviors Transfiguration, and tasted by it but a little superficial joy, and yet
you see they could have been content to have remained there al their lives. But
that example which I shall now declare, deserves yet greater admiration.

A certain Religious Monk of holy life, exercised long in the contemplation
of the Joys of Heaven, conceived at last such a fervent desire of it, that he
incessantly besought Alm. God, that (to comprehend it the better) if it were
possible he might have some taste of it in this mortal life; and continuing in
this devotion many years, at last close by his Cell he heard a bird sing so
wondrous delightfully, as ravished with it, he presently lied him out to enjoy
more freely its delicious melody, and following it a flight or two, at last it
ledd him into a wood thereby; where it begann to sing; and he rauish't in
hearing it, satt down nighe the tree whereon it was, where he might both see
and hear it best, nor did he know, with whether he was delighted most; who
when he beheld the beauty of it, wished himself al eyes, when he heard its
divine notes wished himself al ears again; In fine, feasting these two
senses so long he satt till the Bird cea'st its melody, and flew quite away;
when he arising took his way toward his Monastery, imagining he had been away
only some hour or two; but beig returned back again, he found it almost al
rebuilded a new again, and knocking at the gate, the Porter and he were both
so strange one to another, as they admired at either, the Porter that the Monk
should say he was Religious of the house, the Monk that he should say he had
been Porter there many years; In fine, the Abbot came being informed thereof,
whom he as little knew as the Porter, and unto whom he was as little known; who
in fine examining him, found by the Records of the House that those Religious
whom he named, to have lived in that Monastery with him, were deceased so long
before, as by computation of time they found, he had been absent three hundred
and sixty years. If then so many years seemed but a short hour to that
Religious man charmed with the sweetness of that Music he listened unto,
performed perhaps by some Angel of heaven; how delicious, sweet, and rauishing
must the Joys of Heaven needs be, where all the Angels sing together
incessantly praising and glorifying their heavenly King.

And if this good Religious man could remain exposed unto the injuries of the
time so many years, ravished with tasting but one dropp as it were of the
deliciousnes of heaven; O God, who can imagine the delight of those, who in all
comfortable Eternity shall be feasted with it to al satiety; They shall be
inebriated with the abundance of thy house, and drink of the torrent of thy
delights; says the holy Scripture. Seeing then the B. Virgin, next to God is
Mistress and Lady of this Palace of deliciousnes, and as it were the pipe
that co^ueyes al its deliciousnes from God the fountain of it, to all that
participat of its Joy in heaven: Let us honor, adore, and reverence her with all those due acknowledgments, of which we have already treated or shall herafter
treat.

That we ought to adore the B Virgin, for that she is the sovereign Lady of all
Creatures both in earth, and heaven. CHAP. V.
APERSON which is rich, noble, and virtuous, deserves honor, and the more
they excel in it, the more honor they deserve; as we see by experience in
persons most eminent in the world. The Blessed Virgin then, being so great a
pattern of sanctity, a Compendium of al perfections, chosen by God for his
Mother, and elected to a supreme height of dignity above all the Quiers of
Angels, and finally being Empress of al superior and inferior Creatures;
with good reason both Angels and men are to honor and reverence her, as the
sovereign Queen of the whore Universe: neither should there be any (me
thinks) so impudent to dispute her title to it, nor so impious as to offer to
defraude her of those sublime honors due to so sublime a title; she were a
Queen, if there were no other reason but only because her son is a King,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and who knows not that the King and Queens
honors goes so conioyn'd in one, as from the dishonouring the one, redounds to
the other a dishonor too? The B. Virgin, being (as formerly we have said)
daughter to God the Father, Mother of his Son, and Spouse of the holy Ghost,
and consequently daughter, mother, and spouse of the holy Trinity, considering
her alliance and conjunction with God, and namely with the humanized Word of
God the Son, whom this great Al acknowledges for King; of her being Queen can
be no doubt al; and this S. Athanasius affirms where he says: He being King
and Lord, his mother who engendered him, has consequently the reputation of
Queen and Mother. And S. John Damascen: She was undoubtedly declared Queen
(says he) of al Created things when she became Mother of the Creator.

Let us then conclude, that she being Queen of this Universe, has over it an
absolut command, and that al are to obey her, and render her that honor and
obeissance, which from Vassals is due to those who are over them; And in
admiration of this power of hers, was that devout exclamation of holy S.
Bernard; O blessed Mary (says he) al power is given you both in heaven and
earth, do as you can do all that you desire.

Among all the title of Greatness, which our Mother the holy Church honors her
with, that of Queen of heaven she uses most frequently, and Lady of Angels:
Reginacaeli, and Domina Angelorum, etc. Now the greater the extent of ones
Dominion is, the greater ever is their power and magnisicence; so as if one
could attain to the Dominion over all the world; how absolute and unlimited
should their power to be? and yet what is all this world to the Heavens
amplitude which she is Lady of? and where her subjects are perpetually honoring
her, so as we may say of her: The Heavens declare the glory of Mary; and the
heavenly Courtyers take it for honor to obey her commands. To conclude, it is
but little we can say of her greatness, how great soever that little may seem to
be, and arriving even to admiration, which ever there takes up, where humane
knowledge leaves.

And so is it not an admirable thing, that the whole roundour of the earth in
comparison of the Heavens should be but as the center point compared to a
mighty Sphere? and who can imagine then the immensity of that, when the earth
which contains Empires, Kingdoms and Provinces, is so mere a nothing in
comparison thereof? Some are of opinion, that the element of water is ten times
bigger then the land, the air ten times bigger then the water, the fire then
that, and so with proportion each heaven bigger then another, etc. And to give
you some dim light of its magnitud, the Moon which in less then a month
surrounds its Orb, would be incircling the starry heaven according to the most
expert of the Mathematiciens thirty six thousand years and more; which
notwithstanding compared to the Coelum empyreum or habitation of the Blessed,
is but a poor little Circle, and for magnitud not worthy the speaking of. For
which reason some Authors are of opinion cited by Philip Diez, that if a
millstone were thrown from thence, it would be a thousand five hundred years
in falling down. Who admires not in hearing this, and cries not out with him: O
Lord, I have considered your works, and remain astonished and out of my self
with wonder.

One of the ancient Prophets in consideration of the greatness of this glorious
Palace of Alm. God exclaim: O Israel, how great is the house of God, how
mighty great is the place of his possession? he is great and has no limits, he
his high and cannot be measured. And we may well imagine it to be great, since
every Saint shall have a habitation a part, and a place proportioned unto its
merits. And this we have from our Savior Christ himself in comforting his
afflicted Disciples for his departure, where he says: Let not your hearts be
troubled for in my fathers house are many mansions. And S. Vincent of S.
Dominiks Order, speaking of these Mansions, says that each of the Blessed in
heaven shall have assigned them for their habitation a larger circuit them is
betwixt the east and west. Now there being incomparably more Saints in heaven,
then there be men on earth, I leave it to you to imagine how infinite great the
heavenly Kingdom is.

Now the B. Virgin being Queen of this so immense dominion, has all the Blessed
there consequently for her subjects and Courtiers, who being in due Order rankt
about her Throne, always make tender unto her of their services and
obsequiousnes, and if (as S. John Chrysostom says) while she was yet on earth
she was attended upon by such an infinity of Angels to defend her against all the assaults of hell, and conserve unto their king this fair tabernacle of his,
Inuiolat; how much more gloriously attended is she now in heaven, where she
sits crowned in possession of so high a dignity? It is impossible to imagine
the number that waytes upon her there; which the Prophet endeavoring to speak
of says. Ten thousand serve thee, and a hundred times ten thousand assist
before thee: setting down a finit number for an infinite. And S. Denis says,
that the number of Angels by many parts exceeds the number of al Corporal and
material things. And for those, we know, how the sublunary bodies yield in
greatness to the celestial bodies, and they unto the the other, the more high they
are; in so much as not a starr of the least magnitud, but is far greater then
all the globe of inferior things together. We know besides, that every man from
Adam to the Consummation of the world has had and shall have an Angel Guardian
to attend upon them, be they good or bad, al equally participating of this
benefit; whence it follows, (as we have said before) that the number of
Inferior Angels deputed to that charge, exceeds the number of al men that
ever were, are, and shall be; which being so, how innumerous must the superior
be, since (as we have formerly deduced) they increase in proportion the more
superior they are. Certainly, more easy it were, to number all the stars in
heaven, the drops of the Sea, the leaves of trees, the plants of the earth, and
the Atoms of the Sun, then the multitud of Angels known only to God himself.

Let us add moreover, the better to set of the glory of our sovereign Queen,
a second wonder in train of this; to wit; That all the Angels, as infinite as
they are, have each one yet a diversity among themselves; and if it be such a
delightful sight, to see a Garden al planted with variety of flowers, how much
more delightful must it be, to see these Angelical flowers adorning the
heavenly Garden with each one their several species according to their several
dignity and merits? And here our Imagination has a spacious field, to
exercise it self in devout conceits of the B. Virgins perfections and
excellence; for if the Courtiers strive with so much sple^dor, how much more
splendid must needs that Majesty be, on whom they al attend.

For so these B. Spirits are perpetually attending before her Throne adoring
her, and ready at the least twinkling of her eye, to execut her commands, which
are commonly for the good and salvation of man. This is the opinion of S.
Augustine where he says: S. Michael and all the other Angels have an eye in
heaven unto the B. Virgin, to see where she would Command them any things for
the good of souls on earth. Let us conclude then; that her Greatness are
unspeakable and incomprehensible not only by men but even by the Angels
themselves, and that next to God she has the most sovereign command in
heaven, as being Queen of all the celestial Hierarchies there, and Mother of
the supreme Monarck and Creator of every thing.

Neither-doth her dominion terminate or end here, but as she is Queen of
Angels, and of Heaven, so also is she of Earth and the Inhabitants thereof; and
for this reason the Divines call her frequently Regina mundi, the Queen of
earth. S. Gregory often intitles her to the name of Lady of al Christians; and
so with good reason may she be, who was so great a part of our redemption, for
God had never been made man but for her, and consequently had never suffered
for us, nor gone through with the work of our redemption; which ought to be a
powerful Motive to induce us to honor and reverence her.

Nay, even the very devils themselves do dread her power at the sole invocation
of whose name they al are put to flight; When I pronounce but Aue Maria (says
the devout S. Bernard) the Heavens do smile, the Angels rejoice, the world
exults, hell trembles, and the devils are in dismay. S. Bridgitt in the first
book of her Revelations says, that the B. Virgins ranks and dignity in
heaven is so supreme, as the devils are constrained to honor it; and she
adds: That as often as any shall be molested by their temptations, let them but
inuocat her sacred name, and presently they al shall vanish and be put to
flight, of whose sole Command they more stand in awe, then of al their
torments; so as whenever she undertakes the cause of any soul, they dare not
withstand her in it; as witnesses this story registered in the Promptuary of
her Miracles, and taken out from thence by Pelbert in his Stellary of the B.
Virgin.

There was a man (says he) of a nature so evil inclined and perverse, as he
never was exercised in any good, but only in some few reuerences and prayers
which he daily offered up to the B. Virgin. This man, though often inspired to
leave his wicked life, was yet so far from it, as he persisted more obstinat
in it every day, until at last in drawing his latest breath, he imagined
himself hurried by a crew of devils, with horrible noise and howlings unto the
tribunal of the Judge; where they demanding justice, and the Judge putting
them to declaration of the cause, they clearly proved him a most wicked man,
and as such desired sentence should be given on him; When the B. Virgin
standing up in his defense, declared whatsoever good she had known by him,
like a most faithful Advocate; but scarce had she finished her speech, when in
an insolent manner the devils argued against her thus; is this al you are able
to say for him? unless you defend his cause better then so and bring more
proofs of goodness in him, what, for his bad, will become of him may be easily
seen; and here he began to add unto the list of his offenses thousands and
thousands more, when the B. Virgin seeing their number so great, as by the way
of Justice there was no hope for him, she strait addressed her self by that of
mercy, and prostrating her self before the Judges feet, no sooner he had
raised her up, but she began: if these pretenders to Justice (said she) were
interessed in the cause more then out of malice, they should carry it and I
would not so much as dispute it with them, but to what end all this long
recapitulation of crimes what concerns it them whether your inspirations were
obeyed or no? or since when have they been so jealous of your honor, that
they should care so much where you were dishonored? certainly, if there be any
fault, it is chiefly theirs, and if there be any offense it is only yours; it
is you only whom he has offended, and to you alone he is ready to make
satisfaction, not with any boast of merit, or that he stands on justifying his
cause, but with repentance in his heart, tears in his eyes, and sighs in his
mouth, to obtain of your mercy, what of justice he cannot hope for. I confess
the quantity and quality of his crimes are so enormious great, that they
deserve nothing but death and damnation; but if my prayers were ever powerful
with you now hear my prayers for him, and by these breasts which had the honor
once to give you suck, I conjure you; for so many drops of milk you have
received from them, to bestow one drop of blood of the abundance you have shed
for sinners, to wash this man from his sins; for his life hereafter I will
undertake, so as you will pardon what is past; for I see al signs of a
repentant sinner in his heart, his eyes, and al; and concluding here with a
profound reverence, the Judge remained a while with his eyes fixed upon the
ground in great suspense, now weighing the mightines of his crimes, now of her
power that interceded for him, whilst either part was wavering betwixt hope and
fear; at last lifting up his eyes, and casting them on her with a gracious
regard: Though it be exceeding much you ask, said he, yet were it much more I
could not deny it such an intercession; for your sake then I pardon him this
once, but never let him hope for pardon again, if he abuse it now; having said
this, the devils confounded departed with horrible cries saying; We knew well
enough what would be the end of it, she ever has the better of us, and it is
our folly to contend with her, she is too powerful an Advocate, and too
gracious with the Judge: so they vanished away, and the poor man returning to
himself again, recounted to all this horrible vision, and deceiving the
Phisicians for his corporal health, and the devils for his spiritual, he
recovered both, making of either such use for the time to come, that he entered
into Religion, and there to his dying day ledd a most holy life.

By which we may see the preciousnes of the sacred blood of Christ our Lord,
and how preualent with him and powerful over our adversaries is his Glorious
Mother and our most faithful Advocate.

Of the great honor we owe to the B Virgin for her being our most dear and
merciful Mother. CHAP. VI.
THE Blessed Virgin standing at the foot of the Cross on Mount Caluary
accompanied with S. John; Our Savior Christ beholding her with a pitiful and
gracious eye, said unto her; Woman, behold thy son; meaning S. John, and
then addressing his speech to him he said; Behold thy Mother; and from that
time (says the holy Scripture) he made account of her as his own, and to the
end of his life observed her accordingly.

From hence the learned gather this great mystery; how our Savior in
recommending her unto S. John for his Mother commended all the faithful unto her
for her children; for if S. John (say they) represented them al (as there is no
doubt of it) the B. Virgin being assigned him for Mother, was likewise assigned
unto al Christians. Whereupon S. Bernard falls into this devout exclamation: O
worthy of al admiration! behold thy Mother, etc. for know thou, if Mary be thy
Mother, Jesus Christ is thy brother, and his Father: consequently thine then
embrace thy happiness in her; And so assuredly it is, God is our Father; Our
Father which art in heaven: We are brothers to our Savior Christ: Go unto my
brothers, etc. says he to the holy Magdalen, and for the B. Virgins being our
Mother, there can be no doubt at al; and hear S. Anselme proving it; Jesus
Christ the son of Mary, is our brother, (says he) and therefore consequently
his Mother must be ours. How much then ought we to rejoice, and how excessive
great our contentment ought to be, having for our Mother the Mother of God
himself, Queen both of heaven and earth.

And not only she is our Mother, but a most benign and gracious Mother,
sauouring of nothing but mercy and sweetness, and exercising nothing but the
works of piety and pity toward us. So as her most ordinary title is the
Mother of grace and mercy: Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae, and so in
that other Antiphon she is called Matter misericordiae, etc. where we, who lie
fighing and weeping in this miserable vale of tears, implore her aid and
gentle pity of our calamities. And wherefore is it, that in every public
place her Image occurr unto our eyes holding her sacred Infant in her arms,
but only to signify she is always in actual Tendering of him unto us for our
good, as if she would say, here take my son and the son of the Eternal
Father who for your sakes descended from heaven to earth, and putt on the
vestment of humanity in which he sufferd so many indignities even at last to
undergo an ignominious death, fear not but approach unto him here with
confidence, he is al gracious, al pitiful, and affable, and if your sins
deterr you from coming near, remember how to make you great, he is become a
little infant, and their angers are ever easily appeased; on my word take him
then, and enjoy him as a gift from me, whose possession can not but much
advantage you; and to render your self more worthy of the interest in him,
wholly renounce al interest in vice, and casting your self humbly at his
feet, resign unto him your heart, and your best beloved desires, and in
recompense thereof he will bestow on you a lasting good and happiness above the
injury of death or time. O happy, and a thousand times happy are those souls
who harken to these silent invitations of hers, and having recourse unto her in all their afflictions know how to prevayle themselves of her benignity; let them
assure themselves they shall never find the gates of her liberality shutt, nor
sit down with a repulse of what soever they law fully desire. God forbit
(says devout S. Bernard) that I should think you can ever abandon those, who
have placed their Confidence in you. And Theophilus in the Book entitled, The
mirror of the B. Virgin, is introduced saying: I know, O sovereign Lady your
Care of us how excessive great it is; for who ever has hoped in you and been
confounded; who ever implored your aid, and been abandoned? And to this
purpose is that saying of Origin: I hold for certainly true, that the B.
Virgin being instantly beseeched for any thing, is never wanting to the
necessities of him who beseeches her, for that she is al mercy, and so full of
grace, and therefore she cannot choose but have Compassion of those who crave
her help. Excellent words, and able to animat the most desperate to a hope of
his salvation, and allay the most outrageous affliction which was ever in any
breast. Being our Mother then, she cherished us with a maternal love, and has
more care of us then ever any Mother had of her only child, never failing us
with succor in our necessities, assistance in our dangers, comfort in our
afflictions, nor finally deliurance from any evil what soever, when soever with
confidence and devotion we importune her for it. So is she our advocate in
heaven with Alm. God, where she gladly undertakes our protection, defends our
cause, procures to assure us the possession of Eternal bliss, and finally
neglects no occasion of putting us fair with her B. Son, and working us into
his grace. In consideration of the great prerogative we have in heaven by such
an Agent for us, S. Bernard encourages man to present himself without fear
before Alm. God: Go, Go, with Confidence, says he, before the throne of his
divine Majesty where the son beholds the Mother; and the father the son;
the son shows his father his hands and feet and side al wounded: the mother
unto her son her sacred breasts that gave him suck, so as there is no fear
of a repulse where so many signs of love and charity are.

But yet this is not al, nor does this careful Lady and Mother of ours only
procure us favors, but she assures them us by appeasing her Son when we have
offended him, and reconciling his love unto us again; but for her, how often
had the world been thundered by that just Judge above? how often had the souls
therein, for their offenses, been precipitated and cast down head long into
Eternal hell? Of which a more clear example cannot be, then that memorable
vision of S. Dominick, who praying one night, behold in vision our Savior
Christ seated at the right hand of his Alm. Father, al inflamed with wrath and
fury, holding three terrible thunderbolts in his hand, ready to discharge on
earth in punishment of three sins then frequently reigning amongst men, Pride
Avarice, and Luxury; when the Blessed Virgin to mitigate his wrath prostrating
her self before his feet, and straightly embracing them; I appeal, I appeal
(said she) from this your anger how ever just it be, unto that wonted clemency
of yours, beseeching you by it, if not absolutely to revoke your sentence, yet
at least to surcease for a while the execution of it; for, alas, what will you
do? against whom do you prepare these arms? and whose ruin have you resolved
upon? will you annihilate your own workmanship, and be the perdition of those
whom you have saved with so much cost of pain and blood? and would you)
replied her son, having raised her up, and seated her by his side) would you
have such crimes as these unpunished? who would not then in hope of impunity
committ them hereafter in despite of me? no, it were but to prostitute my
Justice to their abuse not to exercise it here; and now to pardon them were to
make my pardon for ever more vile and contemptible? why alas dear son (said
she) as they are apt to offend, so ar they to be sorry for it, doubt not then
but at your first summons of them to repentance, they will be obedient to it; and
to this effect behold here ready two servants of yours (pointing out to S.
Francis and S. Dominick) apt ministers to employ therein, and to exhort them
unto penance, after which if they persist in their wickedness, do your justice
what it will with them, I have done with them. Hereupon his divine Majesty let
his thunder fall out of his hands, his boiling anger cool, and at his Mothers
prayers was for that once content to pardon man.

Having then a Mother in heaven so powerful as she, let us have recourse to
her, and put us in shelter under her, as children do under their Mothers when
they fly their Fathers wrath; and that especially when we find our selves
most pressed with ill fortune or calamity, and say unto her: Sub tuum praesidium,
etc. O mother of God and of us, we put our selves under your paotection,
refuse us not in our necessities, nor abandon us unto the afflictions that
threaten us; and have a firm confidence that she will succor you, and have
pity of your miserable estate, who never refuses those who have recourse to
her. In so much as a holy Doctor says; If so great be the enormity of our
crimes as we fear to appear with them before Alm. God, our best course were
to address our selves to her, and she infallibly will succor us. And S.
Chrysostom in one of his Sermons says unto her; You have been chosen from
eternity (says he) Mother of God, to the end that those whom God in justice
cannot save, should arrive by your pitiful intercession unto salvation.

And with this accords well that Vision which B. Leo had, one of holy S. Francis
companions, in which he had a representation of the final Judgment day, where
he saw two ladders reared up, the one a read one reaching from earth to
heaven, where our B. Savior al in terror sat; the other of white, just of the
same proportion extended to the B. Virgins throne, where she sat in all
sweetness and affability; and he observed that those who mounted up by that read
one, did fall to ground again some from the nether rounds and so upwards even
unto the very topp, until Saint Francis called to them, and admonished them to
clime by that white one, and he would assure them of better speed; and he saw
that those who followed his counsel were graciously received by our Lady and
introduced into heaven. From which vision, and we have before deduced, results
an evident proof of her motherly Care of us, and how she loves us ever to
passion procuring with extraordinary solicitud al we stand in need of both in
heaven and earth. With good reason then ought we to reverence her, and have her
in honor and veneration; with good reason are we to serve her affectionately,
and consecrat unto her the best desires of our heart; and this al laws both
divine and humane exact of us, to wit, that if she be our mother, we should
love and honor her; and if a love and honor be due from us to our parents who
engender us into this world, with how much more reason is it due to her, who so
carefully procures our regeneration to a better life?

Let us not cease then to love and reverence this sovereign Lady both of
heaven and earth since God himself does it as well as we, and (according to
Methodius) has a kind of obligation also to do it, she being his Mother, and
consequently the precept of honoring our parents having also reference unto
him, yea and it seems in more particular manner unto him then us, since she
was more particularly his parent then any can be ours, both because he had no
other on earth but her, as also because she could have no other son. You have
good reason to rejoice (says the said Methodius) since you have him in a
manner on the score with you, to whom al mortals are indebted else. And so he
went still honoring her here on earth, as his dear Mother, and as such was
obedient to her; et erat subditus illis, as the holy Scripture says; neither
does he less honor her now in heaven, but (as some devout Doctors said) after
his glorious resurrection first saluting her with a Salve sansta Parens; he
iterated it at her Assumption into heaven, and there seating her at his own
right hand, all the Court of heaven doing reverence to her the while, he
constituted her in absolut power and authority over the trine Empire of the
Universe; where al bow down before her, as to the daughter, mother and spouse
of the Alblessed Trinity, the Queen of Angels, Empress of the World, and most
faithful Mediatrix of al Christian souls unto her Blessed Son, who grants al
things at her request.

How to put these reuerences in practice, whereby the B. Virgin is to be
honored. CHAP. VII.
IN the precedent chapters we have seen of what excellency and valor is the
exercise of Reuerences to the B. Virgin, and how acceptable unto her it is, we
have moreover sufficiently informed our selves of the reasons which should move
us unto her reverence, as that she is the mother of the king of heaven, her
surpassing glory there, and that she is of higher dignity then all the quiers of
heaven, that she has al power here on death, and finally that she is our
Mother and sovereign Lady also. And yet much more could allege I allege to
move us to devotion, did not the fear deterr me of ingulfing my self into so
wide and profou^d an Ocean. Wherefore now it remains that I treat of the Method
we are to use, to put in practice this so laudable devotion.

First then I say, we are to endeavor by often genuflexions and inclinations
of the body to honor her; in which the better to actuat our selves we are to
banish from us al tepidity and drowzynes; and make choice of time and place
most convenient for it: and first, touching the circumstance of place, priuary
is the chiefest thing we are to regard; of time, the night seems fittest as
that, which is freest from distraction, and best composeth the mind.

We read in Surius, how S. Elizabeth daughter of the King of Hungary exercised
herself with such affections in this so laudable devotion, as she appointed
one of her women every night to awake her at a certain hour by some secret
way she had, when she would rise unknown to the Prince her husband, and spend
most part of the ensuing night in these adorations which the Roman Breuiary
makes mention of; She rising in the nights (says it) from her husband, and the
time in prayer and genuflections. At which time, no doubt, but the Angels
rejoiced to see her virtuously employed, being rich and noble by birth, but
far more by virtue and her true devotion, and finally her performing that on
earth, which the Angels account themselves happy to do in heaven.

Now for the number of them, I will prescribe none, but leave it to the
devotions of those who are desirous to exercise themselves therein, nor the
manner how it is to be done, either of bowing one knee to the ground, or both,
of lifting up their hands or crossing them before their breasts, but let them
choose that posture which likes them best, and which makes most for their
devotion.

Only I will speak a word or two in the commendations thereof in general, as
first, of the facility wherewith it is don, there being none so much employed
or infirm, who cannot with ease do somewhat in this kind, either in bending
the knee, or bowing the head, actions which are compatible with all, in what
estate or employment soe'r they be. Then it is a king of devotion (this of
adoration) of al others the most noble and acceptable to the Queen of Heaven,
the office of Angels, and who then would not be ambitious of it? to do the
same on earth, which all the celestial Courtiers do in heaven? and I beseech
devout persons, that they would but consider, how diligently and with what care
your earthly Princes are served and honored by their followers and Courtyers;
which whosoever shall, but observe, must needs blush for shame, if they be not
as careful and assiduous in serving their Queen of Heaven.

And to incite our devotions thereunto, it would do well to read of the
diligence of Saints in this particular; as namely in Surius of S. Albert, how
he bowed his knees a hundred times a day, and fifty times prostrated himself on
the ground, saying each time an Aue Maria in honor of the Queen of Heaven;
And of S. Catherine of Sucina daughter of S. Brigit, how (according to the same
Author) she was from her tender infancy so exercised in prayer, as besides our
Lady Office which she recited every day, with the Penitential Psalms and
other such deuotio^s, she employed her self four hours every day continually
in this exercise of genuflexions unto the B. Virgins honor, accompanying it
with many tears. As for that which S. John Damascen has left written of Simon
Stilites, it does more cause our wonder then imitation; his standing on a
pillar, exposed unto the rigors of winters and scorching of so^mers heat;
thirty fix cubits high, situated on an eminent Mountains topp; and this
continued for more then thirty years, making a thousand and a thousand
genuflexions and inclinations every day; and one of the servants of B.
Theodoret Bishopp of Cyrene observing him one day, counted above a thousand two
hundred and forty inclinations of his, and that of those more painful ones, he
bowing (as it were) even round in performing them.

So of the glorious Apostle S. Bartholomew we read; that, a hundred times a
day and as many by night, he used to bend his knees, which was more in one who
was so perpetually and assidually employed in preaching and converting of the
world, then a hundred times so much were in another man. Well did he understand
of how high price and value with the B. Virgin these Reuerences and adorations
were,) understanding things in such an illuminatiue manner as he did) or else he
had never been so careful and punctual in performing them.

But no wonder that the holy Saints and friends of Alm. God have produced such
strange effects as these, and left to us so little hope of imitating them, since
the divine grace that superabounded in them, the ardent fire of the holy Ghost
that incessantly inflamed their hearts, and that height of perfection they had
attained unto al concurred unto the rendering them active vigours and diligent
in this holy exercise. But as for us weaklings as we are, destitut of those
spiritual forces which they had, and that mind to apply those forces to the
best; if we cannot imitat them so nearly, yet at least a far off we may do
somewhat in their imitation; and bitter is it so to do, and do it devoutly,
then weary our selves by enterprizing too much, and so become wholly dulled and
dis-animat, and rather loose spirit then gain by the excess.

There is an Example concerning this, taken out of the Mirror of examples
which is this. A certain Religious woman had a daily devotion to say an
hundred and fifty Aue Mary's, accompanying each one with a profound reverence;
but she growing cold in the performance of them, by reason the number seemed
excessive great, was divinely admonished in vision to diminish them to a third
part, under the condition that she should say those with greater fervor and
devotion. And S. Hierome to this purpose says, it is far better to say one
Psalm devoutly and with alacrity of spirit, then the whole Psalter with
negligence and tepidity. Notwithstandiug, supposing al be equal, certainly much
better it is, to do more then less, in these or any other exercises of piety,
since good works ar the more meritorious still with the more difficulty, they are performed and the more grateful is the doing of it, to those unto whose
reuerencs it is exhibited.

How the aptest time for the exercise of these devotions, is the particular
feasts of our B. Lady. CHAP. VIII.
THE Church ever guided by the holy Ghost, has in all times erected Temples,
and consecrated Altars, in reverence of the sacred Queen of Heaven, and has
honored her with vows, Hymns, Canticles, and Lauds, and diverse other
devotions and services, which the fear of detayning the Reader too long, makes
me forbear the relation of; but above the rest, some feasts it has commanded
to be kept, whereon she is more particularly honored.

Those may be divided into two Classes, the greater and the lesser, the greater
include her Conception, Nativity, Purification, Annunciation, and her
Assumption into heaven: The lesser (and which are not of precept) her
Praesentation, Visitation, and others; among which we may add the Saturday. To
begin then from the lowest, the Saturday is dedicated by the holy Church unto
her honor, and namely in the Council of Trent, where it is ordained, that
Masses, and Offices, should be said of her, on those days, when they concur
not with any other feast. Moreover it has been an ancient custom of devout
Christians, to fast that day in her honor; which kind of devotion is most
acceptable unto her, as appears by this following story.

S. Anselme writes of a certain Thief, who entering once into a poor widows
house, with intent to despoile her of what she had, and finding her so
slenderly furnished as he imagined it not worth his pains, he to decline the
suspicion of what he came for, ask't her what victuals she had, and whither she
had broke her fast that day? God, forbid, replied she, that I should violat so
my vow I have made to the B. Virgin, of fasting in her honor every saturday:
why so? said the thief: because, (said she again,) I have heard a certain
learned preacher say that whosoever did it, should never die without
Confession: The thief was so stricken at the report of this, as remaining a
long time in consideration of his wicked life, at last he started out of that
melancholy posture wherein he was, and setting one knee to the ground, and
lifting his hands and eyes to heaven: Seeing, it is so, O B. Vigin, (said he,)
and that each poor thing that is don for you is so richly rewarded I here
promise and vow in imitation of this devout servant of yours, every saturday to
fast in your honor, as long as it shall please Alm. God to give me life and
health; which afterward he inuiolatly observed, but for the rest continuing
still his haunt of robbing, it happened once that being over matched by
passingers, he had his head cut off, and they thinking they had made him sure,
went on their way glorying in what they had done, when behold, the head cried
out, Confession, for the love of God, Confession; when imagine in what affright
they were, unable a long while for amazement to stir or move, until at last
they came unto the next village, and certified the Curat of what had happened;
who running thither accompanied with many of his parishioners brought thither
by Curiosity, behold, rhey having joined the head unto the body, he with a love
and audible voice that al might hear him, said: understand al of you, that I
never did any good in all my life, but only in honor of the B. Virgin fasting
Saturdayes, for which reason when my soul was issuing forth of my body, as it
was separated from my head, and the devils ready to intercept it, were al
assembled, behold the B. Virgin hindered them, nor would she suffer it to issue
forth of my body, until by Confession it were expiated of its crimes; and
thereupon having confessed himself, and desiring all the assistants to pray for
him, he exchanged this life for a happier on.

This day then being particularly consecrated to the honor of the B. Virgin we
should do well; to add unto our fasts this devotion of lowly inclining and
reuerencing her; It being of such excellency as we have declared before, of
which each one may offer up as many as his devotion shall suggest, and time and
place permit. How ever for the more certainty, might I prescribe them a taxed
number, it should be the number of the Beads, to wit sixty three, in honor of
those years, which (according to some Doctors) the B. Virgin lived upon
earth, and so it were best to number them upon their Beads, performing them the
while with that attention, as if the B. Virgin were really present there; and
while they do it, they may at earth one pronounce those first words of the
Angelical salutation Aue Maria, which some are of opinion the Angel pronounced
in actually bowing his knee and lowly reuerencing her, with bowing down his
head; But of this we shall speak more amply in the 11. chapter of this book,
where we shall teach an apt Method of putting in practice this exercise; and
what I say of the Saturday, may be observed when any of her lesser feasts
occurr.

As for the Greater feasts, the greater the solemnity is, with the greater
devotion we are to solemnize it; wherefore it were well if on such days as
those, we increased to a hundred the number of those reuerences, it being a
number much celebrated in the holy Scripture for perfect and mysterious; but I
would not wish you to perform them al at once, for fear of taediousnes, but
to divide them so, as both morning, noone, afternoon, evening, and night, may
have its parting, which in the former number of sixty three I would likewise
have observed, that we may come to it with fresh devotion, and renew the memory
of our B. Lady more affectionatly and often; And if the feast be celebrated
with an Octaue, we may celebrat each day of the Octaue with this devotion, when
if we begin the vigil with a hundred and ten, and so continue the Octaue out,
we shall make completely up, the number of a thousand, a number perfect, sacred,
and mysterious.

This excellent devotion was most frequent with S. Margaret daughter of the
king of Hungary Religious of the Order of Saint Dominick, who (as Doctor Querin
of the same Order recounteth in her life, was so affectionatly devoted to the
Queen of heaven, as she no sooner saw her Image in any place, but she
presently kneeled down before it, reciting in her honor the Angelical
salutation, and on the Eues of her most solemn feasts she always fasted with
bread and water; from which day til the conclusion of the Octaue she said a
thousand Aue Marias; at each one of which she humbly prostrated her self on
the ground, making it her greatest delight next to honoring Alm. God, to
honor his B. Mother.

Of the Feasts of our Savior Christ. CHAP. IX.
UPON occasion of treating of the feasts of our B. Lady, I am put in mind to
speak a word of the feasts of our B. Savior which we are to honor above all the rest; and with good reason, for if the feasts of creatures (as we have
said) may be celebrated in their honor, how much is the Creator on his feast
to be honored? Al those devotions we may exercise on his feast, which we have
taught to be exercised on the feasts of our B. Lady: always provided that we
reverence him in a higher strain of Latria, only proper to God himself: Thou
sbalt honor and serve the Lord thy God, etc

The principal feasts of our Savior Christ which are celebrated with their
Octaues are five; the Nativity; the three Kings adoration; the Resurrection;
the Ascension; and that of Corpus Christi. or the blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist; amongst which I place in the highest rank that of the Nativity,
because on that, all the Quires in heaven descended unto the earth, to adore
their King then an infant lying in the manger or in his mothers lap. And so the
devout soul that exercises these devotions on that day, is to frame a lively
imagination of the place imagining themselves in Bethleem, and adoring amongst
the rest him, whom al both in heaven and earth adore.

The feast of the three Kings puts us in mind of nothing but adorations, since
on that day they al adored our Blessed Savior in his Mothers lapp, and in them
all the nations of the world; and with how much devotion it was accompained may
be gathered from this pathetical expression of it by the Evangelist Saint
Matthew: And entering into the house (said he) they found the infant with Mary
his Mother, and falling on the ground adored him.

The glorious Resurrection; to the dignity of which, al other feasts give a
kind of pre-heminence, deserves Adoration likewise; because on it our Savior
rose again al victorious and victory, charged with the spoils of hell, while
the Angels adored him rejoicing at his triumph, and singing in his praises
their songs of joy.

And what should I say of his most glorious Ascension, on which our Lord and
Savior after his victories, made his magnificent entrance into Heaven, and
there being seated at the right hand of his Eternal Father, to whom he was
every way equal in power and virtue, all the heavenly Hosts the while humbly
inclining before his Throne, did him most prosound honor and reverence.

Now let us come to the feast of Corpus Christi, or the B. Sacrament, in which
all the others are comprised, and consequently more then all the others we are to
reverence it. And is not this continually celebrated each day, and in each
place (almost) throughout the world? do we not behold a world of Masses said,
and people daily communicating throughout al Christendom? do we not see in
every kingdom and almost every little village the B. Sacrament kept, and adored
with unspeakable reverence, where our Savior Christ is as really present as
he is in heaven, where Angels and Saints are incessantly adoring him. Wherefore
we are never to enter into any Church, or pass by any Altar where the B.
Sacrament is kept, but we are humbly on our knees to reverence it. And happy
are those, who perform this devotion not perfunctoriously, or for custom, as
many do; but with gust of devotion and from their hearts, relishing the sweetness
of the exercise they do; perhaps they may deliver some soul out of Purgatory
by it; (with such devotion it may be done): which arriving unto heaven, will
there become perpetual intercessors for them to Alm. God; than which a greater
benefitt cannot be imagined.

But alas, (I cannot speak it without tears) we see Christians the while
scarce vouchsafe to uncover their head or bend a knee before this B.
Sacrament, so vnreuerent and weak they are in their faith of it; Impudent and
irreligious as they are, not to know how this mystery surpasses al discourse
and al humane capacity, and that faith here is all the light we have. Let faith
Commend to us what we can neither see nor comprehend, says the holy Church in
one of its Hymns, and in another place: Ad firmandum Cor sincerum, sola fides
sufficit: For to Confirm a heart sincere; only faith sufficient were. And yet
how many clear testimonies have we had of the verity of this by evident
miracle: sometimes it has appeared in the form of a little child in the
Priests hands at the Elevation: some times the very beasts themselves (less
beasts then some men therein) have acknowledged their Lord and Creator in it:
as witness those Miracles which I shall here recount.

Al Paris in the year. 1258. a certain Priest saying Mass in a Chapel
adjoining to the Palace, as he elevated the sacred Host, a little child of
incredible beauty appeared in the place of it; Which Miracle being reported to
S. Lewis King of France; and some soliciting him to go and see it amongst the
rest, he made answer worthy of so pious a Prince; Let those go who doubt of
the reality of his being there (says it); for my part I behold him daily with
the eyes of faith.

The other Miracle happened at Toulouse in France, recorded in the Chronicles
of the Minims, as also by Surius and diverse others, and it is this: S. Anthony
of Padua being there, had a fearce dispute one day with an obstinat heretic,
denying the reality of our Saviors body in the B. Sacrament, who being
vanquished by the reasons of the Saints, Yet not willing to Confess it; said
unto him; What need al these words and disputations by which although by
Sophismes I Confess I am overcome, yet my reason remains vn-conuinced: If
then you will do any good with me, let me see a miracle in confirmation of what
you say, and I promise you I will turn to your opiniion; the Saint accepted of
the condition, and confident that the Author of the verity would not be
wanting to the confimation thereof, he bid the Heretic (to convince him the
more evidently) name himself what miracle he desired should be done; and he
answered him, he had a mule at home, which he would keep fasting three whole
days, and then procure him in the public market place, where let one of your
Priests be (said he) with your God in the Sacrament, and if the mule refuse to
eat of the oats I shall offer him, to adore him there, I will promise you I will
be ready to adore him also; This was done, and at the fame of this, there being
a mighty confluence of people from al parts to behold what the issue of it
would be; The day assigned being come, and al things ordered as was agreed
upon, the mule at sight of the oats even wild with famine running toward
them, and having taken some of them in his mouth, was in this manner coniured
by the Saint with the Blessed Sacrament in his hand: In the name of God (said
he) whom I although unworthy hold here betwixt my hands, I command thee to
leave that provinder, and come presently hither to adore and reverence him:
When behold a most stupendous miracle, the beast not only forbore to eat any
more, but even let fall out of his mouth that prouinder it had, and ran
presently bowing down the head, and on his knees adored the holy and blessed
Sacrament, to the unspeakable joy and alacrity of all the Catholics, the
Heretics confusion, and the conversion of the man.

Now Friday being the day dedicated to the memory of our Savior in particular
by reason of his death and passion; I would advise the devout Christian,
besides his ordinary devotions in honor of his five precious wounds to make
five reuerences, which can not but be very meritorious and acceptable to the
Majesty of Alm. God.

Of the Feasts of Saints. CHAP. X.
HAVING spoken of the adoration of our B. Savior, and his holy Mother, it will
not be out of the way of my purpose, to say somewhat also of the adoration of
Saints, since the holy Church celebrates them for no other end but to incite us
unto their reverence. This article of faith is confirmed and ratified by many
Councels, and lastly by the Council of Trent in the 25. Section, where Angels
and Saints are declared honorable with the reverence of Dulia proper and
appropriated unto them.

On the days then when any Saints are to be honored; especialy the more
principally sort of them, we are to do it with the foresaid reuere^ces. On
simple feasts and those of lesser obligation, it may suffice before we go to
bed, to incline only once or twice in their reverence; and when it is the feast
of those to whom we have any particular devotion, or whom we have chosen for
Patron or Advocate, we ought with more particular Adoratio^s to honor them
more or less according to the devotion and affection of every one.

Let al those then who desire with due reverence to honor those Saints, to
whom they are devoted, accustom themselves before they go to bed, to make
profound reverence unto them, imagining the while them really present, and
beholding what they do; for so, although corporally they be not there, yet
spiritually they are, and both well know and understand what is done in their
honor there, and have a particular care and protection of those that are
devoted unto them, perpetually procuring for them favors and assistances from
Alm. God; and this verity is Orthodox, confirmed and approved by many Councels,
and holy Doctors.

Now for the Saints Founders of Religious Orders, which by excellence are
called Patriarcks, because as Abraham (for example) was styled by that name for
that so many people descended from him; so from them so many Religious are
propagated in the Church: Of this sort is S. Benet, S. Augustine, S. Francis,
and S. Dominick, and of later-yeares S. Ignatius, etc. Al which are to be had
in highest veneration by those of their holy Orders, not only on the particular
days when their feasts are honored; but every day of the year besides; and
that Religious man who desires to augment in him the devotion: he has to the
Founder of his Order, should do well, to assign a particular day of the week
for honoring him, and that Wednesday in particular, as the most convenient for
this effect; when with some extraordinary devotion of fasting, praying,
reuere^cing him, and the like, he is to procure to honor him more particularly
and referr unto that end al which he does that day, which finally has
reference al unto the honor of our Savior Christ, and to employ some hours
of the day in the meditation of the particular virtues of that Blessed Saint.

It is the general doctrine of the learned, that the Founder of each Religious
Order has a particular care not only of the Order in general, but also of each
Religious in particular (more or less according as their merits are) and that
they assidually defend them, strengthening their forces, and weakening the
enemies who oppugn and fight against them. Of which great privilege and
prerogative Brother Leo in particular had an excellent revelation, vision of
holy S. Francis, which I will here recount.

S. Francis being happily departed unto rest, having rendered his body to the
earth and his soul to heaven, Brother Leo one of his most affectionat
disciples bearing impatiently the absence of one whom he loved so dearly well,
prayed instantly unto Alm. God to make him so happy, that once more in this
life he might enjoy the happy aspect again of his beloved Master, and
iterating his petition both earnestly and often; it pleased Alm. God; that one
day he being retired into a solitary place, he beheld S. Francis appearing unto
him in a strange mysterious shape al shining with glorious light, but for the
rest winged with golden wings and tallonted both hands and feet with Eagles
claws; The Brother transported with joy al sight of him, was running to
embrace and kiss his hands and feet, but espying in what strange equipage
they were, he al amazed demanded of the Saint, the reason why he appeared in
that sort: the Saint answered again, understand these are no other then marks
of the affection I bear my Order and the Religious thereof; and these do
signify, that amongst all the other rich prerogatives his divine Majesty has
honored me withal since my arriving into heaven, one is the authority and
power to vindicat my Religious from their necessities, and defend them from any
adversity that presses them, as often as with confidence they invoke my aid;
and these wings and tallons now I have assumed, to signify my readiness and
promptitud in succouring mine, and the force and violence with which I oppugn
al those who iniure them.

Good reason then have the Children of this great Pattiarcke to rejoice on
earth, for having so powerful a protector of him in heaven, so loving a father,
and so careful an Advocate; I would advise them to be assidual in honoring him
with those reuerences of which we have spoken; and particulary to salute him
every day with five times bowing their knees unto the ground in honor of the
five wounds so miraculously impressed upon him while he lived, rejoicing and
congratulating with him for so high and so sublime a dignity; It being no
doubt one of the most acceptable devotions we can exhibit unto him now he is in
heaven.

Of the Adoration of the Angels. CHAP. XI.
AND if we be obliged to honor the B. Saints with that due reverence
appropriated their worship, as we have amply proved in the precedent Chapters;
with far more reason are we to honor the holy Angels, as the noblest in
substance of al created things, and representing most lively their Creatours
unlimited power and magnificence. And although it be true, that both men and
Angels are both Creatures of Alm. God, and works of that sovereign Artificer;
that they are either framed according to his Image, and by the faculties of
their memory, understanding, and their will, capable of his grace and of being
participant of his glory and eternal felicity; and that many circumstances
there are, which equal Man with Angels; yea and in consideration of the
Hypostatical union, and the Mother of our Savior Christ, it may pretend some
pre-eminence above them also. Yet if we weigh their natures, and balance them
equally one against the other no doubt but we shall find the one far exceeding
the other; and as lead can never arrive to the excellency of silver, nor silver
of gold: no more can a body any way equal in excellency a soul, nor the soul
of man naturally speaking, the most inferior Angel that is in heaven. Unto
which our B. Savior infallibly alluded when he said: Verily I say unto you,
amongst the sons of men has not been borne a greater then John Baptist;
nevertheless the least in the Kingdom of heaven is far greater then he.

But now before we wade any further into this matter, we are to understand,
that the word Adoration is a notion general to good Angels and men. In
conformity, to which we find it in holy Scripture indifferently used for
either; as where it is said that the Israelits adored both their king and God;
they bowed down, says he, and adored God, and afterward their King. So the
Children of Israel adored their brother Joseph then Governor of Egypt; and
after his brothers had adored him, etc. For which reason, the Doctors both
ancient and modern have distinguished it into three several species of
Adoration; Latria, Dulia, and Hyperdulia; the first being exhibited only unto
God himself, as a souueraine kind of adoration, only fitted to the sovereign
power he has; with the second we honor Saints and Angels; And as for the
third, it appertains to the B. Virgin alone, and unto her who surpasses in
excellence both Angels and al rest of Saints besides; and of this in the
precedent Chapters we have discours't at large.

In brief then we establish this conclusion: we are to adore Angels and men
deserving it; and this is an Article of faith (according to Suares) defined by
Pope Felix the first of that name in the Council at Rome, the 7. th. Synod; And
S. Augustine speaking of the B. Apostle S. Peter says: An infinite number of
the believers adored the B. Fisher Peter. And in another place: Men merit
(says he) to be respected and honored, and to say more, adored. Conformable
unto which verity we find in the holy scriptures many men to have adored the
Angels; as Abraham in particular three, and Lot his brother two. So Joshua the
famous Captain of the Israelits adored one, who appeared to him in the likeness
of a man; he'fel prostrate on the ground, and adored him.

Seeing then we really owe them this honor, let us endeavor to discharge the
debt, in honoring them with such frequent genuflexions, as our own devotions
shall incline us to, as the most excellent Creatures of heaven, full of grace and
glory and participant of the divine nature.

And amongst all the motives to incite us to it, me thinks one of the most
principal should be, the sublime privileges they are endowed withal in
heaven. For if we consider their lives, we find them to be incorruptible and
immortal: of their nature and condition, they have no body, and consequently
are above al its necessities, and are superior to al those miseries and
afflictions to which we are subject here. If we cast our eyes on the agility
and promptitud with which they operat, we shall see nothing in this universe to
equal them, and even the heavens themselves come short of them, whose velocity
we so much admire. But what should we say of the capacity excellency of their
understanding, that comprehend perpetually without discourse, and from the
first instant of their Creations had a perfect knowledge of al natural things?
What of the constancy and efficacy of their Will, wherewith they will earnestly,
what soever they desire, and are irreuocable in all that they intend? what of
the tenacity of their memory, which never forgetts what it has stored once?
lastly what of their so great and unmeasurable power, that one Angel only in a
night slew one hundred eighty five thousand of the Assyrians? and which is
more, that one only can turn with an incredible facility the primum Mobile,
in comparison of which all this great machin of earth and water is but like a
little point: and that with so even and regular a motion, that in so many
thousand years was never observed the least disorder or deuiation. And to
omit nothing that may conferr unto their honor, I will here declare the
several orders of them and numbers which they contain.

In the first Hierarchy then: which is that which receives immediately the
splendors and illustrations from Alm. God, there are three Quiers or Orders, to
wit, the Seraphins, Cherubins, and Thrones: of which the Seraphins in seruor
of charity excel the rest, the Cherubins in plenitud of knowledge, and the
Thrones in seeing farthest into God the causes and origins of his divine
effects. In the second Hierarchy are likewise three other Quiers or Orders to
wit, Dominations, Virtues, and Powers; In the third, three others, to wit,
Principalityes, Archangels, and Angels. For we must understand, though this
name of Angel be common to al, yet in a more particular manner, to those of the
third quire, it properly signifying a messinger, and so is rather a name of
Office then nature, which because they are more ordinarily delegated to that
sunction then the rest, has a more particular reference unto them.

Notwithstanding we must observe, that S. Paul speaking of the superior Quires
of them says: that they are ministers of God, employed for those who are to
participat of his inheritance: which words of his S. Denis the Areopagite his
disciple, S. Gregory, S. John Damascene, and S. Thomas interpret thus: not that
he means the first Quire of them are employed immediately with men; but the
second receive their intelligence from them; the third of them and of what they
are to do. Yet S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Cyprian S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine,
and many other Doctors, are of opinion, that although ordinarily they are not
employed about the affairs of men, as the inferior are, Yet notwithstanding
when any important business concerning them is to be done, Alm. God sometimes
imployeth them: as a Seraphin to purity the Prophet Isays lips; the Archangel
Raphael to accompany young Tobias on his way; the Archangel Gabriel to Annuntiat
to the B. Virgin the divine mystery of our Saviors Conception; and lastly, S.
Michael in a particular manner to have a care and protection of the Church,

Now if the division of their quires and Orders be so admirable and great, far
more admirable and great is the number of them, which none can truly tell but
Alm. God himself, although many have given a guess thereat. Certain it is,
that if God for the Conueniency thereof has furnished this inferior world
with such infinite diversity of creatures corporal, much more abundantly would
he store the superior world with creatures immaterial and spiritual, invisible
and incorruptible, such as the Angels are.

And for their Number, I leave you to conjecture it, from this Consideration
how this world in comparison of that, is no more than the Center point is in
respect of an infinite Circonference and consequently how many Inhabitants must
go more to that then this. And so Job speaking of them says: There is a
multitud of his soldiers: And if the Majesty of a King on earth, is declared
most in the number of those that serve and fight for him, as the Holy Ghost in
express terms affirms: The dignity of a king Consists in the multitud of his
people, and in the small number of them the Princes shame. We must needs
conclude then to be infinite, in respect of the Majesty of Alm. God. Touching
their number in particular, I will here declare what Albertus Magnus amongst
other Doctors has left written of them. She says then, that there are nine
Quires of Angels, and that every quire has its Legions, that each. Legion of
them co^taines. 6666. and that there are, as many Legions in every Quire as
there are Angels in a Legion. Others say, there are ten times more in the
second Quire then in the first in the third then in the second, and so with
proportion to the highest Quire. So as there being, for example, in the Quire
of Angels four and forty millions, four hundred thirty five thousand, five
hundred fifty six Angels, that of Archangels has ten times as many; that of
the Principalities as far in number exceeds them, etc. Who is not ready to
issue out of himself, with admiration of such infinite multitud exalted by Alm.
God for his service and our benefit? and who entering into himself again, can
comprehend with what profound reverence they serve his divine Majesty of which
Job speaking says: Those who move the heavens, bow down and lie prostrate
before him, and the Pillars of heaven tremble at his sight. So the Royal
Prophet speaking of their readiness and promptitud in executing his commands,
says of them: And ye Angels praise our Lord, who are so powerful in
performing of his will, and obey so faithfully the voice of his commands. And
this is the first reason, that should incite us to render them service and
reverence.

The second yet is more forcible, and that is, our many obligations to them for
their many good Offices don us perpetually, which although it be at the
appointment of Alm. God, and they in their performance are but his Ministers;
yet they being derived unto us by them, from the sovereign fountain from
whence al our good proceeds, we are to receive them from them most gratefully,
and with a thankful acknowledgement. I will not enlarge this Chapter to sum
them up, but remit the Reader to the holy Scripture, where they shall find them
recorded both very particularly and frequently. Now let us come to the exercise
of this devotion. To render them then that honor which is due to the
abundance and sublimity of Glory which they have, in being of so near access
to God the fountain of it al, and participating by it of his divine nature; we
are (to do well) for to retire our selves, and there recollecting us in the
interior of our soul, (excluding al earthly cogitations) to be the whilst the
more in heaven, we are to imagine their Orders and array, their beauty,
sublimity, riches, splendor, and in fine their glory and admirable perfection,
and thus discourse within our selves: this Quire then the rest, is more
sublime, this more specious, this fuller of merit and luster, with a thousand
other considerations on a subject of such great worth and amplitud. Then we are
to salute them troup after troup, with a comportment full of reverence and
respect, making the longer stay, where our devotions shall detain us longest,
either amongst the Seraphins, Cherubins, etc. Congratulating with them their
great splendours and prerogatives; and afterward prostrating our selves before
the throne of God, we are to praise and render him humble thanks for creating
creatures so perfect and excellent for his service and the honor of his Court.

The like manner of proceeding we may use in honoring the Saints, as
Patriarcks Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. Virgins, and the like,
especially those which we are most devoted unto, addressing us to them, by the
foresaid acts of congratulation, and adoring them, and taking delight to
maintain discourse with them in our hearts, communicating with them our
affairs and necessities, and instantly commending our selves to their prayers:
seeing (according as the Doctors affirm) they behold in God, and know al our
necessities, our most secret wishes, and the affections of our hearts, and all the reuerences and actions we do in honoring them.

Besides, I think it fit, and would counsel it to the zealous Catholic, who
desires to go on, in honoring these B. spirits; to prescribe to himself a
certain number in reuerencing them; as that of Nine in honor of the nine
Quires of them, etc. But because the holy Church makes reverent mention of
three of them in particular, S. Michael, S. Gabriel, and S. Raphael; I would
consel to begin with them: As first, with S. Michael, who is Prince of all the
rest, seeing as Laurentius Iustinianus says, although we are to honor all the
soldiers of heaven, yet their General deserves more peculiar reverence, for
the greatness and highness of his qualityes and prerogatives, his invincible
force, the singular love which his sovereign Emperor bears him, and finally
for his fidelity to his service and admirable valor; of which he gave so rare
proofs in that great battle he fought against the Infernal enemy and al his
follows. And certainly with good cause does the holy Church so reverence him,
acknowledging him for her protector, and one that receaues into his patronage
al departed souls that die in grace and the favor of God almighty. Next S.
Gabriel, as he that had that happy embassage committed to his charge of
Annunciating to the B. Virgin the Incarnation of the son of God. Thirdly, S.
Raphael the guide and defender of Pilgrims in this life, as he did by the young
Tobias in all his pilgrimage.

If thou be then desirous to perform these devotions, and have retired they
self to perform them the better, putting thy self in their prefence (as it
were) who really behold at al times what we do; thou art twelve times to bow
down and do reverence honoring by the first Adoration S. Michael, General of
the host of heaven; by the second, S. Gabriel, who brought the Embassage of our
salvation; by the third, S. Raphael, and by the rest in their several Orders
the nine Quires of Angels, etc.

For the better performance thereof, I will here set down a most easy method
(for all sorts of people,) of this devotion.

The practicing of honoring and reuerencing the Angels: saying as follows.
I HONOR and reverence you, O Glorious Saint Michael, chief of all the Angels.

I honor and reverence you Blessed S. Gabriel, for delivering that so grateful
Embassage to the B. Virgin.

I honor and reverence you, affable S. Raphael, for rendering to the young
Tobias so clear a testimony of Alm. Gods ineffable goodness to man.

I honor and reverence you most ardent Seraphins, who burn continually in the
flames of the love of God.

I honor and reverence you most holy Cherubins, who in clear knowledge and
plenitud of the science of God surpass al other Angels.

I honor and reverence you most happy Thrones, seeing in you the eternal
Majesty does repose, and by you our fowls are disposed to peace and
tranquillity.

I honor and reverence you most noble Dominations, who by the great authority
bestowed on you by Alm. God, rule al other spirits of inferior rank.

I honor and reverence you most powerful Virtues, who are deputed by the
sovereign King of heaven to the regency and government of all the soldiers in
heaven.

I honor and reverence you mostvaliant Powers, who by your might repress the
insolency of the powers of hell, and oppose your selves to all the machinations
and designs they have upon us continually.

I honor and reverence you invincible Archangels, to whom is given the
protection and care of people, and Kingdoms, and to reveal unto them for
their good most sublime mysteries.

I honor and reverence you likewise most humble Angels, who disdain not to
co^uerse with men, and undertake their patronage and protection.

But if any be so defective of memory, as not to be able to retain by heart
what is before set down, It will suffice only to say: I honor and reverence
you O glorious S. Michael; I honor and reverence you O glorious S. Gabriel;
and so of all the rest, only adding the simple names of Seraphin, Cherubin,
Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Powers, Principalityes, etc. So likewise they
may, more to facilitat the memory, begin with the lower Quires, and so by
degrees ascend to those more high. And if there be any yet so wanting memory
that they cannot remember this, it may suffice they make nine reuerences, with
intention to honor each Quire of Angels by it, without pronouncing any word at
al, but only imagining with themselves; now I honor the first Quire, now the
second, and now the third, etc.

Now it rests, that we assign one day of the week for the exercise of this
Devotion; and what more proper the^ that the Church has appointed to honor
the B. Angels on? to wit, the Tewsday: Let that then be it, and on that day
let us most particularly honor them, those that al Priests saying Mass of the
Angels for them, those of the laity devoutly hearing it, etc.

And because Psalmody is exceeding grateful to them, (:if it be accompanied
with due attention of spirit;) those who are employed in that laudable
exercise, are to endeavor to comport themselves with all due reverence and
devotion; imagining themselves in presence of the Angels while they are
performing it: I will sing Psalms in the presence of Angels, I will adore in his
holy Temple, and praise his holy name. And to this accords well that which we
read of S. Bernard in the hystory of the illustrious men of the Cistercians,
how he saw the B. Angels, while Te deum was sung, to go from one Quire to
another, encouraging the Religious to sing it with fervor and devotion:
Another time he saw them busily writing down what the Religious pronounced,
those in golden better which were pronounced with force of spirit and from the
heart, those in silver which were uttered with attention but not such fervor as
the former were; those in ink, which proceeded from them with a little
admixture of distraction; and those finally in puddle-water, which were
pronounced without al sense of devotion. Moved then, by this example, and
knowing that the B. Angels are assistant at our devotions, let us perform them
with such a spirit, not only worthy of the Oratory that we are in, but also of
the Company that is there. Happy and thrice happy are they who shall so honor
them, since they shall be rewarded for it, not only by the Angels intercessions
in heaven continually for them; but also by their assidual assistance of them
here, from al dangers both of bodily and ghostly enemies, til at last receiving
us at the honor of our deaths, they take us out of this transitory and
miserable life, and tranfferr us to a happy and eternal on.

Of the honor and reverence we owe unto our Angel Guardian. CHAP. XII.
AND who sees not, how reasonable it is, in lieu of so many benefits we receive
from them, to honor and reverence the B. Angels for it; and in particular our
Angel Guardian, who has the care and protection of us committed to his charge.
For certain it is, and auerred by all learned men, that (excepting our B.
Savior) each man has his peculiar Angel attending still on him: whence we may
perceive, how great is the goodness and charity of Alm. God toward man; who (we
being such contemptible creatures as we are) has not only been contented to
create the Elements for our service, mixed bodies for our use, and finally al
corporal creatures else; but also has encharged the holy Angels with our
protection and defense, creatures so excellent, so sublime in glory, wisdom,
and power, to be our instructours in virtue, and our guides to truth.

But if goodness be to be admired in bestowing them upon us; no less admirable
is his power in creating them in such innumerable multituds, that the very
lowest Quire of them is sufficient to furnish with Angels guardia^s, not only
all the men that are, but all that have been or shall be as long as the world shall
last: so according to the probable conjecture of the learned, there being a
matter now of some million million of souls in all the world, not only every
one of them has an Angel guardian, but one so particularly unto himself, as he
was never Guardian to any one before, nor ever shall be to any after him; God
whenever he creates a soul, appointing a pecular Guardian that never in that
office was employed before. And who can imagine then, how many millions of
millions there must be to serve for so many millions of men, that have been and
shall be until the general Judgment day? And this opinion is the more probable,
not only because of Gods omnipote^ce which is more illustrated thereby, but
also of a certain congruency on the Angels part, who if they should not
suffice in number to afford each one a Guardian, it would follow that the
number of men would exceed that of them, which would argue a deficiencie in
them, and take from that proportion by which it is supposed, that as the
Archangels exceed the Angels ten to one, etc. so there should be ten times more
of Angels then of men,

The necessity we stand in of their caelestial aid, is great and urgent; first
because our souls are spiritual, and consequently spirits can best see their
necessityes next because we our selves are weak and ignorant of the force and
imagination of the Enemy to ensnare and overcome us were it not for them; Who
watching continually by us observe al their ways, and carefully meet them
with prevention.

But here some may object, how can they be continually by us when our Savior
says, they continually behold the face of Alm. God, in whose vision consists
their cheisest beatitud: Angeli eorum semper vident faciem Patris mei qui in
caelis est. To this I answer, with S. Gregory, that it is true the Angels are
still in heaven, even when corporally they are employed els-where; else we could
not reconcile that other place of Scripture with this, where it is said; that
God imployes them on his Embassages here on earth; so as while in contemplation
of the heavenly essence they are still in heaven, we must grant them really the
while to be on earth.

And to incite in us a greater devotion toward them, I will endeavor to sum
up the many good offices they daily do us; which although infinite in
themselves, may yet be reduced to three heads. The first is; they deliver us
from many evident dangers, by their careful custody of us, which the holy
Prophet testifies where he says: He has given his Angels charge of thee, to
look to thee in all thy ways, and bear thee in their hands least thou
should dash thy foot against a stone. And here let each one Call to mind,
how many-fold dangers they have escaped Here, one the falling of a house upon
his head, which if he had not suddenly changed his mind, he had gone just under
it as it did fall; and to whom can he attribute this change of mind, but to his
Angel Guardian: Another, being prepared to go some voyage puts it off, he
knows not why, and after wards understands that if he had gone, he had fallen
into the hands of Pirates or of thieves, and this was the work of his good
Angel also; with a hundred others the like. Which the Patriarch Jacob
acknowledged to come from his Angel keeper, when blessing the children of his
son Joseph he said: The Angel who has preserved me from al evil, bless
these children, etc. And so did Judith returning victorious from Holofernes
camp. So it has seemed good unto our Lord (said she) whose Angel has guarded
me, in going forth, in remaining there, and in returning back.

And though the B. Angels care extends it-selfe as well unto the bad as to the
good, yet not withstanding they more specially impart their aid unto the just;
as the Psalmist testifies where he says: Qui habitat in adiutorio Altissimi,
etc. Who dwells in the aid of the Highest, remaynes in the protection of the
God of heaven: And there is no doubt, but God has a most particular care of
the just and virtuous, and consequently commends them in a most dear manner
unto their Angels Guardians; as may be gathered out of that passage of holy
Scripture: He has given his Angels charge of you, etc. As if he would say,
those who are Gods faithful servants, may go securely in the midst of dangers,
for God has given the charge unto his Angels to have especial care of them.
Whether they sleep, or wake, they need not fear; for being in this particular
protection of God and their Angel Guardian, it may be said unto them: They may
walk on the Aspick and the Basiliske, and tread the Lion and Dragon under
their feet. What a wonderful privilege is this? to be able to contemn the
Aspick and Basiliske, which even kills with its sight, and the Lion and Dragon
the most formidable of al other beasts? and who restraynes the killing looks
of the one, or cohibits the others fieccenes, but only our Angel Guardian?

The second benefit which we receive from them, is the wholesome Counsel and
advice, which they are still infusing into our minds. And of this we have a
clear example in the Angel that accompanied Tobias on his way, and gave him
such wise and prudent instruction, in point of his marriage, how he should
comport himself with his new spouse for to escape the fate which had sent so
many of her husbands unto death: as namely, that he was to begin his marriage
(quite contrary to the custom now a days) with watchings, prayers, and
devotion. In the like manner an Angel Guardian is continually suggesting
wholesome counsels unto us, now deterring us from evil, now inciting us to good,
which without their incitement we should never do: now proposing to us the
example of our Savior Christ before our eyes, now of some other Saint, for to
awake our Imitation; then inflaming our wills to embrace the occasion of
imitatating them; lastly, they go somtymes spurring us on by the consideration
of the mercy of Alm. God; and now refrayning us again by that of his justice
and severity; so ever directing even our course betwixt heaven and hell, that
neither the consideration of the one extol us too much, nor the other too much
depresse us.

And tell me now, have you never experienced, when you were about to committ any
grievous crime, a remorse of Conscience, and certain shrinkings back, and
bidding us forbear? and what should this be; but our Angel Guardian, appointed
to this office by Alm. God? Besides, how oftentimes may we imagine God offended
with our crimes, to have been in mind to have plucked us from the earth, like
unfruitful trees, and thrown into the fire of Eternal hell, had it not been for
their interceding for us? like him who said unto the man in the parable, being
minded to pluck up his figgtree, which for three years he had observed never
to have borne fruit that he should have, patience with it another year, and
after he had cultiuated it, if it bore not fruit he should do his pleasure
with it; The Doctors in explicating this passage say: We are these unfruitful
trees, Alm. God the Lord of the Orchard, and our Angel Guardian he that
intercedes and undertakes for us: Imagine then how much we contristat him if we
be wanting unto his promises and to the hopes which he conceiues of us

The third and last benefit for which we are liable to our Angel Guardian is,
that he accompanies us perpetually from the hour of our birth to the final
period of our lives, and never abandons us even when we are abandoned by every
one besides; and such a friend we have of him, as the world has none; For
behold a beauteous Virgin in the flower of her years and pride of her beauty,
how many, servants she has that make court to her, and with what obsequiousnes
they observe her, til that flower fading, and the winter of her years and
decays of age fallen on her beauty once, they fall of as fast, and she is left
only to solitud and neglect, who was before the only one frequented, and to
whom al respects were paid. Whereas our good Angel is so constant a friend of
ours, as no change of fortune qualifyes, or time makes us go less with him,
but he is ever the same, and never alters in love unto us, even when he sees us
hated of God and man; and the reason of this, is, because he knows not as yet
the final reprobation of him whom he has in charge, otherwise he would not
have such care of wicked men, as most certain it he has.

Another benefit for which we stand infinitely obliged unto the^ is, that they
carefully present our Petitions unto Alm. God our alms, watchings, and al our
good works we do; which by those words of the Angel to Tobias is rendered
evident: When thou prayedst with tears, and buriedst the dead, when thou did
leave thy repast, and did conceal the dead by day in thy house; and did
bury them by night, I offered thy prayer unto our Lord. And this by that
mystical ladder of Jacob was understood, where the Angels were seen ascending
and descending, betwixt heaven and earth, to signify the continual commerce
they have with either for our avayle, not by local motion, but by a far more
ready way. Sometimes one Angel presents to Alm. God the generous victory of
this man over his temptations; another says, behold, O Lord, the profitable
use which this soul makes of that precious blood you shed for it upon Mount
Caluary, and of al those other graces which with so liberal a hand you have
bestowed on it; A third cries out, Good Lord receive this charitable persons
alms bestowed upon you in the person of the poor, or these devout tears shed
only out of an affectionat love of you; Another finally present the oblation of
this good Religious person in wholly renouncing al worldly commodityes, or this
Priests piety and zeal, in offering up the holy sacrifice of the Mass, or
meditating our Saviors Passion; and this the Canon of the Mass confirms
saying: Iube haec perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime Altar tuum
in conspectu diuinae maiestatis tuae: Command this to be carried by the hand of
your holy Angel to your sublime Altar in the fight of your divine Majesty, etc.

And as they are assistant to us during our lives, so at our deaths are they
much more powerfully defending us from all the assaults of the Infernal Enemy;
as testifies B. Aloysius Gonzaga of the Society of Jesus, in that his devout
meditation of our Angel Guardian where he says, that our Angel Custos at the
time of our death is most diligent in assisting us against the Enemy,
preserving us chiefly from those two sins which are most incident to men in
that article of time, Infidelity and despair, to the end that making here a
happy end they may repair with them to heaven, unto their everlasting
habitation; And in prosecuting his discourse he says, that as soon as the
soul once is free from the captivity of the body, its Angel presently conducts
it to the Tribunal of Alm. God, animating and encouraging it on the way, to put
its chiefest confidence in the merits of the sacred blood of our Savior
Christ; and if it chance (the better to be purified from its sins) to be
adjudged unto the purging flames, he visits it often there, comforts it, brings
it the suffrage and succor of those prayers and merits which are offered for it
in the other world, and encourages in midst of its suffrances, with the hope
it can not be long in suffering; and in fine when the time is expired, he
conducts it out, and al bright and purified leads it unto heaven, and in the
twinkling of an eye, presents it unto Alm: God to receive from him the Crown
of eternal beatitud, prepared from al eternity for those, who here sighe after
it in this vale of tears. O happy and a thousand times happy is that soul,
which having been faithful to its Creator, and pliant to his hand to be ledd
whither soever his least motion carried it, in following his good Angel for
guide leaving the world full of the virtue of his example arriues at last unto
that Kingdom of eternal felicity, where with God and his Saints it shall for
ever reign.

But now touching the practice of this particular devotion to our Angel
Guardian; first being assured that we are committed to his Regencie, and that
so noble and excellent a creature, as all the eloquence of the world rather
diminishes then add to its co^mendations, vouchsafes to keep us perpetual
company, and defends us from al evil, with his careful watchings and his
comfortable advise, we are on our parts to endeavor a requital: First, by
comporting our selves with all devotion and due respect unto his presence and
next honoring him with all competent honor. Let us then consider if we stood
perpetually in the sight of some earthly Prince or Monarke; how careful we
should be so to compose our outward behavior, as might render us most grateful
in his sight; and with how much more care and diligence ought we in the
presence of our Angel Guardian to comport our selves? Hear what S. Bernard
says in explication of these words: For he has given his Angels charge over
thee to guard thee in all thy ways, etc. O mortal man, says he, what
reverence, what devotion and confidence art thou to conceive in thy breast from
these comfortable words of the Royal Prophet; reverence in standing in presence
of thy Angel, devotion for his love of thee, and confidence for his care. Be
therefore vigilant never to exceed the bonds of thy respect while these holy
spirits are always in thy sight by the appointment of Alm. God himself
attending them thy preservation in all thy ways, and wheresoever thou art,
either in private or public, be always careful never to commit that indecency
before him, which before me thou would not do. Thus S. Bernard in his
devout and pious manner.

Secondly, we are to honor them with these reuerences we have formerly treated
of, which may be best performed when into private we have retired our selves;
especially before we retire our selves to rest with a profound inclination we
are to say, Angele Dei, qni Custos es mei, etc. beseeching him to keep us in
our sleep from the assalts of the Enemy, that ever watches to harm and
mischief us; so when we awake, we are to commend our selves unto them that day
following, and whatsoever business we are to undertake, that it may sort a
wished conclusion; and we should do well often to commend unto them in some
vocal manner a devout conception of our heart in our occurrant necessityes,
beseeching them to assist us in the manage of this or that particular affair.

This devout custom had one Alexander Luzaqua an Italian Gentleman of a most
holy and virtuous life; that as often as he saluted any man, he mentally
intended that reverence unto his Angel Guardian whom he saluted; and an
excellent consideration it was, to think a celestial spirit, more worthy the
salutation then an earthly worm. Let us imitate this devotion, and in saluting
any say thus in our minds I offer this reverence to the Angel Guardian that
attends upon him or he whom I salute. And most happy it will be for us if we do
so, for by this means we shall indeare our selves in the love and care of those
B. spirits, who can do more for our real advancement and good, then all the
world besides.

Jn What manner We are to proceed in the exercise of these Adorations, Worthily
to honor the Mother of Alm. God. CHAP. XIII.
WE being composed of two parts, the superior and inferior, of body and
soul by the singular providence and goodness of Alm. God, that we might honor
him with both, both here and in the world to come; a great part of our corporal
honor Consists in these fore said Adorations, which not only the Saints have
practiced, but even our B. Savior himself, we often read how he bowed of whom
his knees unto his eternal father, and prostrated on the ground; as namely the
night preceding his Passion, when according to the Evangelist S. Luke: He
kneeled and fell prostrated on his face. And. SS. Matthew and Mark; he
prostrated on the ground: by which words we may gather, how our Savior
reverenced his eternal Father in spiritu and veritate, in spirit and verity,
with each part both of body and soul.

Let the devout Christian then desirous to render honor to the B. Virgin,
accompany his interior devotion of the soul, with the exterior of the body;
and first, when thou art retired in secret, for so, when thou would Pray,
enter into thy chamber, says the holy Scripture; thou art to begin with this
Consideration, how excellent she is, whom thou art to reverence, and the
excellency of the reverence thou exhibit'st to her, which the whole Court of
heaven take for highest honor to be employed in. And touching the exllency of
her, thou art to consider her large portion of glory above all the other
Saints, and represent her to the eyes of thy mind, Inthroned in a most glorious
manner above all the rest, as becomes the sovereign Empress of them al; al full
of glory and of Majesty, encompassed round about with innumerable Saints and
Angels perpetually making Court to her, and honoring her with humble
reuerences; amongst whom thou art to imagine they self, and making thy first
approches of adoring her, without uttering any word, but only fixing thy mind
upon her excellent beauty and Majesty, procuring to begett in thy mind the
whilst frequent acts of affectionat love and complacency in so much beauty and
Majesty as thou conceiu'st to be in her, congratulating with her that her high
dignity of being Mother of God, and consequently Queen of heaven and earth;
Acts which if they be performed with due intention and devotion, it is
impossible to imagine how grateful they will be to her, and how profitable for
those who are exercised therein.

We have an example of a devout Religious woman recounted by F. Heroide
Dominican) who being afflicted with a grievous malady after much pain and
sufferance died thereof, whose soul appearing some days after to the
sub-Prioresse of the Convent said amongst other discourses; Know, Mother, that
the reward which Alm. God bestows upon the least good work of ours, is so
excessive great, as if it were putt to my choice, I would return even from the
joys of heaven unto the earth again, and suffer al my former afflictions,
only to recite one Aue Maria, that returning thence again, I might acquire a
new merit by it in heaven, and this, although I were not certain to say it
without tepidity or distraction, so that I were but in grace the while, and
free from al mortal sin. And if this holy Religious woman would have exposed
her self to such cruel pain and sufferances, only for the merit of so small an
act, how great shall their merit be, who exercise themselves in this devout
exercise of reuerencing her, being one of the greatest and most excellent
services which a Christian can render unto the Mother of God.

Hitherto we have treated of the interior co^portment of the mind during this
our actual reueencing the B. Virgin; Now let us come to the exterior of the
body. First, we are to bow the knee, in crossing our hands before our breast
with a little inclination of the head; and after having prayed in that manner,
we are to rise again, and iterat the same devotion for the second time, and so
forwards as our devotion shall instruct us; the which Adorations we likewise may
perform only with bowing one knee to the ground, joining of our hands, and
fixing of our thoughts on the Majesty of the B. Virgin the while; and if any
through infirmity find difficulty in these inclinations, they may help
themselves by leaning or the like, or only bow down their body, or make some
light inclination with the head.

Always remembering that this exterior behavior is not the chiefest thing we
are to regard, but that which is proceeding from the interior, as the words
pronounced, or by the heart or mouth the whilst, now saying: I adore you o
sacred Mother of God; and repeating it as often as we make our reuere^ces, or
else pronouncing these two words only of Aue Maria, with which the Angel Gabriel
saluted her, and in that reverent manner (it is supposed) which we here
prescribe to her devout servants to imitat: so doing we shall perform that
Angelical office too, as well as he, nay in a manner more excellent, for he
saluted her but as a humble Virgin, we as the Mother of God, and daughter of
the most holy Trinity; he in the lowly house of Nazareth, and we in the high
Court of heaven, where she sitts maiestically enthroned and crowned Queen of
the whole Universe; he finally while she was yet subject to mortality and the
incommodities it goes annex't withal, but we now when she is above it,
participant of eternal life glory and felicity. Great then is their prerogative
who salute her so, and great shall their merit be, if they do it with that due
devotion and reverence, as they ought.

Hov in the like manner We are to reverence God, as also the Saints in Heaven.
CHAP. XIV.
HAVING spoken of the Interior and Exterior reuerences, we are to honor the
Mother with all: Let us make application of them unto God himself with the
sovereign honor of Latria due to his most divine Majesty. We must then
procure to reverence him so, as these exterior devotions may proceed from the
redundancy of the Interior; to which effect be fore we put in practice the
foresaid reuerences, we are to fix our interior eyes on the Majesty of Alm.
God, confidering his immense greatness and incomprehensible perfections in which
we are infinitely to take complacence; as in his being what he is, so exceeding
good, and so exceeding great; and then we are to accompany this Interior act
of ours with most profound reuerences and inclinations, bowing even unto the
ground before that Majesty, before whose glorious Throne the Angels themselves,
adore in prosterning their faces on the ground.

And to acquit our selves the better of this devotion, we are especially every
morning when we rise, as at night when we retire to rest, most profoundly to
reverence this our Alm. Lord, and whilst we remain in that humble posture on
our knees, we are to cast the eyes of our mind with an affectionat regard on
that high and incomprehensible Majesty, so to begett interior acts of Joy and
complacency of the sovereign power he has, and sovereign goodness accompanying
it.

And this let us do, as often as we bow our knees in reuerencing Alm. God,
accompanying it still with some interior act of the love of him, an act, which
no creature in heaven and earth can truly imagine the excellency of it; being
an operation which God continually is exercising in himself, to wit of joy and
complacencie in his infinite goodness, whence does proceed the love of it which
must likewise be infinite; These acts of love then let us endeavor to stir up
in our selves, and assure our selves that the least of them is sufficient to
raise a soul to a most high degree of perfection.

As witnesses this story extracted out of the second part of the Chronicles of
the Friars Minors. A certain Religious matron beheld in vision thirty
Religious of the Convent of Paris al departing this life at once, whereof five
only were condemned to Purgatory, the rest went al immediately to heaven; and
one amongst the rest had his place assigned him amongst the Seraphins: She
being returned from her vision and astonished thereat, had recourse to the
Guardian of the Friars where she lived, and declared unto him all that she had
seen; who like a prudent man, advised her, to beseech Alm. God in continuation
of his former favor to reveal unto her the name of him who was so highly
advanced above the rest; thereby more particularly to know the truth of the
vision: she did so, and it was revealed unto her that his name was Venance;
here-vpon the Guardian dispatched an Express to Paris to inform him of those
who were lately dead in that Co^uent; whose number being given him up, he
found them exactly to agree with that of the Vision; and that this Venance was
only a simple lay Brother amongst the rest, whose Office was to have care of
the Friars habits, and mend them when they were torn; which it seems he had
executed with such charity, as he had merited by it that high place in heaven.

Now if this good Religious man, in exercising this slight and manual Office
could merit so high a degree of glory, those who are exercesed in this
Angelical devotion which we treat of, if they do it with that attention as they
ought, how far more high an one must they needs merit by it? And for our
encouragemenr, it were good to consider, how far more profitably we may be
exercised in it, then the blessed Angels whose continual employment it is: for
they with all that they can do, can never advance higher by it, an Angel can
never become an Archangel, an Archa^gel can never sit equal with the Thrones,
nor a Cherubin in fine be embraced with the fire of a Seraphin; whereas we may
not only accumulat merits so, to raise us from men to Angels, but even surpass
them themselves, and being elevated higher then Principalities and Thrones,
become even equal with the Seraphins: and by this only exercise may all this be
effected.

So likewise may we apply this devotion to the honor of Dulia proper to the
Saints, by the only turning of the minds intention, and this more particularly
on the days whereon they are honored, and their feasts are celebrated; when
besides these external reuerences we are to procure to honor them from our
hearts, by elicit acts from thence of congratulaion for their felicities, and
thanksgiving unto Alm. God for having predestined the^ from al eternity to
that high dignity to which he has promoted them, and to which they have
arrived, by so many virtuous and meritorious ways, leaving to us their
Imitation, to trace their glorious foot steps after them; That day likewise we
are to ascend in mind to the particular actions of their lives, considering the
ardent charity of this one, this others profound humility, and the like
according as their lives shall give occasion.

In conclusion, this advertisement I will give, out of that holy Cardinal
Bellarmine touching these exterior reuere^ces, to wit, that they are only to
be distinguished (whether don in the honor of Alm. God, of his B. Mother, of
Angels, or of Saints) by the internal inte^tion of the mind, and the merit and
excellency of those they are directed to. As for example, we adore and
reverence Alm. God for the immensenes of his gratnes and Maisty, for his
infinite goodness, and for being both our beginning and final end. We honor the
Saints, as those who participat of his divine grace and celestial glory; and
the B. Virgin, as Mother of Alm. God, and surpassing in excellency of title, al
Creatures both, in heaven and earth. Conformable to this, we see in holy
scripture, how Abraham with the same sort of veneration, bowed down both to
God, Angels, and men, indifferently honoring them according to their
dignities; and in this manner we are to understand the holy Scripture when it
occurrs to speak in any other passage of these venerations.

How these genuflexions may devoutly be exercised before any Image of our B.
Lady. CHAP. XV.
IT is an ancient Custom of the church, to honor Images both of our Savior,
his B. Mother, and his holy Saints, nay an article of faith from Apostolical
Tradition received, as we are taught by diverse Concels. This only is to be
noted, that while we honor them, we direct not our reuerences unto them, as
they are materially what they are of wood or stone, etc. but as they represent
them whose Images they are; it represents according to that ancient axiom; the
honor of the Image is referred to those whom it represents. And this the
Council of Trent inferts where it says: In the Images, which we honor and fall
down before, we adore Jesus Christ, and reverence his Saints. And so the 7.
Synod says; Who adore the Images, adores the sovereign king it represents:
the like we may say by the Image of the Queen of heaven; and it is confirmed
by Origin where he says: Who beholds any man's Image, (says he) may be said to
behold him whom it represents.

This verity then so Catholic, for the better performing this holy exercise we
should do well to procure some Picture both devout and fair, before which we are
to do our reuerences (although of this there be no necessity;) I say fair, for
fair objects do soonest stir up the affections of the mind; as appears by
that example of S. Bernardine, who while he was but very young, was so taken
with devotion to a certain picture of our B. Lady, more comely then the rest,
that he was never well but when he was on his knees before it; and here it was
where he laid the foundation of his sanctity, which afterward he built so high
upon, as it was an admiration to the world.

Which manner of adoring the B. Virgin in her Images, is a forcible remedy
against the temptations of our infernal Enemy; as this following example does
declare, taken out of S. John Damascen by F. Suarez of the Society of Jesus.
There was a devout Religious man (says he) accustomed to worship the Mother of
God in a certain Image of hers; who being one day fiercely assalted by the
Enemy, with a grievous temptation, as he was carefully employing al his force
for the repelling it, the devil appearing to him promised him, if he would
forbear to honor that Image, he would not only free him from that present
temptation, but never molest him with the like again. But the good Religious
man in defiance of him, fell a fresh to honor it before his face, and the devil
and temptation both vanished away.

And a great help it would be to this devotion, to imagine the B. Virgin the
while beholding us from heaven (as without al doubt she does) and taking
complacence in our honoring her; and to make the Imagination work the
liuelyer, let us frame a conceit, that if an earthly Queen should take such
delight in being honored in picture, as she should place her self where she
might behold with what alacrity and affection it were done, and bountiously
reward those whom she saw most forward in their honoring it; what concourse
would there be by all who desired to ingratiat themselves, and indeare their
services to her Majesty: and if this for an earthly Queen would be don with
such forward and greedy desire, how much more prompt and ready ought we to be,
to do it to please and gratify the Queen of heaven? which while we do,
devoutly, we may suppose her graciously regarding us, and taking notice of each
particular action, pointing us out to the Angels about her, thus such one does,
and thus such a one, therefore have a particular care of them to defend them
from their enemies, and when their souls are free from their mortal prisons,
be careful to conduct them higher unto me. Which is confirmed from this ensuing
example recounted by F. Razzi a Dominican, in his Hortulus, of a certain
Shepherds daughter axceedingly devoted to the Queen of Heaven, in so much as
seeing her picture in an old ruinous Chapel (one day while she was tending her
fathers sheep) and much greeuing to see it so neglected, she said: O B.
Virgin, were it in my power, this your Image should be in greater veneration;
but what it wants in exterior ornament, I desire my interior devotion may
supply; which desire of hers was so grateful to the Queen of Heaven, as
minding to reward her for it and her innocent life with an everlasting crown
of glory, she sent her first a sickness the forerunner of her death, and just
as that was ready to approach unto her. Two devout Religious men, the one in
vision, the other in prayer, had either of them this revelation. Concerning
her; they first saw a Procession of Virgins richly habited, al shining with
glorious light; which passing by them, another troop followed them more rich
and glorious then the former, al clothed in white, and lastly a third whose
garme^tsbeing red, in ornament and beauty far surpassed and out-shined al
those that went before; in the closing of this last train, a Queen of
incomparable Majesty appeared, infinitely exceeding all that can be imagined of
venerable and amiable; at the feet of whom those Religious men prostrating
themselves, desirous of her to be informed who she was, she thus answered them:
I am the Mother of God, and al those troops, you see marching before, are
those who have conseru'd their virginities al their life time; the first
troop, not fully resolved of their course of life, have yet died Virgins, and
received the reward thereof, the second is of those, who have consecrated their
virginities by vow unto their heavenly Spouse; and the last, who to the Crown
of virginity have added the glorious palm of Martyrdom; al which are now
attending me to a hamlet here to receive the departing soul of a poor
sheapardesse; whom for her devotion to me in mine Image, I mean to place
amongst these heavenly Quires, and reward her with the glory of an everlasting
Crown. This Revelation (it hapened) these two Religious men communicated each
to the other, when inquiring who this poor Shepardesse should be, at last they
were directed to a little cotage where lay this poor young Girl upon a padd of
straw, even ready to breathe her last, When seeing these Religious men entering
in; Good Fathers (said she) in reward of your charity I would to God I could
show you what a glorious Company is here awayting to bear my soul to rest;
and having said this, she rendered up her soul into their hands, who willingly
received it. By which example we may see, how acceptable to the B. Virgin are
our reuerencing her devoutly in her Images.

Now to the end the frequent aspect of her Images may excite us frequently to
hononr her; I would counsel every devout Catholic to adorn their chambers
with some Image of hers, or procure rather to have some portable one, which
they are never to depart withal; In imitation of S. Heduing a Duchess of
Polonia, who to honor the glorious Mother of God more frequently, would never
be without her Image in her hand; the two first fingers and thumb of whose
right hand at the opening of her Tomb some five and twenty years after her
decease were found whole and incorrupt, (all the rest of her body being wasted
unto to bone) holding betwixt them an Image of the B. Virgin so fast, as
neither when she dyed, nor then, could they take it thence.

So when in any place her sacred Image occurs unto our sight, we are devoutly
to honor it, in uncovering the head, bowing the knee, etc. According as the
ancient Chrestia^s were accustomed: the like reverence we are to do when we
hear her name pronounced; a devotion so punctually observed by the ancient
Christians, and Saints as S. Gerard Bishop of Pannonia commanded it through al
his Diocese.

And that which we said of reuerencing her name, inuites me likewise to say a
word or two of the reverence we owe to that of our Savior Christ. First, for
the name of the holy Trinity how venerable it is in the holy Church, witnesses
that verse in the conclusion of every Psalm: Gloria Patri, etc. Glory to the
Father, etc. in pronouncing of which, al rise up and do reverence, not only the
Quires on earth, but also in heaven it-selfe; as is manifest by that wondrous
example recounted by Petrus Damianus. There was a devout man (says he) who one
night, while they were singing Matins, ravished in ecstasy, beheld the B. Virgin
accompanied with an infinity of Angels and Virgins entering the Church, and
leading the Procession up the high Altar, he saw the^ al kneel down, and
whilst each Gloria Patri, etc. was singing, they al fell prostrat on their
face; who demanding the reason of his extraordinary reverence, it was answered
him, that as often as thatverse was sung on earth, they in heaven were
particularly touched with the reverence exhibited unto the holy Trinity, and
rejoiced that their ordinary exercise in heaven of adoring the Al Blessed
Trinity, was in such vogue on earth.

And how severely any irreuerence unto this sacred verse, is punished by Alm.
God, we have a clear Example in the second part of the Fr. Minors Chronicles,
of a Religious man, who for not inclining while this verse was pronounced out
of a negligent custom he had got, was after death punished in this manner;
she was punished placed on a most high and narrow pillar, environed about with
sea, where a hundred times a day and as often by night, he was condemned, to most
profound inclination until he had satisfied for his neglect of them, in the
other world. Which punishment being expired, he revealed unto one of his fellow
Religious, that at every inclination he felt such a horrible fear, as if at
the instant he had been falling into hell.

As for the B. name of Jesus, there needs no other testimony, nor incitement to
honor it, then those words of holy Scripture where it is said: That at the
name of Jesus, al knees should bow both in heaven, Earth, and the Infernal
deepes below. So likewise do we reverence those words of S. John's Gospel Et
Verbum Caro factum est: and the word was made flesh: and that other particle
of the Nicen Creed: Et incarnatus est, etc. by which we are reduced to memory
of the sweet goodness of Alm. God, and his infinite love; which caused him for
our sakes to undergo so many torments, and afflictions in this mortal life; and
that man were a very monster of Ingratitud, should he refuse to honor him for
it.

Admirable truly and worthy the notice of all the world is that history which
Cesarius an author worthy of credit recounts. There was (says he) a young
Gentleman of a proud and hauty nature, who being present once at Mass sung in
the Cathedral Church, whilst al at pronouncing these words, Incarnatus est,
etc. bowed down their knees in humble reverence, he never offered to stir or
move him from his seat; In punishment of which irreuerence, it pleased Alm.
God to permit the devil presently to appear unto him in a most horrible and
frightful shape, who giving him a furious blow on the face, said unto him;
Poor impious man, do thou not know that the Eternal God became man for thee?
and art thou not ashamed then to Sit while others kneel, and bear thy self
so high, for whom God stoop't so low? and what art thou more then others or
what privilege have thou above therest? ungrateful as thou art; if he whom
thou neglect'st so much, had done but a hundred part so much, for me, as he
has done for thee, I would not only bow down unto the earth unto him, but
even unto gel it self.

For the honor which appertains to Images, having by the way spoken of it
before, I will here omit it, and pass unto.

The Reuerences We are to make in saying our Beads. CHAP. XVI.
HAVING spoken of diverse sorts of Adorations, that which we intend to speak of
now, humbly to incline our selves at every Aue Maria in saying of our Beads, of
al others is the most excellent, we may gather from the excellency it self of
Rosary and the Angelical salutation.

And first for the Beads or Rosary, its excellency Consists in this, that it is
a devotion wholly composed of our Lords Prayer and the Archangels words, with
and addition of Saint Elizabeth's, out of the holy Ghospel, etc. unto which the
holy Church has no devotion comparable. Then for the number, it consisting of.
63. Aue Marias, being the number of years the B. Virgin lived on earth, it is
both devout and mysterious; wherefore it were good, that in saying over the
Beads, we inclined at every Aue Maria in memory of each year of her B. life,
and each virtue in which she was exercised the while; which if it be duly
performed, what an excellent devotion must it necessarily be, whilst we
commemorat, how she lived an infant, how in woman's state, and how al her life
in every age thereof, according to the several decades of our Beads' upon every
one, whilst we make devout and humble reverence me thinks we exceed in
devotion, even the Angel whom we imitat, for he only once saluted her, but we
as often as there are Beads in the Rosary, and as often as we shall say them over.

And whilst we are exercised in this devotion, what do we else but compose a
Garland for our selves of the Roses and lillyes of immortal life, with which
after this mortal life we shall be Crowned, or rather she does it for us, to whom
we offer up this our devotion; as whilst a certain devout Virgin say her
Beads, an Angel was observed on a goulden thread for each Aue Maria to thread a
Rose, for each Pater noster a lilly, which the following Miracle gives worthy
credit unto, taken out of the third part of the Fr. Minors Chronicles, and it
is this: A certain Guardian had commanded a Nouice of his called Lewis
Albanois, to say every day his Beads over before he eat or drunk. This
devotion! the good Nouice once by chance (hindered by other business) did omit,
which the Guardian understanding instantly commanded him to perform, it (just
when they were then sitting down to eat,) seuearely reprehending him for his
negligence, the Nouice obeyed, and repaired unto the Church, where after he had
for some good space remained, the Guardian sent one of the Religious to seek
him out: who going, found the Nouice on his knees before the high Altar
devoutly saying his Beads, and saw an Angel clofe by him threading of roses and
lillyes on a golden thread) as we have said before): whereupon he remaining
astonished at the thing the Guardian dispatched another in search of him, who
having found him out, joined with him in astonishment at so rare a spectacle;
In fine, one in train of another, being sent, and none returning thence, the
Guardian at last with the rest arose, and al repayring to the Church, were al
witnesses of the Miracle; In testimony of which, after the Angel disappeared,
(which was not til the Nouice had finished his take) the place remaind', for a
long while as freshly sauouring of roses and lillyes, as if they had grown
there.

For diverse reasons is this devotion of the Beads to be exceedingly esteemed,
First for that the Angelical salutation cosists of words invented first in the
consistory of the sacred Trinity, and afterward pronounced by the Archangel
Gabriel one of the chiefest in heaven; for which reason Albertus magnus says
on these words Missus est, etc. that the Angel saluted the B. Virgin with these
words Aue gratia plena: hayle full of grace; not in his person, but of the B.
Trinity, Secondly, be cause they are words pronounced first by one of the
highest Seraphins, according to S. Gregory the great and diverse others; and
certainly there was a congruency in it he should be one of the highest in the
Court of heaven, who should be employed from Alm. God in a business of the
highest Consequence on earth.

Thirdly, by reason of the objects dignity, which is the B. Virgin, whose
sovereign greatness and perfections are far transcending al other Saints.

Fourthly, because of the magnificence and respectful manner this heavenly
Embassage was delivered her by the Angel Gabriel, who accompanied with
multituds of Angels apparailed in a white vestment set of with shining beams
of light, with countenance full of cheer and humble demeanor saluted the B.
Virgin with the glorious titles of full of grace, and our Lord being with her,
Aue gratia plena, Dominus tecum: etc. so as with good reason the holy Scripture
says, she was troubled at the aspect of so great Majesty and magnificence, and
especially at so unaccustomed a salutation, attributing so much honor to her,
and dignity; for (as Lyra well observes) it was that, and not the Angels
presence she was so amazed at, for they had often been present with her before;
but Aue gratia plena, Dominus tecum, she had never heard before; and so the
scripture says, she stood musing at that salutation, comparing the dignity of
it with her own unworthiness (as she imagined) and that high favor with her
low estate. The excellency finally of this Angelical Salutation consists
likewise in this, that it contains all the virtues, graces prerogatives,
dignities, and greatnesses, which God has aduantaged his Blessed Mother with all, it comprehending the highest and deepest mysteries of our redemption, and
there shining brightly in it the infinite love and immense goodness of the
sovereign wisdom and incomprehensible omnipotency, of God. Which being so,
with how much devotion and reverence ought the devout servant, of the B. Virgin
to pronounce it, and how high esteem are they to conceive the whilst of so
mysterious a prayer? what sweet resentments and gusts of Joy are they to
conceive, while they pronunce these words so full of sweetness and consolation?
But what should I speak of the dignity thereof, of which the Angels can never
speak enough.

Those then, who would devoutly indeed perform this exercise, are before they
begin their Beads, to imagine the B. Virgin seated in a high Maiestik throne
environed about with innumerable Angels and Saints, honoring and reuerencing
her; which I magination being framed (as soon as we have been speaking it)
they are to begin their beads, making at each a profound reverence in bowing
either the head or knee, and let the meditation of their heart accompany their
words of the high titles of honor and dignity attributed unto her therein, and
although they reach not fully the sense of the words, yet it will suffice that
they keep the eyes of their I magination fixed upon the B. Virgin imagining
they speak in person to her; which will much avail to stir up in them, a
lively devotion; and this is the advice which Nauarr gives us in his
Commentaryes, to recite with attention the Pater noster, and Aue Maria.

Besides we must observe, that we are to make our reverence at pronouncing of
these words Aue Maria, etc. natural reason teaching us that in pronouncing of
the name of those we honor, and giving them Al hayle, we are to make the
greatest demonstration of Reverence. And how grateful unto the B. Virgin this
devotion is, if devoutly indeed performed, and how it Crowns her as it were
with celestial honor; we may learn from this Example recounted by the B.
Bernardin of Felthe at Verona in publik Sermon. There was (says he) a devout
Religious man, who one day saying his beads before the high Altar of the
Church, another who secretly observed it beheld the Angels at every Aue Maria
he said crowning the B. Virgin with a crown of sparkling diamonds, which action
they iterated at every bead which he let fall, whilst others presented her the
whils with several flowers of lillyes roses and the like. Which devout vision
ought to be al of great consolation to those who are piously exercised in this
devotion.

Remarkable Jnstructio^s how to say the beads, extracted out of the second Tome
of Nauarrs Commentaries, and other Authors. CHAP. XVII.
THE advice of this great Doctor is, to divide the Beads or Rosary, and say
them at several times (even those we are to say of obligation) now one or two
decads, and as many another time, more or less as our commodity shall serve; so
as there pass no hour of the day that may not have part of our devotions; and
he instances in the Canonical Hours, al which although they integrat one
Office, yet the Church deuides them into several hours, and assigns several
parts of the day for the reciting them; so says he, although the Rosary be but
one prayer, as it were, yet may it be divided into several parts to be said at
several times.

And what on excellent commodity is this, for all sorts of persons, even in the
midst of the press of their affairs, to be able to comply with their
devotions, to her, who of al other creatures can best proper them; the merchant
or citizen may say his beads, one part as he goes in the streets, the other at
his rerurning home, the lawryer in going to the Hal, the Courtier to the Court,
without any danger of distraction, or interruption of their devotions on the
way; the Sodalists of our Lady whilst the Sodality is assembling, the devout
persons whilst they await the beginning of a Mass, or return homewards after
it is done.

And by this devotion of the Rosary, or any other particular prayer, the pious
Catholic reapes a world of good: For first he often entertaines discourse with
Alm. God and his B. Mother, by their several prayers, and that in a manner most
succinct and breife; which is the best, if as the saying is; short prayers do
soonest penetrat the heavens; For which reason S. Chrysostom in one of this
Homilies, counsels the people of Antioch, rather to the exercise of Iaculatory
prayers, that is short and often repeated, then to seldom and long prayers,
for this (says he) soonest begets tediousnes; and he confirms it from the
doctrine of S. Paul, and of our B. Savior himself; and this (according to
Cassian) was much in use with the ancient Fathers of the Desert. The second
good which we reap from it is, that the more short and brief it is, with the
more fervor and attention it is said; for we see by daily experience that when
we have much to recite, we make more have with it, then when we have but little;
which haste takes much away from our fervor and attention.

The third Good is, that it puts us more often in memory of the B. Virgin, and
consequently awakes our love of her, more often too.

And lastly, it actuats us more frequently in these Adorations and Reuerences
of our sovereign Queen and Empress of Heaven.

Now if by business any one be hindered from saying their whole Rosary in a day,
they may do it in a week (in this manner) saying each day a several decad of
it, etc. which is so facile and easy to persorme, as none in reason can excuse
themselves from it.

How alternatim, or by turns, we may say our Beads.
THIS learned person also teaches us, how in manner of Quire, we are likewisse
to say our beads, one answering the other; which Responsory Custom was very
frequent in the Primitive Church, and we read in the Ecclesiastical History of
S. Ignatius the Martyr who lived in the Apostles time, that he rauish't one day
in ecstasy, beheld two Quires before the Throne of God, one answering the other
in this manner; and so the ancient Hymn of Angels says: Alternantes
concrepando, melos damus vocibus: which confirms the received opinion to be,
that the Angels in that manner sing in magnifying God and his B. Mother, whom
men to their no small joy and comfort ought to imitat.

The manner then to say the Beads alternatly, or by turns, is this; Two, or
more, are with their beads in hand to say a Pater noster first unto themselves,
and then with an audible voice recite the Aue Maria gratia plena, Dominus
tecum; the other answers; benedicta tu in mulieribus, et benedictus fructus
ventris tui I esus; when the first resumes again, or both may join together
and say: Sancta Maria etc. and so forth unto the end. And this may be done
either walking in the feilds, or visiting the stations in the streets, or the
masters or mistresses of families convocating them together may distribut the^
in Quires, and do it with much profit and devotion; which if it be done with
due attention, it is impossible to imagine how grateful it wilbevntothe Queen
of heaven. To conclude this Chapter then, I will only recount a certain Miracle
in confirmation thereof.

What time the B. Brother Bernardin of Felthe preached at Pauy, a certain
noble Matron had this devotion to teach al her children daily before they went
to school, to say their beads before a certain Image of the Queen of heaven
which she had in her Chamber; now it happened that one of the least of them,
one day fell into the River in passing over a bridge; of which accident the
Mother being advertised, she presently casting her self upon her knees before
the Image of our Lady in lifting up her eyes to heaven, al bedeawed with
tears; O mother of God, said she the, usual hope of the afflicted, if it be
your blessed will, save my poor child, if not, your B. will be done; and
concluding with the Angelical salutation devoutly said; she ran to the place
where many people were assembled to save the child, and was no sooner arrived
at the bridge, but behold she saw her child floting upon the water and calling
her by her name; at which much reioicing she cried out, take strong cheer my
child, call upon the B. Virgin, and my life for yours; when presently the child
was taken up safe, and brought unto its mother, when embracing it; the child,
said unto her its is not to men I owe my deliura^ce, but to our B. Lady, before
whose Image you so often instructed me to pray; and thereupon it recounted unto
her, how being fallen in, she had received it in her arms, and bore it above
the waters; At this, all the Assembly moved to devotion toward the B. Virgin,
did render praise and thanks to Alm. God, and his B. Mother, for being so
favorable and succourable to those who devoutly inuoke her in their
necessities.

Of the most excellent devotion of the Rosary. CHAP. XVIII.
THOSE who are diligent in serving of great princes, are still inuenting some
new way of honoring them; and so we Christians being servants of Alm. God and
of his B. Mother, are to do the like. Now amongst all the Inventions of which
devotion has been most fertile, none has been comparable to the Invention of
the Rosary.

And to say nothing of the name, or whether it were fo called to signify, that
as the Rose holds the first rank amongst al flowers so the Rosary amongst al
devotions; or that the contexture of it seems to be as a Garland of roses, for
to crown the head of her whom we honor in it. Finally there is none more
universally exercised then this devotion of the Rosary, whose Invention the
whole Christian world owes to that great Patriarch S. Dominike; as the
propagation thereof unto the Religious of this Order, who take care to
celebrate it every where on earth.

Neither is it celebrated on earth alone, but the very Angels in heaven do
exercise it too, as is confirmed by this vision, recorded by two grave and
learned Authors Lanspergius the Carthusian, and Blosius the famous Abbot in his
spiritual Mirror, as follows: The Prior of the Carthusians at Treuers a very
holy man, and one much exercised in this devotion of the Rosary, one day
ravished in vision, (as he was frequently) beheld the glorious Citizens of
heaven, praising and blessing with ineffable joy our Lord Jesus Christ and his
B. Mother by commemorating the mysteries of the Rosary, and recommendation of
al those who devoutly exercised it here on earth; besides he observed that
singing in their praise as often as they repeated the glorious names of Jesus
and Maria, they made humble obeissance to it; and lastly it was revealed to him
that those who devoutly exercised this devotion on earth, should obtain by our
Ladies intercession a plenary Indulgence of al their faults, with diverse
privileges in this life, and more then can be imagined in the next. From
whence we may gather the excellency of the Rosary, and how acceptable it is to
our Lord and Savior Christ, to his B. Mother, and all the Court of Heaven.
Wherefore we are to endeavor to perform it with all due reverence and
attention, if we desire to be grateful unto them, and to have them propitious
unto us.

The whole Rosary consists of fifteen Decads of Aue Matias and fifteen Pater
noster, that is, a hundred and fifty Aue Marias which admitting of a triple
division, your beads of five decads are those, most ordinarily in use. Now the
manner of Meditating on them, the several mysteries of our Saviors and B.
Ladies life, is this. On the first five decads they use to meditat the five
Joyful mysteries, to wit, upon the first, the Angelical salutation; when the
Eternal Word by the holy Ghosts cooperation, was conceived: Upon the second
decad, the Visitation of S. Elizabeth: On the third, the Nativity of our
Savior Christ: On the fourth, the Presentation in the Temple of our Savior
Christ, where holy Simeon and Anna the Prophetess foretold to his glad mother
his future greatness and miracles, And on the fifth, our B. Ladies finding her
B. Son in the Temple disputing with the Doctors. etc. On the five next
decads, we are to meditat the five Dolorous mysteries; The first of which is,
our B. Saviors prayer in the Garden, where he fell into that bloody Agony: The
second, the cruel Flagellation, or his whipping at the Pillar, til he was al
goary blood: The third, the crowning him with thorns, their spittings in his
face, buffeting, reuiling him, and the like: The fourth, the Carrying of the
cross on his B. shoulders to Mount Caluary, when his body so enfeebled as
before, must needs sink often under the heavy weight: The fifth, his
Crucifixion, or nayling upon the Cross, with unspeakable cruelty, and
indignity.

On the last 5. Decads we are to Meditat, first our Blessed Lord and saviors
glorious Resurrection, next his Ascension into heaven; Thirdly the happy
departure of the B. Virgin hence; Fourthly, her Assumption into Heaven: Fifthly
and lastly her glorious Coronation there, where she is declared Queen over the
universal Kingdoms of heaven and earth.

Where is to be noted, that for the obtaining of the Indulgences granted to the
sodality of the Rosary (then which I do not know any more ample) it is not
requisite to meditat al these mysteries in order as we have set them down; but
it may suffice to entertain ones mind the while, with meditating any one or
two of them in which we shall find the greatest devotion, nay only to say our
beads over vocally (according to Nauarrs opinion) is sufficient, so it be don
with due attention and devotion.

Now for the more ignorant, that they may participat likewise of the fruit of
devotion, before they begin their beads I would counsel them, to frame an
Imagination of the B. Virgin, in one of these three manners, as vulgarly they
are accustomed to delineat her: Either with the Angel saluting her, or holding
her B. Son betwixt her arms, or finally al glorious in heaven, ready to
hear and grant our Petition; and this there is none but may make benefit of,
for the stirring them up unto devotion; And that learned man Nauarr when he was
fowerscore years of age, not only made use of this Imagination in reciting of
the Rosary, but also in all his other devotions, and prayers, still Imagined the
dignity of the person to whom he directed them. Which manner of stirring up
attention is both easy, recreatiue, and devout, maintayning the spirit in
attention and recollecting the memory the whilst, and opening a way to great
familiarity with Alm. God and his B. Mother; which if (as we ought) we practice
and esteem according unto its dignity, we shall in short time make wondrous
progress in the way of spirit, and shall heap up in heaven riches enough to
make us happy for all eternity. There only rests, that I add to this, a most
stupendous accident, by which we may see the great importance of this
devotion, and the great benefit those of the Confraternity of the Rosary enjoy
thereby, and it is extracted out of a little book entitled, The Rosary of our
Lady.

At what time S. Dominik preached in the Kingdom of Aragon, a certain young
Virgin of good account called Alexandria made instance unto him as he came
down, from out of the Pulpit (where he had omitted nothing might make for the
commendations of the Rosary) to be admitted into the Sodality thereof, which
she obtained although for the rest, her life was no ways accordingly, she
being one who spent much more time in adorning her body, then to have her soul
well adorned. Now it happened, that two Gentlemen at once making suite unto her,
it was sufficient ground of quarrel (as they in their madness thought) one to
challenge the other into the field, where they both remained dead upon the
place. The friends of either hearing of this sad accident, and imagining her
(as it was true) the cause to be revenged on her, they rushed into her house,
and notwithstanding she desired at least, but so much respit as to confess her
self, they would not allow it her, but presently cut of her head, and threw
it into a pit. But our B. Lady, who has ever a special care of her devoted
servants, (though never so defective) revealed the fact unto S. Dominick, who
in order to her merciful commands, went to the pit, and called on Alexandria by
her name, when behold (a wondrous accident) the Angels visibly in sight of all the people, brought up the head from the bottom of the pit, which joined unto
the body, she besought the Saint to hear her Confession; which being done, she
declared three things worthy of particular note, arrived unto her both before
and after she was dead: The first, that by virtue of her being of the
Confraternity of the Rosary, she had a perfect act of Contrition at the instant
of her death, without which infallibly she had died eternally: The second, that
as soon as she was dead, the devils putting her to great affright, she was
maruelously secured and comforted by the glorious Queen of Heaven: The third,
that for Penance and satisfaction of the death of those two Gentleman, she was
condemned to Purgatory for two hundred years, and for five hundred more, for
her vanity in attire the cause of, that so lamentable effect. But that she
hoped by the merits of the same Confraternity, to be soon delivered from that
punishment, and having said this, after she had remained a live two whole
days, for the confirmation of the miracle, and to augment the devotion of the
Sodality: she left this life again, whose body was honorably interred by the
sodalists there. When fifteen days after, she appeared again unto S. Dominick
al in glory clothed in resplendant beams of light, declaring unto him after a
world of thanks for the inestimable benefits she had received of him, two
things of especial note concerning this devotion of the Rosary; the one was,
that she was delegated to him from the souls in Purgatory with a Petition to
be likewise inrold in the Sodality, to receive the benefit of it amongst the
rest; The other, that the Angels much rejoiced at the erection of his Sodality,
and that God instiled himself the Father of it, the B. Virgin the Mother, etc.
And having said this, she flew away to heaven.

This example ought to be a great incitement unto every one to make themselves
of this Sodality, and the better to become participant thereof to recite every
week the whole Rosary, at least a pair of beads cannot be burdensome unto
any one of what employment soever they be; at the end of every decad thereof
they are to make a profound inclination, saying with heart and mouth: O most
holy Mother of God, I adore you, and wish the Saint and Angels may reverence
and adore you a thousand and a thousand times together, with whom I have firm
confidence through the grace of Almighty God, and your favorable assistance,
to bless, praise, and adore you hereafter for ever and evermore.

Twelve most notable Adorations to be made, in the honor and memory of twelve
dignities and privileges bestowed on the B. Virgin by Alm. God, answerable to
the twelve Stars, which go to the composing of a Crown for her most sacred
head. CHAP. XIX.
THE B. Evangelist S. John in his sublimes Revelations of the Apocalypse beheld
a woman of incomparable beauty, euironed with Sun beams, the Moon under her
feet, and on her head a crown of twelve brighter stars: by which according
to the exposition of the holy Doctors and Interpreters, our B. Lady is
understood, by the Sun, the glory and Majesty which she shines withal in
heaven; by the Moon which she treads under foot, is signified how all that is
under God, such as are sublunary and earthly things she is Superior too, and
for the twelve stars which adorn her head, are prefigured twelve singular
privileges and prerogatives, which Alm. God has endowed her with all, above all the Monarks in this world, and highest Angels and Seraphins in heaven; and
these her words have a relation unto it, in that so excellent Canticle of hers,
where after she professes her soul does magnify our Lord, she adds the reason
why, quia fecit mihi magna qui potens est, because he has don great things for
me (says she) which, in that she specifies not what they are, we may imagine
to be above al expression. These then how infinite and unspeakable they are, we
shall endeavor to speak a word or two of, reducing them unto the number of
twelve, answerable to the twelve Stars, which go to the composing of her
Crown.

The declaration of the first Starr.
THE first starr, or rather prerogatives; which our heavenly Lady is adorned
with all, is her Eternal and particular Predestination, who before the Creation
either of heaven or earth, and before al times was divinely elected and
predestined unto sanctification, the plenitud of Grace, and the accumulation
of al heavenly gifts, to the end that she adorned therewith, might be the
better disposed to the Co^ception of the Eternal Word. The holy Church makes
mention of her divine predestination in these words of the holy Scripture
attributed unto her: Dominus possedit me ab initio viarum suarum: the Lord has
had the possession of me from the beginning of his ways. And this other: Ab
initio and ante saecula Creata sum, etc. from the beginning I was created and
before al times. So S. Bernard discoursing with the B. Virgin upon this point,
You have been predestined (says he) in the Spirit of God, before al
creatures, to the end you should engender God himself, This then is the first
starr which crowns the B. Virgin. Where we may observe, that, what is future
and to come to us, is present, and as it were past unto Alm. God. So S. Paul
speaking of the predestination of Alm. God, speaks of things to come, as if
they were already past: Those whom she has praedestinated (says he) he has
called, and justified, and glorified. This B. Virgin then having ever been
present to the eyes of Alm. God as the most endeared object of his love, may
well say of her self; ab initio and ante saecula creata sum: And so at the
first instant of the Angels creation amongst the Idaeas which they beheld as in
a Crystal mirror presented unto their eyes one of the most beautiful of al
next to the humanity of our Savior Christ, was this celestial Virgin; when
with what delight and delectation may we imagine them to have contemplated her,
and in her the mystery of her redemption, and the restoration of humane kind:
Where were you (says the Wiseman) when the morning stars did praise me, and
all the children of God joyfully cried out?

Having been then in so particular a manner of predestination elected before al
creatures; by consequence in excellency she was to excel them al, for so
undoubtedly being honored with the greatest dignity which a creature could be
capable of, she likewise had as great grace and sanctity as in any Creature
possibly could be, with all the other endowments requisite, for one who was to
be Mother of Alm. God, who in preparing her unto that dignity, has heaped upon
her more perfections, and showed greater proofs of his Omnipotence, wisdom,
and infinite goodness in creating her, then in creating the whole Universe
besides; and so whosoever had an eye so clear and piercing to penetrat God
Alm. work in her, would admire it more then his work manship in all other
things beside, in perfectioning of whom he has been more exact, then in
whatsoever else.

The second Starr declared.
THE second Starr which adornes and imbellishes our dearest Lady is, the
prerogative of her sanctification or Conception; in which, her most pure soul
when it was united to her body, received no stain of original sin at al, it
being endowed even at that instant with more abundant grace then any celestial
or terrestrial creature else, even at their greatest height of sanctity; for
which it necessarily follows, that in the womb of her holy Mother, she should
have more perfect use of reason, then any other at the ripest years; by which
she both knew, loved, and contemplated her God and Creator in a more perfect
manner, then all the Congregation of Saints and Angels could together. Naturally
speaking it is true indeed, as desce^dant of Adam she should have been subject
to original sin, as also al other miseries which follow in train thereof,
had not God with his superabondant Grace prevented her, as one whom he had
chosen to be his Mother, from al eternity, and so by an especial Privilege
exempted from the common condition, which all the rest are generally borne unto,
through our first Fathers disobedience, and so it was most convenient, if we
consider the excellency and dignity of the Son of God, and his B. Mother; Now
the manner by which was don was this.

At the same instant as Alm. God created the soul of the B. Virgin, and
infused it into her body, the^ newly receiving form in S. Anne her mothers
womb, it pleased Alm. God to enriche it with his grace; so as to free it from
the contagion of al sin, which else naturally it had been infected with, in
such manner as the devil never had any interest in it; but to say, in what
abundance it was, not only exceeds my capacity and expression, but that of al
other creatures besides. For God at that instant did not consider her, as
issuing from Adam a sinner and his enemy, but as his Mother chosen out for the
reparation of our sins, and to bruze the head and trample on the pride of the
Infernal Enemy. Which being so, if (as they say) the Empyreal Heaven be
composed of so noble a substance, and shine with so pure and rarefied a light,
only because it is the medium, wherein the object of Alm. God is seen; how
pure and noble must the B. Virgin have been, who was chosen to be the
tabernacle, where he was to inhabit, and in which the eternal Word was to unit
himself to his holy Humanity.

And what a glory is this for humane one of their own lineage, not only thus
exempte from al original and actual sin, but also from the very instant of
her nativity, to begin to lead a life full of grace, celestial, and divine? What
a consolation is this for poor sinners, who desire to convert them from their
sins, to have one to aid them, who has so gloriously triu^phed over them?
what comfort to those who fight against them, to have her assistance in the
fight, who formerly has overcome them? But yet, not only men, but Angels
themselves, rejoice and glory in it, to see their Queen, and the mother of
their king, graced with so rich so rich endowme^t, with so many graces
adorned, and accumulated with so many privileges, al derived from this her
immaculat Co^ception. For which reason S. Vincent Ferrerius says, that at what
instant the B. Virgin was conceived, there was universal Joy throughout the
court of Heaven.

The declaration of the third Starr.
THE third Starr, or prerogative, that goes to composing the Crown of our B.
Lady, is her Virginal purity, with which she was endowed by the holy Ghost, at
the first instant of her Immaculat Conception; and if, before her birth she
was so pure and holy, how pure and holy must she necessarily have been
afterward? finally, so pure she was, as S. Anselme says of her, that next to
God there was not to be imagined the like; and Theodoret says, she surpast in
purity all the Angels in heaven, treating of these words of the Canticle; There
are sixty Queens amongst the saved souls of men, (says he) she who had the
honor to bring forth Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary his mother, no doubt
surmounts both the Cherubins and Seraphins in purity; And so holy, so pure, was
this B. Virgin still, as she held that strict guard over her affections, that
never any disordinat action came near them, never any unlawful desire, or
repugnant to her deuoir had never any access unto her, finally never had she
committed any venial sin as the sacred Council of Trent obliges us to
believe, seconded by the opinion of all the most famous Doctors of the Church;
And the exceeding affection she bore to this Angelical virtue (as S. Anselme
says) was it, which made her consecrat to God her virginity from her most
tender years, so as she was the first Inuentrix of this rare and excellent
virtue, which equals men with Angels, and the first who by perpetual vow has
offered up her virginity to God, and led the way which so many since have
followed, so as with good reason she is styled Virgo virginum, the Virgin of
virgins; besides we must believe, a rare purity was requisite in her, who was to
be the habitation of the holy Ghost, Mother of the Eternal father son, the
light of Heavens, and mirror of al purity and perfection. Besides, such an
affectionat love she had to this precious flower of Virgiginity; as in her
tender years she left parents friends and al worldly delights; to retire her
self within the enclosure of the Temple amongst other Virgins there, where she
remained til the fourteenth year of her age, the great fortunes which accrued
unto her by her father and mothers death, (which happened about the eleventh
year thereof) not being able to divert her from her holy resolution; mean
while she refused al offers of marriage, being at marigeable estate, professing
that she had consecrated her virginity to God, and that she had rather suffer a
thousand deaths, then once in the least thought violat her vow.

Whereupon the Priests of the Temple suspended at the strange nes and nouelty of
the thing, betook themselves to prayer, and consulting the divine Oracle how
they were to comport themselves in this affayre, it was revealed unto them,
they should assemble all the men of the Image of David, and he to whose lot she
fell, should have her for his wife; which, being don, (she having a revelation
on the other side that such was the will of heaven) it was S. Joseph's lot to
marry her, who had the happiness by it to be the Foster-father of Alm. God.

The fourth Starr declared.
THe fourth starr, which in splendour and beauty surpasses all the rest, is her
being the Mother of Alm. God; so great a prerogative (according to S. Augustine)
that no mortal greatness can equal it, and nothing can go beyond it but God
himself, so much it has in it of the Infinite (as S. Thomas says) being so
nearly conioyn'd with the infinite person of the Son of God; and this dignity
of hers it is (says he) that implies in us an obligation, to adore her with a
more excellent sort of Adoration, then any other Saint.

But is it not a wondrous thing, that a Virgin in the closet of her womb,
should contain him whom heaven and earth and sea cannot contain, who has
appointed to the Sun and Moon, and stars, their several orders and stations;
which maruayles are sufficiently expressed in these three verses: Quem terra,
pontus, aethera, etc. Cui luna, sol, and omnia, etc. Beata matter munere, etc.
Is it not a wondrous thing, the same woman should be both mother and a maid,
that one should conceive and bring forth a child, without any detriment of her
Virginity? that she should have a mothers faecundity joined with the purity of
a Virgin, that she should have a son both in heaven in his fathers bosom,
and on earth in his mothers womb together which son in heaven should be
engendered without mother, and without father on earth? These are the
exclamations of the great and learned Origin on these words; Cum esset
desponsata, etc. O grace (says he) to be admired! O incredible sweetness! O
Sacrament eneffable! the same is both mother and Virgin, the same both mother
and servant too, and engendered one at once both God and Man! who has heard of
such wondrous things as these: so far Origin.

And so great and incomprehensible is this divine mystery, as the B. Virgin her
self, although she were most extraordinarily illuminated by the holy Ghost,
yet could she not comprehend, when the Angels told it her how it could be,
that she who was a Virgin could conceive a child without any detriment of her
virginity, as appears by her; Quomodo fiet hoc, quoniam virum non cognosco?
etc. neither could the Angel too inform her how? but he remitted her to the
holy Ghost; Spiritus sanctus superueniet in vos; for the understanding of the
mystery. O mystery of mysteries; and maternal dignity to be admired both of
Angels and men, and never sufficiently to be understood! but let us yet proceed
to delineat her praises more unto the life.

When God out of the ribbs of Adam had framed Eve, he waking out of his sleep,
said to himself; this now is bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh; wherefore a
man is to leave both father and mother, and joining himself to his wife, to
become one flesh with her. Let us apply this mystery now to our Savior Christ
and say, that in like manner the humanity of our Savior Christ, by its union
with God united humane nature so straightly with the divinity, that the B. Virgin
might as properly say of our Savior Christ; this is flesh of my flesh, bone of
my bone, etc. seeing, as S. Augustine says, the flesh of Christ, was the B.
Virgin flesh.

From whence S. Peter Damian inferrs, that God not only was present to her by
his unlimited being as he is universally withal, nor by his grace as he is only
with the Just, but in a far more excellent manner of Identity, in that that
the son of God, is her son also, and (as we have said) flesh of her flesh,
etc. having taken from her the substance whereof his sacred body was composed,
a dignity in her so great, as admiration must there take up, where humane
discourse lays down, and with its tongue of silence only celebrat it.

This so streit union or Identity betwixt Alm. God and the B. Virgin, is by the
Angelical Doctor S. Thomas styled Parentela, or affinity betwixt God and her,
which can be said of no other creature living besides her self, neither of man
nor Angel, to be naturally allied, with God like her, having the natural son
of God for her son. In consideration of which, S. Anselme says; The Eternal
father had not the heart to suffer, that his only beloved son, should be only
his son, but would withal he should be truly the only and natural son of the
B. Virgin also; and this not as of two several persons but the person of the
son of God, was likewise the person of the son of the Virgin also; and so the
contrary. By which we see, that she was truly the Spouse of the holy Ghost,
who wrought in her womb the Conception of the son of God, and by this she
becomes every way allied unto all the persons of the B. Trinity. To conclude
then, this dignity and prerogative we say (as we have said before) is the
greatest in a creature, as can possibly be imagined.

The declarotion of the fifth Starr.
THe fifth starr brightly shining and adorning this celestial Princess, is the
Illustration of her spirit, by the holy Ghosts ouer-shadowing her, conformable
to that which the Angel said in her salutation: Spiritus sanctus superueniet
in te, and virtus Altissimi obumbrabit tibi: which divine obumbration was then,
when the Son of God was incarnat in her womb, the disposition to so
miraculous a conception; and ouershadowing her with its divine virtue, the
better to enable her to endure those celestial ardours which inflamed her
breast the while, and which doubtlesly but for it, had wholly consumed her, the
flames of divine love were so vehement the while.

Neither (according to S. Augustine and S. John Damascen) did the holy Ghost
obumbrat her body only, but her soul likewise; which obumbration is no other
then its light and grace, which was conferred upon to her most abundantly, when
the Son of God was Incarnat in her womb, at which time her spirit was
enlightened, and the darkness of ignorance wholly expeld from thence by which
divine light was clearly revealed unto her the profound mystery of the
Incarnation, and diverse other mystical secrets of heaven; as also the
understanding of the holy Scriptures, and the spirit of Prophecy was
communicated to her thereby, in a more ample manner then it ever was before to
any other of the Prophets.

And it is the opinion of diverse Saints and learned men, as namely of S.
Antonin, S. Bernard, S. Cyprian, Vrsin, and Cassal, etc. that what time the
Son of God was Incarnat in the B. Virgins womb, she was often rauish't up to
the Third heaven, where she beheld the clear vision of Alm. God, more face to
face, then either Moses or S. Paul. And Rupertus on these words of the
Canticles: Oculi tui columbarum: thy eyes, are the eyes of Doves, clearly says
that she was rauish't up to the third heaven, where she beheld in a more
excellent manner then S. Paul did, those secrets which it is not lawful for me
to know. This if it were granted to any, (as most certain it is, it has) no
doubt but it was to the B. Virgin; who as far excels al Saints and Angels, as
the Sunn in splendor and brightness a little Starr. But what tongue can worthily
express the sacred motions of her heart, while the Son of God was Incarnat in
her wo^b? the light and splendor which illustrated her mind and understanding?
the fire and ardour which embraced her will? the Joy finally, which her blessed
soul possessed, when the Word eternal taking flesh from her, ennobled her with
the high title of his Mother.

What beams and rays of light, may we suppose, reflected from her
countenance, while the Divine spirit illustrated her soul, in whose eyes were
two continual fires burning with Divine love, al who beheld her, and yet in an
admirable manner quenching al carnal love the whilst; And if Moses issuing
forth from conversation with an Angel, had his face shining with such maiestick
beams, as struck an awful reverence in the children of Isreal's hearts; what may
we imagine of the B. virgin, who was perpetually accompanied with Angels, who
took it for honor, ever to be serving her.

In the mean while, her understanding was so clearly illuminated as she had
perfect knowledge of the Creator and al his creatures, and how much love she
was to bestow on every particular thing; and so she burned in the love of God,
as she loved him not only above al earthly things, but above her very soul,
above her life both spiritual and temporal, above al glory, and finally above
al desired felicity and beatitud in heaven. So she enjoyed such a tranquillity
of mind, and had al her apprehensiue and concupiscible powers so wholly at her
Command, that the inferior part of her soul never rebeld against the
superior, but was always in subjection and subordination to it. Whence it
was, that she breathed forth in all places where she came, so excellent and
sweet an odor of sanctity, which increased in her daily more and more, the
longer she went with our B. Savior in her womb; which sanctity of hers we
cannot better praise nor speak of, then by silent admiration; notwithstanding
every one is to make some reflection on it in his mind, and seek to draw forth
from thence some spiritual profit by it.

The sixth Starr declared.
THE sixth starr of the B. Virgins Crown, and which was one of the chiefest
motives the Omnipotent God had to choose her for his Spouse; Was her plenitud
of divine grace, and of every virtue else. Of this there needs no other
testimony then the Angels words unto her: Hayle full of grace, etc. Which
plenitud of grace in her (says S. Augustine) was a disposition no less then
necessary for conceiving the Son of God. And although many Saints have been
said to be full of grace, and of the holy Ghost, as Zacharias and Elizabeth,
with S. John Baptist their son; the Apostles, the seven Deacons, and many
more; Yet none of them al in that plenitud as she, the word admitting a
superlatiue; one B. Savior as the fountain of al grace deriving it unto
others from himself according to their several capacities now the B. Virgin
being the most, capacious of al, no wonder she had more in her then all the
rest. But yet it was a greater plenitud the Angel meant by saluting her so, and
the greatest indeed that possibly could be in any Creature; aplenitud which
(as S. Bernard says) deriuing it felfe to others, gives liberty to the
captive, comfort to the afflicted, to sinners pardon, grace to the Just; to the
Angels Joy, glory to the holy Trinity, and to the Eternal Word the substance of
her proper flesh. Besides, as S. Hierom says, Grace was given unto others by
parcells only, but to her, fully and in its entire perfection, in that the
fulness of al was included in her; and consequently by this fulness of grace, she
must be full of al other virtues else, which ever yet any Saint was endowed with all; Nay, the holy Fathers, and in particular S. Cyril and S. Hierom say, she
was not only full of grace, but had al other virtues, divine gifts and
endowments congregated in her alone, which in scattered pieces were dispersed
amongst all the other Saints. There is nothing (says S. Herom) if we consider
it well, of pure, splendious, or of virtuous, which shinnes not in the glorious
Virgin most particularly.

Now if so large a portion of virtues fell unto her share, before she was Mother
of God, how must they afterward be augmented, when shed was indeed? assuredly,
no tongue is able to express, how infinite and incomprehensible they were,
(says S. Bernard) the greatnesses and perfections of God being infinite and
incomprehensible, his Mothers who conceived him in her womb, must needs
participat of the incomprehensibility and infinitnes of them also.

Besides, there was also congregated in her al moral virtues in greater measure
then ever was in any one, nay had an Angel come to the earth invested in humane
flesh, it could not have been more perfectly accomplished then she; for proof
of which assertion, I will sum up in a catalogue those most excellent parts of
hers, which are recorded to have been in her by diverse holy men; the
admirablenes and perfection of whose life, was proposed as a pattern for
virgins to imitat by S. Ambrose in these words: Never did she offend any (says
he) though she had never so just a cause; but she both wished and willed well
unto every one, and did well them too; she was reverent toward her superiors,
and no way molestful to her equals; she shunned al boast, al her actions were
conformable to reason; and she loved al virtues with her heart; she never
contristated her parents, and never with friend or acquaintance entredinto
contest: she disdained not the humble, derided not the simple, nor thought it
shame to accompany the poor; there was no affectation in her behavior, nor
dissolution in her gate, and her words were so te^pered, as the modesty which
shined in them and her actions sufficiently declared her interior sanctity,
and in ward virtue and perfection of mind; no otherwise then a sumptuous Portal
does the magnificence of the Palace that is within. Never but to the Temple
did she stin abroad, and then never but accompanied with her father, Mother,
kinsfolks, or the like: and within doors she was delighted with solitud, and
employed her thought always in some what of good and profitable for her soul.
This much S. Ambrose, who has much more besides.

And S. Hierom describing her Heroic virtues and celestial manner of life in
the Temple amongst the sacred Virgins, says: She always endeavored to be the
first at Vigils of the night, to be best instructed in the law of God the most
humble in her demean, the most eagre in the works of Charity, the purest in
purity and most perfect in all sorts of virtues and perfections, she was
assidual in prayer, and (as the Prophet says) meditated night and day in the
law of God, she was jealous of the honors of those she conuersed with, and
that without any disgust or molestation of theirs; Deo gratias was her answer
to al salutations; and in fine, her whole life was such as for prayer,
humility, modesty, solitud, silence, virginal bashfulnes, and the like noble
virtues of her sex, she was a pattern and model for all to imitat.

The seventh Starr declared.
THe seventh Starr nothing inferior in brightness to the rest, is her near
Communication of trust and secrecy with Alm. God, so as no earthly Prince was
ever more confident with Secretary or chamberlain, then he with her, nor none
ever more secret and faithful then she to him. When he was an Infant, she with
incredible care and diligence attended him, made him ready and unready, gave
him milk from her sacred breasts, and with her virginal lips tenderly kissed
him; Al which she did with such devotion and respect, as (according to Albertus
Magnus) she never laid him to rest nor took him up, but she adored him first
with profound reverence, and entered so far on the consideration of his infinite
love, that made him do what he did for us, as for the most part she fell into
ecstasy. Afterward for the space of 30. years, in all times, in all occasions
she was present to his necessityes, in all his trauails, miseryes, and
calamities both winter and summer, in cold and heat, rain or snow, she ever
willingly would accompany him; neither was he wanting on his part to correspond
unto the dearenes of her affection communicating with her the greatest secrets
of his divinity; so as she never desired him to unfold any hidden mystery as
of the Trinity the Quires of Angels, the vocation of the Gentiles, the union of
the faithful with his holy Church, but he did it presently; and if he revealed
to his disciples with such candor and promptitud, the secrets of his heavenly
Father I call you no longer servants but friends (says he) for what I have heard
frommy Father, I have declared to you: much more would he do to his B. Mother,
we suppose; And if in freque^ting of his company and hearing of his doctrine
only, during his last three years he could render them so learned and expert
in the divine mysteries, how much more learned and expert must she needs be,
who both frequented and heard him for more then 30. years? whilst he revealed
unto her those mysteries here on earth, which the very Angels of heaven were
ignorant of. As Princes then use to ennoble those with great titles of honors
and dignityes, whom they entrust with their persons and secrecies; so not only
did our Savior here on earth advance the B. Virgin to eminent dignity, but
much more now in heaven does he entitle her to the highest degree of glory and
excellence, not ranking her with the quires of Virgins, Co^fessours, Martyrs,
Apostles, Prophets, nor Patriarks, but to a high sublimity above them, and
above all the heavenly Hierarchies he has adua^ced her, seating her at his own
right hand, where she sits instaled Queen of heaven: The Queen is at thy
right hand, (says the Prophet David) adorned with all varieties; whilst all the
Blessed grant her the precedencie willingly, and deferr it unto her as their
sovereign Queen. Finally she rules over the whole Universe; and all the most
important affairs of the B. Trinity, in a manner, do pass through her hands,
so as all the heavenly Citizens, the inhabitants of the earth, the souls in
Purgatory, nay even hell it self acknowledge he power and reverence her for it
with all humility.

The eighth Starr declared.
THE eight starr is the high Privilege she had of Contemplation and enjoyed al
her life; so as from the very first instant of her sanctification in her
mothers womb, (according to Suarez) she had the use of reason, and converted
it to the knowledge, love, and contemplation of Alm.God, from which nothing
could divert, her ever after; and he confirms it, for if this gift (says he)
was bestowed on the Angels at their first Creation, with greater reason may we
imagine it bestowed upon the Mother of Alm. God, and Queen of them. Whilst she
was resident in the Temple with those other consecrated Virgins, she was still
in highest contemplatio^, supplicating the divine Majesty with the feruorous
prayer often interrupted with amorous sighs for the Incarnation of the Messiah
that was to come the whilst there are grave Authors who report, that the
Angels daily administered her her food, still entertayning her with some
heavenly news, or some divine rapts she had during those nine months the
Incarnat Word lay couched in her sacred womb. Some times she being wholly
transported from her self, and absorpt in God, at other times her soul making
such sallyes forth, per modum transeuntis (according to some) as clearly to
behold God face to face; and no wonder, she having so spacious a field for her
Contemplation to walk in even to the third heaven, and farther if it were
possible as her B. son then actually present with her, his heavenly ffathers
delight and Mothers joy; who can say, or so much as imagine her sweet
transports through the consideration of the maruaylous excess of that love of
his, that had enclosed him in womb whom the Heavens cannot contain, and held
him in the restraintof a little body, who in his hand held all that is comprised
in this great universe? ffor my part I am of opinion with SS, Bernard,
Bonauenture, and the learned Canisius, that she continued whole nights ravished
in contemplation of these divine and wondrous mysteries; for we may believe,
she was of a complexion and temper so excellent, as she required but little
sleep, and during that little time she slept, F. Suares is of opinion, that she
was so inflamed with the love of God, that she often started out of her sleep,
(as love is a restless thing) and was transported by the force of love to God
the only object of her affections; and S. Bernardin affirms, that she enjoyed
so supernatural a contemplation, that she had the use of it in sleep, in a
far more excellent manner, then ever any Saint in waking had. Howsoever,
whether waking or sleeping, or howsoever employed, we may well affirm with the
learned Canisius, that she never interrupted her meditations, but thad al her
life was but a continual exercise of ecstasy and contemplation; whilst every
thing ministered matter to meditation; she read with incredible affection the
holy scripture, which she understood exactly well, both by her own clear
understanding, as also by the light communicated unto her from Alm. God; and to
her meditations a great help was the moderatnes and temperature of her diet,
which together with her solitud and silence disposed her spirit to meditation
and union with Alm. God, with whom she was so perpetually united, as she rather
seemed divine them mortal. For which reason perhaps it was, that God would have
no mention made in holy Scripture, neither of her father nor mother; to wit,
that we might consider her rather a celestial creature coming from heaven, then
a terrestrial, borne on earth. Mean while, the Angels, that she might the more
wholly attend to contemplation, did daily bring her food; a miracle, which we
are the less to admire, since we read of S. Paul some what to the like
effect, who was one by infinite degrees inferior in sanctity and perfection unto
her.

And what wonder is it, that she should seem more divine then humane, when she
was arrived to such a high degree of innocencye, that she never fett into the
least defect, nor was ever transported so much as with the first motion of any
disordination; which were no wonder, if (as a grave Author affirms) she were
borne impeccable, a quality, says he, but, in a manner, necessary for her, who
was destinat to the high honor of being the Mother of Alm. God. Neither was it
possible for her to be other wise, considering how Alm. God took up all the
lodging with in her for himself; while she considering her own humility on
the one side, and the high honor on the other, to which God had advanced her,
was so studious how to comply with her obligation to him for so great a
benefitt, as her thoughts had never leisure to think of any thing besides; To
say nothing of the absolut mortification of her body and exterior senses, and
the continual watch the Angels kept over her by turns, that no evil should
approach her, as one who was the living Tabernacle of the living God. As for the
devils, they fled her more then they follow others, as we may well imagine if S.
Antony, S. Bernard, and other Saints were so formidable to them as they durst
not approach their sight; And for her, she fled sin more then any wicked
person followed it, as knowing that whosoever sinned, ipso facto felt into the
disgrace of Alm. God, a thing which of al other she dreaded most so as al her
delight was in the exercise of virtue and sanctity of life. To conclude, she
despised al honors of the world, as knowing she was shortly to go to the
possession of that supreme honor of being Queen of Heaven having nothing then
to divert her from it; and al helps and incitements to it, how could she choose
but be perpetually in contemplation?

The Declaration of the Ninth Starr.
THe Ninth Starr of our B. Ladies crown, is the Dignity she is exalted to,
above al creatures both in Heaven and earth, which by proper name, we may call
her Exaltation; since by it she is exalted above the highest heavens, above all the Orders of Saints, and Hierarchies of Angels, as the holy Church sings of
her praise: Exaltata es sancta Dei genitrix super choros Angelorum ad Caelestia
regna. Neither can we admire, that next unto himself, the sovereign king of
glory should advance her to the greatest he had, for she being his Mother there
was a kind of obligation on his part to honor her and do her al good he could,
since the honor which Children are bound to give to their parents, Consists
not only in words and ceremonious respect, but much more in effect and really
doing for them. Wherefore (says Hippolytus) he who has commanded this: Honora
patrem and matrem: honor thy father and thy mother, to fulfill the law which he
himself prescribes to others, would not (we must suppose) be wanting to his
Mother, in soever honor grace and glory he could bestow upon her. Now all the
privileges and advantages above others which the B. virgin has, are founded
upon these two principalls; the first, the infinite power of her B. son; in
consideration of which S. Augustine speaking of her Assumption both in soul and
body. says, that God could do it and why he did it not, those who denied it
were to give him a reason for it, The like argument we may use in point of the
B. Virgins glory,

The seconc is her dignity in being the Mother of God, who is infinite,
wherefore as the title of Son of God is the foundation on which we ground the
excellency of the humanity of Christ; so the title of Mother of God, is that,
on which we ground al her prerogatives, her singular graces, and her supreme
glory; for natural reason teaches us that the mother is more nigh to her
son, (excepting the Father) then any other kynn. Wherefore the B. Virgin
being the Mother of Jesus Christ, who was Incarnat in her sacred flesh, must
needs be nigher her son, in grace and glory, too, then any else besides.

So he would not rank her amongst the Hierarchies of Angels, for then there
had been others higher advanced then she amongst the Powers and Thrones; nor
amongst them, because the Cherubins and Seraphins surpast them in dignity; but
next unto himself, as was most fit, that his Mother might not be inferior
unto his servants, nor the Queen unto her subjects, where she sitts enthroned
with incredible pomp and Majesty, making a Hierarchy more high and excellent
by her self, then any of them al.

But what understanding can comprehend, or what tongue express the Glory she
is possessed of? For if the eye has never seen, the ear never heard, nor the
heart of man ever conceived, what God Alm. has prepared for those who love him;
how can one conceive, what he has prepared for her, who not only loved him,
but brought him forth, nourished, educated, and served him with such affection
and diligence? Only this we may imagine and say of it that glory and felicity
next to Alm. Gods, is the greatest that is in heaven, and that in comparison of
creatures she is holy above al holyes, happy above the happiest, has more
grace then those who have most besides, and has more glory then the most
glorious.

The holy Doctors speak marvayles of this Exaltation of hers, and amongst the
rest, S. Bernard says, that the glory she enioyes in heaven, bears a
proportion to the plenitud of grace she had on earth above al creatures else;
and adds, that as on earth there was not a more sanctified place then the
sacred Temple of the Virgins womb, which contained God himself, so in heaven
there is not a more glorious then her Throne, where she sitts exalted at the
right hand of God. In another place he says, the understanding of man cannot
conceive her glory, nor his tongue declare it, which puts the Inhabitants of
heaven it self to their admiration in beholding it. Andraeas Cretensis says,
that her glory can not be comprehended, for that it exceeds the glory of all the
Saints and Angels putt together. S. John Damascen, that there is a mighty
difference betwixt the servants and the Mother of God. S. John Chrisostom, that
the B. Virgin is more glorious incomparably then the Seraphins. B. Laurentius
Iustinianus, that all the glory and felicity which in scattered pieces is
distributed amongst the Saints, is found united in the B. Virgin And the
Seraphike S. Bonauenture says, that the greatness and goodness of God does more
manifestly appear in the B. Virgin only, then in all the rest of creatures, and
that al their perfections are in a more excellent manner to be found in her
then them; and he concludes, that as in grace and merits she surpasses al
other Saints, so likewise does she in felicity and glory. This and much to this
effect is said by them of the B. Virgins high exaltation answerable to the
height of her other merits and prerogatives, who being Mother of God, the
supremest dignity which any creature could be advanced unto, on earth.
Correspondent to it is this ninth Starr, and one of the brightest in her
glorious Crown of being advanced to so supreme a dignity in heaven.

The tenth Starr declared.
THe tenth, and that a most resplendant one, is the Empire and sovereign
command she has over the whole Universe, al creatures both in heaven and earth
and in the deapes below, acknowledging her superiority in reuerencing her for
it, and adoring her; there being a congruency, says S. John Damascen, that the
mother should partake of the sons dignity; And since he (says S. Athanasius)
who was borne of her, is King and sovereign Lord of al, consequently she who
bore him, is to beheld for sovereign Lady and Queen; so says S. Bernard; who
can deny her a legitimat claim to be Lady over al, of which her son is Lord.
Let us then acknowledge her authority over al, to be as great and unlimited as
her will. In consideraton of whose greatness S. Bernard breaks forth into this
exclamation: Al power, O sovereign Lady, in heaven and earth, is given you to
do what you will withal. S. Brigitt in one of her Revelations says, that at the
instant of her solemn entry into heaven, God advanced her above all the
heavens, gave her the Empire of all the Universe, and constituted her Lady and
Mistres of the Angels; and she confirms it in these words dictated unto her
by the holy Ghost: The principality of al people and nations she had (says she)
and by her virtue she treads upon the hearts of the Proudest and highest there.
And truly a wonderful dignity it is, which equals her (in a manner) with the
Lord of al; but a more wonderful and stupendous it is, that she should have an
authority even over him; which that it may seem less strange unto the ears
of flesh and blood, let us remember only, that she is his Mother and our
admiration will cease, for that filial obedience he owed her here on earth, he
stands not so quitt of in heaven, but it induces a kind of obligation in him to
grant her whatsoever she desires; whom there we may Imagine speaking unto her
thus: Demand of me, dear Mother, whatsoever you please, it is not lawful for
me to turn away my face.

This our triumphant Empress, to express unto us more unto the life the
greatness of her dignity, declares unto us in these remarkable words four
things: I alone have incircled the round of heaven, and have penetrated the
depth of the Abisse, and have walked on the waves of the sea, and have the
principality of al nations: signifying by the first part of the text the
dominion she has in heaven, by the second, that which she has in hell; by the
third, the benefit the souls in Purgatory receive by her; and by the fourth,
her dominion over all the world, and what can be more said of her dignity?
Unless what a devout servant of hers in a certain prayer unto her has said;
O most pure (says he) and singularly happy Virgin, al full of grace and glory,
the most blessed amongst al women, who surmou^test the Angels in purity, and
all the Saints in benignity next to your B. Son, you only command over this
world in chief, extending your favorable hand to al who lie and crave your
aid; and there is no hour nor moment equally amiable and admired, who have
conceived the Son of the Highest, and brought for the Savior of the world; O
Mother of salvation, and fountain of mercy, we miserable sinners in rendering
of them up, without last breaths sighe and groan to you, praying, saluting, and
acknowledging you Queen of this world, rejoicing at your greatness,
congratulating your glory, your souerainty and the place you hold at the right
hand of you B. Son, where becoming wholly in a manner divine, and having
nothing of mortal in you, you govern the heavens at pleasure, illuminat the
Sunn, rule the world, trample under foot the pride of hell, and have dominion
over the stars, the elements serve you, the seasons obey you, the Angels adore
you, the devils stand in awe of you, whole nations and Kings bow their knees
before you, and do you honor and reverence: O Lady of heaven and earth and
hell, your Majesty and Empire is so great a thousand tongues cannot speak it to
the full; and even the fowls of the air, the beasts of the land, and the
fishes of the sea do al acknowledge it at your beck, the flowers spring up,
pla^ts grow, and seeds sprout forth, the earth is fertilized, rivers flow, and
winds do blow, the lest will of yours can incline the destinies, and order
second causes, whilst the first is wholly at your dispose. Cast a gracious and
pitiful eye upon us poor sinners here, and declare the greatness of your
power, by helping us to overcome our selves, and to obtain remission of our
sins, grace here, and glory in the life to come by your prayers and merits,
unto which is nothing impossible; that after this miserable life, we may come
to enjoy that happy life, where we shall see our sovereign Lord, in whose sight
consists al our felicity.

The declaration of the eleventh Starr.
THE eleventh starr, whose splendor not only adornes her head, but the rays
of it thence do likewise reflect on us, and crown us with a supreme felicity,
is her Mediation betwixt God and man; one of the chief reasons according to the
holy Doctors, why God from eternity chose her for Mother, that as a most
powerful mediatrix her maternal prayers for sinners might mother at the rigor
of the divine justice, and occasion a reconcilement.

Jesus Christ (says S. Bernard) was sufficient) it is true) for our reparation,
from whom proceeds all that suffiseth thereunto; but it was well for us he joined
with him such an one as she; for although, as he is man, he be our most
faithful and powerful Aduocat, Yet such dayeling beams break through his
humane nature from his divinity that we cannot look upon him with that
confidence; and though he be infinitely gracious, yet being Judge with all,
offenders have small heart to approach unto him; for which reason the B. Virgin
was chosen for Aduocat, and meditatrix betwixt God and man, to whom there is
none can fear to approach, she having nothing in her of formidable or austere;
but rather being al sweetness and benignity and abounding in all goodness and
mercy. Thus S. Bernard.

None then, how great sinners soever they be, but may be confident of their
salvation, if they have but recourse to this our sweet and pitiful Lady, who
being constituted the mediatrix betwixt Sinners and Almighty God, most
faithful performs the charge, and like a true Mother of mercy stands always
with open arms ready to embrace those sinners who have their refuge unto her,
and it is impossible they should perish, if they have but recourse unto her as
they ought, if you will believe S. Anselme in his Book of the miracles of the
B. Virgin: O happy Mary (says he) as the sinner whom you forsake and detest
cannot but perish: so who converts him unto you, and you receive, and our
Savior, cannot but be saved. To which concords these excellent words of S.
Bernard so frequent with preachers to give hope unto the desperate sinner: O man
(say this great Doctor) thou have a sure access to God, where the son,
beholds, the mother, and the father beholds the Son, whilst the Mother shows
her son the breasts that gave him suck and her chaste womb; the son to his
father his wounds and pierced side; where so many loving signs concur to the
entertayning thee, thou can not be repelled.

And this cannot but be a great comfort to poor sinners, that they know they
have with the Eternal Judge such an Aduocat still present, or rather a mother
indeed who is his mother also. For so in the person of S. John, our Savior on
the Cross by these words, Woman behold thy son, commended her for mother
unto us al; at which time she had two sons on Mount Caluary both dead, the
one in body, the other in soul, one by the torments of the cross, the other
by languishing of spirit; of which one was her natural son, the other only by
adoption, the one innocent the other culpable. This in these words S. Anselme
would say: O shure refuge that we have, (says he) the Mother of God is our
mother also, and either of her children suffered death, in his passion, the one
upon the cross, the other by Infidelity; Judge you in what bitterness of mind
the while was the B. Virgin, etc.

And so there is no Mother would more rejoice, to see her only son revived
from death to life again, then the B. Virgin does when a sinner repents and
has recourse to her; and for me I am of opinion, that she glories in no title
more (excepting that of Mother of God) then of being Mother of sinners, and
consequently is most glad when she may show it most: Maria matter gratiae, matter
misericordiae; says the holy church; the very sound of whose name, me thinks,
has a certain sweetness in it, that promises al grace and clemency: In
confidence of which, S. Ignatius the martyr who lived in the Apostles times,
thus supplicats unto her: Receive me then, says he, in the bosom of your
maternal piety, you who are the mother of the sovereign Deity, true Mother of
our Savior and of sinners by Adoption. She is painted in a long vestment,
under which many are protected, to signify the maternal care she has over
them; and amongst the rest, the Fathers of S. Dominicks Order, are pictured so,
upon this occasion, (as S. Brigit received it by Revelation); S. Dominick near
his happy end, thus with tears in his eyes converted himself unto the B.
Virgin and said; Receive, O sovereign Queen, receive my brothers, whom with
such care I have nourished and educated under the spreadi^g veil of your great
mercy; govern them, and give them such force and courage, as their ancient
Enemy may never prevail against them; To whom she answered; I promise you, my
beloved Dominick for that you have loved me better then your self, to take a
tender care and protection of yours, and to receive both them and al those who
shall embrace your Rule under the covert of my veyle, which is my mercy, the
benefit of which and but demand it, I refuse to none. From whence we may
perceive, how great her mercy is to her devoted servants, to sinners who have
recourse unto her; and finally to al, in that she is the Mother of God, the
Mother of grace and mercy, the mediatrix betwixt God and man, one, of the
greatest dignityes she has in heaven.

The Twelfth Starr declared.
THe twelfth and last Starr, which diffuses over the world its brighter rays,
is the Universal honor, exhibited to our B. Lady, both from the Angels in
heaven, and men on earth, al calling her Blessed, in fulfilling that prophetie
of hers: Behold, al nations shall call me blessed; and she gives the reason;
Because the Almighty has done great things for me. Thus this divine Oracle of
verity has presaged of her self. that for her gracious privileges, and
sublime dignityes heretofore declared, she should be called Blessed by all the
nations of the Universe.

And so it is, for there is no climat so remote, no nation so barbarous no
people so vncultiuat, where the mother of God is not blessed and adored, and
her name celebrated by the tilte of the Queen of Heaven and earth, The first
Christian consecrated Temples and erected Altars to her honor those now make
solemn vows, and institut Sodalities in her name, so as there is no country
great or little, fertile or barren, where some Church or Oratory is not
dedicated to her name, nor any man so impious and wicked, who has not some
particular devotion to her; yea the Jews themselves, according to Josephus in
his Antiquityes, though mortal enemies to the name of Christan, are yet effused
in her praise; and S. Bonauentur says, this they affirm of her, that though
on the one side she was exceeding beautiful, yet on the other she never stirred
up in her beholders other then chaste desires, her modest and maiestick
presence repelling al unchaste thoughts, and purifying their minds with whom
she was present. Neither do the Nations more Infidel and Barbarous render her
less reverence; since according to S. Antonin in the third part of his Sum,
the very Turks and Moors in their Mosquees praise and honor her, and have
her name in such veneration, as whosoever blaspheme or speak irreuerently of
it, they punish them most rigorously. Whence we may see, how universally
honored she is, which is the dignity represented by the Twelfth Starr, with
which we conclude the contexture of her glorious Crown.

The faithful Christian then, who would call to memory these twelve prerogatives
of the B. Virgin, or rather would crown her with these 12. bright stars, must
every day in memory of them make twelve reuerences or inclinations; which while
he does) in profound silence) he is to call to mind the immensity of her
greatness in them, and endeavor to produce as many Acts of complacence and
congratulation with her for them, according to the instructions we have given
heretofore. There are many spiritual persons, who in memory of those 12.
stars, use to recite twelve times the Aue Maria, saluting her as often in that
manner as the B. Archangel S. Gabriel did.

I would counsel also, to do these reuerences with more devotion, and to stir
up our affection more to the service of the B. Virgin, that at every reverence
they would express by word of mouth, her several dignities and prerogatives,
which for that purpose I have briefly here expressed.

1. I reverence and adore you, O blessed Mary, the most illustrious Daughter of
the sovereign and eternal Emperor. 2. I reverence and adore you, the celestial
Spouse of the holy Ghost. 3. I reverence and adore you, the glorious Mother of
the Incarnat Word. 4. I reverence and adore you, Mother of the Omnipotent God.
5. I reverence and adore you, both Daughter, Spouse, and Mother of the holy
Trinity. 6. I reverence and adore you, who are highly seated in a Throne of
glory above all the Hierarchies of Heaven. 7. I reverence and adore you,
Treasurer of all the riches and graces of the Divinity. 8. I reverence and adore
you, most glorious Queen of Heaven. 9. I reverence and adore you, most worthy
Lady of the Angels. 10. I reverence and adore you, Empress of all the Universe.
11. I reverence and adore you, our most pitiful Mother and faithful Aduocat.
12. I reverence and adore you, whom al Kings and Monarkes of the earth do
reverence, and whom al heavenly Courtiers adore.
Another sort of Adoration, which for the greater variety of the devout
servants of the B Virgin, I have here annexed.

1. I Reverence and adore you, O B. Virgin Mary, with all the Angels of heaven.
2. I reverence and adore you, with all the Archangels. 3. I reverence and adore
you, with all the Virtues. 4. I reverence and adore you, with all the
Principalities. 5. I reverence and adore you, with all the Powers. 6. I
reverence and adore you, with all the Dominations. 7. I reverence and adore you,
with all the Thrones. 8. I reverence and adore you, with all the Cherubins. 9. I
reverence and adore you, with all the Seraphins. 10. I reverence and adore you,
O B. Virgin Mary, with all the Nations of the world. 11. I reverence and adore
you, with all the faithful departed souls. 12. I reverence and adore you, with all Creatures of Heaven, earth, and depts below.
These 12. reuerences the zealous honourer of the B. Virgin is to make with
great resentment and reflection of mind, because of the profound mysteries
contained in them; And by so doing, he shall adorn the head of the B. Virgin, a
more grateful Crown of these 12. Stars, then if it were al composed of 12. of
the richest Jewels in the world, nay of 12. of the most radiant Stars in
heaven.

Touching the acts of complacence, which we formerly mentioned, I have here
set down a form of them, which each one may exercise according to their
devotion.

Twelve Reuerences correspondent to the Blessed Virgins 12. prerogatives.
1. O Blessed Virgin, I heartily congratulat and rejoice with you, for your
being predestinat from al eternity to be Mother of our Savior Christ, and the
living Sanctuary of the holy Ghost.

2. O B. Virgin, I heartily congratulat and rejoice with you, for being
conceived without al spott of original sin, in such manner as you outshine
in purity and splendour the very Angels themselves.

3. O B. Virgin I heartily congratulat and rejoice with you, for your being the
first in consecrating your Virginity to God, which so many Virgins have
imitated since.

4. O B. Virgin, I heartily congratulat and rejoice with you, for being Mother
of the Omnipotent, the highest honor which you have in heaven, and on which al
your dignity depends.

5. O B. Virgin, etc. for the holy Ghosts illuminating you, in so excellent a
manner, at the holy Incarnation of the Son of God.

6. O B. Virgin, I heartily congratulat and rejoice with you, for your being so
replenished with divine grace, and endowed with all rare virtue and perfection.

7. O B. Virgin, etc. for your dignity of being of nearest trust and secrecy
with the sovereign Monarke both of heaven and earth.

8. O B. Virgin, etc. for that high privilege of yours, to have perpetual
fruition of the wisdom of Alm. God.

9. O B. Virgin, etc. for your being so highly seated in an eminent Throne
above all the Quires of Angels.

10. O B. Virgin, I heartily congratulat and rejoice with you, for the great
power and authority you have over all the Universe, and for that both heaven
earth and the depts below, obey your Commendements.

11. O B. Virgin, etc. and with our selves, for your being our reful and
affectionat Mother, and like a faithful Aduocat procuring every way our greater
good and advancement.

12. O B. Virgin: etc. finally for that all the world honors and adores your
name, celebrats your praises, and praises your graces, merits, and perfections.

And this devotion of taking complacence in the B. Virgins perfections and
dignityes, is souerainly grateful unto her; as was manifest to S. Brigit in her
Revelations upon this occasion. Her son being a brave and noble spirit, dying
in the holy wars, she anxious for his soul, besought the B. Virgin to reveal
unto her, in what estate it was; when behold, when she was in the greatest
fervor of her devotion, the B. Virgin appeared unto her, and comforted her in
this sort; my dear daughter, said she, be no longer solicitous for your son,
for I have taken care of his salvation, in visiting him before his decease, and
rendering his heart inaccessible to al sorts of temptations, and so as no doubt
of faith could bow it from the rectitud it was in, nay more, I made the passage
of death both sweet and easy for him, to the end the fear and terror of it
might not transport him either to impatience or despair. So, I cleared his
chamber of those devils assembled there, to lay snares for his soul, and
intrapp it at its departure thence, and at the instant of his soul and bodies
separation, I took it in my ne aryues, under the protection of which, I carried
it safe away from its infernal enemies.

And the reason of this te^dernes of hers she declared in another revelation,
when one day the holy Saint making her prayers at the Sepulcher of Christ, was
ravished in ecstasy into a sumptuous Palace, where she beheld our Savior Christ
on an Imperial Throne, and his B. Mother seated by his side, with an infinity
of Angels incircling them about; Presently after, she beheld her son present,
al trembling and in great dismay before this Throne to receive his Judgment
there, his Angel Guardian on his right hand, and the devil on his left, who
with a horrible voice thus cried out: most omnipotent Judge, I appeal to you
for Justice, and right of the greatest injury that was ever offered me; your
Mother against al equity has ravished that wicked soul out of my hands,
entering his chamber at the hour of his death, and excluding me and my company,
has debarred me of that privilege which you have granted me, to tempt every
soul at the article of time, when it will best be testified whether they belong
to me or you, then which greater injustice can there be imagined? To this, the
B. Virgin answered, though thou art the father of lies, yet in this thou have
but declared the truth, I have don all this indeed, and my reason for it was
this: This soul, while it was couuersant in the world, was so devoted to me,
as it rejoiced and took complacency in my dignity of being Mother of Alm. God,
and at my exaltation above all the quires of heaven, the pleasure of which it
would not have exchanged for all the contentments and pleasures of the world;
Judge then if I had not just reason to do what I did: O but (replied the
devil), all this cannot excuse it from an Injury to me, your debarring me
access to tempt him, as also your receiving his departing soul, and conueying
it hither which chiefly belongs to me; when converting himself unto the Judge
he said, of you then I demand justice (who ought to be as equitable, as you
are powerful) against this wicked soul here, who being arrived unto the years
of discretion, in steed of taking the right hand way of your commandments,
went on the left, in his transgressing them; wherefore I demand but Justice
that he be condemned; and here he insisted in particularising his mortal and
venial sins; at this, his good Angel interposed himself saying; thou wicked
feind, all this is but true, I grant what thou have said; but know thou not,
that his holy Mothers prayers incessantly offered up unto Alm. God for him,
have cancelled these, and obtained for him a true contrition, and sacramental
absolution for them before he dyed; besides her, and his many other holy works
don in satisfaction of them, how then can thou have the impudence to urge
them any more? go home, and keep company with damned souls, look not after
him, for he is a saved one. At this, the devil vanished away.

And by this we may see, the benefit of being devoted to the B. Virgin, of the
prayers of others for them, and of dying in a good estate, prepared unto it by
true contrition and Confession.

An excellent way of adoring the B. Virgin, in remembering the joys which she
had here. CHAP. XX.
THE common opinion is, that the B. Virgin had in this world, seven joyful
times in particular.

The first was, at her Annunciation. The second, the Visitation of S.
Elizabeth. The third, the glorious Nativity of our Savior Christ. The fourth,
the Adoration of the three Kings. The fifth, at the finding of her B. son in
the Temple. The sixth, at our B. Saviors apparition to her after his most
glorious Resurrection. The seventh, her happy decease, and glorious Assumption
into Heaven.
Now her devout servants may daily administer her matter of fresh Joy, by
calling these unto remembrance, and occasion to themselves a great increase of
merit and glory. The Angel Gabriels salutation to her of Aue, etc. was no other
then an Inuitation to rejoice, according to the interpretation of Origin; so
the holy Church sings her Antiphon: Gaude virgo gloriosa, etc. and in other:
Regind caeli laetare etc. and bids her rejoice and be glad; and in a third;
Gaude and laetare Virgo Maria.

Let us then announce unto her Joy by commemorating those her seven Joyful
mysteries, in this following Method, making at each one of them a low reverence.

1. Rejoice, O B. Mary, for that upon the salutation of the heavenly messinger,
you concerued in your sacred womb your son, to the incredible consolation of
your soul. 2. Rejoice, O B. Mary, for that you burning with divine love, and
incited by the holy Ghost, overcome the toil and labor of passing over the
high mountains of Jury, and visited your cosen Elizabeth, where you heard her
uttering your celestial praises, and magnifyed in spirit your Lord and Savior.
3. Rejoice, O B. Mary, for that at the end of nine months, you brought forth
into the world, the so long expected Messiah, bright as the sun of heaven,
while all the celestial Angels played in the beams of him, to your unspeakable
comfort. 4. Rejoice, O B. Mary, for that you saw the three Kings adoring your
B. Son, and conceived a fortunat presage from thence, of the Gentiles
conversion. 5. Rejoice, O B. Mary, for that after three days search, you found
your B. Son, to your excessive gladness, amongst the Doctors in the Temple,
where you were astonished amongst the rest, to hear him expound the deepest
mysteries of the holy Scripture, so clearly, and with such admirable
perspicacity. 6. Rejoice, O B. Virgin, for that after three days deluge of
tears, by the appearing of your glorious Son in his Resurrection, they were
al dried up, and you exceedingly reioyc't and comforted. 7. Rejoice, O B. Mary,
for that all the Apostles being assembled together at the happy hour of your
departure out of this mortal life, the third day after you were gloriously
Assumpted into heaven, where now you sit crowned and instated by the holy
Trinity Queen of Angels and of all the Universe.
S. Anselme, amongst our B. Ladies miracles, records this for one; that a
certain devout Religious man, whose custom it was, daily in his deuotio^s, to
remember the 7. Joys of our B. Lady, being now near his end, and exceeding
fearful of that last Agony, our B. Lady appeared unto him, and comforting him
said, my son why should you fear? you who have so often rejoiced me with the
remembrance of the greatest Joys I had in my mortal life? take courage, and
assure your self no evil shall happen unto you, but you shall soon be partaker
of those Joys which you have so often announced to me: with whose celestial
presence he was so comforted, that forgetting his sickness while he endeavored
to rise, and through joy to cast himself at her feet, his soul prevented his
body, and went out before to the fruition of those Joys which she had promised
him.

The foresaid Joyful mysteries may be distributed to each Hour of the Office
of the B. Virgin, The first, at Mattins; the second, at Prime; the third, at
the Third Hour; The fourth, at the Sixth; The fifth, at the Ninth; the sixth, at
Vespers; and the seventh, at Complin; On each one of which we way devoutly
meditat the while, and so in the like manner we may meditat then on our Beads;
a devotion most acceptable to our B. Lady, as from this Example we may
perceive, recounted by Pelbert in the Stellary of the B. Virgin.

There was, says he, a young man, who making himself Religious of S. Francis,
his Order, was accustomed before he entered into Religion, to crown a certain
Image of our Lady with a wreath of flowers which he daily gathered for that
intent, but being once become Religious, wanting the commodity of flowers, he
intermitted this devotion, though so unwillingly as the leaving that, made him
resolve at last, to leave being Religious also, and being upon the point of
departing the Convent, behold our B. Lady appeared unto him saying; leave off
that your so pernicious resolve upon so triuial an occasion, and if you desire
to undertake a devotion grateful unto me, in steed of making me a material
crown of flowers, offer me up a spiritual one of salutations, and I shall be
far more delighted with it, and the form of it shall be this: you shall first
say a Pater noster, in memory of the Joy I conceived when the Angel saluted me
and the Eternal word was Incarnat in my womb, and say. 10. Aue Marias in
consequence thereof. Secondly, you shall do as much; in memory of the Joy I had
in visiting my cosen Elizabeth: and so forth, unto the seventh Joy I had;
which you shall conclude with the last three Aue Marias of your Beads, so the
whole number will amount to 7. Paters and 63. Aue Marias; which devotion if you
shall daily perform in mine honor know you shall much more please me, then in
that other devotion which you had; and having said this, she vanished away,
leaving him exceedingly comforted and strengthened in his vocation. Now it
happened that whilst one day he was performing this devotion, a certain
Religious beholding him by chance, saw an Angel standing by him, threading on
a golden thread, as many roses as the Nouice said Aue Marias, and for each
Paternoster a golden lilly: al which when the Nouice had done he joined them
together, and crowned his head with them; the Religious man astonished at this
vision, charged him by virtue of holy obedience, to declare unto him what
deuotio^s he used; which he doing with great sincerity, the Religious man
encouraged him to persist therein, assuring him it was a devotion the B. Virgin
was delighted with.

And S. Bernard exercising this devotion our B. Lady appeared unto him once,
saying unto him; my son, this devotion of thine, is exceeding grateful to me,
and that thou may perceive so much, I have obtained of my son for thee in
reward thereof, the grace of preaching, and of working miracles; besides, I
promise you, one day to make you participant of those Joys which you daily call
to remembrance; and de facto soon after, the holy Saint began to be famous
indeed for miracles, and to abound in innumerable graces, and converted a world
of souls by his learned preachings and force of his miracles.

Of the Interior Reuerences we are to exhibit to the Glorious Queen of
Heaven, and of the place, time, and occasion of exercising them. CHAP. XXI.
HITHERTO we have spoken of the Adorations we are to make, the exterior
accompanying the interior, with relation to man's composition consisting both
of body and soul; Now because those exterior are not always to be performed,
neither are all places and times accomodate for them, we wilonly speak of such
interior Adorations as we may be exercising, they being only acts of adoration
produced by the Will; which according to S. Thomas, are those which the Blessed
in heaven only exhibitvnto Alm. God. These then, there is none but may
perform, when in the performance of the others, they are hindered either for
want of commodity of place or time, and these indeed are the most excellent of
al, and most acceptable to Alm. God, as those without which the others were
nothing worth.

And it being our principal scope, to treat of reuerencing the Mother of God,
we will only exemplifye in that, and instruct her votaries in the place, and
Time, when and where they are principally to be exercised. In all times and
places they may comodiously be produced, but chiefly when for the company of
others we cannot exercise any other devotion, as also when we ride, walk,
eat, or take repose; at al which times it is but lifting up our mind to
heaven, and to say with our heart: I humbly adore you, O B. mother of my Savior
Christ; I adore you O Queen of Angels, or the like; in only doing of which, we
sanctify al we do, making every one of those indifferent actions, aequiualent
to prayer: happy the ground they go on, happy the bread they eat, and the
rest they take, who are so exercised the while; So when the Clock strikes, it
were a good devotion in this sort to eleuat our mind, as also before each Hour
of our B. Ladies Office, producing an act of interior complacence, saying with
our heart: I exceedingly rejoice O B. Virgin, for your high honor of being
Mother of God, of being Queen of heaven, etc. which cannot but be most
acceptable and grateful unto her. In the mean time this devotion were best
perfomed on their knees, it being a posture most repugnant to sloth and
tepidity.

Besides, for those who are troubled with infirmity, age, or any other weakness,
this devotion were best, as that which without any difficulty they may
perform, since there is none but have their spirit free, or at least so free,
as for a glance or so they may reflect it upon heaven, how ever otherwise they
are incumbreds, And a great consolation this ought to be to every one, that
without any other pains, then the only lifting up the mind to God, so it be
don with spirit and viuacity, one may merit so much, as to arrive to most high
perfection. When one then, is sitting by the fire, or reposing on the bed, let
them but exercise their minds in these Interior acts of devotion, and even
when they seem to men most idle, they shall appear unto God most virtuously
employed. O most happy employment, that a man in a manner doing nothing, may do
as the very Angels in heaven, And while some, to find out solitud and
devotion, retire them to the Deserts, and live Eremites lives, he that
exercises but these adorations, has all that within himself, which they seek
abroad, and may as soon arrive to the height of perfection by this easy way, as
by the most fatigable they can go. Besides, these acts of Adoration have yet
another benefit, that they expose us not to vainglory, which others perhaps may
do, as being only betwixt God and our selves performed in the interior of our
soul, which by so much the more innobles them above the other, as the soul
exceeds the body in nobility; and therefore of the bodies operations we are to
have no regard at al, further then they go accompanied with the attention of
the mind, comfortable to that saying of the Apostle: Corporalis exercitatio ad
modicum vtilis est.

But to return to our purpose, the servant of the Queen of heaven is to the
uttermost bent of spirit and industry to employ himself in these interior
Adorations, as far forth as the circumstances of time place, and occasion shall
give him leave. Notwithstanding he is to have regard the while to accompany
them (if he can) with exterior reverence both because the one much aids the
other, as also because the neglect of them always implies an inexcusable
negligence; which that Example which Pelbert recounts, does well declare,
happening in his time in Hungary, and recounted unto him by a Religious man of
worthy credit, and it is this: A Religious of the same Order was accustomed
ever at the Aue Maria bell, or Angelus Domini, to rise out of his bed at the
hours of night, and humbly on his knees salute the Queen of heaven; This
devout custom once, being persuaded by sloth and lazines, he omitted, when
behold, being fallen a sleep again, he seemed in his sleep to see, the Church
steeple eue^ incline it self unto the ground; which sight three times being
represented unto him in sleep, at last he imagined that he heard these words;
Miserable and negligent creature as thou art, art thou not ashamed to see even
senseless creatures thus bow down themselves in reverence to the Mother of God,
whilst thou sensible as thou art, neglectest it? by which vision touched with a
lively sorrow for this neglect, he became more feruorous thereafter in his
devotions.

These interior Reuerences then, although of themselves they be of never so
high worth and dignity, yet when commodiously they may be done, we are never to
neglect the exterior, but still accompany the one with the other, that the
fervor of the one joined with the other pain may render them more
meritorious; and the best place for the exercising these devotions is, when the
commodity of some Chapel or Oratory is offered us, at which time we are upon
our knees, in a more particular manner to commend our selves to Alm. God and
his B. Mother; And of this we have for pattern our Savior Christ, who as often
as he ascended to Jerusalem, repaired ever to the Temple, the first thing he
did, to offer up to his eternal Father his prayers and adoratio^s. In imitation
of which, those of the Capucines Order have a constitution, that when they
arrive in any place, they are first of al to resort unto the Church, and there
to adore the Blessed Sacrament: the words of the Constitution are these: Being
arrived to the place where we are to go, to show our selves true sons of the
Eternal father, we are first to visit the Church, where having don reverence,
etc.

And diverse by these means have escaped imminent dangers; as appears by this
following story, recounted by the Illustrious James Voragius Archbishop of
Genua, in his history of the B. Virgins Assumption.

There was (says he) a person of quality, whose wife excelled in all virtues,
but principally in devotion to the B. Virgin, so as no day past that in some
reverent and Religious manner she did not honor her. Now it happened that her
husband through his excessive prodigality, at last fell into want and misery, in
so much as one day some noble men inuiting themselves to dinner with him, and
he wanting means to entertayne them, in that splendid and abundant manner as
he was wont, to avoid the shame went forth into a wood, where he intended to
absent himself while they might be come and gone without taking notice of their
visiting him; whilst in a Melancoly passion he wandered up and down then
revoluing in his mind into what misery he was fallen, behold a person of a
horrible aspect, mounted upon a horse no less horrid then he appeared unto
him, requesting him to let him know his cause of discontent; To whom the
Gentleman (after he had recollected his spirits which fear with its dismay,
had putt to flight at first) declared his whole fortunes; at which (quoth the
other) if that be al, take comfort, for I will promise you (grant me but one
request) to reduce you to an estate more rich and opulent then ever you were
in before; It must be a strange request (said the Gentleman) I should not grant
you upon that condition; nay, it is but easy in performance said the devil) for
it was he disguised in that shape) to wit, that on such a certain day and
hour you bring your wife along with you, and meet me in this place: and this
being agreed upon, the devil directed him to a cave, where he found a mighty
treasure, by the help of which, recovering out of his necessity, he lived in a
more noble way then ever. Now it happened, the time drawing nigh, when (as he had
promised) he was to take his journey with his wife unto the place appointed.
and she perceiving that som-what extraordinary was in hand, by his hasty
warning her to prepare to take horse with him, and the trouble of his
Countenance, when she could by no means get out of him what it was; she
recommended the matter to the B. Virgin, and presently took horse so obedient
to her husband, as never to examine further his intentions; Now it happened on
their way, that passing by a little Chapel dedicated to our B. Lady, the Lady
by the consent of her husband lighted and went in, only in mind to do her
devotions, and return again; but behold, whilst with prayers and tears she
commended to the Queen of heaven the good success of her affairs, she was
divinely cast into a sleep mean while the B. Virgin assumed her shape, and
with her husband went on her way.

They were no sooner arrived at the entry of the wood, but the devil with great
noise and fury appeared unto the Gentleman, not daring to approach unto him for
fear of our B. Lady (whom presently he knew) but casting on him a stern
regard in this manner he spoke unto him; ungrateful and perfidious as thou art,
is this all the reward I have, for those great benefits thou have received of
me? did thou not promise to conduct thy wife hither unto me, and in her steed
had thou brought here the mother of Alm. God? It was against thy wife (since
against this I cannot) I intended to avenge my self, for her being so diligent
in the honor and firm affection to the Queen of heaven.

Whereunto the B. Virgin thus answered him: and whence is this temerity thou
abominable Feind, that thou should dare to offer any injury to those who
love and reverence me? go hence to Hell again, and desist from malicing them,
upon pain of a greater hell, then ever yet thou feltst; When the devil with a
violent clatter, as if all the wood had been torn up by the roots, strait
vanished away, and left the Gentleman in such affright, as he fell flatt to the
ground before the B. Virgins feet, beseeching her pardon for his offense; who
sharply reprehending him for it, commanded him to go back unto the Chapel, to
awake his wife out of her trance, and returning home with her, to discharge his
house of al those il gotten goods, so damnable to keep: Al which he punctually
did, and quitting both those goods and his evil together, he became in short
time of more plentiful fortune, then ever he was before, by the special favor
of the Queen of heaven; who is always succourable and merciful to those, who
implore her aid in their necessityes, and advantage them with high graces and
privileges, who endeavor to honor her with this excellent sort of
Adorations, as well exterior as interior, which hitherto we have largely treated
of; together with the reasons, discourse, authority, and wondrous examples,
which should induce us to the embracing of it, which is the principal scope and
aim of all this work.

And now at last, we have brought it to an end, by the particular favor and
assistance of Alm. God, obtained through the intercession of his glorious
Mother, our most benign and B. Lady; whom we beseech by the same intercession,
to render us worthy of the participation at last of eternal good, which being
only that, which can satiat indeed, can only render us on al parts happy and
content.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Print.
PAge 8. line 1. read which God p. 13. l. 2. the cause, p. 16 l. 14. vanished,
at sight of, p. 17 l. 17 al which, p. 36 l. 18 at his, p. 38 line 9
Sovereign, p. 48 l. 1. the Dungeon, p. 51 l. 9 Confessor, p. 59. l. 15 freed,
p. 61 l. 7 hear our, l. 10. supplicat p. 63. l. 7 was a, p. 64 l. 12 at the,
p. 65. l. 2 tenderness p. 72 l. 9 conclude, p. 88 l. 3 offered, p. 98 l. 10
Savior, p. 103 l. 19 curiously, p. 109 l. 12 abiectly, l. 13 at the worlds p.
111 l. 1 they presently undertook, p. 115 l. 8. months space, p. 121 l. 12
adorning, p. 113 l. 7 title of, p. 131 l. 8 not such, p. 147 l. 11 chose, p.
148 l. 8. the like, p. 157 l. 9 that p. 164 l. 17 words, p 169 l. 3 execution,
p. 178 l. 8 high nobility, p. 182 l. 13. them most, p. 186. l. 1 near the, p.
189 l. 1. altar, p. 210 l. 18 gust, p. 218 l. 4 holy man, 131. l. 14 man of, l.
15 may well, p. 236. l 22. theirs there, p. 237 l. 2. them, p. 260. l. 5 this
deedr p. 262 l. 11 afterward, p. 184 l. 15 at al, p. 289 l. 16 then, p. 315
l. 4 protection, p. 322 l. 3 earth, l. 6 could I allege, p. 329 l. 19 better,
p. 338 l. 17 at each: p. 349 l. 3 at Paris, p. 374 l. 15 them, l. 20 he says,
p. 390 l. 22 hour, p. 400 l. 8 fiercenes, p. 416 l. 8 bevved his knees, p. 446
l. 18 he was, p 455 l. 5 ask, p. 463 l. 6 and the, p. 464 l. 5 lawyer, p.
473 l. 16 of his, p. 437 l. 17 environed, p. 492 l. 2 he has, p. 520 l. 12 she
was, p. 534 l. 19 fell, p. 553 l. 16 mediatrix, p. ^81 l. 11 conceived.


