A True and perfect Description of the Cittadell or Fort of St. MARTINS in the
Isle of REE.
THE CYTADELL or FORT



YOu may see in this Map sent over from the Island, by a Gentleman of quality, a
true Description of the Cittadell or Fort, seated near to the Town of St.
Martins, in the I Will of Ree, beleaguered at this present by the the English
Army, under the command of the most illustrious Prince, the Duke of
BVCKINGHAM. This place (which is now held by Monsiur Thorax, and 1500.
Frenchmen appointed for that Service) is almost of a perfect Quadrangular
form, every point flanking one another, according to the precisest rules of
Fortification. The Caualier or Keep it self, is made of free stone, and has
without it a Counterscarfe of earth, the Rampires whereof are about 18. foot
high. Under this there lies three half Moons, the points whereof are directed
toward another Counterscarfe, which being the uttermost of all, is also made
of stone, and serves for a circumuallation unto the rest of the works, being
about an English mile in compass. The ground upon which it is seated, is for
the most part sandy, only to the North side it stands on a hard rock, which
being environed with the Sea, makes the Fort vnapproachable of that side. The
English entrench themselves upon the three other Auenues, from the land side,
and having drawn their approaches within the distance of Musket shot at point
blanke, they have raised diverse batteries upon several platformes to answer
the Counterbatteries of the Enemies, upon which the besieged have planted ten
or twelve whole Cannons, besides many other Pieces of Ordnance of the lesser
size. And although our men severally do their duties, both Officers and
common Soldiers three or four days in a week, by watching in the Trenches,
Approaches, and Batteries, yet they gain ground still of the French, and
think no labor too much, nor task to heavy which may tend to the public
good, and to the service of their King and Country. Wherein they are
encouraged by the presence of their General, who carries a Cudgel in one hand,
and Coin in the other, to punish the sloathfull, and to reward the virtuous.
Most nights his Excellence walks the first round personally himself, and if
he finds any man negligent in his duty, he causes him to suffer according
to the quality of his offense for the good example of others. Monsieur Thorax
the Governor of the Cittadell, offers to clear himself of the horrible
complot against the Duke, by seeking to murder him (by his Minister) with a
Rauilliacke Knife. But notwithstanding all his Appologies and excuses the
common suffrage of opinion has found him guilty of that ignoble crime. The
French that are besieged hold in their horns, and though they were very
daring at our first landing; yet ever since they have showed themselves no
hotespurres, for they have suffered themselves to be surrounded with our
Intrenchments, and yet never made as much as one sallie. They are much
distressed for want of Water, ever since their Conducts were cut off, so that
they hang up sheets in the air, to take the raine-water that falls down.
Their provision of victuals within is not great, and if we may believe those
Fugitives which run from them daily, the better sort of them eat horseflesh
for great dainties. And which is worse, they are not like to be relieved in
have, all the Land-passes being quite blockt up, and the Sea being so carefully
kept by our Fleet, that a Skiffe or long-Boate cannot pass in without
discovery and surprisall: So that there is great hope (if we fasten our
judgments on probable conjectures) that Famine or the Sword will master this
place, notwithstanding all reports and conjectures to the contrary.

B Is our Batteries. G Is our Gardens, or Vineyeards. T Is our Trenches. R Is
our Redoubts E Is the Enemies Stone-workes, and Trenches from the Fort. S Is
the Seas. W Is the Well which they live by.
The Fort has 1500 Men, beside Women and Children.

Printed at London for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at the Eagle and
Child in Britains Bursse. 1627.


