The City Mouse.


The Country Mouse, AND The City Mouse.

OR A merry morrall Fable, enlarged out of Horace. Sermon. lib. 2. Sat. 6.

Rusticus urbanum murem, mus paupere fertur,
Accepisse cavo, veterem vetus hospes amicum*
In former time a Country Mouse
That in a Cave did live:
Unto a wealthy City Mouse
Did entertainment give.
The second Edition.



LONDON, Printed by Tho, Cote's, for Michael Spark Junior, and are to be sold
at the blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1637.

A Caveat to Readers.
LEt the Envious strive to show
His scorn of this Fable below
His fancy which must mounted be,
Above the Readers Charity,
As if he strived to relate
Mysterious Oracles of Fate.
This Fable is no fine device,
But an old Fable of two Mice,
Which desires no commendation
But to be read for Recreation.
For these Mice may talk in season,
Having eaten many a Reason,
Therefore if the Reader likeum,
Mus novum accipit amicum.
Which is to say, the Mice intend,
To count that Reader a new friend.
THE COUNTRY MOVSE; AND The City Mouse.
IN Italy, a Country rich in pleasure,
Which nature had adorned with all her treasure,
Both to delight the eye, and feed the sense;
And seeming prodigal in her expense
Had made the air sweet with the breath of flowe^rs
Which were begot by soft and gentle showers.
Here on the bending of a Hill there stood,
Some pleasant trees which made a shady wood,
And here it chanced that a Country Mouse
Did live alone, and kept a Country house.
His house was not so spacious as those are
Whose lofty Pinicles advanced with care
May seem the living grave of some rich man:
Who does usurp authority, and can
In a fair roomy building, keep a house
Of such clean diet that shall starve a mouse.
But such was not the Cottage, nor the Cave,
Wherein this Country Mouse, did live most brave
And most complete, for though it were not large
And spacious, yet this Mouse at his own charge,
Did keep a good warm house, well stord with plenty
The larders, nor the Butteries were not empty,
As in these pinching days, no, he had store
Of rich provision, and that is no soar.
And first he had brave yellow Bacon, which
For fatness was both glorious and rich,
And some dry chippins that long time had been
Kept in the moldy Prison of a Binne:
Yet you must know this Country Mouse by nature
Was but a covetous and hide bound creature,
That stored up provision without end,
Which he did choisely keep and would not spend
Until that hunger did compel, then he
Unto himself would somewhat liberal be.
Yet he would feed alone, and often did grutch
To think his belly should devour so much,
The thought of a dear year kept him in awe,
So that with Acornes he would scour his mawe,
With Acornes or with some far courser fare,
And as the Miser does his God, would spare
His chief provision, yet his narrow mind
Did somewhat now enlarge, he grew more kind:
To counterfeit a virtue he nere had
Liberality, he showed himself right glad,
That the City Mouse would come visit him
In his poor Cottage, whereby it did seem
He forgot not his poor friends, thus he went
Forward with his dissembling complement.
The City Mouse as cunning, did return
His Country Complement with a kind of scorn,
Casting a look on him which seemed to pity
His ignorance that never knew the City,
Imagining that Wit must be confined
To Cloakes that are with Plush and Velvet lined:
And that a Country man (as we do say,)
Has not a mother wit as well as they.
The City Mouse it seemed conceived so,
But now the Country Mouse begins to show
Unto the other all his rooms, contrived
In such a manner, as if he had strived
To imitate the Labarinth of Greece;
Where Theseus obtaind the Golden Fleece.
Being so intricate, for it did wind
And turn about, so that no Art could find
The way out of it, and such was the Cave
Wherein this Mouse did live, and wisely save
His Fathers wealth, his parlour was thick spread
With rushes, which were dry and withered.
I should at first indeed have named the Hall,
But that his house had no such room at all,
He kept no Liveries, nor did he feed
A crew of serving Creatures, nor did need
A Hall wherein they might unto his credit
Entertain strangers, no he did not need it,
But scorning such old fashions, he had none,
For entertainment but his dining room:
On this hand stood his Buttery where he laid
The Meat and Chippins which he had convaid
From rich men's houses, and there went a way,
Which led unto a Seller, where there lay.
Some Crabs, and wildings with whose sharp sour juce
To quench his thirst he oftentimes did use,
He had no greasy kitching, for his meat
Was always dressed, ready for to eat.
Yet he had Larders where he laid his store,
And a bedchamber, with diverse rooms more:
For you must know, an old and ancient Mole,
Was at the charge of building of this hole;
And you do know a Mole, can forthwith cast,
A house at his own proper charge and cost,
Much workmanship, are in his models found,
Although the building be still underground.
And it did seem, this fair house did belong
Unto a Mole, but he was dead and gone,
And being defunct, both his goods and lands,
As others do, came to a strangers hands,
But this is but a needless fond digression,
The Country Mouse had gotten now possession,
And warmely lived therein full many a day,
And to the Lord of the soil did not pay
Any rent at all, which made him to grow bolder,
Because he knew that he was a freeholder.
But let this pass, the Country mouse having shown
The City Mouse his house and every room,
As he had given content unto his sight,
He thought to yield his stomach some delight.
For the belly when a merry tale it hears,
Takes no delight because it has no ears,
The hungry belly loves no tales I wish,
Unless it be a Tail of buttered fish.
It loves a pudding, wherein plumbs do stick,
Better than Aristotle's Rhetoric.
But I make haste now to describe the feast,
Wherewith he did receive his dainty guest,
So that Vitellius feasts though Sea, and Field,
The earth, the air and all did freely yield
Their several sacrifices to his Table,
Yet to compare with this they were not able.
Yet not for store, but this was more complete,
Because it did exceed the dull conceit
Of Cooks to make such, unles they turn thieves,
When they do make a dinner for the Shreeves.
Sure not one bit of meat or bread was here,
But had been stolen before it came there.
He set before him ground Oats for to fill
His belly, which were stolen from a Mill,
With Pease, and other Pulse, and yellow Bacon,
In pecces, which he cunningly had taken
Out of a Cubboard, for his time he spide,
When the Maid swallowed sleep by the fire side,
When night grew old, and the candle burnt dim,
Then presently to filch he did begin,
Also some husks of grapes which being pressed,
Last vintage had bled forth wine of the best.
Also some fragments of dry Pasty Crust,
Wherein some lushious meats to heighten lust,
Had smoak't sometime, or else some Goose had been,
Within this funeral Coffin closed in,
Which at the private Sessions of a feast,
Had been carved round about to every guest.
And thus the Country Mouse with change of fare
To please the City Mouse, did take great care,
That with variety he might yield delight,
To the City Mouse, whose costly appetite,
Expected greater cheer, and was so dainty,
He scarce would taste of any, in such plenty
And store of dishes: but the Country Mouse,
(who may be styled the Master of the house,)
At the others niceness inwardly did laugh,
And being laid along in this years chafe,
He only fed upon dry Beans and Pease,
And Barley, or such other pulse as these,
Or on hard Petches that might exercise
His teeth, at these he closely nubling lies,
But for the other dishes he did spare
To taste them, since indeed he thought they were
Too costly; for his sparing was too great
To allow his belly any such good meat,
It Was an affliction unto him to waste
His store in such a manner, or to taste
Of those same dishes; with which it did seem,
His stomach never had acquainted been.
And herein he did lively represent
Some Miser, whose mind is so closely bent
Upon his riches, that he does command
The occasions of his life, to wait and stand
At the will of his purse, he must not dine
If his purse check him, he must drink no wine
If his purse check him, then it is not good:
For he pretends it will inflame his blood.
And thus the Miser basely serves his purse,
Money is not his blessing, but his curse,
Who out of covetousness inures his Pallet
With Diogenes, to feed on a poor Sallet,
With musty Vinegar, and no oil at all,
This is the man whom we a miser call.
He with this Country Mouse does well agree,
For both of them alike conditioned be.
The Country Mouse did set before his guest
His chiefest fare, to feast him with the best,
But for him self he did allow the worst,
And in this manner covetous men are cursed:
But at the last the City Mouse to show,
That from the City he his breeding drew,
Where it is held a point of manners great,
To talk and complement, as they do eat,
The City Mouse to observe due decorum,
And show he was of the been moratorum,
Or the well manured, began to stroke
His beard with his foot, and in Print thus spoke,
Kind friend quoth he, know I am of the City,
And therefore I your ignorance do pity,
Had you any wisdom or intelligence,
You would not live here with such patience,
On the backside of a dark wood alone,
Without company or conversation.
Having no pleasant objects which may yield
Delight unto you, but a hedge or field,
Or store of trees wherein the wind does make
A hollow noise, when he their leaves does shake.
If thou had wit or ingenuity,
Thou would not prefer the society
Of beasts and trees before men, therefore leave
This melancholy Cell, which does bereave
Thee of delight, come therefore follow me
Unto the City, where all pleasures be,
And since that we who are terrestiall creatures,
Have all of us but frail and mortal natures,
And after life we must return again
Unto the earth, and no part shall remain
Of us, to tell the world that we have been,
To live in pleasure, it to me does seem
The readiest way to happiness that is known,
Our summum bonum, is a good fat bone.
These Latin words I once by chance did eat,
While I a book did gnaw, since that I speak
These words by rote, and as some do, so I
On all occasions bring forth and apply,
Because I have no more; but to the matter
My friend and Country Mouse I would not flatter
Your understanding, for believe me death
Will one day stop the pipes of our weak breath,
If we were nere so great, yet you and I
Must yield to time, for men and Mice must dye.
Nay there is no exception, none can have,
Nor great nor small a Privilege from the grave,
Therefore be wise, make use now of thy time,
Before thy days run on, and strength decline.
Cherish thy self, and banish heavy sorrow,
Think not on cares that shall ensue to morrow.
Because our time will quickly have an end,
Let us be sure our precious hours to spend,
In such delights, that every greedy sense,
May have his object, age does bring offense,
And takes away the enjoying of all pleasure,
Then let us now enjoy our youthful leisure:
Let us make time grow young, to see how we
Do wast our time in mirth and jollity,
And since our time will quickly waste away,
Friend Country Mouse, it is wisdom to obey
My counsel, and therefore come go with me,
Unto the City where all pleasures be.
Come go with me, and thou shall quickly find
That in the City, which will please thy mind.
The Country Mouse harkning unto the story,
Which the City Mouse, unto the Cities glory,
Did thus set forth, in all her Pagentry
Consented unto him most willingly.
It seems he had no great intelligence,
And therefore he was drawn on by his sense,
For of his speech he understood none of it,
But that which touched his pleasure, or his profit:
Like to some men who nothing understand,
Until the matter be put into their hand,
Even so this Mouse imagining that he,
Should in the City live in Iollity
And height of Pleasure; does consent to go
With the City Mouse; and so away they two
Do trudge together, for both lightly skipt
Out of the house, and so away they tript,
And thus together they jog'd on a while,
Till having gone the length of one good mile
They reached their journey, and at last they came
To the City gates, where a blinckling flame
Of Candle in a lantern, seemed to watch
The sleepy bill men, that stood there to catch
Some wandering drunkard, whose light giddy head
Was reeling home to find the way to bed.
But happy were those Travelers, or Mice,
Who coming to the gates did in a trice
Slip in between them, and in this fashion
They past the watch without examination.
And now it was the mid-time of the night,
And Luna in her chariot shined bright,
While these two Mice did strike up many streets,
The Country Mouse at every thing he meets
Did wonder much, for when that he had seen
A Conduite, he imagined it had been
A bottle wherein Widows tears were kept,
Which at their husbands burial they had wept.
He thought the signs that on the signeposts hung
Were hanged for some offense that they had done,
And when he saw a Tavern, he was bold
To ask if any ale at all was sold
In that Gentleman's Hall; The Country Mouse
Thought every Tavern had been an Alehouse,
And that the bush an Ivy bush bad been
Where the old Owl or Buzzard lived within,
Thus every thing appeard most strange and rare,
For strangers with new objects taken are:
So was this Mouse, who in the Country saw
No rarities or sights were worth a straw,
But in the City each thing did invite
His eyes, to gaze with wonder and delight,
And now suppose that they at last arrived
At the house of a Citizen, who thrived
So much in getting store of wealth, that he
Exceeded all the rest of his degree,
And he it seems had made a Misers feast;
Who seldom making any, had expressed
More bounty then he used, for there came
Many dishes from the table, to remain
In the keeping of the Butler, to be made
A standing sacrifice, and to upbraid
The guests in cold blood for their gluttony,
For their excess and wanton luxury.
In a large platter here a Goose did lie,
Of whom they had made an Anatomy,
As it had been dissected at the Hall
By cruel Surgeons, for to the bone all
His flesh was pared off; and then moreover,
There were some pasties that had half a cover,
Some quaking Custards that had been attempted
With many spoones, and so had been half empted.
Besides some Tarts that had been cut with knives
And dealt about unto the talking wives.
To sweeten their conceits, whose froward hearts
Do make their husbands often sup with Tarts.
Also there was a worshipful piece of beef
Which is held to be of all meats the chief.
Besides the bones of fowls that had deserved
So ill at their hands to be cut and carved,
While the woodcocke, whose name is ill abided,
Amongst the wiser sort had been divided.
There were wings of Partridges, Ducks, and Quales
The legs of Turkies, Phesants, Snipes, and Railes
As if they had ransackt the Sea and Field,
And got all kind of foul, the Arc did yield:
The Country Mouse likt all this good cheer well,
And ayrd his stomach with the wholesome smell
Of such good fare, for with much readiness,
These Mice into the Buttery got access,
At a small hole, was underneath the door,
And when they saw of cheer such costly store,
The Country Mouse therewith was well content
And the City Mouse without all Complement,
Bid him welcome, and advised him to eat,
For here quoth he you see is store of meat,
Dispense with my blunt phrases for it is night,
And to use many words would but afright
The Servants in the house; if we should squeake
In a loud key, out of their sleep they would break.
Content quoth the Country Mouse, let us fall
About the meat, and make no noise at all.
Withat the Country Mouse straightway did lay
His teeth to a Ducke that was in his way,
And spoiled the fashion of his wings then next
The body of a Turkey, he straight vexed
With gnawing it, and then again to change
His diet he began again to range,
And fasten on a Quail, then on a Snipe,
And all this while his mouth he did not wipe,
Forgetting Ceremonies and all manners,
For these two Mice had never learnt their Grammars
Of morrall matters, or of Civillity,
And therefore they scorned all formality:
When they had eaten hard seeing such store
The Country Mouse since he could eat no more,
Was very sorry for he did never taste,
Such dishes as had at this feast been placed.
Before this time, so that he thus did say,
Happy are such as eat and sport, and play.
We may talk of wonders, but I think it is right
That sensual pleasures yield the most delight
Though some termed Clarks are more intelligible
Yet Mice, and Maidens still are sensible,
And this morrall Note I will gather hence
The soul of pleasure lies in the sense.
Why do we talk, yet why are we afeard?
A Mouse is a Philosopher by his beard.
But now all thanks unto the City Mouse
I tender, for bringing me unto this house.
How poor is the Country, how disconsolate?
For now my belly's full a while to prate
I can intend, I tell you those who live
In Country Ignorance, and do only give,
Their time to vulgar drugery; do spend
Their happy houses unto a servile end,
That understand but how to drive their teame
With whistling while their Horses are in a dream,
Concerning provender, until they do make them
An exposition when their whip does wake them.
I tell thee City Mouse, the Country can,
Afford no pleasures unto Mouse or Man,
For here I have what my desire can crave,
There I am glad of chippings in a cave.
And yet I thought them good, but now I find,
He that does change his air, does chang his mind.
If I talk beyond my compass, I desire,
To be excused, this cheer does me inspire
For when the bellyes full, out of the Platter
Men oftentimes do speak exquisite matter.
Some say that we should with a stomach talk
And let our tongues courageously then walk
But to talk without a stomach sure is best
When we have filled our stomach at a feast.
Nay quoth the City Mouse since you admire
This store and plenty I do now desire
You would survey the Rooms, and you shall see
What spacious and fair large rooms here be.
Each place does seem a paradise of pleasure,
Wherein the Rich man spends his doting leisure,
You are not cased up here within a cave,
For your large mind, as large a room shall have,
Under the gilded seeling of some chamber
Or palace, where you may live free from danger;
The thefts of Mice rich men do scorn to see
For in such places Mice may live most free,
But a small fault committed by a Mouse
Is soon discerned in a Country house.
Here we may live, but as I said come see
Those other rooms, which I will show to thee.
Thus usherd by the City Mouse they come
At last into a fair neat dining Room:
With pictures hung about, there was a Friar,
That to a Nun it seems had a desire
He hugd her in his arms, and the warm zeal
Which Friars do bear Nuns he did reveal.
The Country Mouse, had a dull apprehension
So that he took no pleasure in invention,
Or to view that picture, but was more taken
With the picture, of a gamon of Bacon,
What sweet proportions are there quoth he?
In this gamon, it is loves epitomie.
Thus rural minds do oftentimes advance
Unworthy things through their dull ignorance*
The tables in this dining room were spread
With Turkey carpets all embroidered.
The stools the cushions, and every chair
Of cloth of Silver and rich Tissue were
Whereon young Gentlewomen, and Ladies might
Sit, while their beauties shined forth more bright,
Then their less glorious feate, but at this time
The Country mouse into a chair did climb,
But the other mouse upon the Table got,
And presently it was his happy lot,
To smell a dish of sweet conserves and plumbs,
Then straightway he a little farther runs
And finds a dish of marchpaine, that was framed
In the shape of a Castle, and had sustained,
A most fierce seige, so that the structure quite
Had been demolisht for the guests delight.
The Country Mouse thus seated in a chair
The City Mouse expressed much love and care
In waiting on him and before him set
A dish wherein was left some Marmalet,
And then he brought him some sweet Sugar plums
The Country Mouse thought these were pleasant crumbs.
For he before had use to whet his teeth,
On rusty Bacon, or upon hung Beef:
So that these sweetmeates seemed to melt,
Within his mouth before that they were felt.
The City Mouse did still attending stand
Waiting upon him ready at's command,
And tasting unto him every dish least he
Should suspect in him some foul treachery.
Much diligence he showd thereby to express
What happiness his present state did bless.
So that the plenty seemed to upbraid
The dinner which the Country Mouse had made.
For the City Mouse, when he came to his Cave.
No such varieties, for him could have
In the Country, but his stomach there was linde
With such fare as the Country Mouse did find
Into some poor cupboord that stood open empty,
But in the City he found store and plenty.
The Country Mouse thus feasted with good cheat
Did in a jocund humor soon appear,
And his conceits were sweetened so that he
In a fine witty humor began to be
And would needs discourse unto the City Mouse,
Telling him that he liked the rich man's house,
For here quoth he, we shall do wondrous well,
And no body our knavery can smell,
For if we to a rich man's house belong:
We shall be honest do we right or wrong.
To walk a nights we need not be afear'd
For in the great rooms we shall not be heard;
O quoth the City Mouse, I see you are wise,
The City does afford most rarities,
And in the City rich men's houses be
Places of pleasure, as you painely see,
Besides all this you shall find more delight
For I will tell you 'twas my chance one night
To hear a wooing match, and as I said
The Butler was wooing the Chambermaide.
I heard it all and when their candle grew
Unto a snufe, he did much boldness show,
So that he would have done I tell you plain
An act of darkness which I will not name,
You must conceive my meaning, but when he
Imagined all the house in bed to be,
I having behind the chamber wainscot got,
Began to scrape, which he mistrusted not.
And hindered him of that which he did mean,
And put him quite out of his wooing Scene.
For I was then even gnawing of a bone,
Behind the wainscot, as I often had done,
But when the Butler, and the Maid it heard
They presently began to be afeard
And through a little cranny I espied
That both the Maids cheeks with a blush were di'd
And so these Lovers, being both faint-hearted
By a poor Mouse were frighted and soon parted
For when I gnawd my bone again, then they
For fear they should be taken ran away.
O then thought I, I do observe by this
That such are fearful as intend amiss,
And though they never think upon the devil
A Mouse can fright them when they purpose evil.
The Country Mouse, when he had heard his story
Began to tell another in his glory.
Some Maidens in the Country on a time
Had made one night a Posset of good Wine.
And thereunto their sweet hearts did envite
Intending to be merry all that night;
The Maidens and their Sweethearts merry were,
When I did put them all into a fear.
For I began to scrape behind a wall,
So that they straightway were affrighted all.
They thought their mistress had been coming down
And so away they slipped every one,
And as you said, thereby it did appear
That guilty minds of all things stand in fear.
But O friend City Mouse what rare content?
Shall we enjoy when we are resident,
Here in the City; where each day and night
Shall yield us choice varieties of delight.
Here we shall feast our bodies with quaint dishes
And in a word we shall have here our wishes.
But when the Country Mouse these words had spoke
One of the Maids began to turn the lock,
Of the dining room, because that she did mean
As it did seem to sweep it very clean,
But then the Mice were put unto their Trumps
One from the Tableleapes, and the other jumps
Off from the Chair, and so both round about
They ran, but yet no hole they cold find out,
So that behind the hangings they did hide
Themselves, and in a mortal fear did bide.
Until the Maid when she had swept the room
Went out and locked the door when she had done.
But now the Mice being in a sweat for fear
Came forth again when that the coast was clear,
But the country mouse did then so quak and tremble
That you might plainly see he did not dissemble.
And now the Servants did begin to rise
And in the streets they heard a hundred cries
So that the Country Mouse was in a fright
And wished he had not come from home that night
Thanking the City Mouse for his good cheer,
Which he esteemed he had bought too dear.
He told the City Mouse he would repair
Unto the Country where without all care
He could live freely, telling him he thought
Pleasure to dear, that with such fear is bought,
Although my Country fare is not so dainty,
Content is better unto me than plenty.
There I can live most quietly under ground
In a poor cave, and never there be found
And when I list can go unto a mill,
And with ground corn my belly soundly fill
To steal into a cubboard I Am not afraid
For any Mouse may fright a Country Maid,
Especially if I do sometimes proffer
To creep beneath her coats, she fears the offer
And presently aloud the Maid will screeke
And then into some hole I straightway creep
And there I laugh to think the Maid Ione can
Thus fear a Mouse that does not fear a man.
Therefore I thank you for my cheer but I
In the Country resolve to live and dye.
Let me in quietness there spend my leisure
For as I said content is my chief pleasure.
But now the Crow with hollow voice did creake,
And daylight did begin a pace to break
The City Mouse, a little on his way
Did bring him, and then it did grow broad day,
So that the Country Mouse bid him Farewell.
For I (quoth he) within the woods will dwell.
Where though my fare be course, I will live free
"He is not poor that can contented be.
The Morrall.
Philosophy was vayld of old
Under Fables, such as Aesop told.
And Horace, showing men their lives
Through those clear Perspectives:
So by this Fable this is meant
That happiness rests in Content,
And that contentedness may dwell
In a poor Cave or Hermits Cell.
FINIS.

