A TREATISE OF PARADISE.

AND THE PRINCIPAL contents thereof:

Especially Of the greatness, situation, beauty, and other properties of that
place: of the trees of life, good and evil; of the Serpent, Cherubin, fiery
Sword, Man's creation, immortality, propagation, stature, age, knowledge,
temptation, fall, and exclusion out of Paradise; and consequently of his and
our original sin: with many other difficulties touching these points.

Collected out of the holy Scriptures, ancient Fathers, and other both ancient
and modern Writers.

LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for NATHANIEL BVTTER. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR FRANCIS BACON Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of ENGLAND, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
HIS Majesty having deigned to patronize the first fruits of my labors, to
whom (if I may presume) ought I rather (for many titles) to second with the
second, then to your Honor? Siluerius in Augusto.
who (as Siluerius says of Caesar) has honored learning by his own labors,
so all the learned labor to honor you with their labors? Seeing therefore
his Majesty vouchsafed to accept of my Treatise of Angels, deigne likewise
(most worthy Peer) to patronize this of Paradise; not for the worth of the
work, that I deem it worthy so worthy a Patron; but that for want of its due
luster and worth, it may receive both by the reflecting beams of your Honor,
which the Lord increase with all just titles of grace and honor, with our
Prince on earth, with the King of Heaven, (...), that as your wisdom and other
heroical virtues are justly admired here upon earth, so they may be with
double poize rewarded in the kingdom of heaven: Which is faithfully prayed for
by

Your Honors humbly devoted, JOHN SALKELD.

The Argument of the Treatise ensuing.
AS knowledge is the perfection of our blessedness in the life, to come;
Quamuis Aureolus apud Capreolum in 4. d. 49. q 1. et Scotus in d d 49. q. 1.
teneant formalem beatitudinem in velatione, imo and Caiet. 1. p. q. 27. ar. 2.
Fer. contragent. c. 53. cap. 1. d. 27. q. 2. Iauel. 9 met. q. 16. Torres de
Trinitate, q. 27. ar. 7. Conimb. 3. de anima, c 8 teneant esse actione^
formaliter.
so I deem it to be the beginning, in this: there, of God, as it is in
perfection; here, of our selves, as in the first step to perfection: so that
here we knowing our selves to be nothing but sin and corruption, may come to
the knowledge of him, who is all in all, goodness and perfection: here, only
possessed in part; there, wholly enjoyed in full measure: but how here in part,
there in full measure, hoc opus, hic labor est, this shall be the subject of
our labor, and end of this present Treatise: by which we pretend to show what
we lost by the disobedience of Adam, Dur quoque q. 4. sine distinctione
affirmat beatitudinem esse in aggregatione omniu^ bonoru^, in intellectu,
voluntate and corpore, sicut and Hugo de S. Vict. in c. 7. l. de coelesti
Hierarchiae. Ric. 4. did. 49. and Gab. ib. and Cordub. lib. 1. quaestionarij
q. 42. in fruitione.

Mars. q vlt. and Argent. q 3 delectatione de Deo viso. Bonauent. similiter
esse visionem fidei respondentem, dilectionem charitati viae, delectationem
spei Communis autem opinio Aquinatis and aliorum in actu solo intellectus
formulem nostram heatitudinem consistere autumat.


and what we got by the obedience of Christ; how in Paradise we possessed God
in part, and by what sin we fell from him wholly; what were our pleasures in
Paradise, and what miseries did follow our fall: how we are raised again
after our fall, and are to be placed in those glorious thrones, from which the
wicked Angels fell. Lastly, what is our blessedness in the life to come, and
by what means it is wrought in us here. In which points if I do err (as of
my self I can no less) it shall be both with all subjection unto the
learned, and with no less desire to be corrected.

THE TABLE and order of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. WHether there was ever any such place as Paradise? or rather the
description of Paradise is to be understood allegorically, and so to be
referred unto the mind only? CHAP. II. The description and situation of
Paradise. CHAP. III. The compass and greatness of Paradise, and why it was so
beautified, seeing God foreknew for how short a time it was to serve the use of
man? CHAP. IV. What may be the reason why Paradise was never found as yet?
CHAP. V. Whether there be as yet any Paradise or no? or rather it was destroyed
in Noes flood? CHAP. VI. Of the trees of Paradise, whether all were fruitful,
or rather some only beautiful, though unfruitful? CHAA. VII. Of the tree of
life, why it was so called? and whether it was corporal, as other trees be, or
rather spiritual and food of the soul, not of the body? or finally
appertaining to both? CHAP. VIII. The allegorical interpretation of the tree
of life. CHAP. IX. Why the tree of life was so called, and whether it had truly
the property of making a man immortal. CHAP. X. Whether the virtue of the
tree of life to preserve man immortal was natural unto it, or supernatural.
CHAP. XI. Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, to wit, whether it
was a true and natural tree, like unto others. And why it was so called. CHAP.
XII. Of the creation of man. CHAP. XIII. Of the manner of man's creation. CHAP.
XIIII. How man was made to the image and likeness of God. CHAP. XV. What is
the difference between the image and the similitude of God, according to which
man is said to he created. CHAP. XVI. Whether the woman be made to the image of
God, or no. CHAP. XVII. Whether man be made like unto God according to his
corporal substance, proportion, and lineaments; or does in any wise represent
the divine majesty? CHAP. XVIII. Whether the image of God way be wholly lost,
and blotted out of the soul of man. CHAP. XIX. Why God made man to his image
and similitude? CHAP. XX. Whether the dominion over all living creatures was
given unto man, and what power that was? CHAP. XXI. Whether in the state of
innocence one man should have been subject to another, or rather all should
have been of equal authority and power? CHAP. XXII. Whether the Angels did
concur to the production of man, or no? CHAP. XXIII. Whether Adam was created
in his perfect stature and age? CHAP. XXIV. Whether the soul and the body were
created in the same instant, or no? CHAP. XXV. Whether the immortality of the
soul may be demonstrated out of the Scriptures, or no. CHAP. XXVI. Whether the
soul of Adam was immortal by its own nature, or only by grace? CHAP. XXVII.
That Adam was not created in Paradise, and why not, and by what means he came
thither after his creation? CHAP. XXVIII. To what end was Adam placed in
Paradise? CHAP. XXIX. Whether the commandment of not eating of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, was given as well to Eve, as to Adam, and how that
was? CHAP. XXX. Why God commanded that Adam should not eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil? CHAP. XXXI. In which the matter of the precedent
chapter is more largely discussed. CHAP. XXXII. What death that was which God
threatened to inflict upon Adam for his transgression. CHAP. XXXIII. Of the
creation of the woman, and to what end she was created. CHAP. XXXIV. What
sleep that was which God caused to fall upon Adam for the creation of Eve, and
whether it was a true sleep or no? CHAP. XXXV. Why Eve was created of Adams
ribbe, and not immediately of the earth, and how that could be without any
grief to Adam? CHAP. XXXVI. Why and how Eve was made of the ribbe of Adam?
CHAP. XXXVII. Whether the ribbe of which Eve was created, was requisite to the
perfection of Adams body or no. CHAP. XXXVIII. How mankind should have been
multiplied if Adam had persisted in Paradise? CHAP. XXXIX. Whether there should
have been more men or women in the state of innocence, or rather an equality
of both sexes: and how there could have been any women, seeing they are said
to proceed out of the defect of nature. CHAP. XL. Of the prerogatives and
excent gifts wherewith Adam was endued in the state of innocence: and first as
touching his knowledge and natural wisdom of natural things. CHAP. XLI. Of
the knowledge which Adam had of things above nature. CHAP. XLII. Whether Adam
was created in the grace of God, or no. CHAP. XLIII. Whether if Adam had not
fallen, all his posterity should have been borne in the grace and favor of
God, and confirmed in the same. CHAP. XLIV. Whether Adam before his sin was
mortal or immortal. CHAP. XLV. What kind of Serpent that was which tempted
Eve. CHAP. XLVI. Whether that which Moses says, that the Serpent was craftier
then all beasts of the earth, is to be understood of the true Serpent, or of
the Devil? CHAP. XLVII. What was the reason why the woman was not afraid to
speak with the Serpent. CHAP. XLVIII. Why the Devil took the shape of a
serpent rather then of any other creature: and why Moses made no mention of the
Devil, seeing he was the chief tempter. CHAP. XLIX. Whether when God cursed
the serpent, it is to be understood of the true serpent, or of the Devil.
CHAP. L. Whether Adam was cast out of Paradise the same day he was created.
CHAP. LI. Of the Cherubin and Sword which were put at the entrance of Paradise.
CHAP. LII. What was the cause why Adam and his posterity were banished
Paradise: wherein two ancient errors are refuted as touching original sin.
CHAP. LIII. In which diverse other opinions touching original sin are
refuted. CHAP LIVE. Whether original sin consist in any privation, or no?
CHAP. LV. In which the last opinion of the precedent Chapter is discussed and
rejected, and the true doctrine of original sin set down. CHAP. LVI. In
which the matter of the precedent chapter is more largely discussed. CHAP.
LVII. Wherein diverse difficulties are solued against the former doctrine. CHAP.
LVIII. Of the manner how original sin does descend from Adam to his
posterity. CHAP. LIX. Whether it was necessary there should be made any
covenant between God and man, that so original sin might descend to the
posterity of Adam. CHAP. LX. How the soul is said to be infected by the body
in the posterity of Adam by his original sin. CHAP. LXI. Whether there
should have been any original sin in us, if either Adam only, or Eve only
had eaten of the forbidden tree. CHAP. LXII. What punishments be due to
original sin in this life. CHAP. LXIII. What punishment is due to original
sin in the other life. CHAP. LXIV. The objections of Simon Magus against the
aforesaid doctrine of the creation of man, and his being in Paradise. CHAP.
LXV. In which the objections of Manes are assoiled. CHAP. LXVI. The objections
of Theodorus and Nestorius against original sin are solued.
CHAP. I.
Whether there was ever any such place as Paradise, or rather the description
of Moses is to be understood Allegoricallie, and so to be referred unto the
mind only.

AS there is nothing in nature so plain which may not be contradicted, neither
any thing so pure which may not be defiled, so nothing so evident in Gods
Word, which has not been opposed. Such is our nature after our fall, and
such our daily most lamentable lapses, after our first lapse, and original
Fall. Insomuch, that ignoring the cause of our infinite misery, we become
desperately sick, and of our selves and nature, without remedy. Wherefore my
intent being chiefly to show us our end, and eternal felicity, I will first
show the place, and demonstrate the grace from which we fell; that thereby
knowing the infelicity of our fall, and place from which we fell, we may be more
thankful unto God for that felicity, place, and grace, unto which we are
exalted after our fall; and so come to a more perfect blessedness after our
fall, then that which we possessed before we fell, or should have possessed in
Paradise if we had not fallen. Now therefore as touching this place of our
first happiness, and from whence our misery was first derived, I will begin
with a worthy Prelate, who though he was one of the chiefest Doctors of the
Church of God, yet being to explicate these very difficulties of Paradise,
Ambrosius de Paradyso, in principio capitis primi.
was not ashamed to acknowledge his ignorance. De Paradiso adoriendus sermo,
non mediocrem nobis oestum videtur incutere, quid nam sit Paradysus, et vbi
sit, qualisue sit inuestigare and explanare cupientibus: maxim Apostolus sieve
in corpore, sieve extra corpus nesciat, raptu^ se tamen dicat vsque ad tertiu^
coelu^; 2 Cor. 12.
idemque testetur se ibi audiuisse arcana verba, quae non licet homini loqui.
Being to speak (says this Father) of Paradise, it does not a little trouble me
to search out and explane what Paradise is; where it is; and what manner of
place it is; especially seeing the Apostle says, that he was rapt thither into
the third heaven, where he heard such things as be not lawful for any
mortal man to utter.

By which words he signifies two things; the first, that, that place was
Paradise, unto which S. Paul was carried (the which opinion in what sense it
may be verified, it shall afterward be explicated) the second thing there to
be noted is, that it is impossible for man to declare, what kind of place that
was, unto which the Apostle was carried, unless peradventure it might have
been by him, who had that special privilege, to be carried thither.

Hence peradventure it is that Origenes, Philo, the Hermetians and Seleucians
were of opinion, that there was never any such place as Paradise, but rather
that the scripture where it makes mention of Paradise, is to be understood
Metaphorically, Spiritually, or Allegorically.

First, because in other places of Scripture, where there is mention of
Paradise, that word cannot be understood of any terrene place: therefore if one
place of Scripture must be the interpreter of the other, according to the
common consent of the Fathers, it may not seem improbable, but that the like
may be admitted in this history of Paradise.

Secondly, because those things which are said to have been in Paradise,
cannot be understood literally: as that in the midst of Paradise there was a
tree of knowledge of good and evil (a property not due unto nature, much less
agreeable or consequent to the nature of a tree). Secondly, that Adam heard the
voice of GOD, where as spirits of their own nature have no voice, or sound,
much less the purest of spirits. Thirdly, that he heard God walking toward
the South, whereas indeed God neither walks, nor moves, but is always
replenishing, working, and filling every place, yea in every place equally
present, in essence equal, in power equal, in all his other infinite
attributes equal.

Again, how can it be understood literally, that after the transgression, and
expulsion of Adam out of Paradise, there was placed a Cherub or Angel with a
fiery sword, as necessary for the custody of the said place: as though either
the commandment of God had not been sufficient, or his will resistible
without the assistance of the Angelical power; or the Angel not sufficiently
powerful for the restraining of Adam, without the use of a fiery sword; as
though again God in power were not omnipotent, neither the Angel spiritual,
but either that the creator had need of his creature, or that which is a pure
spirit had need in his operation of an impure, imperfect and corruptible body.

Moses Barsephas tractatu de Paradyso.
Moses Barsephas in his Treatise of Paradise says, that there be two parts of
Paradise, one corporal, another spiritual, one created for the pleasure of
the body, another for to delight the soul: so that, as man is composed of two
parts, the one spiritual, the other corporal, and yet but one only man: so
(says he) was Paradise partly corporal, and partly spiritual, yet one only
Paradise: his arguments be these.

If Paradise were only corporal (says he) then the body only of Adam was
delighted there: because no corporal thing can delight the soul: wherefore if
God had not created another part of Paradise spiritual, he might seem to have
dealt fraudulently with man (which were blaspheamous) who promised a Paradise
for the whole man; and yet created such a one as could not delight the whole
man.

Again, that Paradise is not only spiritual, he proves with these
arguments: For then it could not have delighted the body, but only the spirit.
Yea all those things which Moses writes as touching Paradise, might be deemed
false; seeing that he so evidently insinuates, that man was created in
Paradise, as in some material place; and that God had planted Paradise in Eden
from the beginning: that he put man there whom he had created, that he created
for him there all trees, herbs, beasts, and all other things necessary, both
for the delight and use of man: That our first Fathers fell from Gods grace, by
eating of the forbidden fruit; that they hid themselves amongst the trees of
Paradise, after their fall; and many other things which cannot be understood,
but of a real and corporal place.

Thirdly, if Paradise were not a real and corporal place, how could there
flow out of it those four rivers, which (as the Scripture witnesses) compass
the whole earth? How should Enoch and Elias be translated thither, and (as many
writers affirm) be conserved there both in body and soul? yea otherwise how
should Adam and Eve have lived there?

Which things, though all of them be not so certain, yet most of them are so
evidently expressed in the scripture, that they manifestly prove the Garden of
Paradise to have been a real and corporal place, Chrysostom. hom. 13. in
genesi^. August. in genesis l. 8. c. 1. and sequenti bus. and lib. 13. de ciuit.
dei c. 21. and q. 27. in genesis Basil. hom. exameron. hom. 11. Hier epist. ad
Pamachiu^. Epiphanius. Damascen. Isiderus. Nicenus Cyrillus. Naz.
and therefore S. Chrysostom in his 13. Homily upon Genesis says, Ideo Mosen
descipsisse Paradisum, That Moses did therefore so manifestly describe
Paradise, the rivers, the trees, the fruits, And all other things thereto
appertaining, that the simple and ignorant should not be deceived, by the
fabulous Allegories, and doting dreams, which some would pretend to diuulge
for sole truth, hidden in the figurative and material description of Paradise.

The like also may be seen in Saint Augustine in his eight book upon Genesis
cap. 1. and seq. and the 13. book de ciuitate dei, cap. 21. and questione
vigesima septima in Genesis Basil. Hom. 11. upon the Exameron. Likewise Hierome in
his Epistle to Pamachius; Epiphanius epist. ad Iohannem Hieros. Damascenus in
his fourth book, de Orthodoxa fide, cap. 13. Isodorus libro quarto
Etymologiarum cap. 3. Gregorius Nicenus oratione quinta in orationem dominicam.
Cyrill, Naz. Ephren, and others.

Lastly, S. Augustine in his 27. Aug. quaest. 27. in Genesis
question upon Genesis gives this reason as an evident demonstration, that
Paradise was a true corporal place; because the land of the Sodomites, and
Gomorrhae ans before the destruction thereof, was compared in the thirteenth
chapter of Genesis, Genes. c. 13.
to this pleasant place of Paradise, in these words: Before the Lord destroyed
Sodom, and Gomorrah, it was as the garden of the Lord, like the Land of
Egypt, as thou go unto Zoar, Wherefore says Saint Augustine in the place
above alleged) if by the fruitful trees described in Paradise, there were
nothing else to be understood but only the virtues of the mind, as some do
hold, and if there were no true corporal Paradise, beautified with all kind of
trees, it would not have been said of that place, that it was as the Paradise
of God. Conticescant igitur (as Saint Hierome commenteth upon Daniel,
Hieronimus in Danielem cap. 10
cap. 10.) eorum deliramenta qui vmbras and imagines in veritate sequentes
ipsam conantur euertere veritatem: vt Paradysum and flumina and arbores putent
Allegoriae legibus se debere subruere. Because the aforesaid Allegories rather
seem deliramenta, dottages and dreams (as this Father terms them) then
expositions of learned Doctors, let them therefore in no wise be mentioned or
uttered: not that there may not be good use of these and other the like
Allegorical expositions, but that they are not so to be used, that they be a
means to overthrow the truth, or that they be taken for the sole truth, which
were no small injury unto the word of God, which oftentimes admits as well
the true historical, as the litterall sense, together with the spiritual
interpretation, if it be rightly applied.

CHAP. II.
The description and situation of Paradise.

THIS may seem as strange a title to some, as how to measure the latitude of
the heavens, the depth of the Sea, or how to number the innumerable stars of
the firmament, yea much more; seeing that of these we have some sight, some
experience, some natural ground; but of this of Paradise, we have no view, no
experience, nor any natural foundation sufficient to build such mighty
machinas of conceits, as some do more boldly, then soundly conceive of
Paradise.

But yet to this I answer; that as we ought, (according to prudence, and
wisdom) to give credit unto such as are expert in any faculty, as long as we
have no sufficient ground to contradict: So much more unto the Fathers and
other learned Divines, in points appertaining unto Divinity: and in particular
of these of Patadise, which though they be not altogether so evident in the
Scripture; yet at least way, they are either evidently deduced, or prabably
inferred out of the sacred text; such as Isidors description of Paradise is,
who in the fourteenth book of his Aetimologies describes it thus.

Isidorus lib. 14. aetimologiarum. The description of Paradise.
Paradyse is a place situated in the Oriental parts of the world, whose
aetimology (the word being translated out of Greek into Latin,) signifies
hortum a Garden. In Hebrew it is called Heden, which interpreted in Latin is
the same that deliciae, delights: wherefore both names being joined together,
they signify a Garden of all manner of delights, and pleasures, a place beset
with all kind of fruitful, and beautiful trees: where there is neither cold,
nor heat, but a perpetual temper of air; furthermore out of this so pleasant
a place there flows in great abundance, a fair fountain, which waters
the whole Garden and trees thereof, which afterward is divided into four huge
and great rivers, but the entrance of this place is always shut up, for the
sin of our first Fathers: yea it is always environed and guarded on every
side with a fiery sword; so that the very flames do always almost touch even
the heavens themselves. In this place finally, are placed the Cherubins, to
wit, a most vigilant custody, or centinell of Angels, for the terror and
expulsion of evil spirits. Insomuch that neither man nor evil spirit may have
access thither, man being kept away by the fiery flame, the evil spirits by
the watch of the Cherubins: thus far Isodorus.

Which is the same in effect, which Alchinus expresses in these few verses
lib. 1. carminum de initio mundi. cap. 9. Alchinius his description of Paradise
lib. 1.o carminu^ de initio mundi cap. 9.


Ergo vbi tra^smissis mundi caput incipit Indis,
Qua perhibent terram confinia iungere coelo.
Lucus in accessa cunctis mortalibus arce
Permanet.
Hic ver assiduum coeli clementia seruat.
Turbidus anster abest, semperque sub aere sudo
Nubila diffugiunt iugi cessura sireno
Nec poscit natura loci, quos non habet imbres
Sed contenta suo dotantur germinarore.
Sic cum desit hiems nec torrida ferreat aestas,
Fructibus autumnus, ver floribus occupat annu^.
To which description I add that of Tertullian in his Apology against the
Gentiles, Tertullianus apol. co^tragentiles.
where he says, that Paradise is a place of divine pleasure, destinated for
the receiving of the blessed spirits; segregated from the notice of the world
by a fiery circle or girdle, which compasses it about.

Basilius orat de Paradyso.
Basil also in his oration of Paradise does describe it thus. Paradise is a
place flowing with all sorts of pleasure and delights, surpassing far the
beauty of all sensible creatures, which by reason of the height it has,
admits no obscurity of night, or darkness by clouds, but rather is always
resplendent with the shining of the oriental stars: to which place also
there can come no immoderate force of winds, no storm, no tempest, no horror
of winter, no inundation by waters, no burning of Summer, no drought of
Autumn, but a continual and peaceble temperature of all times and seasons,
insomuch that, that which may be justly thought the best and most pleasant of
every several time of the year, that does always here concur and abound, to
wit, a continual pleasure of the spring, the abundance of harvest, the mirth
and alacrity of Autumn, with the rest and quietness of the winter. To which
Ephren (as he is alleged by Barsephas in his Treatise of Paradise) adds,
that it is beyond the Ocean, in another world. And S. Austine ad Orosium, that
is a place situated in the East part of the world, reaching even up to the
circle of the moon: and so as it was safe from the inundation of the flood; so
also it is inaccessible to man after his first expulsion thence.

Abulensis also seems in part to assent, saying, 2 Cap. in Gen q. 2 etc. 13.
q. 107.
that though Paradise touches not the Globe, or circle of the moon, yet
(says he) it far exceeds the limits of our turbulent, and dark air; and
that it is placed in the third region of the air, higher at least by twenty
cubits, then all the mountains of the earth: so that the waters of Noah's
flood, which transce^ded (according as the Scripture relates) all the
mountains of the earth, fifteen cubits, could cause no damage to so high a
place, as that of Paradise.

Bonauent. lib. 2 sent. did. 17.
Finally Bonauenture in the second book of the sentences, did. 17. houldeth
Paradyse to be under the equinoctial line; because (as he and many others have
imagined) there is always a perpetual temper of the Heavens and time, by
reason of the perpetual equality of the days and nights under that line.

Eugubinus, Oleaster, and Vatablus in 2. cap. Genesis
Eugubinus, Oleaster and Vatablus upon the second chapter of Genesis think
that Paradise was placed in Mesopotamia, but that now it has lost his beauty
by the inundation of Noes flood: so that now being patent not only unto man,
but also unto the beasts themselves, it needs no Angelical custody, or fiery
sword.

These be the common opinions of the Fathers, and doctors in these points; to
which every man may assent as he finds most agreeable with reason and true
Philosophy, for seeing that in these points there is nothing revealed or
declared unto us in the holy Scriptures, nature must be the best guide and
mistress, where supernatural authority is wanting.

Out of which natural principles that of the huge hight of Paradise, and
reaching of it even unto the Sphere of the Moon, seems altogether
improbable; for if Paradise was made for the habitation, yea for the delight of
man, why should it be situated in so inconvenient a place, yea (speaking
according to natural reason) naturally not inhabitable by reason of the
neerenesse of the Sun, and other Planets, and stars.

To which (I cannot deny) but some show of answer may be made as that neither
Sun, nor any of the Planets, are (as the Philosophers say) formally but only
virtually hot; that is, though they have the virtue to produce heat in these
inferior things, yet that they be not in themselves hot, neither are they
capable of heat: because, as they neither agree in matter, nor form (as many
Philosophers hold) with these inferior creatures; so neither can they have the
same kind of qualities that our Elements have.

But this answer is easily confuted, because as the virtuall heat of the sun
is sufficient to make inhabitable some places of the world (as diverse grave
Writers affirm) by reason of the neernesse unto it, why might it not also
cause the like effect in Paradise? unless we will fly unto the omnipotence
of God, and miracles, the only refuge of ill grounded Philosophy and
ignorance.

Or say (as some have fondly fained) that Paradise being of another kind of
matter then the rest of the earth, or of the same Species, and purity, that the
heavens are, as these be incorruptible by reason of their most pure matter, or
incorruptible union, so likewise Paradise, and the things there: only man
being of the same nature that now he is, was by the particular providence of
the omnipotent power, kept from mortality or corruption as long as he
preserved himself from the corruption of sin. But these and such like
solutions, as they are forged without any ground, so they may easily be denied
without any more reason, this only being added to the former proof, that so
high a place as the Sphere of the Moon, was altogether unfit for the
situation of Paradise, by reason of the perpetual agitation, and motion of that
place, which is so continually rapt, and carried about with the most violent,
and swift course of the heaven. Many other reasons (I confess) might be
given, but which rather appertain unto Mathematikes and longer discourses, then
the breuity, which we have here taken upon us, will permit.

Now therefore only remains that by the consideration of the excellencies of
this place, wherein we were before our sin, we gather the hatred God bears
to sin; seeing that for the sin of one, yea and that but one only, God, who
is so good, yea infinite goodness and mercy, would punish with so long a
punishment, and with so great punishments, for so long a time, so infinite a
number, as is, and shall be the whole posterity of Adam, even unto the worlds
end; And that sin, certainly, has a kind of infinity of malice which could
deserve so infinite a punishment, yea so much provoke the infinite goodness
and mercy of him, who is infinitely good, and merciful. And lastly we may
infer, what sin justly deserves, if it should not be punished more
according to the rule of mercy, then according to that, which the rigor of
justice requires; seeing that nothing was, or could be sufficient, to blot,
or wash it away, but only the blood of the lamb of God, which only washes
away the sins of the world; by which, we are to be restored, not only into a
more high participation of God, and his grace, then we possessed before our
fall; but also into a more perfect Paradise, then that was, from which we were
banished, for our first sin, and fall: And this only by his merits, blood,
and passion, who could in no wise either slip, or fall: So that we may well
exclaim with Saint Austine, August. in meditationibus.
O strange judgment, o unspeakable disposi ion of the divine mysteries; the
sinner offends, the just is punished: the guilty transgresses, the innocent
is beaten; the wicked sins, the godly is condemned; that which the evil
deserves, the good suffers; the servant does amiss, the master makes
amends: man commits sin, God bears the punishment. O Son of God how
have thou debased thy self? how have thou burned in affection? How far is
thy mercy stretched? whither is thy compassion come? Adam did wickedly, thou
was punished; man sinned, thou wast afflicted; Eve offended, thou wast
tormented; we were disobedient, but thou obediently bear the punishment of
our disobedience; we served our concupiscence, but thou enduredst hunger; the
tree allured us unto an unlawful desire, but perfect charity led thee unto
the Cross; we tasted presumptuously the forbidden fruit, but thou sufferedst
torments for our presumption, and momentarie delight. We enjoyed the pleasure,
but thou wast peirced with nails; we delighted in the sweetness of the
apple, but thou therefore did taste the bitterness of the gall.

Here astonished I know not what to say, nay I am so amazed I know not what to
think, only I can exclaim with the Apostle, O altitudo sapientiae and
scientiae Dei! O deapth of the wisdom of God! o mercy of the omnipotent
without measure! quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae tribuit mihi? What
shall I give unto God again, who has given himself so often for me? unto
hunger for my riot; unto nakedness for my pride; unto dishonor for my honor,
unto humility for my ambition; unto mortality for my immortality: And
finally unto the ignominious torments of a thorny crown, and other of his
sacred passion, and vital death, for to crown me with an eternal crown of
glory, in the life to come, in that everlasting Paradise, unto which no
mutability, no mortality, and much less any impuritie can ascend: vbi non est
transmutatio, nec vicissitudinis adumbratio: whither not even the very shadow
of change can approach.

CHAP. III.
Of the compass and greatness of Paradise, and why it was so beautified,
seeing God fore-knew, for how short a time it was to serve for the use of man.

WHere there is less certainty in the conclusion, there I mean to spend less
time in the resolution, as in this of the compass of Paradise: a question of
more difficulty, then necessity: yet nevertheless because it is urged by
some, I will endeavor to give some satisfaction in it, such as may be in so
uncertain a point, at least way as far, as other principles of Philosophy, or
Divinity, or finally as the grave expositours of the sacred text will give me
any firm ground of discourse.

Amongst whom Ephren above alleged answers to this question, that Paradise
was greater then all the earth now inhabited. Ephren lib de Paradiso.
The reason may be, because as the inhabitants were to be more in number then
the earthly, and more worthy; so their habitation, according to the wisdom,
and bounty of their Creator, should have been more magnificent, and far more
capable: of the beauty and magnificence no man can doubt, who doubts not of
the history of Genesis. Why then should we doubt of the other, seeing the same
reason urges in both? yea if we may discourse according to reason, in these
things which depend only upon the free disposition of the sole independent
cause; certainly, as this cause of causes has created all other things,
pondere and mensura with due poise and measure of beauty, magnificence, and all
other proprieties, according as the nature of the things required, and their
final ends, for which they were created, a fortiori, or much more, it ought
likewise to be inferred of the greatness and magnificence of Paradise;
wherefore, seeing that the seed of man, if he had not sinned, had been more
multiplied then now it is, because sin (as true Philosophy teaches) is no
small impediment unto generation; it must needs follow, that as the
Inhabitants should have been more in number, and the place of their habitation
more magnificent; so likewise the capacity of the same place where all should
have dwelt, to wit, of Paradise, should have been greater then now the
habitation of man is, in all the world now inhabited.

I know well what is wont to be answered, to wit, that if Adam had not tasted
of the forbidden fruit, there should have been none in Paradise, but only
those, which should have supplied the seats of the lapsed Angels; and
consequently they should have been but few in number: according to that of the
Gospel, pauci electi, few be the chosen. To what end then should their
habitation have been of so great compass, as is the worlds now inhabited?

Again, if we acknowledge God to be conscious of all future events, and that
this foreknowledge, is as it were (according to our base manner of conceiving
so high mysteries) a direction unto the free disposition of his Divine will and
providence, to what end should he create so mighty, huge, and so magnificent a
place, for so few, and for so short a time, as he knew our forefathers should
be there?

The answer unto both is easy, but first unto the first. I grant that if we
had not sinned, only the elect should have been created, and placed in
paradise: whence without any subjection to mortality, or other things, now
necessarily annexed thereunto, they should have been translated unto their
supernatural felicity in heaven; but it follows not hence that they could be
so few in number, as might well be contained in so little a compass, as
Paradise is imagined to be.

Neither, because it is said, that small is the number of the elect, for though
they be so in comparison of the reprobate (in which sense the fathers interpret
that place) yet absolutely they be many, yea without question more, then ever
there were men living in the world together. For so it is evidently gathered
out of the Apocalypse, where the beloved Apostle after that he had made mention
of twelve thousand in every Tribe, sealed, and signed, he concludes with
these words (...). And after these things I saw, Apoc. 7.9.
and behold a great multitude which none could number of all nations, and
Tribes, and people, and tongues, standing before the throne, and in the sight
of the Lamb: covered with white stoles, and with palms in their hands: Now if
these be the elected (as without doubt they be) how could they all have dwelt
together at one, and the same time in Paradise? how could they (I say) have
been contained in so little a space or garden as Paradise is imagined to have
been? True it is, that man was created to supply and replenish the seats of
the fallen Angels: but hence, we are rather to infer the contrary of that
which was pretended in the objection; because the badde Angels, as the Fathers
say, and has been proved in our Treatise of Angels, were almost innumerable,
wherefore if the blessed men be to supply their places, as indeed they be,
they must necessarily be more in number, then could conveniently inhabit so
little a place as Paradise is imagined to have been: seeing that, if not all,
yet infinite more should have concurred together, then now possibly can after
our exile out of Paradise; whence all occasions of mortality should have been
removed, and where the tree of life should have been sufficient for the
preservation of man's life; if not for all eternity (as many have said) yet for
many thousands of years, or at least for a far longer space, then now the
life of man can naturally be prolonged, for besides the natural causes which
then were more forcible, or of more virtue, for man's preservation, and none
nociue to man, as long as he was not hurtful unto himself, the supernatural
cause of causes did particularly concur in this, as well by his particular
providence, as by the virtue of the tree of life.

Now to the second objection, which presumes to demand a reason of Gods secret
decrees, and judgments, to wit, why God foreseeing man's sin, and that from
all eternity, would create for man's habitation, a place so spacious, excellent,
and capable, which he knew was to be enjoyed for so short a time? I answer
with the like objection, why also did he create so infinite a number of
Angels, with so many excellent gifts, as well of grace, as nature, and both
gratis, yea and heaven so beautiful and admirable a place for them, whom he
knew would so soon praeuaricate and fall from that felicity, into the other
extreme of infelicitie? yea the like I ask of Adam, why would God so adorn
him with all kind of gifts both natural and supernatural, whom he knew ab
aeterno from all eternity was presently to be so ungrateful, and wilfully to
fall from his grace? if these things be not unbeseeming his goodness, neither
contradict his providence and foreknowledge of future event, neither does this
other of creating Paradise so beautiful, spacious, and capable of so great a
number, whereas God knew from all eternity that Adam by his fall was to loose
that place both for himself, and all his posterity. The only reason of the
question propounded may be (and the same may be applied with proportion unto
the rest) because, as we find by ordinary experience, that God does not
ordinarily deal with man according to future events, and his divine prescience
thereof, but according to his own science of things as present, Aquinas prima
part quaest. 14. Molina, Suarius, Valentia, Vasquez and alij scholastici.
which the Divines call scientiam visionis or intuitiue knowledge. Hence it is,
that God seeing man not unworthy of that place persisting in the grace, in
which he was created, according to the present estate he had created him in,
therefore (I say) not respecting man's future demerits, but his own present
grace, as he bestowed original Justice upon him, to be translated unto his
posterity, so likewise he gave this so excellent and capable a place as a
sufficient and apt habitation for him, and his posterity, if they had not
fallen from his grace.

These be the grounds of Ephrens opinion, which to me is altogether
improbable. Wherefore my judgment in this so uncertain a point, is, that
though Paradise was not so ample, as the rest of the world inhabited, yet that
it was of no small compass, which I infer of the greatness of the fountain
which sprung there, out of which four mighty rivers were derived. Secondly
because there was no need of any such extraordinary compass as Ephren
imagined, seeing that it was but to contain the elect only, which should have
been but few in comparison of the multitude which now possess the face of the
earth. Neither was it necessary that all beasts should remain there; because
man in that happy estate had no such need of their service, as now he has.

The length, breadth, and compass of Paradise according to Abulensis upon
Genesis.
Wherefore Abulensis is of opinion, that the length of Paradise was about twelve
miles, and the compass 36 or 40. But these are but uncertain conjectures in
things, which are not so manifest in Scripture.

That which seems most probable in this matter, is, that seeing the Scripture
calls Paradise but a garden, that surely it cannot be of any such compass
as some imagine. And secondly because it is said to be situated in the Region
of Heden in the Eastern parts, which in no wise may be compared with the rest
of the world for greatness.

Now to the other difficulty above insinuated, whether man persisting in the
state of innocence, should have dwelt in any other place, but only in
Paradise: I answer, that without all doubt he should, because so small a
circuit, as Paradise was, could not have been sufficient for the habitation of
so great a multitude, as might very well in one man's age concur together, for
if after the fall of Adam some men lived all-most a thousand years, certainly
if Adam had kept his original justice, he should in all likelihood have
tripled the time (as Villalpandus affirms) or lived much longer then he did
after he sinned in which space there must needs have been almost an infinite
number of inhabitants, and consequently the place of their habitation must
needs have been of correspondent space, and capacity, wherefore seeing that
Paradise (as we have already shown) was of no such capacity, as was apt for
the co^taining of such a multitude, it is not likely that man should have been
confined there only, until the time of his translation into a more happy
estate, which should have bin after his sufficient trial in the terrene
Paradise, according to the free disposition and decree of his Creator.

CHAP. IV.
What may be the reason why Paradise was never found as yet?

Ephren de Paradiso.
SOme with Ephren do hold the reason to be the high situation of the place.

Others assign three great impediments of free access unto Paradise. First,
the hugeness and insuperable height of the mountains, which are betwixt us
and Paradise. Secondly, for that there be mighty wildernesses full of all kind
of most venomous Serpents, and wild beasts. Thirdly, because there is no way
but through large regions of most pestiferous air, in which no man can live.
Others with Saint Chrysostom hold that at least, Chrysostom. in Genes.
before Noes flood the way unto Paradise was known, and where it was; but that
men durst never adventure thither, for fear of the Cherubin, which did always
guard it with a fiery sword.

Wherefore I judge with Saint Chrysostom that though then that was the chief
impediment of free access unto Paradise, yet that now at least way, that
Paradise is not accessible, known, or seen as a Paradise, because it was
destroyed with the Deluge, which passed all the highest places of the earth,
and that many a cubite, which whether it be so or no shall be discussed more
largely in the Chapter following, because the resolution of diverse other
curiosities depend thereupon.

CHAP. V.
Whether there be as yet any Paradise or no, or rather it was destroyed in Noes
flood.

SAint Basil, Abulensis, Basil. and Abul. supra cit.
and others above alleged do seem to hold that Paradise was not destroyed by
the deluge, and consequently that it remains as yet. Iren. lib. 1. contra
baer.
Tertullian and the Master of the Sentences, yea and Ireneus in his first book
against Heretics adds, that it was the Paradise into which Paul was carried
when he saw such ineffable things which was not possible for man to utter.
Moreover that this was the opinion of the ancient Asian priests the Apostles
Disciples.

Justin. in respon. ad. quaest. orth. quaest 75. 76. 85.
Moreover the famous Martyr Iustine in responsione ad Orthodoxorum quaestiones
quaest. 75. 76. 85. Auerreth, that Paradise is extant as yet, and is to be even
to the worlds end, as the habitation of the two Patriarchs Enoch and Elias, who
shall come thence, to fight against Antichrist, not long before the end of the
world. Finally he concludes as a thing vndoubtable, that this is the place,
whither the good and converted Thief was carried, to whom Christ said upon the
Cross, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise, to wit this earthly, the
first habitation of mankind.

Lastly Saint Austine seems more peremptory for this opinion in his second
book against Pelagius and Celestius where he says, Aug. lib. 2. contra
Pelagium and Caelestiam.
that there be some questions in which we may be ignorant without any
prejudice unto our Christian faith, and the definitive sentence may be
suspended, or in which all humane conjectures may easily be deceived, as when
it is inquired what manner of place is Paradise? or where that region is, where
God created the first man of the dust of the earth? whereas notwithstanding our
Christian faith does not permit us to doubt, but that there is such a place as
Paradise, cum tamen esse illum Paradisum fides Christiana non dubitet.
Wherefore, though we may be ignorant of the manner, qualities, situation, and
the like circumstances of Paradise, yet if we will not be Infidels we cannot
be ignorant that there is such a place: And of this he gives this example: Cum
quaeritur vbi sit nunc Helias vel Henoch, an ibi vel alibi, quos tamen non
dubitamus in quibus nati sunt corporibus viuere. As for example touching that
question where Henoch or Helias be? whether they be there in Paradise, or
rather in some other place allotted them to live in, as yet? without all doubt
we may doubt about these particular curiosities, which are not plainly
expressed in the holy Scriptures, but we neither can nor may doubt but that
they live, not according to the spirit only, but corporally also, their souls
being really united unto their bodies, as ours are: after the same manner we
may doubt of the circumstances of Paradise, not of the real existence or being
of it.

And this the rather because in the 44 Chapter of Eccles. it is said that Enoch
was translated into Paradise that he might be a pattern of penance unto the
Gentiles. Therefore if Henoch be there as yet, yea as a pattern of penance
unto the Gentiles, there must not only be an earthly Paradise, but also it
seems that it must be a place habitable, or to which men may have some
access, in such sort, that they may see their pattern of repentance, for if
either the place be destroyed, inaccessible, or invisible, how can it be true
that Henoch is there detained as a pattern of repentance? therefore if Henoch
be as yet preserved alive (as many do hold) it follows consequently, that
there is yet a terrene Paradise, not as yet destroyed by Noes flood.

These be the arguments of this opinion, and for which many do not think it
improbable: never the less (all the places of Scriptures and fathers, together
with their reasons well pondered) it seems much more probable, that Paradise,
in which Adam was created is not now to be found, but rather that it was
destroyed by the general deluge.

First, because the Scripture Genesis 7. Chap: says, that all mountains were
covered with the waters of the flood, a fortiori therefore this pleasant Region
or Garden was thereby ouer-flowne.

But peradventure, this was a whole Region higher then any Mountain, and
consequently though all Mountains were covered, yet this place might be safe,
as which was the habitation of that blessed man Henoch: or peradventure though
it was not so high, yet was it reserved for the said reason by Gods particular
providence.

I answer that neither, not the first, because as it is in the same place
above alleged, the waters of the flood ouerflowed the highest mountains seven
cubits: neither the second, because such a great miracle was not necessary for
the preserving of Enoch; who whether he be yet alive, or how he is, it shall
be more at large discussed in an other place.

But supposing that the contrary opinion is probable, to wit, that Paradise is
as yet extant, not only according to the place it self, but also to the
beauty and pleasure which the Scripture testifies it had, at the first
creation; it may well be inquired, what should be the reason why it has never been discovered of any amongst so many as have compassed the world.

Some as I have already touched, answer, that the reason is, because Almighty
God offended with Adams transgression, has environed it with huge Hills,
mighty mountains, swelling seas, fearful rocks, and great wildernesses
full of all kind of terrible beasts, and venomous Serpents, so that it is
impossible for any mortal man to pass thither.

Others again answer that Paradise has not been discovered, neither sought
for by Infidels, because they thought it to be but a fable, neither by the
faithful or Christians; because they know it to be inaccessible. But if I may
interpose my opinion and freely speak what I judge in this matter, I think
that none of these reasons are so concludent and certain as that the place of
Paradise is as yet unknown by the particular disposition and providence of
God; as part of our punishment, for that sin, for which we were banished
thence, as not only unworthy to inhabit the place it self, but also of the
notice where it was. Or secondly because it is not in any wise necessary to be
known, either as belonging to the furtherance of our felicity in this mortal
life, or to the obtaining of the eternal happiness in the other immortal. As
in like manner this also was the reason, why though our Savior knew at least
way by supernatural means, and as he was the eternal wisdom of God, the
time of the end of this world, and of his second coming to judgment, yet
because this was not necessary for man to know, therefore he denied the
revelation thereof even unto his Apostles: insomuch that our Savior said Act.
1. cap. verse. 7. unto his Apostles, that it was not for them to know the times
or seasons which the Father has put in his own power. So neither is it for
us, too curiously to inquire after this place of Paradise, which God has
either destroyed, or hidden from us, as part of our punishment for our first
and original offense in that place.

CHAP. VI.
Of the trees of Paradise, whether all were fruitful, or rather some only
beautiful, though unfruitful.

Certain it is, as we read in the beginning of Genesis, that in the beginning
of the world God produced omne lignum pulchrum visu, and ad vescendum suaue,
Every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food; the tree of life
also in the midst of the Garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

Now the difficulty is, how these words are to be understood? whether
coniunctiuely, or disiunctiuely? to wit, whether all the trees of Paradise were
as well beautiful to the sight, as sweet in taste: or rather some were only
delightful to the sight, some pleasant only in taste, others both, as well
beautiful in sight, as pleasant in taste?

Many (I know) answer, that all the trees of Paradise had both proprities, so
that there was no one tree there unfruitful, neither any fruitful, which was
not also beautiful: insomuch that those unfruitful trees, which now, after
our miserable exile out of Paradise, are necessary, were not planted in
Paradise: Because Moses says that God planted every tree beautiful in sight,
and sweet in taste, to wit, coniunctiuely: which could not be true, if any tree
wanted either sweetness, or beauty, or was not both beautiful, and fruitful.

Yea, which is more, God himself also commanded Adam that he should eat of
every tree of Paradise, Genesis 2.16. excepting the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil: consequently every tree of Paradise was fruitful, if fruitful,
questionless then pleasant both to taste and sight.

I dare not condemn this opinion, because it has authors of no small
authority, nevertheless to me it is altogether improbable: seeing there be
many fruitful trees not very beautiful: and many most beautiful, though not
fruitful.

It is therefore more conformable both to reason and the sacred text also, that
it be understood disiunctiuely: to wit, that there was trees of both sorts,
some beautiful, some fruitful, some both. Yea, this is plain out of Ezekiel
31, the 8. verse. where both the Cedar and Fur trees altogether unfruitful,
are named as trees of Paradise, to whom the glory of the Assirian was thus
compared, the Cedars in the Garden of God could not hide him, the Fur trees
were not like his boughs, and the Chestnut trees were not like his branches,
nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his beauty. I have made
him fair, by the multitude of his branches; So that all the trees of Eden,
that were in the Garden of God, envied him.

CHAP. VII.
Of the tree of life, to wit, why it was so called, and whether it was
corporal as other trees be, or rather spiritual and food of the soul, not of
the body, or rather appertaining unto both.

SVch was the bounty of God toward man in the happy estate of Paradise, that
he did not only give unto him what was necessary or convenient for his natural
estate there, but also added other most extraordinary means and helps both
natural and supernatural, convenient and necessary for both his estates of
nature and grace; such was this of the tree of life, which (as some well note)
according to the original text, was called the tree or wood, not of life
only, in the singular, but in the plural, of lives, because it was so to
lengthen the life of every man, that every singular and particular man's life,
might well seame the life, not of one only man, but of many.

Whereby we may first admire the power of Almighty God, secondly his goodness
toward man: his power in the creating of such a fruit: his goodness, in
bestowing it upon him, whom he knew was in so short a time after, to be so
ungrateful for that, and many other most excellent, as well natural, as
supernatural gifts.

The second reason, why it is termed the tree of lives, is, because as a man
has three lives, virtually: if not really distinct, the sensitive, vegetative,
and rational; so this fruit of the tree of lives should have had virtue to
fortified all three, in which also we may note the wisdom of God, but more
again his mercy: his wisdom in that he knew to produce incorruption, at
least way for many years if not eternal (as many hold) by a continual
repairing of nature by the eating of the said apple; but more again (I say)
may we admire his mercy, and bounty, by which he sought means to eternize
him, whom he knew by his fall was to be his own death, yea the death of his
most dear and eternal son which was the true tree of life, prefigured by
this tree of life or lives, so also called because it was not to give, or
prolong the life of Adam only, but also the lives of his posterity; until
such time, as it should please their Maker to translate them from that earthly
beatitude, unto a more perfect and supernatural estate; Man. 17.
where (as Saint Austine says) they were to possess in a more perfect
measure, and that through all eternity joy without sorrow, rest without labor,
honor without fear, wealth without damage; health without sickness;
abundance without care; life with all security; immortality without
corruption; all happiness with no misery at all. Where all perfection is in
the highest degree, and all imperfections remote; where sight is face unto
face, where perfect knowledge, and nothing unrevealed of which humane nature
can be capable; where Gods sovereign goodness reigns super omnia above al
things, and the light enlightening is glorified of the Saints; where the
present majesty of the Almighty is perpetually beholden, and the mind of the
beholders eternally filled with this fruit of life.

Fourthly, it was called the tree of life, or lives; because it did after a
double manner sustain and renew the life of man: first in restoring our
natural moisture, by which we live, which consumes every day more and more
by our natural heat, which was a propriety common also to all other fruits of
Paradise.

Secondly, in that which was proper to this tree only, and for which it was
particularly termed the tree of life, because it was of such qualities and
excellent proprieties, that being eaten, it did renew our humidum radicale, our
natural humiditie and moisture, whereby we should have lived with the like or
equal purity and perfection, which had been in man at his first creation;
yea it should have so fortified our natural heat, that although it did
naturally suffer some detriment and loss by continual action, yet should it
have been so strengthened by that fruit of life, that it could never have
decayed or perished, and consequently man could never die corporally in that
happy estate, unless he had first killed himself spiritually by being
partaker of the forbidden fruit, insomuch that the disobedience of one brought
in by concupiscence was the cause of all our misery and mortality, that so God
of his mere goodness through his infinite wisdom might thereby take
occasion of showing his mercy upon those who after Adams fall were nothing but
misery, and by the obedience of his dearest Son might repair and redeem
the disobedience of us most accursed caitifes: so that we participating of the
fruit of the tree of life communicated unto us in the sacred communion by
virtue of that tree of life prefigured in this Paradise, might thereby be
revived from a temporal death to an eternity of blessedness, and perpetuity
of a most blessed life; yea so by occasion of our first sin, gain more then
ever we had obtained if we had not sinned: seeing hereby we obtained that fruit
of life to be prepared for us upon the tree of the cross, yea and thence
communicated unto us in the sacred communion, and bread of life, which
doubtless we should not have obtained, at leastway after that manner and
measure, if we had not transgressed. Or at leastway Christ prefigured in this
tree of life, should not have appeared passible as one of us, if we by our
sin had not needed his passion. Wherefore we being astonished at so great
mercy shown unto us in so infinite misery, and that so lamentable a loss
should be an occasion of so joyful and infinite gain, we may well exclaim
with Gregory the great, O foelix culpa, quae talem and tantum habere meruit
Redemptorem, O happy fall, and happy unhappiness, which was occasion of so
great happiness.

Lastly, the aforesaid tree was worthily called the tree of life, or lives;
because it did not only preserve our natural being, by the repairing of our
natural forces, but also did so renew them by a supernatural virtue
proceeding thence, that thereby we might have lived a life free from all kind
of fears of death, or of any griefs, vexations, or torments, now necessarily
annexed to both deaths, corporal and spiritual, temporal and eternal: now I
say annexed to both deaths, unless we have applied unto us the virtue of
another tree of life, by whole life all things being have their being, and by
whose influence all things living have their life.

Hence it is that the former was a most perfect pattern or representation of
the latter, but the latter a more perfect form then could be fully
represented by the former, or by any other possible. Nevertheless the tree of
life was created in the terrestrial Paradise, to the end that it might be a
type, and in some sort represent that which should be fully represented or
seen in the celestial kingdom by the eternal light of glory, according to
the divine oracle, In lumine tuo videbimus lumen, in thy light we shall see
light; that is, by and through thy light of glory (which is a supernatural
habit infused into our understandings) we shall see the glorious light of thy
essence, not comprehensiuely, which is impossible, but most perfectly and
essentially, which is common to all the blessed Spirits and Saints of heaven,
to every one according to their degree of glory, correspondent unto the measure
of their faith heard here in earth, or while they were in the way to this
supernatural blessedness.

CHAP. VIII.
Whether there was ever any such tree in Paradise as the tree of life, or
rather that which is written of it in the Scripture is only to be understood
spiritually or figuratively.

AS now in this deluge of miseries, which have overflowed the world, there be
many which in outward show and words pretend so much spirit, that they leave
nothing for the inward but acts of carnalitie: so there wanted not these kinds
of monsters in former ages, who though they were never so far plunged in the
depth of hell, as ours be, yet were they not far inferior in the fictitious
morallizing of Scripture, or rather wresting from the true sense the word of
God; such were Origines and his fellows Allegorici, so termed because they
wrested the Scripture beyond all truth and sense, only to a spiritual and
allegorical sense, especially those places which speak of Paradise and the
tree of life: some thinking it to be our Savior Christ, or word of God
incarnate, others the sole attribute of the eternal wisdom of God: some
again our everlasting happiness in the kingdom of heaven, according to that
of S. John: Reu cha 2. verse. 2.
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of my God: that is, as Eugobinus in his Cosmopoeia
holds, not our essential blessedness in the sight of God, as the former
opinion is, but a propriety necessarily annexed thereunto, to wit
immortality, which God had promised to Adam and his posterity, if they had
persisted in their first state of innocence wherein Adam was first created.

Here be many fictitious propositions ill grounded, and which of themselves are
sufficient to overthrow themselves: the truth and the common opinion, as well
of School Divines, as of Expositours of the holy Scriptures and Fathers is,
that as the history of the tree of life, and the rest of Paradise may well be
interpreted in an Allegorical sense, without any contradiction to the true
meaning of the history; so to understand it only thus, excluding the history,
is a manifest injury done to the Scripture. So S. Austine in his 13. book of
the city of God, chap. 21. says, that we may understand by Paradise the
blessed life of the Saints of God: likewise by the four rivers of Paradise the
four cardinal virtues, prudence, fortitude, temperance, and justice: by the
trees all profitable Arts and disciplines; by the fruit of the tree, the good
works of the godly; by the tree of life, wisdom the mother of all goodness;
finally by the tree of knowledge of good and evil, the experience of the
commandment transgressed. These things likewise may be understood of the
Church, as prophesies proper unto her future estate. So that by Paradise we
may understand the Church according to that which we read of her in the
Canticles. Moreover, by the four floods, the four Gospels; by the fruitful
trees, the Saints, whose fruits be their works; by the tree of life, the
Saint of Saints, Christ our Savior; lastly, by the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, our own moral and civil actions, not the supernatural, in
which we are more passive then active.

These and the like of Origenes and others of the Fathers are questionless
most excellent Allegories, yet not such as may be taken for sole verities,
excluding the plain history of Moses, and literal sense, which is the second
part of my assertion, deduced also out of S. Austine in the place above
alleged, where he concludes thus: Haec and siquae alia, These and the like
may be spiritually applied unto Paradise, so that the truth of the history be
faithfully kept, and no injury offered to the word of God: for if once we give
a sole and general passage to this kind of Allegorical exposition, we shall
soon be brought to many fond definitions in matters of faith.

CHAP. IX.
Why the tree of life was so called, and whether it had truly the property of
making a man immortal.

AS it is truly said of the bread of life, the Sacrament (I mean) of the Lords
Supper, that it does not concur physically with any real influence unto the
grace of God inherent in our souls in this life, or to the eternity of
blessedness in the life to come, but that it is only a sign of the one, and a
pawn and pledge of the other, to wit, of grace in this life, of an eternal
poies of glory in the other: so many holding the tree of life to be a figure or
type of the bread of life, have with proportion held of them both, to wit, that
neither of them were physical and real causes of their effects, but only
moral. Hence it is that Eugubinus above alleged in his Cosmopoeia thinks
that it was called the tree of life, non effectiue quod vitam faceret
immortalem, not because it did really cause or should have caused immortality
in man; sed significatiue tantum, because it should have been a sign and
token only of immortality, if he had not transgressed the commandment of his
Creator: a probable opinion certainly, or which cannot easily be refuted; for
although all almost Writers and Fathers both of the Greek and Latin Church
do agree, that the effect of this fruit was immortality, yet in the manner
how, they do not agree. So therefore if we agree of the thing, it is not
material how we hold of the manner of concourse. As in like manner we doubt
not to say of the bread of life, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that
certainly it contains the cause of life Christ, but how it contains him,
who can express? This exceeds the natural capacity of Angels, the other of
the type also the reach of man. Agreeing therefore about the things, why should
we so contend to express the manner, which in no wise can be expressed,
because it is not expressed in the book of life, and therefore cannot be
necessary to eternal life.

Nevertheless (if I may conjecture in things so hidden) I deem the contrary
much more probable, to wit, that this tree of life was not only a type or
token of immortality, but that really it was a cause sufficient to have
produced immortality: my reason, or rather congruence (because no concludent
reason can be given in this point) is, because it was the most perfect figure
(as the Fathers affirm) of that most excellent tree, which for all eternity
is planted in the celestial Paradise, to wit, of Christ, who says of
himself, Apoc. 2. cap.
Vincenti dabo edere, to him that overcomes (to wit himself) I will give to
eat, what will he give? himself, to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
Paradise of the eternal God, not carnally, as carnal men dream, but
spiritually in the bread of life, as he himself does affirm of himself. As
therefore he who is the tree of life, or rather the author of life, or to
speak more properly, life it self, even as he is in the Sacrament of life,
does here truly in this miserable life produce in us the life of grace, as a
present pawn of our future glory: so it seems most probable that the other
tree of life (as a most perfect figure of this) planted in the terrene
Paradise, had the like inherent virtue, for to perpetuate, or at least to
prolong the lives of Adam and his posterity, as long as they were to live in
that terrene Paradise.

But whether this fruit of the tree of life was sufficient to perpetuate our
life, or only to prolong it for some determinate time, Abulensis super Genes.
c. 13. quaest. 175. Scotus li. 2. sent. did. 19 quaest. 1. Aquinas 1 p. q.
9.7. art 4 and Caiet. ibid.
many dispute probably for both opinions.

Tostatus upon the 13. chapter of Genesis, q. 175. is most peremptory for this
perpetuity; Scotus, Thomas, Caietan and Durand, for a very long time, but not
for eternity, because that is the natural measure of nature, this the
supernatural of him who is above all nature. Secondly, seeing the power of the
tree of life was a natural power and cause, the effect could not be
supernatural: for though effects be often inferior to their causes, yet never
the causes unto the effects; the reason, because no cause can give that which
it has not, neither any effect have any excellency or perfection not
proceeding from the cause: wherefore if the tree of life was (as without
question it was) a natural tree, as the Laurel, Cypress, and other trees be,
it could not have as connaturall, the supernatural effect of making eternal
the life of man.

Moreover it is a principle even in natural philosophy, that omne agens
physicum in agendo patitur and debilitatur, that every natural cause does
suffer some detriment even in and by his own action: consequently therefore,
though our natural heat and vigor might be very long conserved by the virtue
of this excellent fruit, yet at length it should have failed, and thence
finally mortality should have followed, as a necessary effect of so forcible a
cause.

Lastly, it is not likely that God, who is the author and first rule of nature,
does produce any thing frustrate in nature: seeing therefore the fall of man
was patent unto him even from all eternity, to what end should he provide an
eternal cause for a temporary effect?

But if this argument had any force, it should force also our adversaries to
the like, if not a greater inconvenience; for who doubts but that God knew
also the little time that man was to persist in his grace? and yet
nevertheless he gave him that fruit, which was sufficient for the preservation
of his life for many a year, as our adversaries hold, why then might he not
likewise for all eternity? is it because of the impossibility? at non
impossible Deo omne verbum, to God nothing is impossible, which does not imply
contradiction, but what contradiction is in this? is it, that here natural
philosophy is contradicted? omne agens in agendo patitur and debilitatur,
every agent does decay even by his own action; but seeing the author of nature
is above nature, why might he not here work that which is above nature? or
though in the compass of nature, yet beyond our natural capacity, which is
so small, that we scarcely or very imperfectly understand things of far
inferior degree, yea such as are within our selves: why therefore shall we
deny unto God that which we do not understand in our selves? My resolution
therefore is that of Abulensis, Propterea dictam esse arborem vitae, quod
fructus eius vim haberet seruandi hominem a morte in omne tempus, and faciendi
eum immortalem, that this tree was therefore called the tree of life, because
it had virtue to perpetuate our natural life, and the union of the body and
soul for ever, if we had not lost the supernatural grace, which was the union
of our souls with God; but seeing we wilfully separated our selves from our
supernatural life, it was most just that we should also be deprived of the
natural: hence therefore is that which Paul so often preaches, mortem in
mundum intrasse propter peccatum, that death entered into the world by the door
of sin, which door if we had debarred to sin, the grace of God should have
been a perpetual union between God and us, and the tree of life should have
caused the like between our bodies and souls; and this of his own nature
eternally, though de facto we needed it but only temporally, both supposing
our fall, as likewise not supposing any at all; for if we had not fallen or
sinned in our first father, we should certainly after some number of years
have been translated from that terrene Paradise, which was our first though
temporary habitation, unto a more excellent and perpetual in the kingdom of
heaven; and this should have heene without any assault of death, because we had
always lived in God, who as he would then have preserved us by his grace from
the corruption of sin, would also have preserved us from this corruption,
which was only the effect of sin, according to that of the Apostle, The wages
of sin is death: the wager being the devil, our souls are bought and sold;
sold away for nothing (sin being nothing but a privation of being) but bought
again by the death of the most precious of mortal lives, which in no wise
should have been necessary, if we had not been lost, or fallen from our
first grace and innocence.

But as that poetical fiction of the Nectar and Ambrosia seemed to Aristotle
of small ground, so this for the like reason may seem to be as fabulous: for
as Aristotle argues against the former, either the Gods used this Ambrosia and
Nectar for pleasure only, or also for necessity; if only for pleasure, how
then could Ambrosia and Nectar be any necessary cause of their immortality?
again, if for necessity, certainly the Gods then had not been immortal by
nature, and consequently no Gods, seeing that, that which has need of any
thing for his preservation must necessarily be mortal.

After the same manner we may argue against this fruit of this tree of life,
which is said to be sufficient to cause an eternity of life, a part post, as
the Philosophers speak: for if our immortality was only to be from the tree
of life, then questionless without it we had been mortal, and subject to
death; contrary to that of the Apostle, Stipendium peccati mors, the wages of
sin is death: for whether we had sinned, or persisted in our primative
grace, all had been one, we should naturally have tasted of death, if we had
not eaten of the tree of life. Again, if it was only ad melius esse, for a
better preservation of our immortality due unto that estate, and not
absolutely necessary for that effect; then consequently it was not the tree of
life in the sense which the Scripture insinuates, but an antidote only
against death, and not a necessary cause of eternal life.

I answer, that though the argument of Nectar and Ambrosia does evidently
overthrow the deity and immortality of the heathen gods, yet does not the
simile or comparison any thing impeach the immortality and deity of the true
God, as neither the immortality of our first parents, due only unto them in
their estate of innocence, and which did principally proceed from the true and
only immortal God; because that immortality of life proceeding from the fruit
of life, was to endure no longer with man then man perseuered in the grace of
God, which was given him as a pawn of eternal life.

Neither does this contradict that of the Apostle, the wages of sin is death:
for though death be due unto man even without sin according to nature, yet
this debt was to be remitted by original grace, and the natural pronenesse
thereunto to be redressed by the fruit of life.

Wherefore though the immediate cause of our immortality in Paradise should
have been the tree of life, yet the primarie and principal of all, to which
the other was consequent, was original grace, whose immediate effect was our
spiritual life, and thereto secondarily followed the freedom from any
corporal harm, or death; yea and this for ever of his own nature, though we
had not been translated thence to a better life: for so it is said of Adam,
that therefore he was banished out of Paradise, and interdicted the entrance
unto the tree of life, lest eating of it he should live for ever, Genes. 3.
chap. 22. v. And the Lord God said, behold, the man is become as one of us to
know good and evil; and now lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the
tree of life, and eat and live for ever, therefore the Lord God sent him forth
from the Garden of Eden to till the ground from whence he was taken.

Hence I conclude with Abulensis and others, esum illius arboris sufficientem
habuisse virtutem, vt vitam homini praestaret aeternam: that this tree of life
had sufficient virtue to prolong a man's life for all eternity. The which also
is the opinion of S. Austine, Aug. li. 13. de ^iuitate Dei, cap. 20. and 23.
Chrysostom. hom. ^3. in Genesis Rupertus ^ib. 3. de Trinitate, cap. 30.
Chrysostom, and Rupertus lib. 3. de Trinitate cap. 30. where he adds this
more then other Doctors, quod semel sumptus vitam praestitisset immortalem,
that this fruit of life had been sufficient to have caused immortality of its
own nature, though it had been but once received; the which though it may
seem improbable to humane reason, yet considering the omnipotence of God, and
his infinite love to man in that estate, it cannot at leastway appear
impossible.

CHAP. X.
Whether the virtue of the tree of life to preserve man immortal was natural
unto it, or supernatural.

LEst we err in the resolution of this question by any equivocation of words,
as it falls out often in the like difficulties of natural and supernatural
objects; I will first declare how the Divines use this distinction, and then
how it is to be taken here.

Natural (as far forth as is necessary for our present purpose) is that
which flows from the principles of nature, to wit, matter and form, of
which, as of their only compacts, all natural and corporal substances are
composed.

Supernatural is that which is above all nature, or rather cannot in any wise
proceed from the principles of nature: but as it is above all nature, so it
flows from that sole principle which is above all nature, if not only, yet
principally.

Secondly, natural oftentimes is taken pro congenito, for that which is
originally produced with any other thing, though it flow not in any wise from
the principles of nature, or be not due thereunto; so no doubt but if an Angel
were created with the light of glory, or beatificall vision of Gods essence,
both the light of glory and the vision of God should be in that sense natural,
or rather connaturall unto the Angel, because it was produced together with
his natural substance or essence. And the same oftentimes is auerred by the
Fathers, of man, in regard of his original justice, in which he was created:
for though this original justice did not flow from the principles of nature,
yet nevertheless, because it was produced with nature by Almighty God, and
infused into man's nature, as due unto it in that happy estate, therefore it is,
and may well be termed natural, though in its own essence it was
supernatural.

Now by these two distinctions of things natural, we may evidently infer
what is supernatural, namely that which is above both these kinds of
acceptions, or distinctions of natural objects; that is, which neither flows
from the principles of nature, neither is any way due unto nature: as original
justice was due unto us in Adam before our fall and corruption of nature.

This distinction presupposed, the difficulty consists in this, whether the
virtue of the tree of life for to preserve man from corruption, may be called
natural, or rather is to be deemed supernatural?

Strabo answers, Strab^ in Genesis
Lignum vitae hanc naturaliter habuisse virtutem, that the tree of life had
naturally this virtue, that he who did eat of that fruit should be endued with
perpetual health, neither should be touched with any infirmity, weariness,
or irksomenesse, which are wont to be the companions of age.

Hugo de Sancto Victore adds, Lignum vitae habuisse in se naturam, vt
perpetuaret homini vitam, si competenter ederetur, that the tree of life had
that virtue in it to perpetuate our life, if it were taken competently. For man
(says he) was made mortal and immortal: immortal because he could not die
by reason of that immortal food: mortal, because he might have died by
outward violence. But God had so inwardly fortified him by the tree of life,
and outwardly by his divine power, that he could not die. Again, because he
had shut up within him the gate of negligence by the vigilance of humane
reason, outwardly also the gate of violence by the divine protection, insomuch
that unless man abusing his reason should open the gate of negligence, never
any harm should enter into him by the gate of violence. But because he was
not careful to keep the charge committed unto him, God therefore forsook the
custody and care he had over him.

S. Austine on the contrary side thinks that the virtue of this tree of life
was supernatural, for so he says in his 8 book de Gen: ad literam cap. 5.
That though that meat was corporal, yet was it of such virtue, and nature
that it did confirm man in perfect health: not as other meats, but by an
occult virtue, proceeding from above. And this he confirms by two examples,
the first of Elias his cake, the second of the flower and oil of the widow of
Sarepta, which without all question were effected by supernatural power.

Beda likewise affirms, that therefore it was called the tree of life,
because it has received from the divine power, that whosoever should eat
thereof should be confirmed in perpetual health.

Neither ought we to marvel, Bonauen^ure 2. lib. sent. did. 17
as Bonauenture well notes, that a man might be disposed unto immortality by
the fruit of this tree, seeing there be many other things, as Myrrh, and
Balm, which do preserve from corruption for a long time: therefore as our
Sacraments do not really concur unto grace; but the divine power which
always is assistant unto them: so the fruit of that tree did not of his own
nature produce immortality, but rather the divine power did communicate it by
the eating of that fruit.

Here we may see these so opposite opinions with their reasons and
authorities, in which it may be free for every one to follow as he likes,
seeing there is nothing in this point plainly expressed in the Scripture; with
me, both the authority of S. Austin and reason does sway most for this latter
opinion; because it seems not so probable, that a natural tree or fruit,
should have of his own virtue and substance so supernatural a virtue, and
quality, as to cause immortality. But to conclude, whether the virtue of this
tree was natural or supernatural, all is one in regard of our loss,
ingratitude, and sin; our loss of both lives spiritual and corporal, our
ingratitude toward God, to us wards so infinitely good, our sin also being
the same: seeing that though it had been only a natural virtue which was in
that fruit of life, yet it deprived us not only of our own lives, but also of
the author of life. What therefore remains, but that now being redeemed from
this sin, and raised again from this death, we bless him perpetually, with
all the powers of our souls, and all the days of our lives, who is the only
giver of life, and sole redeemer of our souls.

CHAP. XI.
Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, to wit, whether it was a true
and natural tree, like unto others. And why it was so called.

NOthing can be so plainly set down in the holy scripture, but there will be
some idle brain or other, who will so moralize, or so wrest it to a spiritual
sense, though oftentimes without sense, that they will not stick to deny the
truth of the history, as it happens here in the first point of our question,
in which some have not feared (...) that name before, but afterward of the
event: so that when God commanded our forefathers, that they should not eat
of that tree, either he called it by some other name, or he demonstrated it
unto them, as it were with his finger.

Many other reasons do the Rabbis give, of the name of this tree, but so far
from reason, that they be not worthy the repeating, I will only touch one as
most fabulous, by which we may conjecture of the rest. They say that our first
Parents were created as infants in sense, and reason, though men in body,
strength, and stature. Now because this tree had a virtue of ripening man's
judgment, wit, and discretion of good from evil; it was therefore called the
tree of knowledge, of good and evil: because, to know good and evil,
according to the Hebrew and scripture phrase is as much as to have the use of
reason.

But this is not only contrary to the text, but also to reason: for certain
it is, that as man was created perfect in all the parts of his body; so was he
no less in the powers of his soul. Yea how is it likely that he was without
reason, who was created lord of all unreasonable creatures? who gave them their
names proper to their natures, and was to govern all things according to their
nature, by his own rule of reason: yea with whom God the author of nature and
chief rule of reason, had made this covenant most conformable to reason: that
if he lived according to the law of nature, and instinct of reason, his reward
should be above all nature, and exceed the capacity of humane reason:
wherefore who was both culpable in this pact, and punishable for his
transgression, must in all reason, have then had the use of reason.

Josephus in his first book of his Antiquities, perceiving well the absurdity
of this opinion, fell into another, which Lyra deemeth not much less absurd:
to wit, that this tree was therefore called the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, because it had virtue to sharpen the wit, ripen the judgment, and to
give prudence, and understanding to all humane affairs.

Lyra his refutation is this, because the fruit of that tree being corporal,
how could it (says he) have any spiritual effect? wherefore the mind, wit,
and judgment of man being spiritual, how could they be helped by any corporal
cause? For though the superior cause, and more perfect then his effect may have
influence into the inferior and imperfect, yet never the inferior into the
superior. Therefore though the spiritual causes be of such excellent
perfection, that they have influence into our bodies: yet never any corporal
creature (says he) is so perfect, that it can inflow in the spiritual. For
what is that which any corporal thing may produce in the spirit? not any thing
corporal, seeing that all, that is in the spirit, is spiritual: neither
again can it be spiritual, because nothing spiritual can be contained in
the virtue of a material or corporal cause.

It cannot be denied, but that this discourse of Lyra might have some force in
those causes, which (as the Philosophers speak) do work direct and per se
by themselves directly, yet in those, whose causaltie is altogether indirect,
true philosophy teaches the contrary. wherefore though it be most certain
that the body cannot directly have any influence into the soul or spirit, yet
because the spirit, whiles it is in this life depends in her operations of
the body, and the dispositions thereof (according to the generally received
philosophical axiom) the manner of the working follows the manner of being,
it must necessarily follow, that accordingly as the dispositions of the body
are better or worse, so may the operations of the mind be also more or less
perfect.

Yea Aristotle teaches us in his 7. book of his Politikes, that though those
men, who are borne, and brought up in the Northern parts of the world, be
stronger then others in corporal forces; yet that they be of a much more
slow, and duller capacity: contrariwise, those who are borne in hotter climates
of Africa, Spain, and Mauritania, and other more Southern parts of the
world, though they be weaker in body, and more debil of complexion, yet that
ordinarily they be more quick of apprehension, and more subtle in judgment,
then the other of the Northern parts of the world be. Finally, that those who
live neither in the extremity of heat, nor piercing cold, do commonly excel
both the other.

A fortiori therefore may the qualities, and dispositions of our food,
especially that of the tree of good and evil, have had no small operation in
the inward dispositions, and powers of our souls, for to make us of a more
ripe judgment, and quicker apprehension. yea finally make us more apt to
discern both good and evil, at least way in moral and civil matters, if not
in supernatural, and things belonging unto grace, for so it was said of the
Messiah, butyrum and mel comedet, vt sciat reprobare malum and eligere bonum,
Isa 7.15.
butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil and choose
the good, the which though it be spoken more peradventure for the mystical
meaning, then for the literal or material, yet no doubt but that the
mystical sense has some ground even in the material comparison of butter and
honey.

But because it seems not so probable, that God would hinder our spiritual
good (such as this was, of the knowledge of good and evil) who has made us
perfect in all corporal powers, and perfections; therefore I deem most
probable in this point either the opinion of Rupertus above alleged; Aug.
lib. 14 de ciuit. Dei cap. 17. and lib. 8. de Genesis ad literam cap. 6. and 15.
Lombardus cum scholasticis 2. lib. sen. did. 17.
or if that seem to have some inconvenience, then that of S. Austin may be
rather followed, which now also is the common opinion of the schools, with the
master of the sentences, to wit, that this tree was called the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil, ab euentu, from the event, for that which
presently followed in the eating thereof: which was, that Adam then knew by
woeful experience the difference between good and evil.

CHAP. XII.
Of the creation of man.

NOw all things being created, and this inferior world perfectly replenished,
there wanted only one, who should be governor and lord over all other
creatures, Genesis 1.26. 5.1. 9.6. 1. Cor. 11.7. Ephesians. 4.14. Col. 3.10.
Faciamus therefore says God hominem ad imaginem and similitudinem nostram, 1.
cap. Genesis 26. let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and let him have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and over the
cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing, that creeps
upon the earth.

But peradventure some may demand why man was created last of all creatures?
seeing that he being the most perfect and model of the rest, he should
consequently have been created as prototypon and first type of the rest, and
therefore as he was the first in perfection, he should also have been first in
his being and production.

I answer, that even for the very same reason, he was created last, because in
a certain manner he was the end and perfection of the rest: and thus beside
other interpretations, this also may be admitted of the philosophical axiom,
quod est primum in intention, est vltimu^ in executione: that which is first
or chiefest in the intention, is last in the execution, or production.

Secondly, man being to be lord of all the maine Machina of this world, it
belonged unto the divine providence, first to provide the habitation, and then
to create him that was to inhabit.

Or thirdly, because man had need of all these things, either for his
corporal sustenance, or for his spiritual exercise.

Or fourthly, because it was convenient, first to create the great world,
containing every thing in his due and distinct order; then afterward to
consummate, perfect, and as it were to crown the end of all his works, with
one, who was to be the crown, end, and perfection of all corporal creatures,
yea containing in a more perfect manner and degree, the perfection of all,
whatsoever he had created before.

Finally, having created both corporal, and spiritual things each separate,
and distinct in their proper natures, it remained only to conioyne them both in
one: insomuch that, as in all things, whatsoever is composed of matter and
form, the parts have their being, prioritate naturae, by prioritie of nature
(as the Philosophers say) before the conioyning of both together, because the
parts are for the whole, and not the whole ordained for the parts. In like
manner it was no less convenient, that man being composed of both corporal
and spiritual substance, he should also be created after them both, as who
was to be the secondarie end of all other inferior creatures.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the manner of the creation of Man.

THE manner of man's creation is described unto us in the aforesaid words. Genesis
1.16. Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. Now therefore it
remains we explicate, what divine deliberation is this, what image is this,
and in what likeness, and similitude of God, was man created. And first of the
first.

This word faciamus, let us make, may be taken in three senses, or
significations: for first, it may signify, how the eternal wisdom of God,
proceeding with a certain deliberation and counsel with himself, the most
holy Trinity, did go about such an excellent work, as was the creation of
man: to the end, that by that manner of proceeding, he might manifest the
excellency of man, above all these inferior creatures, partaker of reason,
beautified with prudence, perfect in wisdom, and created to his own image,
and likeness.

Secondly* God is said to use this manner of deliberation in the creation of
man, to manifest the weight of the business, and worth of the work which he
then intended; to show (I say) what a work it was to create man, with so great
sanctity, grace, and felicity, to conserve him in the same, and being lost to
restore him again. For God in his eternal wisdom, foreseeing the frailty of
man, did likewise foresee the act of his fall, and finally that he would
perish, he did likewise know before the difficulty in conseruing, and
restoring of man after his fall; and finally how to bring him to the end, for
which he was created before his fall.

Wherefore, if all these difficulties be duly considered in humane reason, it
might justly be doubted, according to our capacity, whether it were
convenient, to create man, or no? wherefore the Scripture accommodating it
self to humane sense and capacity, does describe unto us God the Father, as
it were consulting with the Son and the holy Ghost, of the creation of man.
Then how it was concluded in that divine Consistory, how it was most
convenient to create such a creature, without which all the rest had been
imperfect, and as a body without a head, a commonwealth without a ruler, or
kingdom without a King, confused, imperfect, without order or beauty. But
seeing that to bring man to this final perfection and end, many things were
necessary, each person of the blessed Trinity did assume to himself diverse
functions; the Father to create, because power and might does especially
appear in the Father; the Son did assume the reparation of man after his
fall (a work of infinite wisdom) and therefore it is particularly ascribed to
this person, and infinite wisdom: finally, the holy Ghost did particularly
work man's sanctification, this therefore is likewise accommodated to this
person, together with all spiritual graces and final glorification.
Nevertheless these offices, operations, and works, are so attributed to the
three holy persons, not that any one of them was effected alone by any one
person, for whatsoever is wrought out of the sacred Trinity, in or by any
creature whatsoever, is equally effected and wrought by all and every person of
the blessed Trinity, but because something does appear in every of these
works, which does especially manifest the Father, the Son, or the holy
Ghost, the Fathers power, the Sons wisdom, the grace and sanctification of
the holy Ghost, therefore these and other the like attributes are particularly
applied and attributed to each person of the blessed Trinity.

Rupertus lib. 2. de Trinitate and operibus ^ius.
This is the ground of Rupertus his discourse, and reason why God created man to
his likeness and image, why he changed his voice, and altered his manner of
speaking: for whereas he said in the creation of other creatures, Fiat, and
factum est; Let it be done, and it was done; now, as though he had been weary
with going about the earth, compassing the seas, and measuring the amplitude of
the heavens, he sat him down, and as it were taking his breath, he called to
mind that there was one thing as yet wanting, which was no less necessary
then fitting to be made; then said he, let us make man to our own image and
likeness. Thus do thou then think that a small matter, which was intended
by these words? A great mystery without doubt it was, in that counsel of
wisdom, in that counsel of such persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost. Can thou judge that there was any thing wanting, any thing
superfluous, either done or to be done in us, or about us, in that sacred
Senate? There doubtless was all our cause considered, there our fall
foreseen, there our death and perdition foreknowne, and determined upon, to
wit, that every person should undertake some part of the work, that as it is
said before, the Father should create, the Son should redeem, and finally
the holy Ghost should work the remission of sins, and the resurrection of
the flesh.

But what should be the reason why God deliberating about the creation of man,
should say, Faciamus, let us make? To whom did he speak, speaking in the
plural, let us make? Shall we say to the earth, as to a compart of man? or to
the Angels, as the fellow-workers with God, as though God had need either of
the cooperation of the Angels, or were so senseless, as thus to confer with
that his creature void of all reason and sense?

Ambrose in his seventh chapter of the sixth book of the Exameron, answers,
that God spoke not to himself, because he speaks not in the singular, but
in the plural, let us make, neither yet to the Angels, as who are but his
servants; therefore though the Jews and Arrians do never so much repugne,
these words without all question are spoken to his Son, as who is the true
and lively similitude and likeness of God the Father. And this I deem to be
the truest opinion, seeing that the eternal Son of God, even as he is the
Word and Son of God, is a lively and express similitude and likeness, not
only of his eternal Father, but also a most perfect Idea and exemplar,
according to which man was created.

Others not improbably do interpret, that God therefore spoke in the plural,
Faciamus, let us make, as Princes and great persons are wont to do, to show
their authority and majesty, saying, We will, We command, We decree, etc. yet
of the two I deem the first exposition to be best, and that the text may
admit them both.

CHAP. XIIII.
How man was made to the image and likeness of God.

FOr the understanding of this, Saints Pagnines in the sauro linguae Hebraae.
we must note the original Hebrew words, Selem and Demuth; by Selem is
properly signified a shadow or transitory similitude, Psalm 33. In imagine
pertransit homo, man passes away like unto a shadow. Likewise Psalm 101. My
days have declined as a shadow. The other word Demuth signifies to cut down,
to fail, to fade, to be silent, to recogitate, and to expect; but most
properly to assimulate or liken: wherefore seeing every similitude or likeness
is transitory, vanishing, and quickly passing away, the same word does also
signify to vanish, to pass away, to fail, and to fade.

Now therefore, when God said that man was made to his image and likeness, it
was to give us to understand, that such was the likeness, and so perfect the
representation, as could be between an inferior creature and his Creator: but
because God is of infinite perfection, it must necessarily follow, that his
similitude should be infinitely inferior and of less perfection then the
prototypon or first type of his perfection. Like as though the shadow be in
some sort the similitude and representation of the body, yet is it obscure, and
imperfect, yea nothing in it self, and in comparison of the body nothing.
Hence consequently we may infer a twofold interpretation of the said words,
adimaginem and similitudinem nostram, to our image and likeness, to wit, of
that image or similitude which is in God his divine nature, essence, being, or
understanding: insomuch that the nature of God, and his Ideall representation
of his understanding be the exemplar and first type, unto whose similitude man
was made. Or again that ^his be the meaning of Gods words, let us make man
such a one as we are, or so like unto us, that he may be such an image,
form, and similitude, as he may represent our nature, power, wisdom, and
providence, yea and immortality in a body of its own nature mortal.

For as S. Austine well notes, Aug. li. 83. quaest. q. 51.
diverse things do diversely represent Almighty God: some do participate of
virtue and wisdom, others only of life, others of existence and being,
insomuch that those things which only have existence, and neither live, nor
breathe, are counted an imperfect similitude of God, because they are good
according to their kind, and flow from that infinite Ocean of goodness, from
whence all other goodness does proceed. Again, those things which do live,
and yet do not understand, do more perfectly participate the likeness of
God: but those things lastly which do understand, do come so near unto the
likeness of God, that nothing created can come more near. Wherefore seeing
that man may participate of the wisdom of the divine nature, yea even
according to hi^ own nature, hence it is, that he is so framed to the image
of God, that nothing can be more like in his being and nature unto God: he
lives, he breaths, he understands, he has existence and being, and is in
all these, as a perfect pattern of his Creator and God.

CHAP. XV.
What is the difference between the image and the similitude of God, according
to which man is said to be created.

SAint Austine in his questions upon Deuteronomie thinks it no less then
blasphemy, to auerre any thing to be superfluous in the sacred text: wherefore
lest we be enforced to contradict this so received a principle, Orig. lib. 3.
Peri^rchon, cap. 6. Basil. hom 6. in Genesis in hunc locum Ambros. li. 6.
Exameron. c. 6. and 8 Nicenus homil. de creat. hom. Eucher. li. 1. commen. in
Genesis in hunc locum. Victorin. in disp^t. quam scripsit aduersus Arrium.
Theodoret. in quaest in Genesis q. 20. Rupert. li. 2. de Trinitate and operibus
eius, c. 3. et 5 Aquin. prima part quaest. 93. Magister sent. lib. 2. distinct
26. and ibidem Scholastici.
and manifest truth, we are to search what difference is between the image
and likeness of God, according to which man was created.

Origenes, Basil, Nicenus, Eucherius, Victorinus, Theodoretus, Rupertus,
Aquinas, the master of the sentences, with many others, both modern and
ancient Writers, are of opinion, that man is said to be made to the image of
God, according to his nature and properties consequent unto nature, as
understanding, memory, and free will, which he exercises in his natural
actions, and in which he exceeds all other inferior creatures; the which
image, though it may be, and is in some sort defaced by sin, yet is it in no
wise fully lost and blotted out, because as it is wholly of God, so it
depends only of God, and therefore can be taken away only by God himself;
nay not even by God himself, man remaining a reasonable creature or man. For
though he may have his senses and other spiritual powers depraved, yea though
he may also be deprived of the exercise of them all, yet in no wise can they be
utterly extinguished, man (as I said) remaining man.

Now as touching the similitude of God according unto which man was created,
we are to consider him, not according unto the natural gifts which are
necessarily consequent unto nature, but according unto justice, sanctity, and
innocence, and grace, which are gifts infused into nature, though above
nature, the which as they are independent of nature, so also may they be and
are separate from nature, according to the free disposition and order of God,
the Author of nature: but this certainly is always for some sin, which in this
sense may be said to be a deprauation of nature, seeing it depriueth nature not
only of these supernatural gifts, which are the chief ornaments and helps of
nature, but also because it depraueth nature herself even in her self, and
hinders the due exercise of her natural powers.

Rupertus in his second book of the Trinity, and second chapter, discourses
very acutely of this point, of the difference between the image and
similitude, unto which man was created, giving also the reason why the word
image is prefixed before the word similitude: in a word, his resolution is
this, that the Son of God is signified by the word image, and the holy Ghost
by the word similitude: for (says he) the difference between similitude and
image is this, that the image is in regard of one only, but a similitude is at
least of two: now the eternal Son of the eternal Father is the image of
God, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Coloss. who is the image of the
invisible God. The Son (I say) is the image of the invisible God, equally
invisible. For the understanding of which, we must presuppose that there be
many kinds of images, as the image of man, of a horse, a picture in the wall,
an image graven in stone or wood, yea we see even the images of the Sun and
Moon in the water, yet we may not think that the Son of God is so to be
called the image of God, but rather, as the Apostle writes in another place,
Heb. 2.
the figure of his substance; because as every substance is known by his
figure or shape, so God the Father by his word. Again, the image of man is
said to be a property of his substance, in which sense the sacred text says,
that Adam begat his son to his image and likeness, Genesis 5.
and called his name Seth. Hence we may understand how the eternal Son is
the image of his eternal Father, and the holy Ghost the similitude and
likeness of the Father and Son, seeing the goodness and love of the Father
and Son is common to both Father, and Son. Hence it is, that it could not
rightly be said in regard of the Son only, let us make man to our image and
likeness; for as the Son is Son in regard only of the Father, not of the
Father and the holy Ghost jointly, so also is he not the image of the Father
and of the holy Ghost jointly, but of the Father only. But it is rightly said
in regard of the holy Ghost, to our image and likeness, because as the holy
Ghost is the infinite goodness of the Father and Son, so is he likewise the
infinite similitude and likeness common to both Father and Son. But this not
by the force of his particular proceeding, as is the Son.

Others are of opinion, that this word ad imaginem, to our image, does signify
unto us the second person of the blessed Trinity, as he was to be incarnate,
or to take our nature upon him.

But if we mark the phrase of the sacred text, we shall easily find that the
Son of God was incarnate rather according to the similitude of man, then that
man was created according to his similitude, Romans 8. Philip. 1. Heb. 2.

Eugubinus in his Cosmopoeia, and Oleaster upon the first of Genesis, are of
opinion, that God therefore said, let us make man to our image and likeness,
because when he created man, he took upon him the shape and form of man, to
the end that he might the better converse with man.

But this seems rather to be an invention of their own, then grounded in
Scripture, because it is most probable (that which the Schoolmen do commonly
hold with Dionysius) that all those apparitions, which we read in the old
Testament, were not immediately of God, or by God himself, but by the
mediation of Angels, who taking upon them airie or other apparent bodies,
appeared unto men in the shape and form of men; but so nevertheless, that
they so appearing and speaking, did always represent the majesty of their
maker, repeating for the most part Gods own words, which he had immediately
infused into their understanding.

Again, if the aforesaid opinion of the assuming of our humane nature is to
be understood by a personal union between God and man, then questionless
God has been twice incarnate, and twice united to our humane nature, which is
contrary to the holy Scriptures. Or if there was no real union, or assumption
of our humane nature, but only a shade or similitude of the same, as we read
that Angels have oftentimes assumed humane bodies, how then was it truly said,
let us make man to our image and likeness, seeing that similitude of humane
nature could not in any wise be the image of God? neither could it be truly
said, that Adam was made to the image of God, if so be that we understand by
the image of God not any true humane nature, but the shade only and similitude
of man's nature.

Hence I conclude the first opinion to be the best, as which is most grounded
in the sacred text, and most followed of the holy Fathers and other expositours.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether the woman be made to the image of God, or no.

IT might seem rashness to doubt of this, if S. Paul did not give us some
ground, denying (as some think) that woman was made to the image and likeness
of God, auerring her only to be the image of man, in that he contraposeth
woman, as the glory of man, to man as the image and glory of God. His words be
these: 1. Cor. 11. and 6.
Man ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of
God: but the woman is the glory of the man; for the man is not of the woman,
but the woman of the man. The woman therefore is not the image and glory of
God, but immediately only the glory of the man, otherwise there could be no
difference in this, between the man and the woman, contrary to the inference
which S. Paul makes in the precedent verse.

Nevertheless, even the text it self does clearly confute this opinion: for
after that it had been said, let us make man to our own image and likeness,
presently it is added, he made them, both man and woman. Wherefore as man was
made to the image of God, so likewise was the woman made to the same.

Aug li. 12. de trinitate cap 7.
S. Austine is very large in giving the reason of this conclusion; but briefly
this is the answer: If we consider the principal reason, why man is said to
be the image of God, to wit, as he is an intellectual creature, and as he is
endued with the properties thereunto annexed; so is it evident, that this word
image does equally signify, and may be equally attributed both to man, and
woman: seeing that they both participate of reason, and understanding, both be
endued with an immortal soul, both partakers of free will, both capable of
supernatural gifts, both of grace and glory.

But again, if this word image be taken in a more large, and improper
signification (as has been already explicated) we may well say, that man was
made to the image of God, and woman framed to the image of man. Because, as God
is the end to whom man is immediately referred: so likewise man in some sort is
in regard of the woman, because man is the head of the woman, by whom she
ought to be directed unto God. This explication seems to be grounded in the
aforesaid place of Paul, 1. to the Corin. 11. chap. for when he had said,
that man was the image of God, and woman the glory of the man, he presently
gives the reason. ver. 8. For man (says he) is not of the woman, but the
woman of the man. ver. 9. for the man was not created for the woman's sake, but
the woman for the man's sake.

Nevertheless, if the similitude of God in man and woman be considered, not
according to their natural gifts, but to the supernatural of grace and glory,
then questionless it happens oftentimes, that some women are more adorned
with these supernatural graces, and gifts, and consequently are more like unto
God then many men. As we piously believe of the blessed Virgin, who as she
was pronounced by the Angel of God to be blessed amongst all women, so no
doubt, but she has received an eternal blessing above all Angels and men,
our Savior only excepted both God and man.

CHAP. XVII.
Whether man be made to the image of God even according to his body and
corporal proportion, shape, and lineaments; or does in any wise represent the
divine majesty.

THE subject of this question is so certain of it self, and without all
coutrouersie, that for the resolution thereof, we have more need of the
subtlety of distinction, then of any profound divinity, or learning. For
seeing that the divine majesty is a most pure spirit, as infinite in essence,
as in all and every of his divine attributes infinite, how is it possible that
there should be any comparison, similitude, or likeness with him, in that, which
is altogether corporal, limited, and most base, such as is our humane natute
according to the body.

Nevertheless seeing the body does in some sort represent the soul, like as
the soul also is the image of God; hence peradventure it may be inferred, that
the body may in some sort be said to be a representation or similitude of God;
in as much as the body (if we consider it in his full perfection) is an
immediate glass, similitude, or representation of the soul, the which most
perfectly represents Almighty God. Wherefore though in regard of our
corporal substance, considered immediately in it self, without any relation
unto the soul, we be no better then brute beasts: yet if we consider it, in
regard of our soul, and as it is the receptacle of the most excellent image of
God, it may after a remote manner, and mediately be said to represent even God
himself.

Wherefore S. Austin propounding this question, August. lib. 6. de Genesis ad
literam cap. 12.
in what does a man exceed the brute beasts, seeing they are both made of
earth? he answers, in nothing, but because he is made to the image of God,
not in body, or corporal substance, but according to his soul, and spiritual
powers. Though true it is also, that he has even in his body, a certain
property, which does in some sort demonstrate the rectitude of his soul; as
that he is made upright, to the end, that he might understand how he ought
not to abase himself to the terrene, vile, and base trash of the world, like
unto the brute beasts, and other most base creatures, who as they are framed
prone, and have their bodies inclined toward the earth, can never erect
themselves to any spiritual, or heavenly thing.

Hence Bernard well notes, that God made man upright in stature, and erected
toward heaven, to the end that his corporal rectitude and vprightnes of his
shape, might stir him up to preserve the spiritual rectitude, and
righteousness of the inward man, who was made to the image of God; and that the
beauty of our corporal substance, and outward proportion, and right
disposition of the lineaments of our body might correct the inward deformity
of our souls, and the powers thereof. For what can be more ugly, deformed, and
abominable in the eye of that all-seeing God, then a sinful, and defiled soul
in a beautiful body? Is it not a shameful, and detestable thing, that an
earthly and corrupt vessel, such as the body is, should contemplate the
heavens, view the Planets, and be delighted with the aspect of the
incorruptible spheres, and motions of the stars; and that on the contrary
side, the spiritual and celestial creature, far more perfect, then all the
celestial globes, and heavens, the soul (I mean) of man, should always have
her eyes, that is her inward powers, and affections debased, and cast down to
the terrene trash, and basest creatures of this world.

Consider therefore (o man) thy dignity of nature, the perfection of thy
powers, thy privileges of grace, the immortality of thy soul, the
excellency of thy creation, the nothing of thy self, and lastly the infinite
price of thy redemption, by the most precious blood and death of the Lamb, thy
Creator, and Redeemer, and let not this so base, and transitory trash of this
world, so alienate thy mind, and bewitch thy understanding, that thou prefer
the filthy and base pleasures of the body, before the spiritual and eternal
of thy spiritual and immortal soul.

CHAP. XVIII.
Whether the image of God may be wholly lost, and blotted out of the soul of
man.

ORigenes, Epiphanius ep. ad Iohanne^ Hierosel: Aug: lib. 2. contra Adamantiam
Manich. and l. 83. quaest. q. 66. and lib. 6. de Genesis ad literam. cap. 27.28.
and S. Austine do seem to affirm that man lost the image of God, Epiphanius,
and diverse other of the Fathers do peremptorily deny it out of Gen: the
Psalms, and S. Paul: but I think this controversy rather to arise, by reason
of the diverse understanding of the image of God, which is in man, then of any
true difference in their opinions; for who can doubt, but if we consider man
according to the supernatural gifts first infused into the soul of Adam, but
that he lost the divine similitude or likeness of God, and that wholly, nothing
remaining but only the deformity of sin, Genesis c 9. Psalm. 38. 1. ad Cor. cap.
11.
in the deformed, and sinful soul; but if we consider him again according to
the natural substance of the soul, and her natural faculties consequent
thereunto, it is equally indubitable, that she retained this likeness of God,
though not in the same perfection, which she possessed before, but rather much
defaced, blemished, and deformed.

My reason is, because there proceeded a more excellent beauty, and perfection
unto this natural substance, by reason of the supernatural quality of
original justice; and consequently the deprivation of this supernatural gift,
which was also a sufficient cause of natures greater perfection, and more
admirable beauty, was a deprivation and defacing of the said beauty of nature,
which otherwise had been a perfect type, and portraiture of the divine nature,
and being.

CHAP. XIX.
Why God made man to his image, and similitude.

MAny and most excellent reasons may be given of this, but which I must needs
confess, are rather moral congruencies, grounded in the infinite goodness of
God, then in any other forcible convincing reason, plainly deduced out of the
sacred Text.

The first whereof may be this, that God therefore made man like unto himself,
that thence it might be manifest how much the infinite goodness of God
exceeds the malignitie, envy, and malice of man: for God being infinite in
his goodness, yea in all other his attributes infinite; yet does he not
disdain our of his infinite goodness, that, that, which in us is limited and
finite should be compared and likened to that, which in him is infinite, and
beyond all comparison: he enuieth not the perfection of our nature, he makes
it more perfect by grace, and by a sacred league, and union, he combineth both,
that by both we may be like unto him in both, who is the author of both.

And this with such a degree of participated perfection, that man does not only
become like unto God, but also may be called, and is truly the adopted Son
of God. So that all men may now participate of the grace, which one only
possessed by nature: insomuch that as he being the natural Son of God, is a
perfect pattern of his eternal Father by nature, so we also be a
participated likeness, and similitude in some degree by nature, but most
perfectly by grace.

The second reason may be this (if so be that we may compare these inferior
things of this world to those supreme, and infinite of God) like as a temporal
Prince (having for to show his power, magnificence, and majesty) built,
furnished, beautified, adorned, and decked some excellent City, in which he
himself does mean to remain, does there erect, in some principal part
thereof his own image, or statue, in some precious porphire, marble, or other
more excellent matter: even so Almighty God, having out of his infinite wisdom
made this maine Machina, and beautiful City of the world, for the
manifestation of his glory, to the end that it might be known, and
acknowledged, who was the only author and architect of all, he was pleased to
place in the midst thereof, in the garden of paradise his own image, and
similitude, man (I mean) who by his soul, and the three principal powers
thereof should represent the unity and trinity of his maker: yea and by his
outward shape and form in some sort likewise represent the inward, and
consequently, though not immediately, even God himself.

Insomuch that, as it is said of the portrature of Venus painted by Apelles,
that none could perfect it, but only Apelles who first began it: so likewise
was it not possible that any should bring our soul to her first perfection,
but only God, who was her first Creator. Hence it is that like as he, who
defaceth the image or statua of an earthly Prince, is justly condemned of high
treason; so, a fortiori, who depraueth his own nature, and by offending his
maker depriueth it of grace, (the which is the seal, sign, and similitude of
the divine power, nature, and majesty) is worthily condemned of high treason
against the same power, and majesty. The third motive, why God created man to
his image and similitude, may be this, to the end that all corporal things
might be subject, and each after their manner serviceable to man, as who of all
other creatures, was the express similitude of their lord and maker, unto
which it seems that God did allude, when he said unto Noe, the fear of you
and the dread of you shall be over every beast of the earth, Gen: cap. 9. ver.
2.
and over every foul in the heaven, and upon all that moves on the earth, and
upon all the fishes in the sea, etc.

And least those incorruptible creatures, the heavens, the planets, the
stars, yea most of all the Angelical powers, Cherubins or Seraphins should
disdain the service of man, or lest any other creature should rebel against
him, who as yet had not rebelled against his God: or finally, lest the devils
should of envy dare against him, as who with his posterity was to replenish
those glorious thrones, from which those wicked spirits fell, it pleased
therefore the divine majesty to beautify, adorn, and fortify man, with his
own likeness and similitude.

So that as it is said of Cain, Genesis 4. verse. 15. the Lord set a mark upon
Cain, lest any man finding him should kill him, so of the contrary side, it
pleased our Creator, to impresse his similitude, and likeness, not only in our
first father, but also in every man, lest any man finding any other man, in
whatsoever offense, not having the anthority, more then of man, should lay his
hands upon any other man. Not (I say) having the authority more then of man,
such as I deem to be in lawful Magistrates, and such as are deputed by them
for the execution of justice. Because this is not only by the instinct of
nature, but also proceeds from the author of nature, and is lastly confirmed
by the giver of grace. Insomuch that he himself does say to all his lawful
ministers of justice, and governors as well spiritual, as temporal, Luke 10.
ver. 16. who hears you, hears me, who despises you, despises me. Because
as it is one and the same law, so likewise the contempt of the law is one, and
the same; and consequently the punishment answerable thereunto must be one,
and the same: But this not only as the law is only from man, but as it
participateth of the law of God, man being the immediate lawgiver, Gods law,
and eternal wisdom being the first fountain and rule, from whence all humane
laws are not only derived, but also firmly established, and to be conformed:
for otherwise they be no laws, but tyranies or deprivation of laws, but as
they be conformable to that divine, and eternal law.

The fourth reason, or motive that moved God Almighty to make man to his image,
was, because he having created all these inferior creatures, and subjected
them to the rule, use, and government of man, as to the most noble creature: so
also he was pleased to ordain him to a most noble end, the enjoying of his
Maker, that so man might be a mean to reduce other inferior creatures, to
their Creator, and end.

Wherefore to the end that this excellent union of man with his Maker, might
appear more manifestly, he imprinted in him, his divine image, with so lively
and firmly an impressed similitude, and character, that while man should
remain in his own being, so long likewise, should he remain, the type and
image of the divine nature and being. As it is said of the famous Phydias, that
he did, with such rare Art and cunning, ingraue his own image in Mineruaes
shield, that while the shield remained entire, his image likewise must remain
entire and undefaced.

Another reason of the impression of this most excellent and beautiful image
of God, in man, may be, that man should be incited and moved thereby, to the
knowledge, and love of his Creator. Wherefore as by the contemplation of other
more imperfect creatures, he is brought in some sort to the knowledge of God;
so with much more perfection by the knowledge of himself. Hence it is, that to
the end, that he might be inexcusable, and not ouercharged, in the curious
searching of God in external things, it pleased his Creator, to imprint in his
soul, a most beautiful image, and clear similitude of the divine nature and
being, the which should be a more perfect representation unto him, of the
divine properties, then he should find in all other inferior creatures. Man
therefore, reflecting upon himself, and viewing his own nature, may ascend
unto God, and perfectly view the divine nature: Seeing the image, he may also
the prototypon: seeing himself, he may ascend by contemplation unto God: for
seeing his own soul, he ought to conceive it as the image of God; and
whatsoever perfection or shade of perfection he finds in himself, that
doubtless he ought and may conceive to be in God, though in a more infinite
degree of perfection. The soul understands, God infinitely more; the soul
freely disposes, wills, and determines, much more God: the soul is capable
of the divine virtue, wisdom and grace, God is even virtue, wisdom and grace
it self, yea that infinite ocean of graces and gifts, from whence all other
graces and gifts do proceed: according to that of James chap. 1. verse. 17.
Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, descending from the
Father of lights.

CHAP. XX.
Whether the dominion over all other living creatures was given unto man, and
what manner of power that was.

AS nothing does more declare the love of God toward man in this life, then
that he made him Lord and ruler over all his creatures: so nothing does more
declare the excellency of man's nature, especially in the estate of his
innocence, then that he had power and dominion over all creatures, the which
as they were made for his service, so were they always ready at his beck in
due obedience. No Lion so terrible, no Elephant so mighty, no Tiger so fierce,
no Foul so ravening, no Whale so monstrous, no not any creature so indomite,
but that it was subject unto man's dominion, while man was subject to his, Lord
and Maker. So God commanded, nature obeyed, (though now in some sort that be
contrary to nature) yea, all creatures did concur unto this subjection, while
man was subject unto his Creator, who clothed him (as the Preacher speaks)
with strength, and made him according to his own image: yea made all flesh to
fear him, so that he had dominion over the beasts and fowls. Or as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm 8. v. 5. 6. 7.
he made him a little lower then himself, crowned him with glory, and made him
to have dominion over the works of his hands: and finally put all things under
man's feet: all sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field, the fowls of
the air, the fish of the sea, and over all things which pass through the paths
of the seas. And hence it was, that Adam as Lord of all gave names unto all
creatures, and Eve though by nature timorous and fearful, was not in any wise
daunted at the presence and speech of the Serpent.

So that as we partly find as yet by experience, and was much more in that
happy state of Paradise, all creatures should have been subject to man, while
man was not disobedient to God: yea as all inferior creatures are subject to
their superior, according to their nature, order, perfection, and Gods decree,
the imperfect to the more perfect, the matter for the forms, the corporal for
the spiritual, the accidents for the substances, the elements for the mixts,
yea even the heavens, stars, and planets for man, man only for God, as
subject only to God, while he did not infringe this sacred order and chain,
where by him all things were to be reduced and linked to God.

Furthermore, this power and dominion of man over all other living creatures,
proceeding from the excellency of his nature, did remain in him even after
his sin, though not in the same act, or actual exercise of his power and
dominion. For albeit whatsoever was due unto nature, was blemished, defaced,
and corrupted by sin; yet nothing substantially belonging unto nature, or
necessarily consequent unto the same, was wholly taken away. Wherefore this
divine image of God being engraven in man's nature, man's nature remaining after
sin, the same image of God must needs remain, at least way as much as was
due unto nature, or not above the sphere of nature; and consequently the
aforesaid dominion must also continue, as having his beginning from this image:
it must (I say) continue (as the Philosopher speaks) non actu, sed potentia,
not always according to the exercise of the act in all particulars, but
according to the extent of the power in general, as may be manifestly proved
out of the 9. of Genesis: Genesis 9. v. 2.
The fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth,
and upon every foul of the heaven, upon all that moves on the earth, and upon
all the fishes of the sea; unto your hand are they delivered. Thus God said to
Noe after the general deluge, and consequently this dominion over all
creatures does remain even after sin.

CHAP. XXI.
Whether in the state of innocence one man should have been subject to
another, or rather all of equal dominion, power, and authority.

SAint Augustine answers, that seeing God had made man a reasonable creature,
Aug. lib. de Ciu. c. 15.
he would not have him to domineere, but only over the unreasonable. So that
man should not have had power over man, but only over beasts, and other
unreasonable creatures. Hence it was, that our first Fathers and Patriarchs of
the world were rather keepers of sheep, and feeders of oxen, then governors
of men; that thence we might understand, both what the right order of
creatures did require, and what followed the disorder of man, and desert of
sin: seeing base bondage, vile slavery, and ignominious subjection
proceeds of sin, as rooted in sin not springing from nature. Wherefore
before the just Noah revenged the sin, of his son, we never read in the
Scripture the names of bondage, servitude, or slavish subjection, which
therefore must necessarily be rather the desert of sin then the effect of
nature. Yea this may be confirmed, in that God giving power unto man over all
inferior creatures, he makes no mention of the power of man over man, because
all men were equally made to the image of God, as likewise because in that
estate all were equally to be borne both in perfection of nature, and adorned
with grace, and consequently all were to be equal in power and dominion, as
consequent to the perfection of nature and height of grace, seeing this is
equally grounded in nature, and with no less equality was to be confirmed by
grace.

Now as it cannot be denied, but that this opinion of S. Augustine has some
probable reasons; yet I deem the contrary to be much more probable: to wit,
that though there should have been no such dominion in Paradise, as which
should then have been burdensome unto nature, and is now necessarily following
our lapse and fall: yet questionless there should have been a kind of order,
subjection and subordination, of children, inferiors, and subjects, to their
parents, superiors, and political governors: not by way of an imperious
command and absolute authority, but by a voluntary and sweet subjection
flowing from nature, and confirmed by grace.

My reason is this, for as all should not have been equal in the gifts of
nature, wisdom, knowledge, skill, magnanimity, and prudence; neither could
they have been all equally apt for political government: such as I suppose
should have been in that most perfect place of Paradise, though in most
perfect manner. Neither may it be thought contrary to the happiness of that
estate of Paradise, that man should have some kind of subjection or
subordination to man, seeing we must necessarily admit the like in the blessed
spirits and holy Angels: who as they are distinct in nature, individual, and
specificall perfections; so are they no less in their subordination, offices,
and degrees. So Jerome says, if there be principalities, powers and virtues,
it is necessary that they have some subject unto them; who fearing and serving
them, are confirmed with their virtue and valor: which distribution of offices
are not only in this wicked world, but also are to be in the world to come. A
fortiori then, there might have been the like subordination and order of
government amongst men even in the state of innocence.

So that as we find in Daniel and Zacharias, Daniel 8. Zachar. 2
that one Angel does command another, notwithstanding the perfect blessedness
of both: so likewise it seems most certain, that there might have been the
like subordination amongst men, the like command and power over others, though
we had all remained in that pleasant place of Paradise. The wife should have
been subject to her husband, the children to their parents, the youth to their
elders, and finally all inferiors to their superiors.

But how then (may some say) was the subjection of the wife unto her husband
inflicted as a punishment due unto her sin, according unto the sentence of
God, Genes. 4. verse. 16.
thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee? How
could this be inflicted for sin, if so be it was consequent to nature?

I answer briefly, that there is a twofold subjection of the wife to her
husband; the one voluntary, the other involuntary; the one of nature, the other
of sin; the one burdensome, the other grateful; the one confirmed by grace,
the other repugnant to nature: finally the one nothing repugnant to the state
of innocence, the other inflicted for original sin.

For certainly, though Eve had not fallen, and transgressed the commandment of
God by tasting the forbidden fruit; yet because she was the weaker vessel,
therefore even her own nature would have required subjection unto her husband;
subjection (I mean) voluntary, not constrained; natural, not forced; yea
free, and without any contradiction, which now even the best of Eues
descendents do sometimes experiment in regard of their husbands, so that
though the one subjection be a property of nature, yet the other is a
punishment of sin, signified by these words, and he shall rule over thee.

CHAP. XXII.
Whether the Angels did concur to the production of man, or no?

THis doubt may be understood of the several parts of man, the body or the
soul: first therefore as touching the soul, which as it was altogether of
nothing, so it was not possible that it should be brought out of that nothing,
but by the immediate power and particular concourse of the Almighty: for as S.
Austine says lib. 9. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 15. as it is impossible for any
Angel or creature to create it self, so is it no less that any other thing
should be produced of nothing, but by him only which is above all things.

Wherefore the doubt only is, whether the Angels did in some sort concur to
the creation of the body of man, seeing that (as S. Austine says in his 8.
book de Genesis ad lit. cap. 24.) all material and corporal creatures are
subject to the Angelical powers: seeing also that their ordinary apparitions
unto men are by corporal shapes and forms, which they assume unto themselves,
it may seem not improbable, that in like manner they may frame and depute unto
every soul her material substance, and corporal shape, yea and unite the
matter and form together, and consequently that they may in some sense be said
to create man.

Nevertheless, though I cannot deny, but that the Angels might in some sort
concur unto the disposition of the material substance of man, and thereby
instrumentally to the introducing of the form; yet they may not in any wise
be said to have created either matter or form, seeing both were immediately
from Almighty God, as which were both produced of nothing.

Aug lib. 9. de Genesis ad lib. cap. 15.
So (as S. Austine most fitly compares) though the husbandman do dig,
plough, plant, manure and till the ground; and the Physician by his medicines,
potions and physic does prolong the life: yet nevertheless neither of them
may be said to create: even so though the Angels might in some sort dispose to
the creation or generation of man, yet may they not absolutely be said to
create, because this is a production of nothing presupposed, which only
belongs to an infinite power.

CHAP. XXIII.
Whether Adam was created in his perfect corporal stature and age.

SAint Austine answers, Aug. lib. 6. de Genesis ad lib. cap. 13.
that as it was proper only to Adam, not to be borne of parents, but framed
immediately of the earth; so also was it peculiar unto him alone, that he was
created in perfect age.

Neither may this kind of production (says the master of the sentences) be
said to be against nature, Magist. sent lib. 2. distinct. 17.
unless it be in regard of us, to whom it may seem to be beyond nature; for
whatsoever God works, that in regard of God may be counted nature: yea this
seems to have some ground in the sacred text, seeing that God having newly
created our first Fathers, he presently commanded them to increase and
multiply: wherefore as he created other things perfect, Genesis 1. ver. 22. and
24.
and apt for to multiply each one in their several kinds; so also did he
create our first parents in the like perfection both of stature and age, (as
some say) as between 30. and 40. years of age, or (as others do assign)
about 50.

Now as concerning the dimension or greatness of his body, though some auerre
that he was the greatest of all men and Giants that ever were, deducing it out
of the 14. of Iosue, Iosue 14. Numb. 13.
and the 13. of the Numbers; nevertheless this seems altogether improbable:
if those places be understood of Adam, they are rather to be interpreted so,
that he was the greatest of all men, not in quantity, but in qualities; not
in dimension of body, but in beauty both of body and soul; not in corporal
extension, but in dignity, prerogatives, and all other excellencies, both
corporal and spiritual; because otherwise he might rather seem a monster in
regard of us, then a man.

My opinion therefore in this point is, that as he was created perfect in all
other respects; so likewise in this of perfect corporal stature, greatness,
and all other dimensions; and consequently that he was created of the best
stature, and proportion of all lineaments and members of his body, that ever
man was, or shall be, our Savior only excepted.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Whether the soul and the body were created in the same instant, or no.

Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 12. and 13. Eugub. in Cosmopaeia, and in Pentateu hum.
Castro lib. 2. contra haereticos, vbi disputat de anima. Ferus in cap 2. Genesis
Tostat. ibid. sicut and Genadius ibid.
Chrysostom, Eugubinus, Alphonsus de Castro, Ferus and Genadius deny, that
the soul and the body were created in one and the same instant: yea this
opinion seems to be grounded in the word of God, Genesis 2. verse. 7. where Moses
says, that the Lord God made man of the dust of the earth, and breathed in his
face the breath of life, and the man was a living soul. Wherefore man (as
these Doctors say) was first made according to his material part, afterward
this matter was disposed by God by the contemperating of convenient qualities;
and lastly, after all this, was the soul infused, and united to the body thus
disposed.

Gregorius Nicenus, Damascenus, Aquinas, and S. Austine are of the contrary
opinion, to wit, that the soul of man was made and infused into the body in
the very same instant and indivisible point of time, in which the body was
created by God.

Aquinas his reason is this, because such is the nature of parts, that while
they are separate the one from the other, they are reputed to be in an
imperfect estate: for why, the part being ordained for the whole, it cannot in
any wise obtain its due perfection, while it is a part from the whole:
wherefore seeing all things were created in their perfect estate, in their
first production: it is not likely, that either the soul was created without
the body, or the body produced separate from the soul, as powerful (I mean)
and in potentia proxima (as the Philosophers speak) fully disposed for the
receiving of the soul.

CHAP. XXV.
Whether the immortality of the soul may be demonstrated out of the
Scriptures, or no.

EVsebius writes of certain Arabians, who held, that though the souls of men
should reviue in the general resurrection unto immortality, yet that now at
the separation of the body, and soul, the soul perishes with the body. Yea
Tertullian also (as S. Austine writes) does seem to hold no less. Augustine.
de haer. nu: 86.


Nevertheless, the contrary is most certainly deduced, out of those places of
Scripture, which do signify that man was made to the image, and likeness of
God. First, in his infinite capacity of mind, and will, which are satisfied by
no created object. Secondly, in the liberty, which he has unto whatsoever
particular good. Thirdly, in his natural propension unto eternity, and
immortality, Plato in Alcib. and in Phaedone. Porph. l. 1. ad Boet. vide
Eusebius. lib. 11. de praepar: euangelica.
the which even Plato and Porphirius thought to be sufficient arguments of the
souls immortality.

Yea the immortality of the soul is evidently proved, in that as Moses
says, God constituted man supreme Lord over all inferior creatures, yea in
that he breathed into him a reasonable soul with full liberty over all his
natural actions, according unto that of the fourth of Genesis, the 7. verse,
where GOD says thus unto Cain, that his desire shall be subject unto him, and
he shall rule over it, but more particularly this is demonstrated out of the
third of Exodus; where God says unto Moises, that he is the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and this not of the dead, but of the
living, as our Savior added in the gospel.

Finally, this may be deduced out of Deuteron: 4, where it is said, that God
made the Sun, the Moon, the stars, and the planets for the service of man,
as for a more perfect creature, and consequently participating a more perfect
immortality, then is the incorruption of those eternal globes, and stars.

CHAP. XXVI.
Whether the soul of Adam was immortal by its own nature, or only by grace.

SOphronius, Jerome, Sophronius in his 11. ep. in the 6. Synod. Hierom. l. 2.
con^^ Pae. lag. Damas. l. 2. de fide orthod. c. 3. and 12.
and Damascene are of opinion that the Angels and humane souls are not
immortal of their own nature, but only by Gods grace. To this also S. Paul in
his first Epistle to Timothy, and his last chapter may seem to incline, where
he says, that God only has immortality. Plato plainly insinuates the
same of Angels, much more then of humane spirits.

Nevertheless it is most certain, that man's soul is immortal even of its
own nature, for which reason our Savior commands us Math: 10. not to fear
them that kill the body, Math. 10. ver. 28.
but are not able to kill the soul. Wherefore as the body is mortal, and
corruptible, it follows by the antithesis, that the soul is immortal, and
incorruptible.

Again this is most plain out of diverse other places of scripture, Psalm 29,
and 16. Ecclesiasticus 12, and the 9. Matthew. 10. 2. Sam. 23. and 32. Phil.
1.23. 1. Pet. 3. and 19. Apoc. 9.6. and 7.9.

CHAP. XXVII.
That Adam was not created in Paradise, and why not, and by what means was he
placed there after his creation.

AS touching the first point, that he was not created in Paradise, it is
manifest, that though the woman was created in paradise, yet the man was not,
for so it is said of him. Gen: 2. the 15. verse. Then the Lord took the man,
and put him in the garden of Eden, that he might dress it, and keep it,
therefore he was not there before, at his first creation, though Eve was; for
so it was convenient, that she should be produced of Adam in his most perfect
state, and being, according to both body, soul, and habitation, which is the
opinion of Basil, Aquinas, Basil. homil. de paradyso. Aquinas 1. part q. 102
ar. 4 and plures in 2. sententiarum distinct. 18.
and the most of the ancient Divines against Tertullian, Josephus, and Rupertus.

As touching the second point, that God took man, and put him into the garden
of Eden. This may be understood three ways; first by inward inspiration, by
which God might show him, that it was his pleasure, that he should have that
for his habitation, in which sense many understand that of Math. 4. that our
Savior was carried of the spirit into the wilderness, to wit, by the inward
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, though he went also voluntarily of himself.

Secondly, we may understand it, that he was carried by the spirit of God, or
rather conveyed by the immediate power of the Almighty, as we read of Henoch,
Habacuck, and Philip.

Or lastly, that he was transported by some Angel, in the shape and form of
man, who showing him the way, did lead him into paradise, as we read of the
Angel Raphael, how he lead Tobias, and to this last I incline the rather,
because it is the opinion of S. Austine.

But now it may be demanded, why God would not create man in paradise? the
reason may be, to the end that he might more manifestly understand his
goodness, and liberality toward him, and that, that place was rather given unto
him of mere grace, then any wise due by nature.

But why then (may some say) were the Angels created in heaven, yea all other
living creatures created each in their own place? I answer, that neither the
purity of the empyreall heaven, did exceed the Angelical purity, neither the
grosnesse of this inferior globe of the earth, did exceed the nature of
corporal creatures there living, and therefore these two places were most apt
for the creation and habitation of Angels, and these inferior creatures. But
such was the perfection of paradise, that it was in no wise to be deemed a
convenient place for humane habitation, man's nature (I mean) only considered,
not the grace, and bounty of God thereby manifested.

CHAP. XXVIII.
To what end was Adam placed in Paradise.

Moses answers, Gen: 2. ver: 15. that the Lord took the man, and put him
into the garden of Eden, that he might dress it, and keep it; or as the
vulgar has, that he might work in it, to give us to understand how much God
abhors idleness, seeing that even in that place, where there was no need
of labor, God would not have man idle: not an ill item for our lazy gallants,
who think their gentilitie to consist in idleness, and a point of honor to
live of other men's labor: but even in this (I am of opinion) that God does
punish them, that they have more griefs, and more discontent in their idle
pleasures, then others in their most wearisome toiles, and labors, which
though it be a most voluntary bondage, yet is it likewise the most base, and
cruel slavery to the base appetites; a tyranny of Satan, a double bondage to
a double tyrant, to Satan, to sin; for as S. Paul says, who commits
sin, is the slave to sin; so who subiecteth himself to the suggestions of
Satan is a slave to Satan; an intolerable slavery, and an infinite misery; the
beginning miserable, the proceedings damnable, the end, as which has no end,
intolerable.

Now therefore lest Adam or his posterity should by alluring idleness, come to
this endless pain; God of his mercy placed Adam in paradise, vt operaretur, and
custodiret illum, that he might work and keep it, to wit, that he working
might keep paradise, and paradise by the same work might keep him from
idleness, from sin: because that is the ordinary cause of sin, for as it is
true, that which the Poet says, that labor blunteth the arrows of Cupid, so
does it no less other darts of the devil.

But hence peradventure some patron of idleness may infer, that labor was
contrary to that blessed state of Paradise, as which required all quiet, rest,
and content; no, rather I say that it was consequent, or necessarily pertaining
to that blessed state, seeing that labor was not any toil, or pain, but
rather a pleasure, and a voluntary effect of his well disposed mind, as it is
now likewise to men not so ill affected, quorum otium, as Seneca said, maximum
negotium, so as S. Austine says l. 8. de Gen: ad lit: cap. 8. non esset
laboris afflictio, sed voluntatis exhilaratio, cum ea, quae Deus creauerat
humani generis adiutorium, laetius seraciuque provenirent, that it should not
be a toil or affliction of the body, but a recreation, and rejoicing of the
will and mind.

CHAP. XXIX.
Whether the precept of not eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
was given as well to Eve, as to Adam, and how that was.

THe difficulty of this question proceeds of the diverse readings of the
precept, because some with Greg. l. 35. moral. cap. 10. do read it according to
the Greek in the plural; the Hebrew, and Caldaean, with the vulgar Latin, and
English are in the singular. Genesis 21.16. and the Lord God commanded the man,
saying, thou shall eat freely of every tree of the garden, but of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for in the day thou
eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death. Whereby we see that this
commandment was directed to the man only, not to the woman, seeing she as yet
was not created, as is apparent out of the 18 verse, the 21, 22, and 23, where
the creation of Eve is described.

Nevertheless it is manifest that the same commandment was extended to Eve
also, for so she answered the serpent according to the vulgar edition, de
ligno quod est in medio paradysi, praecepit nobis deus ne comederemus, but of
the tree, which is in the midst of Paradise, God commanded us, we should not
eat; wherefore though this precept was principally given to Adam, yet was it
also to be observed of Eve, for as they were conjoined in nature, so were they
not to be separated in regard of their precept and grace.

But why then (may some say) was the name only of Adam expressed? I answer
with Rupertus lib. 2. de Trinitate, and operibus eius c. 32. because the
precept was principally given unto him, as upon whose obedience or breach, his,
and his posterities happiness did solely depend, not upon Eues.

CHAP. XXX.
Why God commanded Adam that he should not eat of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil.

TErtullian, in the beginning of his book against the Jews, says, that this
commandment was given to Adam, as the first principal foundation and ground
from whence all other laws were derived, and in which all the ten Commandments
be virtually included: so that as Adam was the first beginning of mankind, so
this was the first ground of all other laws. But though this cannot be
rejected, as an improbable speculation, yet certainly it is not so firmly
grounded in the sacred text, as Tertullian imagined.

The reasons therefore in my opinion why God so strictly prohibited the eating
of the aforesaid fruit, was, first, that thereby, as God had declared unto us,
his power over us: so we should show our obedience toward him: not that (as
S. Austine notes) God has need of our service; Augustine. l. 8. de Genesis ad
literam cap. 11.
but that we have need of his power, protection, rule, and dominion over us;
according to that of the Psalmist, who speaking in the person of God, says,
constitue super eos legislatorem, vt sciant gentes quoniam homines sunt,
Constitute a ruler over them, (as the vulgar translateth) that the heathen may
know that they are but men: so that as it is a token of vassalage, and
subjection to receive laws, so is it of power, dominion, and authority to
command, constitute, ordain, and set down laws to be observed. Yea
secondly, God gave this law unto man, that thereby he might exercise his
obedience toward God, a virtue as necessary to man, as acceptable in the sight
of God, Aug. lib. 8. de Gen ad litera^ cap. 8.
and therefore (as S. Austine well notes) God gave not this law in any object
of it self otherwise evil, or of its own nature good: to the end that the
virtue of his obedience might be the more illustrious; because it deriueth not
his excellency, from the material object, but from the formal, the sole
subjection to Almighty God.

It may seem peradventure not improbable to some, that the law of nature,
which God had infused into the nature of man, might have sufficed to lay open,
try, and manifest man's obedience toward God: to what end then should the
second law of abstayning from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil be
added, as a second trial of that which otherwise might sufficiently be
manifest by the law of nature, and obedience thereunto? I answer, that the law
of nature would not have been a sufficient trial of Adams obedience: because
it is not altogether manifest by the law of nature, that God is sole and
supreme Lord over all mankind: for some do imagine that the law of nature is
a property only due unto a reasonable creature, as every species, or kind of
living creatures has their particular property agreeing to their nature.

Again some are of opinion, that those things which are contained in the law
of nature, are to be embraced, or rejected in as much as they agree, or
disagree with natural reason: not as they are commanded, or forbidden by God,
as supernatural agent. So that although it be prescribed by God unto all men,
yet does it not sufficiently manifest his most ample and absolute power over
all mankind: seeing that by this law there is not any thing commanded, or
forbidden, but only that which is according to humane reason, either good, or
evil, of its own nature.

Wherefore Gods absolute dominion, and extent of his divine power, were not
sufficiently known only by this law of nature, but only as it is agreeable
to the instinct of nature: the which as it was but only in things within the
sphere of nature, could not possible show the extent of the absolute power of
God in things both with in the compass of nature, and above nature.

Hence Gregory well notes, Lib. 33 moralium cap. 10.
that the forbidden fruit was not evil of its own nature, but was forbidden,
to the end, that man being created upright by nature, might increase in
righteousness by the subjection of his nature, and perfection of his obedience
to the author of nature.

CHAP. XXXI.
Why God commanded Adam that he should not touch the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, especially seeing he fore-knew his fall.

THe answer is easy, to wit, that by the trial of his obedience, in this one
commandment, he might subject the whole man unto himself in all things, and
that man by the breach, or keeping of the said commandment, might know by
woeful experience (as he truly did in his woeful fall) the difference,
between good and evil; so that whereas before he knew it only by
contemplation, now he should find it by a lamentable experience: yea, in this,
his sin was the greater, in that the object of his obedience was so facile,
and the commandment so easy to be kept. Aug. li. 14. de ciu. Dei, cap. 15.
For (as S. Austine says) like as the obedience of Abraham is highly extolled,
because the slaying of his son with his own hands was of such difficulty;
even so the disobedience of Adam in Paradise was the more heinous, by how much
the precept which he had imposed was the more facile to have been fulfilled.
Again, as the obedience of the second Adam was so much the more admirable,
because he was obedient even unto death; so the disobedience of the first Adam
was the more detestable, by which he became disobedient even unto death: for
where the punishment of the disobedience is great, and the thing commanded
easy, who can express how great an evil it is, not to obey, and how great an
injury to so great a power, especially threatening so great punishments?

Now as touching the second point, I answer, that therefore God as absolute in
his will, science, and power, would create Adam, and give him the aforesaid
precept, which he knew nevertheless he would so presently violate; to the
end that his unhappy fall might be an occasion of our most happy Redeemer: for
as the Schools commonly hold, if Adam had not sinned, the Son of God had not
been incarnated: so that (as Gregory says) in regard of this it was a happy
fall, which deserved, or rather required to have such a Redeemer: O foelix
culpa, quae talem ac tantum habere meruit Redemptorem: in which I know not
whether I should more admire the goodness of God in the creation and
restoration of man, or the ingratitude of man toward God, in and after both
his creation, redemption, and infinite offenses and falls; but that as it is
the nature of that infinite goodness to effectuate the greatest good, of the
greatest evil, so is it no less consequent to man's natural propension, and
of himself, as it were an infinite of evil, of the greatest good to work the
greatest evil: a thing not easily believed, if our daily and woeful experience
did not so manifestly prove it: for as God by our greatest and original evil,
did work our greatest and original good, and this only out of his infinite
goodness (the incarnation I mean of his eternal Son) so man out of his
infinite malice, did by occasion of this so infinite a benefit, work the most
wicked outrage that could be imagined, against his benefactour, by seeking his
dishonor and death, who so abased himself, to give him life: so that I know
not whether I should more admire God shedding his blood for man, or man
spilling the blood of God; man's ingratitude toward God, or Gods infinite
bounty toward man.

And hence it is, that as faith teaches us, this evil and sin of Adam was
foreseen and permitted of God, so is it no less a blasphemous heresy, to
auerre, that this or any other sin is wrought by God, wrought I mean by his
particular command or concourse; not by his universal, which is due unto all
entitie and being, yet in some sense neither due unto this of sin, as which
in it self has neither entitie nor being: but rather (if we speak formally)
is a privation of all rectitude, goodness, and being.

CHAP. XXXII.
What death that was which God threatened to inflict upon Adam for his
transgression.

AS it is certain that the mortality of Adam, and consequently of all
mankind, did proceed of sin; so it has no small difficulty to declare what
instant death that was, which God so instantly threatened should follow man's
sin, for so says the text, Genesis 2. the 17. verse: In the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall die the death. What day is this? what death is this?
seeing that he neither first sinned the last day of his life, nor yet died the
first day of his sin: true it is, that as death was due at his last day, for
his first sin, so was it not inflicted in the first hour, for his first
days sin. Was this death peradventure the privation of grace, by which his
soul supernaturally lived? for as the body lives by the soul, so Adams soul
lived by grace, consequently as the body is said to die by the absence of the
soul, so the soul spiritually by the privation of grace: but yet though this
be true, yet it cannot be the sole meaning of the aforesaid words; so that
then no other death should have been due unto man, but only the death of the
soul, the separation from God, who as he had sinned both in body and soul,
was justly to be punished in body and soul; which the effect afterward showed,
that God had before accordingly decreed: so that the sentence of his death, as
it was executed both in body and soul, so it is to be understood to have
been decreed as well in regard of the body, as of the soul; because the
corporal death is a necessary consequent of the spiritual; now then the
spiritual being inflicted in the very instant of man's sin, how chanced it
that the corporal also did not befall him in the day of his sin? especially
seeing that though God threatened not death in the instant of his sin, for the
instant of his sin, yet at least God says, that man shall die in the day of
his sin.

Is it peradventure threatened, and not truly decreed? or if really decreed, how
is it not absolutely performed? God threatened his death in the day of his
eating; Adam eats, and yet lives long after his eating. Could Adam change
the decree of God, or could God decree that he meant not to perform? He
performed not, therefore he decreed not; if he decreed not, how then was it
said, In the day that thou eatest thou shall die the death; not of the soul
only, for that was instantly, but of the body principally, seeing that is said
to be in tempore, in the day, not in instanti, or momentarily. Was it a threat
only, as we read of the Ninevites? but they changed their mind, they
repented their sin; therefore as the sentence was conditional, the condition
being changed, the sentence of God (though eternal) is said to be revoked, not
changed in act, but immuted in object, the act being immutable, the object
mutable, according to the decree of the immutable act. But here in this of
Adam, the cause is altered; God threatens, the sin is committed, why then is
not the sentence presently executed? In the day that thou eatest thou shall die
the death.

Justinius the Martyr, Justinius in dialogo cum Triphone Iren. lib. 5. aduersus
haereticos.
in this more acute then Catholic, answers, that even the very same day that
Adam was deprived of the spiritual life of his soul, he was no less also of
the other of his body: for though he died not the same day, according to the
natural revolution of the heaven, yet seeing that a thousand years (as David
and Peter speak) are but as one day in regard of Gods eternity, Adams death
being within the compass of the thousand years, may well be said according to
Gods and the Scriptures phrase, to have died even the same day that he was
created.

But seeing true histories do seldom admit any such subtilities, I rather
incline to the interpretation of Jerome and S. Austine, who understand that
sentence of death, not of death then instantly inflicted, but of the necessity
of death then forthwith contracted. Jerome therefore commends Symmacus, who
for that which our translation has, morieris, thou shall die, translateth
mortalis eris, thou shall become mortal: so that whereas he had been created
to an eternity of life, now he is made subject to the penalty of death; or as
our interpretation seems to insinuate, even to death it self, seeing that
even from thenceforth he began to be mortal, who by grace before was
altogether immortal. So that, as according to true Philosophy, we may say,
that the alteration of qualities, or the dispositions unto generation, are in
some sort generation; so likewise by this phrase of Scripture, that Adam should
die in the day of his sin, we may well understand that he began to die,
dispositiue, by way of disposition, in the day of his sin, seeing sin was
the immediate disposition or cause of his mortality and death, sin (I say)
being the cause of his mortality, his mortality consequently prepared
forthwith the way unto death. For so it is said in the second book of the
Kings; We all die, and slide away as water: for though at the present, while we
live, we be not jointly dead, yet because we slide away toward death, as the
floods toward the Ocean, we are all said to die instantly, because our life,
even from the first instant thereof, is nothing else but a swift sliding
toward death: yea our temporal life (as Gregory the great well notes)
compared to the eternal, is rather to be called a present death, then a
continued life; seeing that our continual corruption and declining toward
death, may rather be termed a long or continual death, then even a very
momentarie life.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the creation of the woman, and to what end she was created.

AS it is most certain that the principal end of the creation of Adam was to
serve, love, honor and obey his Lord and maker; so the same likewise was the
woman's principal end. Again, as Adams secondary end was to be the father of
mankind, so was it also Eues to be the mother of all, and to be a comfort and
help unto her husband, Genesis 2. verse. 18. It is not good that man should be
alone; I will make him an helper meet for him: good neither in regard of God,
of man, nor of the world; of God for his service, of man for his help, of the
world for procreation: for though this was not absolutely necessary, neither in
regard of God, man, or the world; yet supposing the decree of God, that he
would be preserved by the beautiful disposition and order of this world, it
was not only most convenient, but in some sort necessary, that he should make
man a helper, and a helper meet for him: for though he could otherwise have
disposed of things by immediate creation, yet was it more agreeable to the
nature of things, and for the sweeter disposition of the course of nature, that
mankind should rather be multiplied by natural course of generation, then by
supernatural power and immediate creation.

Hence peradventure it may be inferred, that seeing God says, it is not good
that the man should be himself alone, that consequently it must be evil if
he be alone; and therefore as by this sentence lawful matrimony is
confirmed, so virginity by the contrary consequence is condemned: for
whatsoever is opposite to that which is good, must necessarily be condemned as
bad, as which is nothing else but the privation of good.

To this I answer, (as our Savior did to the Sadduces, in their objection
touching marriage) Matthew. the 22.29. verse, Ye are deceived, not knowing the
Scriptures: for as Christ is not against Moses, neither the new Testament
contrary to the old, neither the greater perfection to the less; so neither is
virginity contrary to matrimony; both are laudable, both in their degree
excellent, but virginity more laudable, more excellent, most admirable, as by
which we rather imitate the angelical state and perfection, then follow our
own depraved nature and corruption. This is the definition of Paul, not any
humane invention; for thus does Paul determine this controversy, the 1. to the
Corinthians, chapter 7. verse. 25. Now concerning virgins I have no command of the
Lord; but I give mine advice, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful. Lo here, virginity is not commanded, but commended; not exacted by
force, but commended through grace; neither counseled to all, because it
cannot be performed of all; counseled therefore only to some, and those but
few, seeing few can attain to this perfection.

1. Cor. c 7. verse. 27.
My counsel therefore is that of Saint Paul, Art thou bound unto a wife? seek
not to be loosed, lest loosing the knot, which God has knit, thou loose thy
self. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife: here Paul counsels,
he commands not, neither is his counsel extended to all, seeing all cannot
be capable of this counsel; not only by nature, because this is not any gift
of nature, but also even by a lesser measure of grace: for though the Sun of
justice does shine over the just and unjust, and send down the dew of his
grace unto all, yet not with equality unto all, but according unto his good
pleasure and will.

Wherefore as S. Paul prosecuteth, If thou take a wife, thou sinnest not; and
if a Virgin marie, she sins not: verse 37. He that stands firm in his
heart, that he has not need, but has power over his own will, and has so
decreed in his heart, that he will keep his virgin, he does well: so then he
that gives her to marriage does well, but he that gives her not to marriage
does better: the wife is bound by the law as long as her husband lives; but if
her husband be dead, she is at liberty to marie with whom she will, only in
the Lord: but she is more blessed if she abide, in my judgment; and I think
that I have also the spirit of God.

Neither is this the mind only of S. Paul, but even of his master our Lord
and Savior: Matthew. 10. Some there be, which have made themselves Eunuchs for
the kingdom of heaven: not that this is contrary to the first institution of
matrimony, but only a greater perfection, supposing a sufficient or
superabundant multiplication of mankind; so that (as Cyprian says) the first
decree of God was concerning generation, the second persuaded continency; when
the world was as yet void and rude, we multiplied by generation; now that the
world is filled, and fully replenished, those that can contain, spadonum more
viuentes, castrantur ad regnum, by purity of life do dedicate themselves to
the kingdom of heaven.

Now as touching the time and place of Eues creation, and first as concerning
the time, it is evident out of the sacred text, that Adam was first created.
Paul in the first of Timothy, chap. 2. says, that Adam was first created, and
then Eve. Furthermore, it is evidently deduced out of Moses, when he says,
Genesis 2.
that after Adam was created, all the living creatures were brought before him,
among all which no help meet for him being found, the Lord God caused an
heavy sleep to fall upon the man, and he slept, and he took one of his ribs,
and closed up the flesh in stead thereof, and the rib which the Lord God had
taken from the man, made he a woman.

Hence it is evident, that there was some time between the creation of the
man, and the woman's production: but it is not so easy to determine, how much
that was, though certain it be, that this time did not exceed the compass of
the first six days: for in the seventh day God ended his work which he made,
and the seventh day he rested from all his work which he had made. Wherefore
the creation of Eve could not be the seventh, as Catharinus and others presume
to auerre.

As concerning the place, where Eve was created, though Josephus, and
Tertullian do think, that she was created out of Paradise: nevertheless the
contrary seems more agreeable to the written word: for there it is evident,
that after Adam was brought into Paradise, all living creatures were set before
him: where God seeing the necessity of the woman's creation, to wit, that Adam
might have an help meet for him, he framed her out of the side of Adam, for
so says the text, and the Lord God said, it is not good for man to be alone, I
will make him an help meet for him. And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to
fall upon Adam, and he sleept; and he took one of his ribbs, Genesis 2.18.21. and
22.
and closed up the flesh in stead thereof. And the rib which the Lord God had
taken from him, made he a woman. Wherefore it is not in any wise probable (as
some have coniectured) that after Adam had been in Paradise, he was carried
out again, and Eve then created.

CHAP. XXXIV.
What sleep that was, which God caused to fall upon Adam for the creation of
Eve, and whether it was a true sleep or no.

THis difficulty does principally arise out of the diverse translations of the
fore-alleadged text. Gen: 2.21, where it is said, that the Lord caused an heavy
sleep to fall upon man, and he slept, where in place of the Hebrew word
Tardemah, Aquila translateth (...), and Simachus (...), a profound sleep.

But most of the Fathers following the translation of the seauenty two
Interpreters, translate an extasis, or an excess of mind.

My opinion is, that seeing the translation permits both, that it is to give
us to understand, how it was both a sleep, and an extasis, or an extaticall
sleep, or a sleepie extasis: a sleep, because the text in rigor does signify
a sleep: an extasis, or rapt, because he had then his mind supernaturally
illuminated, and filled with a prophetical spirit, insomuch that presently
awaking, he said forth with, this now is bone of my bones, Genesis 2.23.
and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called woman, because she was taken out
of man.

CHAP. XXXV.
Why Eve was created out of the ribbe of Adam sleeping, and how that could be
without any grief unto Adam, and finally why the woman was not created
immediately of the earth as well as man.

THe master of the sentences, and diverse other school Divines say, that Eve
was framed out of the side of Adam sleeping, for to signify the mystical
production of the Church, out of the sacred side of the second Adam dying; but
with this difference of productions, that the first sleep was joyful to the
first Adam, because he had not transgressed as yet; the second, most
ignominions and painful unto the second, because he had taken upon him the
sins of the first. The first was deprived of pain, by particular
dispensation of the author of nature; the second was full of ignominy, and
pain, by a supernatural, and gracious dispensation of God, as author both of
nature, and grace: to the end that nature being now depraved by sin, might be
raised again, and restored to her former estate by an omnipotent grace.

But now could this be, the Adam should have a ribbe taken from him without any
grief?

For the understanding of this we must necessarily praesuppose that no grief
was agreeable to Adams estate before his fall. Now then I answer, that as God
could, and de facto, did suspend, or withdraw his concourse, and action from
the Babilonian fire, for the preservation of the three children, Sidrach,
Misach, and Abednego: so likewise here, for to show the like power, did God
withdraw his concurse from all natural passion, which naturally should have
followed the extracting of the ribbe.

Now to the last, why the woman was not created immediately of the earth, as
well as the man, but of the man's side and ribbe? I answer, it was, to the end,
that Adam acknowledging her to be a part of his substance, and she also
knowing that she proceeded thence, it might be an occasion of a more perfect
love: for that otherwise, he considering how she was the cause of his misery,
it might be an occasion of a perpetual, and implacable hatred between them:
or principally this was to signify the mystical union between the second
Adam Christ, and his Church; according to that of Paul, Ephesians. 3.32.
this is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ, and concerning the
Church, because the divine union between Christ, and his spouse, was signified
by the union of Adam, and Eve: so that as Eve was framed out of the first Adams
ribbe, so was the Church out of the side of the second.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Why, and how Eve was made of the ribbe of Adam.

IT was not without the particular providence of the wisdom of God, that the
woman was not made neither of the most principal, nor of the most base parts
of man: not of the principal, lest she should be too impudent; neither of the
baser, lest she should be too much debased; she was therefore created of the
ribbe, and of that ribbe, which was next to the heart; the one to signify the
mediocritie of her condition; the other to insinuate the esteem, and respect,
which both she should have toward Adam, and Adam toward her; as also to
signify the heart, love, and fidelity, which he should bear unto her, who
had her being from so near his heart.

Now the difficulty is, how Eve being of so perfect stature, as she was
created, could be created out of a ribbe of so little quantity, seeing either
she was equal in stature with the man, or not far inferior in greatness
unto him, was there any matter added unto the ribbe? or was the same matter of
the ribbe multiplied? surely it might be, as Lombard, and Gabriel said, by the
multiplication of the same matter, or by rarefaction of the same ribbe; or
rather, which I deem more probable, by addition of new matter, as the Divines
hold it happened in the multiplication of the five barley loaves (of which we
read in the gospel).

Neither may it be inferred hence, that then it should rather have been said,
that the woman was framed of other matter, then of the ribbe of Adam, because
the more principal part bears the name, not always the greater; especially,
when the principal part, is not only the principal, but also the first of the
whole compound or work.

Wherefore, seeing the ribbe of Adam was the first, and principal matter, of
which the woman was created, and unto the which the other was but an addition:
it is therefore rightly, and absolutely said, that Eve was made of the ribbe of
Adam, without the expressing of any other matter; because, though the new
assumed matter was the greater in quantity, yet less in perfection: so
likewise in the muitiplication of the five loaves, though that which was added
was much more, then the precedent quantity of bread; yet because it was but an
addition unto the former, therefore the name was derived of the more principal
part, according to the common axiom of the Philosophers, denominatio sequitur
principaliorem partem, the name must follow the more principal part.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Whether the ribbe of which Eve was created, was requisite to the perfection of
Adams body or no.

BOth the Physicians, and Philosophers do agree in this, that every man
according to his natural constitution, and perfection has 24 ribs, twelve
of each side; wherefore if our first father had thirteen on the leaft, it may
be thought that this was rather monstrous, then agreeable to nature, which
neither admits want, nor superfluity; either therefore this ribbe was
super-abundant in him, and so he monstrous by super-abundance, or it is wanting
in us, and so we monstrous by defect.

I answer, that though it were monstrous in any of us to have 13 ribs, yet
was it in no wise in respect of Adam: it were in regard of us, because none is
to be created of us; but in regard of him the defect were rather monstrous,
because Eve was to be created of it; so that neither was Adam a monster, when
he had that, which we have not, neither yet deficient, when he wanted that of
which Eve was created: because the name of monster is not so much in regard of
superabundance or want, as in regard of the ends, and purposes intended by the
author of nature, grounded in that, which is most connaturall.

Wherefore, though in regard of the particular nature of Adam, as he was but
one particular man, this ribbe was superfluous, and so consequently in an other
person might be thought monstrous, yet in regard of him, of whom the rest of
mankind was to proceed, it was most natural.

Neither do these two sorts of considerations imply contradiction: seeing that
even in nature we have infinite examples of this: for so the heauiest dross,
and massiest matter, has a natural, and particular inclination to descend to
the center, which nevertheless will ascend for the preservation of the course
of nature: ne detur vacuum, when there is any danger of vacuitie of air, or
want of any other body, which naturally should fill all places; so that, as to
descend is proper to heavy things, considering their particular inclination,
and nature; so to ascend is no less agreeable unto their nature considering
their universal propension for the preservation of the universal good of
nature.

In like manner if we consider Adam, as one particular man, not as first parent
of our humane nature, it were monstrous, that he should have more ribbs on the
leaft side, then on the right, or more then any of his posterity have: but if
we consider him, as he was to be the first father of mankind, after that
particular manner that God has determined, it was most necessary, and
agreeable to his nature, that he should have more ribbs then any other of the
same specificall nature, seeing, that our first mother Eve was to have her
being of this ribbe of his, and we all ours, by her.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How mankind should have been multiplied if Adam had not sinned.

GRegory Nisene, Damascene, Chrysostom, Procopius Gazeus, and diverse others
were of opinion, that if Adam had not sinned, there should have been no such
natural generation of mankind, as is now, but rather an immediate
multiplication, and production of men by the immediate power of God. So that as
we shall be like unto the Angels in the celestial Paradise through our union
unto Christ; so we should not have been unlike unto them in the terrestrial
by the immediate production of God: wherefore as sin was the cause of our
dissimilitude from the Angelical life, so was it (according to these Fathers)
the cause also of the dissimilitude of our production; the Angels being by
creation immediately from God, we not immediately, but by mediate generation:
and hence it is that Austine says, that consanguinities, and affinities
proceed of sin, not of nature.

The ground peradventure of these Doctors may be the impure, and corrupt manner
of our generation, and the deformity of lust together with the immoderate
pleasure thereof proceeding, the which our first fathers (as S. Austine says)
presently upon their sin experimented, and thence were ashamed and covered
themselves.

Nevertheless, I cannot but deem it most certain, but that so long, as man's
superior powers were subject to God, so long also should man's inferior powers
have been obedient to man; wherefore whiles there was no deformity by sin in
the will, neither should there have been any filthiness or abomination in the
actions of nature: But as our eyes, and other senses be as yet subject to our
will, so also, all other now rebelling inferior powers, should have been
subject to their superior: lastly, as all deformities and disorder should have
been taken away; so all conformity and order should have been left. The
sensitive appetite should have been subject to the reasonable, the reasonable
to the spirit, the spirit to God. And as no disorder in nature could proceed
from the author of nature; so no disorder in the acts of nature, could have
been found in the course of nature; and this, though even in the very estate
of innocence there had been generation of mankind, as now it is: as now (I
mean) in the substance of the act, not in the manner of reigning, and raging
lust.

And this certainly was Gods intent in the creating of our first fathers male,
and female; because, if it had not been for generations sake, they might have
been both created males: because all things at their first creation were
created in their greatest perfection: if therefore the man be more perfect
then the woman, why should they not both have been created male, if it had not
been for their multiplication, by the ordinary course of generation,
especially seeing God blessed them with these words, which signify no less;
increase, or (as the Hebrew has) fructify, and multiply, especially seeing
(as the Philosopher says) generation is the most natural action of life;
Aristotiles lib. 2. de anima, and lib. 4. meteor.
yea then every thing is in his perfect estate, when it is powerful to bring
forth another like to it self.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Whether there should have been more men, or women in the state of innocence:
or rather an equality of both sexes: and how there could have been any women,
seeing they are said to proceed out of the defect of nature.

AS touching the first point, I think it most probable, that there should have
been more men, then women, if so be that we had persisted in the state of
innocence: my reason is, because nature then being in a full perfection, would
for the most part have produced the most perfect, which questionless is the
male, for the most part I say, not always, because the female also was
necessary for the natural propagation of mankind.

Again it was necessary for the most part, not altogether necessary, but
only most perfect, and therefore most agreeable to that most perfect estate.

As touching the second point of the multiplication of the female sex, and how
that could be connaturall and agreeable to that perfect estate of paradise,
seeing it belongs to the perfection of nature, to bring forth the most
perfect, and consequently male not female, as which is rather a declining from
perfection, and argues some weakness in nature, or imperfection in the Parents;
Aristotelis de generatione animalium lib. 4 cap. 2. and 6.
yea as Aristotle says is praeter intentionem agentis, and therefore seems
rather a monstrous act of generation, then a perfect issue, or pattern of the
Parents, or nature.

And least this may seem improbable, even nature herself (as the Philosopher
writes) gives sufficient tokens and signs of this, seeing that the female
sex is begotten rather in tender and old age, then in the flourishing, and
vigorous time of man's age: for as natural heat has not attained unto his
perfection in the one, so has it lost his former vigor in the other. It is
also ordinarily seen that the moistest, and most feeble bodies do beget
females, by reason of the want of natural heat.

Furthermore the same philosopher says, that the female kind being of their
own nature feeble, and cold, are to be deemed as a defect, error, default, or
declination of nature.

Nevertheless I answer briefly, (because this matter more belongs to
Philosophy then to Divinity) that the production of the female, does not
proceed only, or rather not always of the defect of nature; but oftentimes
also of the more remiss manner of concurse of the power of generation, as also
of the imagination thereto inclining, and other like natural defects: whence
it is, that though the generation of the female be in us a sign of less vigor
of nature; yet was it not so in Adam, but rather it proceeded of the aforesaid
causes of the imaginatiue apprehension, or particular disposition of the author
of nature, for the multiplication of mankind.

CHAP. XL.
Of the prerogatives and excellent gifts with which Adam was endued in the
state of innocence, and first as touching his knowledge and natural wisdom
of natural things.

IT is the common opinion of the Fathers, and other Divines, that Adam had
infused into his soul a most perfect knowledge of all natural objects,
according to that of the Preacher, the 17. chapter, where thus he describes
the creation of man, together with the prerogatives wherewith he was first
endued, verse. 3. Ecclesiasticus cap. 17. v. 3.4 5.6.7 8 9.10.11.
He endued them with strength by themselves, and made them according to his
image, and put the fear of man upon all flesh, and gave them dominion over
beasts and fowls. They received the use of the five operations of the Lord,
and in the sixth place he imparted them understanding, and in the seventh speech
an interpreter of the cogitations thereof. Counsel, and a tongue, and eyes,
ears, and a heart gave he them to understand Withal he filled them with the
knowledge of understanding, and showed them good and evil. He set his eye
upon their hearts, that he might show them the greatness of his works. He
gave them to glory in his marvelous acts for ever, that they might declare his
works with understanding. Besides this, he gave them knowledge, and the law of
life, for an heritage.

And hence it was that Adam perfectly understanding the nature of other
inferior creatures, gave each of them their names according to their natures;
for so says the text, Genesis 2.19. And out of the ground the Lord God formed
every beast of the field, and every foul of the air, and brought them unto
Adam, to see what he would call them, and whatsoever Adam called every living
creature, that was the name thereof, and Adam gave names to all cattle, and to
the fowls of the air, and to every beast in the field. Now if Adam gave to
each living creature his name according to his nature, as questionless he did,
it can be no less certain, but that he had a perfect notice (if not
comprehension) of their natures, according to which he had given them their
names.

But now the difficulitie is, how this is to be understood, that God brought
the beasts and fowls unto man; whether only by an intellectual
representation, bringing them or representing them as objects of his mind and
cogitation, as Caietan holds or corporally, truly, and really, in their own
nature, essence and being: and if thus, by what means? whether by natural
instinct, guiding them to perform this will of the author of nature, or that
God himself immediately by himself, or by the ministry of his Angels did
present them before Adam?

Though I find no constant resolution of this point, either in the Scripture,
Fathers, or reason; nevertheless that which seems to me most probable, is,
that as every living creature has his natural, peculiar, and proper instinct
unto diverse things, according unto the diversity of their natures, variety of
dispositions and qualities; so likewise I think it most certain, that they
had in regard or this, a particular instinct by the extraordinary concourse of
God: to the end that as they were all to acknowledge, Adam for their Lord and
master, he might according to his absolute power and dominion over them, give
them their names as a token both of their subjection, and of his absolute power
and dominion.

And this may also be the reason, why God presenting all other creatures to
the presence of man, he did not likewise bring him the fishes as well as the
beasts of all species and kinds, because the beasts being domable, and easy
to be tamed by man (at leastway whiles man was subject to God) might serve for
the use of man, while man was not disobedient to God: or peradventure this was,
because the fishes could not naturally live out of the water, as man cannot in
any wise persist without God.

Moreover, as touching his knowledge and perfect comprehension of the natures
of these inferior creatures, I doubt not, but that I may be bold to pronounce
that of him, which was said of Solomon in the book of wisdom, 7. chap. verse.
15. to wit, that he granted him to speak as he would, and to conceive as was
meet for the things that were given him: because it is he that leads unto
wisdom, and directs the wise. He gave him certain knowledge of the things
that are, namely to know how the world was made, and the operation of the
elements: the beginning, ending, and midst of the times: the alterations of the
turning of the Sun, and the change of seasons: the circuits of years, and
the positions of the stars: the natures of living creatures, and the furies
of wild beasts: the violence of winds, and the reasonings of men: the
diversities of plants, and the virtues of roots: and all such things, as are
either secret, or manifest them he knew.

For if this be indubitable in respect of Solomon, it seems much more in
regard of Adam: wherefore doubtless he was the wisest of all men, our Savior
only excepted, the author of his and of all other wisdom.

Neither does my position in any wise contradict that which is said unto
Solomon in the first book of Kings, chap. 3. verse. 12. Lo I have given thee a
wife and understanding heart, so that there has been none like thee before
thee, neither after thee shall arise the like unto thee. For though the
proposition be universal, yet such like oftentimes are not to be understood
universally, as S. Hierome well notes, exemplifying in that of the Psalm,
Hieron in comment, in cap. primum ad Ephesios.
Every man is a lier: again if he who speaks it, lies, neither can it be
true which he speaks, that every man is a lier: wherefore if it be a true
saying, that all men are liers, we must take this word all, not that
absolutely nd universally all be liers, but that a great many are liers. So
likewise although it be said that Solomon exceeded all men in wisdom, yet
this word all may be understood not absolutely all, but with some exception.
For so argues the same Father in another place: Hieron. in comment. in caput
quintum ad Romanos.
Scribit and alibi Apostolus; The Apostle writes also in another place, how
we taught all men, and warned every man, not that he taught all, for how many
be there even to this day, which never heard of the Apostolical doctrine or
name?

Or peradventure this universal proposition, that Solomon was the wisest of
all men, is to be understood in respect of those, who had not their science,
wisdom, and knowledge infused: for who can think (who thinks so divinely,
and judges so supernaturally as he ought of our Savior) that the wisdom of
Solomon was in any wise to be compared even with the accidental wisdom
infused into the soul of our Savior? Wherefore if that universal proposition
be not universal in all, and do not conclude in regard of all, as
questionless it does not in regard of our Savior, I do not see why Adam may
not also be exempted, especially seeing he was to have been our head, from
whence all natural and supernatural gifts should have been derived, if so be
that he had persisted in his original grace.

CHAP. XLI.
Of the knowledge which Adam had of the things above nature.

AS it is most certain that our first fathers were created perfect according
to nature; so is it no less in regard of grace, and all other supernatural
acts and habits thereto annexed: wherefore as he was endued with the
perfection of all natural knowledge, so was he no less perfect in the
supernatural; not in so high a degree as the soul of our Savior, nor yet as
the least of the angelical spirits, yet certainly more perfect then all other
men, not only in regard of his faith, which was most perfect, but also in
regard of other objects more clearly revealed.

And first as touching faith, it cannot be denied, but that he had this
supernatural gift infused into his soul, because this, Ad Heb. c. 11 v. 1.
as S. Paul testifies, is the substance or argument of things hoped for, the
evidence, ground, or confidence of things not seen.

Again, seeing he was created not so much for the obtaining of any natural
thing, as for the enjoying of supernatural blessedness; it must needs follow,
that as his nature and natural end did necessarily infer and bring with it
the knowledge of the natural means, by which it was to be obtained: so
likewise the decree of God, by which he was predestined unto a supernatural
object and end, did necessarily infer and bring with it by a connaturall
consequence, the notice of the supernatural means necessary for the obtaining
of that end, object, and felicity, which was above nature. Insomuch that as
the substance of the matter and form of things either corruptible or
incorruptible, is in regard of the accidents: so likewise is Faith a necessary
argument, of things not appearing; necessary (I say) in regard of the
inference, not evident in regard of the conclusion, or that which is inferred.
For, though the objects be sufficiently patent, and most clear in themselves,
and unto those blessed spirits who have the eyes of their understanding already
illuminated with the light of glory: yet is it obscure unto us, who as Paul
speaks, as yet see only in speculo and in aenigmate, in a glass, and by
species, obscure enigmaes, and other imperfect representations of inferior
creatures.

Hence the difficulty is, what things in particular were revealed to Adam? I
answer, that as the objects of this supernatural science may be reduced to
four kinds: so likewise the sciences, and knowledge, may be said to have
been fourefold. The first, of his reward, for though the perfectest love be
not mercenarie, and so base, that it do principally respect the reward: yet
nevertheless, the all-seeing and infinite good God does never leave the least
love of man without his reward. It is necessary (says Paul) that he who does
come unto God, should believe, and especially believe that he is a rewarder.
Wherefore as the first act of a regenerate person is faith, so the first object
of this act is touching our end: for (as the Philosopher says) quod est primum
in intention, est vltimum in executione; that which is first in intention or
speculation, is last in practice or execution: and contrariwise, that which is
first in practice and execution, is last in intention and speculation.
Wherefore as our supernatural end and felicity is the last thing which we
are to enjoy; so is it the first and principal which we ought to seek and
intend: and if this be true in all our actions, it must needs be much more in
this of faith, which is (as Paul said) the substance, ground, or confidence of
things hoped for, and of all our supernatural actions.

By this it is manifest, that the measure of the knowledge of the means of
this supernatural felicity, was according to the perfection of the
apprehension and notice of this end, insomuch that as this end may be attained
unto by a threefold mean, so was man ordained thereunto by the same means, to
wit, faith, hope, and love: faith for the discovery of the object of our
felicity; hope, for the effectuating of the means of our happiness; love,
for the combining of both the means; a triple cord, with a triple knot, which
not even the power of Satan shall be able ever to dissolve.

Again, it seems most certain, that he knew the fall of the damned spirits,
because he might by the knowledge of this be much helped in the obtaining of
his end; as thereby inferring the severity of the divine judgment toward the
Angels, and his infinite mercy toward men, by the one he might be moved to
fear the like severity, if himself should fall, and hope to replenish the
places of the fallen Angels if he should stand.

The third object revealed unto Adam was the mystery of the blessed Trinity,
how God (I mean) was three in one, and one in three; three in distinction of
persons, one in the indiuisibilitie of nature, being, and essence, and all his
other infinite attributes: the which though distinguished for our capacity
according to their objects, yet he well understood them to be one and the same
in nature, realitie, and simplicity of essence. My reason why I think the
revelation of this object unto Adam to be certain, is, seeing that the sight
of it is to be the perfection of our blessedness in the life to come, it must
needs be also a beginning of it here: wherefore as it is there by a perfect
sight face to face; so it must be likewise here in speculo and in aenigmate,
with imperfection and obscurity. Yea seeing Adam knew himself to be made to
the image of God, three in one, and one in three, in his simple essence, and
his three spiritual powers: so he must needs infer the same of his
prototypon and Creator. Lastly, he had revealed unto him the incarnation of
the Son of God, not as passible for his sin (which certainly he did not
foresee) but as to be united to our nature for the excellency of the
mystery, and because he was to be the head of mankind.

CHAP. XLII.
Whether Adam was created in the grace of God, or no.

THough it be out of all controversy, that Adam was before his fall in the
state of grace; yet many be of opinion, that he was not created so: this was
the opinion of Alex. Hales, Scotus, Bonan, Marsilius, and Altisiodorensis, who
though they grant that he was created in original justice, yet distinguishing
these two, they deny that he was created in state of grace; their reason is,
because by grace there is contracted a spiritual kind of wedlock, league,
and union, between God and our souls. Now then as matrimonial union
requires the consent of both the parts; so likewise here, and the rather, that
Adam thereby might the better know himself, and the weakness of his own
nature, by an after infusion of grace.

Nevertheless it seems much more probable, that though we distinguish grace
from original justice, or howsoever, that Adam was created in grace; for (as
S. Austine says) God created the first man in that estate, in which if he
would have kept himself, he should have been transposed at his due time,
without any death, unto a better estate, and where, as he could have committed
no sin, so could he have had no will unto sin: so that it was with Adam as
the same Father says in another place of the Angels, God did simul condere
naturam, and largiri gratiam, jointly create his nature, and give him grace:
yea this, according to the opinion of Origin, Victorinus, Basil, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Beda, and Rupertus, is signified by these words, let us
make man according to our image and likeness; image, to wit, in nature, and
her proprieties, similitude, according to grace, and her ever following
virtues; yea this is insinuated by Paul himself, in his epistle to the
Colossians, 3. chap. 9. and 10. verses, where he says, that we should not lie
one to another, seeing that we have put off the old man with his works, and
have put on the new man, which is renewed with knowledge after the image that
created him.

CHAP. XLIII.
Whether if Adam had not fallen, all his posterity should have been borne in
the grace and favor of God, and confirmed in the same.

HVgo de sancto Victore answers, that though Adam had begot children in his
innocence, yet that his children should not have been borne inheritors of
their fathers righteousness, because righteousness proceeds not of flesh and
blood, but of the mere grace of God: so though they had not been borne in
sin, yet neither should they have been endued with original justice.

Nevertheless the common tenent of Divines does persuade the contrary: to wit,
that as Adam by his sin did transfuse into his posterity the imputation of
sin together with the crime it self: so likewise if he had kept the same
original justice, in which he was created, he should also have derived the
same unto all his posterity. And this in effect is the meaning of the
Arauficane Counsel, where it defines Adamum peccando sanctitatem and
iustitiam perdidisse, non sibi tantum, sed omnibus etiam posteris suis, that
Adam lost both his sanctity, and righteousness, by his original sin and
transgression, not only in regard of him self, but also to all his posterity.

Neither may it be inferred hence, that then grace were no grace (as Paul
speaks) seeing that it should be co^naturall in the aforesaid cause: for
though in some sense it should have been connaturall, that is, having her being
together with nature; yet seeing it was not of nature, neither due unto nature,
it cannot be denied, but that it was grace, as which was not consequent unto
nature, but above all nature. Wherefore as now in the law of grace, all that
are regenerated by baptism in Christ, do in and by baptism (according to the
opinion of many Divines) receive the grace of Christ: so likewise in the state
of innocence all that should have been borne of the loins of Adam, should in,
and at the very instant of their natural conception, and first moment of
natural life, have received the first influence of their spiritual birth, and
supernatural life.

Now the difficulty is, whether if Adam had persisted in the state of
innocence, all we his posterity should then have been confirmed in grace:
insomuch, that as we should have been borne in the grace, and favor of God;
so we should never have fallen from the same.

Anselmus lib. 1. Cur Deus home. cap. 38. Gregorius lib. 4. Moraliu^. c. 36.
Anselmus, and Gregory the great answer, that if Adam had not sinned, then all
his posterity should have been confirmed in the grace, and favor of God: for
who (says Anselmus) dare presume to affirm plus valere iniustitiam? that
injustice should have been of more force to bind unto bondage: in man's first
persuasion: then his justice to confirm him in liberty if he had persisted in
his first temptation: for even as all humane nature was overcome by Adams
sin; so by him all should have overcome, if he had not sinned.

Nevertheless I resolve with S. Austine, that the posterity of Adam should
not, at least way in the instant of their generation, been confirmed in grace,
though Adam had persisted in his original justice: for how is it credible,
that they should have received more abundant grace, then their first head, and
father, at his first creation.

Wherefore like as Adam, though created in grace, could fall from that happy
estate of grace; so it seems most probable, that his posterity might also,
seeing that we read of no particular providence and grace promised to them,
which was not profferd to their first father. For though Adam could (as many
Divines hold) have increased in grace; yet none but Paelagians hold, that he
could merit unto himself the infusion of the first grace, much less unto
others.

CHAP. XLIV.
Whether Adam before his sin was mortal, or immortal.

SAint Austine in his 7. book de Genesis ad lit. cap. 25. answers most
excellently that the body of Adam before his sin was both mortal, and
immortal; mortal because he could die; immortal beause he could not have
died. For it is one thing not to be able to dye; another to be able not to dye:
that belongs only to the Angels, this is agreeable even unto man; not by the
constitution of his nature; but by the benefit of the tree of life; from which
tree he was banished, as soon as he sinned, that he might dye; who if he
had not sinned, might not have died. wherefore he was mortal by the nature of
his corruptible body: but yet immortal by the benefit of his Creator, for if
the body was mortal because it could dye, by the like reason it was immortal,
because it could not have died: for, that is not immortal only, which cannot
dye at all, unless it be spiritual, which is promised to us in our
resurrection.

Now therefore the difficulty is, whether this gift of immortality due to the
perfect state of Paradise, was due also and connaturall unto man persisting
there.

Many of the best learned of this age are of opinion, that this original
justice, which did bring with it a power of immortality, and a perfect
subjection of the flesh, and senses unto the rule of reason, was a gift due
even unto nature, granted unto man, as not only agreeable, but likewise
belonging, and consequent unto his natural integrity, and perfection:
insomuch, that man's nature being now deprived thereof, may justly be deemed in
a manner maimed, imperfect, and monstrous, especially seeing it was to proceed
of natural causes, such as was the eating of the tree of life. Again even
natural reason does require, that the mind, and reason should rule and
govern the whole man, and consequently, that the flesh, and senses should be
ruled by reason, and obey the superior power: wherefore as it is without all
question, that the rebellion of the flesh against reason is contrary to man's
nature; so original justice, which did restrain the rebellion, did
questionless pertain to the natural state, integrity and perfection of man;
yea, how were it otherwise agreeable to the divine wisdom to make a creature
partly immortal, and incorruptible; partly again mortal and corruptible.

Nevertheless unless the question be more de nomine, then dear, I deem it
most certain, and out of all question, that, that gift of immortality was
supernatural, as which was in no wise due or consequent to nature, for neither
this immortality could proceed of the qualities proportionate to the body,
seeing these tend rather to corruption, then immortality, as which are each
contrary to other, and after a sort consuming one another, and these tending to
the disvniting of the body and soul: neither could this immortality be ab
externo agente, from some outward principle, and cause; for then, if it were
so, it were rather to be deemed in some sort opposite to the inclination of
nature, the which of it self, as we have already said, tends to corruption;
yet, as that which is congenitum, or produced jointly with nature, may in some
sort be said to be natural, or rather connaturall, so I will not deny of this
quality of immortality (though of it self it be altogether above nature) yet
respectively, and in regard of the first infusion into nature, I will not (I
say) deny, but that it may be deemed natural.

CHAP. XLV.
What kind of serpent that was, which tempted Eve.

Josephus in his first book of Antiq. and chap. 1, holds that, as it was a
true, and natural serpent, which tempted our first fathers: so it was natural
unto it to speak, understand, yea, and to go upright like unto man: and that
understanding man's felicity, moved with envy, he sought his overthrow;
maliciose persuadens mulieri, vt de arbore scientiae gustaret, maliciously
persuading the woman, that she should taste of the tree of knowledge.

Ephraim the Syrian (as Barsalas relates in his book of Paradise the 27.
chap.) held that the serpent which spoke with Eve was a true corporal serpent,
and that Satan had obtained of God the faculty of speech to be given unto the
serpent for a time; so that as in Balaams reprehension God gave the use of
speech unto the Ass, for his just reprehension and punishment; so likewise
here, says Ephraim, God gave not only speech, but even intellectual power,
and understanding, unto the serpent for a trial of our first fathers obedience.

Cyrillus in his third book against Julian the apostata, and Eugubinus in his
Cosmopoeia, are of opinion that this was not a true serpent, but that it was
the devil in the shape and likeness of a serpent, and therefore he was cursed
under the name of a serpent.

Nevertheless this opinion seems not true, for if it had been a devil,
then would he have left the likeness of a serpent after the temptation: as when
any Angel does assume for any time a humane shape, presently after he has
performed his purpose, he puts of that corporal shape: but this serpent,
even after the temptation remained in his former shape, for after that Eve had
been so severely reprehended for eating the forbidden fruit, presently she
excused her self, and said, the serpent deceived me, then the Lord God said
unto the serpent, because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all
cattle, and above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou go, and
dust shall thou eat, all the days of thy life. So that the serpent retained
his former shape, even after Eve had eaten of the forbidden fruit, neither
could this curse be fitly applied to a fained serpent.

Caietan in his Commentaries upon Genesis thinks that here by this word serpent,
is neither signified a true serpent, nor yet any thing that has the
resemblance of a serpent, but only the devil in his own likeness, who by
reason of his subtlety, and vehement desire of man's destruction, is often in
the scripture termed a serpent, and therefore he says that this temptation was
not externally, by proposing the forbidden fruit in outward speech, and
persuasion, but by the inward suggestion, moving, and inclining her appetite.

Nevertheless, as this opinion is most improbable, so is it contrary to the
common opinion of the Fathers, interpreters of the Scriptures, and common sense
of all Christians; who generally hold, that Eve was tempted of the devil in a
corporal, and true serpent, who allured her by external persuasion, and
present view of the forbidden fruit.

Furthermore the whole text in this place is perverted by this, and such like
allegorical expositions. Neither can there any sound reason be alleged, why
this place may not be understood historically, as the text sounds, and is
propounded unto us: or if not, why may not the same be said, and the like
allegorical exposition be only admitted of Paradise, the trees of life, of
good and evil, of the four rivers, of the creation of Adam, and lastly of the
framing of Eve out of Adams side.

The fifth, and last opinion, Damascen. lib. 2 de fide Orthodoxa cap. 10.
Augustinus de ciuit. Dei lib. 14 cap. 11. and lib. 11. de Genesis ad lit. c. 27.
and which I hold to be the most true, is, that it was a true and natural
serpent, by which the devil tempted and overcame Eve, speaking with her in the
shape and substance of a serpent, not in his own voice, as who has none,
neither by the hissing of a serpent, which was not sufficient for that purpose,
but with humane voice, sounding as some think like unto a woman, as most
accommodate for to deceive the woman; and this is the opinion of Basil,
Austine, Damascene, Chrysostom, Theodoretus, Beda, and Rupertus. The devil
(says S. Austine) spoke in the serpent, using him as his instrument, after
that manner that the Devil could move, and be moved, to express the sound of
the words, and corporal signs, by which the woman might understand the will
and intent of the tempter: though not so that the serpent could understand the
sound of the words, which were spoken unto the woman: neither is it to be
thought, that the soul of the serpent was transformed into a reasonable soul,
seeing that neither those men, who are possessed do not know what they say,
when the Devil speaks in them. For although it be the opinion of the
unlearned, that the serpents hear and understand the words of the enchaunters,
insomuch, that they leap out of their holes, and caves by the force, and
virtue of the enchantments, yet that also is by cooperation with the Devil.
Yea it seems to proceed by the particular providence and permission of God,
that serpents are moved more by verses, and enchauntments, then any other
living creature, which is no small sign and token of our first seduction by
the serpent: yea even the devils rejoice, that as yet they have this power
permitted unto them, by which they move serpents by men's enchauntments: that
after some sort they may deceive, and overcome man, who in some sort was
occasion of their fall: the which is permitted unto them, for a memory of the
first fact, by which the devil seduced mankind, using the serpent as an
instrument of their seduction, and utter overthrow, unless it had pleased God
to have redeemed us by the blood of the Lamb.

CHAP. XLVI.
Whether that which Moses says, that the serpent was craftier then all beasts
of the earth, is to be understood of the true serpent, or of the Devil.

SAint Austine answers, Augustine. lib. 11. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 29.
that the serpent is said to be craftiest of all kind of beasts, by reason of
the craftiness of the devil, who used him as his instrument to deceive
mankind: like as the tongue is said to be prudent, subtle, wise, cunning, or
crafty, moved by a subtle, prudent, or crafty man.

Nevertheless, this seems not probable, that the serpent is called the
craftiest of all beasts, by reason of the craftiness of the devil, for that
either this was for the subtlety, which the serpent had of himself; or for
that which he was to receive of the devil: not the first, because the
craftiness of the devil was not inherent in him, neither could the devil
impart any such craftiness unto him, seeing the Serpent is not capable of any
such craftiness either rational, or sensitive remaining a serpent.

That therefore which seems more probable is, that the reason, why the
Serpent is called the craftiest of all beasts, was not so much to signify his
natural craftiness, as to show the order and conformity of the divine
providence in taking so apt an instrument for the fulfilling of his permissiue,
will about the fall of Adam, for if we mark it, we shall find, that such is
the providence of him qui attingit a fine vsque ad finem fortiter (as the
Wiseman says) disponens omnia suauiter, that even in works most miraculous,
and above nature, he uses those instruments for the most part, which are most
accommodate by their own nature: for although we admit that Wolves, Foxes and
Elephants be more subtle, wise and crafty in their kind, yet nevertheless
we shall find no creature so naturally bent by a malicious craftiness to hurt
man, as the serpent is: this therefore was the reason why God cursing the
serpent, said, Genesis 3.15. verse: I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed: she shall break thine head, and
thou shall bruise his heel. Yea questionless this natural instinct of the
serpent is signified in that Prophecy of the Patriarch Jacob, of the tribe of
Dan, Ge. 39. ver. 17. Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder by the path,
biting the horse heels, so that the rider shall fall backward.

CHAP. XLVII.
What was the reason why the woman was not afraid of the speech and
communication with the serpent.

Petr. Com ester in historia l. Genesis cap. 21. Bonan. in 2. l senten. did. 21.
Dionysius Carth. in Genesis allegans Bedam authorem huius opinionis.
BOnauenture, Dionysius Carthusianus, Bid, and Peter Comestor do answer
(though not altogether approving the opinion) that the reason why our first
mother was not afraid to approach and talk with the serpent, was, because the
devil had chosen such a serpent, as which (in face at leastway) represented a
woman, yea and one most beautiful like unto her self: for as ordinarily in
all his temptations he does craftily accommodate himself unto the nature,
complexions, and dispositions of the persons tempted; so here he deemed it
most fit for the accomplishing of his desire in the temptation and fall of the
woman, to accommodate himself, as much as possibly he could, to the feature
and natural disposition of the woman.

Yea Basil in his Treatise of Paradise, and Joseph in his first book of
Antiquities, and first chapter, do not much disagree; for so says the first,
the serpent then was not horrible to man, but gentle and tame; neither did he
creep upon the superficies of the earth, but did go upright upon his feet,
insomuch that, as Damascene says, he was more familiar unto man then any
other creature, fawning often upon him with pleasant circumuolutions of his
body: and this was the reason why the devil took him for his instrument in
the fall of our first parents.

Nevertheless it seems most agreeable to reason, that which Chrysostom
says in his 16. homily on Genesis, to wit, that therefore Eve did not fear
to see and converse with the serpent, because before the fall of our first
Fathers, all serpents and beasts were gentle, meek, and subject to man's
command and government, so that as they had no power to do any harm to man,
so neither did they appear horrible in their aspect.

Hence arises a new difficulty, for which though we have no authority out
of the Scripture, yet somewhat we may say out of natural reason, and
discourse, to wit, what kind of serpent that was, that deceived Eve; to which
Eugubinus answers, that it was the Basiliske, who as he is the most venomous,
and king as it were of Serpents, so therefore he may be deemed to have been
the most fit instrument of the Prince of darkness, for the overthrow of our
first fathers. But this seems not likely, seeing that this serpent is so
deformed, pestiferous, and noisome even in the very aspect. If therefore I may
conjecture in a thing so doubtful, it seems more probable, that because Eve
was so delighted with the company of the serpent, that it was that most
beautiful serpent Scytile, the which (as Solinus in his 39. chapter says) is
so glistering with variety of spots upon her back, that it makes men stay to
behold her beauty, insomuch that whom she cannot overtake by reason of her
slow creeping, she takes them as amazed at her wonderful beauty; not unlike
unto the common and powerful temptation of women, to whom nature has denied
the force of the body, yet has permitted her to overcome by her beauty, those
who are most powerful and vigorous in body: whereby we may see that which God
does so ordinarily execute by most just providence; in quo quisque m^ ^ne
excellit, and excellentia praesumit, praesumptione peccans, punitur maxim.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Why the devil took the shape of a serpent, rather then of any other
creature, and why Moses made no mention of the devil, seeing he was the chief
author of the temptation.

SAint Austine in his 11. book super Genesis ad lit. cap. 3. answers, that we
are not to think that it was in the devils choice, to choose the instrument of
the temptation, but that it was by Gods particular permission and designement,
that he made choice of the serpent. Yet in his 4. book de ciu. Dei, 11. chap.
he answers more probably, that the reason was, because this is animal
lubricum, and tortuosis anfractibus mobile, operi suo congruum; because the
serpent was a most deceitful, cunning, and crafty creature: for though, as
the master of the sentences says, l. 2 sent. did. 21 ^he devil would have
come in the shape of a dove, that by her innocence and simplicity he might
more easily cover his own craftiness and subtlety; yet God would not permit
this, to the end that his malice might be detected with more facility, and
Eues sin be less excusable. Neither again was it convenient, that this
shape and type of purity should be depraved by the impuritie of the devil,
seeing the holy Ghost was afterward to appear unto the Apostles in the form
of a dove.

Now as touching the second point, why Moses made no mention of the devil; I
answer, that he relates only that which was done, not interpreting the meaning
of the fact, and therefore described that which did appear outwardly to Eve.
Like as in the 18. of Genesis the Scripture making mention of those three which
Abraham did entertain, he called them men, although they were not men, but
Angels. As also in the 32. chapter, the Angel which wrestled with Jacob is
called a man, because he appeared in the likeness of man. Yea Paul in the 11.
chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, imputes this deceit of the
devil to the serpent, and not to the devil: But I fear (says he) lest as
the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be
corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ.

CHAP. XLIX.
Whether when God cursed the serpent, it is to be understood of the true
serpent, or of the devil.

MOses Barcephas, Ephren, with diverse other, think that this curse is laid
upon the serpent, although he did not commit any crime at all: his reason is,
because this narration of Moses being historical, it is to be understood
simply, as the words do sound.

Now if it be demanded how this stands with natural reason, and the justice
of God, which is never contrary to reason, but is rather the rule of all
reason, that the serpent being innocent, and not capable of reason, neither
consequently of sin, that he should have inflicted so great a punishment and
curse, as is denounced against him, Genesis 3. verse. 14. where God said to the
serpent, because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and
above every beast of the field; upon thy belly shall thou go, and shall eat
dust all the days of thy life:

I answer with Barcephas and others above alleged, that God did this
principally as a punishment, and in hatred of the principal agent, the old
serpent the devil; thereby to punish him not only in himself, but even in his
instrument, by which he had committed that heinous offense against his God:
like as he who breaks the instrument in hatred of the Musician who played
upon it. So likewise in the 20. chapter of Leuiticus, God commanded that the
beast shall be stoned to death, with which any man has offended; thereby to
signify how great the offense is in the sight of God, who does punish it, not
only in the principal actor thereof, but even in his instrument; thereby to
signify unto us how hateful sin is, seeing often he does punish it in his
unreasonable and insensible creatures, who are not capable of the sin it
self.

Again, he cursed the serpent for Satan's sake, as he did the earth for Adams
sin: yea and that which is most dreadful, he drowned the world with an
universal deluge, not sparing the beasts, for their owners sins.

The like also we find in Princes and other Potentates of this world, who take
vengeance of the innocent for the nocents sake, of the sons for their fathers
offenses, of their subjects for their Princes outrages. So the Poet, not as a
Poet says: Quic quid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achiui.

The Chastillians blood in France spilt at the massacre, was long after
required of the Guis^an race. The Thracians did beat their wives, because their
forefathers had killed Orpheus. And Agathocles wasted the Island Corsyra,
because in ancient times it gave entertainment to Ulysses.

But now the difficulty may be about these words above alleged: Upon thy
belly shall thou go, and shall eat dust all the days of thy life. For if it
were a serpent before, even the very name does signify, that it crept upon its
belly: if then it was the serpents nature, how was it a curse? or if a curse,
how was it his natural property?

I answer with Ephren and Barcephas in his book of Paradise, that creeping
rather proceeded of Gods curse, then of the serpents nature, who as we read of
other serpents, went upon his feet, yea more upright then any other serpent,
but as Lucifer his principal mouer became by his sin a most ugly devil of a
most beautiful Angel; so the serpent, who was the instrument of Lucifer in
this action, became a most filthy, venomous, and detestable creeping beast or
worm, of a beautiful and upright going creature.

Nevertheless, as I have already before insinuated, the curse pronounced
against the serpent, is principally to be understood against the principal
author of the temptation, and mouer of the serpent, to wit, the devil,
according to the opinion of S. Austine, Beda, Rupertus, Hugo de sancto Victore,
Caietan, and many others: so that the devil (as has been touched already) is
called a serpent, for his subtlety and craft in deceiving of mankind. Again,
he is said to be cursed amongst all the beasts of the earth, because he is
condemned to eternal punishment: and whatsoever is said to be obscene, filthy
and abominable in any whatsoever beast, or other most filthy creature; that
spiritually is found in the devil in a higher degree, and more detestable
measure: he goes likewise upon his breast and belly, because he tempts
principally in pride and lechery: and therefore most fit to tempt, attempt,
and overcome the woman, as most inclinable to these kind of vices: he
especially (I say) tempts in pride, signified by the breast; in lust, by the
belly. Or finally, he goes upon his breast, which is the seat of the
irascible power, anger, and wrath; and upon his belly, because this is the
fountain of all filthy lust and concupiscences.

CHAP. L.
Whether Adam was cast out of Paradise the same day that he was created.

Moses Barcephas supra citatus. Philoxinus oratione de arbore vitae Ephren
comment in Genesis Sabugensis oratione de passione Domini. Irenaeus, Cyrii^us, and
Diodorus Tharsensis.
SOme think that Adam was created the first hour of the sixth artificial day,
without the compass of Paradise, and was brought in thither at the third
hour: afterward about the sixth hour he eat of the forbidden fruit; and
finally about the ninth being reprehended by God, he was cast out about Sun
setting. The reason of this opinion is taken from the words of the serpent unto
Eve: Why did God command you, that you should not eat of every tree of
Paradise? by which words we may infer that Adam and Eve had not eaten any
thing till that time, and consequently that they were but newly brought into
Paradise, yea that they were created but a little before.

Nevertheless I think it more probable, Basil. homil. de Paradiso Damascen.
l. 2. de fide Orthodexa, cap. 10. August. li. 11. de genesis ad lit. cap. 21. and
l. 20 de ciuitate Dei, cap 26. Gregorius lib. 4. dial cap. 1. Tostatus
Abulensis super 13. ca p^t Genesis Joseph lib. 1. antiquitat.
that our first parents persisted more then one day in Paradise, and that this
was done by the particular providence of God, to the end that they might the
better perceive the misery into which they fell by sin, by the knowledge and
experience which they had of their former felicity in Paradise. And this is
the opinion of S. Basil, Damascene, Austine, Gregory, Abulensis, and Josephus.
Yea it seems most probable, that our first parents were not one only day in
Paradise, for otherwise the serpent would not have asked them, why they did not
eat of every tree of Paradise: for then it might easily be answered, because
their necessity did not require it as yet.

Wherefore though many have defined the time of their abode in Paradise to have
been so many years as our Savior lived in this mortal life, others forty
days, according to the time of our Saviors fast; yet if it be lawful to
conjecture in this matter so doubtful and uncertain, I would think that they
were only eight days in Paradise, because this was sufficient for the
experience of that happy estate: so that as our Savior was conceived (as many
think) on the Friday, and died on the same day; so likewise (as some
conjecture) was the fall of Adam the cause of his death the same day: so that
Adams fall, his creation, and redemption, was by the particular providence of
Almighty God, wrought (as some contemplate) upon one and the same day. The
which, though it be no conuincing reason, neither sufficiently grounded in the
sacred text, yet can it not be denied but that it has some congruitie and
conueniencie in reason, that the wound and the remedy should be in one and
the same day appointed to be by God, who from eternity foreseeth the end,
together with the means, and decrees of the end together with the means, to
the end that the common course of time, and remembrance of the day, might put
us in mind both of our miserable fall by Adam, and our more happy redemption
by Christ: that so we might continually bewail our sins, proceeding from
Adams, and give humble and hearty thanks for the infinite mercies received by
Christ.

CHAP. LI.
Of the Cherubin and sword which were put at the entrance of Paradise.

THe Originists do understand this allegorically, so that by this kind of
custody is meant nothing else but the particular providence of God, by which
our first parents were deprived of all hope of returning to Paradise.

Others think that by the Cherubin and fiery sword is mystically understood a
twofold impediment or means, by which we be now debarred from the celestial
Paradise: the first invisible, of the invisible spirits and devils, according
to that of Paul to the Ephesians, the last chapter, verse 12. For we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, and
against the governors of this world, the Princes of darkness, against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in high places.

The second impediment (as these Authors say) mystically signified by the fiery
sword, is the perpetual fight of flesh and blood in our spiritual battle, as
well in prosperity as adversity, according to our Saviors words, Matthew. 11.
chap. 12. verse: The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force: and that of Job; Militia est vita hominis super terram.

Or rather (as other do interpret) we may understand by these lets of access
to Paradise, three principal hindrances of access to the celestial
Paradise: by the Cherubin, which is interpreted the fullness of science,
wisdom and knowledge, may be understood too much curiosity of science, and
spiritual pride oftentimes contained therein, much repugnant to the
simplicity and purity of Christian faith. By the fiery sword may be
understood (as some Authors do allegorize) all enflaming lusts and vices
proceeding from the sensitive appetite; the which as it is twofold,
concupiscible and irascible, so is it signified by the fire and sword, or fiery
sword: the which being voluble, or as it were wheeling about, and always in a
perpetual motion, does plainly express the perpetual inconstancy,
volubilitie, and motion of humane matters.

Aquinas and Tertullian think, Aquinas 2. 2 ae quaest. 165. ar. vlt.
that by the Cherubin and fiery sword, is understood the place and situation
of Paradise, under the aequinoctiall line, or Torrida Zona, the firest Climate
of the world.

But certainly, the heat of this place is natural unto it, and proceeding
from the neerenesse of the Sun (as the Mathematicians do demonstrate) and
therefore could not be occasioned by the sin of man, much less proceed
thereof, as a natural effect of sin, which in it self has no real being,
but is rather the privation of goodness, according to its formal essence and
being.

Lyra. in Genesim.
Lyranus thinks, that by the Cherubin and fiery sword, is understood a mighty
and flaming fire, issuing out of the mountain of Paradise, defending and
compassing it round about, in the manner of a wall.

Ambros of in Psalm. 118.
Ambrose upon the Psalm 118. thinks the fore-sayd flaming sword to be the
fire of Purgatory, by which the souls that depart our of the world not
altogether purified, are cleansed before their entrance into Heaven.

But (to omit the controversy of Purgatory) this cannot be, seeing that the
sword and Cherubin were placed at the entrance of Paradise (as is manifest in
the Text) lest Adam should enter into Paradise, and participate of the tree of
life; for so says the Text, Genesis 3, ver. 24. Thus he cast out man, and at the
East side of the garden of Eden he set the Cherubins, and the blade of a sword
shaken, to keep the way of the tree of life. That therefore which seems most
probable in this point, is, that the words of the aforesaid text are to be
understood literally, of a true Angelical custody of Paradise and fiery
swords; the first against the infernal spirits, the second for to terrify
man. The Devils were repelled and kept from this place of Paradise, lest they
should deceive man by the tree of life, promising him thereby a perpetuity of
life, such as he should have enjoyed, if he had not fallen; man also was
banished out of the same place, not only by the just judgment of Almighty God
executed upon him for his disobedience, but also by a fatherly divine
providence and tender love toward mankind, lest eating of the forbidden
fruit, which was of immortality (a sufficient cause I mean to make him
immortal) he should live an immortal life in this vale of misery, and so
become miserably immortal, and immortally miserable.

CHAP. LII.
What was the cause, why Adam and his posterity were banished out of Paradise?
wherein two ancient errors are refuted as touching original sin.

TVrrianus in his Epistle to the Bishop of Towers alleges as an ancient
opinion of diverse Doctors, that original sin was that, which the soul had
committed before it was infused into the body: which opinion seems first to
have been taken from Origenes, who held that the souls of men being first
created altogether in heaven, were cast down thence, into this vale of misery,
and joined unto these material, and gross substances of our bodies, in
punishment of their sin committed in heaven, before their union to their
bodies.

But this is evidently convinced as false, out of many places of Scripture: for
if original sin was contracted in heaven, how was it contracted by Adam in
Paradise, and if we did all contract it by one, how did we all contract it in
our selves, by our selves, according to that of Paul, Romans 5. chap. verse. 12.
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so death went over
all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned. verse. 16. Neither is the gift so, as
that, which entered in by one, that sinned; for the fault came of one offense
unto condemnation, but the gift is of many offenses to justification. verse. 18,
and 19. As by the offense of one the fault came on all men to condemnation; so
by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all men, to the
justification of life. Where we may manifestly see contraposed, death, and
life; justice, and injustice; condemnation, and justification; these as
proceeding from the obedience of Christ; those as flowing from the disobedience
of Adam.

The second opinion in this point, is, that our original sin does not
consist in any quality, or accident inherent in the substance of our bodies,
or souls, or in any privation of any excellency, or good quality, which we
ought to have retained in our souls, but even in the substance of our
corporal, and spiritual nature: the reason is, for whatsoever is not
conformable to the law of God is sin; but all our nature is corrupt, and
auerse from the law of God, therefore the whole nature of man both body and
soul being thus corrupt, and become abominable in the sight of God, is sin.

But thus it would follow, as S. Austin well urges against the Manich^es, (who
held some things to be evil, even of their own nature) it would follow (I
say) that God were the author of sin, seeing he is the author of nature.
Therefore as S. Austine says of the Angel, so I of man: Diabolus natura est
Angelus, sed quod natura est, Dei opus est: quod vero diabolus est, vitio suo
est, vtendo male naturae suae bono: opera vero eius mala, quae vitia dicuntur,
actus sunt, non res. The Devil by nature is an Angel, and this is Gods work:
but that he is a Devil, comes of his own sin, by the evil use of his
good nature: so that his evil works which are called vices, are the actions
of his nature, not nature it self or his Angelical substance.

After the same manner, God of his infinite goodness created man good in
substance, in nature excellent, in his powers perfect, and in essence of all
inferior creatures the most eminent: but he by his will abusing Gods gifts,
depraved his powers, and deprived his nature of these supernatural gifts,
which were made connaturall unto his first creation: not that either his nature
became formally sin; or that his sin was transformed in substance, and
nature: least that he, who is the author of nature, should also be judged the
author of sin: but that man freely subiecting himself, unto the breach of
Gods commandment, voluntarily deprived himself of those supernatural graces,
which according to the former decree of God, were due unto his happy estate of
innocence. Insomuch that all the goodness, beauty, and graces, which before
were connaturall unto him, were bestowed by God: and all the evil which was
preternaturall unto him, and accidentary unto his nature, was derived from
himself, according to that of the Prophet Hosea chap. 13. verse. 9. Thy
perdition is of thy self, but in me is thy help.

Hence it is most evident, that our nature depraved with sin, must needs be
distinguished from that sin, which depraueth nature, as the man infected with
any malady, or sickness, is distinguished from the quality, or malady
infecting the man.

CHAP. LIII.
In which diverse other opinions of many Divines touching the essence of
original sin are declared, and refuted.

Lombard. 2. did. 33.
LOmbard the master of the sentences, Driedo, Ariminensis, Parisiensis, and
Altisiodorensis, Greg. 2 did. 30. q. 2. art. Gabr q. 2. ar: 1. and 2. Hen:
quod l. 2. q. 11. Guliel. Paris. tract. de vitijs and peccatis cap 2. and 4.
Altisiod. lib. 2. tract. 27. cap. 1. and 2. Driedo lib. 1. de gratia, and
libero arbitrio. p. 3 confider. 4. Holcottus q. de imputabilitato peccati ad
primu^ principale.
with diverse other schole Divines, are of opinion, that the essence of
original sin consists in morbida quadam qualitate, in a certain
infectious quality, not of the body, but of the soul, derived from the
corruption of the carnal appetite; yea S. Austine may seem to allude unto
this in his first book de nuptijs and concupiscentijs cap. 25 where he says,
that original sin does not remain substantially in us as a body or spirit:
but that it is a certain affection of an ill quality, as a disease or
languishing. and in his 13 chap. he calls it morbidum affectum, a sickly
quality, affection, or disposition, though more spiritual, then corporal.

Again in his sixth book against Julian chap. 7. he explicateth himself more
plainly, oppugning others in this wise, some Philosophers said that it was the
vicious part of the mind, by which the mind or any part of it becomes
vicious, that so all being healed, the whole substance may be conserved; so as
it seems, the Philosophers by a figurative kind of speech called that vicious
part of the mind, libidinem, lust, in which the vice, which is called lust, is
inherent after the manner that those who are contained in the house, are called
the house.

Ambrosius in cap. 7. ad Romano^. M^gister sent: lib. 2. distinct. 31. cap. 8.
S. Ambrose likewise, seems to be of the same opinion, in the 7. chap. of
the epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, where propounding this question, how
sin does dwell in the flesh, seeing it is not any substance, but the
privation of goodness? he answers, ecce primi hominis corpus corruptu^ est per
peccatu^, etc. Behold (says this Father) the body of the first man was
corrupted by sin; and the corruption by reason of the offense, remains in
the body, retaining the force of Gods sentence, denounced against Adam; by
whose fellowship, and society the soul is spotted with sin.

But certainly, if we duly ponder the aforesaid places, we shall easily
find, that neither Austine, nor any other of the Fathers is of this opinion;
wherefore the meaning of S. Austine in the places above alleged, is, that
concupiscence is not any substance, or part of substance; but rather a
quality, or affection, or effect of an ill quality: and therefore it is most
fitly compared to a disease, not because it is distinguished from the sensitive
appetite; but because it is the very appetite, and power it self now depraved,
which is a quality, and (as the Divines term it) affectio morbida, a sickly,
corrupt, or infected affection, or inclination.

First, because it does prevent, or ouersway reason, which ought to be the
gouernesse, and rule over all humane actions.

Secondly, because it is deprived of original justice, which in our first
Parents, was a power above nature, yet connaturalized (if I may so term it)
unto their nature, as well for their direction in matter of nature, as for
their help, and furtherance in actions of grace: insomuch that while their
wills were ruled by reason, they were always subject to their Creator: and
likewise directed in all things belonging both to nature, and grace.

True it is (as St. Austin does often repeat) that the soul is corrupted by
the flesh, as the liquour, by the corrupt and unclean vessel: not because
that there was any such quality, as the forementioned, derived into the soul
by the sin of Adam: but rather because the soul is infused into the body,
which descended of the defiled seed of Adam, and therefore does contract this
sin, by which it is truly said to be polluted.

And according to this interpretation, we are also to understand, that which
the Master of the Sentences above alleged, does falsely cite out of St.
Ambrose, being rather the words of the ordinary gloss upon that of Romans chap.
7. But that sin which dwells in me: for the Author of the gloss adds
unto the rest of Ambrose his word, cuius consortio anima maculatur peccato: by
whose society the soul is defiled with sin: which by no wise can be
understood, by reason of any infectious quality derived from the body, and
thence transfused into the soul, but accordingly, as has been partly
explicated already, and shall be hereafter more declared.

And this may be further demonstrated, even by reason, for first, either this
morbida qualitas, this infectious quality was naturally produced in our
appetite, and thence transfused into our wills, or supernaturally: the first is
impossible, because sin had no such natural force or power in Adam,
otherwise it should have had the same effect likewise in all the posterity of
Adam: which even our adversaries do deny, seeing there is no reason, why it
should be so auerred of one more then of all.

Or peradventure this quality was not produced by natural means, but by
supernatural, not by any natural power of man, but by the supernatural of
Almighty God, and as some has adventured to pronounce, ex sola Dei voluntate,
merely by the will of him, to whom nothing is impossible, cui non est
impossible omne verbum, to whose will all do obey.

But certainly if we weigh this answer, either in the natural principles of
true philosophy, or supernatural of grace, we shall find the aforesaid
position and solution to be most dissonant to both, seeing that both do
evidently demonstrate unto us the repugnance and contradiction of this; that
he who is the fountain of all goodness, or rather goodness it self, should
be the particular and natural efficient, or moral cause of that which is
summum malum, the greatest evil, nothing more distant then summum bonum and
summum malum, nothing so unlike in their being, so nothing so improportionate
in their causalities and effects. Wherefore, as it is impossible for goodness
it self not to be good, so is it no less contradiction to the particular
cause of evil, and consequently seeing that sin is summum malum, the
greatest evil possible, and seeing likewise of all sins, this in some sort
is the greatest, as which is the original and fountain of all other actual
sins, as it does imply contradiction, that God should be the particular cause
of other actual sins, so it does a fortiori imply the same, that he should
be in any wise of this original; yea, even natural reason was a sufficient
light of this unto the very Heathen Philosophers. So Plato in his second book
De Republica says, Omnibus modis pugnandum est, ne Deus qui bonus est, dicatur
esse malorum causa, alioqui secum Deus pugnaret, qui suis legibus contrarium
fieri mandauit. We must by all means endeavor (says this divine
Philosopher) lest God, who is altogether good, be said to be the cause of
evil, otherwise God should be contrary and repugnant unto himself, seeing
that he has commanded the contrary in his laws: whose eyes (as Abacuc says)
are so dim, Abacuc. 1.
that they cannot see evil, neither can they behold any iniquity. Not that
really, he does not perfectly view, and comprehend with his all-knowing
science, the secretest and most hidden, and abominable action, or most inward
cogitation, and that from all eternity, even before it be conceived or thought
of by the sinner himself: but he is said not to see it, or not to know it,
scientia approbationis, that is, he does not approve it, but reprove it: not
allow it, but condemn it: and in this sense that is to be understood, which
the Gospel says, shall be pronounced unto the vnrepenting sinners, nescio
vos, I know you not, not that our Savior either according to his humanity,
much less in his divinity, was, or is ignorant of any good or bad action,
according to which he is to reward in his judgment: but that he did not see
or know them so, as that he did deem them as worthy of the divine knowledge
and approbation, or of any reward, but only of eternal fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

Albertus, Pighius, and Catharinus de originali peccato.
Albertus, Pighius, and Catharinus flying the inconveniences of the aforesaid
opinions, fell into another extreme: to wit, that there was no other original
sin in Adams posterity, then the sin of Adam, by which he first of all,
then all his discendence were reputed sinners; he inwardly, they outwardly;
and as the Schools term it, by an outward denomination, to wit, by Adams
sin inward to Adam, imputed only to them, as though it had been really their
own, and actually committed by them, whereas in very deed they had none
proper, or inherent, but Adams only by imputation, not by real appropriation.

Which opinion may fitly be declared by the example of a man, who being
adopted by a King, as his son and heir apparent to the Crown, should have
granted unto him and to his posterity, all the privileges annexed unto his
adoption and principality: but yet with this condition, that if this Prince so
adopted should commit any treason against his father, both he and his posterity
should not only lose the aforesaid titles and privileges, but also should be
accounted traitors unto the Crown. In which cause, although the posterity of
this man had not committed any fault in themselves; yet were they to be reputed
morally as traitors, and to have committed high treason in their head and
pregenitor.

After the same manner (as the Doctors of this opinion auerre) was the compact
made between God, and our first father Adam; so that if he had not
transgressed the commandment of his Creator, eating of the forbidden fruit, he
and his, should have been translated out of the terrene Paradise, unto the
kingdom of heaven. But this compact being broken by our first father, both he,
and we lost our right unto the blessedness, for which we were created; he in
himself, and we in him: Not that as he had inherent in him the spot and
blemish of original sin, we also should have it: but only by an externe
denomination (as the Divines term it) because we had really the effects
thereof, and our first father, in whom we were all contained, had really both
the cause and effect, the sin (I mean) of disobedience and the priuatio^ of
original justice, together with all other effects thereupon ensuing.

This opinion is gathered out of Paul, Romans 5. In whom (to wit) in Adam all
have sinned, as who would say, we had not sinned originally, but only in
Adam: we have not therefore originally sinned in our selves, and consequently
if we have not sinned in our selves, but only in Adam, our sin only is in
Adam, as it is only by Adam, not in our selves, as it was not committed by our
selves: in so much, that it may only be termed ours by imputation from our
forefathers, not by real inhesion in our selves, seeing we never gave any
consent by our own wills unto the foresaid disobedience, but as we were
included in Adam, as in our head; we are therefore said to be spotted with
original sin, in as much only, as he who was our head, and in whose loins
we were contained, did really commit the said sin, and consequently (as the
foresaid Doctors infer) original sin in us, neither consists in any
actual or habitual transgression, neither in concupiscence, or in the
privation of original justice: not in the first, Vide Augustinum li. 1.
retract. cap. 15. and in epistola 3. ad Hillarium quae est 80. and in
Encherridio. cap. 36.
seeing that was not ours, but Adams; not in the habit, because this should
proceed only from the precedent act; and finally, neither in the two last,
because these are rather effects, proceeding from our original justice, then
the crime and sin it self.

This may also seem the opinion of S. Austine in his 3. book de libero
arbitrio cap. 20. where he says that we are all inquinati peccato primi
parentis, defiled with the sin of our first father, the which sin could
neither be inherent in us as actually proceeding from him, neither as
habitually inherent in his soul, or priuatiuely adherent to his form. It was
therefore in us by an externe denomination, inwardly affecting him, but
outwardly only denominating us.

But if it be so as Austine says, that we were all originally defiled with
the sin of our first father, if we had also besides this some other inherent
original sin, we should have two kinds of original sins, the one by
imputation, the other by inhesion; the one inherent in Adam only, the other in
us derived from Adam, which is to speak without ground of Scripture, which
only makes mention of one original sin, by which all be truly called
sinners, according to that of the Apostle, Omnes peccauerunt in Adamo, all have
sinned in Adam, in Adam he says, not in themselves, and consequently none
such did truly possess them.

By this we may see what color of truth may be given to falsitie, yea even
unto heresy, such as this seems to be; for if original sin be nothing
else in our posterity, but the punishment and sin of our first father Adam,
for which all his posterity is punished, certainly after the same manner, the
sons also of any other of his posterity, who as the Scripture witnesses,
are justly punished for their fathers offenses, might rightly be said to have
contracted so many original sins, as be sins punishable in them by reason
of their fathers transgressions: which without all question were most absurd,
and yet the consequence seems most evident.

For if original sin (according to this last opinion) be nothing else but
the sin of our first father Adam, as it is punishable in us; no question, but
by the same reason, as many sins of our forefathers as are punishable in us,
even unto the third or fourth generation, may as well be called original
sins in us, though they be not really inherent in our souls, or powers
thereof, but only are said to be in us by an externe denomination, or name
proceeding from our parents.

Moreover, if our sin be nothing else but the sin of our first parent, as
it is imputed unto us from him as our head; certainly as that is blotted in him
by his repentance, so it should also be blotted in us by the same repentance:
for if his sin could be sufficient for the condemnation of all, why should
not his repentance be sufficient for all? especially it being nothing in us but
an externe denomination, or bare name taken from his sin, which now being
washed away in him. should of necessity be likewise blotted in us, nulla
siquidem forma, sieve interna sieve externa, potest denominare, nisi eo modo quo
est: for questionless no form, being taken away, can denominate as when it
was present. This form therefore being an externe form, which never had any
union in our souls, or powers thereof, could never, even when it was present,
denominate our souls inwardly sinful, much less now, when it is altogether
blotted out of the first subject, wherein it was really inherent, but rather
now it should give no denomination at all, and consequently none of the sons of
Adam should truly be said to be borne in original sin, seeing that form,
from which they were said to be borne in sin, is quite abolished and blotted
out even in the first subject, from whence it should proceed unto all.

Finally, as David witnesses, we are all borne in iniquity, and our mother
conceived us in sin; and S. Paul, All have sinned in Adam: but this could not
be true, if so be that we were only to be termed originally sinners, in
that our first father Adam sinned; for his sin being blotted out, the
denomination also proceeding from it, should be taken away, seeing that no
form can any longer denominate, then whiles it is present, and after the
manner that it is so. Therefore as it could not really and intrinsecally
denominate the posterity of Adam, sinners, even when it was present, according
to the foresaid doctrine; so now when it is altogether taken away in his root
and first origin, it cannot in any wise denominate us sinners, which is
evidently against the Scriptures, which repeat so often, that all mankind was
conceived in sin, and to have sinned in Adam, he only excepted, who as
goodness it self, in no wise could be subject to this so great evil; and as
man, was hypostatically united with the second person of the blessed Trinity,
and predestined to be the general redemption of the world, from this
general deluge of sin, and therefore could not be defiled with any sin.

CHAP. LIIII.
Whether original sin consists in any privation, or no.

MAny seeing the inconveniences of the former opinions, not finding in what
positive act or habit they might constitute the essence of our original
injustice, at length have been driven to say, that it was not essentially and
formally in any positive act or habit, but that it consisted rather in some
privation.

The reason of this may be, because the essence of sin according to his
nature, common to all sins, both actual, habitual, and original, is (as
the Fathers do often insinuate) non natura aliqua, sed negatio; not any
nature, but a negation of nature, and consequently the same must be here in
original sin.

So Dionysius 4. cap. de diuinis nominibus, speaking of the evil and malice of
sin, says, neither this evil of sin is the appetite it self, but the
declination of the appetite from good to evil, and more plainly afterward
calls it a privation, atque vt summatim dicam, malum quemadmodum saepe
diximus, infirmitas imbecillitasque, ac priuatio est aut scientiae, aut fidei,
aut appetitus, aut actionis bonae: Evil or sin, as I have often said, is a
certain infirmity, and imbecillitie, and a privation either of knowledge, or
of faith, or of the appetite, or of the doing of that which is good. Iustine
also in his book of the questions which were proposed by the Gentiles unto the
Christians, amongst other things, resolves this difficulty, 46. q. and 73.
that evil or sin is nothing else but the corruption of goodness: so that it
is not any positive entitie or being, but rather a privation of entitie or
being; or as Basil describes it, Basil. hom. 9.
priuatio boni, the privation of good: and Athanasius more plainly says, Atha.
oratione contra idola.
that it is an ethnicall and heretical opinion, to say, that sin or evil
has any entitie or essence, seeing it is rather the privation of entitie or
essence.

And this is the reason why Nazianzene compares sin unto darkness, Naz.
oratione 9. n. 39.
not only because darkness and obscurity in matters of salvation, and the
mysteries of our faith, is the effect of sin; but also, or rather, because as
darkness is opposite unto light, and is nothing else but the privation of
light; so sin is nothing else but the privation of goodness: wherefore in
his 40. oration in sanctum baptisma, he concludes, that which Nisenus,
Damascenus, and Nizetas took from him, nullam esse mali essentiam, that evil
or sin has no essence; to wit, no real or positive essence or being,
Augustine. l. 11. de civ. Dei.
or as St. Austin describes it, natura nulla, sed boni amissio, no positive
nature, but the loss of goodness, which position Fulgentius in his book of
faith, the 21. chap. deemeth so certain, that it ought, says he, to be holden
as a matter of faith, because all things that have real being or nature, are
good: his words be these: Quia omnis natura, in quantum natura est, bona est,
sed quia and in ea bonum and augeri, and minui potest, in tantum mala dicitur,
in quantum bonum eius minuitur: malum enim nihil aliud est, nisi boni priuatio;
vnde geminum constat esse rationalis creaturae malum; vnum quo voluntary ipsa
defecit a summo bono creatore suo; alterum quo in vita punietur: Evil (says
this Father) is nothing else but the privation of good, and hence it is
manifest, that the creatures endued with reason are subject to two kinds of
evils: one, by which they voluntarily fall from their cheifest good, the other,
by which they are punished in this life.

Likewise St. Austin in his first Treatise upon St. John gives this reason,
why God being the Creator of all things, may not be said to be the author of
sin, to wit, because sin in his own being, has no entitie or being, but
rather is a privation of entitie and being. Peccatum quidem non per ipsum
factum est, vt manifestum est, quia peccatum nihil est, and nihil fiunt
homines, cum peccant: Sin (says he) was not made by God, because sin of it
self is no thing, but nothing, and men become nothing becoming sinners.

Now then if the essence of sin in common, or of all sin whatsoever be
nothing, but that nothing which is the privation of good, Turrianus in epistola
ad Iacob^m Ami^tum episcopum Antisiodorensem. Corduba lib. 1. q. 10. opinione
6. qu^s etiam sequuntur plures recentiores.
hence it must needs follow, that the essence of original sin must also
consist in some particular privation of some particular good, the which we are
now particularly to search out.

In which point Turrian and Corduba are of opinion, that this privation is
subiectionis and coniunctionis cum Deo, in qua nati fuissemus, si primus parens
non peccasset: of the subjection and conjunction with God, in which we should
have been borne, if our first father Adam had not fallen.

This they prove by impugning of the other opinions, for that as has been
already proved, it cannot consist in any positive and real thing, because God
otherwise might in some sort have been said to concur unto it, and
consequently after that manner to be the cause of it, which were blasphemous:
neither can it consist in any other privation of any other supernatural gift,
because all such priuations or deprivations, are rather effects consequent, as
punishment due unto the sin it self; therefore as the heat cannot be said to
be the cause of the fire, from whence it does proceed, nor the light cause of
the Sun: so neither the privation of original justice, or of any other
virtue or supernatural gift, can be said to be the essence of original sin:
for certainly if we understand aright, we shall find that all such
priuations are rather consequent unto sin, and so the effects, then the sin
it self, yea, rather the punishments inflicted by Almighty God upon man for
his transgression, then the transgression it self.

And hereby also we may easily demonstrate the absurdities of that common
opinion of the Papists, that the essence of original sin in us consists
formally in the deprivation of original justice, which had been due unto us
all, if we had not transgressed in our first father; which is the common
opinion of the schools and Papists, of Aquinas, Caietan, Conradus, Scotus,
Taperus, Sotus, Marsilius, Ocamus, Buderius, Alexander, Bonaventure, Richardus
de Medianilla, Mayor: Vasquez, Zuares, Sumel, and almost all other Papists of
this age.

Anselm: lib. de conceptu virginali cap. 26.
Yea Anselmus says that he cannot conceive that original sin is any other,
then that which was committed by the inobedience of Adam, to wit, the
deprivation of the justice in infants, which was otherwise due unto them.

Arasicanu^ concilium 2. Can. 2.
Finally the Arausican Council 2. Can. 2. defines it to be the death of the
soul, wherefore if death (as is plain out of Philosophy) be nothing else but
the privation of the life of the soul: seeing nothing else can be understood
to be the life of the soul, but only the inward grace of God, by which only
the soul did live that supernatural life, which is possessed in Paradise:
consequently the privation of this original grace, or justice, wherewith the
soul was adorned, and lived in Paradise, must needs be the privation of the
same gift.

As if our natural life, here in this vale of misery does consist in the
presence of our soul, or union thereof with the body, consequently our death
must necessarily consist in the absence of the same soul, which gave it life,
or in the disunion or separation of these two comparts, the soul, and the
body: after the same manner, if the supernatural life of our soul, consist in
the presence of God dwelling in our souls by his grace, then certainly our
spiritual death, whether it be considered here after our expulsion out of
Paradise, or in the fall from that first happiness, must necessarily consist
in the departing of God from our souls, or (which is all one) in the absence
or deprivation of his grace.

Neither can this want of original justice be rightly deemed a punishment of
our original sin (as has been before objected) because no defect or want
worthy of an other punishment, can be inflicted as a punishment: wherefore
seeing that this makes our souls worthy to be deprived of eternal bliss,
which is the greatest punishment imaginable, that could be inflicted for
original sin; Aquin. 2. 2. q. 21.
it can in no wise be the punishment due unto the fault, but rather it must be
the sin it self, because as the school Divines well note, the fault as it
is a fault deserves punishment, so that the worthiness or debt of the
punishment does follow the fault, as a proper passion thereof, as intense hear
follows the fire, and light necessarily proceeds from the Sun.

CHAP. LV.
In which the last opinion of the precedent Chapter is refuted, and the truth
set down in what consisted the sin of our first father, and ours contracted
from him.

WE may easily perceive by the opinions refuted in the precedent Chapters, how
easy it is, even for the greatest wits to err in supernatural matters,
without the assistance of Gods supernatural grace, and illumination, seeing
that those who were accounted the very mirrours of wisdom in their time, have
been so hoodwinked and blinded in the cause and first fountain of their
felicity, insomuch that though they knew, that they were conceived, as David
says, in iniquity and sin, yet they were not able to declare sufficiently
in what consisted that iniquity, and original sin, much less to
demonstrate with any certainety, that which S. Austine almost in one word does
declare so evidently, libro qo: de nuptijs, and concupiscentijs cap. 23, and
26. where he expressly holds that our original sin consists in
concupiscence, which though it remain in the regenerate, yet is it not imputed
to them, in ijs ergo qui regenerantur in Christo, in those therefore who are
regenerated in Christ, when they receive the remission of all their sins, it
is necessary that the guiltiness of this as yet remaining concupiscence, be
remitted; So that (as I have already said) it be not imputed to sin for as the
guiltiness of those sins, which cannot remain, because they pass, when
they are committed, remains nevertheless; which if it be not remitted, will
remain for ever: so the guiltiness of the foresaid concupiscence, when it is
remitted, is quite taken away.

Calvin. lib. 2. Instit. c. 1. Melancth. in colloq^io Wormatien. and apologia
confessionis A gustanae.
So that here we see auerred and proved, that which many learned late writers
do avouch as a matter of faith, evidently deducing it out of the 6, 7, and 8.
chap. of the Apostle to the Romans, and the 11 to the Hebrews, to wit, that
our original injustice consists in concupiscence, the which though it does
remain in the regenerate, yet is it not imputed unto them; so that as diverse
learned men do declare themselves in this matter, tegitur, non tollitur;
raditur, non eradicatur: it is covered, not rooted out; it remains, but is
not imputed.

For proof of which, Romans 7. verse 14. 15 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. and sequentibus.
I will only ponder the example of Paul, who no doubt was regenerate, at least
after he was called an Apostle; and yet he could find this sin of
concupiscence within himself, striving against the spirit, yea he did
acknowledge it to be his original sin, the fountain of all actual sins,
and therefore he adds, We know that the law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin: for I allow not that which I do; for what I would,
that do I not; but what I hate, that do I: now then it is no more I that does
it, but sin that dwells in me. Now what sin is this the Apostle speaks
of, but original, or concupiscence, remaining as yet even after his
regeneration, drawing him unto that which he would not, and therefore afterward
in the same chapter, opposing it to the right inclination of the mind, he
calls it another law in his members, rebelling against the law of his mind,
and leading him captive unto the law of sin, which was in his members: and
hence he concludes, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? that is, from original sin, the which as it is the death
of the soul, so likewise it causes the death of the body.

CHAP. LVI.
In which the matter of the precedent chapter is more largely discussed.

THe first heretics, who after the preaching of the Gospel denied original
sin, were Pelagius and Coelestius, as S. Austine writes lib. de peccatorum
meritis and remissione, cap. 1. 2. 3. 9. and 19. whom Julian the Pelagian
followed in his fourth book which he wrote against original sin; yea this
is attributed unto the Armenians, to Faber Stapulensis, and others.

The first argument of this heresy is that which Julian the Pelagian used
against S. Austine; because it is essential to all sins, to be voluntary;
but nothing can be voluntary unto infants, before the use of reason, seeing
that as the Philosophers say, and prove, nihil concupitum quin praecognitum,
nothing is willed, desired, or sought after, which is not first known; infants
therefore who have no use of reason, can have no abuse of will by consent unto
a foreknowne evil; and where there can be no sufficient foreknowledge or
distinction of good from evil, there questionless can be no sin.

Yea this seems to be confirmed by S. Austine himself, lib. 3. de libero
arbitrio, cap. 13. where he confesses that sin is so voluntary an evil,
that nothing can be sin, which is not voluntary: and in another place he
avouches, that neither any of the small number of the learned, nor of the
multitude of the unlearned, do hold that a man can sin without his consent.
Wherefore Doctor Bishop against M. Perkins out of those words doubts not to
vpbraid the Church of Englands doctrine about this point, saying, What
unlearned learned men are start up in our miserable age, that make no bones to
deny this, and greater matters too?

To this argument of Julian peradventure some will say, that original sin is
voluntary in the infants, not by their own proper actual will, as who can
have none such, but by the will of their first father Adam, which after a sort
may be said to be the will of all his posterity, seeing he was the head of
them all, and therefore that by his voluntary transgression all Adams
posterity may be said to have sinned in him.

But this seems not to satisfy for original sin, if we will consider
well the nature of it: and as all the adverse part does hold, vere auertit a
Deo parvuli voluntatem, and came conuertit ad bonum mutabile; it does truly
auert the will of the infants from God, unto an apparent and mutable good, yea
even to the devil; therefore the will of our parent, and his sin, is in no
wise to cause original sin in us. Secondly (as true Philosophy teaches) no
cause can produce that which it has not in it self, either virtually, or
formally, neither does any cause produce any thing, but after the manner that
it contains the thing which is to be produced, either formally, if so be
that it has the same form, species, or kind, which the effect has; or
virtually, if it contain it in a more perfect degree and measure. But
certainly, neither our first parent Adam, neither our immediate parents now
regenerated in Christ, have in any wise the guiltiness of original sin at
the time of our generation; how can it therefore possibly come to pass, that
any such guilt of original sin should proceed from them unto us? Certainly
this could not proceed from any matrimonial act, seeing that was and is
lawful in all laws, both of nature, Moses, and grace: how therefore could
that which is a sin, and consequently unlawful, proceed from that which is
altogether lawful? Thirdly, the actions of our external powers, as of seeing,
smelling, tasting, and the like, are in no wise voluntary, or so termed, but
outwardly only, or (as the Philosophers term is) by an extrinsecall
denomination, or name derived from our will; and this, because they have no
freedom or liberty in themselves inwardly, but only as they are directed from
the inward faculty of the will: and therefore as they have no liberty or free
will, but only by an externe denomination; so neither have they any sin
inwardly inherent, but only as they are commanded, or proceed from the will.
Therefore after the same manner, seeing the souls and wills of the infants
have no liberty, or freedom of choice, but only by an externe denomination,
outwardly derived from the will of Adam, now altogether past, and of his sin,
now forgiven; it must needs follow, that they cannot in any wise be said to
have contracted any sin, but only by an externe denomination, proceeding from
the sin of Adam.

Fourthly, that which in it self is according to Gods law, neither in any wise
contradicting the same, cannot be the cause of that which is against the law of
God: wherefore seeing that matrimony, or the matrimonial act, is according to
Gods law, it cannot be the cause or occasion of original sin in the infant,
which is against Gods law.

Fifthly, original sin cannot proceed from Adam unto his posterity, neither
as from the moral cause thereof, neither as from a physical, natural, or
real cause: not morally, because as death did proceed from sin; so life, if
he had perseuered, should have proceeded from grace, and original justice,
which was a gift given unto all our nature in Adam, not per modum meriti, by
way of merit, (as some have dreamed) but gratis: otherwise (as the Apostle
argues, Romans the 11. chapter) grace should have been no grace. Now therefore
consequently, neither does original sin pass unto us his posterity by way
of demerit, or as a moral effect of sin, seeing that the same reason which
does urge for the transfusion of this demerit or sin unto us, does also urge
for the transfusion of grace. Wherefore seeing he could not be the meritorious
cause of our grace, because it does implie contradiction, to be deserved, and
yet to be grace, a free gift, and graciously given; neither can he be
consequently the moral cause of our original sin. Neither finally can the
sin of Adam be the real or physical cause of our sin, seeing that his
sin, whereof ours should proceed, is now neither actual, nor virtuall; not
actual, because it is forgiven; not virtuall, for that then it should be
latent in the generatiue power or seed; which cannot possibly be, because then
it should be attributed to God, who is cause of the generatiue power; seeing
(as the Philosophers say) causa causae est causa effectus illius secundae
causae, the cause of any second cause is the cause of the effect proceeding
from the second cause.

Lastly, there cannot be assigned any time or moment, in which the sons of
Adam do or can contract this original sin: therefore both according to true
Divinity and Philosophy, it cannot be that we do really and inwardly in our
souls contract any such sin, but rather we are called sinners in Adam, and
are said by the Apostle to have sinned in Adam, by reason only of his fall,
who was our head. The antecedent seems certain, because this sin can
neither infect our souls in the first instant of their creation or infusion,
otherwise the soul should have it from her creation, and consequently it might
be attributed to Almighty God, as to the author thereof, seeing that as true
Philosophy teaches, operatio quae simul incipit cum esse rei, est illi ab
agente, a quo habet esse; the action which begins jointly with the being of
the effect, is from that cause, from which it has being.

And hence Aquinas holds as impossible, Aquinas 1 part q. 63. art. 15 in
corpore.
Angelum in primo instante creationis suae peccasse, quoniam peccatum illud
tribueretur Deo: that Lucifer sinned in the first instant of his creation,
because that sin should have been attributed to God, which were blasphemous.

Neither could this sin be contracted by us in the instant, in which our
souls were infused into our bodies, seeing that the immediate subject of sin
is not the body, but the soul, or some of the powers of the soul: seeing
therefore no instant can be assigned, in which the sons of Adam are infected
with this original crime, it follows necessarily, both according to the
grounds of reason, and Scripture, that there is no such infection or corruption
inherent in our souls.

For the better understanding of this fundamental point, so controuerted in
all ages, we must note, first, that original sin is called peccatum naturae,
the sin of nature, according to that of Paul, Ephesians 2. We were by nature
the sons of wrath: because sin did spot, defile, or rather corrupt the
whole mass of humane nature in our first father Adam, from whom, as first head
and fountain, it has been and is derived.

Secondly, this sin is called the sin of the world, John chap. 1. Behold
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world; because all men
were defiled with this, one only excepted, God and man, by whom al others were
redeemed.

Thirdly, it is also termed peccatum humanae conditionis, the sin common to
all humane nature; because there is not any (Christ only excepted) which does
not undergo this yoke. So Jerome explicating that of the 50. Psalm, Behold I
am conceived in iniquities, says, Hieron. super cap. 4. Ezechiel.
not in the iniquities of my mother, but in the iniquities of humane nature,
which are general to all humane nature, or which has defiled all mankind.

Fourthly, the sin of Adam is called peccatum radicale, the radical sin,
or root of sin; because we being now deprived by it of original justice,
which as it was in Adam, so should it also have been in us, an antidote
against all inordinate desires: but now our inordinate appetite and
concupiscence (which is the root of all evil) is let loose, to the overthrow
of all true liberty.

Lastly, we must note this difference between the original and the actual
sin of every particular man besides Adam, that the actual sin is committed
by the actual will and consent of every sinner, but the original comes only
by Adams sin and transgression, and thereby is transfused and passed into us.
Wherefore God speaking not of the former, but of the latter, Ezechiel chap. 18.
says, The soul that has sinned shall die: the son shall not bear the
iniquity of the father, neither the father the sons iniquity: the
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the impiety of the
wicked upon him.

On the contrary side, original sin being the sin of nature, requires
only the free liberty of the first and principal head of nature, because his
will is reputed as the universal will of all: whence it is, that we must not
think, that when the child is first conceived, and the soul first infused
into the body, that then (I say) it may be deemed to sin, but rather that
then it is conceived in sin: so David says, that he was conceived in sin,
not that he sinned in his conception. For though both insinuate a true sin in
us, yet the one, that is, original sin, is thereby signified to be derived
from Adam unto us, yea also to be inherent in us: the other, that is, actual
sin, is from our selves, and of our selves; whence it is, that the person of
Adam was first infected with this original contagion, and then his nature: but
in us contrariwise, first the nature is infected, then the person depraved.

These things presupposed, my first conclusion is, that it is a point of
catholic faith, that all those who descend of the seed of Adam by ordinary
means, are infected with this general malady of original sin. Wherefore
God threatens, Genesis 13. that he whose flesh is not circumcised, shall be
blotted out of the book of God, Aug. lib. 3 de peccato originali, cap. 30. and
35. and li. ^ d^ nupt ijs ^ concupiscentijs, cap. 17
because he has made frustrate his covenant: out of which testimony S.
Austine thus argues against the Pelagians; The infants did not frustrate this
covenant made with God by any actual sin, seeing they could not commit any
actually; therefore they contracted originally by original sin derived from
Adam.

The second testimony, which proves this point, is out of the 51. Psalm,
where David says, Behold I am conceived in iniquities, and my mother conceived
me in sin. Out of which place almost all the Greek and Latin Fathers do
infer the foresaid conclusion, especially Origenes, Basil, and Chrysostom,
who in his 3. book in Leuiticum cap. 12. notes, that David does not by these
words accuse any sin of his mothers, but that he calls nature his mother,
signifying thereby, that the filth and impuritie of Adams sin has descended
upon all his posterity. Yea this is also the exposition of Eutimius, Hilarious,
Ruffinus, Innocentius tertius, Beda, Gregory, Ambrose, and Hierome, who also
allege for the same conclusion Eccles. cap. 4. a heavy yoke upon the sons
of Adam from the day of their birth unto the day of their death: which place S.
Austine thus explicateth; Quid est grave iugum, nisi peccatum? What is this
heavy yoke, but sin? And why is it called a yoke, but because it
proceeds from two, the male and the female, of the good, and of the bad; and
because it is a yoke in both the sexes, therefore it is said to be a heavy
yoke upon the children of Adam: therefore in that he said upon the sons of
Adam, he made no difference of ages, no distinction of sexes, and by the
comparing of sin unto a yoke, he made all men equal, Christ only excepted,
who was not borne as others were of corruption and sin.

Many of the Fathers, August lib. 6 contra Donatistas, cap. 12. and lib. 1 de
piccatorum me ritis and remissione, cap. 17. and 20. 29. 30. and lib. 2. cap.
27.
and principally S. Austine does deduce this our conclusion out of the 3. of
John, where our Savior says, that unless a man be borne again of water and
of the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: out of which
place, though Bellarmine with most of the Doctors of the church of Rome, do
infer an absolute necessity of baptism, by reason of the general exception
made by our Savior, that unless a man be borne of water he cannot be saved;
yet nevertheless this is not so to be understood of the material water, but
of the grace of God purging and cleansing us as water does, as a reverend
Author of this age does well expound: Attersol in his 2 book of the sacrament of
baptism, chap. 5.
which interpretation may be gathered by conference of a like place, Matthew. 3.
verse. 11. he shall baptize with the holy Ghost, and with fire, that is, by the
spirit of God, which is as it were fire, lightning our hearts with the
knowledge of God, enflaming them with his love, and purging them from all evil
affections. So when we are said to be borne again by water and the spirit,
he means by the spirit showing forth in us the force, power, and property of
water; as if he should say, we are borne of water, which is the spirit, as John
7.38.39. and 4.21. Again, if it were meant of water in baptism, it must be
understood according to a like sentence John 6.53. Unless you eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you: which
must be understood of such as are of years, according to the exposition of
Innocentius 3. Decret. Gregor. lib. 3. tit. 42. cap. 3 Lumbardus lib 4. sent.
distinct. 4.
and Peter Lumbard the master of the sentences.

But to leave the confirmation of this point as touching the salvation of
infants unbaptized, S. Chrysostom, Theodoretus, S. Austine, with many other
Doctors do evidently deduce the foresaid conclusion out of the 5. to the
Romans, Romans 5.
where Paul says, that by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin
death passed unto all men, in which all have sinned. Irencus l. 5. cap. 17. and
19. Athan. de i^carnatione verbi. B^si^. super Psalmos 32. and 50. Concilium
Milevitanu^ and Araust^anum. J^stinus Martyr. Greg Nazian, oratione 42. in
sanctum Pascha, and oratione 38 in Christi nattuttate. Chrys^stomus de Adamo
and Eua. Cyrillus Alexandrinus lib. 1. in Genesis Theodoretus in Psalmum 50.
Damascenus lib 2 f^le^ Orthodoxae. Origines super epistolam ad Romanos c. 6.
Cyprian. epistola 59. Hilarious Pictariensis ad Psalmum 18. Ambros. l. de Tobia
c. 9. and ad Psalm. 48. and l. 1. de poenitentia c. 2. Hierom ad cap. 42. Zech:
Fulgentius de gratia Jesu Chrsti, cap. 31. Bernard seria 4. hebdomadae paenosae
de passione Domini.
Yea this is plainly the opinion of the Milevitan and Arausican Councels; of
Iustine Martyr, Ireneus, Athanasius, Cirillus, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Cirillus
Alexandrinus, Theodoretus, Damascenus, Origenes, Cyprianus, Hilarious
Pictaviensis, Ambrose, Jerome, Fulgentius, Bernard, and many others.

Now it remained, that I should have answered to all and every of the arguments
of the contrary opinion, but seeing they may be easily answered with one and
the same distinction, I will only express that, and so conclude this
question, which has so troubled the Church of God in former ages.

The distinction is this, that we must understand the difference, and
distinction of a twofold sin: the first is actual, the second original: the
first from our selves, the second from Adam, though in our selves: the first we
grant could never be in the aforesaid infants, as which never came to the use
of reason, and consequently neither could ever abuse it: the second, which is
original sin, might be and was in them, as is manifest by the authorities
and reasons above alleged both of Scripture, and Fathers: and by this
distinction we may understand all those authorities which seem in any sort to
favor the Pelagians in this point; which therefore I conclude with S. Austine
sermon: 7. de verbis Apostoli circa finem: Ecce infantes in suis vtique operibus
innocents sunt, nihil secum, nisi quod de primo homine traxerunt habentes,
quibus propterea est Christi gratia necessaria, vt in Christo viuificentur, qui
in Adamo mortui sunt, vt quia inquinati sunt generatione, purgentur
regeneratione: behold (says he) the infants be innocent in their own works,
having no sin, but that which they have by descent from their first father,
to whom notwithstanding the grace of Christ is therefore necessary, that they
may be received in Christ, who died in Adam, to the end that being defiled by
generation, they might be purged by regeneration, in his blood, who died for
all.

CHAP. LVII.
Wherein are solued diverse difficulties against the former doctrine.

MAny objections are wont to be made against the doctrine of the precedent
Chapters, of which these following are the principal, yea all may be reduced
unto them.

First, that if the concupiscence, or fomes peccati, which is left after our
baptism in us, were sin, it would follow, that God were the author of sin,
seeing he is the author of our nature, and therefore he must needs be the
author of that, which necessarily follows nature; as who is the cause of the
fire, is also of the heat proceeding from the fire: wherefore seeing that God
was the author of nature, he must also be the author of this fomes peccati,
and concupiscence, which necessarily flows from the same nature, if therefore
our original sin consist in this concupiscence, which flows from nature,
he who is the author and cause of nature, must also be of the sin, which
flows from nature, which both seem no less blasphemous then absurd.

I answer, that this fomes peccati or concupiscence (with which Adam was
created, and we all borne) was first in him, and should also have been in us,
though we had persisted in original justice, yet had it not been any sin in
any of us, if Adam had not sinned, and we in him: because this was as it were
extinguished and overcome by original justice in Adam, and should have been in
us also, by reason that the like grace and justice which was infused into Adam,
should also have been derived unto us by Adam.

But seeing Adam lost this grace both for us, and himself: both this privation
of grace is attributed unto us, as also the concupiscence reviued in us by
reason of Adams sin: true it is that the guilt thereof is taken away in the
regenerate by baptism, and so it is not imputed by reason of our regeneration.

But hence peradventure it may be further urged, that though God be not the
author of this concupiscence, as it has the force, and malice of sin, yet
that he is the author of the same thing, that is original sin, to wit, of
that fomes peccati, fuel of sin, concupiscence or inclination unto sin,
which also is no small absurdity. I answer that this is no absurdity, but
necessary, no heresy, but catholic doctrine; so that it be not granted that
he is author of it, as it is sin, but of that material, or thing which by
man's wickedness is made sin, yea which is good as proceeding from God;
though evil and wicked, as flowing from man, Gods concourse being altogether
good, man's determination evil, as detorting it to evil; as the light of the
Sun of it self pure and good, is oftentimes used and abused to evil, yea of
this we have infinite examples, in which our adversaries are driven to auerre
the like.

For who doubts, but that Almighty God, ( qui operatur omnia in omnibus, who
works all real actions in all things whatsoever) is also the universal
cause of every real action, and habit of sin? and yet nevertheless no man
will be so blind, and blasphemous, therefore to attribute to his infinite
goodness, that which has infinite malice in it, as it is against that infinite
goodness.

The reason therefore, why it is rather to be attributed unto man, as second
cause of it, then unto God, who is the universal cause of all, is, because man
having the universal concourse of God unto good, determines it, according to
his evil inclination unto naught, and so commits that nothing which in it
self is sin, and privation of good.

Secondly, it may be objected against original sin, that if that privation
of original justice which ought to have been in us, and of which we were
deprived by Adams fall, were in any wise to be termed original sin, it
would follow, that there were not one only original sin in every one of us,
but many: for seeing that there is not one only culpable privation of that
original justice, which Adam had in Paradise, but also of faith, hope,
charity, and of all other graces, consequent unto the foresaid original
justice, why should there not be by the like reason as many original sins,
as there be priuations of supernatural gifts, and graces?

The answer is easy, for that all these deprivations of graces are derived of
one, which is of our original justice, which should have been the root, and
fountain of them all.

The third objection may be, that seeing that it is not in the power of any to
attain to the grace of God, being in original sin, consequently the formal
of original sin cannot be any privation of grace, but rather a negation. I
answer, that because once it was in the power of Adam, supposing the covenant
made by Almighty God with him, that the said supernatural form of original
justice should have been by his perseverance passed unto his posterity; hence
it is that this absence of original justice in Adam and his posterity, is
rather a privation, then negation.

Fourthly, it may be objected, that as in the opinion of Scotus, whenever the
act of sin is past, the sinner may truly be called a sinner only by reason of
the relation of the act past, which is not as yet forgiven; so it seems, that
the same might be said in original sin, that though the act of Adam be past,
yet that this might be imputed unto us his posterity, only by reason of the
relation which we might have from his act, and this without any other
privation, negation, or concupiscence remaining in us.

I answer, that although this be the opinion of Albertus and Catharinus, yet
that in no wise it may be admitted, for so we are not really, and internally
sinners in Adam, but only by an externe denomination of his sin, which (as
we have already shown) is most erroneous.

CHAP. LVIII.
Of the manner how original sin does descend from Adam to his posterity.

THere has been three distinct heresies about this point: the first, which
making no difference between the souls of men, and other living creatures,
held, that as the souls of all other creatures compounded of matter and form
are produced with dependencie of their subject, and material substance: so
likewise, the souls of men. And that therefore they were infected and polluted
by the conjunction with the body.

The second opinion, no less absurd in Philosophy, then erroneous in
Divinity, is that one soul does concur unto the generation of another, as
the whole man, wholly to the production of another.

The third, and worst opinion of all does attribute the production of original
sin in our souls unto the absolute power of God, spotting thereby his
infinite goodness by the too much extending of his omnipotence, even unto
that, which rather argues impotencie, then omnipotency.

Now therefore the true cause of original sin in us (as the Scripture often
witnesses) was our first father Adam, by reason of his transgression of the
commandment of God, but this not by real influx and concourse, but by moral:
first because he could not of himself, and by his own nature pass unto his
posterity any such effect, especially, seeing that, that sin now is
altogether past; yea, at least way according to the guiltiness thereof, it is
washed away by the blood of Christ, but according to the decree of Almighty
God, he was the moral cause, insomuch as the infusion of original justice
into us depended upon his will, by not sinning, according to the compact made
between him and God: he therefore eating of the forbidden fruit, there
followed necessarily privation of original justice in our souls, and
consequently original sin in it self.

CHAP. LIX.
Whether it was necessary that there should be made a covenant between God and
man, that so original sin might descend to the posterity of Adam.

CAtharinus above alleged thinks it altogether necessary, that there should
be such a pact between God and man, vt in posteros peccatum deriuari possit,
that so Adams sin might be derived unto his posterity, and that the said
pact was included in these words, in quacunque hora comederis, morte morieris,
in what hour soever thou shall eat, thou shall die. Genesis 2. and 3.

Sotus, on the contrary side in his first book de natura and gratia cap. 10.
thinks it frivolous to admit any such pact: which opinion many more modern
writers do the rather follow, because the law of nature did oblige man to the
preserving of justice.

But certainly, no man can deny, but that original grace and justice should
have been transfused to Adams posterity, if he who was our head, and had
received it for us all, had perseuered, and this by the sole will and ordinance
of God; for certainly, this was not required by the nature of original
justice, and consequently it only required the decree of God about this
matter, which might have been otherwise.

But that there was the said pact between God and Adam himself for himself,
it seems evident, out of the aforesaid text of Genesis as Athanasius well notes.

CHAP. LX.
How the soul is said to be infected by the flesh.

I Answer, that this infection is not because the soul receives any real
influx from the body, for without question the body can in no wise as an
efficient cause maculate or spot the soul, but this is because as soon as
ever the soul is created, and in the very same instant that she is infused
into the body, she wants that gift of original justice, which she ought to
have had, and therefore concupiscence is imputed unto her, as sin, which
should have been healed, or not imputed by original justice, if Adam had not
lost it for us all; and this is the meaning of venerable Bede tomo 8. in lib.
quaestionum 4. 14, a little before the end, where he says, anima^ ex union
cum carne peccato maculata^ esse, that our souls are maculated by the union
with the body.

CHAP. LXI.
Whether there should have been any original sin in (...), if either Adam,
or Eve only had eaten of the forbidden tree.

THe reason of this doubt, is because (as the preacher says) a muliere initium
peccati, sin had his beginning from the woman, and through her all do die,
it seems therefore that though she only had sinned, the same sin should
have been imputed unto us all; yea all should have contracted that sin in her
and by hers.

Secondly, S. Hierome and S. Ambrose explicating these words ad Rom: 5. per
vnum hominem etc. through one man sin entered into the world, in whom all have
sinned, do understand that one to be Eve, if therefore she was the first
cause of this sin, it seems that though she only had sinned,
nevertheless sin should have been derived unto her posterity, though Adam
had not sinned, seeing that these words, in whom all have sinned, according to
the interpretation of S. Hierome, and S. Ambrose, are to be applied unto the
woman, as who was the first cause of man's woe.

Although I can gather nothing altogether certain about this point, either out
of the holy Scriptures or Fathers, yet nevertheless it seems more probable,
that the whole cause of original sin in us ought to be reduced unto Adam,
so that by Adams consent only, and not by Eues we were to be borne in
original injustice.

The reason is, for that all the Fathers ( S. Hierome, and S. Ambrose only
excepted) who do interpret the aforesaid place, do understand it of Adam, and
not of Eve; yea it seems that this may be gathered out of the words of S.
Paul 1. Corinthians. 15. As in Adam all do die, so all shall be reviued in Christ,
wherefore venerable Bede is plainly of this opinion in the 14 of his questions
tomo 8, where he says, originale peccatum trahere originem ex Adamo non ex
diabolo, quia ex diabolo non propagamur, non ab Eua, quia vir, id est Adam, non
est a muliere, sed mulier a viro; ex quo sequitur, Adamo non peccante, etiamsi
Eua peccasset, non futurum in nobis peccatum. That original sin has his
beginning from Adam only, not from the Devil, because we are not begot by
the Devil, neither of Eve, because the man, to wit, Adam is not of the woman,
but the woman of the man; whereupon it follows, that though Eve had sinned,
if Adam had not, we should not have been borne in sin.

Aquinas gives another reason, quia mulier passive se habet ad generationem
prolis, because the woman does only concur passiuely unto generation, but
whether this be true or no, quod medicorum est curent medici, tractent fabrilia
fabri; one thing seems most certain that this depends more on the secret
will of Almighty God, then of any natural reason and consequence, which may be
deduced out of the principles of nature.

CHAP. LXII.
What punishments be due unto original sin in this life.

I Answer briefly, that the first punishment due unto original sin, and
which was first of all inflicted upon man, was the privation of original
justice, as proceeding from God, and as it did subdue the inferior portion of
the soul unto the superior, and the superior unto God.

The second punishment proceeding from the first, was in the soul and her
powers, both understanding and will: not that any thing essential either to
the soul or her powers, is taken away, but that they are not so able to
exercise their functions, as they should have been being endued with original
justice.

The third punishment of original sin, was, that both Adam and his
posterity became thereby subject to all corporal infirmities, yea even unto
death it self, and many other expressed in the third chapter of Genesis, verse.
16. I will greatly increase thy sorrows and thy conceptions: in sorrow thou
shall bring forth children; thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall
have the rule over thee. Verse 17. Unto Adam he said, because thou have
hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree, concerning
the which I commanded, saying, thou shall not eat of it; cursed is the ground
for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Verse
18. Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, and thou shall
eat of the herbs of the field Verse 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou
eat bread, till thou be turned again to the ground; for out of it was thou
taken, for dust thou art, and into dust shall thou be turned again.

Now seeing this natural death could not naturally be effectuated so long as
Adam was in Paradise, because the tree of life retained his virtue, wherewith
man might renew his age: therefore Almighty God adds in the same chapter,
verse 22. 23. and 24. And now lest peradventure he put forth his hand, and
take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever, therefore the Lord
God sent him forth from the garden of Eden to dress the ground, whence he was
taken. And so he drove out man, and at the East side of the garden of Eden he
set the Cherubins, and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way
of the tree of life.

CHAP. LXIII.
What punishment is due unto original sin in the other life.

ALL the difficulty of this point is wholly as concerning those who depart out
of this world without baptism, whereby the guilt of original sin (as many
hold) should have been taken away: wherefore the question is, what becomes of
these, or what punishment is due unto them for this sin, supposing that it be
not taken away, as certainly it is not, at leastway in those that are not
comprehended in the covenant of grace.

The common opinion of the schoole-Diuines in this point, is, that the
innocents unbaptized, either baptismo sanguinis, fluminis, or flaminis, either
with the baptism of blood, to wit, of martyrdom; or of the holy Ghost, by
some supernatural act or habit, sufficient to justification; or finally by the
ordinary baptism of water, that such (I say) are punished with the loss of
their supernatural blessedness, though not with any other sensible punishment.

This is expressly the opinion of S. Ambrose upon that of the 5. chapter to the
Romans, as by one man, where thus he declares his mind in this point: Death
is the resolution of the body, when the soul is separated from the body: there
is also another death, which is called the second death unto hell; which we
do not suffer through Adams sin, but this is gotten by our own proper
actual sin, though by the occasion of the other.

Yea if we only attend unto the nature of original sin, contracted by the
aforesaid innocents; we shall find that they are altogether incapable of the
punishment of hell fire: for who will say that a man might justly be cast in
prison, or beaten for his original sin, seeing it was never in his power to
avoid it? much less therefore were it just, Lumbar. 2. did. 33. Bonau. ibid.
ar. 3. q. 1. Rich. ar. 3. q. 1. Dur. q. 3. Scotus q. vnica. Gal r. q. 1. ar. 2.
concla. 1. and seq. Marsil. in 2 q. 19. ar. 5. post 2. conclusionem. Alex. 1.
par. q. 39. mem. 3 ar. 4. Dom. Sotus l. 1. de natura and gratia, ar. 4. cap.
14. Cath. in opusc. peculiari de hac re.
that any man should suffer the eternal torments of hell fire, for that sin
which he never committed, neither was ever in his power to avoid it. wherefore
this is the most common opinion of the Schools, that the infants, or others
who die with original sin only, shall not suffer any sensible torment of
hell fire, though they be eternally excluded from the company of the blessed
in heaven, and the glorious sight of Almighty God: and this in particular is
the opinion of the master of the sentences, Bonauenture, Richardus Durand,
Scotus, Marsilius, Gabriel, Alexander, Sotus, and lastly of the Council of
Florence in the last session, in literis vnionis.

The second opinion of other schoole-Diuines is, that the said unbaptized
innocents are to be punished in the other world, not only with the loss of
the sight of God, their essential bliss, but also with other sensible
torments, even with hell fire it self.

This is plainly the opinion of S. Austine, l. 5. hypognosticon post medium,
and in his book de fide ad Petrum, c. 27. and 44. But if these be not so
certainly Austines works, the second at least is of the learned Bishop
Fulgentius, and the other of some learned Author: yea whosoever be the authors
of those, it is most certain that Austine was of this opinion in his 14.
sermon of the words of the Apostle, where he says, infantes in peccato
originali discedentes ex hac vita, deputandos esse ad sinistram, ad ignem
aeternum: that the infants that depart out of this world in original sin,
are to be deputed to the left hand unto everlasting fire.

Again, in his fifth book against Julian, the 8. chapter, a little after the
midst, he auerreth, hanc poenamignis seruatam esse infantibus, quanta vero
futura sit, non audet definire: that this punishment of fire is reserved for
infants, though (as he says) he dare not define how great this punishment of
fire shall be, in regard of them who depart with the guilt only of original
sin. The like also is not improbably gathered out of Gregory the great, in
his 9. book of his morals, the 12. chapter, upon those words, in turbine
conteret me, where he seems plainly to insinuate the said sensible punishment
of the infants by fire; ac si aperte humani generis damna considerans dicat, as
if considering the losses of mankind he should plainly say, with what
punishment will that most just and rigorous Judge punish those who are
condemned for their own fault, if he also eternally smite those whom the
guiltiness of their own will does not condemn? by which word of smiting he
seems to insinuate the punishment of sense, which is by fire.

Again he declares his mind himself touching this sensible punishment, upon
those words of the same chap. multiplicabit vulnera mea, he shall multiply my
wounds; where speaking of the foresaid infants, he says, that perpetua
tormenta percipiunt, qui nihil ex propria voluntate peecarunt; that those who
have sinned in nothing by their own proper will, receive perpetual torments:
which words of perpetual torments must needs import a sensible punishment.

Yea this was the opinion of the Bishops of Africa in Fulgentius his time, as
is plainly out of him above alleged, and more plainly in his book of the
incarnation, which book he wrote not only by the approbation of all the
Bishops of Africa, but also in their names, as may be evidently seen by the
beginning of the first chapter of that book.

Finally, this seems to be the sense of the Scripture, Matthew. the third
chapter, verse 12. and Mark also the third chapter, verse 14. where S. John
Baptist speaking of our Savior, says, that he will come with his fan in his
hand, and will make clean the floor, and gather his wheat into his garner,
but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire: where (as we see) all
mankind is but only of two sorts, the good and the bad, the wheat and the
chafe, whereof the wheat only is for the garner, that is, the good for heaven,
the chafe for the fire, the bad for those intolerable torments of hell: here
is no mean; all is either good, or bad; all either for eternal bless, both
sensible and spiritual, or eternal curse and punishment, both sensible and
spiritual; and consequently, there is no other place or manner of punishment,
for those who die with original sin, innocent in their own actions, though
eternally sequestered from the sight of God, for Adams sin and corruption.

Secondly, it is said in the same chapter, that every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast in the fire. Wherefore seeing
those that depart out of this world with the guilt only of original sin, are
unfruitful trees, consequently they are to be cast into everlasting fire.

Thirdly, when our blessed Savior shall come to give every man according to
his deeds, he will only separate two sorts of people, one of the right hand,
another of the left, the good of the right, the bad of the left, those for
eternal bless in the kingdom of heaven, these for an eternal curse in the
unquenchable fire of hell. Matthew. 25. chap. verse. 31. And when the son of man
comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon
the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all nations, and he
shall separate one from another, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the
goats, and he shall set the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the
left. Lo here be two sorts of people signified by those two kinds of beasts,
the sheep and the goats, the good and the bad, the sheep on the right hand,
the goats on the left, according unto the two sorts of sentences pronounced,
verse 34. and 41. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, come ye
blessed of my Father, possess the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. Again to the cursed he says, verse. 41.
Depart from me ye cursed unto everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Devil and his angels.

Hence therefore it must needs follow, that seeing those who died in original
sin imputed unto them, as who were not in any wise ingraffed in the body of
Christ, that these (I say) must needs according unto the opinion of the
aforesaid Fathers be condemned unto unquenchable fire, though certain it is
(as God willing shall be demonstrated in another place) that those who are in
any wise ingraffed in Christ, either by the baptism of water, of blood, or of
the holy Ghost, by reason of original sin only, shall never taste of those
eternal torments prepared for the devil and his angels.

CHAP. LXIIII.
The objections of Simon Magus against the aforesaid doctrine of the creation
of man, and his placing in Paradise.

AS there is nothing so manifest unto reason, but has been oppugned by
reason; so neither has there been any thing so evident in Scripture, but has
been oppugned with Scripture. So the Pharisees resisted the Messiah, and Simon
Magus the doctrine of Moses, especially about the creation.

For either (says he) the God which created man was omnipotent, or not; if
omnipotent, how is it that he would that Adam should not fall, who
nevertheless did fall? if he was not omnipotent, how can he be God?

To this we answer, that though Adam sinned, and by his sin did contrary to
the will of God; nevertheless he remained in some sort conformable to the
will of God: for as he created him, endued with understanding, that thereby
he might discern good from evil; so was he also created with free will,
whereby he might embrace the good, and eschew the evil, obey or disobey his
Lord and maker: this was the perfection in which he excelled the beasts of the
earth, paulo minor factus Angelis, in this he resembled the purest Angels, yea
in this he is said to be made to the image of God himself.

But God (says Simon Magus) would not that Adam should have eaten of the
forbidden fruit, who nevertheless did eat of that fruit; it follows
therefore that he remained not as his Creator would have had him to have
remained; how then can God be omnipotent, or his will always fulfilled?

It were necessary, if we should fully satisfy this argument, to entreat more
largely of the will of God, then were convenient for this place: wherefore,
that we may briefly answer this objection, we must presuppose with the
Schoole-Diuines a threefold distinction of the will of God, Aquinas 1. n.i. te
quaestione 19. Ibidem Molina, VasqueZ, Suarius, Sumel, Bannesius, and alij
plures.
according to the diversity of their proper objects: the first they call his
efficient, effectual, or working will, by which God does so effectually intend
any thing, that he performs it actually by some external operation and
work, either actually produced, or to be produced.

The other kind of will, which the Divines distinguish in God, in regard of
some objects which he does not really produce, is called inefficax voluntas, a
kind of propension or inclination of his divine will to the effectuating of
any good effect, which might redound to the felicity of man: yet for the
attaining of the end, which out of his unsearchable wisdom he has prefixed,
he oftentimes permits the contrary to this his divine inclination and will;
the which therefore is called Gods permissiue will. As for example, God would
that all men should be saved, according to that of the Apostle, Deus vult
omnes homines saluos fieri; to wit, in his universal grace, calling, and
inspirations, and other general means, offered to all, so that out of his
infinite goodness he wishes and wills in this sort all to be saved, and
that he might the more manifest his infinite mercy by the efficacy of his
working will, he actually saves some, even so to manifest his justice by his
other permissiue decree, he permits others to work their own ruin and
eternal damnation.

So that according to this distinction, it may truly be said, that the
transgression of Adam was in some sort contrary to the will of God, in some
again agreeable to the same: for first, in that it was permitted by God, it
was for the further benefit unto mankind, and the greater glory of God, by
which he wrought that miraculous effect of the hypostaticall union between
the second person of the blessed Trinity, and our nature, taking occasion of
the greatest evil to work our greatest good: insomuch that it may well be
deemed (as Gregory terms it) foelix culpa, quae talem and tantum habere
meruit Redemptorem; a happy fall in regard of the issue, not as it was a sin,
but as an occasion of a more perfect abolishing of sin; neither as willed by
God, but permitted; foreseen by Gods wisdom, effected by man's wickedness,
yea in some sort effected by God, to wit, by Gods universal concourse, but
determined by man's depraved will, Gods action being indifferent, or rather of
its own nature, and as Gods, ordained to good, but by man's depraved will
determined to evil; which yet again by the infinite goodness of God is made
an occasion of our greatest good. So that, if it be demanded, whether God
would that Adam should eat of the forbidden tree, or no? and if he would, why
did he forbid it? if he would not, why did he not hinder it?

The answer is, that in some sort he would it, and again after some sort he
would it not: he would it not, as a sin; he would it nevertheless as a
mean, or rather as an occasion of a greater good. Wherefore he forbad it as a
sin: he concurred with it, as universal cause of all things being, not as a
particular cause, or agent in sin, as it was sin, though in some sense he
would it (as has been said) as a mean of an infinite greater good: and as
the greatest occasion of showing his infinite wisdom, and goodness; of his
wisdom, because he knew to produce such an excellent effect, of so infinite an
evil; of his goodness likewise, in that being moved only by it, and for it,
he was pleased to effect our greatest good, of the greatest evil: a work so
excellent and admirable, as which could only proceed and flow from that only
infinite ocean of goodness.

Yea Adams eating of the forbidden fruit was an evident argument, that he
remained free to sin, even after his sin: according to the pleasure and
will of God: for such was his divine will, that Adam should be endued with free
will, that it might be in his power to choose the good, and eschew the evil,
not of himself, but by grace: so that thus sinning he showed his power, and
consequently by the same sin he showed in some sort himself to remain
according to Gods divine will and pleasure with freedom to sin: for seeing
that no sin can be committed without some actual exercise of free will, and
that by the same exercise the precedent power is manifested, it follows, that
by this exercise, and action of Adams free will, I mean his transgression, it
was made manifest, that he was created, and always preserved according to his
divine will, in that he was endued, and afterward remained with free will
sufficient to sin, though insufficient in it self to the actions of grace.

In this sense then we see that although Adam sinned, yet remained he
according to Gods will, because he remained always endued with free will.

Likewise, we may understand in an other sense, how Adam remained according to
Gods will, yea and this even in regard of his sin; I mean, according to his
permissiue will: for Almighty God (as we have said before) out of his
incomprehensible wisdom foreseeing the infinite good, which might proceed from
thence, to wit, the hypostaticall union, and being determined by his absolute
and secret will, to effectuate the same, he permitted this sin of Adam, as a
negative means, or rather occasion, of so excellent an end.

But God (says this heretic) would have had man to have persisted in that
blessed estate, from which nevertheless he fell: how then was not Gods will
more then his power, seeing he obtained not, that which he would?

But here we may see both the malice and ignorance of this heretic, which both
are the roots and springs of all heresies: his malice, in that he presumed
against God himself; his ignorance, in that he taxes that he understands
not: for if he had understood either what belongs to the free will of man, or
rightly apprehended the power and wisdom of the omnipotent, he might easily
have perceived, that the fall of our first father, did rather demonstrate the
wisdom of God, then contradict his omnipotence, and will: for seeing it
pleased his divine majesty to give us free will, and to place us in such
estate, in which by his grace we might persist, and which being rejected, we
might fall of our selves: what can be more evident, but as that our
perseverance should have been attributed to God, and to the right use of his
grace, so our fall only unto our selves, and the want of our concourse with
his grace, the which in that estate was not only sufficient, but very
abundant. Seeing therefore it was once in the power of our first father, to
have withstood the temptation of Satan; and not to have cast off so easy a
yoke, as was imposed him, with so abundant grace; he deserved no doubt to be
deprived of that grace, thrust out of Paradise, yea finally to be disrobed of
the beautiful robe of immortality.

In the combination of which we may magnify, and admire the omnipotent
wisdom, and infinite wise power of God, in that he knew and could so
excellently combine justice, with mercy; the which two attributes, as they are
to be found in all his works, so without all question most admirable in this:
his justice, in not leaving unpunished so foul a fact as original sin; his
mercy, in the merciful manner of the punishment: his justice again, in that
he deprived man of the vesture of immortality; his mercy, even in the same
penalty and deprivation of immortality, least as Moses Barsephas does most
excellently answer in this point, ne ipsius prauitas foret immortalis, qualis
est diaboli: least his wickedness should become immortal, such as the Devils
is, following the nature of the subject, to which it is adherent.

Furthermore God therefore punishes man with this merciful punishment of
death, that thereby he considering the effect, might eschew the cause: or
lastly, because out of this mortality of man he would produce a more perfect
immortality in the same man: for God foreseeing that out of Adams posterity
should come an infinite multitude of martyrs, the sentence of death was
pronounced against Adam, to the end that many of his posterity suffering death
for the Redeemers sake, might supply the places of fallen spirits.

But that we may return from whence we digressed, if God were therefore to be
counted deficient in power, because he created Adam with such liberty, that he
could contradict the commandment of his Creator: after the same manner might
likewise be inferred, that now also he has the like defect, or impotencie;
seeing that now also man has the like liberty to transgress: because as he
commanded Adam, that he should not touch the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil: so likewise has he commanded us his posterity, that we should follow
the good, and eschew the contrary evil: now therefore if we do transgress
this law, it must needs be God either allowing or contradicting this
transgression: if it be by Gods approbation, why does he prohibit it? if
contrary to his will, why does he permit it? or if he permit that which is
against his will, how can such a God be called omnipotent? or lastly, if he
can hinder that which is evil, and does not; how is he good, who consents,
and concurreth so evil?

To these I answer out of the former principles, that even this permission of
sin does most manifestly demonstrate the infinite wisdom, power, and
goodness of God; his wisdom, in that out of this in a manner so infinite
evil, he did work such an infinite good, as is the manifestation of his
glory, and the incarnation of his Son; his power, in that he could, his
goodness in that he would.

But why (says the adversary) did God prohibit Adam the eating of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil? what else could be his meaning, but least
he should be able to judge between good and evil, and consequently least he
should eschew the evil, and prosecute the good? how then is not God envious,
or how can he be God, who enuieth and prohibiteth that which is good?

I answer, that God did neither absolutely decree that Adam should eat of this
fruit, neither that he should not eat, though he did command him, that he
should not eat, but left him to his own free will to eat, or not eat: he did
forbid him to eat, not because the fruit was morally, or of it self good or
evil, but in the issue; good, if he had abstained; evil, if he abstained
not: good by obedience, evil by disobedience: where fore God did intend in
this prohibition to try his obedience, and that only was respected in this
commandment: so that if Adam had obeyed God, accordingly as was in his power
by the grace of God, he should for a time have enjoyed that terrene Paradise,
in which he was created, and afterward have been partaker of the celestial
eternally with his Creator.

Hence we see how impiously God is accused of wickedness, and envy in the
forbidding of our first fathers the eating of the tree of good and evil;
seeing that the eating of this fruit was indifferent of its own nature, as out
of which neither good nor evil could proceed: but that which God did regard in
this commandment, was our obedience or disobedience: in respect of which he
was after a manner indifferent, neither absolutely decreeing the one, neither
effectually willing the other: only this we may add, that God did desire and
will our first fathers abstinence, and therein required his obedience; but as
this his divine will had not his efficacy, so did he and might permit the
contrary for other respects worthy his divine providence and infinite wisdom,
which have been already touched. Not of envy (as some have blasphemously
imagined) least Adam become immortal, for if this blasphemy, were consequent
to the foresaid prohibition; certainly, God, who foresaw all future events,
either would not have created man, or having created him, would not have placed
him in Paradise so near unto the tree of life; or at least way, he might
either have hidden, or not have created the tree of life. Wherefore the true
reason, why he forbad him the tree of life, was (as Moses Barsephas well
notes) ne perpetuo viueret in peccato, least he should live in perpetual
death of sin, as the Devil does, ever living, ever dying.

Lastly, the adversary obiecteth against the curse of the Serpent: for why
(says he) did God curse the Serpent? if he cursed him as the author of the
evil committed, why did he not hinder it, least it should be committed? but if
he cursed him as author of that good, which was consequent unto the evil, how
is that God called good, and not rather envious and wicked, who punishes, yea
enuieth the author of such an excellent effect? Again, if neither of these was
the cause of the Serpents curse, how may God be excused of wilful
maliciousness, or malicious foolishnes?

The answer to this blasphemy is patent out of that, which has been already
said out of the former objections, to wit, that God did therefore curse the
Serpent as author of evil, neither did hinder him pretending the evil to the
intent, that he might out of so infinite an evil, as was the transgression of
the first Adam, work that infinite good of the incarnation of his Son, and
birth of the second Adam: for though it be an argument both of his power, and
goodness; ex bono efficere melius, of good to make better: yet it seems much
more excellent, and conuincing even our natural capacity, that he is
infinitely potent, and good: who can ex nihilo perfectissimum producere
effectu^: vel ex pessimo efficere optimum; who can (I say) produce the most
perfect, good, and most excellent effect, yea far exceeding all other created
perfection and excellency, of nothing; yea even of that nothing which is most
remote from any goodness, yea is the very privation of all goodness and
excellency.

CHAP. LXV.
In which the objections of Manes are assoiled.

MAnes that wicked heretic, with the rest of his sect do most blasphemously
accuse the wisdom of God, as touching the foresaid commandment of abstaining
from the tree of good and evil: for (says he) doubtless when God did give this
law, unto our first fathers, he thought, that they would obey it; which seeing
they did not, God (as Manes obiecteth) was deceived.

Secondly, he accuses God of unjust wrath and indignation: in that he
condemned man for so small a matter, as the eating of an apple. Finally, he
accuses him of ignorance, mutabilitie, and contradiction to himself; in that
ignoring his future compassion toward man, he did frustrate the law, which
he himself had made, yea and contradicted the sentence of death, as rashly
pronounced by himself against Adam.

Here we may see, how (as Tertullian says) God of his infinite goodness and
mercy suffers himself to be dishonored in his other infinite attributes,
and dietie: but that it may be apparent, that these blasphemies have not any
ground, even in natural reason: we answer, that though all things, and
consequently the disobedience of Adam was perfectly fore-knowne by God
Almighty, yet nevertheless it was conformable to reason, that Adam being a
reasonable creature should have this law of obedience prescribed unto him, so
conformable to reason: first, for to manifest the absolute power, dominion, and
authority of God the Creator over his creature; and the due subjection of the
creature toward his Creator.

Secondly, this law of obedience was most profitable unto man (though
foreknowne that it was to be violated by man) most profitable (I say) it was,
both in regard of the manifestation of Gods justice, and mercy: as also for the
exercise and trial of the good, and bad; righteous, and unrighteous, a
necessary object of the aforesaid attributes.

Now if this law should therefore have been omitted, because God fore-knew the
transgression thereof; by the same reason, or rather no reason, no other law
should have been prescribed unto man; seeing there is no law, either of nature
or grace, which God in his foreknowledge did not foresee would be oftentimes
violated by man.

Furthermore, as touching the blasphemy against the wrath of God, I answer,
that it is not to be attributed to God, as signifying any passion, or mutation
in the immutable or impassible God; but that this shadow of change, or show of
mutabilitie, is attributed unto him, who in his nature is altogether immutable,
because he seeing the wickedness of man, he works those effects, which in
us be evident tokens, and signs of mutabilitie and change.

Nay secondly, I add, that after Adam had transgressed the commandment of
God, God pronounced against him the aforesaid sentence of death, more moved by
mercy, then of any anger or wrath: which we may evidently see in that he did
not die the same day of his transgression, according as the sentence, which God
pronounced against him, seemed to threaten; so that whether we respect the
sentence given before Adams disobedience, or the execution of the same after
his sin, we may admire the infinite mercy of the Almighty in both, both in
regard of Adam, and his posterity; as also in regard of the sentence threatened
to be inflicted so immediately after their sin: so that even in his justice
we may magnify his mercy, and say with the Psalmist, misericordia eius super
omnia opera eius, that his mercy abounds in all his works, yea and is above
all his works: because (as the Divines say) remunerat vltra condignum, punit
citra condignum, he rewards our works far beyond their worth, which is
none at all, unless it be in Christ; and punishes our sins much less,
then they deserve.

To the other blasphemy, which Manes uses against the Almighty God, in
accusing him of repentance, and mutabilitie, I answer, that we must first
suppose, what it is to repent, or to be sorry for any thing, which we have
done: For repentance or sorrow supposes ignorance in us, of future events, yea
of such as are noxious or hurtful to those who are affected with the
aforesaid passion; both which are far unfitting the all-seeing science, and
omnipotent power of God: who did not remit the rigor of this sentence, moved
by sorrow or repentance, as it happens in us, but rather, as we have said
before, by his infinite mercy and clemency, to the end that his infinite
goodness and mercy might be the more manifest unto us.

In like manner we may say, that when any sinner does turn from his former
being in sin, God Almighty in some sort may be said to remit the rigor of
his sentence pronounced against him; and this not by reason of any ignorance,
or mutable repenting himself of the former fact, or threatening (as Manes
blasphemously obiecteth) but rather he remitteth out of his infinite
clemency, the sentence of damnation, which conditionally he had decreed, to
wit, if the sinner had not repented himself of his sin: an example of which
we find in the commination of doom and utter destruction threatened not
absolutely, but conditionally against the Niuiuites, Ionae 3.
that they should utterly be destroyed within forty days, 4. Reg. 20.
likewise against Ezechias, that he should die for his sins, whom
nevertheless God pardoned upon their repentance: and the like also we find
in others, most heinous offenders, against whom God having denounced his wrath,
nevertheless pardoned upon their sorrow, contristation, and humiliation.

Now as touching the lie, which this heretic obiecteth against God, in that
he threatened death unto man in the day of his transgression, which
nevertheless was not inflicted: I answer, that as man is composed of body and
spirit, so likewise the death threatened against him was both corporal and
spiritual; which both were in some sort inflicted even in the very instant of
his transgression: the spiritual in the separation of his spirit from God and
his grace, wherein consisted his spiritual and supernatural life: the
corporal in the perturbation of his affections and powers both spiritual and
corporal, which was a kind of beginning of a never dying death, beginning in
this life, and which according to the present justice of God, if it had been
executed, was to have been consummated in the other life, or rather eternal
death, if so be that this first lapse and fall had not been remitted, not of
man's merit, but by Gods mercy.

CHAP. LXVI.
The objections of Theodorus and Nestorius.

THeodorus Bishop of Laodicea, and Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople, with
diverse others of the Greek Church, were of opinion, that sin was not the
occasion of death, but that man should have died though he had not sinned:
because mortality is consequent to nature, as immortality proceeds only of
grace. How then is it possible, unless God can contradict and deny himself,
or that one of the divine decrees can be opposite to another, that God should
first decree the immortality of man, then presently upon his transgression,
the object being changed, God also should be changed in his decree: for either
God fore-knew man's fall, and his perseverance in grace for so small a space, or
he fore-knew it not: if not, how was he God? if he fore-knew it, how is he
so presently changed, and consequently also no God?

Again, if we were deprived of the gift of immortality bestowed upon Adam,
and in him upon all his posterity, how may it stand with the justice of God,
and much more with his infinite mercy, that we should be punished for Adams
injustice, the innocent for the guilty, the just for the unjust? Yea how
stands this even with the word of God, and his complaint by Ezechiel, chapter
18. verse 2. where God complains of this, as it seems, blasphemy of his
people: What mean you, that you use this proverb concerning the land of
Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth
are set on edge? which is as much, as to say, our forefathers have sinned, and
we are punished for their sins. How may this stand with the justice of God,
seeing God himself taxes this as unjust, and as unjustly objected against
him, in the third verse of the same chapter, where contesting against man's
unrighteousness, he protests and proves his own righteousness and just
dealing, insinuating thereby, yea detesting the contrary as injustice, verse 3.
As I live, says the Lord, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this
proverb in Israel, to wit, that the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
childrens teeth are set on edge; that is, that their fathers have sinned, and
they were punished: against which he contesteth, and that by an oath, even by
himself, in the latter end of the fourth verse, The soul that sins, it
shall die, that is, all that sin shall die, and none shall die but those
which sin: he gives the reason in the beginning of the verse, and that with
an ecce, behold, because he would have all to acknowledge his justice with man,
and how he uses equality with all men; the father as the son, and the
son as the father, every one according to his deeds in Christ, because all
are equally his, who says, Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the
father, so also the soul of the son is mine; the soul that sins, it
shall die: as who would say, and none else shall die, but who sins; which
may be proved by the opposite justice, and is exemplified even by the Prophet,
as that none shall be rewarded for another righteousness, so none shall be
punished for another unrighteousness: for so the Prophet prosecuteth in the
fifth verse: But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right, and
has not eaten upon the mountains, neither lift up his eyes unto idols of the
house of Israel, neither has defiled his neighbors wife, neither has come
near a menstruous woman, and has not oppressed any, but has restored to the
debtor his pledge, has spoiled none by violence, has given his bread to the
hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment; he that has not given
forth upon usury, neither has taken any increase, that has withdrawn his
hand from iniquity, has executed true judgment between man and man, has
walked in my statutes, and kept my judgments to deal truly, he is just, he
shall surely live, says the Lord God.

How then can it be true that Adams posterity should be punished for his
sin, or deprived of immortality, which God had decreed unto them for Adams
transgression? Or otherwise how can that be true which the same Prophet
prosecuteth in the twentieth verse? The soul that sins, it shall die: the
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father
bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be
upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Where he
prosecuteth throughout all the chapter, proving and approving the justice of
God, together with the reproof of man's unrighteousness and injustice,
especially from the 29. verse to the end, where he propounds and answers
the objections of his people: Yet (says the house of Israel) the way of the
Lord is not equal: O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your
ways unequal? Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one
according to his ways, says the Lord God: repent and turn your selves from
all your transgression, so iniquity shall not be your ruin; cast away from
you all your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed, and make you a new
heart, and a new spirit: for why will you die, O house of Israel? for I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore turn
your selves, and live.

Now then if God have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, how has he
pleasure in his mortality, having created him immortal? or how has he not
pleasure in his death, whom for so small a matter as the eating of an apple, or
some other such like fruit, he depriueth of immortality, yea contradicts
his own decree for the fulfilling of the aforesaid revenge of sin?

Again, though we grant that Adam died for his sin and injustice, why
should we not likewise say, that Noe, Melchisedech, Abraham, and others of the
Patriarchs and Prophets were restored unto immortality for their justice and
righteousness? We know that God is always more prone to show his mercy, then
to execute his justice: how then may it be said, that here he so withdraws
his mercy, and extends his justice? He often pardons the wicked for the
godly men's sake, and never punishes the just for the wickeds sin: from
whence then is this his cruelty and unjust dealing against those which never
committed any injustice?

Moreover, the son of God was incarnate for Adams sin: we ought to be
thankful even to the devil, to our selves, and to sin it self, as occasion
of so great good, as was the restoring of mankind to a more blessed estate.

Lastly, if Adams sin was cause of his death, why did not the devils also
die, seeing they sinned much more grievously? If you say they died spiritually,
in that they were deprived of the grace of God, why might not the like death
suffice also for Adams sin? the death (I mean) of the soul, his body
remaining as it was created, not subject to death? How did God justly execute
his justice, inflicting a greater punishment upon Adam for a smaller offense,
then upon the devils for a greater, depriving them only of their spiritual
life, but Adam both of spiritual and corporal?

These are the arguments of these heretics, against the just punishment which
God did inflict upon our first father for his first offense of disobedience; by
which they would conclude, that whether Adam had sinned, or remained in his
former righteousness, whether he had eaten of the forbidden fruit, or
abstained from it, he had nevertheless been subject to death, because he
was created of his own nature mortal, which nature neither the eating of the
forbidden fruit could make mortal, nor the abstinence from it immortal.

Hence therefore they are imboldned to affirm, that wheresoever the Scripture
makes mention of Adams sin, as cause of his corporal death, that it is to
be understood figuratively, not that Adams sin was properly the cause or the
occasion of his death, but that the Scripture uses this phrase, to the end,
that when Adam should hear of so severe a punishment, as the death of both
body and soul, he might be terrified thereby from the committing of sin.
The Scripture uses the like manner of speech in diverse occasions, as in the
22. chapter of Genesis, God tempted or tried Abraham, which place must needs be
understood figuratively; for God who sees all things, as well future, as
present, or past, has no need of any trial or experience. The like kind of
threatening we have in the fourth chapter of Exodus, where it is said, that God
would have slain Moses, which places are not to be interpreted literally as
they sound, but figuratively, as all other places of Scripture (according to
the rule of S. Austine) when otherwise they signify any absurdity, as this of
the death of Adam does, because it contradicts the decree of God concerning
his immortality.

Nevertheless the contrary exposition is most firmly to be holden as
concerning the immortality of man before his fall, and mortality after and by
his transgression: not that there was any mutation in God, but transgression in
man: God predetermined according to his foresight, man sinned according to that
foresight, not that the foresight was cause of man's fall, but rather man's fall
was the object of Gods foresight: insomuch that God had not foreseen man's
fall, if man had not been to fall; neither man had fallen, if God had not
foreseen his fall: so that though it be necessary that God foresee that which
is future, yet that is not necessarily future, which God does foresee; for so
sees he things future as they are future, not imposing any necessity in
things not necessarily future by his foresight: which as it is necessary in
regard of things necessary, so is it contingent in regard of things contingent:
contingent (I say) in respect of the object, though necessary in respect of his
own entitie and being; or as the Schoole-Diuines do explicate it, ad intra
necessary, ad extra contingent: insomuch that all the mutation is in the
outward and created objects, nothing at all can reflect or redound unto God.

Wherefore though Almighty God had eternally decreed the immortality of man in
his first creation; yet was there no mutation in God, because upon his
transgression he made him mortal, and subject to death: for as both the
degrees were eternal, so the foresight of the event of both was likewise
eternal; the mutation issued only from the object, and remained in the same:
immutabilitie was always, and remains in God, because as he had foreseen,
so he determined; and as he determined, so likewise he foresaw.

Lege ad Romans cap. 5. and 7.
Hence it is is, that seeing the Scripture so often witnesses, that death was
the effect of sin, and that if sin had not reigned in our souls, neither
should death have destroyed our mortal bodies; questionless, though man was
created immortal by grace, yet is he justly deprived of that immortality,
and become subject to death through his transgression.

Now as touching the absurdities so ignorantly (if not blasphemously) inferred
upon the foresaid doctrine, I answer, that though God do reprove that ancient
proverb of the Jews, and their comparison of the sour grape, with other the
like contestations of silly worms with their Creator, that these (I say) are
principally to be understood in regard of actual sin, as is plain out of
the text it self, and not habitual or original, of which the text speaks
not.

But if it be referred (as some have done) even unto original sin, yet
neither can the justice of God be any whit impeached thereby: for though we
eat not the sour grape, neither taste the forbidden fruit in our selves, yet
did we both taste and eat in Adam, who was our head: yea though we tasted not
the fruit it self in our selves, yet we contracted the sowrenesse thereof, and
the effect of the sin, yea the sin it self in our souls: for though the
action was only in our head, yet the passion, and effect was in all the
members; as is more largely explicated above in the question of the manner,
nature, and essence of this sin, in which all the difficulties concerning
this and the like points are answered.

Neither can it be inferred hence, that God does punish the just for the
unjust, or revenge the fathers wickedness in the sons: (which nevertheless
were no injustice, seeing the sons are in some sort deemed as parts of the
fathers, and consequently may justly be punished for their fathers offenses)
but rather that every man is punished for his own original sin; which
though it be contracted from Adam, yet it is inherent in every man's own
nature.

Again, seeing Adam of his own nature was created mortal, and by grace only
was to be preserved immortal, there was no injustice in God toward Adams
posterity in that they were deprived of original justice, but this proceeded
from Adams demerit for himself, and his posterity. Especially seeing that the
covenant was so concluded between GOD and Adam, that qua die comederet,
moriretur, that his eating should be his death; his abstinence, life: with this
difference that death should be only from himself, as sin had been only
from his will, but life should have been only from God, and the preservation
from sin, from Gods grace only.

Hence we may understand how there is no injustice or unrighteousness in God,
that although Adam was created immortal, yet we should be borne of Adam
mortal, and subject to death: seeing he was justly deprived of immortality
by his sin, and we by him.

Lastly, if we read the sacred text, we shall find it neither to be injustice,
or any nouelty that the sons be punished for their fathers offenses; for so
it is in the 1. of Samuel the 15. because I remember that which Amalech did
unto Israel, going out of Egypt, go thou Saul, and fight against Agag, and
his people: and the 2. of Samuel 18, it is said, that the wives of David should
be defiled for David's sin. again in the 2 of Samuel the 21 it is written,
how David hanged the sons of Resphe for the Gabaonites sake.

Moreover, if it were true that which the Poet sang unto his friend; delicta
maiorum immeritus lues: thou shall bear the offenses of thy forefathers
without thine own deseruings, then certainly the question, B. King upon
Jonas, cap. 1. v. 7.
as a reverend and learned Prelate well notes, were more difficult, but who is
able to say, my heart is clean, though I came from an unclean seed? though I
were borne of a Morian, I have not his sin: though an Amorite were my father,
and my mother a Hittite, I have not their nature: though I have touched pitch,
I am not defiled: I can wash my hands in innocence, and say with a clear
conscience, I have not sinned? but if this be the cause of all, that there is
not a soul in the whole cluster of mankind, that has not offended, though
not as principal as Achan in taking the cursed thing, Choran in rebelling,
David in numbering the people, yet as accessarie in consenting and concealing;
if neither principal nor accessarie in that one sin, yet culpable in a
thousand others committed in our life time, (perhaps not open to the world, but
in the eyes of God as bright as the Sun in the firmament; for the Scorpion
has a sting, though he has not thrust it out to wound us, and man has
malice, though he has not outwardly showed it) it may be some sins to come
which God fore-seeth; and some past, which he recounteth, shall we stand in
argument with God, as man would plead with man, and charge the judge of the
quick and the dead with injurious exactions? I have paid the things, that I
never took, I have borne the price of sin, which I never committed? You see
already the ground of mine answer.

We have all sinned father and son, rush and branch, and deservedly are to
expect that wages from the hands of God, which to our sin appertains.
Besides it cannot be denied, but those things, which we part in our conceits,
by reason that distance of time and place have sundered them, some being done
of old, some of late, some in one quarter of the world, some in another; those
does the God of knowledge unite, and view them at once, as if they were done
together; out of all which conceived together (as the all-vnderstanding wisdom
of God does conceive and unite them) we may well infer that the judgments of
God be as just, and his ways as right as his mercy, and goodness, and
providence extended to all, that as there is no work of man, not fully
recompensed, or rewarded with overplus; so there is no sin, whether actual,
or original, not justly punished, citra, as the Divines hold, but never vltra
condignum, less, I mean, then the sin does deserve, never more then the
fact does require, Gods mercy being (as the Scripture witnesses) over all his
works; and always in some sort more extended then his justice: for though it
be true, that as his justice is included in his mercy, even formally (as most
Divines hold) so like wise his mercy is included in his justice, and so both
equal in nature and being: yet such is the goodness of our infinite good God,
that in the execution, and ad extra, (as the Divines term it) his mercy
should always be extended further then his justice, and his just judgments
always in somewhat at least, detained, or after a sort restrained by his
mercy. Wherefore as we are wont to say, of famous, worthy, and excellent men,
in caeteris vicit omnes, in hoc seipsum, in other things he exceeded all men;
in this, he overcame himself; The like we may affirm of God; that he is
incomparable, in all attributes, and works, but in this he exceeds
himself. To him therefore, as infinite, merciful, and everliving God, three
persons and one indivisible deity, be ascribed all honor, power, majesty,
and dominion, now and for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

