A Description of Time: Applied (...) this present Time.

With Times merry Orders to be observed.

Men do blame Time, while they their Time do spend
Unto no purpose, or to a bad end.
LONDON: Printed by I. O. for Francis Gr^ve, and are to be sold at his Shop on
Snow Hill, near the Sarazens head. 1638.

THE DESCRIPTION of Time: Applied to this present Time.
WHereas Time has seen much vanity, which is all laid upon Times old
Shoulders, and whereas Times ears have been tired with Tales of Cocks and bulls,
lying, swearing, and complementing, scoffs, and jeeres, while one cries, O
Times! O Manners! another says, What Times are these? another sings no other
song but, Here Is an Age would make a man mad: Time therefore to clear
himself, and to show that the World is deceived in laying the blame of all
matters upon Times back, has here set down his abuses, and certain merry
orders to be observed, that so the World may not grudge at the present Time,
nor Time be offended with the vice and vanity of the World, but both live
merrily, according to these orders following.

O Mortals! why do you complain of Time?
Read here my grief and wrongs in every line.
You oftentimes do wish that I would stay,
When you are at the Alehouse, or at play:
But never think that Time with his sharp Sith,
Mowes down by hours and days your mortal life.
And when you commit any wickedness,
And thereby bring your selves to great distress,
Then with poor Time you presently are mad,
And think me evil because you are bad.
What should Time do, if he should strive to please
All those who are sick of a mad disease?
And are so discontented with old Time,
Who quietly does run through every Sign.
For if that he would get the Landlords praise,
Then he must turn himself to Quarter-dayes:
Or if the Tennants curses he would shun,
Then he must make the Quarter slowly come:
If he would please the Virgin, he must bring
A Suitor to her in her youthful Spring:
If he would please the Old man, he must stay
His Houre-glasse, and his hour of Death delay:
Or if he would the Citizens love earne,
Then he must add to the year a fifth Term.
One says that Time is now grown very hard,
And that his gates against the poor are barred:
Another says, it is a wanton Time,
When men are only guilty of that crime.
For Time is much ashamed by Day and Night,
To see such sights as do him much affright,
And make his old gray Fore-lock stand on end,
To see how some do prodigally spend
Their precious hours in drinking and in swearing,
Making a show, and to the world appearing
Brave Gallants, who are only outward shapes
Of Gentlemen, or rather but their Apes.
For they esteem that Virtue cannot be
The formal cause of true Gentility,
Or that poor undiscerned Virtue can
Give only being to a Gentleman.
But let them pass; they that do thus abuse
Poor Time, shall want Time, which they scorn to use.
And in a word, most men their Time do spend
Unto no purpose, or to a bad end.
Times Orders to be observed.
FIrst, let no Woman presume to Times cheek will look fresh and lively.

Let Taylers never cosen Gentlem^n in London nor take up more than will serve,
conspiring with the Mercer to gull the Gentry: Let them never make any l^^se
bodied gowns for Women, so that they can never hold their own. Let them never
sow any garments in such hasty manner, that ye seames are presently all
unript, let them never put in bad linings into any Suit, and keep the other
for themselves. And lastly, let them never with long Bills assault and set upon
Gentlemen: these Orders being observed, the hands of Time will not be guilty
of so much theeving and stealing.

Time shall be counted no Drunkard.

Time, that he that spends money before he has it, shall be counted a
forward fellow, and a cunning man; but because women are like this year to
have tender eyes, therefore they shall have mourning Gowns made with great
sleeves, that they may mourn for their Husbands decease in their Gowns, and
laugh in their sleeves.

July, they shall forfeit all the shoes in their shops; but if his wife be a
scold, then the case is altered, for he may go to the Alehouse by the
privilege of bad Husbands. Also if any one drink more than will do him good,
it is ordained by Time, that (...) morning his head shall be cut off, and set
up for the Sign of the Fox and Goose. for by this means the Drunkards in
these Times will be fewer.

Besides, it is decreed and ordained, that Time shall not be disquieted with
the noise of scolding in the streets.

Furthermore, it is ordained, that Oyster, shall invent a new way to ring Bell^
without making any noise: Smiths (...) viles shall be lined with Cushions,
Roarer^^ shall grow hoarse for want of money* Scolds (as I said) shall grow
tongue tied, Carts and Coach-wheeles shall be lined with Bombast, and order
shall be taken with Watermen* that they shall not make such a bawling;
Prentices in a Terme-time shall not dare to cry, What lack you? but shall fall
asleep upon their Shop-bookes, and generally, all noises shall be put down,
and silenced, whereby the ears of Time are offended: as most especially, all
drunkes quarrelling and prating in Alehouses, and singing of Catches when they
be more than half asleep: Also Coopers shall h^^pe the^^ Tubs and Uessels in
Cellers, and not in ye Streets, and all other violent sounds and noises, as
barking of Currs, winding up of Iacks, squeaking of Cats, the humming noises of
Muskets, withal the Thunders in the lower Regement of the belly, and the
bay^ing of the Bears, are all forbidden, as troublesome and offensive to Times
ears.

Times eyes are grown old and sender, therefore it shall be ordained, that
none shall have more money than wit, for that is offensive to Time; neither
shall any wear new brade clothes that are not paid for nor presume to iustle
the wall when he is drunk, nor to reele afterward into the kennell. Also for a
Woman to break her Husbands Coxcombe with Ladle, shall be a fight-very
displeasing to Time: also the strange Fashions which are every day invented,
shall be quite forgotten, and young men shall not strive to have Beards before
their Time, nor shall Dogs presume to run away with shoulders of Mutton out
of Rich men's houses: Fools shall not ride upon wise men's backs, nor make Asses
of them; Serving-men shall not wear Cloakes for their knavery, young Wenches
shall not look green at Fifteen for want of Husbands: all Tobacco-pipes
shall be broken, and Joane Slattergood shall buy new Stockins, for Time is
much distasted to see her hose broken above the shoe: also all courting of
Maids in the dark, with whispering them in the ear, and other silent
temptations shall be quite abolished: Bread shall beee made of a just size and
quantity, although the Baker be not taught to see to make it weight, by
looking through a wooden window* And to conclude, Owls shall fly in the
Night, Measures shall be made right and just, Red Noses shall grow pale, bald
crowns be covered with Perriwigs, Wenches shall never walk in their dreams
stark naked fools shall not feere for want of Wit, Beggars shall not ride while
wise men go on foot: Chandelers shall not cut small penny-worths of Cheese,
Cobblers shall not dare to play the Cooks, and lick their thumbs; Meat shall
not be roasted without a fire, and Chambers shall never be kept clean without
sweeping and washing, for these sights are displeasing to Time.

Time is out of T^st^, and distastes many things, therefore he has ordayn'd,
that poor men and prisoners shall never make great sumptuous Feasts* and also,
men shall not pay more for their sawes than for their meat, which has bin an
old custom time out of mind. Besides, it is ordained, that Mustard and
Hartichoaks, or clowted Cream and Uineger shall never be served up together;
also a Table without meat shall be counted no Dinner, and it shall be lawful to
rise from thence without giving thanks; also for any man to choke himself
with drinking good ^ack, shall be very distastefull to the Pallat of Time: and
besides, Time allows none to eat good cheer, but such as have money to buy
it. No Tarts shall be made of Ieeres and scoffs, nor such as have Rheumaticke
Noses, shall make no Puddings; nor shall any fat wench make Butter in Summer:
besides, Carpes, and Pouts, and Railes, with Crabs for an after course, shall
not be served up at any married man's Table, notshal an old shooe-soale, though
it be mine'd, and butterd, and dressed after the French fashion, ever make any
good meats: And also Time has thought good, that butterd Ling without Eggs,
shall not be so good meat as with Eggs; nor a Calves h^^d without Bacon, as
good as with Bacon; also there shall be very little savor in ye white of an
egg, nor in any thing else without Salt, for that will savor all things except
ill words, or the folly of a Fool. Besides, no man shall presume to taste very
hot broth for fear he burn his mouth; nor to eat a dozen of new Cakes
without drink, for fear he choke himself. And in general, all working
days and fasting days, furm^ty that is burnt to, conserves of roast Beef,
all sauciness in Boys, all Uineger virtuous admonitions, and Wormwood words,
and more especially swallowing down knavery, without troubling the stomach of
Conscience, is distasteful^ to Times taste.

Time. And moreover, it shall be accounted better to have a sweet breath, than
to wear sweet powders and Musk about them. Also the smell of Mace shall be
very dangerous, especially about the Counter, and the smell of a great Feast
shall never fill a man's belly.

It is ordained also, that the smell of Sir Ajax breath against rainy weather,
and the sent of More-ditch in Summer, shall be very distastefull to Times Nose:
all h^st is words also shall make Time take Pepper in the nose, and therefore
hot stomachs shall eat great store of Sage to cool their fury. Also knavery,
hidden under shows of honesty, if discerned; shall smell rank, and be very
distastefull to Times nose; and also complements being perfumed and sweetened
with dissimulation, shall be soon disliked. Moreover, Water that is pure and
clear, shall be thought to have no smell; but good Sack shall make Times nose
look Sunburnt. Also the smell of Money shall be counted very savoury,
according to the old Proverb, Bonus lucri odor ex re qualibet: The smell of
gain is sweet, though from a Iakes. Lastly, the smell of ye snuff of a
Candle, the burning of Woollen in the fire, a Chamber Pot full of stale Urine
the cunning of Hostesses, the knavery of Hostlers, and generally, all false
dealing and corruption shall be very distasteful to Times nose.

Also, because Time is old, and stark Time is old, (as I said) in his last
declining Age, therefore it shall be lawful for old men to dye in good age, and
while they live, to be honored before young Gallants, by the privilege of
Time and Seniority.

Moreover, because Times wit and judgment Time has ordained, that he that can
keep his fingers out of the fire, shall be counted a wise Man, and she that
can rea^^ eggs well, a cunning woman; but if any Ass presume to put on a
Gown, he shall be apprehended for a counterfeit Philosopher.

It is ordained also, that Fools shall aggree very well together; and he that
can tell an hundred pound of his own Money, shall be counted a skilfuller Man
than he that can cast up great sums in figures. And to conclude, to see Geese
cackle, and talk Greek, to hear Asses make Orations in strange Languages, to
hear Cuckowes sing several Tunes, to see Young men have more money than
manners, to see Roots worn for Night-Cappes, and Hats for Shoes, and to tell
a Tale to a Mare, shall be all displeasing to Times wit. Also, to hear a
Morris Da^ce commended for an excellent Mask, or Crabs for very good Pippins,
or that the Powder of a Post, is better than Sugar to sweeten Wine: These are
all distastefull to Times Judgment.

Therefore it is ordained, that money shall be preferred before desert, by the
principal Judgments, and that a Calves head and Bacon shall be esteemd a
better Dish of meat, than Ling without Oil and Mustard; a foul stable shall
be judged better for a tired horse than a fair way: but between Knavery,
Dishonesty, and Baseness, there shall be little difference in Times Judgment.

And moreover, because Time is Time pass away unregarded; and so shall such as
frequent Alehouses be adjudged to go in old clothes, because they did not
make use of, nor respect Time.

And because Time has been much abused by Drinking, therefore it is ordained,
that some shall be carried to the Counter before they have Time to pay their
Debts, or compound with their Hostess; and besides, he that takes up
commodities upon Times back, shall be found to pay for them over Times
Shoulders.

Also it is ordained* that men shall waste upon Time and Tide, and Puddings and
Pyes shall be dough backed, if they be not set in the Oven in Time.

And likewise Time does ordain, that he which sleeps till ten of Clock,
that he will be so offended with him, that he shall never rise early in a
Morning: And whereas Time did use to make young Wenches ripe and ready for
Husbands at fifteen years of age, now they shall stay till twenty five, if
they have not Portions: Moreover, those that shell Pease in Summer, and can do
nothing else, may freely play three quarters of the Year; and such as dress
themselves only against Dinnertime, shall be counted no early rising
Huswives; and Beer shall grow ripe with Time, but Ale shall be transformed into
Uineger.

Moreover, it is the pleasure of Time, that all Bills and Bonds bearing no Date,
shall be paid in the year One Thousand six Hundred and never. And because
Young men should be wary and thrifty, (as it becomes them so to be)
therefore such as wast their Time, in following vain and idle pleasures, are
ordained to Beggars, by a Statute that was made in the Year One thousand four
hundred and seven.

And also to prevent all inconveniences arising by the neglect of Time. it is
ordained, that Prodigals shall have more wit than money, and that the stealing
of a nappe upon an Alebench, shall be counted a Felony against Time; and that
Feather, beds shall be made hard, being stuffed with Cotton of Care, that men may
turn twenty times before they can sleep, or take any rest: And also Tobacco,
a great waster of Time, shall be made to smoke wheresoever he is found:
Ringing also of Bells shall not be held so necessary as ringing of Clothes, and
such like.

And lastly, Time ordaines, that Drinking until Midnight, sleeping until
Noone, dressing until Dinnertime, Starching on Sundays, working on Holy
days, tedious trimmings at the Barbers, following costly Su^tes in Law, also
for young Maids to lie a Bed and spoil their beauty or complexion, and long
at Dinner, and sleeping by the Fireside in the Wintertime, also all extreme
laughing and quaffing, with many other kinds of ill living, shall be
distastefull to Time.

To give you Counsel thus, Time thinks -- it best,
And teach you truth, although it be in jest:
For he that will not counsel take from Time,
That he will ner^e be wise it is a Sign.
FINIS.

