WONDERFVLL PROPHECIES FROM THE BEGINNING of the Monarchy of this Land, hidden
under the PARABLES of: Three young Noblemen in a fiary Furnace. A chaste wife,
and two old Fornicators. (...) BELVS and his Dragon. DANIEL in a Den amid Lions.


(...) agreement with Canonical Prophecies: Also (...) Temperate Defense of the
Apocryphals annexed to the Canon of the Scriptures. Together with an Essay
touching the late Prodigious COMETE; how far forth the Praesages thereof do
accord with such Prophecies, as are found to pertain to these our times. By
all which, the discrete and wise in heart may gather touching things to come,
what is forewarned unto Men; as for the General and Public, so also for their
Private and Particular.

By ROBERT SALTER.

The (...) has foreseen the evil and hides himself: but the rash have
passed on and shall be plagued.

Pro. 22.3. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES dwelling in Red-crosse street.
1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDMOND Lord SHEFFIELD, Baron of Butterwyke, Earl of
Mulgraue, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and my singular good
Lord, Life and Light from God in the Love of Christ,
WHat Unthrifty kind of Spirit is it, that the mind of the Man is now so
obessed with! For what notion so ever shall be offered unto it, differing but
the least point from the vulgar airs which Praeiudice has formerly taken hold
off: howbeit there appear, whether manifest Argument of Necessity, or strong
Inducement of Benefit; yet it is reproved and rejected only for this; Because
it is NEW. Whereas on the Contrary, let it present us with vanity of delight,
or choice of idleness, though to the inevitable destruction of one and all of
us, yet by how much the Newer it is, by so much the more is it honored,
rewarded, and greedily embraced.

An Instance hereof, may be the present state of this our Christian world, in
whose greatest part, this is found to be true, that albeit there be tendered
unto us, Stability of Estate, Treuth of Society, Peace and Plenty on earth, and
favor with God and Man, such, as greater the world never before enjoyed: yet is
there no place of audience to be gotten, even for none other reason but this.
That the path is New and untrodden; And we must not be weained from walking on
still in the spiritual blindnesses, wherewith we have hitherto like
Mould-warpes been holden and delighted, as if it were written in Capital
letters for a Frontispice, on the Gate of our common sense [Non intret frugi.]
Let not a good Object be admitted, nor a thought of Grace be conceived amongst
us.

Such lot has this man of God, the Penman of these Parables, bin forced to
pass under. Concerning whom, because in men of former times, there was only a
doubtfulnesse, for they were unto them (perhaps through their own negligence)
not yet unsealed; Therefore the men of our days will out of a Preiudicate
wilfulness, John 9.
utterly abolish them, and (as the Jews did concerning Christ) excommunicate
as many as bear witness to any of them, how well so ever they shall be by the
Spirt of God opened, and how comfortable so ever the things contained in them
be found unto us. [Thus do men love darkness rather then light, John 3.
least their deeds should be reproved.]

In the midst of so desolate a wilderness more disordered then the brute sea
(for the Ocean has kindly returns of ebbes and flows, and his Decumanos
fluctus, I was by a Mighty hand guided, to the taking up of this our Prophet,
cast out as condemned to perpetual exyle, and not worthy the light of the Sun
of Righteousness in his Church, when viewing well, I could discern in him the
life of Divine seed; which I acknowleged my self bound by the laws of
Nature, common to us both, to foster and cherish unto full growth, according to
the best skill of my understanding and light in heavenly Mysteries. Wherefore I
proffered him my service and help, which even at the very first was so
chearefully accepted of him, that he immediately directed me to present him to
you my excellent good Lord, with assurance of good speed thereby* wherefore
without delay I hasted to accomplish this request, neither has my expectation
erred for the Gracious enterteynment he found at his first access to your
Presence: simply clad (as he was) in Pilgrims Habit: No more then was
sufficient to auow him one of Gods good Creatures, and a Christian (I mean
that Extemporary Interpretation of him which some few Months sithence it
pleased Your Honor to accept at my hands) now since he has gotten about him
better attire and Language, has emboldened him to make a Second show of
himself, in hope that by Your Noble Protection he shall not only recover
against the unjust and unworthy imputations laid upon him, but be Restored
wholly to the possession of his Original Honor: Namely; An Evangelical Prophet
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Certainly he acknowlageth the largeness of Your Heart in understanding the
things of God, The brightness of Your Light in matters of Profoundest Search;
and the Ardor of Your Spirit constantly aspiring unto Motions of the Purest
Air: Such Hearts only can understand in these: Such Lights only can discern
of them: And such Spirits enjoy the Comfort of theit Dew use: And because there
are so few of such ones; therefore is it that this lovely Stranger has been
so little set by among Men to their own Reproof and Loss inualuable. His
demands are just, and the profit he tendreth to the Honorers of him singular,
as appears by that which is here revealed out of him. So that the goodness
of the cause it self remoueth all doubt, but that under your Excellencies
countenance he shall assuredly find plentiful regard, the Newness of his
present habit and speech notwithstanding.

As for my self; when I beheld (as I do daily) the zealous and continual
exercise of Piety in your own Person, the gracious practice of Relligion in
your family, the singular good government of your house, whereby the late
dangerous times came not near you, to touch you; nor any of yours (though
being in the midst of them). I cannot but be persuaded, that your Noble and
Pious spirit will vouchsafe to regard this my endeavors (weak that they are)
and fill up the wants with the sweetness of your good acceptance, which is
wont not to reject any (proceeding from a single heart) that is not altogether
unsavory.

Wherefore my prayers unto God for you (my Lord) are, that the Integrity of
your wisdom, your Relligious learning, your virtues and your valor may crown
you with Honors and Richesse, and graces and favors both with God and Man, as
if with full Sheffes the field which the Lord will have blessed.

These are the vows which do with content and delight unspeakable open the
light of the Morning, and shut in the sight of the Evening daily, to your
Honors trewly loyal servant and Chapellan:

ROBERT SALTER.

VINDICIAE DANIELIS.
Of Apocryphals in General.
FIRST, when I do enter in to serious consideration of the Sobriety of our
Forefathers, that having received from their Elders a volume of Gracious
writings, would not be wanting to deliver them over to their Posterity in the
same Number and Order, they had received them; I cannot but approve their Pious
Ingenuity, choosing rather to subscribe to their Elders in things not
altogether intolerable, then to question their discretion.

And in the Second place, when I behold the Syncerity of men of our own times,
that will not admit the least blast of Earthly Air to mix it self with the
Oracles known to be immediately breathed unto us by the Divine Spirit, I must
needs admire their Religious integrity, that cannot endure any show of Parity
to find place betwixt the things of God and of Men.

Wherefore blessing them both in their several Graces; it is a Motion (I make
no doubt) proceeding from the Spirit of Unity and Truth, adored of them and us
all, that we endeavor (by reconciling them what in us lies) to enjoy the
benefit of both their Lights in common with them; As we rejoice in the
acknowledgement of Life in Communion with them.

The Question about which they differ is, That whereas there are certain
writings delivered unto us, together with the books of the First Covenant,
partly adjoined as Members of some of those books, and partly subjoyned as
Entire works in themselves, and yet not found recorded in the same Character;
whether they be to be permitted to pass jointly and promiscuously as hitherto
they have done, or whether they ought at length to be divorced as not lawfully
brought together?

Touching them all I have not at this time to speak; but leave it to those,
whose liberty of time and happiness of State may solace themselves in the
lovely contemplations there to be found. For my part, (First answering the
exceptions brought against them in General such as I have found) I shall by the
help of the Divine Grace discover the Heavenly Mysteries employed in some one
Particular of them, if perhaps thereby, some other of them may find the better
entertainment.

And thou o Holy Spirit, which make the light of truth to spring up in our
Hearts, Pstl. 112.6.
out of the darkness of our Corrupt Nature, strengthen me by the heat of
thy Love, that the clouds of my sins may be so thoroughly dissolved into
shoures of contrite tears, that they never return again to hinder the sight
of thy comfort and conduct, this night of ignorance so powerfully
praeiudicating us in the things of God and our true happiness.

One objection is that they are acknowledged on all sides to be writings
Apocryphal; And therefore as some do seem to understand (ipso nomine) not
Canonical: for as much as these Names are taken to be so contrary in
themselves, as to be applied to one and the same thing in one and the same
respect is altogether impossible.

Whereto I answer out of the Different meanings and uses given to the name
Apocryphal, which are found to be these.

First, this word Apocryphal indeed in a proper and literal signification
imports [Hidden] or Removed from our sight, as it is said [(...)] to hide
the earth, when by sailing far into the Sea we do (as Seamen use to
speak) bring land to water and the sight of the Land is wholly taken from us.
And in this Passive Nature it is after a figurative manner made conuertible
with the word [Priuate,] which is to say [Sequestred] or hidden from public
use. So that taking the word [Canonical] to be used for that which is made and
ordained for public use, and is so received and used; in this sense indeed
these Names unto one and the same Subject as is above said are utterly
incompatible.

But this word [Apocryphal] is found also capable of a Secundary intention. And
that is by an Active signification to express an Excellency of things, by
which some have in them a Preheminency of Brightness and Illumination, or a
superiority of Dignity and victory in outward presence, whereby the presence of
others (of not so great Outward note) is obscured; And so these become
(Latebrae) Hyding places (as the word is also found used) unto those others.
And in this sense these Apocryphals being according to the dead letter, but as
the Shells, may have for their kirnells matters of High and spiritual Mysteries
enclosed and hidden in them, in sort, that the Names of [Apocryphal] and
[Mysticall] may be found in them of one and the same Air and Sense. And these
Mysteries being found Consonant and Analogicall to the Canon of the Sacred
Scriptures, purchase thereby the title of [Canonical] together with them.

For whereas according to the Literal context the Hystories Apocryphal seem to
make mention of some passages amongst the Jews, either in their Babilonian
captivity or soon after, and so of no use nor Reference unto future times: now
if by a more illuminate search they be in Mystery found to convey unto the
present Church of Christ such Gracious speculations, as either it cannot well
want them, or at least wise it be much helped by them in their times and
seasons (which I do verily believe our Forefathers did see, though the notice
thereof, out of some special work of the Divine providence have not as yet
been imparted unto us:) Then will this application of the name [Apocryphal]
be sufficient to vindicate them from the Aspersions cast on them by the
Praeiudice of the former sense.

It is again objected, that many falsities and doublings, indecencies, and
impossibilities are found in the Relations of their Histories, and therefore
not to be admitted.

This (for answer) is indeed confessed according to the letter of them to be
true; and I suppose many the like are to be brought forth out of the
Canonicals themselves, which (as these) do call for Spiritual eyes to discern
of them, Ezeck. 4. Hos. 1. Luc. 16.
as Ezekiels bands and bread, and Hoseahs wife of fornications, the Rich man's
charity in Hell and such like; So that to the one as well as to the other this
seems to be imputable. And therefore in these cases, the eyes of flesh and
blood are of necessity to be closed, and we must submit our selves wholly to
be led by the light of the Spiritual man, and strive to acquiet our selves in
the Mysteries of them, without nice satisfaction of the Natural reason.

A farther Exception is, that because they are not concluded within the Number
of the Alphabeticall letters, fulfilling the Old Testament, as the Rabbines
register them to have been taken in Ezraes time, nor found in that holy
tongue, nor admitted by Hebrews old nor new, therefore they cannot have been
breathed by Gods Spirit.

For answer hereto, first I cannot but make use of the words of that good
Father Saint Augustine, in an Epistle which he writes to Saint Hierome for
instructions from him, as from his Elder. He there, upon the words of our
Savior, [Bee ye not called Rabbi, Math. 23.
for one is your Master even Christ] goes on thus: Nec alius docuit Mosen,
etc. Neither was there (says he) any other, that taught Moses by Iethro; nor
Cornelius by Peter his Elder; nor Peter by Paul his younger. For by whom soever
Truth is spoken, it is delivered by the gift of him who is the Truth it self.
And this same also and almost in the same words does he repeat in his second
book and 18. Chapter, touching the Doctrine of Christianity, affirming that it
is the duty of every good Christian to know that wheresoever Truth is found,
(as well in Profane Authors as in Sacred) yet it is to be referred to the
breath of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, from whose alone spirit all Truth
does proceed. And so when in these, Truth is to be found, whether after the
Letter or in the Mystery; then in respect of the fountain whence it springs,
it is to be received for Certain, without any Conditionate Admission of
[Magis and Minus] more or less truth in the one of them, then in the other.

Secondly, I say, that Truth being so found in them, it is not to be
believed, Vnius cuiusque linguae par est et eadem virtus, m^do par sit and
eadem pietas. Cor. Agrip. de Cabala.
that the Spirit of God has so confined it self, to any one Language of the
Man more then other; that the Air of the words being but Signs should bring
any credit to the Truth, of the Things signified. Or if any will needs have,
that it does; why then may we not rather believe, that for as much as the
things of Truth delivered in these Apocryphals, pertaining principally to the
Church of Christians, from that time shortly approaching, and not to the
Mosaical now declining, were by the special instinct of Gods Spirit, dictated
in the Mouth of the Penmen, in such language of the Gentiles, as was ordained
to be the instrument of conueighing the Doctrine of Christ, at hand, to be
revealed to all the world? Isa. 28.11. 1. Cor. 14.21.
Therein to the very Letter fulfilling the Prophecy, as the Apostle renders
it, [with other tongues, and with other lips will I speak unto this people.]
And even in that it self, intimating to the people of the Jews, that as they
were now (by the pleasure of God) made subject to the Gentiles in body; so they
should in mind submit themselves, to be ruled by that form of Doctrine,
which was in the Gentiles language, to be made Authentical unto them. And this
may we be the rather induced to believe, in that we find the first
miraculous confirmation of the Euangelical Doctrine of Christ, Act. 2.
after his full Glorification, to be in this same kind: namely, the
Sanctification and Consecration of Languages unto that Ministry.

Yet, notwithstanding all that has been said in defense of these
Apocryphals, I do nevertheless humbly desire so to be understood, that it is
far from me, so much as in the least shadow of my thoughts separately to
parallel them to the Holy Scriptures, (which have from the beginning, and
evermore been by the whole Church acknowledged Canonical and Authentic,)
whether for Measure of spirit, or Light of judgment, or Authority of bynding
power, 2. Tim. 3.
or finally, for sufficiency of Doctrine [to make the man of God perfect,
etc.] Yet may it be no disparagement to those pure fires of Holy Scriptures,
that these Apocryphals be to them taken [Coniunctim,] as the Golden Pot, Exodus
16.
to the Manna laid up therein; or as the Vehicula which Physicians do use in
the applying of their Medicines, whereby their richest Antidotes are brought to
a more universal benefit, for the whole body of the Man; or as the steely
Armor of the Lode-stone, which is altogether impotent of its own separate
strength, to work Magneticall Attraction; Howbeit, fitted duly to that
inualuably precious Gem, does by copulation, multiply the virtues thereof, to
dispart it self into a much greater Orb, and with more powerful rays.

How justly this that has been said, is applyable to these Apocryphals, I
leave to the Aestimate of their deserts which have labored in some parts of
them, not unthriftily; their work is their crown, and the Sterres thereof
shall be multiplied daily, unto the day of Consummate Retribution.

The Apocryphals of Daniel.
THat which by me has hitherto been said, serves first, to remove the
Objections which praeiudice had laid to the charge of those Mystical
writings; which doubtless, had never been so Constantly, Reverently, and
Relligiously preserved, in one and the same closet with the Sacred Scriptures,
had not the Divine Providence specially wrought, and been pleased to shine
forth therein. And so in the second place, this serves also, to purchase a
respective Attention, to that which is therein contained; and that we labor
and use means, that the same may be Revealed unto us, in regard of the great
benefit resulting.

The special part, I have chosen for the present to speak unto, is the
Auctary of Daniel. Which appears to me, whether for the necessity of
knowledge of the Truth, employed in it; either for the Amplitude of the Extent
of it; or lastly, or the Height of the Spirit, by which it was dictated, to
aduow unto it self place in the former rank.

First therefore, whereas we find the Name of Daniel adfixed unto it; whether
it be literally after the Author thereof, the Penman of the Canonical
Prophecy: Certainly, the matter therein contained, does acquit it self, not
unworthy the name of so Glorious a Prophet. Or if it be Parabolically,
according to the Resemblance of the Subject, to that of the former. The
Communion of the Name, and Adiection of it unto that other, does no way impair
the Honor and selfe-sufficiencie, of that Gracious Canonical Prophecy: As
will appear by that which follows.

But what if in a Mystery, we understand the Name of Daniel, given unto it from
the Abstract of the Name it self without any Reference to any person in
Concrete? And so the Name intimating the Manner of Gods working in his
judgments, Daniel. 1. The judgment of God. Or, God is judge.
according to those times in the which the Several parts of this Prophecy were
to be fulfilled?

In truth when I behold the gracious unity in Spirit, betwixt the works of
God of this kind, in the times before this Prophecy, Deuteronomy. 32. Iud. 2. 2 Samuel
24. Psa. 90.106. Joel. 2. Iona. 2. Luc. 18. 2. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 1.
as Moses speaks of them, [The Lord will judge his People, and be
compassionate over his Servants,] And as we find it often repeated by the
Prophets successively; and in the times as they ensued after this Prophecy, as
they are spoken of by our Savior himself and his Apostles after him; I am
wholly possessed with Persuasion and ample Assurance, that this Name of Daniel
given to this Auctary, is Principally (according to the letter,) Apocryphal;
that is to say, A covert and shell wherein the Nature of Gods Judgments then
to ensue, were Mystically enclosed.

For this Auctary, albeit that it is found dispersed into diverse Sections, as
Namely, the Additional to the third Chapter of the Canonical Prophecy, and the
XIII and XIV chapters, as they are added to the end of the Canonical Prophecy:
yet by the Coherence and dependency of them one on the other, it appears to
be one continent Prophecy; reporting in Angelical Language the State of the
Church and Faithful, from those times to the End of times; under the Type of
the Babilonian Captivity of the Jews, the only faithful Church at that time
manifest in the world. And distributeth it self into IIII. distinct Passages
or Periods very regardable. Namely.

Dan. 3.
I. A DIVINE PROTECTION of three Religious young men in a fiery Furnace. Dan. 13.
II. A IVDICIALL DELIVERY of a chaste wife distressed by Calumny of II. old
Fornicators. III. An INGENIOVS CONFVTATION and Conviction of an IDOLATROVS
CVLTVRE. Dan. 14.
IV. A JUST RETRIBVTION executed on a tumultuous People, Vbi. 5.
BRVTISHLY conspiring against their FAITHFVLL RVLER sent them from GOD.
And into such IV. Periods are the Times of the world thence ensuing exactly
reduced, as appears by the Explications of other Prophecies Canonical.

The first Period is of the Martyrdom of three young men.
Wherein the first Circumstance is of these III. Noble men, And they walked in
the midst of the flame.
which if they be taken figuratively [A Definite number for an Indefinite,]
Then is it to be taken for that competency of witnesses, that should spring up
with one voice, confessing the Truth of God in his Administration and
Providence, That in the mids of all the Tumults and vexations of the world, it
is directed wholly to the work of his Mercy and Love, to the Man in Christ, by
his Spirit comforting and confirming them.

Secondly, if we consider them Typically, it is to be taken for the three
Laws Natural, Mosaical, and Euangelical; which in the mids of all the
Frowardnesses of worldlings, All the works of the Lord bless ye the Lord, etc.
do by a sweet and melodious vnicent, publish the praises of the Creator, to
be testified by the voice of the whole frame of the Creature, and parts
thereof.

Thirdly, if taken Mystically, it puts us in mind of the present and ready
Assistance we enjoy in the Person of the Manhod of God, by his Offices of
Prince, Priest, and Prophet, in the Administration of his Providence over all
his creatures, for our service and good. In assurance whereof, he does not
fail to raise up unto his Church in all Tentations and Pressures faithful
ones of all these sorts, namely, Princes, Priests, and Prophets, from time to
time representative of himself, Ap. 1.
walking in the midst of it.

Fourthly, if taken after the the manner of Parabolical History, it does report
unto us, under the Notation of the names of these three young Men, the
threefold differences of Men, as they are descended from their first fathers
after the Deluge. Iapheth Enlarged.

Chananiah, Gratified with favor from God.

Europe wholly, The greater part of Asia: Indies, East and West: South-Pole
Lands.

Shem. The name. Azariah. The help of God. Cham. Burnt with heat Mishael. God
is withdrawn.


Chananiah answering to the name of Iapeth the eldest brother, whom (according
to the Prophecy of his Father Noah upon his name) it should please God to
Gratify with Largeness of Earthly Dominion, (namely, the greatest part of the
whole Habitable,) and to coinherite with the Blessed Shem in the Heavenly
Possession.

Azariah answering to Shem the second brother, who was also (according to his
name) to be as the Name of Help from God, unto the Generations of both his
Brethren.

Mishael answering to Cham the youngest, who (according to his name also) was
by the burning of his Fathers displeasure Excomunicate from any Society, and
confined to a servitude under the Church of Shem and Iapeth, whereby God might
be thought to have withdrawn himself from him.

These in the mouth of Azariah the holy Shem, unto whom the blessing (as is
above said) was most peculiarly alloted in his issue the Messiah, are summoned
to bear witness, to the praises of Gods, who had been always a present
Help to himself, and would now receive into favor his elder Brother Iapheth,
as he had promised; and also return and draw unto him his youngest, whereof
the forlorn seed of Cham had no Argument of Hope.

Which applicataon is to me the more approved, in that Azariah representing
the People of the Jews sprung from Shem, (and chief Author of this holy
Hymn;) does name himself in the second place only, after Chananiah, (his
brother Iaphet) elder then himself according to Nature, though inferior in
calling according to the Blessing. And this song fulfilled in the Jews, who
being now again brought into a furnace of Captivity under the Babilonians, Ps.
81.
as they had before been under the Egyptians, are made the Preachers of Gods
Truth by their Dispersion throughout the world. And the Nations thereby
prepared and brought more flexible to entertain the Mystery of their
Reconcilement to God by Christ shortly to be revealed.

Fifthly, and lastly, Prophetically it bears thus; That whereas the Nation of
the Jews, the only now-visible Church of God, were to be as the comnon
threshing floor, or furnace of Affliction, wherein the Peoples round about
them should express their furyes: yet the true Jews, Romans 2.
whose Circumcision is not Outwardly of the flesh, according to the Letter, but
inwardly of the Heart, and according to the Spirit; should be comforted by the
Sensible Notice of Gods gracious care over them in their Relief from People of
all sorts; whether of the Jews in Azariah, Azariah. Ananiah.
Public Professors of God according to his written word, or of the Gentiles
in Chananiah; such as (though far of) yet had some Light of the Truth, wherein
they rejoiced themselves, and showed Gratitude unto the Jews the bringers of
it unto them; by the benefit of whose inclination, the Jews were permitted
freely their Sabbaths and Jubilees, and other Religious Rites among foreine
Nations, and uncircumcised People where they were scattered, Gozan. Chalac, and
Habor. 2 R 17. Act. 7.
even as far as Goesanum, Colchis and Iberia, and the inland parts of Armenia
most remote from their own Country: and (as the blessed Martyr St. Stephen
says,) beyond Babylon. Or lastly, Mishael.
of those Libertines and Pagans in Mishael; such as for their profaneness
having been by the hand of God smitten into furies with Nebuchadnezzar, are
compelled to proclaim their own shame, and Gods glory, though still
persisting Incendiaries to the whole world besides.

Then Azariah stood forth and prayed, and opening his mouth in the midst of the
fire. 1. Pet. 1.7. and 4.12.
The second Circumstance is of a Fiary furnace, which represents unto us, that
fire whereof the Apostle Peter makes mention; Originally poynting to the words
of Moses, [His law to them was a fire] which for their trial the faithful were
to pass, that they might come forth precious vessels for their Lords service,
whose coming to Bridals, by his Incarnation and Humiliation did now hasten,
and they earnestly wish and wait for.

Deuteronomy. 33.2. The Kings servants that had cast them in, ceased not to make the
oven hot with Naptha, etc.
The third Circumstance is the Materials of the fire, Naptha, Pitch, Tow, and
Vine-twigs, which do design unto us, that the Country where these were
found, most kindly breed and manured, were to be the most proper places of
these Trials and Combustions, and those were Babilonia, Persia, Chaldaea,
Syria, Phaenicia, Asia minor, and Egypt.

The Angel of the Lord sm^t the flame of the fire out of the furnace. Genesis 3.
The fourth Circumstance is, of the flame beaten forth of the Furnace, which is
the Combustions that the world was then shortly to be cast into, which (as it
was in the Beginning a Seraphim to the Tree of Life, separating betwixt it and
The Man fallen from his Perfection; so now) was to as many as by faith were
restored to their first Estate, Ex. 13. Deuteronomy. 1.
made a Partition (as the Pillar to the Israelites in their departure out of
Egypt) and a Lode-starre of Direction, (as it was to them in the wilderness)
to as many as will rejoice in the Light thereof; but a sword consuming the
unbelievers (as was that from Heaven upon Sedom, Genesis 19. 2. Reg. 1.
and that upon the two Captains and their troops that came against Elijah,)
while in the mean space the servants of God in the midst of these Combustions,
walk Invisible to the world, (as the Air by Inflammation is made
Intransparent, Not to be seen through. Zac. 2.
God making it to them a fiery wall of Infinite extent for the Receptacle of
his Church, an impregnable Rampart against them that are without, and a
Gracious Communion of his Holiness and Glory, by his constant presence among
them. Thus to them is it a fire, not to burn, but to Illuminate, Purge and
sanctify them, but to the others, consuming and destroying.

The fifth Circumstance is, of the XLIX. The flame went out of the furnace 49
cubits. And it brake forth and burnt those Chaldeans that it found by the
furnace. Dan. 9.

A Decade is the number of ten, as we use to say A couple, or a brace for two,
or a leash for three.


Cubits of the fires rage, which is the Period of those outrageous times;
either answering to the LXX. weeks of the Canonical Prophecy, every Cubit
fulfilling a Decade of years, from the time of the commandment given, for the
return out of Captivity, as the Prophet had limited; Either else it is a
Decade of Iubilies, in the end whereof, the true Jubilee (whereof all the
former were but Types) should be celebrated, by the grant of Liberty from the
Rigor of the Mosaical Law and Ceremonies, and from Sin, Death, and Hell (unto
which only Enemies the man was obnoxious.) And this Liberty and Manumission to
be granted Indefinitely and without Limitation, to as many as did content
themselves, in the sober and patient expectation and salutation of it, yet so
far off.

That the Jubilee is called the fiftieth year, Leuit. 25.
will make no difference. For the computation of Jews and other those Easterly
Nations, being [Inclusiue] accompting both the terms, as is the manner of
Physicians in their Paroxysmes of sharp diseases, (whereby appears from
whence they are to acknowledge the Propagation of that Learning), And the
computation of the Greeks (in whose tongue this our Prophecy is found
written) being [Exclusiue] leaving out one of the Terms, it falls out, that
one and the same year in the Compute of Time, comes to be the fiftieth
year unto the Jews, which unto the Grecians and other Western Nations is but
the forty ninth. As appears by this Diagram.

IVBILE.


A figure of seven sides, every side containing seven years for the Iehudean
Sabbath of years, which makes forty nine years, In sort, that the first of
the first Babbath, being reckoned also for the last of the Iubilean Period ( as
it is Leuit. 25.) makes up the full number of fifty for the year of Iubile
unto the former, and the first year of the Sabbath following.

The Accomplishment.
FOr from the time of the Return upon the Going forth of the word, unto the
Consummation determined for the ouerspreading Abomination, were troublous times
through the whole world: As the Harmony of Annals do show; In the which God did
notwithstanding raise up from time to time for the Comfort of his Church, a
competent number of witnesses to his Truth.

(This word was not that given by Cyrus, (Ezra. 1.1.) This Note (though not all
so proper in the matter) I could not omit, for love of the gracious meditation
it ocasioneth.
which was about the 29. year of the Epoch or Style of the Persian Monarchy,
and the 222. year of the Building of Rome; which fell in the time of Tarquinius
Superbus the last King of Rome about 530. years before the word became Man.
But the Going forth of the word (Daniel 9 25.) by the Ministry of Haggai and
Zachariah the Prophets, under Darius Nothus otherwise called Syrus; which was
above 100. years after the former; Namely, about the 137. year of the Persian
Era; the 330. year of Rome built, 420. years before Messiah the Prince; and
about the first Reducing of this our Albion into a Monarchy by the Great
Mulmutius father to the valiant Belinus and Bremus: where we have to observe
that the Foundation of the Politic State of this our Land, begins with the
Foundation of the Second Temple, (the Type of the calling of the Gentiles) laid
by our Prophets above praised. As afterward, the full coming in of the
Gentiles and Submission to the Gospel of Christ by Public Consense was
(first of all Nations) begun by the Politic State of this Land under our
Christian King Lucius, before the first general Conversion of the Roman
Empire under their Emperor Constantine near 130 years.)

First among the Jews; As of Rulers, such were Zerubbabel, Tirshatha, the
valiant Maccabees, etc. As of Priests, such were Ezra, Iehoschuah, Iadduah that
turned the Heart of Alexander the Great from demollishing Jerusalem, Eleazarus
to whom Ptolome sent for interpreters, Simon the Just, Onias the Holy, etc. As
of Prophets, Matthew. 1. Luc. 3.
such were Haggar, Zachary, Malachy; and that Sterry Stream from Zerubbabel to
the Virgin Mother as the Evangelists do record them.

Secondly, among the Gentiles as of pious Proselites and Proficients; such as
were those noble Pythagoreans, Sybills, Tit. 1.
Sages of Greece, and other Philosophers, Hystorians, and Prophets, (so does
the Apostle call their Poets;) And those (not inferior in learning to the best
of them) Druides of this our Heauen-named Albion, (I weigh not fables,)
Ptolomaus Philadelphus and Aristaus his favorite, to whom the whole world is
indebted for having been instruments of bringing the Divine Oracles to speak
to us in our own tongues, and others of whom we find large testimonies in
that most diligent and trusty Annalist Josephus, and else where.

Lastly, among profane Libertines, such as were Alexander the Great, Antiochus
the Great, Seleucus Nicanor, and others both Asiatiques and Africans, Grecians
and Romans, whereto bears Suffrage the Inscription of that Altar in Athens:
Act. 17.
[To the unknown God] and the common speech of those days [of the world to
come] which the Poet profanely enough wresteth in his verse.

Magnus ab integro Seclorum nascitur ordo. Virg. Pollio.
All these I say, and many more from time to time, even to the coming of the
Messiah, were unto the faithful in the mids of those Combustions, as the still
small voice to Elijah, 1. Reg. 19. And the Angel made like a moist hissing
wind in the midst of the furnace. 2. Macc. 6. and 7.
refreshing their wearied Spirits, with the solace they took in the
Expectation of their Redeemer; though to the world they seemed ineuitably
embraced with flames no less tormenting, then were those constant Martyrs,
Eleazar the Scribe, and the Mother and her seven sons in the furnace of
Epiphanes: But this was (I say) unto them a refuge from greater evils; and to
the world, and to them that were without, a gulf of destruction, The flame
burst forth and burns those that is found by the furnace.
as appears by the continual desolations betwixt the Persians and Graecians,
Seleucidans, and Lagidans, until they all at length, fall before the Romans,
as was foretold by our Prophet in his Canonical message.

And now is the Messiah come, The Angel of the Lord went down into the furnace
with them that were with Azarias.
and though nothing be found in him, yet must he enter into the same furnace,
no less [Passiae] to suffer with them; then [Priuatiue] to take the force of
the fire from them. And so must the rest of all those holy vessels, his
Confessors follow as they did, until the time of these Desolating fires
accomplished, as is above showed. And so this Period ends with the expiration
of the Mosaical bondage; to the obedience whereof, these holy witnesses were
engaged, even to the Death, and were now to rise again, and come forth to the
life of Euangelical Liberty. The utmost limitation of which their stay in this
furnace, Luke 21.
our Savior designeth unto them to be [the beleaguering of Jerusalem.]

The second Period is of the chaste wife.
IT was very fit that there should be a large distance betwixt the Relating of
the former passage, touching the three Noble young Men martyred, and this next
ensuing. For there was a long course of Occurrents to be accomplished betwixt
them; Even so much as was to take up forty nine Cubits, or seventy weeks of
time, which (as was showed before) were those four hundred and ninety years,
in which all the Prophecies ensuing that part (namely the third Chapter of the
Canonical Prophecy, whereto our former Progress is subioyned) were to be
fulfilled. And so the Connection of these Passages which now follow, to set an
end to the whole Prophecy.

In this Period of the Chaste wife.
Circumstance is of the Place named Babylon: Not the first, There dwells in
Babylon a man called Ioacim, etc. Babylon. Confusion. Psa. 137. Isa. 13. Ier.
50. and 51. Ap. 13.
for it was long sithence desolated in the flames of the former Period, and
made an Extemplary Confusion to all the Enemies of God and his People, as it was
foretold, and commanded by the Prophets. And all the Saints of God were called
out of it long sithence.

But it is of the Second now, by this time standing and grown great, by the
spoils of all the world besides; And which was to begin a New Captivity of the
People of God, and to make a New Depraedation of the Church of God, and to set
up a new Confusion, out of the Ruins of the old. So then this chaste wife must
be put to her Purgation in Babylon the NEW.

And he took a wife named Susanna. Susanna. A Lilly. Cant. 2. Ap. 17. 1. Reg.
7. Iehotakim. The establishment of God. 2. Cor. 1.
The second Circumstance is, of the Person, [The Church] which is first
described by her Name [Susanna] A Lilly. For so does God decipher his Church in
the world [As the Lilly among the thorns,] Susanna a chaste wife in Babylon the
mother of Harlotry.

Secondly, by the name of her Husband [Iehoiakim.] The Pillar which God has
established, and not Man. For Christ is the spouse of his Church, in whom God
has ratified all the purposes and promises of his love unto the man by an
irrefragable Covenant of Yea and Amen. And He takes her to wife; for Christ
loved his first.

The daughter of Helkiah. Helkiah. Gods-Lot. Ephesians. 1.
Thirdly, by the name of her Father; Helkiah, that is to say, The portion of
God. For God had chosen us to himself in Christ before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.

Fourthly by her presence, She is very fair, for Christ has presented her to
himself Glorious, A very fair woman. Ephesians. 5.
without spot or wrinckle, Holy and without blame.

Fifthly, by the Regularity of her Education. She is by her righteous Parents
bred Religiously; And one that feared God. Her father and mother also were
godly people, and taught her according etc. Ps. 119. Now Ioacim was a great
rich man, Col. 2. 1. Tim. 4. Vrbem fecisti. qui prius Orbis erat. Rutil.
For it is the word of God that must be the [Lanthorne to our feet,] without
which, the wisdom of the man is folly, and his righteousness, provocation and
vnexcusablenesse.

Lastly, her Husband is very Rich and Honorable, for in Christ are all the
Treasures of the Deity; and the Godly have the Promises of this Life and of the
Life to come.

So then, here have we a perfect Purtrait of the Church, as our Savior at his
departure from the Jews, the place of his earthly abode, had sequestered her to
himself, from amids the world of the Gentiles (the new Babylon) for his own
and Only beloved, and she a chaste wife, faithful and loyal to her dear Lord
and Husband, whose only voice she follows.

The third Circumstance is, of two Luxurious Judges, The two Elders seeing her,
have a lust unto her
Idolatrous Paganism of the Gentiles not yet converted to the faith of Christ:
the other, the obstinate superstitiousnesse of the Jews, still persisting in
hardness of heart and unbelief, concerning any of the promises of God, that
they should be accomplished in our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. And that
these are the persons which they represent does very lively appear by the
several Detections brought against them in the mouth of our Mystical Daniel
(The judgment of God) though but a child; For the Doctrine of the kingdom of
God in Christ, was yet but as in the nonage amongst them. First, Against the
former is brought forth the same burden that is by the Apostle laid upon the
Gentiles, for their unthrifty Ingratitude toward God, Romans 1.
namely unrighteousness, unmercifulness, unnaturalness, etc. And in the next
place, against the later is urged Canaanitish uncircumcision and spiritual
fornication, Romans 2. Mat. 15.
whereby they seduced the people of God from their pure and chaste Religion and
service of him, Isa. 57.
through their Adulterous traditions.

The fourth is, the crime these lay to the charge of this chaste wife [The
Church] which is Adultery, A young man come to her and lay with her. Ezekiel. 16.
1. Cor. 5. Iac. 4.
that is to say, a violation of the Law of God in point of Relligion, which by
the mouth of God is called Spiritual Adultery: and a violation of the Law of
man in point of society, which is also by the Spirit of God termed, the
Adultery of the world.

fifth is, the vindication of the Innocence of this chaste spouse the Church of
God. And that, out of the mouth of the Accusers themselves, in their
examinations (severally taken) found contrary one to the other

( Observe here the weaknesses of judgment given, upon Testimonies jointly
taken before men, how circumspect soever otherwise; and how easily the most
sufficient understandings may be seduced and abused therein. To which only
end, this circumstance seems to be inserted.)

And herein are we to consider the matter of their confessions, whereby the
falsehood of their Testimonies is discovered, namely, that the one names the
place to be under a Lentisque Tree; the other, under a Scarlat-bery Holme Tree.
Wherein literally is showed (out of the difference of these two Trees;) the
impossibility that either that thing should be true, which these false
witnesses did arm with such contrary circumstances; Or that they should be
mistaken in the sensible differences of such manifest objects.

For first, both these Trees are observed to have on them through the whole
year, both leaves and fruit; so that there could not be wanting unto these
Accusers sufficient appearance of their differences.

Of the Lentisque is thus sung.

Iam vero semper viridis, semperque grauata.
Lentiscus triplici solita est grandescere foetu
Ter fruges fundens.
Plin.
The Lentisque ever green, thrice yearly burgeoneth,
Thrice yearly rendereth fruit and flourishes.
And of this kind of Holme is recorded. Plin.


Ilici folia non decidunt --
The Scarlat Holme sheddeth not leaves.
And again:

Ilex annifera, novusque fructus illis cum annotino pendet.

The Scarlet Holme bears fruit the whole year, and she has new sprung
fruit on her together with the fruit of the former year.

Secondly, both these Trees are acknowlaged to be Arbores indigenae: Trees
naturally growing and breeding in that country, and of much and often use
among the People there, So that the youngest child that can discern of things
among them according to Natural sense, cannot be ignorant of the Difference
of these two Trees.

Differences of them, either from other are found these.

The Lentisque has the leaves of a deep green color, and the edges of the
leaves, and the ribs or veins somewhat red. But this sort of Holme has
leaves green on the upper side (but not so dark) and white underneath.

The leaves of the Lentisque do resemble them of the Licorice, or Olive. But
the leaves of this kind of Holme are like them of the Bay and prickly in
manner of a Saw.

The Lentisque fruit is first mossy flowers in clusters upon long stems, after
which comen beries like Fitches or Elder-beryes, first green, then purple, and
last of all black, which fruit is sometimes pressed into an Oil; and
sometimes is seasoned into a Sallade. But this sort of Holme has first an
Acorne like the Oak, though shorter and smaller, yet such as many use for
bread in time of penury of Grain; And afterward has a Bery cleaving to the
boughs, without stem (other then as the Oake-apple) and of the bigness of a
Pease, or little other; colored first White, after Ashcolour; in which is
gendred the vermin, whereof is made the rich Scarlat dye [Coccus Baphicus] by
us called Coccianel.

The barque of the Lentisque is bright red, and is (as are the barques of those
teary Trees) thin, The gummes of all these sorts of trees are properly called
Lacrymae, Tears.
and apt to be wounded, and to send forth their tears, those precious Gummes
they yield.

But the barque of this sort of Holme is very dark red inclining to
blackness, and is thick and dry and spongy like that of the Corke-Tree,
insomuch as in some places the one is used instead of the other.

These observations as they are delivered by the most approved Authors,
Dioscorides, Galen, Cic. Plin. Matthiolus, Amatus Lusitanus, Dodoneus, Gesner,
Gerard, etc. may suffice to show, that it ought not to be reckoned unlikely or
hard for a child, to close these two false Accusers in the net they had laid
for the Innocent; And even so easy was it for any that were not hardened in
mischief, to discover the accusations laid against the Primitive Church by
the Jews and Gentiles, to be so incompatible in one and the same subject, as
it must of necessity appear to have proceeded not out of Truth, but of mere
envy and malice, that they were so charged with them.

What out of the Nature of these two Trees severally considered does farther
arise, is properly pertaining to the Accomplishment following.

The Accomplishment.
THe Primitive Church at the first, (that is to say, after the Apostles
dispersed themselves from Jerusalem into all parts of the world) consisted
only of private persons, and was as a wife in the house, without any
commanding power in order as to the Public state. And had these two
Adversaries, the Heathen Idolatry, and the Iewesh superstition, evermore
standing forth in accusation against it. By which it suffered grievous
Persecutions and Martyrdomes, through their Calumnies put into the ears of the
Emperors, and Kings of the earth yet Infidels and unconverted. Which as I have
said did no better agree together, then that two Trees so much different,
should be said to resemble one the other, or to be of one and the same kind.

But what if we shall say, that out of the Appellatiue names of these two
Trees, are foretold what kind of accusations should be brought against it by
either of them? Certainly when I consider the Nature of them both together,
with the reference they have to the persons to whose Accusations they are
adpropriate, I cannot but understand some special Mystery hidden in it.

For first to the Gentile is allotted the Lentisque Tree, whose tear is that
usual gum Mastique, so serviceable unto them that study wholly for the
outward beauty and graciousnesse of the body, as if (with the Epicure) they
made the pleasure and contentment thereof their Summum bonum and only end. And
so did the Gentiles lay to the charge of the Christians, that under pretense of
their religious meetings, they gave themselves wholly to Anarchy, Sensuality,
and carnal liberty, which must breed a reiection of all good Government,
Order, and care of the common good. And on the other side, whereas to the Jew,
is adscribed this kind of Holme-Tree, whose beryes (as I showed before) yield
that precious dye (which pertaines only to the Princes and great statesmen of
the world to be attired in). So the accusations which these men brought
against the Christians, were (altogether or for the most part) matters of
Ambition, Treason, and Innovation, as if they aspired to a worldly Power and
Souerainty. And this they charged them with, thereby to make them odious to the
Gentiles, in whose hand the state then was. And if either of these happened to
change into the others Arguments, it proceeded of the lyding they bare either
toward other against these Christians whom they had set up for the Common
enemy to them both; and not of their own Apprehensions.

But Daniel [the judgment of God] steping forth in the mouth of sundry learned
men, Justinius. Aristides. Athenagoras. Tertullian. Vid. Eusebius.
(which were notwithstanding but Private, and as it were under age in order as
to the State) by their Discrete and just Apologies do make manifest, both to
Princes and People, the Innocence, and holiness of conversation among the
Christians; and so their cause being heard they are acquieted, and those false
Judges, (the Heathen, and the Jewish Laws) exautorate as condemned to death,
and the Truth of God in the Christians generally approved, and received.

The last Circumstance is, of the great reputation that (upon his judgment
given) the young Prophet grows unto among the people. For after that the
Integrity of the Christians was made thoroughly known; Sella in Curali struma
Nonius sedet, Per consulatum peierat Vatinius. Catul.
they increased daily in number and power; the Doctrine of Christ obtaining the
more credit, by means that men did look into the intolerable mischiefs and
furies of the impious, when they were in Authority, and the fearful plagues
and punishments sent by God among them, which were Defenders of Idolatry and
Superstition.

And so this Period is continued, from the Determination of the Mosaical Church
(where the former Period ended,) for so long time as the Primitive Church
Christian is in Private estate, and not received into place of Sovereign
Government; as is represented both by the Sex and Order of a wife, and the
childhood of the Prophet. Namely, the times of the Church as they are by Saint
John typed under the Ephesine, Smyrnaean, and Pergamine Churches; The visions
of the opening of the Seals; of the Queen of Heaven in travel; and the King
of Heaven and earth borne, which was until by Public Edict, the Crown was
set upon the Head of Christ, and the Kingdoms were acknowlaged the Lords, and
the bynding power to pertain alonely to Christ and to his Laws.

The third Period is of an Jdolatrous Culture.
AN entrance is made into this Passage by a solemn Preface (for preparation)
taken from the time, when, it is to be observed to have beginning. Namely after
the change of the Imperial state.

Now in this Preamble, first is to be noted, When King Asly ages was laid with
his Fathers Cyrus the Persia^ received his Kingdom.
that Literally it seems a manifest absurdity, unworthy the spirit of
Prophecy, to make mention of Astyages, as pertaining to the State of Babylon.
For albeit, that true it is, that Cyrus succeeded Astyages in his Kingdom, yet
this taken, as I say, according to the letter, is altogether impertinent to the
matters of Babylon. For Astyages was King of the Medes and Persians, and not of
Babylon; And the succession of Cyrus unto him, was in his own right of
inheritance to the Crown of Media and Persia, for he was the son of
Cambyses a Persian, and Maudane the only daughter of the said Astyages,
Thereof was Cyrus (by the Oracle) called (...). A Mule, because he had a Persian
to Father, and a Mede to Mother. Genesis 10. Genesis 7.
who was a Mede by birth: so that he could by no means make title to the
Crown of Babylon, not from the very first dispersion of peoples unto their
several seats. For Babylon came of Cham; But the Medes from Iaphet, and the
Persians from Shem, and from these two later (as is showed) came Cyrus. So that
in this translation of the Empire of Babylon to the Medes and Persians, is no
relation to humane right, that Astyages should be mentioned; But in it, is
(first) accomplished the blessing of Noah upon his two elder sons, and his
curse upon the younger; And (secondly,) the burden upon Babylon from God in the
mouth of his Prophets, personally calling forth Cyrus to the performance of it.

Isa. 44. and 45.
In the second place therefore, the spiritual sense of this Introduction
yields more Grace. For the name Astyages duly searched into, signifies One,
that not so by Justice and right as by crafty Policy, and violent Tyranny has
the rule of the People; Astyages. Tyrannus.
And such were those, that had the Empire of the world, and of the Kingdoms of
the Heathen, in the time of their ignorance concerning Christ; until it pleased
God to send and set over them Cyrus, the Substitute of his Heir (as the name
bears), Cyrus. Pro-haeres. Psa. 2. And Daniel did eat at the Kings table,
and was honored above al his friends.
namely Christian Princes, the Lieutenants of Christ Jesus, the Heir Apparent,
and Lord Paraumont of Heaven and Earth; which as they acknowlage to Reign by
God; so they conform the whole Reason of their Government to the Plat-forme of
his Law. Knowing that wherein so ever their Laws are not Regulated by it;
their Rules are Tyrannical and inordinate, how fair a show soever they make
otherwise. And in this sort is Daniel taken into presence and conversation with
the King and State in Babylon.

Thus then (by this Preface) we are prepared to understand, when this
Idolatrous Culture is timed to be in Babylon. Namely, after the change of the
Empire thereof, from under the Curse, to pertain to the Promise; that is to
say, from Heathenish Idolatry to the Confession of the liueing God in Christ;
and yet the seat of the Empire continues still in Babylon; which because it
was not found in the old Babylon: for it was utterly ruined and desolated, and
so continues even to this day (in order, as to Impery, as appears by that
which has been said before). Therefore it must of necessity be verified in
the NEW; and this Idolatry, spoken of it (not as it was before [Ethnique] But)
as it is now become Christian, and had sworn Homage and fealty to Christ, in
Constantine the Great, the Christian Cyrus of the Empire, and in Lucius our
Christian Cyrus of this Land of Albion, and so of other Kingdoms respectively.
And thereupon comes into question the Idolatrous Culture of the Babilonian,
whereof this third Period has to speak of.

In which, the first thing to be considered is, The Babilonians had at Idol
called Bell.
of the Jdol Belus or Bell. The Appellatiue [(...)] if it be taken after the
Original use, for [Rei verae effigies], the shape of a true thing. (For so it
is said, that the Lacedaemonians did carry about [(...)] the Idol of their dead
King in a bed well adorned or set forth), And the name Belus for the proper
name of the first founder of that Empire; then does it in Prophetical Language
import, that this second Babylon should (notwithstanding their professed
conversion to Gods Laws, and to Christianity) still hold in admiration, and
even to Idolatry, adore the Heathen Policy of their founder, (as Belus was to
the old Babylon) and his Successors, in their National Discipline. Which how
trewly we find even to this day verified among them, is so manifest; as I
suppose it would seem superflous to men of knowlage and understanding, to have
report made unto them of it, whether in their Laws Civil, Oeconomical, or
Moral.

(For this point and some others, I have chosen to refer the Reader to the
observation of particulars, as they are obuious in many that have formerly
written to those purposes, and pass by the instances of them my self, least I
might both be thought to have drawn the waters of other men's Fountains into
mine own Cisterns; and also that the labor self might not grow to a greater
bulk, then that might be no way greiuous to the meanest to purchase it.)

And these laws (though not according to their Written tables, yet to the
Acception of their Brutish spirits) so inviolable, as were the Laws of that
Dracons, of whom it is said, he wrote them not in Ink, but in Blood.
Witness the severity of them, upon their own children, yea, upon their own
selves, in case of breach of their Laws, though perforcely committed.

But if the Appellatiue [(...)] be taken as by a Secundary Intention, for the
Representation of a feigned thing; And the King worshipped it, and went daily
to honor it.
And this Name [Belus] be drawn from that common Name of Bahal after the
Radical Hebrew, or Beel the Chaldaean sprout thereof, and used for any Lord
having and exercising Divine Power and Right of Propriety over Persons or
things; Then does it discover unto us, in what steed these New-Babilonians
should hold the faith of God in Christ. Namely, with such Reference unto
Imaginary Patrons and Coadiutors (if not chief Authors) of their vows and
prayers in special to be observed, as should be best for the promotion of the
cause of their Politic respect in general.

Now what is the multitude of their Canonized Intercessors (howsoever in show
they serve to set Forth their voluntary Devotion and Humility, Colos. 2.
as to the Particular) other then (for the truth of it in General,) like to
their own Country North-East wind, the more lofty, the more cloudy? Ater
thit expellens mendaci nubila statu -- Cae^ias.
So do they as juglers lift up their eyes most fixedly to Heaven, thereby to
draw the spectators eyes to accompany theirs, when they the mean while may
the more vnperceiuedly bring to pass their Legier-du-maine, and earthly ends.
Namely, to get credit where they most purpose to deceive, and to purchase
opinion of love and friendship, where they seek soonest and most summary
destruction.

And that this is to be understood of them, The second thing to be considered,
In that same place was a great Dragon, which the Babilonians worshipped.
(Namely, the true and lively presence of this their Imaginary Belus) does make
to appear, which is (indeed) found to be a Dragon. And even so is their
Relligion made in show to be Humane, Reasonable, Gracious, Godly, as by the
Idol. But is in truth Bestial, Cruel, Bloody, Deuillish, as by the Dragon,
whereof let none others but their own Records be brought forth to witness.

As in Divine letters, the Character of the Devil is a Dragon; and Idolatry
called Devils worship. 1. Cor. 10. So in Pagan-learning the Hieroglyphique of
Witchcraft (which is the Invocation of Devils) is a Dragon, ( as by the
Poet-Nunc ego Medeae vellem fraenare Dracones-) To intimate, that the Man that
does either set up, or so much as conniue at Idolatry, does thereby make
himself fit, both to work, and to be wrought upon, by Witchcraft. Whereof
what plentiful Instances we have had in the New-Babilonian Idolatry, I suppose
none but the deaf Neighborers of Nilus ouerfalls are ignorant of.

Secondly, if there be any that will needs have this Idol of Belus, to
express the whole of their Relligion, There were spent upon this Idol every
day twelve great measures, etc.
to stand in the worship of those trunkish Gods they call upon, and the Realty
of this their worship to be the service of the old Dragon the Devil; Or
thirdly, if any will otherwise have the Idol Belus to be that Great
Mountabancque their Pope; and the Dragon that Infernal Conclaue of Cardinals,
whose only breath does enliue that Idol; Or if there be any other light here
in emparted to others of my brethren in the Ministry of the Prophecy of our
Lord and Master Jesus Christ; I will not refuse to join with them, so far
forth as they make the parts to agree and move together, as in this they are
found to do.

As we have hitherto been informed touching the form of this Idolatry: so in
the third place we are taught, what to esteem of it in respect of the end,
and that is expressed in phrases of speech pertaining to food, where is to be
observed, that to the dead Idol is offered an unmeasurable daily allowance of
meat and drink; whereas it could not be unknown to any Reasonable creature,
that the Idol could take none. And on the other side, the Dragon was
acknowlaged to live by food, and there is none found to be offered unto him.
And such are the ends of this their double dealing Impiety, according to the
saying.

Simulata sanctitas duplicata iniquitas. For the former their Belus or
Belly-god, does set forth their insatiable Couetize, according to the word of
their chief Minister: Non sufficit Orbis.

And the later their Dragonly policy shows their unlimited Ambition, whereby
they have in conceit already swallowed up Heaven and Hell, and yet are not
satisfied.

But God be thanked, it is not found in our Prophecy, that either of them
takes any sustenance. For [Babilon is fallen, Ap. 18.
it is fallen,] and that by Daniel, first discovering unto Christian Princes
and Magistrates, the sly conueighances of these Babilonian Impostures. And
secondly, removing the preiudicate conceit of their impregnable force and
strength.

The former, (Namely, the discovery of their Abuses) is by tracting their
footsteps in ashes. Daniele commanded his servants to bring ashes, and these
they strawed, etc.
And ashes is that which is left of the dissolved bodies of the dead, whether
Animals or Vegetables. So did the discreet wisdom of Relligious Princes, by
the advice of our Daniel (the judgments of God) search into the ashes, that is
to say, into the Records and Memorials left of the Decessors of these Priests
of Baal, and the fruits of their works while they lived; And discovered
whereto tended all their Hipocritical show. Namely, to devour the whole earth,
which how true it is in them, let the dead speak, as in all the world over,
Dan. 7.
so more specially in these parts wherein we live.

For France let the whole Treatise of La Cabinet du Roy de France, etc. be
viewed; And for Germany, the Articles of the Diet at Worms, Anno. 1521; and at
Noriberg, Anno. 1523. be considered. And for England, the sundry passages of
Fox in his Martyrology, and of Jewel in the defense of his Apology, and diverse
others be called to account, as the footesteps of those times in ashes, and it
will appear, that the greatest part of the wealth and treasures of these Lands
(and consequently of all the Kingdoms in Christendeme) were in the hands of
their Par^izaus, which (as horseleaches when they are filled with blood) this
Belus and his Dragon did by salting and poudering them, make them to disgorge
into their cofers.

The later, namely, the ouerweening of their irresistible power, is voided by
the use of a Medicinal Pil ministered to them which, as it is not food to give
nourishment to their Nature, but Medicine to work upon and alter Nature. So
there is no hope by fair means to prevail with them (for Improbitas nullo
flectitur obsequio) but the Humors abounding in them must be met with and
subdued. As appears by the Ingredients. First; Daniel took fat, and pitch,
and hair, and boiled them together, and made lumps thereof. This did he put
into the Dragons mouth, and so the Dragon burst in sunder.
all of them are things not suffering Putrefaction easily.

Next they are every one in their kind, apt to join with the other of them;
so that while their Natures in themselves remain undestroyed, it is very hard
to sever them one from the other.

Thirdly, they have a glutinous and clammy quality, whereby they are hardly
removed from the place or thing, whereto they are once made to cleave.

So that by the Ingredients of these Pills are three principal virtues commended
to us, by which this venomous Beast is to be destroyed. For

Their Incorruptiblenesse of themselves, does betoken unity.

The Inseperablenesse either from other, does design secrecy.

The Vnremoueablenesse from whereto they are applied, is Constancy and
Perseverance, which the Daniels of Nations in their Councils are to use for
performance of this Rare Cure.

Those that will in a more literal manner have it understood, that these
Materials, being of special use in Sea services (as the Tallow for speedy way,
-- Natat vncta carina.
the Pitch for stanchnesse, and the Hair for defense against Orcs and gnawing
Worms,) do intimate the manner how this Dragon is to be taken out of the
way. Namely, by a Nautical expedition against the Den of his abode; these do
herein commend unto us the virtues of Integrity, Secricy, and Expedition.

And so upon the Matter both these come to one, in Point of Performance.

The Accomplishment.
THis third Period we find to have been taken up with the discovery of the
viperous generation of Haeresies, Schisms, and Heathenish impieties, in Matters
as well of Church as of Comon-wealth, put upon the Church, under the masque of
Relligion. All which have bin either first bred and begun, or otherwise by
Protection and Maintenance, See for this Carrion Image of both Churches Acts and
Monuments* Mystery of Iniquity. Pisgah Euangelica. Problemes concerning
Antichrist: and a million more, both Ancient and Modern. Ap. 2. and 3.
seconded and continued by the New Babylon. And have been brought to their
Trial by [Daniel] The judgments of God, in the mouth of faithful Ministers,
and in the hand of zealous Magistrates. As witness those Armies of Holy
Professors from time to time; and their vnweried spirits, in the encounters and
combats they maintained even to death, against this Babilonian Belus and his
Dragon, and their Sectaries concerning their Tenants, so far forth as they
were not Regular, and Demonstrable out of the Arche-type of Gods word and Law.
By means whereof, the New Babylon is brought into contempt with all Princes
and People of understanding; And Belus and his house and his Priests destroyed,
by abrogating the bynding power of his laws; And his Dragon slain, by
removing the Pagan policy, and by demolishing the place of their Antichristian
prouocations. And so does conclude with the destruction of Babylon the later,
which is (at the length) to be as Real as was that of the former.

Thus this Period of our Prophet does square with those Revelations of the
Euangelical Divine, delivered under the types of the Thyatirian and Sardeian
Churches, and the visions of Michael and his Angels, Ap. 12. 13* etc.
and of the Dragon and his Beasts.

The forth Period is of a tumultuous Conspiracy.
AS to a turbulent enterprise among the multitude, it is not found, that they
use any precedent consideration, either touching Motives, Manner of doing, or
Ends, but Qua data porta ruunt --

They are carried headlong, they neither know nor care whither: When the
Babilonians heard it, they were wondrous wroth and gathered themselves
together against the King
So needed not any Preface by way of connection to be interserted, betwixt the
former Period of those Babilonians subposed wrongs, by demolishing their
Idolatry, and this of their unquenchable thirst of Revenge; but that the Hint
of that, should (according to their Brutish Natures) necessarily draw on their
outragiousnesse in this, to their own confusion.

In which we have first to consider, that by these Tumultuous Babilonians are
designed, what inordinate Conspiracies the Sectaries of the Mystical Babylon
would enterprise, now that they are made headless, by the conviction of the
dead truncke of their Idol Bel-Pope, Saying deliver us Daniel, or else we will
destroy thee and thy house.
and the Ignis fatuus of their Cardinal Dragons Conclaue. All which their
Intendments and Conspiracyes are against the Church, upon pretense of
maintaining their old (Antichristian) Relligion and Policy, which the true
Church of Christ does indeed mainely oppose.

Secondly, In the Den were seven Lions.
the seven Lions are an Heptarchy of an Idolatrous people which shall be by
these Antichristian Babilonians in all places stirred up, Ier. 51, 17.
as brute Beasts exasperated by famine, to the spoil and devouring of the
Church.

They cast him into the Lions Den.
Thirdly, the six days or weekes-worke of the Prophets imprisonment is, a
term of time in which Professors of true Relligion shall (notwithstanding) be
given over to be drawn into brutish and profane courses and ways, and to the
compassing of earthly ends, as worldly minded men do in the week days, to
the labors and cares of flesh and blood; without any reference of their works,
to the setting forth of Gods glory.

Upon the seventh day the King went to bewail Daniel.
But on the seventh, that is the Sabbath day; namely, so soon as they settle to
a serious reformation of themselves in the service of God according to his will
and ordinance; they shall be released and rewarded (for that they have
suffered) with double honor, according to the rites of the Sabbatical Culture.

Fourthly, the shutting of the Lions mouths is, the loving care of the Almighty
over them that fear him and trust in him, When he came nigh the Den he looked
in, and behold Daniel sat in the midst of the Lions Number. 24.
whereby notwithstanding their many Errors and wrenches betwixt God and them;
yet are they (by his holy hand holden over them) safe amidst those furious
people, and that in recompense (whereunto these people are guided by God, as
Balaam was to bless the Israelites) for the inuitation they had by them, to
the acknowlagement of Gods glory and power in the first Period.

There was in Iewry a Prophet, called Habaq.
Fifthly, the food miraculously brought by the Prophet, may be taken for the
Succors that by Gods Providence shall come unexpectedly to the faithful from
far, and very swifty and strongly. Or else it may be according to a moral
understanding, taken for an admonition to the faithful, that they make recourse
to the gracious meditations delivered by that Prophet (literally to the Jews,
but Mystically pertaining to all faithful Christians in that case), as unto
the spiritual food of their souls, the word of God therein. Namely, that
albeit God does chastise his Children by the rod of the wicked, as here in the
Person of Daniel: yet they should not therefore fall from their hope, as here
he may be said to speak unto Daniel; But that [the godly and just shall
live by their faith] and contraryly, the Impious, Oppressors, Habaq. 2. 4.
Idolaters and Tyrants, shall perish in their sins. And this is the sum of
that gracious Prophecy, which how fitly we may perceive it to appertain to
this state of the Church wherein Daniel is now made to be; every good
Christian may see.

Sixthly, Daniel delivered, He drew him out of the Den and cast them that were
t e cause of his destruction into the Den, and they were devoured in a moment
before his face.
and Lions devouring the Babilonians, is the turning of those peoples hearts
and forces against those Babilonians that had stirred them up to destroy the
true servants of God, which when these faithful ones shall behold, they shall
triumph and give God the praise.

Seventhly and lastly, one thing is to be added which is not in the Text. For
though it be not expressed, yet is it of necessity to be understood; And that
is how our Prophet spent all this time of his Bondage with the Lions? which out
of Decency and Analogy with other Saints of God in like cases as Manasses in
the Dungeon, 2. Chro. 33. Iona. 2. Dan. 3. 2. Cor. 11.
Jonah in the Whailes belly, Paul in the depth of the Sea, and the Young men in
the Furnace, (as in our first Period) must be understood, to have been first
in Reconcilement to God, as touching former delicts (considered in this place,
not altogether so much in respect of himself, but specially in the Person of
his Nation; as he does also elsewhere). Secondly, Dan. 9.
in thanksgiving for his present preservation, and Petition of relief and
comfort to be continued; And thirdly, in Prophetical exultation upon steadfast
assurance, that he shall be in good time delivered, and his Enemies taken in
the Pit they have made for others. And many meditations do we find of this
kind, both in the book of the Psalms, and otherwhere, Psa. 3. and 4.
dispersed through the whole volume of the Holy Records.

The Accomplishment.
Who so will enter into an accurate and discrete search of the proceedings of
these Babilonians, and compare their practices of these days with thoe of
former times; shall easily find, how tenderly they take the late Entryes made
upon the freehold of their Conclaue, as well in word as in writing, King James
in his Praemonitory Epistle, etc. Novus homo.
by sundry worthy Agents in the cause of the Church. Specially a New man, which
has ex professo, debated and proved out of their own mouths even by the Rules
and Laws of that their Conclaue, that there is not now, nor for long time past
since, has been any Regularly made neither Pope nor Cardinal; wherefore from
thence forth they have not dealt (as they were wont before) by a show of Legal
proceedings, as by Excomunications, Interdicts, Jndulgences, Dispensations, and
such like formalities. But now they plainly declare themselves by Assasinats,
Leagues, Proscriptions, Invasions, Breaches of promise and faith, Treasons
universal and particular, Vid. Cancel. Hispan.
as is discovered by their own letters and Remonstrances one to another, which
they hoped should never have come to light in Testimony against them.

Deuteronomy. 29.17. O King be not deceived for this is but clay within, and brass
without, and did never eat ought
And hereby they show what reckoning they make and ever did, of their Dunguy
Belas. Namely, no more then according to the matter whereof he is made,
[Nehustan, a piece of brass, or a lump of clay]. But the Dragon in the Cage
is that, which so long as they could bear the world in hand, of the life and
strength of it, they held themselves safe enough. And now at length, they
proclayme fire and sword against Daniel and all the Kings and Princes that call
him to counsel against their Heathenish Idolatry and Dragonly Policy, The King
is become a ^^w, for he has destroyed Bell, etc.
and they are to them, Jews, and worse, that presume to move or to be seen
in it.

Wherefore they have stirred up an Heptarchy of Nations, Classicum Belli sacri.
that is to say, a full and competent power of sundry Kingdoms (which as Lions
kept in dens, are at their command) to set upon Daniel and his followers, the
sincere Professors of Gods truth, who seem to be thereby utterly forsaken by
all their friends, and assailed on all sides by Adversaries, in such inevitable
distress (as far as man may discern by the eye of flesh and blood) as if
they were in a dungeon, among devouring Beasts. But they that behold them with
spiritual eyes, Period. 1.
do contrarily see them as safe as they were before in the furnace.

Those that out of much curiosity will not be contented with the understanding
of this Number of Seven, after the for me of Prophetical speech (wherein a
Definite Number is usually put for an Indefinite, as it is found in many places
of the Canon of Holy writs, both Old and New) seem to press a Nominal
designation of them. And so reckon France, Spain, the Empire, Italy, Bohemia,
and Poland, for six of them. In some of which may be perhaps some doubt. But
for the seventh, I cannot, neither do I think any other will make doubt of.
And that is, A home party in the bosom of the Church, and of all them of the
true Relligion, which must needs be the most dangerous, by how much the
greatness thereof is not possibly to be discovered. By this we may perceive,
what is to be exspected by the true Professors, from all those that are at the
Babilonians beck ( specially the last of the seven named Lions). The home
party.
Let them otherwise make what show they will of society and common Country,
their bridle is the only power of God, without any disposition to peace in any
of them. And it is a very dangerous Security in men, to set so light as they
do of that Tenent of theirs [How that it is a principal case of conscience in
them, Fides non habe^da cu^ Haereticis.
not to keep faith with Heretics.] For so consequently it is to them a
meritorious work to purchase credit with the faithful, that so they may be
deceived, and by their credulity utterly cut off by these Infidels. Yea, and a
sin inexpiable, for them to enter into any such faith of league and society
with the true Professors, which they do not before hand purpose and practice
to break when soever they shall see their best time to do most mischief
thereby: so that it is less perilous to trust a Viper in the bosom, then
these men upon any terms. For that is felt at his first wounding, and so may
the venime be encountered and expelled. But these are not felt to sting, till
the wound be past recovery.

Howbeit for all this God has not forsaken his people; but so soon as they
turn and call to him, he will hear them, Ps. 46. Habaqquq. Affectionately
embraceing.
and that right early; as he does our Prophet in the den, by the relief of
Habaqquq, that is to say, such as shall lovingly embrace them in the
acknowlagement of the truth they profess. Specially those old Confessors the
Jews, Iehudah: Confessing or ^raysing.
who with new praises in their mouths, that is to say, by their conversion
unto Christ their Messiah, shall either come themselves with that irresistible
speed, and unperceived secrecy, as if they were borne in the Air, ^gelus.
messenger or ^ssage.
by Angels, above the reach of man's sight; Or else (as the name of Angel does
import) by message of comfort from them, no less speedy then secret, of their
mature assistance and confederacy.

But when shall this be (say some)? unto whom it is answered, that it shall be
so soon as we begin to hunger and thirst after righteousness, as Daniel is to
be understood to do for natural food, according to the long time of his stay
in the Den.

Yea, and that by the special work of God, who otherwise could as well have
preserved him, without feeling hunger, as he did Moses in the Mount, and
Elijah in his journey. (...) 34. and 34. ^^g. 19.
But this was disposed by God after this manner, to the end, it might be to
the Prophet a corporal and natural sign incurring into the senses for the
strengthening of his faith, as the message of the conversion of the Jews shall
be to the true Professors of Christ, in the midst of their Terrors.

And hereupon is it, that no sooner does he pray, but even before the prayer
is past his lips, Isa. 38. Act. 10.
he (as Hezekiah and Cornelius) receives answer of grace, and grant of his
demand, by an Angelical message in the hand of a loving and lovely Prophet;
namely, Hebrewe conuerts confessing Christ.

Which tidings brought shall amaze the Babilonians, 2. Reg. 19. Ap. 17.
as the tidings of the approach of the Aethiopians did Sennacherib and shall
turn the hearts of these Nations against the Babilonians (as the flames were
turned against the fewellers in the first Period, and as the Beasts, unto whom
the Christians were cast forth to be devoured in the second Period, Eusebius. Isa.
66.
were turned against those that provoked them) and shall destroy them; the
Saints of God looking on and rejoicing.

Thus in this Period is contained the wars of Gog and Magog, and the vision
of the New Jerusalem, Ap. 20. Ap. 21. Ap. 3.
and of the Philadelphian and Laodiecian Churches. That is to say, the
distresses of the Church by an Anarchical Apostasy, and the causes thereof,
with the time of the endurance and means of delivery; the calling and
conversion of the Jews, and their union unto the true Professors of Christ,
whereby shall be purchased Triumphant days. Namely, Number. 28. Upon the seventh
day the King went to bewail Daniel.
the double sacrifice due to the Sabbath, which is the sacrifice of both Jew
and Gentile, with one heart and mouth praising God. And this Sabbath never did
the Church yet enjoy, but at length must, for a preparation to the end. Which
time hasten o Lord, thou which art the true and Aeternal High Priest, in whom
thy Church does celebrate a perpetual Sabbath, offering themselves up a Holy,
Romans 12.
Lively, and Gracious Sacrifice, by their (not Brutish but) Reasonable and
Intelligent service of God. Even so Lord IESV, come quickly. Amen.

The first Corollary.
IN the mean space; the Light that this Parabolical Prophecy does illuminate
us with, is: That all the members of the Church of God generally, and every one
severally be hereby informed to a due consideration of the state, wherein they
presently stand; either for their spirit of their inmost conscience, or for the
private of their worldly state, or for the public of the politic society,
wherein they live. And that they do accordingly dispose of themselves. First,
whether suffering furnace of Gods trials, that they abide constant, rather to
dye then to fall from their hope. Secondly, Obloquy, that they pacify
themselves out of the testimony of a clear conscience. Authority, that in the
first place, they advance the honor of God, that has advanced them unto honor
above others. Or lastly, whether in the Brute-hearted generation, that they be
not any way dismayed, but cheer themselves, in assurance, that the power of
their Adversaries is limited, and shall not be able to stretch it self
farther, then shall be for the honor of God, and good of his faithful
servants. Remembering this withal, that so long as we give our selves over to
the Pursuit of our private ends, so long shall we be left to the danger of
these our Brutish Enemies. But so soon as the Day Star of the Lords Sabbath
shall arise in our Hearts, and we by the conduct thereof, seek his face,
leaueing our own self wranglings: Psa 148. Isa. 60. Ap. 21.
The whole creature shall join with us unto a perfect celebration thereof. And
of that Sabbath day shall be no Sunset: for Christ our righteousness shall
ever more and more lighten us unto Triumph, 1. Cor. 15.
and treading down of our Enemies, Death, and all, under our feet, in him and
by him. Amen.

But -- Paulo maiora. Here is in this Quadripartite Parable described unto us a
fourefold state of the man in Christ.

The first is the state of Nature, Natural Propagation.
originally derived unto him from his Parents; touching which, are the the
words of the Prophet: In iniquity was I formed, and conceived in sin. Out of
the remembrance whereof, Psalm. 51.
so long as he beholds himself as in that state, The fyary furnace.
he finds nothing in himself but fights (of his own guilty conscience)
within, and fears (of the whole Creature calling for Justice against the Man
for his abuse of them) without; Thus every where bearing about in the body, the
dying of our Lord Jesus Christ by his afflicted spirit. 2 Cor. 4.
Only the zeal of his inward LOVE, the feruor whereof is far more mighty,
then to be invaded by outward and Elementish considerations, makes him a
freshure, as unto these young men in the midst of the flammes in the first
Period.

The second is, Adoption and Spiritual Regeration.
the state of his Adoption and Childhood in Christ through Grace. By the means
whereof, even in his greatest weakness, he saluteth (as it were a far of)
the lovely Revelations of God unto him, in such liberal manner as he is
overcome, and in fear to be puffed up by them. And therefore it is good for
him, The false Judges.
yet to endure the buffetings of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.
whereby the Testimony is sealed unto him, that the grace of Christ is
sufficient for him, as the Chaste wife does in the second Period.

The third is, Manhood and Strength.
his full growth and strength of manhood in Christ, whereby he is able with
all Saints to comprehend, what is the breadth, length, depth and height: Ephesians. 3.
and to know the love of Christ, which passes all knowlage. And therefore from
the former Period, of being able to Suffer, he is now grown to be able to
Do. Namely, to cast down (Belus) Imaginations, 2 Cor. 10.
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowlage of God, and
to bring into captivity (the Dragon, and) every thought to the obedience of
Christ. So that by times, even at his first coming into the entertainment of
Cyrus (Christ risen, Belus and his Dragon.
ascended, and reigning in him) he takes away all the ungodly out of the
Land, and does cut of all the wicked doers from the City of the Lord. Psalm. 101.
And this City, is not only his outward rank in the world: but the inward
man of him, as he is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and those wicked ones are
the many bayts, suggestions, excesses, and wants, as well within him, as round
about him. In all which, he now can say with the Apostle, Phil. 4.
I can do all things by him that strengthens me, as we find it the part of
all Daniels to do, in the third Period.

Perfection.
The fourth is, the glory of the man's consumation. By the which [ although he
do yet walk in the flesh (assailed on every side with the spurs thereof, as
with so many Lions), 2 Cor. 10.
notwithstanding [hee does not war after the flesh] that he should stand in
fear of them, The Den of Lions
or be annoyed by them, because he lives in Christ. And for as much as he
is able in the brightness of a good conscience, to bear witness to himself
with the Apostle [I have kept the faith;] 2 Timothy 4.
therefore does he conclude, that [neither tribulation, Romans 8.
nor distress, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor
sword, shall separate betwixt Christ and him.] For in all these, we are more
then conquerors, as we find Daniel amidst the Lions, in the fourth Period.

And even this very Mystery is it, that a right learned and virtuous Mr.
Edmund Spencer. The great contentment I sometimes enjoyed by his Sweet
society, suffers not this to pass me, without Respective mention of so true
a friend. Sine nomine Corpus. The young men in the fyar.
Gentleman has so lively decyphered, in his Legend of the Patron of true
holiness, the Knight of the Red-Crosse; whereby, and by the rest of those his
lovely Raptures, he has justly purchased the Laurel of honorable memory,
while the Pilgrimage of those his worthies are to endure.

He there has brought forth our Noble Saint George; at the first only in the
state of a Swayne, before his Glorious Queen cast down on the ground
[Vncouth, vnkest] Vnacknowne, vncared off as a dead trunk, and only fit for
the fire (as in our first Period).

But when he had arrayed himself in the Armor of his Dying Lord, his presence
is then become Gracious, The Chaste wife accused and freed.
and his Person promising great things [as one for sad incounters fit]. Belus
and his Priests suppressed.
Which he first Passiuely (as in our second Period), and after Actiuely (as in
our third Period) does so victoriously pass through and finish; that at the
length (as in our fourth Period,) he is become altogether Impassible, Daniel
amids the Lions untouched.
whether of Assalts of the fraylety of Nature within, or Affronts of
Adversaries without, as being fully possessed of that Kingdom, against which
there is none to stand up.

The second Corollary.
BY that which has been said, is made manifest, how exactly these Apocryphal
Prophecies of Daniel do agree. First, with the Prophecies, Sacra Scriptura dum
narrat gestum, trodit Mysterium.
Parables, and Prophetical Histories of the Canonical Scriptures.

Secondly, with the gracious Speculations and Observations of the Religiously
learned.

Thirdly, with the Accomplishments of them all from time to time. And so
(according to the Law, that In the mouth of two or three witnesses the truth
be stablished) how worthily they have to challenge to themselves, Deuteronomy. 19.5.
their ancient place and right. Namely, if not to go [promiscue] with the
Sacred Scriptures, as they formerly did; yet to hold their attendance on them
inseparable, above all other writings whatsoever. And how dangerously any shall
presume to divorce them, which have been found yoaked and drawing together, so
many ages of the Church of God, inconstant and vn-interrupted succession.
Whereby their coupling together, may be judged to have been the work of God,
and not of man.

But for farther confirmation of a thing already so manifest, let us add [ex
abundanti] one Testimony more, whether as necessary as the former, I forbear
to say, certainly no less Gracious.

The wonderful Light (I mean) exhibited unto us from Heaven by the late
Prodigious Comete, according to the several differences to be considered in
it. Namely, 1. The Influence of its Compound received from the Ethereal
bodies. 2. The peculiar motion allotted unto it. 3. The large progress over
the heads of so many Nations. 4. The sundry constellations it visited in
progress. 5. The different Extention of his train. 6. The great distance of
it from this Habitable of Mortality. 7. Lastly, the place of Exspiring and
Disparition.


In all which it has by Divine Characters and Lines drawn in the Heavens
(that all Mortals might by them be made Inexcusable) preached unto us, the
Approach and Accomplishment of those works of the Creators providence, which
were so long before ordained and revealed, that they should be performed in
their due time. To the worldlings, and to them that put their trust and content
in the uncertainty of Transitory things, Dismal and Desolatory, according to
the word of God by his Prophet, [They shall say to the Mountains cover us, and
to the Hills, fall upon us.] But to the trewly faithful, and those that have
in Christ, crucified themselves to the world, full of joy and comfort,
according to the word of their Lord, [when these things begin to come to pass;
Luc. 22.
then look up, and lift up your heads; for your Redemption draws nigh.

For proof whereof, let us make a Superficial Essay of some few.

Ara, Lar. (...)
The Original of it, esteemed near to the Constellation of [The Altar,] and as
it were bred out of the smoke thereof; As it seems to declare that the
worldlings under pretense of Relligion did put themselves into Secret
Combinations and in manner of Relligious vows for the Prosecution of their
pernicious calumnies, and unjust Persecutions against their Enemies the
Faithful now more then ever: Sap. 2.12.
So in like manner it puts the Godly in mind of the Glorious Altar from
under which the Souls of the Blessed Martyrs call for vengeance; Ap. 6.
and the Gracious answer they receive for Confirmation of us that are left
behind.

The Influence it received from the Planetary Lights in the Generation of it as
in the Evil, Oppos. with ^ Conjunction with, and.
it shows their ouer-growne Frowardness, Infidelity, and Rashness: So in
the Pious it portendeth their Constancy, Princely Patience, Martial valor and
boldness, and Ingenious Compasses for their discreet and Convenient Ends.

The Luster it gathered at the first by Reflection on Cauda Pauonis as in a
Mirraur shows that notwithstanding the Pretext of Holiness the Hypocrites
make: Cauda Pauonis.
yet it is wholly to advance the Painted plumes of some whether Peacocke or
Austriche, that display their gay feathers more for vain show then for any
gracious use they put them to.

The Constellations is passes through; Lupus and.
First Wolf and Scorpion, in the Evil is sign of their Rabide and venimouse
Implacability against the Saints; But in the Good their Inward Ardor in Piety
toward their Godly Generation as Jacob fortelleth of his Lovely Son the Wolf
Benjamin; Gen 44.
and their outward help from God against their Enemies, as was unto the
Israelites amids fiery Serpents, Scorpions, Deuteronomy. 8.15.
and drought in the wilderness.

The not appearing of the Comet during his being vnvnder the Constellation of
Libra (because he was then under the beams of the Sun) does touching the Evil,
In sub radijs is.
testify the Summons of them to declare, and a Compulsion of them to speak
openly their Designs, by Legal Proceedings, Ambassyes, Treatyes, etc. The
train of it toward.
which (by the projection of his Train to the Characterisme of Virgo) are then
manifested to be intended against the Church [eo nomine] as it is the flock of
Christ: is motus a in.

Motus Cometae a in and inde versus.


On the other side to the Good it shows that howsoever by the Suns going
forward (according to the Order of the Signs) in the Zodiaque, and the Comets
Retrogradation (against the Order of the Signs (God does seem to leave the
wicked to their Counsels, with free liberty to pursue them; yet does he
nevertheless impose a Severe restreint of their Malice by Order of Justice,
that it shall not bring any damage to his Spouse the Mayden-Mother Queen his
Church.

Serpens.
Hereupon the Comete by his Northward way is carried to the Serpent by which he
is stung and pricked forward (for then the Comete is seen in the Mornings* and
his Motion is become most swift) showing that the Evil finding their Projects
frustrate in manner as is above showed, should change their privy Conspiracies
into open Hostilities, which they should pursue in most violent manner, and by
the greatest strength they were able to make or procure: But to the Godly it
shows that by means of the Noble Serpent [Dan the Iudge] the more Expedition
and Strength their Enemies should use, Genesis 44.
the sooner should they be dissolved and vanish by the Chariot and Horsemen of
Israel, 2 Reg. 13.
as the Comet in his coming to Boots and the Rest of those Polar Characters
is seen to languish: Arctophilax etc.
And so by a slower Motion and through a Part of the Heavens not honored with
Constellations (as through a Desert of Obscurity) Vrsa mayor etc.
to hide the head.

Cauda Draconis.
Lastly, the Comet drawing to the tail of the Dragon is by the Light of the New
Moon (then gathering strength) wholly darkened, Nouilunium.
his body dispersed, and his fire quenched. Showing that howeuer the Evil do
yet a third time seek to gather more new poison from the Old Dragon (and the
Purple Harlot his Rider the founder of all their Practices) yet it shall not be
her Nasty skirts that shall serve to releive or shelter them, but by the
Brightness of the Church, coming forth as a Bride out of her Chamber, Cant. 6.
Gracious as the Morning, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, and terrible as
the Banners of Machanaijm (Men and Angels, Genesis 32.
or Angelical Men) they shall be utterly frustrate and end in a Smoke and Stench
as the Comete then did.

These few (as I said) have I for an Essay thought good to touch upon: which
how true they have been unto us thus far, and how fully they do square with
the Captivity of our Prophet in his last Period I need not enlarge. As also
that (no less in every ones Particular then as before in the General) it is
in the faculty of Men to make use hereof (if they list) to their Private
counsels.

Neither let any vnderprise these as no more then voluntary Applications: For
if they think that either the Names first allotted to these Constellations
were [Sine Numine] things wherein God had not a Special hand; Or that they
were not so Distributed into Characters by Divine Inspiration; Or lastly, that
these Caelestial Apparitions have not Reference nor Enterview with this
Habitable Orb: Let all such understand, that how much so ever knowlage whether
of Humane or Divine Letters they have scraped up together: They have not yet so
much as by sight aloof saluted the threshold of True wisdoms Sanctuary. Pro.
9.


The Conclusion.
NOw therefore for Conclusion, let every one as he tendreth his true and
Aeternal good, settle himself thriftily and carefully to search into his own
heart, and that without weariness or Intermission, until he find in which of
these 4. ways of our Prophets Parables he stands, and accordingly shape his
Course. With this rest to be laid up, that if in order as to the Church, he
find not the world unto him as in one of these States; or that in order as to
himself, he bear not himself as by these precedents he is informed; The same
man has no comfort out of this Prophecy, nor out of any other that does
Analogize with it.

And such are the scorners of these times, whom the God of this world has so
blinded, that they begin to say again as some did of old [where is (...)]
Things are to day as they were yester^^^ (...) shall be to morrow as they are to
day. (...)
If we shall be saved we shall be saved, let us live as we list, and so much at
Reproof and hate the Reproouer.

Oh that there were not so many of them in these days, which turn the
sweetest juices of Wit, Learning, Tongues, Favor, Strength, Honor, Wealth,
Place, yea Relligion and all into the floaty Gall of vpbraiding and contemning
others. As I surmise there will not be wanting some that will do of this my
Labor: unto whom (if any be) I reply none otherwise then thus; That there are
yet other things enfolded in this Prophecy perteining to the Influence of a
Different Climat, Mundus alter and idem.
which by the Rule of Prophetical wisdom; and Sacred Sobriety in Spiritual
matters are not to be entrusted to Paper and Enke; 1 Ioh. 13.
and therefore have I in them followed (I hope upon good warrant) the Apostles
Rule of Reservation. Now my request to these men is, that they first please to
make Essays of their own Illuminations unto the Discovery of those things.
Which if they atteine unto, it shall be to me a double comfort that I shall enjoy
their brotherly concurrence, whereby more hopefully then by my single strength
may be endeavored the shortning of those Days which our Savior has declared
out of his incomprehensible love and care over his Elect to be expedient that
they be shortened unto which work every good Christian is bound to conspire.

And herein I do in the bowels of Christ Jesus desire these my dear
brethren, that laying aside al bitterness and superfluity of Malice they will
join with me; That so in them and in me and in all that love the coming of our
Lord may be heard the Melodious Harmony of the Angels Singing, GLORY TO GOD IN
THE HIGHEST.


