A brief and a plain introduction, teaching how to pronounce the letters in
the British tongue, (now commonly called Walsh) whereby an English man shall not
only with ease read the said tongue rightly: but markyng ye same well, it shall be a
mean for him with one labor and diligence to attain to the true and natural
pronunciation of other expediente and most excellent languages Set forth by W.
Salesburye.

Imprinted at London by Roberte Crowley, dwelling in Elye rentes in Holburne.
The year of our Lord. M.D.L.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To his loving friend, master Rychard Colyngborne. Wyllyam Salesburye wysheth
prosperous health, and perfect felicity.
THE natural inclination, the gentle amity, and the fervent love and favor,
which you most affectuouslye, entierlye, and perfitlye, do not only owe, but
have, bear, and prosecute toward me, my contrye, and contrye language: and
again the sudden semblable vehemente affections which I most comparable and
ardent, mutuallye and dulye do bear toward you: has caused me to abortiat,
(if I might speak my contry la^gage, I neaded not to borowe the latin term,
neither make any further explanation thereof) and to bring forth my late
conceived child before his natural and destinated time of birth.

But what than? For this evil chance there lies none other remedy, but
either (if he seem to have his lineamentes tyghtly proportionated, though as
yet somewhat lumpyshe) to lycke him hereafter (as the Bear does her whelpe)
into a more perfect shape: either else, if he shall appear ouermuche monstrous
to take him and throw him into the botomeles flood of Lethe, where then he
shall neither grieve the Parents hertes, nor yet offend the eyes of kynne, nor
stranger.

But peradventure ye will say, what by all this? ye speak in parables, but I
pray you friend Salesburye speak plain English to me. Well therefore to
appear in mine own likeness, and to be as plain as the plain of Salesburie.
The said child is this book, whom you so inordinately desire to go abroad
before the appointed season by the determination of the grave, discrete and
pithy Poet Horace Flactus, whose verses be not far from these in sentence.

When that thy restles pen, of fame has ought contrivd:
At Metius ear se that thou tune, the cord in work reuivd
And let them judge therein, whose hears be grisely grown;
Let middle age, let unripe years, thereon their judgment sown
Than may thou well at will (nine years in trial spente)
Set forth the work of wisdoms brain, that the in lot is lent
The sound escaped once, can not be called back:
But shut up thoughts in heart may be, amended where they lack.
Yet nevertheless, for your faithful frendshyps sake I will not only wynke at
this, but even advisedly will forsake the prudent counsel of the wise man thus
admonishynge. A fool differs nothing from a wise man whiles he keeps
silence: yea, and I am not abashed to publishe these unsavory trifles (for the
small commodity that you shall perceive by them) among the honorable
theater, and worshipful company of the learned, which most plentuously
(thanks be to the Lord) habound now in every place.

But of whence than comes this unshamefast boldness? Marye of a license
granted and provided form by the very same Poet, whose own praise, meter,
and words (ne lest by unapt traduction of the same, I should disgrace the
divine poetical majesty) I will here subscribe.

-- hoc tibi dictum
Toll memor, certis medium et tolerabile rebus
Recte concedi: consultus iuris et actor
Lausarum mediocris, abest virtute diserti
Messale, nec scit quantum Caselitus Aulus
Sed tamen in pretio est.
Besides this, the head learned man of all our time even Erasmus Roterodamus,
holds soore on my part, for it is a true said saw (says he) yt there is
not written so ill a book, but it is worthy the reading for some consideration.
And again, he affirms even about the same place that it is expediente to
hear the unlearned play the orators or preachers, whereby it may appear,
what shall be decent, and what not.

Therefore (I say) be it expedient or rather tolerable to admit as well some
such unlearned writters as have not the grace to observe To prepon or comlynes
every where, and at all times. Amongst which sort I will not disdain to be
accounted, seeing I am adsured to satisfy in some part your mind, though it
be but slenderly to the purpose.

And in as much as I am fulli persuaded that you be the man to whom boeth for
good learning and perfect judgment therein, and for the favor pretended
toward this feeble enterprise, I neades must commit this book (if for the
littlenes it may be justly called a book) not only to be read, corrected,
and perfected, but also to be defended from the cancred malicious checkes of
all those, who at all times can be at better laysure to rebuke other men's
doings, than to do ought them selves. Thus fare ye hartelye well.

At Thauies Inn in Holburne more hastily, than spedelye. M.D.L.
Wyllyam Salesburye to the Reader.
IT was not long after (gentle Reader) that I had compyled a little
Dictionarye for the use and behoue of my contry men, ye Walshmen, and the same
set forth and published at the kings hyghnes license and pleasure, but
there came certain persons unto me, The occasion of ye making of this book.
whereof some were Englysh marchers bordering upon Wales: and some not skilled
in the Walshe tongue, nevertheless having good and honest occasions, either for
their promotions and lyuynges, either else for trade of Marchau^dice and other
their affairs to be conuersante in the said contrye of Wales, and
peradventure sometime chance to be among them that can not a word of
English.

And some other were such Walshmen that had be^ brought up from their youth and
tender age, out of the precinct of their native contrye, who thought it
reproach to be utterly ignorant in their mother tongue, having a mind also to
come to some knowledge therein, whereby they might ye rather (semyng less
strau^g) renew frendshyp and familiarity with their contrye folk and
friends, (which thing otherwise they could not so conuenientlye bring to
pass) and most chiefly to edify them, as well in ciuyle institutions, as
in godly doctrine.

Now the other some, were such English men as had not so vrgente a cause, nor
so earnest an occasion to travel in this behalf, but yet were they so fervent
(as it seemed by their importune request) as they (who^ I spoke of before) whom
the Greeks with one propre term call Philoglottous, Langage lovers
whose gentle herted disposition is always addicte, bente, and given to be
seen in all languages, but specially of their own fellow subjects and country
men, though they purchase there by but small gaynes, lucre, or wynnyng,
which things be the honied sweet baytes of the auaricious beastly misers, and
contrarywyse the defiaunce of all liberal and noble stomakes.

When (I say) such men resorted unto me to question whether the said
Dictionarye was as indifferente for English men to learn Walshe by, as for
Walshe men to learn English: I answered that it was not al so indifferent.
The reason why, if I should declare it, should not be easily perceived but of
the learned, who do understand it already.

Than amongst other communication had, they asked, whether the
pronounciation of the Letters in Walshe, did dyffer from the English soundynge
of them? And I said very much. And so they perceiving that they could not
profit in buildynge any further on the Walshe, lacking the foundation and
ground work (which was the Walshe pronunciation of the letters) desiered me
efte sons to write unto them (as they had seen me do in Walsh to my
contryemen, to introducte them to pronounce the letters English like) a few
english rules of the natural power of the letters in our tongue.

And so than, in as much as I was not only induced with the premises, but also
further persuaded that neith^r any inconvenience or mischefe might ensue or
grow thereof, but rather the increase of mutual amity and brotherly love, and
continual frendshyppe, and some commodity at the least wise, to such as be
desierous to be occupied thereaboutes. As for all other, even as it shall never
work them pleasure, so shall it no displeasure.

Even therefore at the last, I have been so bold as to enterprise
(condescendynge to such men's honest request) to invent and write these
plain, simple, and rude rudimentes of the Walshe pronunciation of the letters,
most humbly desierynge the Readers to accept them with no less beniuolente
humanity than I hertely pretended toward them, when I went about to treat
of the matter.

The Pronunciation of the the lettters in the Brytyshe tongue.
THE letters in the Britishe or Walshe tongue, have the same figure and fashion
as they have in Englysh, and be in number as here underneath in the Alphabet
appears.

A b c ch d dd e f ff g h i k l ll m n o p r s t th v u w y.

These be the vowels. a e i o u w y.

These two vowels a, w, be mutable.

The dipthonges be these, and be pronounced after the very Greek pronunciation.
As euaggel of eua^geliou.
Ae ai au aw ay ei ew ia ie io iw oe ow oy uw wy.


These letters be called consonauntes. b c ch d dd f ff g k l ll m n o p r s t
th v.

The pronunciation of A.
A In Britishe or Walshe in every word has the true pronunciation of A in
latin. And it is never sounded like the diphthonge au, as the French men
sound it coming before m. or.n. in their tongue, nor so fully in the mouth as
the Germans sound it in this word Magen: Neither yet as it is pronounced in
English, when it comes before ge, ll. sh. tch: For in these words and such
other in english, Damage, heritage, language, ash, lashe, watch, calm, call
(a) is thought to decline toward the sound of these dipthonges ai, au, and
the words to be read in this wise, domaige, heritaige, languaige, aishe,
waitche, caul, caulme. But as I said before, a. in walsh has always but one
sound what so ever letter it follow or go before, as in these words ap, cap.
which have the same pronunciation and signification in both the tongues.

Much less has a, such variety in Walshe, as has Aleph in Hebrew (which
alone ye points altered) has the sound of every vowell. Howbeit that
composition, deriuation, and the plurell number, do often times in the commune
walshe speech change a, for e. as in these words, vnweith, seithfed,
ebestyl. Nevertheless e. then succeadeth, and is also written in the stead of a.
so that the Reader shall never be troubled therewyth.

The sound of B.
B, In Walshe is universally read and pronounced as it is in English. Albeit
when a word begins with b, and is joined with more words coming in a reason,
the phrase and the manner of the Walshe speech (much like after the Hebrews
idiome) shall alter the sound of that b. So do these walshe words, cuuit,
cuuicul, vicses which be derived of cubitus, cubiculu^, bisextus,
into the sound of the Hebrew letter that they call Beth not daggessed, or of
the Greek Veta, either else of v. being consonant in latin or Englysh, as
thus. Where as b. in this walshe word bys a finger, is the primitive (or if I
should borow the Hebrew term) the radical letter, which coming in the
contexte of a reason shall not than be called b. but v. as in this text: I
vys: his finger. And sometime b. shall be turned into m, as for an ensample. vy
mys: my finger. And yet for all the alteration of this letter b, and of diverse
other (as ye shall perceive hereafter) which by their nature be chaungeable
one for an other, it shall nothing let nor hinder any man, from the true and
propre readinge of the letters so altered.

For as soon as the ydiome or propriety of the tongue receives one letter for
an other, the radical is omitted and left away: and the accessorie or the
letter that comes instead of the radical, is forthwyth written and so
pronounced after his own nature and power as it is plain inoughe, by the
former exemple.

Provided always that such tra^smutation of letters in speakinge (for therein
consists all the difficulty) is most diligently to be marked, observed,
and taken head unto, of him that shall delight to speak walshe aryghte.

How C is pronounced.
C, Makes K. for look what power has c. As witnesses cicut deducted of
cicut^, natali^ of natalitis. accen of accentus discipul of discipulus, cist of
cista.
in English or in Latin, when it comes before a. o. u. that same shall it
have in walshe before any vowel, dypthonge, or consonant what so ever it be.

How be it some of our time do use to write.k. rather than, c. where writers
in times paste have left c. written in their ancient books, specially
before.a. o. u. and before all manner consonantes, and in the later end of
words. Also othersome there be, that sound now.c. as.g. in the last
termination of a word: An exemple: oc, koc, lloc: which be most communely
read, og, kog, llog.

Furthermore it is the nature of c. to be turned into ch, Construccion is taken
here for ye joining together of words otherwise called a reason. Carw is the
absolute word
and other whiles into, g. But I mean this, wha^ a word that begynneh with.c.
comes in construction as thus: Carw, a heart, Ewic a charw, a hind and a
heart. Either else when.c. or.k. (for they be boeth one in effect) is the
first letter of a word that shall be compounded, as for an example: Angraff,
angered, angrist, which be compounded of an, and of kraff, kred, krist.

The sound of chapter
Ch, does whollye agree with the pronunciation of ch, also in the Germayne
tongue, of the Greek Chy, or the Hebrew Cheth. or of gh, in English:

And it has no affinity at al with ch, in English, except in these words,
Mychael, Mychaelmas, and a few such other. Ch also when it is the radical
letter in any Walshe word, remains immutable in every place.

The sound of D.
D, Is read in Walshe none otherwise than in English, saving only that
oftentimes d, in the first sillables shall be turned into dd, resembling
much Daleth the Hebrew d. And sometime when a word beginning with d, is
compounded with (an) the d, shall slyp away, as anawn, of an, and dawne:
anoeth, of an and does.

Dd is nothing like of pronunciation to dd. in englysh or latin: For ye double
dd. in Walsh has ye very sou^de of dhelta, or dhaleth, dashed with raphe, or of
d. betwixt.ii. vowels in the Hispanish tongue, either else of th. as they be
communelye sounded in these english words, the, that, this, thine: Neither do
I mean nothing less than that dd. in Walshe be sounded at any time after
the sound of th. in these words of English, with thynne, thank. But ye
shall find in old written English books, a letter having the figure of a
Romayne y. that your auncesters called dhorn, which was of one efficacy with
ye walsh dd. And there be now in some contryes in England that pronounce dd.
even in these words An instrument of a Couper.
adds, fedder, according as they be pronounced in the walshe.

And ye must note that dd. in walsh is not called double dd. neither is it a
double letter (though it seems so to be) wherefore it does not fortify nor
harden the syllable that it is in, but causes it to be a great deal more
thycke, soft, and smothe. For he that first added to the second d. mente
thereby to aspirate the d. and signify that it should be more lightly sounded,
and not the contrary.

But I think it had be easier, more mete, and less strange to the Reader, if
that he had put h. after the former d, in a sign of asperation, than to add
an other d, thereto.

And as it seems it is not passing three or four, C. years ago, since they
began to double their d, for before that time by lykelihode they used one
constante manner of pronunciation of their letters, even as the Hebrews did at
the beginning.

How E ought to be sounded
E, Without any exception has one perman^nt pronunciation in Walsh, and that
is the self pronunciation of Epsylon in Greek, or of e, in the latin being
sounded aryghte, or e. in English, as it is sounded in these words, a were
wreke, break, wreste.

And the learner must take good head, that he never do read the said e, as it
is read in these Englysh words, we, believe: For than by so doing, shall he
either alter the signification of the word wherein the same e, is so
corruptelye read, either else cause it to betoken nothing at all in that
speech. Example: pe, signifies in Englysh and, if: now, if ye read it pi.
than will it betoken this letter p. or the bird that ye call in english a
Pie. And so gwe is, a web: but if ye sound e. as i. readinge it gwi: than
has it no signification in the Walshe.

And least peradventure the forsayde example of the walshe or strange tongue
be somewhat obscure, than take this in your own mother tongue for an
explanation of that other: wherbi ye shall perceive that the diversity of
pronunciation of e, in these English words subscribed hereafter, will also
make them to have diverse significations, and they be these words, bear, pere,
hele mele. Neither yet do we use in Walshe at any time to write e, in the
middle or last sillables and to leave it unspoken in reading: as it is done by
Scheua in hebrew, or as the manner of writing and reading of the same, is
accustomed in english, as it shall be more manifest by these words that
follow: gold, sylke, pureness, Chepesyde: wherein (as I suppose) e. is not
written to the intent it might be read or spoken, but to mollifye the syllable
that it is put in.

But now I am occasioned to declyne and straye somewhat from my purpose, An
observation for wrytinge of english which in printynge can not so well be
kept.
and to reveal my fantasy to young writers of English, who (me thinks)
take over much pains, and bestow vnrequisite cost (having no respect to
the nature of the english endinge e.) in doubling letters to harden the
syllable, and immediatlye they add an, e (which is a sign of mittigatynge
and softenynge of the syllable) after ye letters so doubled, as thus: manne,
worship Godde, wotte, wyshe, goodness, hemme net: which words with such
other like, might with less labor, and as well for the purpose, be written
on this wise: ma^n, worshypp, Godd, wott, wysh, goodness, hemm, nett: or rather
this: man, worship, God, wot, wysh, goodness, hem net.

For according to the commen proverb, it is but folly to bestow more, where
less will serve.

How F is communely sounded.
F In Walshe and V being consonant in walsh english, or latin, be so nyghe of
sound that they use most communely to write in walshe indifferentlye the one
for the other. And I my self have heard English men in some contryes of
Englaude sound f. even as we sound it in Walshe for I have marked their manner
of pronu^ciation and specially in soundyng these words: voure, viue,
disvigure, vishe: where they would say, four, five, disfigure, fyshe. etc.

But who so ever knows the sound of the letter called Digamma (whose figure
is much like F. but overwhelmed vpsydedowne, as ye see here F) he shall also
know thereby the very sound of the syngle f. Eolicu^. F
in Walshe.

The sound of ff.
ff In Walshe has but the same sound that the single f. has in english. And
they are feign to use the double ff. for the single f. because they have abused
f. instead of v. a consonante. But in such words as have p. for the first
letter of their original (for to keep the ortographie) they write ph. and not
ff. as thus. Petr a Phawl, Peter and Paul.

The pronunciation of G.
G In every word in Walshe sounds as the Hebrew Gymel: or g. in Doutche, or
as g. in English sounds before a o u. And marcke well that g. never sounds
in Walshe as it does in english in these words, George, gynger. G, is but
very seldon turned into chapter Gwedy Gwad. Glass


G, also in walshe sometime (when it comes in a reason) shall be turned into
ch, and sometime elided or left clean out of the word as thus: a chwedy
hynny. iawn ne wad: koch ne las: and not koch ne glass.

And otherwhile words compounded shall put away g, as these do, serloyw,
dulas: whose simple be these: ser, gloyw: du glass.

Of the aspiration H.
H, In every word that it is written in, in Walshe, has his aspiration in
speakinge also, and is read, even as in these words of English, hard, heard,
heart, hurt: And therefore where so ever h, is written in walshe, let it be
read with all, and not holden still, as it is done in French and English in
such words as be derived out of latin as these, honest, habitation, humble
habit. etc. Except when h, is settled between two vowels in walshe words: for
than it forces not greatly whether h, be sounded or not, as in these words
that follow: brenhin, kyhyr, mehein, gweheu, heheu, gwehydd, gohir. etc.

The sound of I.
I, In Walshe has the mere pronunciation of i, in latin, as learned men in
our time use to sou^de it, and not as they yt with their corrupt pronu^ciation
make a dipthong of it, saying: veidei, teibei, for vidi, tibi. But look how i,
sounds in English in these words: singing, ringing, drinking, winkinge,
nighe, sighe, might, right.

So the^i, in every syllabe in walsh has eue^ ye same sound as e, has in
Englysh in these words: we, se three, be. And i, is never sounded so broad
in walshe as it is in this English word Ego
I. And beside that i, is never consonant in walsh, but ever remaining a
vowell, as it does in the Germayne tongue, or as iota in the Greek. And because
they that have not tasted of the precepts of Gra^mer do not lightly understand
what this term consonant means: I will speak herein as plain as I can, for
to induce them to understand my meaning.

When i, is consonant.
Therefore when we say in spellynge m, a, ma: i, e, ie, st, e, ste, majesty:
(or) I, e, Ie, s, u, s, sus, Jesus: now in these two words, majesty and
Jesus: i, is consonant. When i, is a vowell.
But when I spel on this wise: i, per se, i, o-rk, ork, and with doing them
together, read iork: than i, is not called consonant, but has the name of a
vowell.

And therefore if ye list to read ryghtlye Walshe words in whom i, is
written, an other vowell immediately following (for therein else is there no
hynderaunce for the strange reader) than must you harken (how i, I for Y. I
in this word iye, (oculus) is now co^munelye written and read as it is in
walshe.
which, I write for y) is sounded in these english words: i-ane, i-arde,
i-arne, ielde, i*elk, i-elle, ielow, iere, iok, iong, iougth, Iorke, iou: And
though these words be written here now with i, in the first letter of every
one, yet it is meant that you should read them as the i, were y, and as they had
be written on on this fashyon: yane, yard, yield, yelke, yell, yelow, year,
yok, young, yougth york, you.

Now I trust that the dullest wytted child that never read but two lines,
perceaueth so familiar a rudimente.

The sound of K.
K, Follows the rule of c, in every point, and therefore look for the
effect of k, where it is treated of the letter c.

The sound of L.
L, Has none other difference in sound in walsh than in Englysh. And note that
it nether causes a, nor o, when they come before it, to sound any more
fullier in the mouth, than they do else sound, coming before any other
letter. And for the playner understanding thereof, look in the rules that
entreat of the sound of a, and o.

And marcke when soever ye se l, to be the first letter of a word, that
either the same word comes in construction, either else the word is of an
other language, and but usurped in walshe.

Of the strange sound of double.ll.
Ll, can not be declared any thing like to the purpose in writing, but only
by mouth: if ye than will learn how it ought to be sounded: For (as it is said
before of d) so the second l, is added instead of h: but look how Lambda
coming before Iota is sounded in the Greek: eue^ so pronounce well, in the
walsh. And if ye could hit kindly on the right and just pronunciation of lh,
thus aspirated: not leauyng unsounded the entier efficacitie and the whole
strength of the aspiration: than should not you be far dissonant from the
true sound of our walshe ll.

For the Walsh l, is spoken the tongue bowed up a little to the roufe of the
mouth, and with that somewhat extendinge it self betwexte the fore teathe, the
lyppes not all touching together (but leauyng open as it were for a wyndowe)
the right wyke of the mouth for to breathe out with a thycke aspirated
spirit the same ll. But as I said before, and if ye will have the very walshe
sound of this letter: give ear to a walshman when he speaks culltell, which
betokens a knyfe in English: or ellyll a ghost:

The Walsh man or the Hispanyard compose their mouths much after one fashion
wha^ they pronounce their ll, saving that the walsheman utters it with a
more thicker and a more mightier spirit.

The sound of M.
M, In Walsh has such a sound as ye hear it have in English or latin: but
yet it is one of the letters yt be chaungeable in constructio^ as thus: mwy,
moo: llai ne vwy, less or more, mwyvwy, more (and) more.

The sound of N.
N, Is none otherwise sounded in Walsh than in English: but sometime (after
the latyne manner) when it comes before b, or p, in composition, it is tha^
turned into m, as ymblaen, which is compounded of in and blaen: amparch, of an
and parch, amp will, of an and pwyll.

The sound of O.
O, In Walshe is sounded according to the right soundynge of it in latin:
either else as the sound of o, is in these English words: a do, a roo, a
too: and o, never sounds in Walshe as it does in these words of English:
to do, two. But mark that o, in Walshe going before l, ll, sounds nothing
more boystouse, that is to say, that it inclines to the sound of the
dipthonge ou (as it does in English) no more than if it had gone be fore
any other letter.

The sound of P.
P, In Walshe differs not from the Englysh sound of p: but p coming in
construction follows ye rules of the Hebrew phe: save sometime it is turned
into b, as thus: pedwar bump, for pump. And sometime p, in composition is
changed also into b, as wha^ we say ymbell for ympell. And one while it is
left out of the compound words: as when these words: kymell, kymorth, be
written for kympell, kymporth.

And an other while our tongue gives us to sound it, as it were an h, as when
we say: ymhle, ymhlwy, ymhlas, for ymple, ymplwy, ymplas.

The sound of Q.
Q, Is not received among the number of the letters in walshe as yet, but k
supplyeth his rowme, and usurps his office in every place. And ye Greks are
feign to practice the same feacte, as ye may se it done. Luc. ii. where
Kyriniou, is written for Quirino.

The sound of R.
R, Is sounded alike in Walshe and English, but r, in walshe for the most
part is pronounced with aspiration, especially being the first letter of
the word. And for the aspiration h, they co^munely put to an other r, as they
play by d, and l, even thus: rrwygwyd, rrodres, rringill, Rufain: But the
manner of some is to write one great captall R, (when it is the first letter
of a word) for the lesser double rr. Also r, serves the turn that n, does in
English, that is to wit, to be put between vowels metynge together in two
sondrye words, for to stop the uncomely gapyng in speech as ye shall
perceive by these words: y-r awr: a-n hour.

The sound of.S.
S, Sounds in Walshe as it does in latin: neither has it two diverse
soundes as it has in English or French, for when it comes between two vowels
in these two languages, it is so remissely and lithly sou^ded as it were a z,
as by these two words of boeth the tongues it is manifestly proved. Faisant a
Fesant.

The sound of T.
T, Likewise has but one sound, and that is as the latins sound it in these
words: atat tute, tegit: Neither do I mean that t, in Walshe is sounded at
any time like th, as some barbarous lispers do, who deprave the true latin
pronunciation, reading Amath, for amat, dederith for dederit. etc.

Howbeit mark well this exception, that t, is never read like c, thorowout
the walshe tongue, as it is communely read of English men in latin verbales
endinge in tio, as pronunciatio, electio, subiectio. etc.

Mark also, that it is the nature of t, to be turned into d, and sometime into
th, and some other time it is so lightly spoken, that the t, is quite left
away, and there remains but the h, instead of the t. But this is to be
understand when t, is the first letter of a word set in constrction to be
construed or builte together on this fashion: Na thric ynhy dwy ne dair.

For before they be hewed, squared, and joined together with their tenantes and
mortesses, they lie in rude and undressed timbre after this manner of sort: Na
tryc ynty dwy ne tair. The absolute words.
Furthermore t, in deriuation is left out of the derived words, that they might
sound more pleasant to the ear, as ye may take these for an example:
chwano^ of chwant: gwnoc of gwynt: monweni of monwent: henieu of haint. etc.

The sound of Th.
Th, has the semblable and like sound in Walsh as it has in English in
these words: through, thycke, and thynne: but it is never so lythlye spoken,
as it is communly sounded in these other words: that, thou thine, this.

Moreover th, written for the first letter of any word, shows the same
word to be than in construction. For there is no walshe word standinge
absolutelye that has th, for his first letter but t, is his native and
original letter, for the which in construction th, is communely used. Neither
yet do we use to write th, in any word, and to read the same as t, or d, as
it is communely done in these englysh words: Thomas, throne, threasure, Thauie
sin: which be most universally spoken after this sort: Thauies inn.
Tomas, trone, treasure, Dauies inn.

The sound of V being consonant.
There be but few words in Walshe yt begin with v.
V, Specially being written in this manner of fashion v, sounds in walsh as
in english or latin, wha^ it is a consonant. And it lightly never begins a
word, except the word be constructed and joined with one or more words. For
than b, or m, being the original or radical letter, is transmuted or changed
(according to the co^gruitie of the tongue) into v, a consonant.

The sound of u, being a vowell.
But u, written after this manner u, is a vowell, and sounds as the vulgar
English people sou^de it in these words of English: trust, bury, busye.

But know well that it is never sounded in walsh, as it is done in any of
these two English words (notwythstanding the diverse sound of them) sure,
luck. Also the sound of u, in French, or u, with two pricks over the head in
Teutche, or the Scottishe pronu^ciation of u, alludeth somewhat nere unto the
sound of it in Walshe, though yet none of them all, does so exactly (as I
think) express it, as the Hebraick Kubuts does.

For the Walsh u, is none other thing, but a mean sound betwyxte u, and y,
being latyne vowels.

And therefore who so ever will destinctlye learn the Walsh sound of u, let
him once give ear to a walsh man, when he speaks in walshe, the words that
signify in english obedience (or) one Acus, seu palea
chafe: which be these in Walshe.uvudd, ussun. And this vowell u, alone among
all the letters in Walshe, swarueth in sound from the true latin
pronunciation. Neither is u thus sounded, but of the unlearned, u abused for Y.
who abuse it for y, and that more often of us that be of Northwales, than of
the Southren Walshman.

The sound of w.
W, In Walshe and english has but one figure and power, though it chau^ceth
to have two diverse names, for in English ye call it double uu, and in Walshe
we give it the name of a syngle u, but than soundynge it after the Latin
pronunciation.

But the lesser Greek o, joined together with the Greek y, made a dipthonge, or
the Hebraik Vaf. cum puncto schurek in ventre, either oo, in these english
vocables: book, look, boorde, word, shall rather express his name, than
his propre efficacy.

But his own power, and peculier office in Walshe, shall there no letter nor
letters more preciselye set it forth than the w, it self, with the English
pronunciation. For although the Germaynes use a w, yet in some words sound
they it (to my hearing) as the forther u, were a vowell, and the latter a
consonant, where we the Britons sound both uu, wholly together as one vowell,
without any sondrye distinction, but being always either the forther or the
later part of a dipthonge in englysh on this wise: with, awe: and in Walshe as
thus: with, awen.

The sound of X.
X, Is not found as yet in the Walsh Alphabet: for the walsh speech has no
need of his office: because that such walshe words as be deducted of the
Latin, turn their x, into s, as do these: crws, nos, estestenna, escommuna,
estran, bicses, which come of Crux, nox, extendo, excommunico, extraneus
bisextus.

The sound of Y.
Y, Is sounded in Walsh as it is these English words: in, sin, is, thynne,
win. Nether yet, as it is sounded of the commune people in any of these two
words following: wide, wynge. Also y, being a word counteruayleth the
signification of (the) in English: and of Le, in French, or of the articles Ha,
Ho, in Hebrew and Greek, as thus: y din, whose propre signification in English
is not communely used, except a man should say, the person: but Le homme,
shall well declare it to any that shall be skilled in the French.

Of the letter Z.
Z, In Walshe is unknown in so much that it was never placed in any walshe
word hitherto: Neither neaded I once to speak of it but because I would put
the reader utterly out of doubt in this behalf.

Of the Abbreuiations.
and, con, Be never used in the Walsh, neither occupy they but few breuiatio^s
of sillables, but write every syllable at length, save only in some propre
names of me^ as they do in these: Eden^, for Edenyued: Eign^ Eigion: Gro^, for
Grono: Gr. or Gruf, for Gruffith: Ieu^n for Iorum, for Iorwerth: Ken^, for
kenwryck: Lln^ for Llewelin: Mad for Madock: Tud for Tuder. etc

Which kind of breuiations be not unworthy the markinge of all such english
men, as shall be either pregnotaries, clerks, or counsaylours in Wales.

For I do remember that once a clarke (being but a young begynner) at an assise
in our country, read a man's name being (short written) Eden ap Iorum where
he should have read it Edenyuet ap Yorwerth And so the crier called still, Eden
ap Iorum come into the court, or lose.x.li. that shall thou lose, for thou was
seen here even now.

And true it was, for the person that was so often and so loud called, stood
still all this while even at the cryers back, and answered not at al (being so
strau^gly misnamed) until he had welmost lost amerciment. At which feact (the
geste at the last perceived) was there no small laughter of all the whole
court.

A brief rehearsal of all the rules before, with certain other additions
thereto pertaining.
A comparison of the pronunciation of ye letters in Walsh to the pronu^ciation
of ye Greek and Hebrew letters.
A, Is most unlike of pronunciation to the Hebrews Aleph.

B, most entierly resembles the nature of Beth.

C, and K, be not unlike in sound unto Caph and Koph. Ch, chi, cheth, and caph
with caphe, be of one sound. D, sounds as Daleth Daghessata.

Dd, conteyneth the power but of one letter, and that of Dhelta, or of Dhaleth,
not Daggesset.

E, is much spoken after the sound of the vowels Segol, or Epsilon.

F, and Beth, without the point Dagges, or the Greek Veta, be as one in
sound.

ff (or) ph, agree in pronu^ciation with the Greek Phy, or the Hebraick phe, not
poynted with Dages.

G, is sounded as Gimel.

H, and thasperation he, be equal in power.

I, in every point agrees with the Greek iota.

L, Lamedh, and Lambdha, disagre not in sound.

Ll, countreuayleth Lambda coming before iota.

M, N. mem, nun, and my, ny, differ not in sound.

O, and Omega shall sound as one

P, does as well imitate Phe and Phy in sound as in other conditions.

R, has a peculier concinuitie with Rho.

S, Samech, and Sigma may go together well inoughe for their tune.

T, sounds as Teth, or Taf in the Greek.

Th, has the very sound of Theta or Taf having no Dages.

V, being consonante sounds as Beth without Dages or as Veta does.

V, being vowell is read as Kubuts and not much unlike unto Ypsilon.

Y, has the very sound of Ypsilon.

What concinnitee the Letters in Walshe have with the Greek letters.
IT semethe not only expedient for the learner hereof, to compare the
pronunciation of the letters, to the Hebrews phrase of soundyng, but it is also
requisite and no less necessary (for him that has a syghte in the Greek
tongue) the same also to sort after the division of the Greek letters.

Wherefore we call four of the consonantes thynne, because they include no manner
of aspiration in them: And the same four shall we call thyck, when they are
aspirated, of whom also three be called mean, or middle lettters, and that when
they be nether thyck, neither yet thynne.

The thynne letters be these: k p t l.

The thycke letters are these: ch ph ll.

The middle letters, g v dd.

And as these letters in the Greek inflexions do pass one into an other, so
have they in Walshe, such like alteration.

The mutable or chaungeable vowels be these: a, w.

The mutable consonantes be these: b p c, or k d ll m t. And all the rest as
well of the bowels as of the consonantes be vnmutable.

Of the sound of ch, g, i.
Ch in walshe is but one letter
These three letters, ch, g, i, have never the like sound in the walshe tongue, as
they have in these englysh words, chere, gentle, jack.

Of contraction used in Walshe.
I-o shall be contracted into o, long, or into aw: as digio, digo, or digaw:
llidio or llidaw. And such manner of co^traction is more peculier unto the
Southren Walshmen, than to us of Northwales.

Of accente.
The observation of accente is it that shall do much toward the attaynynge of
the native pronunciation of any language, in so much that sometime the
alteration of accent shall altere also the signification of the word, as in
these words in Greek: Neos, Tomos, Pharos. and these in walshe: gwydd, gwyll,
gwyr: and in English: these, differ, provide, deny. etc.

Certain English words whereof ye may gather the Walsh pronunciation of the
letters.
Archangell, Being, Called, Michael, Discomfyted* Dde, Ever F for V
Fillaynous, Fend, Gget, Him, Dd for th
Itch I-eldynge, Kest, Lay, Mellttt, Murmuring, Not, Over, Prevailed,
Rauenynge, Horrible, Satanas, Tormented, Through, Valiant, Business, Worthy, Ill.

These be words wherein the letters be most unlikely sou^ded to the walsh
pronunciation of them.
All, Comb, Dombe, Cease, Cyue, Check, Adder, Ele, Fyshe, Gender, Engyn,
Humor, Honor, In, Iaundice, Fall, The bide.
Osyll, Reason, Season, Thomas, That, Uncle, Idle, Syngyng.

The signification of a, in Walshe.
A, in walshe set before an interrogatiue reason betokens (whether) in
english as thus: a ddaw of, a y ynte ni ddaw? yt is (if I might so well phrase
it in english) whither will he come or whether will he not come? A y hwn yw of?
is this he? A y hon ywr vwlyddyn vecses? is this the bisext or leap year? But
ye must mark that sometime a, in Walshe is the forther piece of ac, which
agrees in signification with (ac) in latin, and with (and) in English: And
this conjunction ac, in Walshe, set in construction before a word that
begins with a consonaunt shall put away c, and shall be read after the only
power of a, as thus. Deo a Mair: un a dau, and not Deo ac Mair, un ac dau.

The signification of Y.
Y, betokens in English (the) as thus: y gwr, the man: y wraic, the woman.
And when y, comes before a verb, it betokens (there) and if the verb or
word that follows after the y, begin with a vowel, than shall there be added
d, dd, or r, unto the y, for to stop the overmuch gapinge that the metynge
together of the to many vowels should else have caused, as thus: yd, oedd, ydd,
oedd (or) yr, oedd, there was. And sometime y, include th in it self such a
relation as schin in the Hebrew does.

A general rule for the reading of Walsh.
THough there be diverse precepts heretofore written of the Walshe
pronuntiation of the letters, I would think it not overmuch dissonant nor yet
to wide from the purpose, to admonish you in this behalf, that is: that you
ought not to read the Walshe according as ye do the English or French, but
even after the reading of the latin. For in reading English or French, ye
do not read some words all so fully as they be wrote^.

And in many other ye seem to sound the sillables more fully than the
expressed letters do give. Which manner of reading is so utterly eschued in
walsh, as ye perceive it to be exactly observed of the^ that perfitely read
the latin tongue: Neither do I mean here to call them perfect and latinelyke
readers as many as do read: angnus, mangnus, for agnus, magnus, ingnis, for
ignis: sa^tus, for sa^ctus, sawl for sal: sowl, for sol: and for mihi, meichei:
and egow for ego: tuw for tu: and quith ligith, instead of quid legit. etc.
Therefore ye must learn to forget such manner of pronunciation against ye
prepare your selves to read the walsh. More over ye ought to know, yt these
words dringo, gwingo, kynga, myngen, anglod, angered: and the most part of such
like walsh words having ng, in them, and being of more sillables tha^ oue,
shall be read as these English words be (but ye must admite them to be
read now as of two sillables every word) Kings, rings, brings, syngeth:
For even as ye do not read them: kyn-ges, ryn-ges, bryn-geth syn-geth: but
rather in this wise: kyng-es, ryng-es, bring eth: even so do wesounde: dring-o,
and not dringo: gwing o myng-en, and not myn-ge^: Albeit yet as ng, may be
severed and parted in this english word sin-geth (but the signification
altered) so have we some words in walshe (wha^ they are spoken) in whom the
sillables may be severed in ng, as in these: an-gerth, llan-gwm, trin gyrch.
etc.

MOre over master Colingborn, this shall be further to certify you, that mine
intent herein was not to instruct or to teach any man absolutely the walshe
tongue, but rather to let the reader have a sight of it (as it were through a
lattesse) and to prove whether it were possible for a man to come to the
natural speech of a language, with the only introduction of precepts. For I
mean nothing less tha^ to go about to enduce any English man to learn Walshe
(but for hope to attain so much english of such in permutation thereof) but
contrarily I would feign with all industry endeuer my self to help and
further all Walshemen to come to the knoweledge of English, English
as a language most expediente, and most worthiest to be learned, studied, and
enhau^ced, of al them that be subjects, and under the obeysaunce of the
imperial diadem, and triumphante Scepter of England, even for the
attaynement of knowledge in Gods word, and other liberal sciences which
through the benifite of the learned men of our days be communely had and
set forth in the said English tongue.

Walshe
Again as for the Walsh tongue even as it is not now to be compared with the
English language, so is it not so rude, so gross, nor so barbarous, as
strangers being therein all ignorante and blind do adiugde it to be: nor yet
(to speak indifferentlye without all affections) is it not all so copious, so
fine, so pure, nor so fully replenished with eligancie, graces, and eloquence,
as they them selves suppose it.

Howebeit when the whole Isle was communely called Brytayne, the dwellers
Brutes or Bryto^s, Wha^ England Schotla^de and Wales were called Britain were
the Walshemens au^cestours called Brytons
and accordyngelye their language Brytishe, I will not refell nor greatelye
deny, neither can I iustelye gaynsaye but their tongue than was as copious of
fit words, and all manner of propre vocables, and as well adournated with
worshypfull sciences, and honorable knoweledge, as any other barbarous tongues
were.

And so still continued (though their Septre declined, and their Kyngedome
decayed, and they also were driven into the most vnfertyll region, barenest
country, and most desert province of all the Isle) until the conquest of
Wales. For than (as they say) the nobles and the greateste men of the country
being captives, and brought prisoners into the tower of London there to
remain during their lives, desiered of a commune request, that they might
have with the^ all such books of their tongue as they most delited in, and so
their pticion was heard, and for the lightness sone granted, and so brought
with them all the principallest and chiefest books, as well of their own, as of
other their friends, of whom they could obtain any to serve for their
purpose: whose mind was none other but to pass the time and their
predestinate, perpetual captivity in the amenous variety of ouerreadynge and
reuolueynge many volumes, and sondrye books of diverse sciences and strange
matters.

And that is the commune answer of the Walshe Barde.
Bardes (for so call they their Poets or rhyme makers) When a man shall object or
cast in their teath the folysh uncertainty and the fantastical vanities of
their prophecies (which they call Brutes) or the doubtful race and kind of
living of their vncanonised saints: whom that notwythstandynge they does
invoke and worship with the most high hon^noure and lowliest reverence.
Lhyfreu Kymry ai llofrudd, Ir twr gwyn aythant ar gudd, Ysceler oedd i Scola^
Vwrw.r twr o lyfreu ir ta^ Gutto.r. Glyn.
Adding and allegynge in excuse thereof, that ye relics and residue of the
books and monumentes, as well of their Saints lives, as of their Brutyshe
prophecies and other sciences (which perished not in the tower (for there they
say certain were burned) at the insurrection of their contrye rebel Owen
Glyn-door: were in like manner destroyed, and utterly deuastat, or at the least
wise that there escaped not one, that was not vncurablye maimed, and
irrecuparablye torn and mangled.

But hereto it might rather appertain to speak to renew, and call to
remembrance the diligent and curious obseruaunce of old antiquiti, as
concerning exact pronuntiation and right soundynge of words sillables, and
letters, which even the noble nation of the Greeks (who excelled all other
nations in every kind of good learning) did not once neglecte to invent,
practice, and duly execute for the wontynge, exercisynge, and perfeictinge of
the tongue of youth, to the end it should not so easily stomble, stagger,
lysp, or relent beside the just and true soundynge of all such letters,
sillables, and words, as were hard to be sou^ded for the strange concourse and
unwont metynge together of the over many consonantes in the same: Of which
sort the Greeks have many words, as it appears in this verse.

Graun chtho^ian aes^hros phthonos ^^^age^ ouxiphos e^hthrou. And such verses
be called of them Chalepoi. that is: hard to pronunce accordynglye. And the
Latins have devised them for the same purpose this other verse. Arx stridens
rostris, sphin^ prester torrida seps strix. And the diligence of the aunciente
English men has found out (to avoid the volutable and slypper lapse of the
tongue in soundynge together a meyny of words containing in them diverse
consonantes of unlike pronunciation) this compacte of words and such other
like. Three beans in a bladder, rattle bladder rattle. The English Saxons
called first the Brytons walshemen
Also the Brytons (I mean them whom the unlearned and the commune sort of
people call still in the old Saxons term Walshmen) of like regard have joined
together certain words for ye same intent: which who so ever shall redilye,
roundely, and perfitelye sound: the same shall also pronounce more easelye all
other words: And ye shall take this now for one hard sentence in Walsh, but
to be spoken roundlye: Paam y bydd garw blayn blew barf gafyr? am y bod in pori
bric helyn garw gardd bardd baron. etc. Here is an other of that sort but
shorter: Barkutan in pigo pupur. An other as hard. Kiffill ar ben gallt y
pistill. These examples may seem to some men not only vulgar and chyldishe,
but also vain, unfruitful, and no less folyshe: and so be they in deed (and
what is not so, being abused or mistaken?) if they be not applied to the
directed scope and purposed intent. But now who shall be so unlucky as to
leap over a block and stumble at a straw? And who is he that shall distincly
pronounce in Douch Bildtschuitzer, but the same shall sone pronounce Verdampt?
What man is he that can sound Wynchester Englyshelike, but cosequently speak
hault or such other light word? And so who is he that can speak thaboue
wryghten walsh sentences and can mysse of the pronuciation of other words of
moare commune construction? And because (as I protested before) I do not entend
to encourage you nor any man else, Brytyshe misnamed walshe.
than is over desierous to the study of Brytyshe (I mean the language that by
continual misnomer the recorder of the aunciente hostility is called Walshe)
I will not once speak a a word in praise of it (though and if I were learned
I might say somewhat to it) but willingly will pretermit to set forth what
select words, what consonant and fine terms, and what sentencious and net
adages, which the old, sage, and learned fathers have not only invented, but
also of the Greeks and the Latins most prosperouslye have taken, translated,
accepted, and until this day still retained: I will omit to declare any white
of the manifold retorical phrases, I will wink at the tropes, metaphores, and
translations, and such manner of speeches which the Brytyshe tongue has as
commune, The Hebrew tongue
yea rather as peculier or sisterlyke with the holy language.

And as for to confer the pronuntiation of them both together I will not:
for, what should I make a comparison betwexte white, and even like white? or
liken an egg, to an egg? And if I should but once enter to treat of the
unspeakable felicity, and the wo^derous graces of the Brytishe meters (who his
inexplicable obseruatiue composition, Look else in ye last leaf
no man but by the only gift of nature has ever attained) I should never
make an end.

But now after this, oh, how it greaueth me to disclose the unfeigned truth,
and to confess the vndisimuled verity, that there remains now but walsh
pamphlets for the goodly Brytish books, sometime so well furnished with all
kind of literature: and so few Brytyshe fragmentes of the book of Christ's
own religion remain vnwormeaten, For if ye gospel be hyd, it is hid among
the^ that are lost. ii. Co. iiii
and defended from iniurye of time, and the book of Howel da ap Cadell so
long preserved salfe and sound? Yea, it is rather to be lamented and greatly
to be sorowed to se how few Walshemen have the knoweledge of the English
tongue, which as by the next way might now restaurate for the outworne baren
Britishe, the relics of the noble Britons to their ever affectionate
knowledge, and accustomed learning of good letters, piety, and godliness.

But now master Colingborne, least peradventure, where I think my self but
familiarly to talk here with you, and other my familiares (as my meaning is
none other in deed) some thankeles taunter entermeddle and say unto me,
alludyng to that mock of Diogenes. O viri Myndi portas occludite, ne quando
vrbs vestra egrediatur. meaning this thereby. O my good friend have done with
your Walshe fables have done: for else your ioly prooemion. and your goodly
parergon shall be longer than al your book beside: Here therefore at ye last I
make an end.

FINIS.
An addicion.
The manner of one kind of meter in the Britishe tongue.

DISTICHI BRITANNICI POLYMETRI RATIO THEORETICA.

Genus metri.

Ciccanet croes cysne Widoc.

chart of cynghanedd meter The name of the meter Cyccanet traws
HARMONIA CONCENTUS

TAVTOGRAMMATON HOMOEOPTOTON

CYCCANET



An other kind of meter.

Pop gwlat aeth [orat un a thri] De braint /
I brintio mewn trevi.
['sef orat Deo]
Nio anos mewn Daoni
Bot yr un gwaith in Iaith ni.
Aehi caradd ac cant.
FINIS.

