A treatise concerning the division between the spirytualtie and temporaltie.

This little book declares diverse causes, whereby division has risen between
the spirituality and temporaltie: and partly shows, how they may be brought
to a unite. And if they that may do most good toward the said unity, will
take the artycles of this treatise, as lyttel tytlinges to bring some weyghtier
things to their mind concerning the same, and thanne by their wysdomes will
add them here unto: and (as they shall think necessary) to see them all put
in due execucion: I think verily that in short time they shall bring this
matter to good effect, to the honor of god, and to the common wealth and
quietness of all the kings subjects.

Diverse articles' which have been a special cause of the division that is
betwyxt the spirituality and the temporaltie in this realm.
The first Chapter.
WHo may remember the state of this realm now in these days, without great
heaviness and sorrow of heart? For there as in times past has reigned charity,
mekenes, concord and peace reygneth now envy, pride, division, and strife:
and that not only between lay men and lay men, but also between religious and
religious / and between priests and relygyous, and that is yet more to be
lamented, also between priests and priests. Which division has been so
universal / that it has been a great unquietness and a great breach of charity
through all the realm: and part of it has risen by reason of a great
singularite / that religious persons and prestes have had to their estate of
living, whereby many of them have thought their estate most perfyte before
al other. And some of them have thereby exalted them self in their own sight
so high, that they have risen into such a goostly pride, that they have in
manner disdayned and despised other, that have not lived in such perfection as
they think they do. And of this has followed, that some of them have had
vnsyttyng words of the other, calling them flatterers, dissimulers, and
hypocrites: And they have called the other again proud persons, covetous,
vain glorious, and lovers of worldely delytes, and such other.

And an other part of this dyuysyon has risen by dyuersities of opynyons,
that have been upon the auctorities, powers, and jurisdiction of spiritual men
among them self. And upon these dyuysions some lay men have in time past
favored the one part, and some the other: whereby the people have greatly ben
inquyeted. But I wot not fully by what occasyon it is, that now of late the
great multitude of all the lay people have found defaute, as well at prestes
as relygyouse / so ferfurthe, that it is now in manner noted through all the
realm / that there is a great dyuysyon between the spyritualtie and the
temporaltie. And verylie it is great pity that such a noise should spring
and goo abroad. And some allege diverse causes why it is so noysed. First they
say, that neither prestes nor religious keep not the perfeccyon of their order
to the honor of god and good example of the people, as they should do: but
that some of them procure their own honor, and call it the honor of god, and
rather covet to have rule over the people, than to profit the people. And that
some covet their bodyly ease and worldely welthe, in meat and drink, and
such other / more than commenly any temporal man does. And that some serve
god for a worldly laud, and to be magnified therefore, more than for the pure
love of god. And some lay men say farther / that though religious men have
varied with religious / and that some prestes have varyed also with religious in
some points concerning the preeminence of their perfection, as is said before:
that yet in such things as perteyne to the mayntenaunce of the worldely
honor of the church and of spiritual men, which they call the honor of
god, and in such things as perteyn to the encrece of the riches of spiritual
me^, religious or seculer, they say they agree all in one. And therefore they
say, that all spiritual men, as to the multitude / be more diligent to enduce
the people to such things, as shall bring riches to the church, as to give
money to trentals, and to found chaunteries and obites, and to obtain
pardons, and to go upon pylgremages / and such other: than they be to enduce
them to the payment of their dettes / to make restitutions for such wrongs as
they have done / or to do the works of mercy to their neighbors, that be
poor and nedye / and that sometime be also in right extreme necessite.

And for as much as it is most commonly seen / that among a great multitude
there be many, that work rather upon will than upon reason, And that though
they have a good zele / yet many times they lack good order and discretion,
which is the mother of al virtue. Therefore some persons thinking that
worldely honor and riches lettethe greatly devotion, so much that as they
think, they can not stand together, have holden opinion, that it is not
lawful to the church to have any possessions. And some taking a more mean
way therein, have said / that as they think, it is lawful and also
expedient, that the church have possessions: but they think / that the great
haboundance, that is in the church / does great hurt / and induces in many of
them, a love to worldely things, and lets and in manner strangleth the love
of god.

And therefore they think, that it were good to take away that is to much /
and to leave that is sufficient. And some also, as of a policy to pulle riches
fro the church, have inueyed ayenste all such things as bring riches to the
church. And because great riches have comme to the church for prayenge for
souls in purgatory, have by words affyrmed that there is no purgatory: And
that granting of pardons rises of couetyse of the church, and profyteth not
the people / and that pylgremages be of no effect / and that the church may
make no laws / and such other things / as foundynge of chaunteries, making
of brotherhedes, and many mo. Wherein they show outwardly to rise against all
the things before rehearsed, and to dispyse them, and yet they know and believe
in their hertes, that all these things be of them self right good and
profitable, as they be in deed, if they were ordered as they should be. And
sum persons there be, that through grace find defaute only at the abusion
and mysse order of such things, and speak nothing against the things self,
neither of purgatory / pylgremages / setting up of images / or such oher.

For they know well, they be ordained of god, and that the mysorder rysethe
only of man for couetyse, singularity, or some other such like defaute,
through perswasyon and dysceyte of the goostly enemy. And though some men
have mystaken them self in the said articles, yet diverse other have said, that
if they had been well and charitably handeled, they might have benne
reformed, and paraduenture saved in body and in soul.

And upon al these matters there is risen a great opinion in the people, in
manner universally, that in punysshyng and corrections all these persons before
rehearsed should have like punysshemente, if spyrytuall men might have free
liberty in that behalf. And that spyrytuall men would, if they could: as
well put them to scilence / that speak against the abusyon or disordre of such
things, as be before rehearsed / as them that speak against the thing self.
And many other murmours and grudges beside these that be before rehearsed, be
among the people, mo than I can rehearse now: but yet above all other, me
thinks that it is most to be lamented and sorowed / that spyrytuall men /
knowing these grudges and murmuracions among the people, and knowing also
that many lay men have opinion / that a great occasion thereof ryseth by
spyrytual men / and that they do no more to appease them ne to order them self
in no other manner for the appeasynge of them, than they do.

For all that they do therein most commenly is this: they take it, that they that
find defaute at such abusions and disordre, love no priests: and therefore
they esteem that they do of malice all that they do, to distroye the church,
and to have their goods and possessions them self: And therefore they think
it a good deed to se them punysshed, so that they shall not be able to bring
their malice to effect. And therefore have they punysshed many persons, which
much people have iuged them to do upon will, and of no love unto the people.
And though spiritual men are bound in this case, for appesyng of these opinions
in ye people, which be so dangerous as well to spiritual men, as to te^porall
men / that many souls stand in great peril thereby, not only to reform them
self, and to leave and avoid all things, that give occasyon to the people so
to offend, that may by charity be omytted and left / but also to fast,
pray / were the hear / give alms, and to do other good deeds for them self
and for the people, cryenge continually to our lord, that these divisions may
cease, and that peace and concord may come again into the world: yet it
appears not that they do so, but that they rather continue still after the
old course, pretendynge by confederacies and worldely policies, and streyte
corrections to rule the people, and that is greatly to be lamented, and it
will be hard for them to bring it so about.

But if they would a little meken them self, and withdraw such things as
have brought the people into this murmoure and grudge: they should anon bring
a new light of grace into the world, and bring the people to perfyte love
and obedience to their superiors. And here me thinks I might say ferther in
one thing / and that is this / that as long as spiritual rulers will either
pretend, that their authority is so high / and so immediately derived of god,
that the people are bound to obey them / and to accept all that they do and
teach / without arguments resistance or grudgyng against them, or that they
will pretend, that no defaulte is in them, but in the people, and will yet
continue still in the same manner, and after the same worldly countenance, as
they do now, and have don late time past: The light of grace that is spoken of
before, will not appear, but that both parties shall walk in this darkness of
malice and division, as they have done in time past.

An other occasyon of this division. The second Chapter.
THere have been made in times past many good laws by the chirch for ye good
order of spyrytuall men / which were right necessary to be kept to this day:
which now be altered either by a law made to the contrary, or by sum
euylle custom brought up and suffered against them. And I shall brefly recite
some of them, as I have found them written by other before this time.

First there was a law made / that a man well approved in his works and
doctrine should be made a bishop, and not a child ne a carnal man / or that
is unlearned in spyrytuall things.

Also that nothing should be given in any place for buryals / confession,
gyuynge of ordres / ne for any of the sacraments, nor for any promocion.

Also that bysshoppes and prestes should not be at vayn worldly sightes or
pleys, ne delight in them.

That it is not laufull for a bishop or preeste to be absente on the
sunday, but to be at masses, and that fasting.

That no priest should eat flesh from Quinquagesime to Ester.

That prestes should fast Aduent.

That bysshoppes and priests, and especyally monks and religyous / shall
study in heavenly scriptures / all lernynges and practyses of litygyous things
left and set aparte.

That the bishop shall every year go about his dioces with great diligence,
and effect.

That heavenly scriptures be read at the bishops table.

That a clerk full of foul words shall be put from his office.

That the wages of clerks shall be given after their merits.

That priests shall eschew feasts at marriages.

That clerks shall comme in no tauernes.

That a bysshope shall have poor apparel, lodgyng, and table, and fedynge for
poor men.

That a bishop shall not lightly strive for transytorie things.

That clerks should rather study, yt their brethren that vary be brought to
peace, than to judgment.

That a clerk should instruct every man with his words, and to the intent
that poor men should not be grieved, that they should get their living with some
handy craft, as saint Paul did.

That clerks shall not take upon them the acts or procuracyons of seculer
men.

That lay men shall not make clerks their factoures or gouernoures under them.

That monks after the counseylle of Calcidonence, shall be holly entendynge to
fastings and prayers in the places where they renounced the world, and that
they forsake not their monasteries for no busynes of the church ne of the
world.

That clerks that customably be players at tables or hunters, shall be prohybit
of houslynge. And saint John^ Chrysostom upon Mathewe the.xxi. Chapter says,
that as of the temple comethe out all goodness / so of the temple al evil
proceeds. And therefore it follows, that if preesthode be hole, all the
church floryssheth: And if it be corrupt, the faith and virtue of the people
fades also and falls away: as if thou see a tree that has wethered leaves,
thou know there by that there is a defaut in the rote / so when thou see
the people live out of good order, know it for certain, that their preesthode
is not hole ne sound.

And therefore if it were asked / where is now the devotion and obedience of the
inferiors, the defense of knights, the peace of Christen princes / to the
end that they, being at a concord, might resyst and feight against
sismatikes and infidels, recouerynge again regions, which they have now
taken fro christen men, and perverted them: It might be answered / that they be
gone through brekynge of such laws.

Many of these sayenges and dyuces other here omytted, be the sayenges of John^
Gerson cha^celler of Paris, in a tretice that is called in latyne, Declaratio
defectuu^ virorum ecclesiasticorum. In which treatise he recyteth also diverse
abusyons / whereof I shall recyte part under the manner of questyons for
shortness, as he does, as well concerning other countries as this / that they
may the rather be known and avoided.

First he asks this question. What it avails / or what profits the church
the superfluous pomp of prelates and cardynalles, and what means it?

Also that one man has.iiii. v. vi. or viii. benefices, whereof he is not
percase worthy to have one, wherewith.viii. persons might be sustained, that
give them self to lernyng / prayer, and to the service of god? Here (says he)
take heed. Whether horse, dogs, birds, and the superfluous company of men of
the church should rather eat the patrimony of the church, than the poor
men of Christ / or that it be expended in the service of god, and to the
conversion of infidels, or in such other works of mercy and piety? O how
many places (says he) ordained for the service of god in Rome or else where
/ be now through the negligence of the prelates desolate and distroyed? O how
is hit that the sword of holy church / that is the sentence of
Excommunication, to her own dispite and reproof, is so lightly drawn out:
and for so little a thing (as sometime for debt) is so cruelly executed upon
poor men? What is it also, that one cause upon a small thing shall continue
so many years? and why is not that length of time / which is the spoyler and
robber of poor men, in sum convenient manner cut away? why is it not rather
mercifully appointed to the Jews converted, sum reasonable living of their
own goods rather than by extreme necessite to compelle them to forsake the
faith again / and to reprove christen men / that they be cruelle and have no
pity? Judge ye also (says he) whether so great variety of images and
pictures be expedient: and whether they do not pervert some simple persons to
ydolatrie? But here it is to be nooted / that John^ Gerson fyndeth not defaulte
in setting up of images / for he commends it in many places of his works,
but he fyndeth defaulte at the variety of them in their peyntyng and
garnysshyng with gold / silver, precious stones, and such other / with so
great riches about them / that some simple persons might lightly be enduced to
believe some special workyng to be in the images / that is not in them in deed.
And so he fyndeth defaute at the abuse of images: and not at the setting up
of images. Discuss also (says the said John^ Gerson) whether so large
exempcions as some have / be expedient? and whether it be profitable so to lead
them fro their ordinaryes? Search also says he, if there be not some
apocrifate wrytynges, or prayers / or hymns by process of time / (some of
purpose, some by negligence) brought up to the hurt of the faith? but than he
asks: whether al prelates and prestes be gyltie in the articles above
rehearsed, and he says our lord forbede it. For like as Helyas, when he had
went that all the people of Israel had been fallen to ydolatrie / herd our
lord say, I have yet reserved seven thousand me^ / that never bowed their
knees before Baale: right so it may be said, that now in these days our
lord has reserved right many good men both spiritual and temporalle /
that be not gyltie in any of the said articles, ne yet party in any manner to
the said diuysyon, which through help of grace, and with the favor of the
superiors / shall be right well able to bring the other to good accord.

An other occasyon of this dyuysyon. The third Chapter.
THere be many laws and decrees made by the church wherein it is recited, quod
laici sunt clericis infesti, that is to say, that lay men be cruel to
clerks / and therefore the church has thereupon made diverse laws to opresse
that cruelty / as in them appears. And thereupon has followed, that when
prestes have red the laws / they have iuged thereby, that their reulers have
known some great cruelty in lay men against clerks. For else they would
not have put tho words in to their laws, and that has caused many spyrytuall
men to adiuge the more lightly, that such things as lay men have done
concerning them, has rather ben done of malice and cruelte than otherwise,
and that judgment in process of time has caused them to confedre them self
togider, to resist that malice / which they many times by occasion of the
said words, have judged to be greatter than it was, and have many times
recited the words / affermynge them to be true: and therefore they have
extended all laws / that be made against lay men the more extremely against
them: Whereby the people in many countries have been so often grieved and
oppressed that they have grutched marueyllously at it. And when lay men have
read tho words, they have taken thereby, that the makers of tho laws / which
represent in them the estate of al spyrytuall men, have judged that the makers
thereof thought, that lay men were cruelle against them and where cruelte is
judged to be / there is no love. For like as nothing helps more to norysshe
love in a man / tha^ that he may know, that the other louethe him, though he
never received any profit by him: so nothing nouryssheth more dyuysion and
discord, than that a man know that another loves him not / though percase he
know / that he never did him hurt / ne entendeth not to do. And therefore when
lay men have by tho words taken occasyon to think / that spyrytuall men have
adiuged cruelty in them: they have anon judged that spyritual men love them
not and that has in their hearts broken ye charitable love and obedyence /
that they ought to have to spyrytuall reulers: and though the occasion of this
article be not universally (for all lay men have not seen tho words) yet the
report of tho words has come to the knowledge of many lay men, as well by
spyrytuall men as by temporal men, that have read them: which by long
contynuance has norysshed one great branche of this diuisyon / which I
suppose verily will never fullye be appeysed, till the spyrytuall governors
will be as dilyge^t to make laws, that shall bring in mekenes among spirytuall
men, and that may enduce them charytablye to suffer some time them that offend
them, as they have been in time past to make laws to set spyrytuall men in
such case, that they may correct all them and keep them under, that will any
thing resyste them. And like as many spiritual men have mysordred them self
against lay men, not only in such things as be partly touched before, but
also in words / affermynge sometime, that lay men love not prestes: so in
likewise some lay me^ misordre the^ self in words against prestes, and will
say, that there is no good priest, or that all prestes be naught: and some, as
it is said / will call them sometime horeson prestes. And if all these words
were prohybyte on both sides upon great pains / I think it would do great
good in this behalf.

An other cause of this dyuysion The fourth Chapyter.
THe hard and extreme laws that are made for layenge violent hands upon
clerks, and such other spyrytuall persons / has been an other cause of this
division. For they be very parcyalle / as to the reders will appear, and they
be also so generalle, that nether king nor lord be not excepted in them, but
that they should goo to the pope to be assoyled. And the said laws be.xvii.
q. iiii. si quis suadente diabolo et ex. de se^tenc. exco^municac. ca. Non
dubiu^ et Ca. mulieris: et Ca. peruenit: et ca. ea noscitur. and in many other
chapiters there / et ex. de sentenc. excommunicac. li. vi. ca. religioso. And
these laws be such / that if a man in violence lay his hand only upon a
clerk / that he is accoursed: but though a clerk beat a lay manne
wrongfully / and with violence, he is not accoursed. And this parcialyte has
done greatte hurt.

An other occasion of this dyuysion. The fyft Chapter.
Though there be diverse good and reasonable articles ordained by ye church to
be read openly to the people at certain days, by the church thereto assygned
/ which commenly is called the general sentence: yet many curates and their
parysh prestes sometime read only part of the artycles / and omytte part
thereof / either for shortness of time / or else to take such artycles as serve
most to their purpose. And sometime, as it is said / they add other
exco^municacio^s after their mind, that be not put in to the said general
sentence. And when the artycles be so chosen out / they sound to so great
parcialite and favor for spiritual men, either for payeme^t of tithes,
offerynges, mortuaries / and such other duetyes to the church, or for the
mayntenaunce of that they call the liberties of the church, as that no
preeste nor clerk. etc. shall not be put to answer before lay me^ specyallye
where their bodies should be arrested, or that no imposicions should be laid
upon the church by temporal power, or against them that with violence lay
hands upon priest or clerk / or such other: that the people be greatly
offended thereby, and think great parcialite in them, and judge them rather to
be made of a pride and couetyse of the church: than of any charity to the
people, whereby many do rather despise them than obey them. And I suppose
verily, that this diuisyon will never be perfitely and charitably reformed and
brought to good accord, till the people come to this point / that they shall
greatly fear and dread to run in to the leeste censure of the church. And
that will never be, till the heedes spyrytuall will refourme them self, and
show a fatherlye love unto the people, and not extend the sentences of the
church upon so light causes, and upon such parcialytie, as they have done
in time paste. And if they will refourme these points before rehearsed, and
sum other hereafter following, I suppose verylye the people will gladdely
here them and follow, them. For than, as the gospelle says they be their
very shepardes. Wherefore if it were ordained as well by auctorytie of
parlyamente as of convocation / that such artycles should be devised and put
in to the generalle sentence, that should stir as well spyrytualle men, as
temporalle men to love virtue / and flee vices / to love troth and plainnes,
and to flee falshod and doublenes / and that none upon a pain should add or
dyminysshe any thing concerning the said articles: I think it would help
much to make a good agreement of this division, and to continue the same, with
love and dread betwexte the reulers spiritual and the people, as there ought
to be. And if like artycles were devised to refrain spyrytuall men fro gyuynge
hereafter any ferther occasion to this division, or any other like: and they to
be read at visitations / Seenes, and such other like places / where prestes
assemble by commandment of their ordinaries / with certain pains to be
appointed by parlyame^t and conuocacion: I think it would bring many things
in to good order / and help much to a good reformation of this division.

An other occasion of this division. The syxt Chapter.
AN other occasion of this diuysion has partly risen by temporal men, that
have desired much to have the famyliaritie of priests in their games and
disportes, and have used to make much more of them that were compenable,
thanne of them that were not so, and have called them good fellows and good
companyons. And many also would have chapleyns, which they would not only
suffer / but also command to go on huntyng, haukyng / and such other vain
disportes. And some would let them lie among other lay servants, where
they could neither use prayer nor contemplation.

And some of them would suffer them to go in liveries not conuenyent in color
for a priest to were, and would also many times set them to worldely offices,
as to be bayliffes, receiuours / or stewardes: and than when they have by such
occasyon been much beten / and greatly exercysed in such worldely busynes /
so that the inward devotion of the heart has been in them as cold and as weke
in manner, as in lay men, yet if any benefyce have fallen void of their gift,
they would prefer them to it / either as in recompens of their busynes and
labors, or for that they were good companyons: rather tha^ another good
devout man / that percase is learned and keeps him self fro such worldely
vanyties and idle company, or that is dysposed sometime to admonysshe charitably
such as he is in company with, of such defautes as he sees or hereth of them
/ and that few men do love to here: And therefore will they prefer them / that
will let them alone. And yet when they have so done, they will anon speak evil
of prestes / and report great lyghtnes in them, and lightly noote one pressed
with an another prestes defaute, and that when they have been partly occasioners
to their offenses them self, as it is said before. And this demenour has
through a long contynuaunce norysshed some part of this dyuysion, and so will
it do as long as it continues. And also where by the law / priests ought to
be at the church on sondayes and holy days, and help forth the service of god
in the quere and ought also when they be there to be ordered by the curate:
yet never the less many men that have chapleynes, will not suffer them to come
in the parysshe church, and when they be there, they will not have them
ordered by the curate, but after them self: ne see them be in the quere, but
sends them many times on other errandes, and that in worldly matters, as
customably as they do other servants, and many such chapleynes show them
self euydently by their diligence in that behalf / to be better content to
do that busynes, than to be in the quere / and that makes the curates and the
neighbors both to think a great lyghtnes in them, and do disco^mende them
for it, and when they here of it, they be also discontented, and their masters
both, and say the other have no thing to do with it, and commenly other
chapleynes will take part in such matters: whereupon diverse grudges and
variances have risen in many places / that have done greatte hurt in this
behalf. And as it is in this case of chapleynes, and seruyng prestes, so it is
also of chantry prestes and brotherhoode prestes in many places. And as it
semethe these articles might be helped thus, that is to say / that it be
prohibyted upon a pain, that no preeste shall hereafter customablye use
hunting / hawkynge, cards / dyce / nor such other games unsitting for a
preeste though percase he may as for a recreacion use some honest disportes
for a time: ne customably use the ale house or tavern. And if any priest use
any such unlawful games or other demenour, not convenient for a priest, so
much that the people be offended by it, and find defaut at it, that than if
he be warned thereof by an abbot and a Justice of the peace of the shire / where
he is dwelling, and yet he do not reform himself: that than beside the said
pain, he be by convocation suspended fro ministryng the sacraments, and be
disabled to take any service, till he be enhabled again by the king and the
ordinary. And that it be ferther enacted / that no man shall have a chapleyne
hereafter / but he have a stondynge house / and that only in his stondyng
house, and none to have a rydyng chapleyne under the degree of a baron / and
that he that has a stondyng house, and has also a chapleyne, shall upon a
pain provide for his chapleyn a secret lodgyng with lock and key / that he
may lodge fro the commen recourse of the lay servants, and use him self
therein conveniently in redynge / prayer, or contemplatyon / or such other
labors and busynes as be conuenyent for a preeste to use.

An other cause of the said dyuysion. The seventh Chapyter.
AN other occasion of the said dyuysion has been / by reason of diverse suits,
yt have been taken in ye spiritual courts of office, yt is called in latin, ex
officio: so yt the perties have not known who has accused them, and thereupon
they have sometime ben caused to abjure in causes of heresies: sometime to do
penance, or to pay great sommes of money for redemynge thereof, which vexacion
and charges the parties have thought have come to them by the judges and the
officers of the spyrytuall court / for they have known none other accusers /
and that has caused much people in diverse parties of this realm to think
great malice and parcialytie in the spiritual judges. And if a man be ex
officio brought before the ordynarye for heresy / if he be notably suspected of
heresye: he must pourge him self after the will of the ordinary / or be
accursed, and that is by the law, extra de hereticis. Ca. Ad abolendam. And
that is thought by many to be a very hard law, for a man may be suspected
and not gyltie, and so be driven to a purgacio^ without proof or with out
offense in him, or be accursed: and it appears de hereticis.li. vi. in the
chapter In fidei fauorem, that they that be accursed, and also parties to the
same offens may be wytnes in heresy: and in the chapter accusatus, page
licet, it appears, that if a man be sworn to say the truth concerning
heresy, as well of him self as of other / and he first confesses nothing,
and after contrary to his first saying he appeleth both him self and other:
if it appear by manifest tokens, that he does it not of lyghtnes of mind, ne
of hatred / nor for corruption of money: that than his wytnes in favor of
the faith shall stand as well against him self, as against other: and yet
hit appears euidentlye in the same court, and in the same matter that he is a
perjured person.

This is a dangerous law, and more like to cause untrue and vnlawfulle men
to condemn innocents, than to condemn offenders. And it helps little,
that if there be tokens / that it is not done of hatred / nor for corruption of
money: that it should be taken: for some time a wolf may show him self in the
apparelle of a lamb. And if the judge be parcyall, such tokens may be sooner
accepted than truly showed. And in the chapter there, that begins Statuta
quedam / it is decreed, that if the Bishop or other enquerours of heresy, se
that any great danger might come to the accusours or wytnes of heresy by
the great power of them that be accused: that than they may command, that
the names of the accusoures or witness shall not be showed but to the bishop
or enquerours / or such other learned men as be called to them, and that shall
suffice, though they be not showed to the party. And for the more indempnitie
of the said accusoures and witness it is there decreed, that the bishop or
inqueroures may enjoin such as they have showed the names of such wytnes
unto, to keep them close upon pain of excommunication, for disclosyng that
secret without their lycens. And surely this is a sore law / that a man
shall be condemned, and not know the names of them that be causers thereof.

And though the said law seem to be made upon a good consideracion for the
indempnitie of the accusours and wytnes, yet it seems that that consyderacyon
can not suffyce to prove the law reasonable. For it seems that the accusoures
and wytnes might be saved fro danger by another way / and that is by this
way. If the bishop or inquerours dread that the accusoures and wytnes might
take hurt, as is said before: than might they show it to the king and to his
counsaylle / besechynge his grace of help in that behalf, to save and defend
the accusoures and witness fro the extort power of them that be accused: And if
they would do so: it is not to suppose, but that the king would sufficiently
provide for their saufegarde: But for as much as it should seem, that
spyrytuall men somewhat pretend to punysshe heresies only of their own power,
without calling for any assistance of the temporal power / therefore they make
such laws / as may help forth their purpose, as they think: but surely
that is not the charitable way, to put the knowledge of the names of the
accusors and witness fro him that is accused, for if he knew them, he might
percase allege and prove so great and so vehemente cause of rancoure and malice
in the^ that accuse him, that their sayenges by no law ought not to stand
against him. And that spyrytuall men pretend, that they only should have the
hole inquerie and punisshme^t of heresy, it apereth extra de hereticis.li. vi.
ca. vt inquisitionis, perag. prohibemus: where all powers / and al lords
temporal and reulers be prohibit / that they shall not in any manner take
knowledge or Judge upon heresy, sith it is mere spiritual, and he that
inquereth of heresy, takes knowledge of heresy. And so the sum called summa
rosella, takes it titulo ex communicac. perag. iiii. And if that be true, it
seems than that all justices of peace in this realm be excomunicate: for they
by authority of the kings co^missions and also by statute inquere of
heresies. And I thynk it is not in the church to prohibit that: for though it
were so, that the temporal men may not judge / what is heresy and what not,
yet they may, as it seems, by their own authority inquere of it / and
inform the ordinary, what they have found. And also if a metropolytane with
all his clergy and people of his dioces fell into herisie: it would be hard to
redress it without temporal power. And therefore temporal men be redye and are
bound to be ready to oppress heresies / when they rise: as spiritual men be.
And therefore spiritual men may not take all the thank to them self / when
heresies be punysshed, as though their charity and power only did it, for
they have the favor and help of temporal men to do it, or else many times it
would not be brought about.

Nevertheless my entente is not to prove the said laws all holly to be cruel
and unreasonable, for I know well, yt it is right expedient, that strayt laws
be made for punisshment of heresies, that be heresies in deed, more rather than
any other offense, and that the discretion of the judges spyrytuall may right
well aswage the rygour of the said laws, and use them more favorably against
them that be innocent, than against them that be wylfull offenders, if they
will charitably search for the truth. But surely if the said laws should be
put in to the handelynge of cruel judges, it might happen that they should
many times punyssh innocents as well as offenders / but I trust in god, it is
not so. Nevertheless whether it be so or not / certain it is that there is a
great rumor among the people, that it is so / and that spiritual me^ punysshe
not heresye only for zele of the faith, and of a love and a zele to the
people, with a fatherly piety to them that so offend / as they ought to do /
how great offenders so ever they be, but that they do it rather to oppress
the^ that speaks any thing against the worldly power or riches of spyrytuall
men, or against the great confederacy, that (as many men say) is in them to
maynteygne it. And though many spyrytuall men may be found, that have right
many great virtues and great gifts of god, as chastytye, lyberalytie,
pacyence, sobrenes, temperaunce, cunnyng, and such other / yet it will be
hard to find any one spyrytuall man, that is not enfecte with the said desire
and affection to have the worldely honor of prestes exalted and preferred /
and therefore if any lay man report any evil of a priest / though it be openly
known / that it is as he says, yet they will be more diligente to cause the
lay man to cesse of that saying, than to do that in them is, to refourme
that is amysse in the priest / that is spoken of, taking as hit were an
occasion to do the less in such reformacions, because lay men speak so
much against them: But surely that will be none excuse to spyrytuall rulers
before god / wha^ he shall ask account of his people / that were committed unto
their keeping.

And if this division be suffered to continue, it is not unlike, but that great
bendynge shall follow on both parties, whereby great hurt and inconvenience
may grow unto much people. And I see none that may set a mean way between
these extremities, ne that minds any thing to do good in it, but the kings
grace and his parliamente. And I think verelye that they are bound in
conscience to follow it with effect, till the division be clearly cessed. Our
lord of his mercy send them grace to do it. Amen.

An other occasyon of this dyuysyon. The eight Chapyter.
IT is a commen opinyon among doctors, that none is an heretic for that only
that he erreth / but for that he defends opynatyfelye his error. And
therefore he that erreth of simplicite, may in no wise be said an heretyke. And
summa rosella, in the title hereticus in principio, says: that a man may
err, and merit thereby: and he puts this example. If a simple unlearned man
here the preaching of his bishop / that preaches happly against the faith /
and he believes it with a ready mind to obey: this man meriteth, and yet he
erreth: but that is to be understand where ignorance excuses. Than it seems,
that it is not enough to prove that a man is an heretic / for that he has
holden opinions ayenste that the church teaches / ne that he ought not to
make any purgation nor abiuration for it: for that that he hielde in such case
was not his faith / but the faith of the church was his faith, though
happly he were not than fully auysed of it. And therefore saint Aidan, when he
held the wrong part of keeping of Eester was no heretyke / and some say
that saint Chadde was of the same opinion as saint Aydan was, which in
likewise was no heretic, for their desire was to know the truth: and
therefore it is not read that they made either purgacyon or abiuracion, ne yet
the abbot Ioachym, which nevertheless erred / for he was ready to submytte him
to the determynacyon of the church / and therefore he was neither holden as an
heretyke / ne compelled to abjure. Than if this be sothe, it were great pity
/ if it should be true, as is reported, that there should be so great a desire
in some spyrytuall men to have men abiured, or have the extreme punysshement
for heresy / as it is said there is. For as some have reported, if any woll
wytnes, that a man has spoken any thing, that is heresy, though he speak it
only of an ignorance, or of a passion, or if he can by interrogatoryes and
questions be driven to confess any thing / that is prohybyted by the church:
anon they will drive him to abjure, or hold him atteynted without examining
the intent or cause of his saying, or whether he had a mind to be reformed
or not: and that is a very soore way, our lord be more merciful to our
souls, than so grievously to punysshe us for every light defaut.

And here some say that because there is so great a desire in spyrytuall men,
to have men abjure / and to be noted with heresye / and that some, as it were
of a polycye, do noise it, that the royaulme is full of heretyckes, more than
it is in deed: that it is very peryllous, that spyrytuall men should have
auctorytie to arrest a man for every light suspection, or complaynte of
heresye, till that desire of punysshement in spyrytuall men be ceased and
goone: but that they should make process against them to bring them in upon
pain of cursynge: and thanne, if they tarry forty days, the kings laws to
bring them in by a writ De excommunicato capiendo, and so to be brought
fourth out of the kings Jail to answer. But surely, as it is somewhat
touched before in the.vii. chap. it seems that the church in time past has
don what they could to bring about, that they might punysshe heresy of them
self / without calling for any help therein of the seculer power.

And therefore they have made laws that heretykes might be arrested and put
in prison / and stocks if need were / as appears Clementinis de hereticis.
Ca. multorum querela. And after at the special calling on of the spirituality
/ it was enacted by parlyament, that ordynaries might arrest men for heresy:
for sum men think, that the said Clementyne was not of effect in the kings
law to arrest any man for heresy: But if a man were openly and notably
suspected of heresy / and that there were sufficient record and wytnes
against him / and there were also a doubt that he would flee and not appear,
whereby he might enfecte other: it seems convenient that he be arested by the
body: but not upon every light complaynt, that full lightly may be untrue. And
it will be right expedient, that the kings highness and his counsaylle look
specially upon this matter, and not to cease / tylle hit be brought to more
quietness than it is yet, and to se with great diligence, that pride, couetise,
nor worldly love be no judges, nor innocents be punysshed, ne yet that wylfull
offenders go not without dew correction.

An other cause of this division. The.ix. Chapter.
AN other occasion of this division has risen by the extremities that have been
showed in suits taken in the spyrytuall courts, by spyrytuall men, for there
has thereby risen an opinion among much people / that a man were as good or
better to let a spyrytuall man have at the beginning all that he demau^deth, as
to strive with him in the spyrytuall law for it. In so much / that as it is
said such extremities have been used in the spiritual law for tithes, that
no prescription / custom, composition, nor other plee shall be admytted in the
spyrytuall law against them. And surely if that be true, it is a great
parcyalyte, and a great denyeng of Justice. And therefore it would be reformed.
And as for mortuaries they be adnulled all ready by statute: But yet begynnethe
to rise oone thing to maynteyne the first dyuysion concerning such
mortuaryes, if it be suffered to continue, and that is / that many curates /
not regarding the kings statute in that behalf, persuade their parysshens,
when they be sick, to believe that they can not be saved, but they restore them
as much as the old mortuarie would have amounted to.

And surely, the Curates that by that means get any recompense, by gift, or
by quest, are bound in conscience to restytucyon. For he is deceived in his
gift or bequest. For it proceeds not of a free liberty / but upon that
untrue infourmacyon. And like as a contracte, whereby a man is deceived in that
thing that is sold, holds not in conscience, as if a man selle copper for
gold, or wine myxte with water for pure wine: and so it is when a man makes a
gift or a bequeste upon an untrue surmyse. And that no man is bounden in
conscience to restore for his mortuarye now, sithe the statute of Mortuaryes
was made / it may appear thus. It is holden by them, that be learned in the
law of this realm, that the parlyamente has an absolute power, as to the
possessyon of all temporal things within this realm, in whose hands so ever
they be / spyrytualle, or temporalle / to take them from one manne, and give
them to an other / without any cause or consyderacyon. For if they do it, it
byndeth in the law. And if there be a consideracion / that hit byndethe in
law and conscience. And certain it is, that all such Mortuaryes were
temporalle goods / though they were claymed by spyrytualle men: And the
cause why they were taken away was, for as much as there were few things
within this realm, that caused more varyaunce among the people, than they did
/ when they were suffered: for they were taken so far against the order of
the kings laws, and against Justice and right as shall hereafter appear.
First they were taken not only after the death of the husband, but also
after the death of the wife, which after the laws of the realm had no
goods, but that it was taken of the husbands goods / and they were taken
also of servants and children as well infantes as other. And if a man died by
the way, and had an household in an other place, he should pay mortuaries in
both places. And some time when the parson / and vicar of a church appropried
/ varied for the mortuaries, the people (as it has been reported) have been
enforced, er they could sytte in rest / to pay in some places mortuaries to
them both. And sometime the curates would prohybyte pore men to sell their
goods in time of their sickness, if they were such goods as were like to be
their mortuaries: for they would say it was done in defraude of the church.
And if the quyck goods were better than the deed goods, they would in some
places take the quycke: And if the dead goods were better than the quycke,
they would take the dead. And the mortuaryes must be delivered furthewith, or
else the body should not be buried. And they prescrybed to have right to
mortuaries only by the prescription of the spiritual law. And under that
manner mortuaries encreassed daily in many places / where they had not been
used before / and of lykelyhode would have gone farther, if they had not ben
stopped in time. And they were in many places taken in such manner / that it
made the people to thynk, that the curates loved their mortuaries better than
their lives. And thereupon rose in many places great division and grudge
betwyxte them, which broke the peace, love, and charity that should be
between the curate and his parysshens, to the great unquietness of many of the
kings subjects, as well spiritual as temporal / and to the great danger
and peril of their souls. For these causes the said mortuaries be adnulled
by parlyament / as well in conscience as in the law: And yet it is said that
some curates use great extremities concerning the said mortuaries a another
way: and that is this. If the executours at the first request pay not the
money that is appointed by the statute / they will anon have a citacion against
him, And there he shall be so handeled, that as it is said, it had been most
commenly much better too him too have paid his old mortuarie, than the
costs and expenses that he shall pay there. And if it be so, it would be
reformed. And surely this matter would be groundly looked upon: for some men
say, that the suit in that case ought to be taken in the kings court / and
not in the spyrytuall court.

Other occasions of this division. The tenthe Chapyter.
THe extreme and couetouse demeanor of some curates with their parisshens /
whereof mention is partly made hereafter, has been an other cause of this
division: And though many spyrytuall men be not fellows with them in the
extremities: yet non of them that have been best and most indifferent have not
done any thing to refourme them that use such extremities / ne to make them
think, that any defaut is in them in that doing: but rather, as it were with
a deaf ear, have dissimuled it, and suffered it pass over / and have
endeavored them self more to oppress all the lay people, that would speak
against it, than to refourme them that do it.

And some of the said extremytyes be those. Some say, that in taking of
tithes, curates in some places will have the.x. part of every thing within
the parysshe, that is tythable, though their predecessors without time of
mind, have been contented without hit: and though there be sufficient beside
for the curate to live on, or though he has not known, but that percase some
other thing in old time has been assigned in recompens for it. And in some
place is asked, as it is said, tithe both of chekyns and eggs, and in some
place of milk and chese, and in some place the x. part of the ground, and
also of that that falls on the ground. And in some places is claimed tithe
of servants wages without deduction: And it is but in few places that any
servant shall goo quite without some tithe payeng / though he have spent al in
syckenes, or upon his father and mother / or such other necessary expenses.

And in some places if a parisshe^ have not x. calves that year, the curate will
put the tythynge of till another year / and than to take a tithe calfe,
accomptynge both years together / rather than he would the first year take the
money, that is in that case assigned by the law. And they do likewise of
lambs, pigs, and such other things. Also in many places the curates take
more at maryages, buryals, and obites, than they were wont to do, and will not
bury a stranger that dies within the parysshe, but he have some what for it.
Also some curates / when there is any varyaunce between him and any of his
parisshens, or that any of his parysshens be in his det, has prohybyte them
fro howsell tylle he be paid. And it has been sometime seen, that when a
poor man has been set to be houseled, the curate has before all the
parysshe upon some such displeasure caused him to rise and goo away without
housell, to his rebuke.

And though these abusyons be not used vnyuersallye (god forbid they should)
for there be many good curates and other spyrytuall men, that would not use
them for the winning or lesynge of noerthly things: yet when people of diverse
contrees mete to gyther / and one of them tells an other of some such
extremities in some curates in his contreye, and the other likewise to him:
anon they esteem such couetyse and extreme delynge to be in all curates. And
though they do not well in that doing / for the offense of one priest is no
offense to an other, if they so will take it: Yet spiritual men do nothing
therein to bring the people out of that judgment, but suffer such abusions
to be used by some of them continually without correction / and (as I have said
before) will rather labor to stop the mouths of them, that will find
defaulte at such demeanoure, than to help to refourme them that do it. And
surely as long as they do so, hit will be very hard to have a good unity and
peace in this behalf.

Other causes of the said division. The.xi. Chapter.
AN other thing that has caused ye people to grudge against the pope and
other spiritual rulers has been the granting of pardons for money. For wha^
it has benne noysed, that the money should be bestowed to sum charitable
use, as upon the building of sayncte Peter's church in Rome, or to such
other charitable use: it has appeared afterward evidently, that it has not
ben disposed to that use. And that has caused many to think that the said
pardons were granted rather of couetice, than of charity, or for the health
of the souls of the people. And thereupon some have fallen in manner in to
dyspysynge of pardons, as though pardons granted upon such couetise, should
not avail. And because the people be greatly deceived in that judgment /
for as to the taker, the pardone is good, though the grauntor offend in his
grauntyng of the pardon. Therefore it is right necessary / that the rulers take heed, that pardons be herafter granted in such charitable manner, that the
people shall have no occasion ne color to think, that they be granted of
couetice: And than the grau^toures shall profytte them self in their grant /
and the people also in their taking, and else it may lyghtely hurt them
both. And verily it were great pity, that any myslykynge of pardons should
grow in the hertes of the people for any misdemeanor in the grauntours or
otherwise / for they be right necessary. And I suppose that if certain
perdons were granted freely without money, for saying of certain prayers therein
to be appointed, that all mislikynge of pardons would shortly cesse and
vanysshe away.

An other cause of this dyuysion. The.xii. Chapyter.
AN other cause of this dyuysyon has been by reason of diverse laws and
constitutyons which have been made by the church, sometime by the Pope,
sometime by Legates / or by Metropolitanes in their province: wherein they have
many times exceded their authority, and attempted in many things against the
law of the realm. And yet nevertheless many priests have given full credence
to them / for they have thought that the makers thereof, which were the heedes
of the church, would not make any law, but by good and sufficient authority.
And thervppon it has followed / that when any doubt or question has risen
upon the said laws: all spiritual men in manner would stycke fast to the laws,
and many temporal men by reason of a comen use and custom, that they have
seen to the contrary, have resisted them: whervppon have risen in many places
great strife, varyaunces, and great expenses in the spiritual law. Whereby
many temporal men have thought that spiritual courts be rather used for
maintenance of couetise, tha^ for ministracio^ of justice. And though, with
the mercy of our lord, the truth is not so universally: yet some diligence
would be taken to remove that judgment fro the people.

And of these laws is the constitution of Bonyface the Archebysshoppe of
Canterbury / whereby it is decreed, that he that lets a woman couerte to make
her will, or that lets it to be proved, is accursed: and the law of the
realm is, that a woman couerte has no goods, that she may make any will of,
except it be of a thing in action, or that she were executrix before. And if
she were so, than with license of her husband she may make an executour to the
intent he may leuye the debt or fulfill the first will. An other like law is
of the decree of the right reverend father in god, Roberte Wynchelsye / late
archebysshop of Canterbury, made against the comen custom of the realm for
tithe of wood: above.xx. year not to be paid / which custom was confermed by
the statute made in the.xiv. year of king E. the.iii. that is commenly called
the statute of Silua cedua: By reason of which decree great suits, variances,
and expenses have ensued and will ensue, if it be suffered. wherefore the said
estatute would be thoroughly seen: And if hit be good, than not to suffer any
decree to stand against it / and else clearly to break it. Other like laws be
the laws that be made by the church, that executoures shall not upon pain
of cursynge, administre, till they have proved the testament: where the law of
the realm is / that they may: and so reason would that they should be: for else
the goods of the testatour might be enbeselled and lost for ever. And that lay
me^ may not put clerks to answer before the^, specially in criminal causes.
And for the strength of tho laws many spiritual me^ have reportid openly, and
that sometime in open sermons, yt such puttyng to answer of pristes before lay
men is prohibited by the law of god / whereupon me thinks ar greatly to be
noted these points / that is to say, that if it be as they say / that it is
against the law of god / that than great defaut is in them, that they have done
no more to refourme it than they have done, for clering the conscience of so
many people, as than daily offend thereby. And if it be ^at, as they say / than
they mainteyn an untruth, which is a great offense in men of such grauite and
perfection as they be. And they also be thereby bounden to restitutio^ as the
temporal princis, which ought to have their fynes and amerciamentes upon such
suits, as should be taken against priests in their courts: whereof they or
many times excluded by reason of the said pretensed privilege. And if it could
be sufficiently proved, that it is ayenste the law of god, to put pristes to
answer before lay men: than degrading of them could not help: For not
withstandyng ye disgradyng, the caracter abides / and so he is a pressed still,
as he was before. And I suppose verily that tha^ the kings progenitors would in
time past have asse^ted to it. And that the kings grace, and all his realm,
would with good will also conform them self to it / but that was never
sufficiently proved, as far as I have herd. And to that that some spyrytuall
men say, that it is an ancient custom, and a custom approved, that priests
in felonies / murders, and treasons should not be put to answer before lay
men, and that by reason of that old custom, they ought to be pryuyleged in
that behalf / though it can not be proved directly by the law of god: to that
it may be answered, that there was never yet such custom in this realm
approved. For priests have been arrained always for treson and felony before the
kings Justices. And for treson it has been seen, that they have been put in
execution / as it appears by a complaynt made by the clergy in the parlyament
holden in the.xxv. year of king Edward the third pro Clero / where the
clergy complained, that prestes, monks, and religious, were contrary to the
liberties of the church (as they said) put to death: and upon that complaynt
it was enacted, that all manner clerks, as well secular as religious, that
should fro thens forth be conuicte before any Justice secular, for any manner
of treso^ or felony / touching other persons / than the king or his royal
majesty, should have fro thens forth freely the pryuylege of holy church,
and be without let or delay delivered to the ordinary them demaundyng. And
it seems that by that term, Clerk, in that statute pro Clero, is understand
as well clerks that be within orders, as clerks that can read as clerks, and
yet be not within orders: for they shall have their clergy in petyte treason /
which be commenly taken to be such treasons / as be recited in the later end
of the declaracio^ of treason, made in the said.xxv. year of Ed. the.iii.
whereof the eschete belongs to the lords of the fee. But in the other
treasons that be recited in the said declaracion / whereof the forfayture is
only to the king: none shall have his clergy by the common law / clerk
within orders nor lay man, that can read / nethere is not any remedy provided
for no manner of clerks in tho tresons / for they touch the king and his royal
majesty. And therefore they be excepted in ye said statute pro Clero, as before
apereth, and be commonly called high treaso^s: and of that nature of treason is
now wasshyng / clippyng and fylyng of money: for the statute made a^no.ii. H.
v. is, that it shall be treso^ to the king and to the realm. And therefore no
clerk can there have his clergy.

And here I would move a little farther, that if a clerk within ordres bren a
house, because he had not certain money laid in a secret place as he
appointed by a byll: whether he shall have his pryuylege: for the statute made
in that case / is that such brennynge shall be high treason. And yet the
forfeiture is given to the lords of the fee. etc. And the said statute is
a^no.viii. H. vi. ca. vi. And since it is haute treason / many men suppose, that
he shall not have his clergy: but I commytte that to other, that list to
treat farther of that matter: But for countrefaytynge and forgyng the coin of
an other realm: I suppose a clerk should not be put in execucio^, if he will
ask his privilege. For the statute is no more, but that it shall be treason,
and says not that it shall be treason to the king and to the realm / as the
other statute does. And therefore I suppose that by the said statute pro clero
/ he shall have his clergy. Yet never the less that statute pro clero in one
point declarethe the common law to be more strayter against the privilege of
clergy / than many men take it to be: and that is in this point. If a clerk
stele any of the kings goods, that he shall not have the privilege of his
clergy. For the said statute is, that he shall have his clergy in treason or
felony concerning other persons than the king or his royal majesty. And
therefore for felony concerning the king self / it seems that a clerk at the
comen law, should not have had the privilege of his clergy: but that I remyt
to other, that be learned in the laws of the realm. And I have spoken the
ferther of these matters, because as me seems, it were right expedient, that
spiritual men should know them, and such other as most specially perteine unto
them, more parfytely than they have done in time paste: and more rather to
coueyte to have the true understanding of them, than to report that the makers
of them offended in the making, specially seeing that they were made by the
king, with the assent of all the lords spyrytual and temporalle / and of the
commens, and some of them at the special request and peticion of the
spirituality.

And here me thinks I might say a little farther in this matter, and that
(as it is like) the troth will prove, that is to say: that as long as the
jurisdictions spiritual and temporal be suffered to stand in such case as
they do now, that temporal men shall say that spiritual men make laws, that
they have non authority to make / and that spyrytuall men shall say, that
temporal men make laws that be against the liberty of the church, wherefore
they be accursed, and no other order taken to have it known, what is the
liberty of the church, and what not / than is yet taken: It will be long ere
this dyuysyon will be fully appeased. Than to return to the pryuyleges of
clerks. The truth is, that yet clerks within orders be more favored than
clerks that be not within orders. For if a preeste be arrayned of felony / and
confesses the felony, or is found gyltie, and than he prays the benyfyte of
his pryuylege, and shows the letters of his orders, in that cas the judges
will not compel him to read. For sith the church has admytted him to
orders, the law presumes that he can read as many men say. And over that if
a priest would wylfully forsake his privilege, and confess ye felony and
become a prouour: yet if the ordinarye will ask him as a membre of the church
/ and show the letters of his orders, he shall have him, and that is by the
statute called articuli cleri. For before that statute he should have been
compelled to have done battle / if the approuee would have waged hit. And
also if a preeste, after that he has confessed the felony, or after that he
is found gyltie / will pray his clergy, and after of wylfulnes he will renounce
his privilege: yet if the ordinarye will ask him, he shall have him: and that
is by the commen law. But in this matter hit is a doubt, to many men /
whether it suffyseth to the ordinary only to affirm, that he is a priest and
so to ask him: or that he must show the letters of his orders. And I suppose /
that it is sufficient / if he affirm that he is within orders, though he show
not the letters of his orders / nor yet the regestryng of them. And that seems
by the statute of an.iiii. H. vii. ca, xiii. where it appears that the
Certificat of the ordinarye, that he is within orders should suffyce. And if
his certificat should suffyce, than it seems that his seeing in his own
person / that the other is a clerk / should suffyce.

And in the statute made anno.xxiii. Henrici octaui / ca. i. it appears, that
clerks within holy orders / have greatter privilege, concerning their clergy,
than clerks that be not within orders. But never the less I leave that matter
to the determination of other.

But admytte / that there had been such accustom received and admitted in the
realm / that prestes should not be put to answer before lay men, and that
than this questyon were asked, whether the parlyame^t might break that
custom? To that questyon (as it seems) it may be answered thus: That if
that custom turn in to an occasyon and boldenes of theft and murder, and
other like things against the kings peace, and that as well in many
spirytuall men as in temporal men by example of spiritual me^, which by reason
of that privilege take a boldness to offend: It were not only a lawful deed to
break that custom, but a right good and meritorious deed to do it, and a deed
that the king is bound to at his coronacion. For he is sworn to maynteigne
the good customs of his realm and to break the evil. And sure it is, that
all customs that be against his peace / be evil, as this should be, if that
effect should follow of it / as before appears. And that the king is
specially bound by his laws to aduoyde all things, that may be a let to his
peace, it apperyth by the statute that is called statutu^ de defe^tione
armoru^, where it is said among other things thus. To the king it
apperteyneth by his royal seynorye to defend strongly all arms, and all
other force against his peace as often as it shall please him. And that he may
punysshe them that do against his peace after the laws and customs of his
realm. And that al his lords spyrytuall and temporal are bound to aid him
therein as their sovereign lord. And sith murders and felonyes are specially
against the kings peace: therefore the said custom should be against his peace
/ if such effect should follow of it, as before appears. Wherefore it seems,
that he should than have auctorytie in his parlyamente to break that custom,
as a thing against ye peace and quyetenes of his people. And he that has
authority to aduoyde such things, as break his peace, has also auctoryte
to prevent and deuoyde such things, as may give occasion to ye breking of
his peace, as that custom should do, if the said effect should follow of it.
And certain hit is, that it hurtethe no more a good priest, that an evil
preeste is punisshed, than it hurts a lay man, that he is punysshed: ne no
more than it hurtethe a good lay man or woman, that an another is evil and is
punysshed for it. And I suppose verily, that this division will never be
perfytely appeased, tylle priests and religious will be as loathe to here of any
defaute in a lay man or lay woman / as in a priest or in a relygious person.
And that will never be as long as the great confederacies and singularite
continues among prestes and among religious persons, as it does now. The
good lay men and women must patiently bear the evil report of other lay men
and women, that be of the same condycyon as they be / and so they shall be
taught by spiritual me^ / that they ought to do: but they will not do so them
self. In so much that I suppose verily, that many a priest and religious would
grudge more ayenste an evil report made of a pressed or religious / that in
deed were guilty, in pride / couetyse, anger / malice, glotony, lecherye, or
such other: than they would be against a like evil report made of a lay manne
or a lay woman, that were not gyltie.

Diverse other laws there be / that be made by the church: that many men
think the church had no power to make: As it is / that no benefice shall be
let to a lay man / but a spiritual man be joined with him: Or that it shall not
be let above.iii. years. And also the constitucion of a dimission noble, and
such other, that were to long to rehearse now. For these suffice to show,
that by such laws, made by the church / that they had no power to make any
law of / has risen one special cause of this division.

An other occasion of this division. The.xiii. Chapter.
AN other occasion of this division has risen by reason of feyned visitacions,
used in times paste by ordinaries and other, that have had power to visyte
howses of religion and churches in the country: For there is a common opinion
in manner universally risen among the people, that such visitacions / after ye
manner as they be used / do litel good, and rather encrece vice than virtue. And
verily the more pytie is, it seems to be true as they sey. For it is used /
that at such visitacions, visitours take of the houses of religyon that they
vysite / sum certain pencyon: And for visitacion of churches they have of
some certain church / mete and drink, where they visit / and than they
gather sum certain duty of all the churches within a certain circute i^
that country. And never the les / as the comen opinion gothe / comenlye they
reform nothing / but as they find it, so they leave it / and neither comfort
they virtue / ne punysshe vice / but many times the contrary, by some worldly
demeanor or evil example, that the people see in them. And thus when the
people have seen, that offenders, as well spiritual as temporal / continue
after the visitacion as they did before: they have coniectured / that the
ordinaries and visitours do visit more rather for their pencions / than for
any good order or reformacion. And this / through a long co^tinuaunce, has
brought the people to judge great couetice in such visitours / which commenly
be of the greattest reulers of the spirituality: whereby the peole by little
and little have fallen into a dispraysyng of such visitations / and into a
mislykynge of their rulers spiritual, and of such pomp and worldly behauour,
as is showed by them at such visitations. And than when such visitours and
spiritual rulers have perceived, that the people have misliked their
visitations, they have disdayned it, and have continued still as they did
before: and so has the grudge between them continued secretly of long time.
And surely it is to be much meruayled, that visitours will attempt to take at
their visitatio^s any pension or imposition of them that they visit, contrary
to the good laws that be made in the.vi. book, ti. de censibus. ca. romana, et
exigit. Wherein great penalties be set upon them that take any pension at their
visitations / contrary to the said laws / as in the same does appear. And but
there be any secret dispensation in that behalf: many be suspended / that
daily ministre. And if there be any such secret dispensation, hit is to
doubt, that the grant thereof proceeded not of charity, but of some couetyse
and singularite: if the very ground thereof were thoroughly serched. Wherefore
hit were right expedient / that such visitations were set in such order, as
well by spiritual authority / as by temporal authority, that good men
hereafter might thereby be comforted / and evil men corrected and reformed, to
the good example of all other that should here of it.

An other cause of this dyuysion. The.xiiii. Chapter.
AN another cause of the said division has risen by occasion of the great
multitude of lycences and dispensations, that have benne made for money by
popes and busshops in time paste / contrary to diverse good laws made by the
church, as of pluralites, against the law that no man should have but one
benefice / and of license to curates to be non resident, of capacities to men
of religyon, and that none shall take orders ne be promoted before a certain
age, and such other: which lycences and dispensacions have been so
accustomably granted for money without cause reasonable, that great
inconuenyences have followed upon it, to the great grudge, and murmour, and
evil example of all the people.

An other cause of the said dyuysion. The.xv. Chapter.
AN other occasyon of the said diuisyon has risen by a great larnes and
lybertye of living / that the people have seen in many religious me^. For they
say, that though religious men profess obedience and poverty / yet many of
them have and will have their own will, with pleynty and delicate fedynge, in
such abundance that no obedience nor poverty appears in them. And therefore
many have said, and yet say to this day, that religious men have the most
pleasant and delicate life that any men have. And truly if we behold the holiness
and blessed examples of holy fathers, and of many religious persons, that have
been i^ time past / and of many religious persons that be now in these days:
we should se right great diversity between them, I trow (as for many of them)
as great diversity as is between heaven and hell. And here, as it seems, I
might conuenyently rehearse the words that be spoken in the first book of the
following of Christ / the.xviii. chapter, where it speaks of the holy
fathers, that have been in religion in time past / and says thus. They served
our lord, in hunger and in thirst, in hete and in cold, in nakedness / in
labor, and in werynes / in vigiles and fastinges, in prayers, and in holy
meditations, in persecucions, and in many reproffes. They refused honors here
in this life, that they might always have them in ye everlasting life. O how
strayt and how abject a life led the holy fathers in wyldernes? how grievous
temptacions they suffered? how fyersly they were with their goostly enemies
assailed? how fervent prayer they daily offered to god? what rygorous
abstinence they used? how great zele and fervor they had to spiritual
profit? how strong battle against all sin? And how pure and holle intent
they had to god in all their deeds? on the day they labored, and on the night
they prayed. And though they labored on the day bodily, yet they prayed in
mind, and so they spent their time always frutefully, and thought every hour
short: for the service of god / and for the great swetenes that they had in
heavenly contemplation, they forgette often times their bodily refection. All
riches / honor / dignities / kinnesmen, and friends they renounced for the
love of god. They coueted to have nothing of the world, so that skarcely they
would take that was necessary for the bodily kind. They were poor in worldly
goods / but they were rich in grace and virtues. They were nedy outwardely,
but inwardely they were replenysshed with grace and goostly comfortes. To the
world they were alyens and strangers, but to god they were right dear and
familyar friends. In the sight of the world and in their own sight they were
vile and abiecte, but in ye sight of god and of his saynctes they were precious
and singularly elect. In them shone al perfection of virtue / true mekenes,
simple obedience, charity, and patience / with other like virtues and gracious
gifts of god. Wherefore they profited daily in spirit, and opteyned great
grace of god. They be left as an exaumple to all religious persons, and more
ought their examples to stere them to devotion, and to profit more and more
in virtue and grace / than ye great multitude of dissolute and idle persons
should any thing draw them abacke. O what feruoure was in religious persons
at the beginning of their religion? What devotion in prayers / what zele to
virtue, what love to goostly discipline, and what reverence and meke obedience
flourysshed in them under the rule of their superior? truly their deeds yet
bear witness / that they were holy and perfyte, that so myghtly subdued the
world / and thrust it under foot. Thus far gothe the said chapter. But the
more pity is / most men say, that now a days many religious men will rather
follow their own will, than the will of their superior, and that they will
neither have hunger another thyrst, heat, nor cold: nakedness, werynes / nor
labor, but riches, honor / dignities, fre^des, and worldly acqueinta^ce,
atte^dance of servants at their co^mandementes, pleasures / disportes, and yt
more lyberally than temporal me^ have. Thus are they fallen (say they) fro ye
true religion: whereby the devotion of the people is in manner fallen fro the^.
Nevertheless I dout not / but there be many right good and virtuous religious
persons, god forbede it should be otherwise: but hit is said, that there be
many evil, and that in such multitude / that they that be good can not, or
will not, see them reformed. And one great cause that lettethe reformation in
this behalf is, this: If the most dissolute person in all the co^minaltie /
and that lives most openly against the rules of the religion, can use this
policye, to extolle his relygion above other / and disprayse other relygions,
for that they be not of such perfection as their relygion is, anon he shall
be called a good seruente brother / and one that bears up the relygion, and
shall be therefore the more lyghtely forborne in his offenses.

Where the throuthe is, that the religion maynteyneth him, and bearethe up
him / and not he the religion. For hit has little need of him. And though
many be good and live a right good and laudable life, after the statutes and
order there used: yet in that point / to extolle their religyon above other,
and to take part with them, that do so though they know: that they that so
extol it / keep not the religion them self, few be without offense, and truly
that is a great defaute, for it gives a great boldness to offenders / and
discourageth them, that be good / when they see them that most live ayenste
their relygion, be so maynteygned and commended.

An other thing that has caused many people to mislike religion, has been the
great extremyte, that has been many times seen at elections of abbotes,
priours, and such other soueraygnes spiritual. And this is a general
ground, that when religious men perceive / that the people myslike them / they
in their hearts withdraw their favor and devotion again fro them: And so
has charity waxed cold between them.

And verily I suppose / that hit were better, that there should no abbotte or
pryoure hereafter continue over certain years, that should be appointed by
authority of the rulers, than to have such extremites at elections, as has
been used in time paste in many places.

And verily (as me seems) one thing would do great good concerning religions,
and all religious persons, and that is this: that the reules and constitucions
of religion were seen and well considered / whether the rygour and straytnes of
them may be borne now in these days, as they were at the begynnyg of the
religions. For the people be now more weyke, as to the multitude / than they
were than. And if it be tought / that they may not be now kept: that than
such relaxacions and interpretations of their rules be made, as shall be
thought by the reulers expedient: For bettre it is to have an esye rule well
kept than a strayte rule broken without correction: For thereof follows a
boldenes to offend / a quiet heart in a evil conscience: a custom in sin,
with many evil examples unto the people: whereby many have found defaut at al
religion, where they should rather have found defaute at diverse abusions
against the true religion: for certain it is, that religions were first made
by holy fathers, by the instincte of the holy ghost, keep them who so may.

The conclusyon of this little treatise. The.xvi. Chapter.
Sithe there is no sacrifyce that more pleases almighty god / than zele of
souls does / it is good that every man dispose him self, as nyghe as he can
/ to have that zele: And if he may through grace come thereunto, it shall
instruct him in many things, how he shall behave him self anenste his
neighbor. And first hit shall teach him / that he shall take heed, that he
do nothing / that might give occasion unto his neighbor to offend. And I
understand not thereby, that he shall only take heed, that he do none evil
deed, whereby his neighbor may take occasion to offend, which in latin is
called offendiculum / that is to say / an occasion to offend: but I mean
also, that he shall take heed / that his neighbor take none occasion to
offend by no deed that he shall do, though it be good, as gyuyng of alms, or
building of churches, or such other: which if the people iuged to be done of
pride and vain glory / must be left for a time, for hurtynge of them that be
of that opinion: till they may be instructed of the intent of the deed. And
if they will in no wise be reformed, than because hit seems to be of malice,
as was in the phariseys: their judgment may be dispysed / and the good deed
continued.

Also where troth should perysshe / if the good deed should be omytted / there
a good deed is not to be omytted. And according to that is said before / the
blessed apostell saint Paul, of a great zele that he had to the people / said:

If eating of flesh should hurt my neighbor, I would never eat flesh.
And therefore in the said chapter he monysshed all them, that would eat mete,
that was offered to ydolles before them that were newly converted of the
Gentyles / and that were yet but weke in the faith: that they should beware,
that though they knew, that they might lawfully do as they did, that yet
they should take heed, that their brother were not offended thereby. And in all
that chapter the holy apostell treats much that it is good to every man to
be ware / that through his deed he give no occasion to his brother to offend.
And I beseech almighty god, that every manne, but most specially our lords
and masters spiritual, may hereafter endeavor them self to keep well this
point, that is to say / that they do nothing to give the people occasion to
offend: and over that, that they may diligently instruct the unlearned people
to the knowledge of the truth / and to stable them as well by doctrine as by
good example / al singularite set aparte. And for as much as doctrine and
good example perteyne most specially to prelates and spiritual rulers,
therefore I shall brefely recyte certain auctorities / that shall some what
move them to have a zele and love unto the people. And also to be pyteous unto
them: And for shortenes I shall omytte for this time to show by whom the said
auctorities were spoken, besechyng the reders to take heed to the words that
be spoken, though hit appear not who speak them.

First I find diverse auctorities that say thus: It is expedient, that prelates
study more to profit the people, than to have preeminence over the people.

Also I find written / that though punissheme^t may not holly be omytted,
that yet it profyteth much / that it be sometime deferred.

Also that it behooves necessarily, that he that has rule over other, brenne
ever in a quycke lively zele to the health of their souls, that he has rule
of: And that else he shall lyttel profit unto them. And therefore he coueteth
indiscreetly to have rule over them, that he studyeth not to profit unto. And
therefore this is said specially to prelates and to other that have rule over
the people: Rule ye to forsee the perils and dangers of them that ye have
rule of / to counsaylle them to procure their health, and to serve and to
profit to other / as good faithful and wise servants, whom our lord has
ordained over his householde.

Plant ye virtue in them by holsomme doctrine / water it by good example, and
help them with your prayour / and tha^ have ye done that pertains to you,
and our lord shall well give encrece of growing / when hit shall please him /
and that parauenture there as after man's judgment was far unlike. These
three things therefore be very necessary, doctrine, example / and prayour, but
the greattest of them is prayour. It is also said to the prelates thus: Know
ye, that ye ought to be as mothers to the people, and not as lords / and ye
ought to study rather to be beloved tha^ dred, and if it be necessary some
time to have correction, that it be a fatherly correction, and not as it were
of a tyraunte / and show your self as mothers in norisshynge of the people /
and as fathers in correctyng them. Be meke / put away al fiersenes / forbere
betyng / and speak unto ye people fair and sobre words, and set not your yock
to grievously upon the^, whose burdeyns ye ought rather to bear. If ye be
spiritual, instruct ye people in the spirit of Softenes, and let every man
consider him self well, leest that he may be also tempted. He that is a mother
dyssymuleth not / he can joy with them that joy / weep with them that weep /
and he will not cease to thruste out of the breast of compassion the milk
of consolation. He takes head, if he can perceive any man / that is vexed with
any great temptacion or trouble / and yt is heavy and weike therewith: And if he
find any such, with him he soroweth, him lovingly he entreteth, him he
comforts, and finds anon many arguments of pity and trust, wherewith he
resseth him up again to comfort of spirit And if he know any that is prompte /
quick, and well profityng i^ grace / he ioyeth with him, he gives him many
wholesome cou^sailes, and kindeleth him / and instructs him all that he can to
perceuer and profit ever fro better to better, he conformeth him self to
every man he torneth the effections of al men unto him self in all goodness, and
proves him self verily to be a mother, as well of them that be offenders, as
of them that profits in grace: And as a true leche he seeks as well them
that be sick as them that be hoole / and all this he does through the gift
of pity, and of a zele, that he has to the health of their souls. Also a good
diligence shepeherde never cessethe to feed his flock with good lessons and
exaumples, and that with his own example rather than with other men's, For if
he feed them with other men's examples, and not with his own / hit is but a
rebuke unto him, and his flock shall not profit much thereby.

For if a prelate will show unto the people the sobrenes of Moises, the
patience of Job, the mercy of Samuel, the holiness of Dauyd, and such other
examples of blessed men: and he him self be vnmeke, impatient, unmercifully,
and not holy, it is to fere, that al those examples shall little profit. And
therefore prelates, that in time passed have been the very true shepeherdes,
though they had their bodies here of the earth, yet never the less they fed
the flocks of our lord to them committed with heavenly fode, and used not to
preach to them their own will, but the will of god. And one man says of
prelates this: When I (says he) behold the heyght of the honor of prelacy,
forth with I dread the peril and danger of it. And when I considre ye
degree, I dread the ruin. I considre the heyghte of the dignity / and I
behold forthwith the mouth of Hell open even at hand. For there is no
doubt, but that their administracion is more perilous, than is the
ministracion of any other. But yet nevertheless if they administre well, they
shall get the^ self thereby an high degree in heaven / and they shall receive ye
gretter abundance and more full measure of peace for their good trauaylle for
ever. And I beseech almighty god to send these.iiii. things habundantly in to
the world, and that most specially among prelates, and spirituell reulers,
that is to say / zele of souls, pity / good doctrine, and devout prayour.
And than undoubtedly, a new light of grace, and of Tractabilitye, shall
shortly show and shine among the people.

Thus ends this Treatise concerning the division between the spirituality
and the temporaltie.
TABVLA.
First that the dyuysyon among spyrituall men them self has been one cause
of the diuysyon / that is now between the spyrytualtye and temporalty in this
realm.

The first Chapter. That the omyttynge of diverse good laws / with certain
defautes and disorder in men of the church / which among other be recited and
declared by John Gerson: have been an other occasion of this division. The
second Chapter. That certain laws made by the church, wherein it is
recited, quod laici sunt clericis infesti, that is to say, that lay men be
cruel to clerks: has been an other cause of this dyuysion. The third
Chapter. That the extreme laws made by the church for leyenge violent hands
upon clerks / have been an other cause of this dyuysyon. The fourth Chapter.
That the disorderynge of the general sentence / has been an other occasyon of
the said division. The fyfte Chapter. That an other occasion of this division
has partly risen by temporal men, through disordrynge of their chapleyns and
chauntrye priests. The syxte Chapter. That suits taken in ye spiritual
courts (ex officio) have been an another occasion of this division. The seventh
Chapter. That though after ye determination of doctors / a man is not an
heretyke, for that only that he erreth, but for that he opinatyfely defends
his error, and that never the less the spirituality, as a commen voice gothe
among the people, have in time paste punysshed many for heresy upon light
causes and offenses, whereupon many people have grudged / and that grudge has been an other occasyon of this diuysion. The eight Chapter. That the parcialite
that has benne showed upon suits taken in ye spiritual court by spiritual
men, has been an other cause of this division. The nynthe Chapter. That the
extreme and covetous demeanor of some curates with their parysshens, has been
an other cause of this division. The tenthe Chapter. That the grauntyng of
pardons for money, as it were to some charitable use, that has not after
followed, has raised an other grudge among the people, which has been an
other occasion of this division. The leuenth Chapter. That the making of
laws by the church, which they had none authority to make / has been an
other occasion of this division. The twelthe Chapter. That lack of good
visitacions, has been an other occasion of this division. The thyrtene
Chapter. That ye great multitude of lycences and dispensacions made by
spiritual rulers for money upon light suggestions has been an other cause of
this division. The fourtene Chapter. That the great laxnes and worldely
pleasures of religious persons / whereby the people has benne greatly offended
/ has been an other occasion of this division. The fyftetene Chapter. Than
for a conclusion of this treatise it is some what touched, how good it is to
have a zele of souls, and how perilous it is to do any thing / whereby they
might be hurted. And that if zele of souls, pity, good doctrine, and devout
pray our / were abundauntly in this world, most specially in prelates and
spiritual rulers: that than a new light of grace and tractabilite, would
shortly show and shine among the people. The.xvi. Chapter.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete next unto sayncte Dunstones church, by
Robert Redman.


