THE ADDICIONS OF SALEM AND BYZANCE.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS. ANNO DO. M.D.XXXIIII*
Cum priuilegio.

The introduction.
BISAN. I have many times since the making of our first dialoge, which is called
Salem and Byza^ce, remebred the Articles of the treatise, yt is called the
tretise, concerning the Diuisyon betwixt the spirituality and the te^poraltie,
which was the very occasion of making of our said first dialoge: And I
think verily, that if the abusions that be recited in the said treatise and
other like, were reformed, great peace and quietness would shortly follow among
the people. And therefore if thou would my friend Salem, to encorage them that
have good zeal toward a refourmation of such abusions, take the pain to
recyte some mo things, that be mysused, and over that would devise some
means how they might also be reformed: I think it would do greatte good.


SALEM. I shall my friend Byzance with good will do that in me is to
accomplysshe thy desire.


Of diverse abusyons concerning some of the seven sacraments, and diverse other
things, as here after follows. The first Chapter.
SAL. Many curates have taken upon them to say, that they be not bound to
minister the sacraments to the people, onles they be required, and that
specially the sacrament of extreme unction, which commonly is called
anoyllynge. And yet the truth is, that they are bound to give a great
diligence thereto them self, and specially to admonyshe them that be about the
sick person, that they may have knowledge when need shall require. And
therefore if any dye without that sacrament for lack of such good diligence of
the curate, surely it is in him a great offense.

2. Also it has been a great default in many places, that the curates will not
sing mass nor dirige for none of their paryshens at their buryals, no more
than they will do for strangers that dyed within the parysshe, except they
have money for their labor, for sithe they have of their paryshens their
tithes, offrynges, and diverse other profytes and commodities, as curates
customably have: Charity would that they should burye them especially that be
householders, and their chylderne with dirige and mass freely, without taking
any thing for it: but to say mass and dirige for strangers they be not
bound thereto, but of their charity. But yet to bury all them freely that dye
within the paryshe they are bound of duty to do it.

Also it is greatte trouble and vexation to the people in many places, that the
sacrament of confirmation is taken fro the propre curates, and is given only to
bishops. For thereby the people in some places be many times put to greatte
labors and expenses in gyuynge attendaunce to the bysshoppes. And also many
chylderne be thereby in some countries long vnconfyrmed, and sometime dye
without it: where if the curates might confyrme them, as they might first,
they should be confyrmed with less labor, and be in much more greater
suertie to have the sacrament then they be now. And sithe bishops have taken
that authority to them self, and no greatter consideration apperynge why they
should do so then there does: It might happily cause some simple men to
esteem, that there is not such necessity in that sacrament as there is in
deed. For they may happily think, that if there were, the bishops would not
put the children in such ieoperdie to be so long without it, as they be often
by that occasion, and no greatter cause to move them to it then they think
there is.

The prohybitinge also of bishops to grant pardons has let greatly the
devotion to pardons, and the taking of money for herynge of confessions, and
specially at pardons, has also done right great hurt. For there is a saying,
the mo confessions, the greatter profyt. Whereby it is meant, that the profit in
heryng confessions is much regarded. And that has made many times right short
confessions, and also as light and as hasty absolutions, which perauenture has
made some unware and unlearned persons to have the less regard to be confessed.

5. And why should the power of absolution that was given by Christ to all
priests: be generally taken from them in any case, and specially from curates
that be admytted to be sufficient to have cure of souls, and be committed only
to bishops or to their deputies, which deputies percase be not many times so
sufficient as the curates be, fro whom it is taken: so that it seems yt the
power of pristes is restrained in that behalf by the law of man without cause
reasonable, and would therefore be reformed.

6. Also it would be plainly declared, where the curate may prohibit his
parishens to be houseled and where not. And surely it seems not to stand with
charity, yt if a paryshener at the time of his houselyng lack money to pay
his duty, that he should be therefore prohibit of houselynge. And sure it is,
that great grudges have ensued in times past upon such matters. A priest (if
he will) may go to mass, though he be in deedly sin, and no man can
prohibit him: but if the curate only by conjecture think his parysshener in
deedly sin, he will prohibit him.

7. Also curious buildings of spiritual men, and the apparel thereof, which
sometime be apparelled with vain stories, stereth more them that beholds it
to vanity and to a worldly love, then to any mekenes or devotion. And though
it be right convenient, that bishops and other spiritual rulers have
convenient dwelling places after their degree, yet all would be ordered to the
honor of god, and to the good example of the people.

Also it diminysheth the devotion of priests greattely in many places, that
there have been so many chapplens and serving priests. For they that be
universally conversant among lay people, and be bound to observe worldely
attendaunce as lay men are, can never have their mind so perfitly to prayer
and devotion, as they that be curates, or be continually resident in churches.
For like as there is a merry proverb in places of court, that the very walls
teach the law, and that every busshe in the country teareth away a piece: so
it may be said, that the very walls of the church teach devotion, and that
worldly company drives it away again. And whenne they be in youth brought
up in such worldly company, it will be hard for them in age to set their
mind to prayer and contemplation. And surely if lay men would be contented
for preserving of devotion in priests to forbear the service and
familyaritee of them more then they have done in time past, and would here
mass and divine service, whenne they might conveniently at their parysshe
churches, at the least on holydays, and when they may here none, would supply it
with prayer or some other good works, they should more please almighty god
thereby, and more show them self to honor the sacrament then they do now,
when they here masses of their chappleyns at home.

Also it has been a great ouersighte (as it seems) in the clergy, that they
have made so strayte laws of irregularite as they have done. For it is hard
for any priest to eschew them all. And thervppon it follows that when they
fall into such irregularitie, and can not by and by be dispensed with (for
there is none at hand that has that power) then never the less because they
should not be noted, they yet sing mass as they did before. And that brings
some priests into such a largenes of conscience, that they be the bolder to
do likewise in other things: and so by contynuall custom therein can learn to
live quietly in an evil conscience.

Wherefore it were better, that irregularitie in some points were clearly put
away, than to drive them in every light point to seek for dispensations. For
many men think, that such dispensations not only in that case, but in many
other also, serve rather for getting of money than for increasynge of virtue.

10. And there is such a like thing in religion. For they profess the old
rules, which although there be also some dispensations very strayte to be
kept in these days, because the people be not universally so strong now as
they were at the making of the said rules. And when they see the reules daily
broken before them, as well in other as in them self without correction, it
brings in to them a quiet heart in an evil conscience, a boldenes to
offend, and finally a custom in sin: whereby follow many evil examples to
the people: and yet they that do it, will be called holy and perfect. And sure
it is, that it were better to have an easy rule well kept, than an hard rule
broken without correction.

11. Also it is a thing greatly abused, that clerks do claim to have as high
power, and as much liberty in their possessions and goods, as lay men have
in theirs. For the truth is, that they may take of the goods that they have
for their ministration, but only a reasonable sustentation for them self,
and for a convenient sustenaunce for their householde, and the resydue they are
bound to distribute among the pore. And in this point the law of the realm
is ouermoche favorable to spiritual men. For it suffers them to make their
wylles and bequestes of their goods, how so ever they come to them by tithes,
oblacyons, or otherwise, as lyberally as any lay manne may. And though that
be against the canons, yet the clergy of this realm, perceiving how
favorable the law of the realm is to them in that point, has made a
constitution provincial, according to the laws of the realm, that no man
shall hinder or let the probation of the same. And surely both the said laws
would be reformed. For they have been a right special cause, as I suppose, that
has made so many to gruge at the goods and possessions of the clergy as
there has done.

Also many priests find defaulte that some prestes be in extreme necessity,
and have nothing to releue them self with, which is not as they think
convenient to be suffered in priestis: but they regard but little the
poverty of some lay manne. Our lord was pore him self: and his disciples, to
whom priests be successors, were poor also, and yet sum priests wene,
that it is not convenient for any of them to be in poverty. I beseech our
lord send us many that be rich in virtue and pore in spirit, and then the
worldly pouerte shall be the more esely borne. I have red of some bishops, that
have made such provision, yt no pressed should go abeggyng within his dioces, but
I have not red of any such provision for lay men. But if some provision were
made to releue ye great multitude of poor men that be now in extreme
necessite, I trow few things were more necessary to be gone about. And over
that if any priest be in such extreme poverty as they speak of, it is most
specially through the defaute of spiritual men, for they have divised titles
for priests in such manner, that they be of none effect in the laws of the
realm: And the cause thereof is, for they ask not counsaylle therein of them
that be learned in the said laws, ne as it seems will not obey the kings
law in that behalf, but make them titles after the grounds of other laws.
And therefore priests many times were as good to be without their titles as to
have them in such manner as they have now.

13. Also if the most honest and most substanciall curates and priests in the
country were examined, what increace of virtue has risen by visitations and
scenes, as they have been of late used: It would appear upon that examination,
that little or none has followed thereby, but that the clergy and some lay men
also appear there, and pay certain duties, and then do after as they did
before. And that the most lightest persons in all the precinct of the
visitation, by means of rewards, shall be suffered to co^tinu as they were wont
to do. And sith the hole clergy have submytted them to the kings grace. It
seems that he has good authority to examyne, how such visitacyons be
used, and to set them in such order, that virtue thereby may hereafter be
increased, and vice repelled and put away. And I suppose verayly, that his
grace is bound in conscience to look specially upon it.

14. More over even now of late sith the statute made in the.xxi. year of the
reygne of our soueraygne lord the king that now is, against pluralities and
none reside^ces, is risen this policy, that a priest that intends not to be
resident, or that intends to have mo benefyces than the prouisyon of the
statute waranteth him to have: will labor to some lord spiritual or
temporal to be his chappleyne, nothing purposynge to do him service, and the
lord like wise nothing desiring his service: and knowing also the intent why
he does it, will accept him to his chaplen, and so wylfully defraude the
statute: Is this trowest thou my friend Byzance no offense in the lord and in
the chappleyne?


BIZAVNCE. I think verily yes, and that the offense is greatter in the
chappleyne then in the lord, if there be no cause reasonable why he does
hit. And though hit be more offense in the chappleyne, yet is hit no lyttelle
offense in the lord, that so wylfullye breaks the intent and provision of so
good a statute. For the prouiso of the statute was made, because it was thought
reasonable, that lords spiritual and temporal should have chappleynes to do
them service: but here no service is regarded. And surely by such means and
other like, some priests have many benefyces, where an other good honest
priest, that is better worthy to have a cure then he, has never one.

Also though the people be more prone and be sooner moved to go on pylgremages,
to bye belles, or vestementes, or to give money for trentals, making of
chauntries, keeping of obites, maynteynynge processions and such other outward
deeds, whereby some worldely recreation or worldely laud and praise, or some
good familiar chere and worldly thank may follow, then they be to releue pore
folks that have need, whereby most commonly neither worldly praise ne other
worldly commodity follows, specially if it be secretly hyd in the bosom of
the poor man, as it ought to be: yet do not prechers encourage the people to
releue their pore neighbors that have need, as they ought to do: but suffer
them to lie still in such outward deeds, as though all were well, when it is
right far amys. The nature of man is much inclyned to be lauded and praised,
and therefore the people would be continually instructed, that such laud
diminishes greatly the reward that they should have of god for their good
deeds. And they should be instructed also, that what good deed so ever they
do, they ought to trust more in the grace and goodness of god then in the deed,
how great so ever it be. How be it in whose default it is, that it has not
ben so in late time paste, I will not speak of at this time, but commytte it to
other: but through whose default so ever it has been, if it could yet be
reformed and brought into due course, it were right expedient, and nothing
more then it were. I red ones a narration, that there was a pore sick man that
lay bedred, and had nothing to succor him self with all, whereupon a
neighbor of his seeing his extreme necessity, moved with pity, appointed one
of his servants to see him have meat and drink at certain hours, as need
required, whereby the poor man was greatly releued a long season. So it happened
that on a time the servant that was wont to bring him meat, had busynes, so
that he might not come at the hour accustomed: Wherefore the poor man was very
angry both with the master and with the servant, saying, they had no pity
on their poor neighbor, and that if they were in like case as he was, they
would be loathe to be so served them self, and prayed our lord, that or that
they dyed, they might feel the pain that he felt. with those words the
servant came with meat. And yet the passion of the man was so greatte, that he
could not forbear, but that he spoke like words to the servant. Then the
servant was angrye and said, that he saw well, that his master and he both
had lost al their cost and labor, and so not contented with the poor man
departed, and told his master all the matter, and that he thought it were well
done, that he should let him alone, till he could mekely yield him thanks
for his good deed. The master answered and said: I do not that I do for any
thank that I look for of him that I give it to, and sithe he gives us no
thanks for it, our reward shall be the more of god. And so he caused his
servant to do as he had done before.

But yet though this manne took it thus charitably, it is very like that
most other men would in such case have withdrawn their good deed. And
surely such chances will fall among, if men should set their minds much to
releue poor men. As if a man lent money to a poor man at his need, and at the
day he asks his money, hit might hap that if he asked it twyse, that some
poor man would say, that he was very hasty in the asking, having no need to
it, with such other vnsittyng words. And would not this happily discourage
some man to lend money to other poor men in their necessity? I trow yes,
and yet it should not be so. Therefore such demeanor would be much reproved
in poor men. And the rich men would be also counsayled not to withdraw their
good deeds after their power for such demeanor, which in deed increases
their reward greattely before god. And if preachers did encourage the people
to suffer such things all that they could, and yet some men would be the more
slack to help other poor men for such demeanor: how will it be then
thynkest thou, if men be nothing encouraged nor put in mind of such
sufferaunce, but be comforted as well by secret counsel in confession as by
preaching to give money for sowles inpurgatorie, or in such other manner as
before apperethe, as though that should suffyse unto them? will not then the
Charity to their neighbors be lightly forgotten, though it be undoubtedly the
best? It is no doubt but it will. And well I wot, that in the time of that,
that is now called the old catholycal preaching, the Charity to our
neighbors is nigh forgoten, and the abusions concerning prodons, pilgrimages,
purgatory, pompous buryals, tithes, offerynges, and such other, have be
meruaylously multiplied and increased, and yet I have hard but of very few in
comparison, that have looked to the reformation of it, our lord amend it, when
his will shall be. Amen.

16. Also many prechers in time past have turned a great part of the tale to
the mayntenaunce of the liberty of the church, to the honor of preesthod, to
fear the censures of the church, though they be given without cause, and to
obey al laws made by the church, and to do as priests do teach, and not
as they do, suffyseth to lay men: and such other like, that the people
have myslyked greatly. And when religious men have preched, they have much
persuaded such things, as have been for their syngular profit and commodity,
so much that it has rather diminisshed the devotion of the people then
increased it. And therefore I am far deceived, but that the most part of all
the defautes and discordes that be now in the temporaltie, have risen through
the defaut of the spirituality. But yet I mean not that al such discordes be
risen by the defaute of spiritual men, that be now living. For undoubtedly
they were begone before their time by their predecessors: but yet my meaning
is, that the spiritual men that now be, are bound before any other to
help to refourme such things all that they can: And I trust that there be
many dispoposed so to do, if they had help.

17. Also it is a greatte ouersyghte, that priests account a defaute in one
priest to sownde to the rebuke of an other priest, because they be all of one
order. And that yet they go not about to reform them that so offend. And so
it is likewise of religious men: and they gruge more in their hartis against
him that makes an evil report of one, that is of the same degree that they be
of, though it be true, than they do against them that make an evil report
of an other, that is not of the same degree that they be of, though it be
untrue. And surely that is a great defaut, and many great inconveniences follow
upon it, that I will not speak of now. And there is no reason why they ought so
to take it, sith the defaut of one pressed is no more reprofe to an another,
then the defaulte of one lay manne or lay womanne is to an another.


BYZANCE. It is true in deed as thou sayste, but yet the thing that most mys
lyketh priests and religiouse men in such reports, is that they take it to
be spoken to the reproach of all priests or religious, and so some will say
in deed, that it is a shame to al priestis.


SALEM. If any man say so, he is far ouersene. And priests that be the
lanternes and light of the world, ought most specially before any other to
take patience at such things, and rather to desire, that the priest that is
reported of, might come to reformation, then to take the matter as though it
pertayned to them self. And verily the truth is, that a defaulte in a lay man
or woman sounds most commonly more to the reprofe of priests, than does
the defaute of one priest to an other: onles he be a special occasyon thereof
him self. For priests are more bound to lay men then commonly one priest is
to an other. For they have their living of lay men, and are thereby more
specially bound by a dew order of charity to procure their health of body and
soul before other that they have no such profyt of.


BYZ. yea but the living that a priest has is most commonly but of some
particular lay men, that are but few in nombre as in comparison. And when he
has done his duty to them again to pray for them, and does for them as his
duty requires, then is he never a whit bounden to other lay men that he has
no profit by, but is then bounden more to an other priest, that is of the
same order that he is of, and that is also in a more perfyte way of living
than lay men be, then he is to other lay men. And ought therefore to myslyke
more an evil report of a priest, then of a lay man, and so ought lay men to
do like wise, if they would follow the due order of charity.


SA. As to that reason a seculer pressed were more bounden to be discontented with
an evil report of a monk or a friar then of a seculer pressed, for they be
priestis as he is, and are in a more perfyte estate then he: and yet the common
experience proves, that they are not so, but rather be often times right well
contented, to here an euylle report of religious men, and they like wise of
them, and therefore the truth is, that the affection that one priest has to an
other in such case, is of a proud syngular love that he has to him self:
rather then of a charitable love to other priests. And here it may be
considered, how far we be fro the charity of saint Paul, when he said, ad
Gal. iii. There is no jew, there is no greek, there is no bondma^, there is
none fre, there is no male, there is no female, as who says, the charitable
man settith no difference betwyxte country and country, betwyxte state and
state, ne betwyxte kind of male or female. For as it follows in the said
text, we all be one in Christ, that is to say, we christen men ought to love
each other in Christ, of what degree or condycion so ever we be. And surely
lay men do thus to spiritual men, and many times love a priest, a monk,
or a friar better then a lay man: but they will not commonly do so again,
unless some profytte or commodity comme to them thereby, our lord amend it,
when it pleases him. Amen.


BIZ. I pray the proceed now to some other matter. 18.


SALEM. It is also a great defaut in many spiritual men, that they have made
pretense, that the tenth part belongethe to priests by the law of god, for by
that pretense all customs prescriptions of none payment of any thing that is
tythable, though the curate have sufficient beside, are clearly disalowed in
spiritual courts, and yet though sum question be now lately risen, whether
the tenth part be due by the law of god or not, no man indeuoureth him self
to set the matter in a clerenes, but suffers it and diverse other things
also to rest still in doubt as they have done in times past. Therefore the
statute of.xlv. E. iii. commonly called the statute of Silua cedua, which is
taken by many spiritual men to be against the law of god: would be seen, and
if it be ageynste the law of god, then it would be broken, and if it be not,
then it would be confyrmed, and ferther be prohibit that none upon a pain
shall say so herafter. For if it be suffered to stand still as it does now,
vndontedly great variaunce and expenses will follow thereupon hereafter. And
spiritual men are specially bound to do that in them is to put such things
out of argument, and to set such matters in such a cleretie, that it shall
appear, that they would not take one penny of the people for their spiritual
ministration more then they ought to do of right. And that they seek rather
the health of their souls, then any lucre of their goods.

19. Also it is a right great oversight that in matters concerning temporal
things, and whereof the spiritual court may yet after the custom now used in
this realm hold plee, that they will judge therein after the law civil or
canon, and not after the law of the realm as they are bound to do, and that
upon no less pain then upon the peyn of restitution, and yet they do not thus
upon the prescription of tithes, but follow a special prescription devised by
them self, which in this realm byndeth not ne gives no right. And in like
wise it is if a man by his will bequeth to one an other man's horse, this bequest
after the laws of the realm is utterly void, for no man after the laws of
the realm, may lawfully give or bequeth that is not his, and yet in the
spiritual court, they judge the bequeste to be good after this manner: that he
to whom the bequeste is made shall have the value of the horse, and surely
thereby they bind them self to restitution, and so it is of the age of
infantes and many other things, wherein the laws do vary, whereof I will no
farther speak at this time.

20. Also it is a greatte ouersyghte, that such things as at the beginning of
the church were refused by many spiritual men, because they thought they
would let and diminishe their devotions toward god and gostely things, be
now so universally accepted and used by them that be of the same order and
degree that they were, that refused them, but the particular hurtes and
offenses of consciences that have followed upon that doing, I will not touch
at this time.

21. Aso it is a great oversight in many religious men, that they will
pretend, that the wey of their religion is the surest way to salvation, and
surely it would be prohibited, that no man upon great pain should hereafter
presume to say so. 22. Also this point has done great hurt, that men will so
lightly report as they do, that there be many heritikes, yea and they that be
of that appetite to have it so noised, use this polici to say that heritikes
will first cause small herisies to be spro^ge^ abroad, to the intent they may
after bring in greatter, and by tho wordis (gretter heresies) they mean that
some men be of opinion, that feith suffisith without good works, and that they
would have all things in common, which if they could bring about, it were in
deed as they say a plain destruction of the common wealth, and they will affirm
stiffely, that if they be suffered to continue, they will in conclusion bring it
about. And how perilous a speaking that is, it is evident, for there can no
man tell, whom it touches: and therefore it may lightly cause great gruge in
the hearts of many people. And as the truth is, it has done so already. And
now as to those two articles I will say thus far therein, that in good faith I
know none that holds opinion, that good works be not necessary to
salvation, specially in men that have full use of Reasone, ne yet that all
things ought to be in common. And I suppose verayly, that there is noted to
be a greatter variance in tho points and in diverse other also, then there is
in deed, if the very intent of the parties were perfytely known, and if it be
so, then is there a gretter defaut in the^ that will so lightly judge other to be
heritikes, then there is in them that they note to hold those diversities of
opinions.

23. Also what a great abusion is it in many spiritual men, as well religious
as other, which be specially ordained for the mayntenance of the service of
god, that they keep in their hands pastures and grounds, which sometime were
towns or villages inhabited with people, which right much maynteyned the
service of god, and many of them keeps in their hands also, parkes for
fedynge of wild beasts, that might right well be made the fedynge of Christen
people, and that in great nombre: and thus they that most specially ought to
maynteyne the honor of god, and increase his service, greatly decay it,
distroy the people, weken the power of the king and of the realm, and delay
the repayring of the fall of aungelles very much, and though some temporal
men have such pastures and parkes as well as spiritual men have: yet the
greatter defaut in the keeping thereof is in spiritualle men, and therefore
have I spoken of them first.

24. Also there gothe a common report abroad among the people, that
spiritual men be most commonly more hard and strayt in making of leasses,
retynge of rentes, leuyenge of fynes, taking of heriottes, allowynge of
reparations, alowyng of fees to officers and such other, then any lay men be.
And as it is said, they take occasion to do so under pretense, that all that
they do is for mayntenance of prayers, and of the service of god, so that hit
is in goddis quarrel all that they do. And therefore if they take any suite for
any right that they claim, or that any suit be taken ageynste them, they are
most commonly more extreme and ferther froo a mean way, then any lay
men be.

And this does great hurt, and makes the people to gruge against them, and to
esteem great parcialitie and couetyse in them, and so will it do as long as it
continues, let them cloak it under the color of goddis quarelle all that they
can.


BYZ. They must needs sue for their right, and also defend it. For else it
might happen, that they in process of time should have but a little to live
with. And such a report as thou spekest of may lyghtely go abroad without
cause, and therefore they may not leese their right for such exclamations.


SALEM. As the common proverb is true, that there is never smoke without
sum fire, so is hit true, that this report is not risen without sum
cause, though perauenture the cause be not so greatte as the report is.

And truth it is as thou say, they must needs few for their right, and also
defend hit. And I agree well, that it is very hard also to know, where a man is extreme in his suytes, and where he is extremely handeled, and
therefore I trow the best remedy were for them to dispose them self in
doubtefull things rather to be over sufferable.

25. Also it has been a right greatte ouersyghte in time paste, that the
deformity of the body has been more myslyked in them that should be
admytted to be priests, thanne the deformytie of life, or lack of moralle
virtues, or of learning. For if he be personable, the lack of such things,
as hit is said, be soon passedde over, as thowghe the goodlynesse of the
person should sound to the honor of pryestehoode, but surely hit is
Mekenes and Charytie, that bring to pryestes the veraye true honor.

26. Also if it were well considered, there are few ceremonies of the church,
but that they sound either to a preeminence or else to a profit of priests,
and that has caused some persons to find defaut at such ceremonies, which as
far as ever I could perceive, be of them self right good as to the most
part, if they were handled with mekenes in the mynysters, as they should be.


BYZ. But I pray the what be those ceremonies, that they mean of?


SAL. They mean of crepynge to the cross, and of the disciplins before Easter,
that the bryde must be given to the priest, and that the brydegrome must
kiss the priest, of the halowynge of candelles, churches, images, and belles,
and of the beryng of candelles on Candelmas day, of sensynge the mynisters at
certain feasts, of lyghtynge a candell before the Gospel, or else not to
proceed any farther, ne that none shall say Dominus vobiscum, but he be within
holy orders, and of diverse other moo then I can remember now.


BYZ. All these be good and commendable.


SAL. I think they be. And yet many men wene, that if there were no money
offered at the crepyng to the cross, ne money given for halowynge of churches,
images, and belles, that those ceremonies would last but a while: and
undoubtedly there be many that think, that there be sometime diverse ceremonies
at mass, that were rather brought up for an honor to the ministers then of
the sacrament, or of the service of god. And therefore they say, that if less
worldly pomp then is many times used about the minystracyon of it, it would
please our lord better, and be also more edifienge to the people then it is
now.

27. Also bishops that be canonised have a propre common appointed unto
bysshoppes, and this Antyphon, Ecce sacerdos magnus, is often in their service.
And kings that be canonysed have most commonly the common appropried to an
abbot. And me thinks that, that is not ordered, as it should be. For as me
seems the clergy can not of congruence give no less honor to a king then to
a bishop.


BY. The canonisyng of saints, ne yet the service of ye church profits
nothing the saints. And therefore it forces little what antyphan or commons
they have.


SALEM. It is true as thou sayeste, but yet such canonisations and the
service ordained upon it, be occasions to encorage them that be of the same
degree as they be: to desire like virtue as they had that be so canonysed,
and sithe the virtue in princis is most necessary to the people and to the
holle common welthe before all other: it seems somewhat to be meruayled, why
such canonisations have not ben so ordered, that they should encourage princis
to virtue more specially than any other.


BYSANCE. Pryncis glorifye them self but little, for the canonisation of
other princes, ne care but lyttelle for the service appointed to them.


SALEM. But yet sum spiritualle men have for them self regarded such
things in time paste right much, and me thynkethe always, that they ought to
do likewise for kings and pryncis, yea and that more then for them self.


BISANCE. Well I perceive now, that thy meaning is, that spiritual men
have in such canonisations ben more diligent to canonise one of the same
degree, that they be of, thanne any other, as bysshoppes of bishops, priests
of pristes, and religious, of religious, and specially such as be of the same
regular order as they be. And yet though it be so, it is no defaute in them,
as me seems, but rather a praise: for it is an envy for virtue, which is
called pia inuidia, a meke envy, and that is commendable.


SALEM. Envy in virtue is commendable, as thou sayste, but an envy, who may
have his virtue more known, or moore lawded and preysed then other, is not
commendable. And it is very like that such things have been seen in some
men, concerning such canonisations in time paste, but in princis no such
affection can be judged. For commonly less honor is given to princis that be
canonised, then to other, as it appears of saint Lucius that was the first
king christened of the Brytons in this realm, and of saint Ethelbert, that
was the first christen king of English men, which be but lyttel known,
and have but little honor in comparison of other, and that me thinks is not
well ordered.


BISAN. Well I perceive thy mind now in this mattier more perfitely then I
did before, and now sith thou haste spoken before of canonisations of saints,
I pray the let me here thy mind, to what intent they were first ordained,
and who has authority to make them.


SAL. One cause why they were ordained, was to increase virtue in other,
specially in them that be of the same degree as they were, that be so
canonised, as I have said before, and it has been most used for them that have
lived a good and a blessed life, above the common sort of other good christen
men, to give the people god example in prayer, fasting, and alms deed, in
sufferynge of tribulations, and vexations for ryghtwisenes patiently, or such
other. And if it please our lord to show miracles for him, whereby it appears
that he has accepted his good works, that is a thing much necessary in such
canonisations: An other cause of such canonisation has been also to eschew
scismes and varia^ces among the people, when one would worship one as a saint,
and an other would say he were none. And in the chapter Extra de reliquijs.
Ca. Audiuimus, It is said, that though miracles be done, yt yet it is not
lawful to worship any as a saynct without authority of the sea of Rome. But
what authority the sea of Rome has to make such a canonisation I never
hard. How be it five resons be made in the gloss, De reliquijs et veneratione
sanctorum. Ca. vnico, Gloriosus libro. 6. why the sea of Rome ought to do it
before all other.

First is, by cause the canonysacyon of saynctes is one of the greatteste
causes, that may be pourposedde among Christen people. The second is, that
because miracles be ascrybed to the feythe. Therefore this question sith it is
notably of the feithe, is to be referred to the sea apostolyke. The third,
because it pertains to the pope to open and declare the doutes of scripture,
therefore of stronger reasone he ought to open and declare the doubts of
holiness. The fourth is that hit ought only to belong to the Sea of Rome,
leeste by the symplicitie of many bishops, the people should happen to be
deceived. The fyfte, leest the saynctes canonysed should be increased to a
nombre infinite. And so thereby devotion wax cold, and holiness little
set by. These be the reasons of the said Gloss, and as me semethe, they
prove not the intent, that they be made for.

And as to one of the said reasons it is apparent, that it does not. For it
is evident enough, that one bishop may sooner be deceived than many
bishops: and all the resydue of the said reasons I commytte to the judgment
of the reders. And where in the same gloss, it is said ferther, that if the
church err in the canonisation of a saint, that yet it is not to believe, that
hit erreth. Surely if the church err therein in deed, it is marvel, why hit
may not be believed that it erreth, for the truth is always to be believed,
though sometime after the law of man, a man may be stopped to say the truth,
as hit is in diverse cases of estopelles, in the laws of England, where a man may be estopped to say, that he knows verily is true, but yet all
though he be so estopped to say the trewthe, he may believe therein as he
list, and so reason would he should do of such canonisations. And therefore I
think, that the meaning of the said gloss is, that if the church upon untrue
profes canonise one that is no sayncte in deed, that yet if a man will say,
that he is no saint, that he offends in that saying. For why, to say that he
is no saint, is is asmoche to say, as that he is in hell, for all that be in
heaven or pourgatorie be saynctes. For they in purgatory be sure of salvation,
though as sum hold opinion, they lack the fruition of the godheed: and
that therefore it is right good and charitable to pray that they may be brought
to it.

And then sithe it is an offense to affirm opinatiuely, that any person that
is departed is in Hell, onles it be proved by scripture that it is so, as it
is of Cayme, Judas, and some other, more stronger he offends, that will
opinatiuely say, that he whom the church has canonised is in hell. But
though it be agreed, that it is an offense to say that he that the church has
canonised for a saint, is no saint, yet why it should be herisi to say he is no
saint, since it may be true as he says, and as the said gloss affirms yt it
may be, I se no reason. For they them self that have canonised him know not ne
can not know assuredly, that he that is so canonised is in heaven, but that they
have a good trust that he is so. For the witness may deceive them, as is
said before: And according to the same effect it is said, Extra de senten.
excommunicationis a nobis secundo, that the judgment of god is so knytte to the
truth, that it never deceyueth ne can not be deceived, but the judgment of the
church follows often times the opinion of men, and so it may be untrue, and
deceive, and also lightly be deceived. And more over one of the principal
intentes of such canonisatio^s, is when any opinion rises among the people,
that such a man is a saint, and that some begin to honor him, and some happily
say they do not well to set the mattier in such an order, that there
shall be no scismes thervppon among the people. But if any opinion rise among
the people, that any is holy and blessed, and miracles be done, than it is
suffered, that the people may honor them, if they be not prohybite by the
superiors, not withstondynge the said Chapitre Audiuimus.

And under this manner king Henry the syxte, and master John^ Shorn^ be
suffered to be worshypped, which be not canonysed. And what a canonisation
trowest thou had the apostels, and such other holy men, in the beginning of
the church?


BISAVNCE. I trow none, but that the holy ghost wytnessed in the hearts of all
the people, that they were holy and blessed, and that suffised without any
ferther canonisation.


SALEM. Surely it is as thou sayste, but of some other new saints, it has
not benne always so, but when sum has holden one very holy, an other has
douted at it. And therefore to keep the people in a good quyetnes in that
behalf. Canonysacyons have benne made, not that the people should be bound
thereby to believe their holiness, as to an article of the faith, but to give
them occasyon the rather to agree therein in one, sithe so many great clerks
have allowed the witness in proof of his holiness, as there has done.

And therefore though it were admytted that he were an herityke, that would
obstinately hold opinyon, that the church gathered to gether in the holy
gooste may err in a thing that is of the faith, and that this is of the same
effect, for as much as the canonisation of a sayncte perteyneth to the Faith,
because that in the inquery of his faith, and of his moralle virtues, and of
his doing miracles stondethe all the mattier: hit may be answered, that the
cases be not like, for two causes. First for that such a canonisation is not
appointed by the laws to the holle clergy, ne to the general counsel, but
to the sea of Rome only, and undoubtedly that see may err, deceive and be
deceived. For that see makes not the church. Second in such a canonisation
it suffiseth, if the wytnes affirm, that he was a man of a true faith, without
rehersynge all the articles of the faith in special. And therefore the
determination of the articles of the faith follows not thervppon: And that the
church may not err in things that be of the faith, I take it to be
understand, where any great dout ryseth concerning the faith. And that, that
dout is committed to the church: whereby I understand most proprely the
general Counsel, that they then may not err. And thereto I can right well
agree. For it is not to think, that our lord that is the very truth, would
leave his people without a dew mean how to come to knowledge of the truth: for
that will not leave any one particular person in such doubt, but that he may
come to the knowledge of the truth, if he will fully put his trust in him. And
therefore it is said. 2. par. xx. Cum ignoremus, quid facere debeamus, hoc solum
residui habemus, vt oculi nostri ad te dirigantur, that is to say, Lord when
we be ignorant and wotte not what to do, this only remains to us for our
comfort, that we lift our eien up to the, as who says, that suffiseth unto
us, so that we shall not err. But in such a canonisatyon, though all the hole
clergy did it, they might err. For it is but matter in deed: and more stronger
these of Rome may err therein.


BYZ. This manner of resonynge is dangerous. For hit might lyghtely induce the
people to set at naught the order and decrees of their superiors.


SAL. As to that thou know well, that no man has power to make laws to
bynd other, but he have authority thereto of god. And if it can be proved, that
the clergy have auctorite of god to canonise a saint, and that they be all
heritikes, that believe it not, it must be obeyed, our lord forbeade it should
be otherwise. But if it can not be proved, that they have that authority by
the law of god, but that they have hit only by a custom and sufferaunce of
Princis, then the reasonynge of hit shall do good to cause the matter be
known as it is.

And yet may the saints that in time paste have benne taken for holy and
blessed, be still so taken.

And then also shall hit not be taken for herysye, that is none in deed: but
the very true intent of canonysations shall be known.

And I suppose farther, that it were no greatte mattier, whether any were
canonysed hereafter or not, if the people would be quyete without it: and not
be so new fangle to pylgrymages, as sum have benne in time paste, and
then to keep the people in quietenesse and in good order in all things,
kings and princis are most specially bounden to before any other.


BYSANCE. Pryncis can not determyne, who has a right faith, and who has
not, ne what is a Miracle, and what not.


SALEM. To examyne all the partycular artycles of the faith, is not necessary
in Canonysations, as I have said before, and what is a miracle, and whatte
not, Pryncis and their counsaylles may have knoweledge sufficiently: And
therefore as me meth it pertayneth most specially to them to order and
appoynte such canonysacyons at a generalle Counsaylle, rather then to any
other, taking the clergy to them as their counsaylours in that behalf. But
for as much as Princis have in time past little regarded such small matters,
being occupied in more urgent causes, for the common welthe, bishops and
spiritual rulers have looked upon such canonisations, which the people have
obeyed, and princis have assented, and therein they have done right well: and
after by the long continuance and sufferance they have claymed, that they of
right and none but they ought to do it: and yet have they not only claymed that
to the hole clergy, but have so handeled the matter, that it has been
brought only to the sea of Rome to do it. And thereupon pretense has been
made, that who so ever that see will appoint to be taken as holy and blessed,
shall be so taken upon the pain of herisie, and to be taken as a scismatike
divided froo god, and his church, and whether that has been a great oversight,
and a right great abusion or not, it is apparent.


BYZ. If one prince auctorised one as a saint, yet perauenture an other prince
would not so accept him, and so it might happen to make variances betwixt the
countries, when one would take one as holy and blessed, and the other not.


SAL. And therefore it were most convenient, that it should be done at a
general counsel. And that princis and their ambassadors should be therein
judges, taking the spirituality as their counsaylours in that behalf, as is
said before.


BIZ. If a man would say abydingly, that Peter and John^ were not holy, I
suppose hit were herisie, why should it not be so likewise, when a saint is
canonysed: and the people has of long time accepted him for holy and
blessed, be herisie to say abidingly, that he were not holy ne blessed:


SAL. To say that Peter and John^ or any other of the apostels were not holy
and blessed, it were against scripture? For our lord said to the apostels,
Luce. 22. I ordeyne to you as my father has ordained to me the kingdom of
heaven: that ye shall sit upon my table in my kingdom, iugyng the.xii. tribus
of Israel. No man therefore may say that the.xii. apostelles be not in heaven,
but he say against scripture. And so the very scripture is a sufficient
canonisation for them. But it is apparent enough, that it is not so of other
saints, yt be not canonised by scripture, though they have by reason of their
holy life and miracles be^ accepted for saints never so long. And therefore
though a man, yt would say, that he that were so canonised, were not worthy to
be canonisid, did not well, ne were not to be commended, because he went so far
fro the common opinion of the people, and of that ye clergy has approved, yet
it should seem not to be herisy to say it.


BY. what is it then to say, that a another man that is not canonised, is as
good and as high in heaven, as Peter or John^?


SAL. Surely it were a foul presumption, and a great oversight to say it: but
yet it were no heresy. For it denies not but that Peter and John^ be in
heaven: and I trust yt there are none of yt opinion. And if any man of malice,
and to make a rumor among people, will report that there be certain persons of
that opinion, they offended right greuousely therein. And surely such reports
have done great hurt, and would be well looked upon here after. For there be many
so light of credence, that though the thing spoken be to the hurt of a right
great multitude of people, yet they will anon report it over to other, not
knowing yt it is true yt they say.29. And now if thou will give me ye hering, I
will show the a litil of my co^ceite, concerning the chap. Oi^s utriusque sexus,
which is ex. de pen. and ramiss.


BY. what think thou of yt chaptre?


SA. That it is not so reasonable in one point as me thinks it should be, and
yt for this cause: every person man and woman, after that he or she comith to
the years of discrecio^ shall thereby specially ones in the year be confessed to
their own priest, whereby is understand their own Curate: how be it, it is
decreed after in the same chapitre, that if a man upon a just cause will be
confessed to an other priest: he shall first ask license of his own priest
and opteyne it: for else the other priest (as it is said there) may another
loose him nor bind him. But it is not expressedly declared in the said
chapitre, that if a man upon a just cause ask license of his propre priest to
be shriuen in an other place, and he of malice or frowardnes refuses to give
him license, whether he may thereupon be shriuen at his liberte in an other
place, and some have said that in that case, the paryshen is bound to go to
the superior, and that he may compelle the curate to give license. And some
other have said, that the superior may in such case give license him self.
And many curates pretend the contrary, because the words of the said chapitre
be so general, that license must be opteyned. And therefore they say in all
cases the paryshens must be shriuen of their propre curates, oneles the curat
be content to give license to the contrary. And therefore for a more clear way
in conscience in this behalf, many parysshens have in times paste obtained
froo Rome, that they might chose them an able confessor, and a greatte
multitude of such lycences have been pourchased, as it is well known, which
has be right great charge to the people in many places. And yet curates have
holde^, that not withstondynge such licenses, religious men, because they be
neither elected by the people, ne appointed by the bishop, to have the
execution of a pristes power over the people, be none able confessors, and
diverse men have been of the same opinion. And therefore a ferther question has been moved there upon, that if any religious men have opteyned a privilege, that
they may enjoin penance to the people, whether that then they be able
confessors, so that they may laufully here the confession of an other man's
parysshen, that has such a pardon, as is before rehearsed, and no license of
his curate or not, and yet many curates have said nay. And the gloss upon the
same chapter, Omnis vtriusque sexus, upon these words, Alieno sacerdoti, is
of that opinion, as to the reder will appear.

And by these diversities of opinions have risen great variances and strives
bytwixte curates and their parishens, where most love and charity should be, to
the right great peril and danger of the souls of many persons: and it is
very like so to do as long as it shall be suffered to continue as it does.
It seems therefore right expedient, that the rulers provide a conuenyent
remedy in this point, in as reasonable time as they can.

And ferthermore if spiritual reulers would now in this dangerous time, for
the auoydyng of such abusions, as be here before remembered, and of diverse
other here omytted, whereby great gruges have risen in many parties of
christendom, be dylygent callers on to have a general counsel, not only to
avoid such abusions, but also to determyne, what power the clergy ought to
have, by the law of god, and what by custom or by grant of princis, and
what not. And that they would be be contented to renounce all such auctorite
as the said counsel should think expedient to be renounsed: then it will
appear, that they intend the honor of god, and welthe of the people. And if
they will endeavor them self to defer the general cou^sayl, and resist it to
their power, the^ it is a lykelyhod, yt they will do what they can, to maynteyne
the authority, power, and worldly honor yt they have had in time paste,
without abatynge of it. And if it be so, all princis christened are bound in
conscience to look on it: and not to cease, tylle they have by one assente
reformed, that is amysse in that behalf.


BIS. Perauenture they would be the lother to such a reformation, for it should
show a defaute in their predecessors, in that they would pretend to have a
power, where they had none: and that they would also suffer such things, which
now be taken for abusions.


SAL. That pretense and suffera^ce was not begone by the bishops that now be,
and if they had, yet they ought not to po^der it so much, but that they should
refourme it if they could, according to this counsel, that says, that that
we have unadvisedly done, let us advisedly reform again. And if they will do
so, I think verily, they shall have more true honor in the hearts of the
people, then they have had in time past. And it is not for spiritual men much
to regard such temporal honor. For they may more lightly offend in
accepting of it, than temporal rulers. For they should ever stere the people
by word and by example to perfyte mekenes, and to dispisynge of all worldly
pleasures: and such worldly honors in spiritual men, break that exaumple very
much. More over it is not very like, that these grudges and murmurations that
now be among christen me^ will be appesed, but it be by a general counsayl, or
by battle. And battaylle can be no reasonable judge in this case. For I here
of no matter yt is now in variance, but that it may right well be determined by
way of counsel. And the people as far as ever I could perceive, are much
desirous to here the determynation of the superiors therein, and ready to obey,
and are not inclyned to any one opinion articuler or singular affection so much,
but that they are ready to be reformed: and desire nothing more then to know
the truth, and to have perfect mekenes appear among ye clergi. Who may then in
this case with out offense take the swerd, not assaying first, whether all
might be appeased with Love and Charity without the sword? I trow no man
will say that any man may do it. And ferthermore it appears in a book that is
called Libellus de moribus Turcarum, that there be among the turks four
diverse opinions, who shall be saved, whereof the first opinion is of them that
say, that no man may be saved, but by the law of Mahumite. The second opinion
is of them, that say the law of Mahumyte profits nothing but the grace of
god, the which they say profits without law or merit. The.iii. opinion is
of the^ that say that every man shall be saved by his merit without law or grace.
The.iiii. is of them that say, yt every man may be saved in his own belefe, and
that there is given to every nation a law by god, in the which he may be
sauid. And that no law is better tha^ an other, how be it they that be of that
opinion, be much suspected among the Turks, and be taken as scismatikes, and
be greuousely punyshed, when they be found. And therefore they keep them self
secret, and dare not show their opinion openly: but they that be of the other
three opinions, be all of great multitude and power, and dare well auowe their
opynion. And thervppon ryseth many times greatte arguments, variances, and
debates, which sometimes can not be appesed without great battaylle. And
therefore he that is strengest has his way preferred for the time. And these
opinions can never be clearly determined among them, because they lack a
ground to bring them to the knowledge of the truth therein: for the book of
their law, which they call the Alkaron, is so full of lies and vain trifles,
that it brings them alwey that look upon it, into more doutes then they were
before. And therefore their priests be always sorye, when it shall be brought
forth. For they know well, that the more it is looked upon, the more the
falsehode thereof will appear. But we be all in an other case, for we have such
a law, that is to say the law of Christ, that if we will with mekenes study how
we might come to the true knowledge of it, we shall pleynly se in it the true
conclusions of al things yt be necessary to our salvation. And if our pristes
would be loath to have ye law of ye gospel known, it could not be thought to be
because the truth will not appear by it, for in deed as they know best, all
truth apereth in it. And therefore if they should resist to have it come to
perfect knowledge, it were like that they did it for fear that it should
appear thereby, how far their manner of living now in these days varieth fro
it, than that they should doubt that the troth would not appear by it: what
then should move us to leave that truth, and turn us to the uncertain
chance of battaylle and war? If we do so, we show our self by our deeds to
follow the Turks and sarasyns rather then our master Christ, though we would
with our words happily say nay. And if such a general counsel were
gathered, it is no doubt, but that they would holly agree, that the clargie
should have all the power and authority that was given to them of Christ.
For they might not take it fro them if they would.

And over that it is not to suppose, but that they would agree also: that the
clergy should hold and enjoy al such authority, liberty, and power, as has
in time past ben granted to them by temporal princis, or that they have by
custom had possession of, so that it stand with the honor of god, encrece of
the faith, and the tranquillity of the people. And if they pretend to have
any auctoritee, that stands not therewith, it were neither good for them
self, ne for none other, that they should have it any longer. And ferther more
there is yet one thing, that does as much hurt, as I trow any other thing
does.


BYZ. What is that?


SAL. That there is an opinion among much people, that many of the clergy,
both spiritual rulers and other under them, have taught and preched in times
paste diverse things, more specially for their own syngular profit and
honor, then for the honor of god or welthe of the souls of the people, and
that yet they endeavor them self no more to ease the minds of the people
therein then they do. For neither do they make it appear to the people, that
they grudge therein without cause, and so offend god thereby: ne yet refourme
they not that that the people gruge at.

And now if any man will say, that good indiffere^cie would, that we should
have touched also defautes in the temporaltie more then we have done, to that
I will say thus, that I am right far deceived, but this be true, that the
world shall never come to a good peace and perfyte reformation, till the
spirituality, either by their own free will, or else by a good diligent
calling on of the temporaltie, be first reformed, and that then they in
charity and in a pure love to god and to the people, put to their hands to
reform such things, as they think to be mysused by temporal men, which if
they do, it is not to doubt, but that they shall right shortly bring the
matter to a good effect. For it is no lyttel thing, that spiritual men may
do therein, if they will, and if they will in no wise lay their hands to the
matter, I think verily, that it will be hard to bring the world to a good
reformation: but that it shall abide still out of order, as it has done in
time paste.


Who is the higher judge in such corrections, as be called spiritual
corrections, the king or the clergy. The second Chapter.
SAL. If the party in any suite in the spiritual court will appele, the order
of his appeal is appointed by the statute made an.xxv. R. Hen. viii. and the
statute is, that if he appele fro the archebyshoppe, that he shall appele to
the kings majesty in his chauncerye, and that upon every such appele a
commission shall be directed to such persons, as the king shall name to
determyne the cause without ferther appele. And sith the king may appoint
commissioners to determyne the cause, I hold it no great doubt, but that the
king him self is the high judge upon every such appeal.


BIZAN. yea but my meaning is in such suytes, where there is none appele
taken: but that the spiritual iuges give sentence against the party, and
appoynte him percase to do unreasonable penance, whether he may have any
remedy by the law of the realm.


SAL. What thynkest thou in that question?


BYZ. That he has no remedy by the kings law. For if he obey not the
sentence, he shall be accursed. And if he stand accursed.xl. days, the king,
upon the Certificat of the bishop, is bound of justice to awarde a writ,
that is called a writ de excommunicato capiendo, and thervppon shall he lie in
prison till he have as well satisfied the church of the contempt, as of the
wrong done to her. For the statute of Circumspecre agatis is, that
corrections, which p^lates make for deedly sin, as for fornicacion,
auoutrie, and such other: the spiritual judge, if he proceed to the
correction of the sin, shall hold plee, not withstandyng the kings
prohibition. And by the statute of Sub qua forma, if bodyly penance be
enjoined, and the party will freely redeem it for money, he may do it. And so
it seems, that the corrections of fornication, auoutrie, and such other, by
the which term (such other) be understand usury, simony, yea and perjury,
and sklaunder in some cases, perteyne of very right to the prelates to correct.
And though they assign unreasonable penance, yet I suppose there is no
remedy, but by appeal. And if the party lose the advantage of his appele,
then he has put him self without remedy. And ferthermore by the constitution
prouynciall, that is in the third book among the constitutions, De immunitate
ecclesie, which begins, Seculi principes, It appears, that he that is in
prison, for that he is excommunicate, ought not to be delivered till he have
made satisfaction as well to the church, as to the party: And so sithe the
church may assign the satisfaction, it seems that the church is the high
judge.


SA. I perceive thy conceyt well, but er that I answer the therein, I shall
show the my conceyte in a another thing, that is to say, that as I suppose,
such spiritual corrections as now be used for fornication, auoutrie, and
such other be not merely grounded upon the law of god, but by the law of man,
and in this realm they ben done by the clergy, by a custom of the realm,
except only the process of excommunication. And if the kings court had used to
have holden ple also of fornication, and auoutrie, and such other the clergy
could not of right have compleyned of hit. And I hold it no great doubt, but
that the parlyament might yet ordeyne, that it should do so herafter. But
parauenture it was thought at the beginning of that custom, that it was more
ease for the people, and less expenses, and parauenture more conueniente to
have such small matters sued in the ordinariis court, then in the kings
court: and therefore it was then so suffered to be. But if it should happen to
appear by experience, that it were as good or better to the kings subjects,
to have susue matters determined in his courts, as in the ordinaries: It
should seem good to bring such corrections to the kings court. For tho
sins may be corrected there, as well as in the spiritual court. For hit is
here to be noted, that although a man be enjoined in the spiritual court to do
such compulsatorie penance as is there commonly used, and he does it: yet he
must after that be confessed of the same offense, and take penance of his
gostely father. And so might he do if he were first corrected in the kings
court. Nevertheless I speak not this to thentent, that I would that such suites
should be brought to the kings court, but that hit may appear, that
prelates hold plee thereof by the custom of the realm, and by the sufferaunce
of the king and of his laws: and not by the i^mediate authority of the law
of god.


BYSANCE. If they may hold plee of such things, it is all to one effect,
whether it be by the law of god, or by the law of man.


SAL. Nay for if they have it only by custom, it may with a cause be taken fro
them, and that may happily cause them to take the better head, how they order
them self in hit. And if it were by the law of god: then it might in no wise
be altered.

And as to the correction of heresy, the king has always seen it done in
this realm: except the time that the statute that was made in the second
year of king Henry the.iiii. concerning heresies, stood in effect. For if a
man before that statute, had been delivered by the ordinaries to the lay
court for heresye, he might not have been put in execution without a writ
fro the king, but with a writ fro the king, after the old custom of the
realm, he might then laufully have been put in execution. But yet as I take
hit, the king was not then upon every request made for such a wryt, bound
forthwith to grant it, but that he might take a respite to se the process,
and thereupon to grant the writ or not to grant it, as he saw to stand
with justice: but as it seems there were some that were not content, that the
execution should be delayed in such case till the kings writ came, but that
he so delivered, should forthwith be put in execution, and after the said
statute of secundo of Henry the fourth was made, by what conueyance I can not
fully tell, but it is not unlike, but that the clergy labored it, whereby it
was enacted, that in such case the party so delivered, should be put in
execution, no mention made that any such writ should be sued for to the
king: by which statute the parties so delivered were sometime put in execution
without any such wryt, and sometime labor was made not withstanding the
said statute, to have such a writ to save all things upright, and that the
king should take no displeasure. But that was not done for necessity but of
policy. For the statute was in the law sufficient warra^te without writ.
Under this manner diverse have been put in execution for heresy, whereupon have
risen great murmours and grudges among the people, when sum have affirmed,
that diverse so put in execution for heresy were no heritikes. Wherefore the
said statute of Hen. the fourth was repelled by the statute in the.xxv. year
of king Henry the.viii. as reason and conscience would it should: and
thereupon it is ordained, that if he that is laufullye conuicte for herysy,
refuse to abjure, or after abiuration fall in relaps, and be duly accused or
presented and conuicte, that then he shall be committed to the lay power to be
burned. etc. The kings writ, De heretico comburendo first had and opteyned
for the same. And so the old law is therein reuyued. And as me seems it
appears evidently, that in that execution the king is judge. For it can not
be done without his writ, which nevertheless he is not always bound to
grant, when it is asked: but as upon the sight of the process and sentence, he
shall think the sentence to stand with reason and conscience. For the statute
is not, that the king shall grant the writ, but that the party shall be
burned, the kingis writ De heretico comburendo first had and opteyned for the
same.

And therefore if the thing that he is co^uicted for, be no heresy, as it may
be, in some cases, after the clergy, because it is ageynste the cannons, and
yet be none in deed, because tho cannons be against the custom of the realm,
and that in te^porall things: then may the king deny the writ. And then as
to that treatise, that thou spekest of, called Circumspecte agatis, I littel
regard it. For many men say, it is no statute, but that it has been so named
to be by the prelates: And so it is said in the nyntene year of king Edward
the third, that it was. And hit is the more like to be so, because the same
Treatise, in manner word for word is put in a constitution prouincial, as a
thing taken out of the kings aunsweres: and in all the statute books, that go
abroad among the lerners of the laws of this realm, it appears not, that
that treatise should be taken out of the kings aunsweres, as to the reders
will appear. Nevertheless if it can be found among the kings records, that
it is a statute, I will take no exception to it, ne yet to Sub qua forma, nor
Articuli cleri. For as me seems it makes no greatte matter to the question,
that we be in hand with now, that is to say, whether be higher judge in
spiritual corections after the old grounds of the law, the king or the
clergy, whether they be statutes or not. For if a man be excommunicate, and so
continewe.xl. days, the custom is, that he shall upon the Certifycat of the
bishop made thereof to the king, be taken and put in prison, as thou have said
before. But then thou know well, that if the party so being in prisone,
make surmys to the king, that he has offered sufficient caucion or gage, to
satisfy the church and they will not receive it: that then the king shall
command the bishop, that he taking an able caucyon shall se the party
deliuerd out of prison: and if he obey not the writ, than the king may
deliver the party out of prison. And over that (if he will) he may, as men
think, put the bishop to answer to the contempt. For disobeyinge his
writ, and then shall the matter be determined in the kings chauncerie, and
there it shall comme in trial, whether the gage were sufficient or not.


BYZ. But whether shall that sufficiencye be esteemed as thou thynkest,
according to the penance assigned by the bishop, or according to the offense?


SAL. It may be, that there is no penance yet given, or parauenture he is
accursed upon a contempt for not apperance. But if the penance be given, and
he will not do it, wherefore he is accursed, and thereupon he is in prison upon
the wryt De excommunicato capiendo, and thereupon he offers a gage: I think
that there the sufficiencye of the gage shall be taken, according to the
offense, for the penance may be unreasonable.


BIZAN. And if the king take upon him to try the greatness or lyttelnesse of
the offense by his laws, than he takes upon him the keys of the church.


SALEM. Nay, for that may be valued as well by the kings laws, as it may by
the bishop, if the party will redeem his penance for money. But if the king
would for the refusing of his Caution take upon him to make the absolution him
self: then might hit be said, he meddled with the keys. But sithe he does
no more, but compelle the bishop to make absolucyon, according to his
laws: It can not be said, that he medleth with the keys.


BY. The process of a contempt, that thou spekest of, has not ben seen. And
over that the prelates complain, that if the bishop refuse to take the
caucion, that then an other writ shall go to the shyreffe to deliver the
party out of prisone, as thou haste said before: and in that writ they say,
there is no mencyon made, that either the church or the party shall be
satisfied. And that is the princypalle cause, why the said Constitution,
Seculi principes, was made:


SALEM. Though the process of a contempt has not ben seen in the same self
case, yet the process of a contempt has benne seen in like cases, for
disobeyinge the kings wryttes, and that that is all upon one like reason,
shall be taken of one like law.

And to that other point, that thou have moved, If the king upon the refusell
of the gage deliver the pertie out of prison, without satisfienge the party,
or the church either: I pray the show me thy mind, what wrong has the
church thereby?


BIS. It has wrong for this cause. For the law of the church is, that if a
man be accursed, he shall never be assoylled, but that he shall first make an
oath, that he shall obey the commandment of him that shall assoyle him, and
that before he be assoyled he shall make amendis to the parties grieved, if he
be able, and if he be not able, than he shall make an oath, that he shall do it
when he is able. And by that writ, De caucione admittenda, he is delivered
out of prison, and neither the church ne the party satisfied.


SA. And though he be so, yet neither of the^ has wrong. For he is yet
accursed as he was before, and may, er he be assoyled, make such oath as shall
be reasonable, but that oath that thou haste remembered before is clearly
against the laws of the realm. But if the king in that case pretended, that
when the party were so delivered out of prison, that he should also be
discharged of the execution, then had the clergy some color to complain, but
now have they none at all. And as to making amends to the party, It stands
not with the custom of the realm, that the clergy should have power to make
any amends to the party, but only that they in certain cases may give
penance for the sin. And therefore for beatyng of a clerk, the amends for
the trespass shall be made in the kings court: and for the layenge of violente
hands on the clerk, amends shall be made in the spiritual court, but yet
they may assign no peine pecuniarie, onles the party freely will redeem his
bodily penance with money without compulsion. And therefore there is one thing
in the said Treatise, called Circumspecte agatis, that makes me the more to
doubt, whether it be a statute or not.


BYZ. What is that?


SAL. It is recited there, that for fornication, auoutrie, and such other,
there is sometime assigned by prelates bodily pain, and sometime pecuniarie
pain, and I know not one case, where prelates for correction of sin may
assign pecuniarie pain. And therefore I think verily, the parlyamente would
never have made that recytalle. And thus it appears sufficientely, that by
that deliuerye out of prison, after the refusinge of the said caution, the
clergy has no cause to say, that the church or party have any wrong.


BYZAN. Well admytte hit be therein, as thou sayste, yet it can not be said,
but that the custom of the realm is broken by it.


SALEM. Why what call thou the custom of the realm in such case?


BIZAN. That the king shall keep in prysone such as be excommunicate by the
prelates, till they have satisfied the church as well of the contempt as of
the wrong. And that the custom is such, it appears pleinly by the said
writ De exco^mun. cap. For by that writ the king commands the shireffe to
justify him that is excommunicate by the body, till he have satisfied the
church of the contempt and wrong, as is said before. And wha^ he is
delivered without such satisfaction, the writ is not observed, ne yet the
custom of the realm.


SA. The writ is as thou sayste, but that is put into the writ rather to put
the party in a fere, and to enduce him to submyt him the rather to his
ordinary, than it is to show the plainnes of the law, or of the custom of
the realm, and that appears by the said writ de Caucione admitten. For by
that writ the king notes unto ye bishop, yt if he refuse to take a reasonable
caucion of the pertie, that he will in that case do yt to him perteyneth to do.
And so it appears, that the king has some other thing to do in the matter,
then to keep the party still in prison. And surely if the custom were
precisely, that the king should keep the party in prison, till he had
satisfied the church, it were far unreasonable. For it may be, that the
ordinary judged hit for symonye, vsurye, or periurye, or such other, that was
none: should the king then be bound to keep the party stylle in prisone,
and to do penance, where he is not guilty, it seems not reasonable.


BYZ. If the king judge, what is symony and usury, and what not: does he not
take upon him to judge upon things mere spiritual, and so confundeth the
keys of the church?


SAL. Thou must always consider, that (as I have said before) the lettynge
out of prisone of one that is excommunicate, hurts not the keys, for that he
shall be accursed still, when he is out of prison, as he was first: and all that
the king does therein, is to see, whether he may with conscience keep the party
any longer in prison or not. And I trow thou wylt agree, that if the king be
so instructed, that he thinks in his conscience, that it is no symony or
vsuri, that the party lies fore, that he may not with conscience keep him
any longer in prison. And I pray the, let me know what thou thynkest therein.


BYZ. Verily thou haste brought me in doubt of the matter, and therefore I pray
the, show me, what is the very law and custom of the realm, concerning a
man that is so in prisone upon a writ de excommunicato capiendo, as the
thinks.


SAL. I take the custom and the law of the realm to be this, that he shall
not be delivered out of prisone, oneles the ordinarye certifye the king, that
the imprisoned has satisfied the church, or else that the party offer a
sufficient Caucion to satisfy the church, and the ordinary refuses hit: or
else that the king or his Chaunceler be so thoroughly informed in the matter,
that it appears unto them, that the party may not with justice and
conscience be kept any longer in prison: As if the sentence were given for a
thing mere temporal, or that so plain and so sufficient witness be brought
in, that it moves the king and his chaunceler, to believe that the first
witness were untrue, or that the examinour entered the saying of the witness
otherwise then the witness testified.


BYZ. And if there be such witness, yet their saying shall not be believed: ne
the king may not put in trial again, that is ones tried after the order of the
spiritual law:


SA. To avoid the exco^ication I agree well he may not put the first proof
in trial again, as thou say, but to order the kings conscience, and to
know whether he may ryghtwysely keep the party any longer in prison or not,
he may well examyne the truth of the matter. For truth rules in conscience,
what so ever the order of the law be, and therefore if the appelle, in an
appele of morder be found gyltie, and the judge of his own knowelege knew
that he is not gyltie, he may not give judgment against him, but must rather
resygne his office.


BIS. I agree well there, but I put case, that the appelle in thy case be
found gyltie by false verdite, and the judge by examination of witness, and by
confession of the same jury also come to perfyt knowledge, that the appelle is
not gilty, he may never the les in yt case give judgment, and is bound to do
it, for he took the examination against the order of the law, and therefore he
must remove that knowledge, because he is com to it of his own wrong, and
against the order of the law, and even so it is in this case. The king ne yet
his chanceler neither ought not to have newli exai^ed the matter, seeing that it
was sufficiently tried and proved before in the spiritual court, and therefore
they must remove and put away the conscience that they have gotten by that
unlawful examination, and beware that they do not attempt so far ageynste
the law an other time.


SAL. Though the judge in the said case of appele did against the law, to
examyn new witness, yet it is not like to this case. For in that case of appele,
the verdite is of record in the same court, and it is given by auctorite of
the same law, that he sits as judge to judge upon, and it is also tried after
the order of the same law: so that upon that matter there is no ferther trial,
wherefore I agree well that he ought not to have taken there any new examination,
but in this case the sentence is given in an other court, and after another
law, than the chancellor is set to judge upon. For he is set to judge
after conscience, and not only after the order of the law spiritual nor
temporal but in few cases, and also the process of excommunication is to
punish sin, and to maynteyne virtue, but what punysshement of sin, and
mayntenaunce of virtue is it, if the king keep him that is no offender in
prysone? And therefore I think the king or his chancellor may well take a
new examination in the matter, and do thereafter.


BIS. I feel thy conceyte well, but yet surely if such examination be used,
hit will be thought by many, that the spiritual jurisdiction is thereby
greatly confounded, and that the king and his laws do littel in favor of it.


SALEM. I se well thou styckest soore to the matter, and therefore to ease thy
mind somewhat therein I will move the of two things.


BIS. What be they?


SA. One is this if the custom were, that when the excommunicate is in prison,
upon the writ of Excommunicato capiendo, that he should be kept still in
prison, tylle he have satisfied the church, whether he be ryghtwisely
excommunicate or not, were this a lawefull custom?


BIS. I think nay.


SAL. And this pretense that thou styckest so much upon, that there should be
no examination of the matter is of the same effect. The second is, if the
parlyamente did put clearly away the writ of Excommunicato capiendo, and
left the matter in such case, that the ordinaries should justify al
excommunicates by the censures of the church, in the best manner they could
without any help of the king or of his laws, should the parlyament thereby do
any wrong to the keys of the church?


BY. I think nay, for the power of the clergy concerning such
excommunications should never the les stond still in her full strength. But yet
it should break a good laudable custom of the realm that was first begone in
favor of the clerge, and of the spiritual jurisdiction.


SAL. thou sayste even truth, and my meaning is not that I would have that
custom broken, but that it should appear, that though hit were broken, that
yet no man had cause to complain, as though the liberty of the church were
thereby brokin, or the keis violate, wherefore me thinks it more expedient for
the clergy, to take this matter as it is, that is to say, that the king and
his laws be as well content to have such rebels, as have deserved
punishment, and yet will not obey the keys of the church, correctio, as they be:
but yet yt the king and his laws should therefore in any case be compelled,
whether they would or not, to punish an Innocente, it is not reasonable: and
thus it should seem to be the more indifferent way, and more according with
justice, that the matter be examined before the king, and that if it appear
thereupon, that the party offended not, that he be deliuerid out of prison, and
yt the ordryng of the excommunication be thereupon left to the conscience of
the bishop, the^ to charge the kings conscience or his chauncellours either,
with keeping of him in prison. And then to that thou have said before, that if
such exco^munications be taken, that it will be thought by many, that the king
and his laws do litel in favor of the spiritual jurisdiction, I pray the be
judge therein thy self, whether it be much or litel, that the king does, wha^ he
only upon ye certificat of the bishop takes ye pertie and leyeth him in
prison, and there kepith him, til he either satisfies ye church, or else if he
complain, that he has wrong, examineth the matter, he being in prison, how be
it I think, yt the king in such case may if he se cause let the pertie to bayl,
ha^ging ye examination, though the shereffe by the reason of the statute of
westminster. i. may not do it. And now to our first matter, If the king would
judge upon Simony and usury, thynkest thou that he should offend the keys?


BYZANCE. I think so, for symonye and vsurye be prohibited by the law of
god, and it belongs to the clergi to declare, what is the law of god, and
what not.


SA. Though symonie and usury be prohibit by the law of god, yet that proves
not, that princis may not therefore hold ple thereof, for taking away of an other
man's goods, and also periurye be prohibyte by the law of god, and yet
princes hold plee thereof, and though Symonye and vsurye be prohibit by the
law of god, yet it is not declared by the law of god, what is symonie, and
vsery and what not. And it seems, that princis taking to them spiritual men,
as their counsailours, may do that well enough. And if it were ordered, that
for symonye that the kings court should hold plee, I suppose it would do
much good. For hit is not unlike, but that many offend therein, and yet I
here but of little correction in that behalf. And therefore though the king
judged upon symonie, and vserye, I suppose he offended not the keys, though
happily as the law of his realm is now, he should offend his laws.


BY. Well I will take a respyte to be auysed, er that I show the my full mind,
in this matter, and I pray the let me now feel thy conceyt, if a man be
accursed, for that he will not obey a decre in a cause of matrimony, and he is
in prisone for it upon the writ De excommunicato capiendo, and offers a
sufficient caucion, to obey the church, shall it be accepted?


SALEM. yea as well in that case, as in any oother case, and hit shall be
valued after the substance of him that is in prison. And if he will yet when he
is out of prison, disobey the decree, and not marye, whereby he forfaiteth his
caucion, than he may upon a new information, made to the king in his
chancerie, be taken again by a new writ, De excommunicato capiendo fourmed
specially upon the case, and be kept in prison till he obey the decree. And so
he may be in all cases, where he is delivered upon a caucion, and keeps not
his promise.


BYZANCE. Well I am content in this matter, but I pray the, whether may the
king in any case deny a writ of Excommunicato capiendo, when it is upon the
certificat of the bishop requyredde?


SALEM. yea and that may be proved thus. It apperethe in the regestre, that if
the king at the certificat of the bishop, have awarded forth a writ de
Excommunic. ca. and after the king before the party is taken, is informed,
that the party appealed before the sentence, or that a prohibition was
delivered, and not withstanding the judge proceeded, whervppon an attachement
is hanging before the king, or else it appears, that the plee perteyneth
clearly to the kings court: in all these cases the king shall grant forth
a Supersedeas, commandynge that the party shall not be arrested, and thereupon
it follows, that if no writ be forth, it may be denied, when it is asked,
and that if the party be arested, before the Supersedeas came, that the king
may for the same causes deliver him out of prison upon a special writ de
excommunicato deliberando.


BISANCE. There is no writ de excommunicato liberando, in the regestre, but
where the bishop certifieth the king, that the parti has satisfied the church.


SA. All writtes that be grauntable by the law, can not be in the regestre, and
the special matters prove, that he ought to be delivered out of prison for ye
time, and so a writ may be fourmed upon the matter well enough to deliver
him: how be it he shall remain yet accursed under such manner, as he did
before, and may be taken again, if need be, and that is in favor of the
spiritual jurisdiction. For I trow therein is no te^porel law more favorable to
the spiritual jurisdiction the^ the laws of this realm be, and yet if such
favor be happily broken sometime, a defaute is found thereat by the clergy, as
though the holle liberte of the clergy were broken thereby, where no liberty
is broken at all, and even upon such a point was the said co^stitution Seculi
principes, made. For the constitution in the beginning recites, that whenne
such excommunicate persons be upon the sygnification of prelates according to
the custom of England, taken and put in prisone, that then the prelates,
because they refuse to take a gage, whereby the party offreth to stand to the
co^maundmentis of the church, and to obey the law, be commanded to deliver
the party out of prison, which as it is said, there the prelates may not
nor ought not to do, as they say, before due satisfaction made, and thervppon
the said constytution says farther, that so lay men usurp the keys of
power and counnynge, to the confoundynge of the judgment of the church, where
the truth is, the church has given no judgment, that the party shall be
committed to prisone, for it has no power so to do, but only to
excommunicate the party for the sin, and thervppon the king according to his
laws has delivered the party out of prison, that he imprisoned him self:
because the bishop has refused a reasonable caucion. And yet it follows in
the said constitution: Wherefore we ordeyne, that the excommunicate persons so
taken in our province, and so goinge out of prisone against the lyberties and
customs of the church of England, shall be to their more confusion showed
excommunicate with ringynge of belles, and lyghtyng of candelles. etc. And so
that, that in the beginning of the said constitution is called the custom of
England, as it is in deed, and is the very common law of the realm, that a
person excommunicate shall be laid in prysone by the king upon the certificat
of the bishop, is after called the liberty and custom of the church of
England: whereby the constitution meneth, that he yt goth so out of prisone,
for that the bishop refuses his caucion: and they that let him out also,
breken the liberty of the clergy of England, and usurps the keys of power
and cunninge, where in deed neither their liberty, ne keys be touched: but the
custom of the realm (whereby they claim their liberty) is observed. And if
they coud prove the custom of the realm, whereby they claim yt liberty
broken, yet they ought not co^plain, as though their liberty were only broken.
For it is no more their liberty then it is the liberty of all the people of
England. For all the people of England make the church of England, and it
hurts all the people, and not only the clergy, to have any one laudable
custom of the realm broken. And yet the meaning of that constitution is that
that going out of prison hurts the clergy only. And such singularite has
done much hurt, and will do, as long as it contynueth.

And farthermore the cause why the said co^stitutio^ says, that prelatis may
not nor ought not deliver the imprisoned by the kings writ De cautione
admittenda, the writ is, that though as the king is informed, the party
has offered to the bishop a sufficient gage, that he shall obey the
commandment of the church, after the form of the law, and that the
bishop refuses to take hit. etc. The king by that term Law, meneth the
law of his realm: which is, that the party excommenged, shall make amendis
to the church for the sin only, and no satisfaction to the party. For that
perteyneth to the kings law. And the law of the church is, that
satisfaction shall be made also to the party. And for mayntenaunce of that
satisfaction to be had by authority of the spiritual law, the said
Constitution was made to put the party in fear to goo out of prisone by the
kings writ.

And all this rises upon the variance of the laws, whereby greatte grudges and
expenses, yea and much unquietness have ensued, and will do as long as it and
other things like shall be suffered to continue as they do now.


BY. All such expenses and vnquyetnesses be well provided for, by reason of
the said appele, that may be made into the kings Chancerie. For it is not to
think, but that the commissioners, that shall be assigned by the king, will
order the matier after justice, and according to the kings laws.


SAL. I trust they will, but yet it is not the ease of every pore man, that
may happily be wrongfully handeled in the spiritual court, to sue forth a
commission under the kings brood seal. And therefore if the old form of the
kings law be observed therein, tbat is to say, that if the party that is
accursed and imprisoned will offer a reasonable caucion to the bishop, to obey
the church, according to the kings laws, and he refuse it, that then the
king, according to the old custom, shall let him out of prison, till he can
find the means to bring the bishop to order him, according to the kings
law, and that all the process of that constitution, whereby the party for his so
goinge out of prison should to his more confusion be showed to be accursed with
ryngynge of belles, and lyghtynge of candelles, should for the cruelof it be
avoided: I suppose verily it would do much good. And yet I pray the my friend
Bysance, let me know thy mind in one thing concerning this matter.


BY. What is that?


SAL. That if a man be accursed, and he is contented to make amends, and to
have his absolution, but the bishop will not take any amends of him: or if
he take amends, or put him to penance, which he fulfylleth, yet he will not
assoyle him, ne he will not certifye the king, that he is accursed, so that
he might by help of the kings laws be dismyssed: but will suffer him to
stand still so accursed: what remedy has the party, as thou thynkest, to be
discharged of that excommunication? And like wise if a man be accursed for a
thing mere temporal, and would be discharged of it, and the bishop will not
discharge him, what remedy has the party to be assoyled?


BYZANCE. In thy last case the party may have a Praemunire.


SAL. And though he take it and recover thereby, yet he stands still
accursed. And also the party and judge may be deed, and then the praemunire is
gone.


BIS. Well, I think in both thy cases, that if the exco^mengemente be
certified in to any of the kings courts of record, that the^ the king upon
the compleynte of the party may command the bishop to assoyle him, if he will
order him self according to the laws of the realm, and if he will not, he
shall ren in a contempt against the king.


SAL. And if the bishop will not certify the exco^municatio^ in to none of the
kings courts, ne unto the king neither: what remedy has the party then,
must he stand always accursed, and be prohibit from heryng of dyuyne service,
and fro all company of feythfull people during his life?


BIZAN. It is not to be thought that any bishop will deny absolution, where he
ought to make it: and if he do, I pray the let me here thy conceyte, what
remedy as thou thynkeste, should lie in the case?


SA. Whether any bishop will do so or not I ca^ not tell, but surely there is a
great opinion among the people, that as the world has gone in time paste,
if such an excommunication had touched the power of a bishop, or the liberty
of the church, or else that any great man of the spirituality, had borne
displesure to the party, that he should have right much business, and also pay
well for it, ere he should have his absolution. But how so ever it has been
in time past, I beseech our lord that the matter may be so well looked to,
that hit be not so hereafter, ne that unreasonable penance, ne unreasonable
money, for redeming of hit, nor for the costs of the suite, be not given nor
taken hereafter.

And as for a remedy for the party to be assoyled, I think verily, that the
king upon the surmyse of the party, may as well co^mande the ordinary to make
absolution, so the party order him according to the laws, where the
exco^mengement is not certified of record, as where it is. For me thynkethe,
that the reason is all one in both cases. For as well shall he be prohibited fro
divine service and communion in the one case as in the other. And if he have
any action to sewe and take it, the ordinarye might else disable him when he
would. And likewise if the bishop assoylle him, and when he has so done,
will not make him his letters of absolutio^: the king may also command him
to do hit, as me seems.


BIZ. There is no writ in the Regestre, that the king may write to the
ordinary to make absolucion, where the excommunication is not certified of
record into the kings court.


SA. And if there be not, it forces little. For if there be a like reason in
an other case, as there is in that: the clerks of the Chauncerie may agree
upon a wryt. And if the king might not do, as I have said, it might happen,
that many of his subjects should fail of Justice, and that the king could
not help it. And therefore if the bishop will not obey the kings writ, an
attachement shall go against him to answer to the contempt: And then shall the
mattier be determined after the order of the kings laws. And so it appears
(as me seems) that even after the old law and custom of the realm, the
king is the high and supreme judge in such corrections, though the said
statute of.xxv. H. viii. had never been made: and that he may see his subiectis
have justice in that behalf, if they will call for help unto him. But if the
party in such case, will submytte him self unto the ordinary, then by the
parties assent, the ordinary may make the fynall conclusion: so he offend not
the kings laws in his doing.


Of diverse things concerning saint Thomas of Canturbury. The.iii. Chapter.
SAL. I know no man that says, but that saint Thomas of Caunturbury is a
blessed saint in heaven: but parauenture there be some, that doubt, what were
the very articles, whereupon king Henry the second, and he varied. And happily
some will say, that he did more against the kings prerogative, tha^ he ought to
have done, but though he did so in deed, yet that moves me but little to
think, but that he was and is a holy man, and a blessed saint. For if he
thought in his conscience, yt rightwisenes and truth bound him to do that he
did, as I suppose verily it did, it suffised to him. For ignorance may excuse,
but only against the law of god, and the law of reason. And the things that
the king and he varied upon: were upon the customs of the realm, and the
kings prerogatyue: which saint Thomas thought, was ageinste the liberty of
the church, wherein saint Thomas might lightly be deceived by ignorance: how
be it I think verily, that there is one thing, that derogateth and diminishes
greatly the very true honor, yt would be given by many men to saint Thomas, if
that were not.


BY. What is that?


SA. It is that some pristes exalt saint Thomas so high above other saints,
and procure honor to him more the^ commonly is done to any of the apostels,
and yet secretly stele the honor to them self, and think them self the more
worthy honor for his deeds: and that has caused some lay men to have less
devotion to him thanne they would have had. And though they do not well in
that doing: yet it is good to al pristes to look upon the matter. And somewhat
to ease the minds of the people therein. And now will I say somewhat concerning ye
outward honor done to sayncte Thomas before other saints, that I could never
see cause reasonable, why all the commemorations in the prouynce of
Caunturburye should be said more in his name, then in the name of saint
Augustyne the apostell of England, which brought the faith first in to this
realm. For as far as to manne appears, sayncte Thomas had never known the
christian faith, ne had been the holy doctrine of saint Augustyne goinge before.
And sithe he was archebyshoppe of Caunturbury as well as saint Thomas was, and
the first and chief of al other archbishops there: I can not se why the
commemorations should not be attribute to him rather then to the other. And I
think verily, that if it were so ordered to be, that a right greatte occasyon
of mekenes in many spiritual men should follow thereupon: and it is no doubt,
but that saynct Thomas would be also right highly plesed therewith. And
ferthermore I can not se any conueniency why saint Thomas should have his
feast of his translation kept in so high solempnitie as it is accustomed to be:
before other saynctis. And parauenture that point with such other like, John^
Gerson mente to treat of in his treatise that he calls in latin Declaratio
defectuum uirorum ecclesiasticorum, where he aduertseth rulers to look, whether
it be convenient, that some new saintis should have more solemnity in the
church of god, then the ancient saynctes have. And yet if the solemnity to
some of the apostols and to saynct Thomas be compared to gether, they be right
far a sonder. And therefore why his Translation should be kept holy day, and
not the very day of the deposition of saint Augustine, or of saint Ethelbert,
that was the first king of England, that was converted: or why the
deposition of saint Edward king and confessor, which fallethe in the.xii.
days, as the deposition of saint Thomas does, should not be had in more
honor then it is, and saint Thomas to have so much, I can not tell what the
very consideration should be of it. And verily I suppose, yt if the depositio^
of saint Ethelbert, and of saint Edward, and the translation of saint Thomas
were on the depositio^ of saint Augustyne kept holy day to gether, and the
holy day of the translation of saint Thomas to cease, and that priests only
should say the service of saint Thomas on the day of his translation, and the
people not to be bound to here it, that it would right highly plese saint
Thomas, and cause many persons also to have him more in honor then they have
now. And here (as me seems) it is somewhat to be meruayled also, that al we
englyshemen, as to the multitude of us, can report more of saint Denis of
France, of saint David of wales, saint Patrike of Irelande, and of saint Ninian
commonly called saint Tronion of Scotland, than we can of saint Augustine the
apostle of England, ye first brought the faith in to England, and yet though
as me seems it were convenient, yt saint August. were more honorid then he is,
nevertheless I mean not therefore, that seint Thomas should have any les true
honor then he has, but rather more. Ferthermore because there be diverse
articles put in books, which, as it is said, saint Tho. should hold, I have
entitled herafter some of the^, as I have found the^ written in a right ancient
book, and shall show my conceit, how the law of this realm, and they agree
together. But I will not expressly affirm, yt saint Tho. held the^ in deed. For
I never saw them as of a full authority, nor I wot not where to find the full
auctorite of them: howbeit if his articles were pleinli and by sufficient
auctorite known, so yt it should not be laufull for no man to add no another to
the^ ne to diminish any thing fro the^, it were well done. For as they stond now
in an uncertainty, many persons take upon the^ to report many articles of
him, yt as I suppose, he never held: and one of his articles, as I have found
it written in the said book is this. If controversy be upon the presentment of
a benefice between lay me^ and clerks, ye king pretended that it ought to be
determined in his court: And it is said, that saint Thomas should find
default at this article, as a thing against the liberty of the church. And
surely it is not against the liberte of the church but is an old laudable
custom of the realm, the kings prerogatyue, and the right of his corowne.
And if saint Thomas resisted it, he resisted ye truth. How be it that
prouethe not, but that he is yet never the les a right holy and blessed saint,
as I have said before.

An other article is, that churches of the kings gift may never be laufully
given without his assent. And this is also an old prerogative to the king and
his progenitors, and is as much to say, as that in benefices, that be of the
kings gift, no time ne laches renneth to the king, but that the king shall as
well present after the.vi. months as before. And if saint Thomas resisted
that, he resysted the right. For it is a laufull custom, and a lauful
prerogative. For why the king ne none other patron within this realm claim
none other right in such presentmentes, but after every auoydance to present
their clerk to the ordynarie. And if he be able, than the ordinary to receive
him: or else upon a notice in some case, and in some case without notice, the
patron at his peril to present an other. And if the king present not, the
ordinary, till he present, may with the profits thereof, appoint one to serve
the cure. But if the king claymed also to have the profytes of the benefice in
the mean time, and he to se the cure served him self, till he presented, that
were more doubt.

An another article is this, that they that be accursed shall not find pledges
to restore, nor be sworn to it: but only to find pleges to stand to the
judgment of the church for their absolution. And this article is also holden
for law in this realm to this day. For in case that the judge spiritual will
not assoyle the parti without restitution, where by the laws of the realm he
ought to do it: the king may upon a contempt command him to do it. And if
he will nedely proceed to compel restitution, a prohibition lyth. And that is
the very cause why an exco^mengement certified before the kings justice by the
pope, was never allowed in this realm, because the king might not write to Rome
to make the absolution, in case yt by his laws the pertie ought to have it.

Also an another article is, that the church shall not defend goods that be
forfayte.

Also that plees of det belong to the kingis court, though an oath be made.

Also that the son of a bond man shall not be made pressed without license of
the lord. These three last articles be holde^ for law in this realm to this
day. And yet it is said, that saint Thomas resisted them.

And as to the third article of the said three last articles, the law is
this, as I take it, that if the son of a bond man be made priest without the
lords license, that yet he is a bondsman as he was before, and the lord may
compel him to do him service, as to a priest belongs, before any other. And
though the truth were that saint Thomas resisted these articles all that he
could, and that he is yet nevertheless canonised as a saint, that proves
nothing those articles to be unlawful. For if he in his conscience thought
them unlawful, that suffiseth to him, as I have said before.

And more over if all the clergy of christendom would prohibit the said
articles, or any article of the law of this realm, yt is not against the law
of god nor the law of reason: yt prohibitio^ should not be of effect in this
realm. And there be diverse other artycles in books and legendis, wherein he
resisted ye law of the realm without cause, if it be as ye said books do
testify, which I remytte to the judgment of them that will take the pain
to read them. And over that in the books of some pardoners, that have gone
about for saint Thomas, be contained many and diverse frivolous and untrue
things for procuring of money: as it is of this article, that ne had saint
Thomas ben, no man should have set his child to scole, nor have eaten in his
house, pygge, gose, nor capon, but he should have paid a fine to the king.
And diverse other things be thus imagyned, whereby the people be greattely
illuded and deceived, and saint Thomas right highly displesed. For he loves no
untruth, and yet they have been suffered to pass over from year to year
without correction: doste thou not think my friend Bysaunce, that such
things would be reformed?


BYZAN. Forsooth I think it right expedient, that rulers and governors look
well upon such matters. But yet sum men will parauenture think, that it is
not convenient, for lay men to speak of such high things, as pertayne to
great clerks and high learned men. And I have hard some men say my self, that
before lay men spoke of such high matters, the world was in good peace and
quietness, and that since they meddled therewith, the world was never well, but
full of trouble, division, and strife. And therefore it will perauenture be
better for the and me, to let these matters pass, till our lord shall put the
rulers in mind to look upon them, and se them reformed, then to speak any
more of them, and lyttyll effect or none to follow of our spekyng.


SAL. The more that the rulers here of the gruges that be among the people,
the more will they regard them, and will the rather set to their
assistaunce to help to avoid them, sithe they be as well to the high
displeasure of almighty god, as to the great hurt of the commonwealth of all
the people. And I think verilye, that a commonwealth shall never rise, as long
as these gruges continue. And therefore I trust our spekyng shall not be clearly
in vain, sith some causis of the said grudges and divisions may happly be put
in mind thereby, which else should not have been remembrid. And there be many
presidentes, by the which it appears, that lay men have reasonned in right
hight matters. First when the statute of.xxv. of Edward the third, that is
called De aduocationibus, was made, was it not (as thou supposest) argued and
reasoned, whether the parliament might set remedy in such cases, where the
pope made collatio^s or reseruatio^s to any benefices within this realm? And
who resoned that matter, as thou think, but the lords temporal and the
commons? verily none. For the lords spiritual durst not therein resist the
pope. And no more they durst when the question was asked in the parlyament,
Anno.xvi. Rich. ii. whether the pope might translate a bishop in this realm
without the kings assent, whereunto the bishops made a protestation, that it
was not their intent to say, but that the pope might make such translacions
by the laws of the church: but they said it was against the king and his
crown, if he did it. And the commons said, that they would stick with the
kings right in it unto the death. And the lords temporal said, that they
would be with him with all their power. And it ts not to think, that these
aunsweres were made suddenly without great reasonyng before. And who should
reasone hit, but the lords temporalle and the commons, and specially they that
were learned in the laws of the realm.

Also sith it is recyted in the writ De excommunicato deliberando, that the
king at the peticion of the bishop comanded the shyreff to justify such a
certain person by his body, as a man excommunicate and co^te^pning the keis of
the church, til he satisfied the church. etc. with diverse other things
commonly used to be put into ye said writ, which be here omytted: are not
they then that be learned in the laws of the realm, specially they that shall
be of the kings counsel, bounde^ to advertise the king, what is a contemnynge
of the keys of the church, and what not: so that he should not in such case
do any thing against the keys of the church? I trow no man will say, but they
be. For else the king should happily be enforced to give credence to spiritual
men in matters concerning their jurisdiction against his own. It is not
therefore convenient for any man to say, that lay men ought not to reason the
power of the church. For if it dimynishe the right of the crown, waste the
substance of the realm, prohibit the labor or living of the people, they
may well speak of it. And also ar bound to speak of it, specially they yt be
learned in the laws of the realm.

And where thou sayste, that before that lay men spoke of such matters, the
world was in good pease and quietness: surely if the people grudged, and
durst not speak, ne wyste not to whom to speak or complain: then was that
peace that thou speakeste of, like to the peace that the prophet Isaie
remembers in his.xxi. chapter, where he says, In pace amaritudo mea
amarissima, That is to say, In peace is my most bitterness. For when the
people would have spoken, and durst not, that was great grefe to them. And
then if they be at length enforced to speak, and trouble and strife rise by
their speking: it is not long of their speaking, but of them that give them
occasion so to murmour and grudge, and that will meyntein forth the old
abusions, and not suffer them to be reformed.


BY. Thou haste recyted many things in these addicions, that thou thynkeste
would be reformed, and in some points thou have devised how they may be
reformed, but thou haste not done so in all: I pray the therefore let me here
thy conceyte by what means (as the thinks) such things as thou have not
yet touched the reformation of, might be reformed.


SA. To trete fully of the remedies of such abusions, perteyneth most specially
unto the rulers: how be it one thing encorageth me very much to do that in me
is to say somewhat in the matter.


BY. What is that that encorageth the to it?


SAL. That shall I show the first with good will, and after I shall touch
shortly sum of the remedies, and shall commyt the residue to them, that it
most specially perteyneth to, to look upon it.


Of certain things, that should seem to be occasions to bring good peace
and quietness betwixt the clergy and the people. The.iiii. Chapitre.
SALEM. First the thing, that encouragethe me to speak of a refourmacyon
betwyxt the clergy and the lay people, is for that as me semethe, if the
matter be well and thoroughly looked upon, there is not so great varia^ce, ne
diversities of opinions betwixt the^, ne betwixt the clerks and great learned
men, that seem to take part ernestly in the matter on both parts, as is
reported to be, specially in the matters that be most of substance: and that
may appear thus. The clergy preach and teach, that our lord Jesus Christ,
very god and man, is the very savior of the world, redemyng us by his
passion. And the other do even like wise, and take him as the very Medyatour
betwixt god and man, and none but him.

The clergy also teache, and preche, that al men be bound to believe scripture,
that is to say, the old testament and the new, and to follow it as a thing
most necessary to our salvation. And ye other be even of the same opinion: and
the diversity that is betwixt them therein stands specially in this point:
The clergy pretend, that they only ought to declare scripture to the lay
men, and that they ought to follow their teaching and declaration therein,
and not to expound it them self, ne to have it in their mother tongue: And
many lay men, and also some great clerks hold the contrary, and say, that
it is laufull, and also necessary for lay men to have scripture in the mother
tongue, to the intent, that whenne they have none to preche it to them, that
they that can read the mother tongue, as many can which understand no latin,
may read it to their own consolation and instruction, and to the instruction of
other also. They vary also sommetyme of the understanding of scripture, and
how it shall be taken: but that is most specially in such points, as
concern the worldely honor, power, or richesse of the clergy, as hit is of
this questyon: whether it be laufull to the successors of the apostels and
disciples of Christ, to have possessions: but in things mere spiritual
concerning scripture, commonly they do not vary.

And likewise there is no such dyuersite of opinions, as some men have taken
hit to be, betwyxte Feythe and good warkes. For both parties agree, that good
warkes be necessary unto salvation: and the thing that seems to be as a
variance betwixt them therein is only upon terms, and not in substance, as
thus: The one part says, that feyth without good warkes is but a deed feyth,
and profits not to salvation. And after as they mean, they say troth. For
they mean of a naked feyth of a man, that has neither charity nor good
warkes: but that he has feythe, and lies in deedly sin, and dies without
repentance. In which case the feythe suffiseth not to him, as they affirm it
does not: but they deny not, but that if such a man in the later end come to
repentance, though it be even at the last point, but that he shall be saved,
and that that repentance shall be acceptable for him before god in place of the
good warkes that he had not, and that his reward shall be after the mochenesse
or littelnesse of his contrition and sorrow. And the other part says, that
feythe only justifies before god: and they also, after as they mean, say
trewely. For they call hit no feyth, unless it have good warkes. And therefore
they stir the people to good warkes all that they can, that they may have
a lively feythe: for they say, that if a man believe all the articles of the
feythe, and all that he is commanded to believe beside, and lives in deedly
sin, that he has no feythe. And so it appears, that these men varye not
in effect in this mattier, but in terms: how be it a littell variance there
is betwixt them therein, under this manner: They that say, that feith justifies
before god, wene yt many people have such a trust in their good warkes, that
they hope to be sauid only by them. And surely if any be of that opinion, they
be far deceyed. For none shall be saved but through ye grace, mercy, and
goodness of our lord. And therefore to give the people occasion, that they
shall trust in grace more then in their good warkes, they extolle feith and
grace above good warkes. And the other party says, that there is none that
trusts only in his good warkes. And therefore they say, that it needs not
to extolle faith so much as they do. But now admytte it be as they say: yet
me semethe, that if any manne doubt, whether they do so or not, and therefore
he instructethe them, that they ought not to do so, that hit is a good deed,
and ought charytablye to be accepted of all men, and that they ought not to
be reproved for it.

Then ferther more many have reported, that there be sum men of opinion,
that all things ought to be in common, so that if oone lacked, he might take
it of his neighbor.

And of all other opinions, that opinion go the most nighest to the
destruction of the common welthe. For it is a maynteyner of slouthe and
idelnes, and a destroyer of all good labor.

And there be many other that sey, that there be none of that opinion: but they
sey, that they have hard many of this opinion, that in time of necessite of
our neighbor, all things that we have, ought to be in common to him, and we
be then bound in charity to minister of our goods unto him, after as his
necessity requires: but that any might take it them self, they say, they
have hard none of that opinion. And surely I think it is true as they say.
And saint Augustine to that effect says thus: He that sees his brother in
necessite, and shytteth his help and comfort from him: how abides the
charity of god in him? And I beseech our lord send us many of that opinion,
that is to say, that we ought to communicate of our goods to our neighbors,
that be in necessity: and not to send us so much as one of the other
opinion, that is to say, that they might take it them self. And that if there
be none of that opinion, that then there be none, that will report there is.


BY. I perceive well, that thou think, that there be not so great diversities
of opinions among the people, as are noted to be, if the very true intent of
their minds were thoroughly known: how be it sum causes of grudges thou
agreest that there are yet remaining. And therefore though the remedies there of
perteyne most specially to the rulers to trete upon: yet as it seems, it can
do no hurt, if thou show thy mind somewhat therein.


SAL. Somewhat in a generality I will say with good will. And first I think
that it is right expedient, that the laws and jurisdictions spiritual and
temporal be thoroughly agreed to gether: for upon the varienge of them this
inconvenience follows: that when some occasion of variance happens to rise
betwixt two men, and they ask counsel, one at the spiritual law, and the
other at the temporal law, that both be informed that they have right, and
that causes them to stycke so soore to their titles, that they be far fro
any mean way, where if either of them were instructed, that the law were
ageynste him, as most commonly the one of them should be, if they both
asked counsel at one law: that would cause him that thought the law against
him, to eschew expenses, and fall to agreement.

Also it is right expediente, that all constitutions prouincialle and
legantines, as have been made in time paste, ageynste the laws of the realm,
and the kings prerogative, where the laws of the realm ought of right to
be followed: and also all such laws as be over grievous to the people by
extendynge over great multitude of excommunications upon them: or that have
been made more of singularity, and in mayntenaunce of the spiritual
jurisdiction then of charity, shall be clearly revoked and put away.

Also it seems expedient, that none hereafter have but only one benefice with
cure, by license nor otherwise, and he to be resident upon it, except such
as have moo now at this time, and they to inioye them, without taking any mo
by permutation or other wise. And if any take mo benefices the^ one, both to
be void.

Also it seems to stand with charity, that like as there is appointed
certain collettis and orisons for infidels in lent, that there be a special
collette for them all times of the year both at mattens, mass, euynsonge,
complin, Placebo and dirige: and likewise for the peace and tranquillity of
all christen realms, specially now in this daungerouse time.

Also that all parkes and pastures, that be in the hands of spiritual men, and
be mete for tyllage, be by a certain time builded and turned into tyllage upon
a pain. etc. And for as much as much tymbre will be spent about it, and
tymbre is greatly wasted in many places, that it be divised, how tymbre and
wodde may be increased and preserved hereafter. And me thinks seeing the
kings grace and his counsel have divised so good a way for nouryshynge of
wodde in Irelande, as they have done, that it were very well, that if they did
likewise for this realm. Also it seems to be right expedient, that certain
articles, whereof part shall be recited hereafter, be gathered to gether, and
that preachers be commanded, that in every sermon, they shall move the people
to fulfylle them, as nygh as god shall give them grace: and such other also as
the parlyament shall think convenient. And not to recyte every article in
every sermon, for it would sometime be tedious, but part of them, as they
shall think most profitable for the audience. And one of the said articles,
as it seems, may be this, that the preacher diligently instruct the people,
what warkes best please god: and also to instruct them, in what order they
ought to be done.

And for a remembrance I shall brefely touch somewhat of that mattier, and
commytte the ferther declaration thereof to the preachers.

The work that most pleases our lord, as I take for the lay people, is the
releuynge and comfortynge of our neighbor, that has need: and the greatter
that his need is, the greatter shall be our reward. And as prayer and
contemplation be the highest warkynges in the life contemplatife: so is this
deed of mercy to our neighbor, done in charity, the highest warke in the life
active. And therefore no man can come unto it, but by great labor and
diligence. For it is always hard to atteyne to virtue, and the higher the
virtue is, the more difficulty is in the atteynyng of hit: and the kyngedome
of heaven must be got with a violence. It is easy to build churches and
monasteries, to give books and chalices to the service of god, if a man have
wherewith: for laud and praise, and a worldly contentation follows commonly
upon it: but in doing deeds of charity to our neighbor, there be so many
difficulties, that it may anon discourage a man to contynewe in hit, but he
do it purely for god. How be hit I mean not that of gyuyng of alms to poor
men that ask it by way of alms in the streets: but I mean hit of
charytable deeds to be done to them, that fight with pouertye, and be ashamed
to ask it: never the less the diffycultyes thereof I will not express at
this time.

Also it is a right great grace, that such a desire is come among the people,
to have pore men releued. But surely if it comme to this point hereafter, that
spiritual men will procure for their own advantage, and lyttelle for poor
men: that desire for poor men will soon slake and vanysshe aweye
hereafter, as hit has done in time paste.

And as to the going on pylgremage, me thinks it may be accounted and set in
the lowest degree of good warkes: in so much, that as I suppose, if a man in
doing such pylgremage spend large money for his costs and offering, that if
he would dispose much less then that, at hoome among his poor neighbors:
that he should more highely please our lord thereby, or our lady, or other
sayncte that he gothe to, and sooner opteyne his just petitions thereby, than by
all his great expenses in his pylgremage and his labor both. And though he
give alms to some poor men by the weye: yet is he more bounden to his poor
neighbors at whom, and moore thank shall he have of god, if he look
charitably unto them.

Also it is right expedient, that preachers often instruct their audience, that
the prayer of a good lay manne more pleseth god, then the prayer of an yuel
priest, or of an yuel religious manne. And to instruct them also, that vocal
prayer is not the only thing that prays, though it be singularly good in it
self: for the true and just labor of the people is also a right good prayer.
How be it if they sometime use vocal prayer, when they may come to it, they do
the better. And therefore I think verilye, that if a good lay man pray, that
such an other man, or such that percase be his benefactours, may be part
takers of all his just and true labor, that it shall profit the other man
more, then the vocalle prayer of many other that be not good.

Also it is expedient, that they induce the people, all that they can, to do
their good deeds here, ere they depart out of this world. And diligently to
instruct them, that if they can be content for the love of god and of their
neighbor, to depart freely with a little portion of their goods here in this
life, that they might keep still if they would: they shall have more reward of
god for it, then they shall have for a right great substance of goods given
for them after their death, when they can not occupye them, though they
would.

Also that they stir the people, to leave the curiosity of burialles, that
has been used in many places in time paste: for they be rather comfortes to the
friends that be on live, then any profit to the souls of them that be
departed. And if the charge of such pomp were turned into dooles, to be sent
to poor men home to their howses, I think it would please our lord very
much.


Whether it be laufulle to war against Turks and sarasyns. The fyfth
Chapitre.
BYZAN. Sith thou haste now at my desire spoken of things concerning abusions,
that as the thynkethe, would be reformed, I pray the speak somewhat now of the
sect of Macumite. For ever sith the making of our first dialoge, I coud never
forget, how great a multitude of souls daily perysshe thereby.


SA. And I would gladly speak thereof, if I thought yt we could do any good in
that behalf. But surely tylle a peace be had among christen men, it boteth
not to speak any more of yt matter. And over that I have perceived, that some
me^ be of the opinion, that it is not laufull for christen men to war upon
the turks, and to go about by compulsion to bring them to the faith. For they
say, as the truth is, that faith is fre and can not be compelled: and therefore
they say, that Macumete him self, is disco^mended by many writers, because
that in the beginning of his sect he used violence: And so I am somewhat in dout
in that matter in my conceit, and wot not whether it be good to speak any
ferther in the mattier or not.


BIS. As to the first point that thou doubtest in, al trust is to be put in
god, and he shall well help us to the piece that we desire. And as to yt other
point that thou have moved, I little regard it. For I am well assured, that if
they them self that be of that opinion, considered all the mattier as it is,
that they would shortly change their minds therein. For since the turks have
many countries, that christen me^ have good right to: it is no doubt, but that
it is laufull for christen princis to war upon them, and drive them out, as
they might do christen men, that were usurpers. And also if infidelles invade
christen realms, and by power would take them into their hands, it is laufull
for christen princis in the title of them yt so were lykely to be wrongfully
put out of their country to resist them, and to keep the Christians in their
right.

And all the infidels that be so invaded, to take them as their ennemies, and
to punyshe them as ennemies, in such manner as they shall think expedient, by
death or otherwise. But then in these cases, if the christians prevailed, and
than the infidels would be converted, and the christen men for favor of the
faith would give them their lives, were it not good charity to do it? And if
they will not be converted: and then the christen men put them to death, for that
they be enemies, is it not olso laufull? And yet hit can not be said there,
that they be put to death, because they will not believe, but because they be
ennemies, as I have said before. And in this case stands the countries of
Constantynoble, and of Jerusalem. For they were long in the hands of christen
men, er that they came into the hands either of the turks, or of the
Sarasins. And as for Constantynoble it is but of late years, that the turks
with power and without title took the emperor and all the empier into their
hands, and with greatte cruelty sawed the emperor a sonder in the mids
with a saw of tree. And it is yet known among the christen men, that be
there in captivity, who is the very heir of blood unto the the empire: why is
it not then laufull to christen princis to restore him ageyn to his
inheritance, and to distroye all them that will resyst them? Never the les in
some case a doubt might rise, whether christen men might invade infidelles in
a country, which they had wrongefully taken into their hands: as if infydels
wrongefully invade an other country, that were also infidels, and that was
never christened, and put the very owners out thereof, whether it were lauful
for christen princis to drive them out, and restore the first infidels into
their right again or not. And this me thinks, may be right well said
therein: that if the people that so has invaded, be the more cruel people
then the first were, whereby it is great peril and danger unto christen
realms, that lie nygh adioynynge unto them, that they will hereafter invade
them also, if they be suffered: that then it is laufull for christen princis to
drive them out, in eschewyng of that dangers, and to restore the first infidels
again to their right. And the^ if those first infidels for ye fauer yt they
have found in christen men will be converted to the faith, I suppose no man will
say, but that it is well done to accept them. But if they would not in that case
be converted of their fre will, I will well agree, yt they must be suffrid to
continue still in their infidelity, as they did before, till our lord shall of
his goodness call the^ to grace. And thus me thinkith it is but a litel doubt,
but yt it is laufull for christian princis to make war against all the infidels,
that be inhabita^tis in ye cities of Constantinoble and Jerusalem, and all the
countries there about, that al any time were in the hands of christen men,
before they were in the hands of the turks, or of the Sarasins, and to put
them to death that will resyste them, as ennemies. And thus have I now
showed the my conceyte concerning that doubt, whether it be laufull for
christen men to war upon infidels or not. How be it if they could without
battle be converted by preachinge or epistles without sheding of blood, that
were surely the best way: But the turks be now so far roted in malice, that
they have made a law, that no man upon pain of death shall preche ageinste
their laws. Wherefore it seems, that christian men may not now with conscience,
send any preacher unto them. And if any precher of zele of martyrdom would of
his free will desire to goo thither: yet it were to me a great dout, whether hit
were better for christen men to stop him, if they could, so that he might do
more good another way at hoome: and not to suffer him wylfully to run unto
his death or not: Specially when there is no lykelyhode, that any good shall
follow upon his goinge. For the preaching to the turks now in these days,
is nothing like to the preching to the gentyls in the beginning of the faith.
For then the gentyls would many times here it. And thereupon many turned to the
faith: and though sometime preachers were therefore put to death, not
withstanding I agree well, that it was good charity for other prechers to
ieoparde to do the same. For many times great increase of the faith followed
thereby. But as to the Turks now in these days, their malice is so greatte,
that there is no likelihod that our preachers should be hard among them, as I
have said before.


FINIS.
The Table.
THe introduction. fo. i. Of diverse abusions concerning the seven sacraments
and diverse other things. The first chaptre. Memorand that in the said first
Cha. be contained.xxx. paragraffes, whereof the first treats of the sacrament
of anoylynge. folio. 2. The second paragraffe treteth of burienge of
parysheners by their curates folio. eodem. The.iii. paragrafe treats of the
sacrament of confirmation. fo. eodem. The.iiii. paragraff treats of the
prohibiting of bishops to grant perdon. fo. 3. The.v. paragraffe treats of
the reserving confession from curates to the bishops fo. eodem. The.vi.
paragraffe treteth of the prohibitynge of the people from howselynge. folio. 4.
The.vii. paragrafe treats of curious buyldynges of spiritual men: And of
the apparelle thereof. fo. eode^. The.viii. paragrafe treats of chaplens and
seruyng priests. fo. eodem. The.ix. paragrafe treteth that the laws of
irregularite be over strayt. f. 5. The.x. paragrafe treteth, that the rules of
relygions be very strayte to be kept in these days. fo eodem. The.xi.
paragrafe treteth how clerks claim as high power in their possessions and
goods as lay men. fo. 6. The.xii. paragraffe treats of the titles of
priests. fo. eodem. The.xiii. paragrafe treats of visytations. folio. 7.
The.xiiii. paragrafe treats of a policy newly risen against the statute of
pluralites, and none residence. fo. 8. The.xv. paragrafe treats of charity
to our neighbor, and other outward deeds. fo. eod. The.xvi. paragrafe
treats that some prechers have preached for their own profyt and singularite
in time past. fo. 11. The.xvii. paragrafe treats, how priests account a
defaulte in oone priest to sound to the defaulte of an other. folio. 12.
The.xviii. paragrafe treats, whether the.x. part of tithes be due by the law
of god. fo. 14. The.xix. paragrafe treats, how in some cases they ought in
spiritual courts to judge after the law of the realm. folio eodem. The.xx.
paragrafe treats, that spiritual men now accept things, that spiritual
men refused in the beginning of the church. fo. 15. The.xxi. paragrafe
treteth, that some religious men pretend their profession to be the surest way
to salvation. fo. eo. The.xxii. paragrafe tretith, how some over lightly report,
that there be many heritikes. fo. eodem. The.xxiii. paragrafe treats of
parkes and pastures being in the hands of spiritual men. fo. 16. The.xxiiii.
paragrafe treats, how spiritual men, as it is reported, be very strayte in
making of leases, reysynge of rentes, and making of fynes. etc. folio. 17.
The.xxv. parag. treteth, how their deformities of body that should be pristis
has been myslyked in time past. fo. 18. The.xxvi. paragraffe treats of diverse
ceremonies in the church. fo. eod. The.xxvii. paragrafe treats of bishops
and kings canonised fo. 19. The.xviii. paragrafe treats of the authority of
canonisation. fo. 20. The.xxix. paragraffe treats of this decree Omnis
uttiusque sexus. fo. 28. The.xxx. paragrafe treats of the opinion, that many
of the clergy have preched for their own profit, and that yet they do
nothing to remove them out of that opinion. fo. 33. Who is the higher judge in
such corrections as be called spiritual corrections, the king or the
clergy. The second chapitre. fo. 34. Of diverse things concerning saint
Thomas of Canturburye. The iii. Chapitre. fo. 53. Of certain things, that
should seem to be occasions to bring good peace and quyetnes betwyxte the
clergy and the people. The fourth Chapitre. folio. 61. Whether it be lawfulle
to war ageynste the Turks and Sarasyns. The fyfthe Chapitre. fo. 69.
FINIS TABVLAE.
Fautes in printynge.
FOlio. 5. pagi. 2. li. 17. read after dispensations be. Folio. 12. pagi. 2.
fin. 13. read that it is reported of. Fo. 14. pa. 1. linea. 14. read, and
prescriptions. Fo. 18. page 1. linea. 9. read after sufferable, than to be
extreme. Fo. 26. page 1. li. 14. read seems. Fo. 31. page 1. li. 5. read
article. Fo. 36. pa. 1. lin. 1. read such after have. Fo. 40. pa. 2. li. 23.
for execution read excommunication. Fo. 42. page 1. li. 9. for notes, read
writes. Fo. 46. pa. 1. lin. 6. et. 7. for excommunications, read examinations.
Fo. 48. pa. 1. li. 20. read there is. Fo. 50. pa. 1. li. 3. after admittenda,
read is this. Folio. 51. page 1. lin. 7. read, cruelty. Fo. 59. pa. 2. lin.
10. for hight, read high. Fo. 64. pa. 1. li. 1. read deceived.


