THE PRACTICE OF POLICY IN A CHRISTIAN LIFE. Taught from the Scriptures.

Written by I. Saltmarshe, M. of Arts of Magd. Col. in Cambridge.

Ye err not knowing the Scriptures,

Matthew. 22. 29. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Samuel Endarby and are to be sold
at his Shop at the Sign of the Star in Popes head alley, 1639.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD HENRY RICH of Kensington, Earl of Holland, Groom
of the Stool, and Gentleman of the Bedchamber, Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
IT may seem a daring and superfluous act to present any draughts of Policy to
so great a Statesman as your self, especially for me, so out of distance to
years, experience, practice, employment, profession, but my privilege is the
subject I make choice on, a subject enriched with all these, I know, as the
Samaritane said, The Well is deep, and I have nothing to draw with, nothing if
compared with the talents of deeper judgments, but my engagement to your
Lordship is the Universiy, our Studies wearing your Honors title and
superscription, and our Savoiur has there entitled a Tribute, where there is
Image and Superscription, what I do here is but in the right recognition,
what I do in the next leaf is in right of Dedication and patronage, God make
your Grace a Jewel to the Crown below, and prepare you a Crown above, My
Lord,

Your humblest Servant, J. SAULTMARSHE.

TO MY HONORED Patron, Sir ARTHUR INGRAM the younger.
SIr, I have observed you active in your conversation abroad and at home, and I
could not study any thing I thought more suitable, and congruous, than these
practical leases, which may at once recreate and instruct your retirement,
instruct you not as mine but Gods, for his words are my ground and foundation
both for place and sense, and in this course I foresaw saw most security, for
here I have his Word for what I say, and I give you his Word for what you are
to do, and my lines are but only drawn here to point you to the center of
the Scriptures: there your designs, your projects, may rest and rely.

Sir, I know you have a breast plate rich enough of your own, yet to set an
higher rate upon your counsels, be pleased to let these holy jewels of Gods
Word (which will be a bright Urim and Thummim to your bosom^) have a place,
and that I may be just to the brevity I profess in my Book, I hasten to be
as I am ever bound, Sir,

Your most devoted Servant J. SALTMARSHE.

The Motives which persuaded me to this.
I Observed that the wit and industry bestowed on the Scriptures, that of the
Fathers and the more modern was most in perspective and meditation, set the
Pulpit apart, I mean Voluptatem quandam in us legend is ex illa reru^
varietate perciper^ sed de illaris ^^ (...) ne (...) quidem, Machi^. lib. disp.
in Prooe^.
Preaching, so as they made the Scripture the Sabbath of their pens
recreating in the divine fancies and contemplations, but I know none that made
the six days work of it, and reduced it into practice for the conduct and
administration of action; David styles it A Lamp unto the feet, not so much to
the head, the contemplative part, as to the feet the active.

I observed too, that the fa^ous Mach^avil.
Politician brought his vessel to this holy cisterne and drew some sacred
Aphorisms, though too few for action, rather devoting his pen to the Roman
Livie for copy and imitation than hither.

I observed again that some had bestowed themselves on Tacitus, and on the
Italian History as Guicciardine.

And Lipsius who deserves much in this has gone a succinct and speedy way in
his Politics, but all his draughts and copies were from heathen examples and
precepts, Haud usquequaque convenienter ad hoc aevum, as he himself, not
fashioned for us and our times.

I observed also, that among the ancient, Plato and Aristotle had not been a
little painful in their Politics, but their conducts were of a great latitude
for common wealths and nations, not strait laced enough for particular
affairs, and so Zen^ph^n and the rest.

These kindled in me an holy indignation, when I was still conversant with a
more faithful and sacred Oracle, therefore I set my self to the study of
Scriptures and drew from thence these short forms from the individuals and
particulars there, which though small, yet like seeds, Se explicant, they are
spreading and diffusive, and such things as are drawn from particulars, says
Ba^on. lib. de Aug. Scien.
our learned Author, know the best way to particulars again.

For method I thought it the best to observe none, for knowing how
independent, contingent, and emergent affairs are, I held it the best to keep
time with the variety, in these which I intend for their conduct and
administration.

For the brevity here, I drew these copies rather in tablets than a larger
space, Legem breve^esse oportet quae jubeat; directive and imperative
aphorisms Sen. epist. 95.
should be quick and spirited, and practice should not be put too far
about*

If some of them here seem in feature and complexion of phrase or matter
alike or the same, you shall find but an exegesin, I hope not unpleasant, a
better illustration, and something for variety superadded, which in so much
variety could not be well escaped.

The sufficiency of Scriptures for Policy.
WHy go ye to enquire of 2 Kin. 1. 1*
B^e^zebub? because there is not a God in Israel? Good Eliah was loath to have
his Master loose credit or resort, to see them go after other gods, when there
was a God at home to supply, and that faithful Apostle is alike so^^icitous,
Master (says he) whither shall we go? thou have the words, etc.

We should be as zealous as this Prophet and Apostle for the advancement of
his credit and glory, and call home all the resorts that are made from him;
though in other Histories civil and ecclesiastical there are many exquisite
copies for action, which may do service to the negotiations of posterity, yet
there are no such warrantable and safe examples, and conducts, and
transactions, as the Scriptures abound with, and he that shall devote his
meditations to them, shall at once be wise and religious, a Serpent and a Dove*
all other forms, and draughts of affairs which are ^eerly humane, have too
much of the wisdom of the World, and The wisdom of the World is
foolishness with God, and a consulting with such is a kind of departure with
Saul to ask counsel of a dead Samuel; the Policies of flesh and blood should
have vigor and influence from divine wisdom, like those jewels which have
their matter from earth, their sparkle from heaven; they that have consulted
their own dark bosoms, never looking after a beam of divine light, have had
success as black as their counsels: how was Herod infatuated in his bloody
design upon the male infants? How was Haman in his project upon the Jews and
Mordecai? How Julian? in extinguishing all Christian Schools, in setting up
the Jews idolatry and superstition, these followed their own propositions.

But he that consults the Word of God, shall see what affairs have been
stirring and how they have been disposed and conducted, how they have
succeeded, what circumstances have hindered, and what have advanced; he shall
likewise see the will of God which is a rule to regulate and submit his
designs to, his Providence, which is a Law to him, that he be not too
peremptory for success, seeing God has the times and seasons in his own
Power, his Power which will make him pray for direction, like Jehosaphat, We
know not what to do, therefore our eyes are toward thee, and besides this
direction for an happy concurrence of such things as may conspire to the good
effect of his enterprises.

God could never endure any departures and addresses from him therefore he gave
his people a cloud and pillar of fire, a mercy-seate, an Ephod, Urim and
Thummim, Priests and Prophets, visions, dreams, and now though he has put a
period to these revelations, Yet (says the Apostle) we have 2 Pet. 1. 19.
a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, a more
sure word we have, this is the Word, The Scripture which is given by
inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, for instruction, That the man of
God may be perfect.

These are able to make thee wise, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
and wise unto salvation.

That the Policies in Scripture are more safe and excellent than in humane
writings.
DIvinity is here so well attended, that if you enquire for any of the
sciences or virtues, you shall not miss, and they seem more comely and
graceful by their office here and attendance upon her; you have Philosophy
without vanity, Astronomy without curiosity, Oratory without Rhetoric, Policy
without cunning, wisdom without subtlety, for they were once like the
Ephesians darkness, but are now light in the Lord, and like Saul falling among
the Prophets they are sacred too.

A learned Author of our times seems to distaste Paracelsus Vallesius and all
such parties who seek for Sciences in Scripture, and style it a seeking for
the dead among the living, as on the contrary to seek Bac^n. ^^ Aug. Scien.
lib. ^.
for Divinity in them is to seek for the living among the dead.

Sure I am that in Scripture they live a kind of spiritual life, when Christ
came among the dead many rose and walked about Jerusalem, it is impossible if
be be in the company, there should not be a subtle participation of his
presence, and a rising or exalting, you know Moses when he had been in
presence of God, wore a brightness upon his face a while after, and these
sciences and virtues being in the Scriptures where God is present, receive a
bright complexion and luster; Elisha when he had the Prophets cloak upon him
was more divine than before, and these having such a Mantle as Divinity cast
over them are more sacred; I have therefore enquired here after Policy and
Prudence, and find her more beautiful than in any other civil conducts or
transactions, Exalt her then, as Solomon says, and she shall promote thee and
bring thee to honor when thou do embrace her.

THE PRACTICE OF POLICY IN A CHRISTIAN LIFE.
The first Book.
POLICY I. What the true Practice of Policy is.
POLICY without practice is something like Faith without Works, a kind of
idle speculative Virtue, and such politicians are like the prophets which saw
Visions and Revelations, yet had nothing to do in the things they saw.

And there is a Practical Policy too, yet not the true, and such are either
too politic for the design, and then overreach, or mistake the quality of
it, and go a wrong way, and yet they toil and are active, but like those
Fishers who toiled all night with their nets, but took nothing, and such are
they of whom it is spoken, There is that labors and takes pains and makes
haste, and is so much the more behind, Eccles. 11. 11.

The true practice is a sacred and serious deliberation and election of the
most fit means, an exact examination of time, place, and persons, and of all
such circumstances as may be in the circle of your affairs, and an
accommodation of what you do to the copy in the Scriptures.

Thus,

Wisdom is justified of her children,

Matthew. 11. 19. POLICY II. How to understand well a design.
IN any Design, understand it first well and purely, and discuss such lets
and difficulties as may appear in the conduct, before you go on too far, so
you shall not be put to too much loss by casualties and accidents which
happen most to the inconsiderate and ignorant; if you dispatch business in an
implicit faith, it is as if you should undertake to hit a way in the dark; as
the Apostle said, I know whom I believe, so it is fit you should be able to
say, I know what I am to do.

Thus,

God first made Light in the work of the Creation, And he said, let there be
Light,

Genesis 1. 3. POLICY III. In perplexed businesses divide and di^perse.
IF your business be perplexed and obscure, there is as it were a Chaos and
confused matter, and like that, first in the Creation a Darkness upon the
face of it* that it cannot be well discerned therefore the best course here
for clearing and serening, is to divide the parts that are mingled and more
obscure.

Thus,

God in the confused mass of Creation, divided the Light from the Darkness,

Genesis 1. 4. POLICY IV. Not to multiply subordinate actions too fast.
DO not multiply actions which are subordinate to the same end too fast, and
go not on too far upon a business till you have seen some success or
proof of your first engagement, for in such indifferent proceeding you
preserve your freedom, and may take off your pen fairly without harm to the
paper, without shedding a blot upon your credit.

Thus,

God would not go on to A Let the Earth bring forth, till he surveyed well the
first part of the Creation, and saw that it was good,

Genesis 1. 10. POLICY V. The trial of obedience is found in small matters,
sooner than in great.
HE that makes trial of the respect and obedience of any in small matters and
slender obligations, shall find the truth and faithfulness of a disposition
sooner than in great and weighty; and this is to commit a weight to the trust
of a slender thread.

Thus,

The Lord commanded the man saying, But of the Tree of the knowledge of good
and evil thou shall not eat,

Genesis 2. 17. POLICY VI. The weak ought not to parley with their too subtle
enemies.
HE that is guilty of weakness and rashness, ought not to hold parley with
those who wait for advantages, especially in occasions not material and
pertinent, for that were a voluntary resignation of your self into the snare,
and you meet a conspiracy in the half way.

Thus,

The Woman was betrayed to sin by parleying, for says the Text, The Serpent
said unto the Woman, and the Woman said unto the Serpent,

Genesis 3. 1, 2. POLICY VII. Interrogatories made to an Offendour will draw the
worm out of the root.
SOmetimes it is best in case convenient to examine an offendour with no notice
of his fault, though you know all the particulars of the trespass, to try the
ingenuity of his disposition, and in a smoothe pretense of ignorance to seek
that you have found already.

Thus,

God although he knew Adam had offended, yet called him and enquires, Have
thou eaten of the fruit whereof I commanded thou should not eat,

Genesis ^ POLICY VIII. Trust not an Offendour who has played false with you.
TRust not an Offendour too much that has played false with you, especially if
any thing of yours lie open to advantage, for by that you put an occasion into
his hands to betray you, and you half persuade him to that, you would not have
him to do.

Thus,

God after Adam had sinned drove him out, Least he put forth his hand, says
he, and take also of the Tree of Life,

Genesis 3. 22, 24. POLICY IX. Envy the mother of Mischief.
AMong Rivals and Competitours of desert, do not publish your grace and
acceptance which you f^nde with others, it excites and stirs to emulation,
and it is a daring your adversary to do you mischief, and even a spreading of
Colors, and of flourishing in the face of your Enemy.

Thus,

Cain smote not Abel till he saw his Sacrifice blaze bright, And his
countenance fell to see his Brother rise in favor,

Genesis 4. 5. POLICY X. True intelligence is necessary.
IN negotiations abroad it is not safe to venture forth where there has been
a danger apparent, till you have received true intelligence, with what safety
you may go, then you draw a lot for security, and you go on trust with chance
for success.

Thus,

Noah kept close to his Arc till his winged intelligencer returned with an
Olive in her mouth,

Genesis 8. 11. POLICY XI. Signs do strengthen ones Faith.
WHen you would oblige one to a condition or promise, it is not amiss to
procure some token for remembrance: this seals them unto performance, and at
every appearing renewes an importunity, and sheds a fresh solicit upon them.

Thus,

God set his Bow, and I will look upon it, says he, that I may remember the
Covenant,

Genesis 9. 11. POLICY XII. Division is the mother of confusion.
IN a Conspiracy which is discovered to you and concerns you, and may prove of
dangerous consequence, consult and observe whether many be interessed in it;
if so, there is more danger; and your course is to plot a division among them,
and to keep them from being of one Language, and this is to disable and
disperse a project, and to confound the Language of a conspiracy.

Thus,

God saw that the builders of Babel were one, And he said, let us go down,
and confound their Language, so the Lord seattered them,

Genesis 11. 6, 7, 8. POLICY XIII. Gods promise and Abraham's obedience.
IF you desire a blessing upon your self or yours, withdraw from such evil
society as you hold any dear correspondence with, GOD is ever jealous of such
adherence, and is sparing till he have better demonstration of your integrity,
and will not part with a favor till you part with your engagement.

Thus,

God said to Abraham, I will bless thee, but first says he, get thee out of
this Country,

G. 12. 1, 2 POLICY XIV. Haste makes waste.
FEigning in some cases is dangerous, and you may put your self upon a hazard
by personating that which you cannot be easily quit of without prejudice,
therefore consider well what may follow, and do not say in haste what you
would unsay upon consideration, and so put your self into the courtesy of a
recantation, it was David's error, I said in my haste.

Thus,

Abraham unadvisedly bid Sarah say she was his Sister* And she was then
commended before Pharaoh and taken into Pharaohs house,

Genesis 12. 15. POLICY XV. If your justice rise early, Gods mercy will not be
lute.
IF you have any affliction or misery upon you, discuss and enquire in your
self, if some sin of yours did not occasion it; if so renounce it with speed
and repent, and if your Justice rise early, Gods Mercy will not be late.

Thus,

Pharaoh when his House was plagued, called Abraham and said, What is this thou
have done unto me? and he sent him away and his wife,

Genesis 12. 18, 20. POLICY XVI. Separation is sometimes necessary.
WHen you observe there will be any discord or jarring in your neighborhood,
the best remedy is to remove: if your nearness be as it were incompatible
with the other, yet first look well with what convenience it may be done, and
do not take your leave at one place till you be secured by another.

Thus,

Abraham's and Lot's Heard^men agreed not, and they separated one from the
other, yet Lot lift up his eyes first, and saw the Plains of Jordan well
watered,

Ge. 13. 10. 11. POLICY XVII. A Friend is tried in adversity.
IF you would get a blessing and respect, be sollicitous in aiding and
revenging the cause and weakness of the just, for in this though you sail
against the stream of the World and the times, yet you become more notable and
meritorious. ``And this is to do like God himself whose Power is most eminent
in the weakness of others.

Thus,

When Abraham heard Lot was taken, he pursued and brought back him and all his
goods, and the King of Sodom went out to meet him, and Melchisedech King of
Salem blessed him,

Genesis 14. 16, 17, 18. POLICY XVIII. A speedy flight is sometimes needful.
IN avoidance of Dangers either spiritual or civil, observe quickness and
speed in dispatch, foresight of the way you are to take, election of your
refuge, so you shall not be overtaken by the peril, nor unprovided of security.

Thus,

Lot saw the convenience of Zoar and escaped thither, and the Angels hastened
him, and while he lingered, they laid hands upon him,

Genesis 19. 22. POLICY XIX. To attain a new favour^ by illustrating favors
received.
WHen you petition a new favor, first illustrate and magnify your favors
received, and then the pretenses for this you desire, yet extenuate it smoothly
too, only report the advantages it may bring you, for the advantages which
appear, will move such as respect you to bestow it, and the less it appears
to bestow it the sooner and more easily.

Thus,

When Lot petitioned God, he would give him Zoar for his refuge: behold says
he, thou have magnified thy mercy to me in saving my life, behold this city is
near to fly unto, and it is a little one,

Genesis 19. 19. POLICY XX. Unlawful kindness dangerous.
THere is nothing lost in suspecting unlawful kindness; for let the pretense
be never so fair, the means is wicked and no good issue can attend it, and
he that is taken and transported thus, is blind in the colors of Good and
Evil.

Thus,

Lot did unwisely, not to be jealous over his Daughters respect and
familiarity, when they made him drink wine,

Genesis 19. 35. POLICY XXI. Wisdom to conceal ones hatred.
WHere there is a Passion of Envy and emulation which cannot be easily
extinguished, it is wisdom for the party to conceal it, especially there,
where there is any engagement or dependancy to oblige you: he that shows
himself too openly an enemy to an other, is not his own friend.

Thus,

Hagars Son did foolishly, for Sarah sa^ the Son of this Bondwoman mocking,
wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this Bondwoman and her Son,

G. 21. 9. 10. POLICY XXII. The trial of a Friend is necessary.
WHere there is a desire in any to oblige or bind you to fair conditions,
discuss with your self, his former behaviors, and if you find any thing
has been done prejudicial, demand the intent of that, and then you may
contract or forbear, with more certainty and confidence, for he takes up
meanings but rashly and ignorantly, that will not stay till the Author expound
and interpret himself.

Thus,

When Abimelech solicited Abraham for an oath and promise of kindness, I will
swear (says he) yet he remembered him of the Well of water his servants to^ke
violently away, but Abimelech said, I w^t not,

Genesis 21. 23. 4. 5. POLICY XXIII. The trial of a friends faithfulness by
presending the hazard of something he enteares.
IF there be any whom you have a desire to continue in your counsels and
affairs, and have proved your self beneficial to him, you shall do well to
try him, with pretense of the hazard of something he endeares and which you
have conferred; if he part with it freely, it may confirm, he respects you
more than your courtesy.

Thus,

God would try Abraham's faith and obedience with commanding him to sacrifice
his Son, Take now thy Son whom thou love, says God, and offer him, and
Abraham rose up early, etc.

G. 22. 2, 3. POLICY XXIV. The behavior of a Stranger.
IF you would be made partaker of any franchises and privileges where you come
as a Stranger to inhabit, use all sweetness of demeanor, and that will speak
for you well to their dispositions; and though you be a Stranger in your
arrival, yet be a familiar in your behavior, the way to obtain a freedom
amongst them is to be free with them.

Thus,

Abraham said, I am a sojourner and bowed himself to the People of the Land,
and required a burying place, and they offered the choice of their Sepulchers,

Genesis 23. 4, 7, 6. POLICY XXV. Gods hand at his Pastport.
WHen you have favors to request of any, that are inclined religiously, and
with whom you have credit, you may advance and further your Design, with
relating how far you have observed Gods hand, in moving to it, or any other
such like circumstance worth observation: he that wooes thus, makes GOD his
Spokesman, and is sure to speed well with the religiously affected, and he
shall never be turned back on his way, that can show Gods hand at his pasport.

Thus,

Eleezer persuaded Rebecca and her friends, with the story and concurrence of
all the passages, how God had blessed him in his journey and Sign. So they
answered, The thing is of the Lord. behold Rebecca is before thee,

Genesis 24. 48, 49, 50, 51. POLICY XXVI. Wisdom in taking advantage.
WHen you observe inclinations and desires in others to fulfill and grant your
desires, defer not the solicit, for imaginations will revolt, and the first
heat you raise by your avenues and addresses will cool, and like an
impression upon water or sand, soon vanish and be blown out.

Thus,

Eleezer did wisely in taking the present advantages, Hinder me not (says
he) since the Lord has pr^spered my way, send me away,

Genesis 24. 56. POLICY XXVII. The right demeanor of an enterview.
In winning and obtaining reputation there must be punctual care had of the
first demeanours and behaviors upon your enterviewes, it is fit to let things
be well cemented and glewed, before you be bold in experiments of carriage.

Thus,

Rebecca when she saw Isaak at distance, made ready her veil and covered her
self,

Genesis 24. 65. POLICY XXVIII. How to dispose of children of diverse wives and
beds.
IN Families and houses where Children are not uterine and borne of the same
Parents, the best course is to divide them and dispose them to distances, for
it is rare if there be not disagreements and differences, -- fratrum quoque
gratia rara est*

For here is a pretty contradiction made good, the nearest are often at most
distance, and there is most difference amongst those that are most alike.

Thus,

Thus unto the Sons of the Concubine which Abraham had, he gave gifts, and
sent them away from Isaak his Son,

Genesis 25. 6. POLICY XXIX. Advantages may be advanced by time or opportunity.
SOme advantages are best advanced by times and opportunities of present
necessity, opposing the supply, yet these you deal thus with would be Esaus
such whom their wicked and desperate improvidence hastens to the bargain, and
then it is no neglecting, God may intend to make their Birthright yours.

Thus,

Jacob saw Esau hungry for his pottage, and he would not part with them without
the Birthright. Sell me this day (says he) thy Birthright,

Genesis 25. 31. POLICY XXX. Dissimulation has much unsafety.
DIssimulation is the worst policy; and besides the unlawfulness, it has
unsafety, it requires too much punctual caution, to preserve it undiscovered,
and the pains you take to betray by dissembling, even betraies Dissimulation;
a secret behavior in business does well, or an open confidence and a kind of
resolute profession, carry your light either in a dark or a clear lantern.

Thus,

Thus when Isaak dissembled and said Rebecca was his Sister, the King looked
out at the window, and behold Isaak was sporting with Rebecca his wife,

Genesis 26. 7, 8. POLICY XXXI. The congediry of great ones.
THey that would preserve their own honors, fortunes, and prescription of
State, withoutstain, depredation, and danger of competition, must labor the
remove of those which grow up to them, trees which stand thick and close
hinder the flourishings and spreadings of each other, yet there must be an
uprightness in such proceeding, as there will be an irregular motion.

Thus,

Abimelech an heathen did wisely in this act though the circumstances were
wicked, when he saw Isaak was strong and grew very great, Go from me (says
he) thou art mightier than we,

G. 26. 13. 16. POLICY XXXII. To be jealous of his enemy coming to treat with
him.
WHen your enemy or adversary would come into favor and correspondence again,
be jealous and suspicious over his pretenses, till you have some solid
occasion for faith and credulity: he that takes his enemies first word, is
soon entreated to betray himself.

Thus,

Isaak (when Abimelech and his Captains would begin Covenant again)
enquired, Wherefore come ye to me seeing you hate me, and send me away from
you,

Ge. 26. 27. POLICY XXXIII. Courtesy is a preamble to love.
THey that would enfavour themselves for the advantage of any business, must
show themselves affable, smoothe, and courteous, all such demeanor prepares an
opinion for them in the parties they aim at, he that sets his net betimes,
may expect a fuller draught than he that fishes later.

Thus,

Jacob having a Design for living with Laban, and seeing his Daughter come
forth to water Sheep, he went and rolled back the stone, and watered the
flock, and kissed

Rachel, Genesis 29. 10, 11* POLICY XXXIV. Credulity is often disparageable.
BE not too credulous in the faith of any in an action or dispatch of
consequence, but enquire into the truth of the performance, especially if the
party be such as you have had no long nor sufficient experiment on, for else
you put your self in danger of being deceived, and of repenting Quando mutare
non erit integrum.

Thus,

Jacob trusting Laban to give him Rachel to bed, in the morning behold it was
Leah,

Genesis 29. 25. POLICY XXXV. A divine Policy to forbear emulation.
IT is a divine Policy if you would procure a blessing or divert an affliction,
to forbear emulation or envy of the good of others, for God sees no fitness
in you for any good, while you cast an evil eye upon the good of another.

Thus,

Rachel erred while she hated Leah, for God saw that Leah was hated, and he
opened her womb, but Rachel was barren,

G. 29. 31. POLICY XXXVI. How to effect actions or businesses.
IF you cannot be a single party and effectour of the business or action you
desire to succeed, then interesse your self as much and as close as you may,
that you may be the better pretender, and that at least a share of it, may
stand beholden to you.

Thus,

Thus when Rachel saw she had no children to Jacob, behold says she, my maid
Bilhah, go in to her, and she shall bear upon my knees, that I also may have
children,

Genesis 30. 3. POLICY XXXVII. To take advantage of time, things, and places.
IN gifts which you do not intend to bestow freely and gratis, look out what
honest circumstance may benefit you, and have respect there, and then stand at
terms with the desire you see fervent* this is to put off ware at the best
hand, he is a cunning Tradesman that knows how t^ raise his rate in a quick
Market.

Thus,

Leah would not part with her Mandrakes to Rachel, but thus, Jacob shall lie
with thee to night,

Genesis 30. 13, 14. POLICY XXXVIII. To make much of hopeful advantage.
WHen you observe any hopeful advantages make much of them, and do not
foregoe them lightly, such are not always near you, nor concomitant: he that
lets his fish escape into the water, may call forth his net often, and not draw
them again.

Thus,

Laban did well when he said to Jacob, tarry, for I have learned by
experience, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake,

Genesis 30. 27. POLICY XXXIX. To quicken the memory of forepast service.
WHen you deal with some you have been gracious and kind toward, make a
smoothe and fair though slender and slight relation of what favors have
passed, which being done upon just and fit occasion, and not with too plain
inculcation, cannot savor of upbraiding, but only of a desire to bring the
other in memory of his engagement, and to quicken his future faith in your
cause.

Thus,

Jacob told Laban, This twenty years have I been with thee, thy Ewes and thy
she-goates have not cast their young, etc.

Genesis 31. 38. POLICY XL. What to discover, what to conceal.
IN matter of contract it is not requisite to discover all the benefit you know
may redound, but to reserve your knowledge, God who is all wisdom does not
reveal himself all; though he dwell in light, yet that Light is inaccessable:
it is wisdom to have something still inaccessable to others.

Thus,

Jacob bargained with Laban for the spotte^^ Lambs, not discovering the issue
of the design,

Genesis 30. 32. POLICY XLI. How to remove from those that fear you or you fear.
WHen you see your self grown great and famous to the emulation of any you
fear remove from their violence, if not by distance, by some other way, which
may supply that and this is to clear your enemies eye of the mo^e which
offends him.

Thus,

Jacob by Gods appointment removed, when he beheld the countenance of Laban not
toward him as before,

Genesis 31. 2. POLICY XLII. To communicate with those that are near in relation
to us.
IN business of great or notable change which concerns your self, deliberate
and communicate it to those that are nearest to you in respects and relation,
their nearenesse obliges their faithfulness, and though their advices may be
but weak, yet your own thoughts laid open, may thus be better considered on,
and besides they may let fall and interpose something, which may advance to an
adjutory or engine of aid.

Thus,

Jacob when he was meditating upon his departure from Laban, sent and called
Rachel and Leah, and told them, your fathers countenance is not toward me,
and they answered, whatsoever God has said unto thee, do,

Genesis 31. 4. 16. POLICY XLIII. He may err in the manner, who erreth nor in
the matter.
BE not too secret and solitary in those actions which receive no great
prejudice by their public execution, for their stolen and close effecting may
be occasion of suspicion and jealousy of that, of which perhaps in their own
nature, they are not guilty, for he that is secret with too much ado,
betrays even an opennesse to* that endeavor to secrecy.

Thus,

Jacob because he went in such secret preparation from Laban, gave him
occasion of pursuit, and Laban overtooke him and said. What have thou done
that thou have stolen away unawares?

Ge. 31. 36. POLICY XLIV. Suspicion keeps awake to prepare for Security.
IN inevident and doubtful occasions, ever doubt and suspect, for suspicion
keeps you awake to prepare and project for most security and safety: he that
lets confidence and presumption shut his eyes, knows not how to look about
him in a danger.

Thus,

Jacob when he was to meet Esau, whise wrath he suspected, divided his
People and Flocks, and said, If Esau come to the one and smite it, the other
shall escape,

Genesis 32. 7, 8. POLICY XLV. Humble words and presents may appease a man's anger.
Toward those of whose faith and friendship, you are not assured, use all
fair entreaty and demeanure of curtelie, and so either charm them into
sincerity of that they profess, or cherish them with such like behaviors as
their own, and thus you speak to them in their Language, and like a fair
dealing Merchant trade with them by way of Exchange.

Thus,

When Jacob was going toward Esau, he sent presents, and told his servants,
they should say, They be thy servant Jacobs, it is a present sent unto my Lord
Esau*

G. 32. 17. POLICY XLVI. Not to suffer any thing we esteem to be too public.
SUffer not any thing of quality you esteem too public and ambulatory in the
presence of great Persons, for if they cast an eye of delight upon it, you
cannot so freely and resolutely deny their solicit and importunity, and it is
as if you should bring forth your picture of wax before the Sun, who whiles
he looks on it, melts it from your own hand.

Thus,

When Dinah walked too openly among the Daughters of the Land, Shechem the
Prince of the Country took her,

Genesis 33. 2. POLICY XLVII. It Is folly to cry, Non putavi.
WHen any one with whom you have had slender correspondence and transaction
would be contracting and covenanting, be first inquisitive into the
engagements they propose, how far they may prove incongruous and inconvenient
to you, it is a folly to say, non putavi.

Thus,

Thus Shechem and his Father were too unadvised, when they yielded to
circumcise the Males of their city, and so betray them to the sword of Jacobs
Sons,

Genesis 34. 18. 25. POLICY XLVIII. Use favor with secrecy for fear of envy.
WHen you have grace and favor with any, use it with secrecy, and not too much
ostentation, least you make work for your adversary to undermine you: he that
shows his wealth to his enemy, is the cause of his own pillage.

Thus,

Thus because Joseph wore a parti-colored coat, the apparent livery of his
fathers love, therefore say his Brethren, Come let us slay him,

Genesis 37. 3. 20. POLICY XLIX. Innocence without prudence is hurtful.
WHen you are to present your self to a party or faction, where you are envied
and maligned, forecast and think, what may be plotted and contrived against
you, and how far it may injure you, and what you have that lies naked and
exposed to the danger, this is to consider and think your self into security.

Thus,

Joseph might have prevented his present misery, had he thought before of his
brethrens envy, and the danger in his single approach,

Genesis 37. 18. POLICY L. Take earnest of an action you suspect.
IF you suspect the performance of a promise, work them obliged by some
special engagement and pawn, this is to imitate a performance, and take an
earnest of an action.

Thus,

Thamar to bind Judah to the remembrance of the covenant said, Give me thy
signet, and bracelets, and thy staff,

Genesis 38. 18. POLICY LI. Not to advance a thing in expectation without trial.
BE not too rash in entertaining opinion by any public profession or open
protestation, and by advancing any thing in your expectation without trial,
least you sacrifice your judgment and election to error and repentance,
barely approve, till a full experiment command your assent. God himself is
famous for his will of approbation. Voluntas approbationis and efficientiae.

Thus,

The Midwife seeing one of Thamars children to offer first into the world,
binds rashly a scarlet thread to it for the first borne, but he drew back, and
his Brother came out,

Genesis 38. 28, 29. POLICY LII. How to avoid the importunity of Suitors.
IF you would avoid all drawing into bad engagements and obligations, avoid
the importunities of others, and do not farm out your ears to the --
Mollissima tempora fandi, the soft times and opportunities of impression: your
stay and attention encourages solicit, and when you come so near to the words
of any, it is hard to keep at distance with his request.

Thus,

Joseph when he was solicited by by his mistress day by day, hearkened not unto
her,

Genesis 39. 10. POLICY LIII. An adversary may rend a skirt of advantage.
WHen you think you lie open to occasion and exceptions, be cautelous and
frugall of your self, least your adversary rend a skirt of advantage from you.

Thus,

Joseph with being in opportunity of place with his Mistress scatters a piece of
his Garment to her courtesy, and she shows it for her own purpose, He left
his Garment with me and fled,

Genesis 39. 18. POLICY LIVE. How to attain honorable employments.
IF you find your self successful and prospering in attempts and
dispatches, show your self abroad in other business, and being once observed
to be lucky and fortunate, the reports and fame will bring you home honorable
emploiments.

Thus,

Joseph wrought himself into grace, The Keeper of the Prison looked not to any
thing, because the Lord was with him; and that which he did the Lord made it
prosper,

Genesis 39. 23. POLICY LV. How a man may recommend himself.
When you have done a thing which has gained you favor or honor in the eyes
of any, make use of it, as it may prove advantageous to you, else you neglect
the opportunity and become guilty of Christ's complaint, How often would I, but
ye would not?

Thus,

When Joseph had told Pharaohs Butler the interpretation of his dream, and saw
that he pleased him, Think on me, says he, when it shall be well with thee,

G. 40. 14. POLICY LVII. A Sheep in Wolves clothing.
IF you would not have any to presume or grow insolent upon your favors,
bestow them without taking much notice, in a kind of neglect and inadvertency,
or else in pretense of indignation, which thing a witty dissembling will much
help, and this is to be a friend in the person of an adversary, and to be a
Sheep in Wolves clothing.

Thus,

Joseph spoke roughly to his Brethren and kept them in Prison, and they
interpreted it harshnesse, which was his love to detain them. And he puts
their money in their sackes, yet so as they wonder how it came,

Genesis 42. 17, 19. 24, 25. POLICY LVIII. A friend in the person of an enemy.
IN discovery of a business which contains in it any thing of eminent
immutation or change, be circumstantiall and prepare them whom the relation
concerns, with passages which in their nature, may exercise and fit them. I
observe the Sun is not without the bright preamble of a Star, and gives
notice in that of a following day.

Thus,

Joseph would tell his Brethren who he was, but first uses them as Spies, then
put devised imputations upon them, then afflicts his Father with taking away
his Benjamin, and then says, I am Joseph,

Genesis 45. 1, 3. POLICY LIX. Gradations necessary to be observed.
IN those relations which you fear may procure danger of Passion in those to
whom it is imparted; first apologize for the qualification, and let your
preface be such, as may diminish the occasion of Passion: and this is to cast
on water, before you kindle the fire.

Thus,

Joseph fearing that his Brethren might gro^ afraid upon the discovery
begins, Be not grieved nor angry with your selves, that ye sold me hither,

Genesis 45. 5. POLICY LX. Not to be too credulous in matters unexpected.
IN business of wonder and unexpected event be not too credulous, till there
be testimony sufficient to convince your faith: it is healthful for any to
rise up early and betimes, but to faith and credulity.

Thus,

Jacob was not confident of the news his Sons told of Joseph till he saw
the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him,

Gen 45, 26, 27. POLICY LXI. Humble words do humble the heart.
When there is a remove of any thing, which has been cause of the
continuance of some favors to you, renew your obligation with the best and
most seasonable circumstance you have, and this is Phoenix like, when one
advantage is quickened out of the ashes of another.

Thus,

Joseph's Brethren fearing when their Father was dead, Joseph might change
toward them, f^ll down at his feet, and said, We be thy Servants,

Genesis 50. 18. POLICY LXII. Pharaoh dealt cruelly with Strangers.
IF any aliens or forraigners multiply and grow numerous and potent besides
you, you may have a vigilant eye upon them, though you need not go so far as
Pharaoh did, to afflict them; it is a pretty cunning to look to your self,
with having your eyes upon others.

Thus,

Pharaoh did wisely in saying Behold the People of Israel, but too cruelly in
saying, Let us deal wisely with them least they multiply,

Exodus 1. 9. 10. POLICY LXIII. Opportunity is a necessary Servant.
IF you desire to be entertained in some occasion, wait not at too much
distance, but study to be opportunely, (but let it seem) accidentally present,
this is to fall into the lap of employment while it lies spread.

Thus,

When the Sister had a desire to interpose her self in any thing which might
happen to the child Moses, She stood a far off, yet so as to wit what was
done,

Ex. 2. 4. POLICY LXIV. Courtesy requited with courtesy.
IF you would obtain courtese and favor, show your self first eminent in the
like respects, and they will invite a return of their like, and as quoy
favors bring home more of their kind to you.

Thus,

Moses in courtesy aided Midians daughter against the Shepherds and drew them
water for their flock, and Midian said, Where is he? Call him that he may
eat bread,

Ex. 2. 19: 20. POLICY LXV. Refresh men's faintings for your profit.
WHen you find you have benefit by the industry and labor of auy, have
respect to supply and refresh their faintings and decaies, for what goes from
you thus, issues but like a vapor from the earth, to fall back upon you with
advantage.

Thus,

The People got Victory as long as Moses hands were lift up when they were
heavy, they took a stone and put it under him, and Aaron and Hur stayed up his
hands,

Ex. 17. 12. POLICY LXVI. Wisdom to comfort as much as we can.
IN great complaints and murmurings of People by reason of grievances, it is
wisdom if you cannot supply their desires, yet to solace and comfort and
addulce their afflictions, which act is a degree of redress to the misery.

Thus,

When the people grieved for the bitterness of the waters of Marah, though
Moses could not bring them to other Fountains and streams, yet cast in a tree
into the waters and made them sweet,

Ex. 15. 25. POLICY LXVII. Secrecy the only requisite in managing designs.
IN the carriage of Designs, closeness and secrecy are the only requisites,
for you should have the light of a project; like a tapour in a dark lantern,
that it may not shed a beam, through any chincke of report to betray it self
to suspicion, and discovery, but only shine to your self and your complotters.

Thus,

God set the Pillar which was in the Desert betwixt the Israelites and the
Egyptians, And it was a Cloud and darkness to them, but gave light to those,

Ex. 14. 20. POLICY LXVIII. Remoras to hinder your Enemies Designs.
IF you suspect or know your adversary has a plot upon you, let your first
care be to retard and stay the speed of it, and inject a delay to it, till you
have time to disperse and defeat it more completely, these are commaes and
half periods to his proceedings, and this bringing in of a parenthesis of your
own Designs, puts his project about till you gain ground on him.

Thus,

God when he saw the chariots of Pharaoh in such haste to pursue the
Israelites, took off their chariot wheels that they drove them heavily,

Ex. 14. 24. 25. POLICY LXIX. Gods wisdom in leading his people
WHen you have any instruments or agents whom you employ in business of
something harsh consequence, and that you suspect their zeales and service in
the cause, if they should find it unsavory or vexing, lead them down the most
fair and even paths you can project, and keep the worst of it from sight,
and thus like Japhet you draw a garment betwixt the eye and the nakedness.

Thus,

When God brought the people from Egypt, he would not lead them through the
Land of the Philistines, least, says he, per adventure the people repent when
they see war,

Ex. 13. 17. POLICY LXX. Princes are to have under-magistrates to help and
ease them.
FOr a Ruler or Statesman or a Grandee of business, it is the best both in
regard of their own particular ease, and the more expedite dispatch of
business, and more methodicall form of proceeding to dispose of petty
imploiments, to assistants and surrogates, and this is as if others should put
their shoulders to the weight of your business.

Thus,

Jethro Moses Father in Law advised, when he saw him sit Judge alone, in such a
throng of business, Thou will surely wear away, for this thing is too heavy
for thee, thou art not able to perform it thy self alone,

Ex. 18. 13. 21. POLICY LXXI. Superiors are not to be long absent from their
People.
BE not too long out of presence where your authority is awful, necessary, and
honored, for there may soon follow a revolt upon your-with-drawing; like the
Air, which if the Sun withdraw the light and influence, falls from the
allegiance it bore to brightness, into obscurity and darkness.

Thus,

When Moses was absent-from the People, and was in the Mount, they said, Make
us gods; for this Moses we know not what is become of him,

Ex. 32. 1, 2. POLICY LXXII. How to behave ones self to his guest.
AT times of great invitations and solemnities, when many are called to your
table, it is in you to show your self sweet and gracious, and to present your
self with a clear face, that your looks may be the Crystal to your
disposition; it is a sin against hospitality to open your doors and shut up
your countenance, Habere ostium apertum, vultum clausum, when thou have done
all thy office, take thy place that thou may be merry with them, Eccl. 32. 2.

Thus,

God appeared to the people, from a place, as it had been the body of Heaven,
in his clearenesse, and the people saw God, says the verse, and did eat and
drink,

Ex. 24 10, 11. POLICY LXXIII. What is the best posture for greatness to
walk in.
HUmility is the best posture for greatness and honor to walk in, and the
more near you are to your inferior, the more dear and applauded: therefore
to do this, let not your height and greatness always appear, but sometimes
sh^owded in obscurity; Stars twinkle most in their greatest height.

Thus,

The Mount was a good example, For the Glory of the Lord abode on it, and yet a
Cloud covered it six days,

Ex. 24. 16. POLICY LXXIV. Princes when they should appear terrible.
MAgistrates and Princes in place and occasion, should appear awful and
terrible, offenses are often put out of countenance and confidence, when the
eyes of Justice shoot lightening and revenge in the face of them.

Thus,

In the eyes of the Children of Israel, the sight of the Glory of the Lord was
like devouring Fire, on the top of the Mount,

Ex. 24. 17. POLICY LXXV. Princes in their absence are to substitute fit
persons in their places.
IF you be in authority and by chance importuned to remove, be wise in the
disposing and packing up your affairs; I mean, leave not things disordered
and confused, but do as God did with Moses, take part of your spirit of
authority and put it upon some that are resident.

Thus,

When Moses was called from the people into the Mount, he said Aaron and Hur
are with you, if any man have any matters to do,

Ex. 24. 14. POLICY LXXVI. To send good intelligence abroad.
IN the charge and advise for intelligence, be very acurate and punctual, and
the relations which are returned accordingly shall do your Design more
service; B^lles come back as they are racketted from you.

Thus,

When Moses sent out his Spies for Canaan, See (says he) the land and the
people, whether they be strong or weak, few or many, what cities they dwell
in, whether in tents or strong holds,

Numb. 1. 18, 19. POLICY LXXVII. How to becalme a mutiny.
IN any commotion or mutiny labor to becalme it, with fair deprecations and
plausible reasons which may superinduce a contrary opinion to that they are
persuaded on; this is to stroke a fury, and fawn upon a frown, and smile a
discontent into favor.

Thus,

When the people mutined because of the false report, Moses and Aaron fell
down upon their faces before all the Assembly, saying, the Land is an
exceeding good Land,

Numb. 14. 5. 7. POLICY LXXVIII. Innovation dangerous.
FAll not into any humor of Innovation or Change too suddenly, neither recant
from any thing, you interest your self in, too inconsiderately; in these
actions, let your motion be like the shadow upon Ahaz Dial, and go back by
degrees.

Thus,

When God pretended he would mite the people that instant for nurmuring, and
make a greater Nation, Moses persuaded him the action would be scandalous to
the Heathen, the Nations will speak, etc.

Numb. 14, 15. POLICY LXXIX. Discontent a kind of plurisie which must be
speedily remedied.
IN universal murmurings and mutinies, labor the remedy, and supply without
delay, common people are sudden and impatient in their passions, and their
discontent is a kind of Plurisie, which must have speedy redress, or the
disease is mortal.

Thus,

When the people complained in the Desert for water, Moses and Aaron without
stay went and fell down on their faces to God, and he bid them, Strike the
Rock for water,

Numb. 20. 6. 11. POLICY LXXX. How to behave ones self in a strange Country.
WHen you are to make use of any thing, where another has property, seek to
contract fair quarter, for your present advantage, and let your arguments for
persuasion be pertinent, and material, and inducing; he that rides other
circuits for execution of his design, is out of his way, or else goes a
farther way about.

Thus,

Moses being to pass by the king of Edom, sent to him, saying, God has heard
our voice and brought us from Egypt, let us pass through thy country, we will
not drink of thy water, nor turn to the right* hand nor left,

Numb. 20. 16, 17. POLICY LXXXI. Places of Authority not to be long vacant.
WHen Places of Authority are likely to be vacant, be ready in project with a
successor, long inter-reynums or interstices in government is the Winter and
ill Season of a State, where the nights are long, and the days short.

Thus,

Aaron being ready to die, Moses even then took Eleazar and stripped Aaron of
his garment and put them upon Eleazar his Son,

Numb. 20. 28. POLICY LXXXII. Praises and promises great inducements.
IF you would prevail with any for some experiments of the faculty they excel
in, you may induce themby promises, and advancing the report of their skill and
ability, and this is a kind of tuning an instrument for your hand, or with
Moses a blowing into the Silver Trumpet to make it sound.

Thus,

Balak though a wicked Prince did well in his act upon Balaam, he sent him
rewards, and Come now says he, for I wot, he whom thou blessest is blessed,

Numb. 22. 6* 7. POLICY LXXXIII. Apply thy self to God on a design for
success.
I know no better Policy in the preface or entrance upon a design, then to
apply your self to God, for success and direction, or for declining your
heart from it if it be not convenient; This is to go to the first Mover for a
motion.

Thus,

Wicked Balaam was imitable in this action, Tarry ye, says he, that I may know
what the Lord will say*

Numb. 22. 19. POLICY LXXXIV. A threefold cord is not easily broken
HE that would draw any into assistance or other complot, shall obtain soonest
by offers of interest in the cause, and by propounding such respects, as you
think may suit the disposition of the parties or agents, and by soliciting,
by persons of fame and quality; and such a threefold cord is not easily broken.

Thus,

The method of Balaks policy, was good and sound, for he sent to Balaam
Princes more honorable, with this Language, I will promote thee,

Numb. 22. 15, 17. POLICY LXXXV. Not to be too importunate.
IF you observe any obstruction, or averseness, or stopping in your business,
press not forward with too much violence, but take time, to spruce the
feathers of your industry, that you may fly more roundly to the mark.

Thus,

Balaam did unwisely to spur on his Ass, when his Ass made a stand, for the
Angel said, I went out to withstand thee, and had she not turned, I had
slain thee,

Numb. 22. 32, 33. POLICY LXXXVI. Several ways to be tried in a business.
IN the thing you would have to succeed, make trial of all the several
advantages you see open, for there are more ways than one into a City, and
some Posternes may be open, though the foregates be shut.

Thus,

Balak (had his action been lawful) took a wise course, for he said to the
Prophet, Come I pray thee unto another place,

Number. 23. 13, 27 POLICY LXXXVII. Public grace is to be shown unto
Successors.
IF you would have your successor inherit your eminency and respect after you,
derive to him betimes some public grace which may be a kind of initiation
or pre-instalment, these whom we would have members of a Visible Church, we
baptize and dip.

Thus,

Moses before he aied took Joshua, and laid his hand upon him, and set him
before Eleazar the Priest, and before all the Congregation, and gave him a
charge in their sight,

Numb. 27. 18, 19. POLICY LXXXVIII. Dangerous to follow the counsel of of an
Enemy.
IF you be upon the heights and battlement of honor or fame, and envied,
suspect any that would draw you to partake of their iniquities, with pretense
of society, or privilege of familiarity, or other allurement, for there is no
practice so devilish as that, for when envy sees you seated in security, and
that you are even shot-free and enchanted in a blessed condition, she knows
there is no way to make you forfeit that eminency sooner than by betraying you
to sin; he that would have another condemned with himself, must draw him
first into the same guilt.

Thus,

The Children of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam committed trespass
against the Lord in the matter of Peor, and there was a Plague among the
Congregation of the Lord,

Numb. 31. 16. POLICY LXXXIX. Memorials to be made of good successes.
IF you would preserve the memory of any attempt or success, raise such
memorials as may traduce an impression to posterity, and be a kind of
register to the action.

Thus,

Joshuah charged the people to bear twelve stones out of Jordan, and to set
them up, saying, That this may be a Sign among you,

Josh. 4. 6, 8. POLICY XC. When to make conditions with advantage.
WHen you have any at advantage, consider well, and make your own fair terms
and do not omit and fall afterward into the complaint of I^b, Oh that I were
as in months past.

Thus,

Rahab dealt wisely with the spies, for while they were in her power, she said,
Swear unto me that you will also show kindness to my fathers house,

Josh. 2. 12. POLICY XCI. When and what Spies are to be sent abroad.
WHen you are to make any onset in a business of of Controversy, send out
some observation to espy, and bring you intelligence, how your adversary
continues, and in what form of resolution, for GOD often begins the success
at home in their own hearts, either by fear or resolution.

Thus,

Joshua sent out Spies, who returned with this, Truly the Lord has delivered
them into our hands, for all the Inhabitants do faint because of us,

Josh. 2. 1. 14. POLICY XCII. Remember God and his Covenant in affliction.
IT is divine wisdom in any time when affliction is heavy and grievous, to
remember God of his Covenant, he has made with his, and to enter a new
Covenant of Sacrament with him; this is to strike a new bargain for a blessing.

Thus,

When Joshua had done circumcumcising the people, This day says God, I have
rolled away the reproach from Israel,

Josh. 5. 8, 9. POLICY XCIII. A bright Sun in a Winter morning.
IN the most fair and complementall action of your adversary, suspect the
most: a bright Sun in a Winter morning, is but a fair apology to a foul day.

Thus,

They of Jericho were vain, when they thought Israel could do the least
harm, while they only walked about their city,

Josh. 6. 1. POLICY XCIV. Examination of ones self in time of affliction.
WHen you observe in your proceedings any unhappy event or unusual failing,
be inquisitive into your self, if some trespass or failing with God, has
not occasioned it; he that goes on without this care, is like a man wounded in
the heat of fight, and because he feels not his bleeding, even faints, while
he neglects to stanch it.

Thus,

When Joshua saw the children of Israel could not stand before their Enemies,
said, there is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, up, sanctify your
selves,

Josh. 7. 13. POLICY XCV. A diversion is a stratagem in war.
IF you would prevail upon your adversary in a business, and you think he
prepares too strongly to be opposed by any force or endeavor of yours, create
something which may make him some work elsewhere, and draw part of his care
and strength to it, then apply your self to a way, which may be least
suspected to him, and where he may be most weak for resistance; and this is
to make him retaile those forces by parcels, he intended to bring in whole upon
you.

Thus,

Joshua sent some to lie in wait behind the city, and I and the people will
approach* says he, till we have drawn them from the city, then ye shall rise
up from the ambush, and seize upon it,

Josh. 8. 4* 6, 7. POLICY XCVI. Look asquint in dangers.
BE not too fixed nor intent upon what is before you or in your eye, but look
asquint into your considerations and about you: dangers and assaults may come
from other parts, and flow in like a Tide, where there is the greatest crack
in the wall.

Thus,

The men of Ai perished, for they looked not back till they saw, And behold the
smoke of the city ascended,

Josh. 8. 20. POLICY XCVII. Not to be too credulous.
WHen your condition is such, as admits easily of advantages and stratagems
which may be plotted, be jealous over the most honest and virtuous pretenses;
Do ye look, says Paul, on things after the outward appearance?

Thus,

Joshua was unadvised to give credit to the old bottles and shoes of the
Gibeonites, and they knew too with what Nation they made a league, for the
Princes said, we have sworn, now therefore we cannot touch them,

Josh. 9. 6, 13, 19. POLICY XCVIII. Diligence in a just proportion to Enemies
flying and hidden.
IN your pursuit of affairs when you have such as are unequal in their
natures, yet by circumstance may prove alike; let your diligence be in just
proportion to both, like a Wheel which carries about the Spokes, and lesser
pinnes with like motion; else ^f you dispose your self unequally, that where
you are most remiss and negligent, may win ground to your injury.

Thus,

When it was told Joshua the five Kings are found in a cave, he bid^ rewle
stones upon the mouth, yet stay not but pursue after your Enemies,

Josh. 10. 17, 18, 19. POLICY XCIX. Strike the iron while it is hot.
IF you have a suit or request to make* when time and place suggests fitness
and season, apply your self, it is like setting on the seal while the wax is
warm.

Thus,

When the children of Israel were dividing the Land, Caleb comes to Joshua, Now
give me, says he this Mountain whereof the Lord spoke,

Josh. 14. 5, 12. POLICY C. When the time is to dismiss Confederates.
THose you take into confederacy and aid with you in any attempt, and have but
for temporary servants, suffer them not to depart, till you have completely
finished, or disposed other ways what you intend, while the Sun with his heat
keeps up a vapor in the air, it w^ites there upon the day* but if he
withdraw and dismiss it, so that it fall upon earth, it is not easily gathered
and exhaled again.

Thus,

Joshua till the Israelites had won the Land, would not send away the
Reubenites and their company, but then calls, And now return ye and get ye
unto your tents,

Josh. 22. 1, 4. POLICY CI. Ecclesiastical persons fit for embassage in
matters of Religion.
IN business of embassage or other convenient affair, which concerns
Religion, employ some of holy Orders and place, the presence of such ever
commands reverence and respect, and it is to them, as if GOD appeared by Proxey.

Thus,

Joshua when he heard the Reubenites, built an Altar and suspected their
Idolatry, Sent Phineas the Son of Eleazar the Priest, and ten Princes,

Josh. 22. 12, 13. POLICY CII. Not to be rash in judgment.
BE not rash to expostulate and suspect upon every rumor, least your
conjecture sand surmises befoole you, finding no cause for them any where
extant and visible, but in your own opinion; Multi aliis jus peccandi
suspicando fecerunt.

Thus,

The princes of Israel hearing of the Reubenites Altar, hasten to rebuke their
Idolatry, but it was, say they, Nor for Burnt-offerings, nor sacrifice, but
that it might be a witness,

Josh. 22. 14, 15, 26, 27. POLICY CIII. How to try those whom you suspect.
IF you would try the syncerity and faithfulness of any, put them upon that
you suspect their faith most frail in, and soonest persuaded by from obedience
and respect; this is to spread a bait and allurement in the face of another
virtue.

Thus,

God seated the Israelites among the Canaanites, Take ^eed (says Joshua)
therefore to your selves,

Josh. 23. 11. POLICY CIV. How to contrive a memorial.
IF you fear your distance and discontinuance may cause any privilege or
relation you desire should continue in fresh title to be forgotten, contrive
such a memorial as may serve in stead of a conservatory, and this is to make
signs to posterity of your meaning.

Thus,

Least there should in after times grow a strangen^sse betwixt the Reubenites
and the Israelites* b^^a^^^ Jordan was betwixt them* T^^^ ^^^^^ ^^ A^^^^ for a
witness,

Josh* 22* 10* 26. POLICY CV. The way to cut off deliberations for objection.
IF you have a suit to any with whom you think it difficulty to speed, come
upon them unexpectedly; asuddai^ne surprisall quickens the party you are to
deal with to attention, and cuts off deliberation for objections.

Thus,

When Ehud would have killed Eglon the King of Moab, and feared he should want
opportunity, h^ turned again hastily and said, I have a secret errand to thee
O King,

Judge. 3. 19. POLICY CVI. The way to extinguish a faction or tumult.
THe way to extinguish a faction or tumult, is to labor at the head or Prince
of it, and if you speed there, be quick and sudden with the rest, and you
shall succeed with more ease and dispatch; such alacrity puts distraction and
astonishment into your adversaries, and your haste retards them.

Thus,

When Ehud had slain the King of Moab, he came suddenly down with the
Israelites and said, Follow me, the Lord has delivered your Enemies into your
hands, and slew at that time ten thousand,

Judge. 3. 27, 28. POLICY CVII. To watch soberly the convenient time for an
Action.
LEt not your zeal or fervency in affection to a cause, push you into any
unseasonable engagement, but soberly watch the most convenient time and season,
else you over-runne opportunity, and ride post thither, where a flower pace
would do more service.

Thus,

Gideon would not pull down the Altar of Baal by day, for he feared his
fathers household and the men of the city, but he did it by night,

Judge. 6. 27. POLICY CVIII. Stratagems done by night and by scattered forces.
IN military stratagems the onset by night has most advantage, and by
scattered forces more than single and entire brunts or skirmishes, for the
darkness and dispersion causes an apprehension in your enemy, that your forces
are more by the report from so many parts, and if your plot be opposite in
quality to the present darkness, it causes more terror and fear, and if
sudden in the first discovery, it amazes the more.

Thus,

Gideon plotted upon his Enemy, he dispersed his companies gave each his
Trumpet, his Pitcher with a Lamp in it, and they must fall by night upon them,
with noise breaking their pitchers, and crying, The sword of God and Gideon,

Judge. 7. 16, 18, 20, 21. POLICY CIX. A gentle soft answer pacifieth anger.
WHen the indignation of great persons is kindled against you, meet them with
such language and behaviors, as may interpret and insinuate their power; for
that is secret incantation or charm to the spirits of great persons, and it is
a victory to have their power acknowledged: -- Satis est potuisse videri.

Thus,

When the princes of Ephraim chide with Gideon for his victory, he answered, Is
not the gleanings of Ephraim, better than the vintage of Abiezer, and what am I
in comparison of you? then their anger abated,

Judge. 8. 1, 2, 3. POLICY CX. How to detract from ones self modestly.
WHen you have much attributed to you, detract from your self modestly and
devoutly, and refer it over to divine Providence, which wise translation will
be a cause of a longer lived and more substantial honor to you, he that
takes in God for a share shall have a surer interest himself.

Thus,

When Israel said to Gideon, Rule thou over us, for thou have delivered us, he
said, I will not rule over you,

Judge. 8, 22, 23. POLICY CXI. How and when to value ones self.
IF any have had a poor and undervaluing conceit of you, after some happy
success in any enterprise, labor by what eminent proof you can to convince
their opinion, and exalt it, that they may in secret and with their own
bosoms recant their mistake, and entertain more honorable thoughts of you,
and this is to win an Empire in that opinion which bore you no allegiance
before.

Thus,

When the men of Succoth upbraided Gideon with his weakness, he slew the two
Kings of Midian, and showed them, with behold Zebah and Zalmannah,

Judge. 8. 15. POLICY CXII. What means a man may use aspiring Principalities.
IF you would commend your self to any place of eminency and popularity, which
passes by vote and suffrage, make those your friends you think have most sway,
and use such arguments for your cause, as you conceive fit and taking with
their dispositions; the vulgar like ships in full sail are blown on their
way, by the breath of the great ones and more eminent amongst them.

Thus,

When Abimelech had a desire to reign, he spoke to his Mothers Brethren, That
they should speak, and remember, says he, I am your bone and flesh,

Judge. 9. 12. POLICY CXIII. Be not too confident upon good success.
BE not too confiden^^ ^^d presumptuous and daring upon every slight grace you
receive, for it kindles and awakes jealousies and fears, and calls dangers to
you, and like the string of a musical instrument, you tell aloud the fingers
of them which touch you.

Thus,

When Gaal was a little gracious with the men of Shechem, he reviled the King
Abimelech, then came Abimelech against him, and chased him that he fled,

Judge. 9. 28, 40. POLICY CXIV. How to behave your self toward your
contemners.
IF you have been neglected by any, and thought superfluous, and after by the
wheel of providence become such, as you may stand them in place, be difficult
if they come after to solicit you, and so your behavior shall be a
corrective to their former insolence, and make you more gracious and
acceptable, and in this the form of expostulation, will do you service.

Thus,

When the Elders of Israel came to Jephtah, he said, Did ye not hate me? and
expel me? and why are ye come unto me now ye are in distress?

Judge. 11. 7. POLICY CXV. How to behave your self to obtain your desire.
IF you be endeared to any, and have occasion to importune them to some thing
you would have effected.

First, observe when you are freshest in respect, for then the patient or
friend is disposed to your hand and you need not prepare him.

Then observe to insinuate and let fall by the way, the want of affection which
you shall have cause to suspect in the denial.

This is an argument impresses deep, because your jealousy over a true friend
respects that, of which he desires to seem least guilty, and therefore will
labor to satisfy and release you from the opinion by friendly offices.

Thus,

When Sampsons Wife would know the Riddle, she said, Thou do but hate me,
and love me not, thou have put forth a Riddle and have not told me,

Judge. 14. 16. POLICY CXVI. How you may use circumlatory speeches.
IF you see one importune you to discover some material secret, especially if
it be such a one, as thinks by the privilege of endearement to prevail,
dally with them by circulatory speeches, run them into a ring, and delude
them merrily for their curiosity, let them observe you are not pleased they
should enquire by deceiving them, nor much displeased, because you reject them
not directly and plainyl.

Thus,

When D^lilah was inquisitive of Sampson how he might be bound, he told her
first with withes, then with ropes, then with weaving his seven locks, etc.

Judge. 16. POLICY CXVII. Neglect not fair advantages.
IF you can make a fair departure for your advantage or further benefit from
the place or condition you are in, neglect not the opportunity, for as the
Apostle says divinely, It were better not to have known the way, than knowing
it to turn, etc.

Thus,

When the Priest which was in Michaes house heard the Searchers say, Is it
better for thee to be a Priest to one man's house or to a Tribe? his heart was
glad, and he went in the midst of them,

Judge. 18. 19, 20. POLICY CXVIII. Retiring is sometimes necessary.
IF you have a greater and more mighty adver^ary, let not your passion sway you
to any peremptory resistance, but wisely forbear and keep your sting to your
self; he that shows himself fiery where his flame cannot touch, like
lightening appears only in flash, but consumes nothing.

Thus,

When Micah saw they were too strong for him, he wisely turned and went back
to his own house,

Judge. 18. 26. POLICY CXIX. How to retain one with hospitality
IF you would retain any in hospitality with you, deceive the time with
harmless mirth and entertainment, which may draw their attention, from being
too much awake to observe their time and season of departure, else the stay is
tedious and importunes absence; he that is spruce at this is like one that
still begins new and fresh stories and sentences in his oration, whereby he
winnes time on his auditors.

Thus,

When the Levite and his Concucubine came to their Fathers house, their Father
stayed them, with Comfort your hearts, and tarry this night, and let your
hearts be merry this night also,

Judge. 19. 5, 6, 7, 8. POLICY CXX. Fair words moves more sometimes than rough
threatenings.
IF you have a friend offending and peccant, you may sometimes sooner win him
to a good conversation and amendment with fair entreaty, than severity and
threatening, for this last course is as it were to commit a rape in the act of
reformation, the first is like the Fable of Orpheus, to make him follow you
with the music of your behavior.

Thus,

When the Levites Concubine played the Whore, and went from him, her Husband
went after her to speak^ friendly to her,

Judge. 19. 2, 3. POLICY CXXI. Considerations in the time of mirth.
IN your times of mirth it is wisdom before ye begin the solemnity, to
consider what occasions of error you hazard by it, and to provide well for
your safety, for when David was playing on his Harp, then Saul cast his
Javelin at him.

Thus,

When the Daughters of Shiloh were dancing in dances, the Children of Benjamin
took every one his Wife,

Judge. 21. 21. POLICY CXXII. When surprisals may be made.
IF you have any surprisall to make, wait the time when those you deal with
are most taken up and employed, and especially in such actions, as put their
imaginations and spirits into joy and alacrity, for then they are in a
disposition most contrary to that which is requisite for opposing you, and* for
the present, their thoughts are as it were abroad in their pleasures, and when
you fall upon them, they cannot come home soon enough to themselves to make
resistance.

Thus,

The Israelites advised the Children of Benjamin, If the Daughters of Shiloh
come out to dance in dances, then come ^ee and catch every man his Wife,

Judge. 21. 20, 21. POLICY CXXIII. Ruths resolution toward, Naomi
IF you would continue an adherent to any, and not part society express your
resolution in such Phrase as may speak your affection importunate and
peremptory, such violence like faith in Scripture, works miracles with a
disposition that is enclining.

Thus,

When Naomi heard Ruth, saying, Where thou go I will go, and where thou
die I will die, and saw her steadfastly minded, she left speaking,

Ruth. 1. 16, 18. POLICY CXXIV. To disclaim a grace with modesty.
Disclaim a grace, that is done you, with modesty, for such extenuation of
your own worth is the advancement of it in the eye of another, for humility
has this blessing attending on it, the more it is lessened in its own
opinion, the more it is honored in another, to bring forth your virtues in
humility, is to power out your Spikenard at Jesus feet.

Thus,

When Boaz (...) Ruth gleane in his field, she bowed and said, Why have I found
grace in thine eyes, that thou should take notice of me,

Ruth 2. 8, 10. POLICY CXXV. A way to be known by some good occasion.
IF you desire to be made known to any by some sober occasion, observe where
you see there is notice soonest taken, and where the presence of you is soonest
discovered, and seem to be there rather by chance than on purpose; Philip
must be made known to the Eunuch, and therefore GOD set him in the way to
Gaza.

Thus,

Ruth had a desire to be known to Boaz, and she went to gleane ears of Corn
after him, so I shall find grace, says she,

Ruth. 2. 2. POLICY CXXVI. Bestow favors with a gracious neglect.
IF you have to deal with modest parties, who perhaps would blush to be
thought guilty of desert, wanting the boldness to manage their own worth,
bestow your favors with a gracious neglect, yet let your neglect be such as
may make a sign it was done on purpose; look like Christ, who though he
would stay at Emaus, yet set his countenance to go further.

Thus,

When Boaz saw Ruth gleaning, he said to his young men, Let her gleane, and
let fall some of the handfuls on purpose for her,

Ruth 2. 15, 16. POLICY CXXVII. How to dispatch a business.
WHen you have a business you would dispatch with any with whom you fear
put-offs and shifts, apprehend him suddenly and unexpected, when he is least
provided to object, and draw some into the conference, for men are desicous in
public to discharge themselves fairly of that which in private they will
shift, for they say in their hearts then, as the wicked man in the Psalm, God
will never see it.

Thus,

When Boaz had business with Naomies kinsman, he called him to sit down, and
he took ten men of the Elders, and said, sit ye down, and then he said unto
the kinsman,

Ruth 4. 1, ^* 3. POLICY CXXVIII. An attempt of comquest in a provident way.
IN attempts of conquest spy out and inform your self first, whether they be
such as are well lawed and disciplined, or careless and disordered, and
whether secure or provident, if you observe these defects, you may promise
better success, the Enemy came with his ^ares in the Gospel, when all were
asleep.

Thus,

The Spies of Dan found them at L^^sh, how they dwelt careless, quiet and
secure, and there was no Magistrate,

Judge. 18. 2. 7. POLICI CXXIX. Bribery in a Magistrate scandalous.
IF you would live honored and obeyed in your Magistracy, forbear corruption
and bribery, which betraies you to scandal and dislike with the people, and
he that is guilty of offense in his place, can never proceed with that clear
confidence which is required in Authority, therefore Solomon says of the
righteous, they are bold as a Lion.

Thus,

When Samuels Sons turned after lucre and took bribes, the Elders of Israel
said to Samuel, Thy Sons walk not in thy ways,

1 Samuel 8 3, 4. POLICY CXXX. Resist not a popular opinion with violence.
WHere you see a popular opinion forward and violent, resist it not with
violence, but decline it with fair and sweet persuasion, Bees are best
tinckled together when they rise, and a little music from David will soonest
persuade the evil spirit in Saul.

Thus,

When the people were earnest with Samuel for a King, God bid him hearken to
them, yet to tell them what a King he shall be, that will take their Sons for
his chariots,

1 Samuel 8. 7, 9, 11. POLICY CXXXI. How to predispose a man to favor him.
WHen you solicit any of honorable parts or place for some courtesy or favor,
present something which may predispose him better toward you; A man's gift,
says Solomon, makes room for him. Prove. 18. 16.

Thus,

When Saul and his Servant were to entreat direction of the man of God, What
(says he) shall we bring the man? what have we?

1 Samuel 9. 7. POLICY CXXXII. Disasters are to be delivered with prudence.
IN your relation of any business or disaster of sad and great equality, do
not deliver it in too sudden and plain narration, for so a misfortune is
presented too like it self, and becomes more dangerous and desperate to the
auditour, or him it concerns, and such a messenger is like one of Iohs
Servants, I also am escaped to tell thee.

Thus,

When the Messengers told Eli abruptly that his two Sons were dead and the
Ark of God taken, he fell from his seat and died

1 Samuel ^. 17* 18* POLICY CXXXIII. Honor Gods mercy with a memorial.
IT is divine Policy to observe any notable favor or mercy GOD bestows on
you, and to honor it with a memorial, which is the thankfulness or
recognition of the creature to the Creator, God sticks most benefits there
where he sees them fixed; you know he set most stars in the Firmament.

Thus,

When Samuel had got a victory over the Philistines, he took a stone and set
it up saying, Hitherto has the Lord helped us,

1 Samuel 7. 12. POLICY CXXXIV. To prepare a man with a preface to receive good
news.
IF you be to discharge a relation which conteines some unexpected and happy
conditions to an inferior and dejected person, first let fall such language as
may a little dispose his spirits for dilation, and diffusion, and so prepare
him that he receive it moderately and safely; That cloud does well that
shootes a bright admonition of lightening before a thunderclap.

Thus,

When Samuel was to anoint Saul King of Israel, first he scatters this, On
whom is all the desire of Israel, is it not on thee? then he places him above
all his Guests,

1 Samuel 9. 20, 21. POLICY CXXXV. A preface in matter of disswasion.
WHen you are bound to perform any thing you see inconvenient, use some
preface of dehortation and dis^wasion at the very moment of performance, in
making these often experiments you may by chance soften them thus into a
recantation, -- non vi sed saepe cadendo.

Thus,

When Samuel had bound himself to anoint them a King, yet at the very time of
solemnity, he says, ye have rejected God, and said, nay, but set a King over
us,

1 Samuel 10. 19. POLICY CXXXVI. Not to take notice of every neglect and injury.
WHen you are entered into any popular grace and credit, take not any notice of
every neglect and injury, for so you discover your self too tender and
apprehensive of your honor you enjoy, which thing will soon create you
contempt in your lookers on; those thoughts are troublesome and vexing to their
owners, which like briers catch at every thing which touches them, and like the
thicket on mount Moriah, which held that Ram by the horns which pushed it.

Thus,

When Saul was anointed King, the children of Belial despised him, but he
wisely held his peace,

1 Samuel 10. 26. POLICY CXXXVII. How to make Subjects fear their King.
IF you would work upon the affections of the people, and superinduce a
passion of fear; you may do it by similitude and representation. GOD made his
Prophet carry forth his stuff and eat his meat with trembling in the sight
of the people, to signify the misery he would bring upon them.

Thus,

When Saul would fear the men of Iabesh, he took a yoke of Oxen and hewed
them in pieces, and sent them, thus shall it be done to his Oxen who will not
come,

1 Samuel 11. 7. POLICY CXXXVIII. If a King will not spare his Son, much less
his Subjects.
IF you be to do something of popular respect, and continue doubtful how it
will take, being there are many opinions to be reconciled, first disperse it
by sleight rumor, and as you observe them affected, you may proceed or
forbear, it is good playing a lesson of experiment before you show your art
upon a Lute in public.

Thus,

When Saul saw there was a fire amongst the people because God answered not,
he told the people, if it were in Jonathan his Son he should die, but there
was not a man answered ^o that,

1 Samuel 14. 38, 39. POLICY CXXXIX. How to move commiseration in a fact of
ignorance.
IF you would move commiseration and pity, when the punishment you are to
suffer exceeds the fact, extenuate your fault in your best art, and make your
clause in a smoothe aggravation of what you are to suffer.

Thus,

Jonathan being condemned to die, said, I did but taste a little honey with the
end of my rod, and lo I must die, so the people rescued Jonathan, that he died
not,

1 Samuel 14. 43, 45. POLICY CXL. Ill report must not discourage from good
actions.
IN business of great enterprise and consequence, if you feel your spirit
excited to it, do not suffer your self amated or put back by the ill reports
or detractions or envies of others; these are but the storms which ill
dispositions raise to blow you from sea, and your adventure, and if you resist
the dispositions which warm your spirit, for the action, you may become guilty
in a proportion of quenching the spirit.

Thus,

When David was stirred up to fight against the Philistin, and heard his
Brethren say, We know thy pride, and the haughtiness of thy heart, he went
on, and said, is there not a cause?

1 Samuel 17. 28. 29 POLICY CXLI. When a man may praise himself.
WHen you are to be engaged in imploiment, and your abilities are doubted and
questioned, and therefore you are scrupeld at, make a modest relation of your
own worth in some experiments you have made and succeeded in, least your
silence make you suspected and neglected; David said, when he kept silence his
bones waxed old, as though for want of speaking he had done himself injury.

Thus,

When David was questioned by Saul, Thou art not able to go against this
Philistin, thou art but a Youth, David said, There came a Lion to the Flock,
and I smote him,

1 Samuel 17: 33, 34, 35. POLICY CXLII. We may do a man wrong in praising him
over much.
IF you desire to keep the fame of some eminent friend entire, after any
general expressions of applause and acclamations of credit conferred upon him,
forbear to publish them in too much formality, such language does conjure up
spirits of envy and detraction, there fore when Christ did a miracle, he would
often say, See you speak it to no man, and when he had appeared in the glory
of his Transfiguration, he charged them not to tell what they had seen.

Thus,

The cause which moved Saul to hate David, was, Saul has slain his thousands,
but David his ten thousands,

1 Samuel 18. 8. POLICY CXLIII. When a man may deface himself in accepting of
favors.
Be not too meeting, and seem not too hasty in accepting graces and favors,
for you ravish that which would come with consent at the season intended, and
it is like the plucking off a curtsey in the bud and blossom, before it be
ripened in the purpose of him that bestows it; and such early setting forth
makes your desert become more guilty, than perhaps there is cause.

Thus,

When Saul told David he should be his Son in Law, Who am I* says he, or
my Fathers Family? and when he was solicited again, he said, I am a poor
man and lightly esteemed, yet after, it pleased David to be the Kings Son in
Law,

1 Samuel, 18. 18, 20, 25. POLICY CXLIV. An expostulation with an innocent
confidence.
WHen there is any wrath or indignation entertained against you, which you may
suspect, created and fed by the private whispers of any, take the advantage of
presenting your self with an innocent confidence* especially if you can make
use of any occasion wherein it may appear, you have forborne, where you might
have offended, and been gracious, where you might have been grievous.

Thus,

David having got Saul's spear, and water-pot from his b^lster while he slept,
showed them for a witness of his mercy to him, and Saul said, I have sinned,

1 Samuel 26. 12, 21. POLICY CXLV. Obligations may be intimated to move the
affections.
IF you would request favors of any who have been obliged to you, express
smoothly what obligations they are bound in to you, for though there be no
propension toward you, yet to discharge the Conscience of gratitude something
may be done.

Thus,

When David sent young men to Nabal for supply, Say, Thy Shepherds which were
with us we hurt them not, neither was ought missing unto them, wherefore give I
pray thee,

1 Samuel 25. 5, 6, 7. POLICY CXLVI. Prudent Abigail saves her Husband and her
whole Family.
IF you observe a return of respects is expected and demanded out of duty, and
that you are overawed by any churlish inhumane condition, do by stealth and
in private what you intend; like the S^nne, when it it is barred out of door,
steals in a beam through a chinke or crannie.

Thus,

When Nabal would send David nothing, Abigail took bottles of wine and parched
Corn, and m^t David, but she told not her Husband,

1 Samuel 25. 17. 18, 19. POLICY CXLVII. Abigails apology for her self.
IF you fear you shall receive a hard measure for the ill demeanures of
another, and none of your own demerit, appease it by early apology and
intercession, and sprinkle your water before the fire kindle.

Thus,

Abigail hasted to meet David, and bowed, and said, I thy bandmaid saw not the
young men whom thou did send,

1 Samuel 25. 23, 25. POLICY CXLVIII. Faithfulness is not to be broke by false
suggestions.
IF you have given your faith or promise to any, and desires to keep it clear
from violation, and knows your nature and disposition such as is easily
stirred up to make a forfeit, keep your self sh^t to all tales and
suggestions, and let not your ear be warmed by the breath of a talebearer:
even the least spark which falls upon such tinder will fire it.

Thus,

When Saul had given his faith to David to assure a truce, the Ziphites came
and said, Does he not hide himself in the hill? then Saul arose and went
down,

1 Sa. 26. 1, 2 POLICY CXLIX. Be not too secure in correspondency with
areconciled Enemy.
NEver be too secure in the correspondence of a reconciled Enemy, and being
such an one who has broken his faith before, for though he has discovered
passion and sorrow for the time, yet it is like the spiritual sorrow, the dint
is not so powerful nor has so much efficacy to restrain from, after
occasions of sinning and offending.

Thus,

Saul having often broke with David, David said in his heart, I shall now
p^rish one day by the hand of Saul,

1 Samuel 27. 1. POLICY CL. Saul disqui^ted wisely, though the business wicked.
IF you think your own naked presence will be any impediment or retardation
to the business you desire, do it by disguise, if you may go on safel^ and
accurately, and this is to act your part in the dark.

Thus,

Saul did wisely though his business was wicked, he went not to Endor like
himself, but put on other ra^m^nt,

1 Samuel 28. 8. POLICY CLI. When to avoid and pass by occasions of distaste.
WHen you have drawn any of quality and might into your assi^tance, and th^^
your strength consists in such a contribution, avoid all occasions of
exceptions and distasts, and wisely pass by them, else you give them occasion
to retire into the consideration of the engagement you stand in toward them*
and to project some course of withdrawing and translating their power where
they hope for more advantage, and like the birds in the fable, each will
challenge their feather and leave you naked.

Thus,

Ishbosheth was *ill advised to rebuke Abner for the Concubine, Have I not
showed kindness, says he, to the house of Saul and to his Brethren, and
therefore as God has sworn to David, even so I do to him,

2 Samuel 3. 8, 9. POLICY CLII. Not to trust a reconciled Enemy.
BE not too confident in the emploiment of such as may do favor to
themselves, and make advantages from the things you interesse them in; like ill
qualitied Hawks which eat the Foul themselves they should take for their
master.

Thus,

The Philistines were wise in not taking David to battle with them, least say
they, in the battle he be a^ Adversary to us,

1 Samuel 29. 4. POLICY CLIII. A discreet retiring where envy is.
IF you perceive, and have notice by any that you are not favored by those
persons of eminency you adhere to, take the admonition, and discreetly retire;
such a motion is but to draw back your arrow, that you may shoot with more
advantage afterward.

Thus,

Achish told David, The Lords favor thee not, and David rose early to depart,

1 Samuel 29. 6. 11. POL^CIE CLIV. How to make use of advantage.
WHen you have one upon fair and honest advantage, make then your own lawful
terms, for the necessitated party will be a little prodigal in consent to
obtain any present redress, and like a patient in his fit of grief would
part with all to the Physician for some instant remedy.

Thus,

David, when Abner sent to make league with him, said, well, but one thing I
require, thou shall not see my f^ce except thou bring Michal,

2 Samuel 3, 12, 13. POLICY CLV. How to draw parties to adhere to you.
IF you would draw parties to you and increase adherents, be sure to negotiate
with the best of a faction, and as friendly as you can, and move them with the
next reasons at hand, he that goes to work with the rest or meanest is like
one that prays to Saints when there is a Son of God for his Advocate.

Thus,

When Abner intended to bring David into the Kingdom, he had Communication
with the Elders of Israel,

2 Samuel 3. 17. POLICY CLVI. How to confer in signs and significations.
IF you would give private intelligence, fearing to trust the business to
relation, invent some thing which may signify so to your selves by your secret
confederacy, and not be conjectured by any other, and this is to confer in
signs and significations.

Thus,

Jonathan and David agreed to mak^ known by arrows how Saul was affected, now
the La^ which gathered them knew not any thing, ^ut Jonathan and David knew the
matter,

1 Samuel 20. 39. POLICY CLVII. Not to pass lightly the words of suspicious men.
IN the discourses of any concerning you, observe what things you hear let
fall by chance, and pass it not with neglect, but lay it up for after
occasion: in the rich Harvest of others discourse, the gleane^s have their
private commodity.

Thus,

When David came to Achish and overheard his Servants, saying, is not this
David of whom they sang? he laid up this in his heart, and was af^aid,

1 Samuel 21. 11. 11. 12. POLICY CLVIII. Birds of a feather will flock together.
IN general* discontents, ob^erve whether any man of quality or famous
condition show himself a party; for those of inferior sort will more easily
comply and be persuaded, being ever more daring by the spirit of another than
themselves, like vapors which fall down if they have not a Sun-beame to rise
by.

Thus,

When David a man of honor showed himself grieved, Every one that was in
distress, every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented,
gathered themselves to him,

1 Samuel 22. 2. POLICY CLIX. Disgrace to an Ambassador redounds to his Prince.
IF you be guilty of any defect, which is a dishonor to you or your place,
behave your self so reservedly, that you put not your self upon the danger of
making it more public; weaknesses would be set forth like Masks by night.

Thus,

When Hanun had shaven the ambassadors of David, and cut off their garments in
disgrace, David sent to them, Tarry ye at Jerich^ till your beards be grown,

2 Samuel ^0. 4, 5. POLICY CLX. How to aid one another in war.
IN fight or battle, if your forces be divided and your troops scattered into
several battalios observe where the first decay or diminution begins, and
there supply from the abler troops; this is to call from the maine mast to
stop a leake in your army.

Thus,

When Joab and Abishai fought against the Syrians, says Joab, if the Syrians
be too strong for me, then thou shall help me,

2 Samuel 9. 10, 11. POLICY CLXI. How to make a prudent relation of matters.
IF you have any relations to make, put those things you think will move anger
or not speed well, in the front and preface of your speech, and what things you
are most confident will enfavour you, place in the reere, it is not fit to go
away like indiscreet Waspes, leaving a sting behind* and it is the welcomest
storm that sets in a fair day.

Thus,

When Joab sent the relation of the war to David, he said to the messenger,
if so be the Kings wrath arise, when thou have made an end of telling, then say
thou, thy Servant Uriah is dead also,

2 Samuel 11. 19, 20, 21. POLICY CLXII. How a General must behave himself
toward his Sovereign.
IF you would be solitary and seem to have no sharer in some famous success,
or achievement, no Rivals to take part of the honor from you, as the Elders
did from the spirit which was in Moses, behave your self in the most
conspicuous fashion you can in occasions that are offered, because the Sun
comes nearer us with his light than other Planets, therefore he has the
honor to be called, That great Light which rules the Day.

Thus,

Joab advised David, I have fought against Rabbah, now therefore gather the
rest of the people and take it, least I take it, and it be called after my
name,

2 Samuel 12. 28, 27. POLICY CLXIII. How to have Intelligencers and Spies abroad.
WHere you fear practice and conspiracies, use the subtlety to mingle
instruments of intelligence, or draw some of their counselors by favors and
promises to be pentioners to to your countenance; by this you may be well
informed in the others complots, and so know better how to dispose your self
and your affairs; it is princely, to have a royalty in the liberties of
another.

Thus,

David bid Hushai r^turne to the City and say to Absalom, I will be thy
Servant, as I have been thy Fathers; and what thing thou shall hear out of
the Kings house tell it,

2 Samuel 15. 34, 35. POLICY CLXIV. An arch Policy to aim one way and shoot
another.
WHen you are in complot or entertained in conspiracy with any, and made
private to a desgne which may prove injurious to whom you are secretly
affected, take it off by a subtle kind of disliking and disapproving, yet put
in your project which may pretend as much evil or more in the face of it than
the other, though not in present circumstance; this is an arch Policy, when
you shall aim one way and shoot another.

Thus,

Hush^i defeated the counsel of Achitophel, by saying, The coun^ell that
Achitophel has given is not good at this time, therefore^ counsel thus, And
we will fall upon him, and of the men that are with him shall not be l^ft so
much as one,

2 Samuel 17. 7. 11, 12. POLICY CLXV. A General must not adventure his person
too far in a civil broile.
IT is not wisdom for a General or Head to adventure himself in person too
far, or too nakedly in a civil or common broile, every wound he receives is
a wound to the cause in agitation, and the danger is most which makes them ^ry
out with the Shunamite Mine head, mine head.

Thus,

The People would not let David stir out to battle, Thou shall not go forth,
now thou art worth ten thousand of us,

2 Samuel 18. 3. POLICY CLXVI. How to behave ones self in a victory.
IN actions of gratulations, in public or private return of thanks, be free
and open, such sweet behavior is a tribute of cheerfulness to the spirits of
those it concerns, the neglect or omission of the ceremony may decline those
affections which were well disposed to you, and may work a remorse in them for
their good service so ungratefully accepted; God has lighted up an example in
the Sun, who shines in the face of him that created him.

Thus,

Joab stirred up David when he kept private for the death of his Son; now
therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortbly unto thy Servants, and the
King arose and sat in the Gate,

2. Sa. 19. 7, 8. POLICY CLXVII. Delays in appeasing commotions dangerous.
IN actions of civil commotion, give not the Rebels occasion for long
deliberations, but labor to dissolve them with s^eed, for delays give them
leave to take breath for advantages.

Thus,

When Amasa was employed to defeat Sheba, he tarried longer than the set time,
and David said to Abishai, take thy lords Servants and pursue after, least he
get him fenced Cities,

2 Samuel 20. 5, 6. POLICY CLXVIII. Employ those for mediators that are in
favor with Princes.
IN petitions and sollicits make your self a second with those you importune,
and let him be some of grace and power, where the onsets are strong the
resistance is ever less, and more weak.

Thus,

When Adoniah entreated Solomon for Abishag the Shunamit^ to Wife, he come to
Bathsheba and said, speak I pray thee to Solomon the King*

1 Kings 2. 16 17. POLICY CLXIX. How to make a man^ry Peccavi.
WHen you would rebuke any person of eminency, who are most commonly
supercilious to all instructions, do it by subtle personation or propounding
another in the same guilt, and so insinuate his own error, and make him
condemn himself by deputy, and in the person of another.

Thus,

Nathan told not David plainly how he had sinned, but tel^ him a story of a
poor man an^ a rich man, and how the rich man had wronged the poor, and when
David was moved against the rich man, Nathan said, Thou art the man,

2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3. 5, 7. POLICY CLXX. When to suspect the affection of a
familiar.
WHen you observe any change in the countenance which has been familiar and
smoothe to you, and in a tongue which has been free in communications, and
begins to be less cheerful in the conference, you may suspect something
either ill taken or intended: from obstructions or stoppings in the body, the
Physician can guess at a disease in the party

Thus,

When Absalom intended to kill Amnon, because he had forced his Sister Tamar,
He spoke unto his Brother neither good nor bad, for he hated him,

2 Samuel 13. 22. POLICY CLXXI. What circumspection is to be had after
reconcilement.
AFter reconcilements be circumspect, for they are often made in policy to
win you from attention and suspicion of practices, especially if they be
persons of state and honor who do this, for they are less sensible of
obligations than inferiors, and therefore make less conscience, and such are
like cunning Wrestlers, who close with you to give you a more complete fall.

Thus,

When David and Absalom were reconciled, Absalom took the occasion of stealing
away the Peoples hearts, and oh that I were Judge,

2 Samuel 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. POLICY CLXXII. Long deliberation in the discovery of
treason is dangerous.
WHen practices are discovered to you, do not deliberate too long before you
have secured your self, least while you are in deliberation destruction
overtake you; this motion is even to think and consider your self into your
Enemies hand.

Thus,

When David heard Absalom was risen, he said to his Servants, Arise and let us
sly, make speed to depart, least he overtake us,

2 Samuel 15. 14, 15. POLICY CLXXIII. Be not too forward in carrying bad news.
MAke no pretense and flourish when you have nothing of weight, for you raise
expectation in others, and you come off with disgrace, if you do not satisfy,
like the picture of a Courser in an hanging, that sits in a riding posture, but
goes no farther.

Thus,

When Ahimaaz might carry no news, Howsoever, says he, let me run, and when
he came to the King, and had nothing to say, turn aside, says the King, and
stand here.

POLICY CLXXIV. At reduction to honor be merciful, not revengefull.
AT your induction into place or honor be kind and gracious, and take not
revenges then though you have power, be not like the Sun, who when he reaches
to the point of nooneday or hour of glory then scorches the World, and the
brighter he is, he has the more heat.

Thus,

David, when Abishai asked him, if his reviler Shimei should be put to death,
answered, Shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for I do
know that I am this day King,

2 Samuel 19. 21. 22. POLICY CLXXV. Opportunity is to be taken with lawful
advantages.
IN time of leagues, let States take all lawful advantages and pleasure each
of other in special negociations and commerce, else they loose the opportunity
and benefit of their sweet interlude: the Apostle followed the opportunity when
he had a door of utterance opened him.

Thus,

Solomon being at peace with Hiram, sent to him for Cedar trees out of Lebanon,
for I purpose to build an house to the Name of the Lord,

1 Kings 5. 5, 6. POLICY CLXXVI. Absence is sometimes necessary.
IF you be envied where you are resident by some of high place, and think you
cannot continue without danger of drawing eminent suspicions and practices
against you, remove your scene and silently absent your self, till opportunity
be fairer, and the season better, if the face of heaven be black and clowdy,
he is no wise man that will not look for a storm.

Thus,

Jeroboam knew he was ha^ed of Solomon, as one that should have the Kingdom
from his seed, and that he sought to kill him, and therefore he rose and fled
into Egypt until the death of Solomon,

1 Kings 11* 40. POLICY CLXXVII. Ask counsel of the ancient and experienced
persons.
IN points or resolutions expected from you, ask advice from those who have
been known practical, experienced, and immersed in affairs, for they are
ablest to give firm counsel, and when your propositions have been tasted or
chewed and deliberated upon by such, it is as it were a politic mastication,
and first concoction, and such advices prove often soundest and healthfullest.

Thus,

When Rehoboam heard the peoples propositions, Depart ye, says he, for three
days, then come again to me, And he consulted with the old men,

1 Kings 12. 5. POLICY CLXXVIII. Flatterers are dangerous to Princes.
IN consultations and deliberations about great attempts, be not too
credulous, especially if you discern their advices and suffrages incline to
that part you discover your self disposed, for men are naturally prone rather
to bend in placency toward their superiors humors, than to minister any
sour contradictions.

Thus,

When the King of Israel enquired of the Prophets if he should war against
Ramoth-Gilead, they said, as he inclined, go up, but for Michaiah who always
prophesied truly to the King, I hate him, says he,

1 Kings 22. 6, 7, 8. POLICY CLXXIX. It is dangerous to resist good counsel.
IN taking advices and in consultations, if you observe any Counsel our among
the rest to swim rather against your own stream than with it, suffer such ^n
one, it is a sign his speech is more generous than others, and not embased
with that servility, which is a common disease in weak and fawning spirits.

Yet this holds not so peremptorily, but sometimes it may be only his self
humor, which a wise man may soon distinguish by surveying the reasons he
produces to strengthen his counsel, men of contradiction are proud, and sail
only against the breath of another, like cunning Mariners, when they have a
cross wind, who to fetch it into their own sails, take about.

Thus,

Ahab did ill when he hearkened only to the Prophets* in whose mouth was a
lying spirit which advised him to battle, promising success, Go up, for the
Lord shall deliver it, and rejected Michaiah, who said, If thou return in
peace, the Lord bath not spoken by me,

1 Kin. 22. 22, 28. POLICY CLXXX. Decline the excellency of your goods modestly.
IF you have any thing of excellent quality, eyed by your superiors, decline
the excellency of it modestly, least their desires grow kindled and enflamed,
like Ahabs toward Naboths vineyard, and such will soon find an officious
instrumnt or J^zab^l to deliver your vineyard into their hand.

Thus,

Because Naboths vineyard was hard by the Kings Palace* Ahab spoke, give me thy
vineyard,

1 ^in. 21* 1, 2. POLICY CLXXXI. It is good to look about when your neighbors
prepare forces.
IT is policy in States when they observe preparations abroad, to provide and
look about them and gather up their powers, for though they seem little at
rising or birth, in appearance to them, yet it is safe to fear that a great
and violent storm may break forth.

For States present their stratagems by a false perspective, to deceive the
opinion, and overtake the judgment of lookers on

Thus,

When Eliah saw a little Cloud, Get home, says he to Ahab, for there is a
sound of abundance of rain, and he girded up his loins and run before him,

1 Kings 18. 41. 44. POLICY CLXXXII. How to comply with hand in hand.
IF you would have your advice take place, comply so far as the action may
seem to have a dependancy upon you in part, yet make no rude intrusion,
therefore there is no way like the putting your hand upon the hand in action.

Thus,

Elisha, that King Joash might shoot with less error laid his hand upon his,
and the arrow fled more level at the Prophecy,

2 Kings 13. POLICY CLXXXIII. Jehu's policy with Baals Priests.
IF you would discover or be acquainted with the secret affections and
inclinations of any, you may pretend to affect what you think* you are
disposed to, they
and make their affections yours, and when they observe the same favored and
practiced, it will encourage them to communicate the more freely.

This is shadowed in that of the Apostle, when he became all to all.

Thus,

Jehu that he might discover the Worshippers of Baal pretended to Ahabs
superstition, as though Ahab had done too little, but he would do much more,
and while all were assembled into the house of the Image, and he saw the
dispositions* when they so freely adored, he th^n commanded those appointed to
sla^ them,

2 Kings 10. from 18. to 26. POLICY CLXXXIV. In sudden attempts be close and
quick.
WHen you intend a sudden attempt, and would prevent all espials and
intelligencers in their returns of notice, be close and quick, like the
Angel which took away Philip out of the Eunuchs sight, while he talked with
him*

These that are known before hand, suffer their project, outrunne by
discovery, and like ill weather and Eclipses are in the Almanac of Date and
expectation before they come.

Thus,

All the Messengers, the King sent with this voice. Is it peace Jehu? Jehu
turned behind him, and kept the King unresolved till he slew him,

2 Kings 9. 17, 18, 19. POLICY CLXXXV. Secrets discovered be jealous and
suspicious.
WHen you have had intentions of attempt upon any, and fee that they avoid and
escape your preparations, you may suspect and grow jealous of some whom you
have near you or in counsel with you, and then be more locked and reserved:
when the Philistines told Sampson his Riddle, he knew they had ploughed with
his heiser.

Thus,

When the King of Syria had laid many plots for the King of Israel and was
prevented, being discovered still by the Prophet, he wisely called his Servants
and said, Will ye not show me which of us is for the King of Israel,

2 Kings 6. 11. POLICY CLXXXVI. Rash inconsiderations make a man rush into
actions with hazard.
Be not too hot and hasty in your suspicions and pursuits, such rash
inconsideration puts out the eye of your deliberation and you rush into action
with hazard. He that sails and steeres by suspicion, is like a Mariner that
has mistook his Star, for all his motion is out of the way; and such
actions are like rambling arrows shot at rovers, which often hit to the sorrow
and disadvantage of the archer.

Thus,

The Moabites discovering the Rivers red with the mornings Sun, thought they
had been red by some civil slaughter among the Israelites, and upon this
pursued, and were overthrown by the Israelites unexpected forces,

2 Kin. 3. 23, 24. POLICY CLXXXVII. How to retally favor for favor.
IF you would return and retally favour^ for favors received, fit and
adaptate them to the present necessity of the party, for that puts a luster
upon the favor, and enriches it with the enamell of season and opportunity;
Paul could not requite Publius better than to cure him, when he lay sick of a
Fever.

Thus,

Elisha would not do the Shunamite any recommendation to the King or Captain,
Because (says she) I dwell among mine own People, but observing that she had
no Child and her Husband old, he promised her a Son,

2 Kings 4 13, 14, 15, 16. POLICY CLXXXVIII. Not to be too much discouraged
in difficult businesses.
WHen you have any new, or uncouth business falls to you, and no reason
appearing for it, be not too much deaded nor distracted by wonder and
conjecture, but wait upon after occasions; little knew Peter what his Vision
of the sheet meant, till he came to Cornelius house, then says he, God has
showed me, I should call nothing unclean.

Thus,

When the King of Syria had writ to the King of Israel to recover Naaman of his
Leprosy, he expostulated thus, Am I God to kill and make alive? not
considering that there was an Elisha in Israel,

2 Kings 5. 7, 8. POLICY CLXXXIX. To be jealous of Officers who are covetous
under good masters.
IF you have to do with Officers of Place in State or Court, and find them
greedy and taking in the name of their Office and Masters, you may be jealous
it is their own suit and project upon you, and they are like Hawks that fly
from their owners and seize upon the prey with their vervels; or as casheerd
Serving-men who rob by the way in their masters livery.

Thus,

Naaman did unadvisedly to give Gehazi two Talents more, for he had said
within himself, My Master has spared him in not receiving at his hands, but I
will run and take somewhat,

2 Ki. 5. 20, 23. POLICY CXC. Observe the inclination of those whom you desire
to please.
IF you would confer eurte^ie upon any, or be beneficial, that they should
accept of it with delight, observe what they cherish and indulge most in their
affections, and accordingly dispose and apply your intents, it is as though you
should set a jewel in a ring which were fit for it.

Thus,

When Solomon knew God had a special inclination to the threshing-floore of
Ornan the I^b^site, because he had appeared there, he builds the Temple and
dedicates it to him in the same place,

2 Chr. 3. 1. POLICY CXCI. Draw your model before you build your house.
IN all your actions and undertakings propose to your self a form, and
pattern according to which you may work, and like a good artificer draw your
model before you build your house; it is good writing after a copy, else you
may scrible for want of rule, this comes nearest to divine artifice, which we
say did all by Idea.

Thus,

David will not set Solomon on work to build God an House, till he gave him
the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, according to which he advised
him to worke^,

1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12. POLICY CXCII. Preparations are necess^ry both in
spiritual and temporal affairs.
DO not go on nor too far in business without engine and preparation to
effect it, that discovers an impatiency, as though you could not stay the
ripening and maturing which is requisite; and it is as if an hasty archer
should draw his bow when he wanted his arrow, as if the Prophet should
prophecy before the Spirit were upon him.

Thus,

David will first prepare Iron for the nails of the Temple, and brass and
Cedar trees, Because (says he) the House must be magnific^^nt, I will
therefore now make preparation,

1 Chronicles. 22. 3, 4. POLICY CXCIII. Laws revived and repeated, when and in
what manner they are to be div^lged.
WHen you are to establish new Rites and Laws (though in their own nature
they be but reductions to former, and a reviving and awaking of old and
wholesome observations to practice, you will do well to publish them by
Senatory consent, and by this they shall receive less scandal and censure,
appearing to be the acts of many.

Thus,

When Ezekiah revived the true and ancient Ceremonies among the people of
Judah, which had been long neglected, He took counsel with his Princes, and
all the Congregation in Jerusalem, so they established a decree to make
proclamation,

2 Chronicles. 30. from 1. to 6. POLICY CXCIV. How and when to change governors.
WHen Kings and Realms fear dis-affection in States which belong to them, and
are afraid of revolts and rebellions, let them take care that they exchange
governors for such, of whose loyalty and allegiance they have had experiment,
and not to suffer such places to continue those of their own Nation in eminent
imploiment.

By this means the preparations for factions will be less, and less daring.

Thus,

Rehoboam is applauded by the Word of God, He dealt wisely and dispersed all
his Children throughout all the Countries of Judah unto every fenced City,

2 Chro. 11. 23 POLICY CXCV. In time of peace build Cities.
IN any calm of opportunity of estate or fortunes, apply your self only to the
confirmation and assuring of what you enjoy, and you shall make as happy
proficiency in the circle of such a purpose, as in proceeding to new degrees of
getting, fortune like the Sea when she flows in will fall back, if you have
no engine to stay her.

Thus,

Asah King of Judah, when the Lord had given him rest, said unto Judah, Let us
build Cities, and make about them walls and towers, while the Land is yet before
us,

2 Chronicles. 14. 7. POLICY CXCVI. Bribes corrupt men, and make them break
promise.
IF you think the faction or party against you receive any ability or strength
for resistance by confederacy and correspondence with others, endeavor the
undoing of that, and drawing others away; wise Physicians, when they would draw
a Flux of humors from one part where they gather too much, use some art to
divert and turn them another way; and this is the rowelling of a
correspondence, and giving it issue in another place.

Thus,

When Baasha King of Israel had strengthened himself by a league with
Benhadad, and then began to offend Asa, Asa took treasure and sent to
Benhadad to bribe him from his correspondence with Baasha, and Baasha let the
work cease,

2 Chronicles. 16. 2, 3. POLICY CXCVII. How to prevent the design of a Politician.
IF you would prevent the designs and machinations of any, study and find out
what the instruments are they make use of, what their materials, and labor to
take away those, or disable them; and thus you disarme a politician, and break
a tradesman, despoiling him of what he sets up trade with.

Thus,

King Asa knowing what Baasha was building and raising against him, waited his
advantage, and carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber wherewith
Baasha was building,

2 Chronicles. 16. 6. POLICY CXCVIII. A King newly installed ought to strengthen
himself.
WHen any Successor is new arrived, let him first study to enable and confirm
himself; God first laid the foundations of the Earth sure and firm, before
he said, Let the Earth bring forth: it is no being bold and confident while
things are crazy and unsure.

Thus,

Jehoram has this laudative in Scripture, that when he was risen up to the
Kingdom of his Father, he strengthened himself,

2 Chro. 21. 4. POLICY CXCIX. Avoid Counselors that have been cause of much
ill success.
IF you observe some Counselors to have been cause of much ill success, and
that they would under some privilege offer their advices to your actions, avoid
them; for he that walks in a path which has been notable for misfortune,
cannot take it ill, if he share in the fate with others.

Thus,

Ahaziah did ill to attend to the counsel of his wicked Mother and the house
of Ahab,

2 Chr. 22. 3, 4. POLICY CC. To take away what may advance an Enemy.
IF you would disable the stratagems of any, spy out what they make most
advantages on, and endeavor the abridgement of those; like him that when the
light of the Sun offends him at one window draws a curtain there.

Thus,

When Sennacherib came against Jerusalem, Hezekiah considering what relief he
might receive by the fresh waters, stopped up the fountains,

2 Chronicles. 32. 2, 3. POLICY CCI. Suspect a too much affected language.
SUspect a plausible and fair language then, when it comes with too much
affectation, and from him whose person may render him suspicious; such are like
Comets and blazing-starres, which portend ill when they appear brightest.

Thus,

Herod behaved himself to the wise men, and enquired of them diligently, and
said, Go search, that I may come and worship him also,

Matthew. 2. 8. POLICY CCII. Inferiors are not always to refuse the favor of
their Superiors.
DO not always stand upon the nice puntilioes and points of state and place,
but remit and submit as occasions require and vary; these that do not observe
this, are a little too strait laced for business either civil or religious.

Thus,

When John for ^ad Christ, I have need of thee, and come thou to me? Jesus
answered, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us,

Matthew. 3. 15. POLICY CCIII. How and when to conform our selves to the ^^wes
of the Kingdom.
Conform your self to the customs and laws which you see predominant in
City or State, or Church, so you betray not the cause of Religion; else you
give occasion to censure and opinion, and become suspected where you might have
passed unquestioned; men look upon unusual apparitions in the Heavens, when
the constant laws of night and day pass without notice.

Thus,

When at Capernaum they demanded Tribute, Jesus bids Peter go to the fish for
money, and was at expense of a miracle to pay it, Least says he, we should
offend them,

Matthew. 17. 27. POLICY CCIV. Require resolution of cases of those that are
expert in them.
IN all doubts and anxieties or perplexities, either divine or humane, require
resolution of the most expert men in those cases, for every one is likely to
give best judgment in his own faculty, Sua cuique art cred^nd^m.

Thus,

Herod did wisely, he gathered the Chief Priests and Scribes of the People
and demanded of them,

Matthew. 2. 4. POLICY CCV. Consider the party you are to deal with.
IF you be to commence a business of distaste against any, consider first, of
what quality the party is, and if he be one that is popular and of repute,
then there is more danger, because the good opinions of many have interest
where you oppose, and it is like the pulling at a beam in an house, where you
endanger all that are near it, and have dependence to fall upon you.

Thus,

Herod was discreet, for when he saw John was counted a Prophet, he durst not
put him to death for fear of the multitude,

Matthew. 14. 1, 5. POLICY CCVI. Be suspicious of ones self and company in
matter of affection.
IN a business of passion and affection be suspicious of your self and
company, for in such cases you are most open and soft to advantages, these are
the Molles adytus.

Thus,

Herod was unwise, for being much taken with the dancing of Herodias Daughter,
he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask,

Matthew. 14. 7. POLICY CCVII. How to procure forbearance of an answer to a
question.
WHen you are questioned strictly and severely, and have no desire to resolve
the question, bethink your self of some interrogatories and demands, by which
you may rival the other, and either procure forbearance thus, or draw them
into an equal hazard with your self.

Thus,

When Christ was questioned, By what Authority do thou these things? he
answered, I also will ask ye, The Baptism of John, etc* and they answered, We
cannot tell, Neither, says he, do I tell you,

Matthew. 21. 23, 24. POLICY CCVIII. How to observe the time and persons in the
action of a thing.
IN actions which the vulgar and commons seem to disaffect, forbear, for a
multitude like the sea, swells into waves of trouble upon every blast of
discontent.

Thus,

The Scribes and Elders consult to take Jesus, but not on the Feast day, Least*
there be an uproare among the People,

Matthew. 26. 4. 5. POLICY CCIX. Keep at distance in matter of danger.
IN occasions which you suspect full of danger and trouble, keep at distance,
if you have had the* happiness to escape from observation at first, for so you
may have a safe walk, and live in prospect and view of all the passages.

Thus,

When our Savior was betrayed, and led away, Peter followed a far off, unto
the High Priests hall, and went in and sat down to see the end,

Matthew. 26. 58. POLICY CCX. Forecast makes a man not to be unprovided in
danger.
IT is policy to forecast and presuppose such inconveniences as are obvious and
in the way of your present condition, so you shall not be found unarmed and
unprovided when they befall and overtake you, but you shall be found like Roter
who had his sword girt, when they came out to take his Master.

Thus,

When great multitudes crowded after Christ to see his Miracles, he spoke to
his Disciples, that a small Ship should wait on him, least they should throng
him,

Mark. 3. 9. POLICY CCXI. In imparting secrets, when to use parables.
IN communicating and imparting secrets, observe your best and most opportune
times; so you shall not wrong the business with any unseasonable relation.

Thus,

Christ spoke in parables to the multitude, but when he and his Disciples were
alone, he expounded all things,

Mark 4. 34. POLICY CCXII. The time fit to discover ones self.
WHen suspicions are entertained by others on you, and you think they may
prove of dangerous consequence if they continue so, give as present and plain
resolution as you can, for this is an untying of the knot, and unlocking the
chain which kept their opinions bound.

Thus,

When Christ's Disciples was on the Sea by night, and saw Christ passing by
them, they feared it had been a Spirit, but immediately he talked with them,
and said, It is I, ^e not afraid,

Mark 6. 30. POLICY CCXIII. When it is fitting to demand the resolution of a
question.
IF there be any difficulties which vex you, and keep you in suspense,
demand the resolution of them in private, else you betray your own weakness
while you desire to be strengthened in opinion.

Thus,

When Christ's Disciples sa^ they could not disp^ssesse one of an evil Spirit,
when he was come into the house, they asked him privately, Why could not we
cast him out?

Mark 9 28. POLICY CCXIV. In society be discoursing of eminent actions.
IN the society you converse with be remembering some of them in a modest
fashion of that thing in which they have been famous and eminent; thus you
shall endeare their favors, and delight them in the memory; this is to hold a
looking-glass before a good face.

Thus,

Peter coming by the Fig Tree Christ cursed, Master, says he, Behold the
Fig Tree, and Christ was pleased with the notice he took of the Miracle, and
answered, What things ye desire when you pray believing, ye shall have them,

Mark 11. 20, 21, 22, 23. POLICY CCXV. The Jews envy Christ's true Titles
IF you would not countenance any thing you think is not true and real, but
in pretense and imposture, do not allow the imposture by way of any ironicall
indulgence, for the least shadow is made use of for gracing it, and it is
dangerous to be too acting and jesting with the vulgar.

Thus,

When the Jews did not believe Christ to be the true Messiah, they advised
Pilate, Write not, say they, The King of the Jews* but that he said, I am
King of the Jews,

John 19 21. POLICY CCXVI. The spirit of contradiction in an ill counseled
People.
WHen you see peoples affections carried in a tide and current one way, do not
at that time speak and expostulate, for it stirs and disquiets more, and it
is like a little water cast upon a great flame, which makes it burn brighter;
a wise forbearance will compose and settle them better; and as a Physician
advises the Patient upon bloudletting* not to stir much, so it is policy when
a multitude has had some issue for discontent, not to move them much after it.

Thus,

When the people cried out for the suffering of Jesus, Pilate said, what will
ye I shall do to him? and they cried out again, Crucify him, and then he
said, Why? and they cried out the more, Crucify him,

Luke 24. 20, 21, 22, 23. POLICY CCXVII. Show not your self abroad before
there be maturity and fitness.
Show not your self abroad, nor make open profession till you observe your
maturity and fitness, for else you hazard the good success of that by
untimely publication, which a later season would cherish and advance, and it is
certain, that former failings cast back and put too far behind for
recovery; for expectations come with an appetite, and will be then satisfied,
or elfe they depart repining, neither do they measure your action by your
present ability, but their own satisfactions.

Thus,

The Prophet John being destined to a great business, to go before the Lord
to prepare his ways, it is said, that he grew and waxed strong, and was in the
Deserts till the time of his showing unto Israel,

Luke 1. 80. POLICY CCXVIII. Be harmless as Doves, wise as Serpents.
WHen you think you are much envied and spited, forbear and be not too
prodigal of your presence there, for when an hated object is present, it
stirs up the passion in your adversary, absence may secure you, and be a
cause their cancour and malice may waste and be exhaled: he that comes thus
before his enemy, is as sure of raising him against himself, as he that
looks in a glass is sure to create an opposite face.

Thus,

Jesus went and walked in Galilee, for he would not walk in Jury; because, the
Jews sought to kill him,

John 7. 1. POLICY CCXIX. When to absent, and when to show ones self.
When you would show your self to the world for fame and popularity, let your
approaches be private and in secret, elsewhere there is too much expectation
and preamble of worth; people are half wearied and spent in their
fore-conceits, and it is but a kind of aftergaine of credit which is so won.

Thus,

When Christ's Brethren bid him go up to the Feast, saying, There is no man
that death any thing in secret and he himself desires to be known openly, Go
ye up, says he, I go not up yet, but when his Brethren were gone up, then
went he, not openly, says the Text, but as it were in secret,

John 7. from 3. 10* 11. POLICY CCXX. When not to discover ones intentions.
IF you would have these you advise with to give faithful and impartial
counsel, do not discover your own resolution or intention, but propose only
by way of consultation; else it is as if you should ask what way shall we
go, and yet lead the company down a path of your own liking.

Thus,

When Christ intended to feed the multitude with a miracle, he said to Philip,
What shall we do to buy Bread for these? this he said to prove him, for he
himself knew what he would do,

Joh. 6. 6. POLICY CCXXI. In matters of false accusation how to behave ones
self.
IN imputations and false accusations do not too much insist upon
contradiction, but allege your most material circumstance, which is the most
probable to vindicate you, by this; though perhaps you blow not suspicions
quite away, yet you scatter, and in a manner disperse them.

Thus,

When the Apostles spoke in several tongues, some mocked and said, They are
full of new wine, Peter answered, These are not drunken as you suppose, seeing
it is but the third hour of the day,

Acts 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, POLICY CCXXII. How to resolve a doubt.
IF you observe a doubt to trouble any, and that their closeness may be such,
as they will not reveal it for resolution and satisfaction, then do it by
some queint device of discourse, and so you shall discharge a duty in your
self, and release an anxiety in them to their great content* and it is a
giving of Balsame in a box, or a cure in secret.

Thus,

When the Pharisee saw Mary the sinner anointing Christ's seet, he doubted in
himself, whether he were a Prophet, which Christ observing, resolved by the
parable of the Creditour, and two Debtours,

Luke 7. 39* 41, 44. POLICY CCXXIII. A commutative policy.
IF you would have any action you do, pass with approbation of authority and
the place you are in, show your self a punctual observer of their laws and
ceremonies, and thus by approving what is theirs, you win them to approve of
yours, and this is as it were, commutative policy, when you get your action
returned with proportion.

Thus,

When our Savior cured the Leper, Go thy way (says he) show thy self to the
Priest, and offer the gift which Moses commanded,

Matthew. 8. 4. POLICY CCXXIV. Be jealous of Enemies intergatories.
BE jealous over the questions and interrogations of those, whose bosoms and
friendships you are not assured on, such p^sing may be angling or fishing for
your inclination and opinion; it is a notable feat, to catechize a secret from
any.

Thus,

The Pharisees asked Christ, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day, that
they might accuse him,

Matthew. 12. 10. POLICY CCXXV. How to speak of ones self in the third person,
being unknown.
IT is policy to retain the discovery of your self sometimes, and if you
happen by chance where you are not known, to comply with the mistake, for by
that you shall hear rumors and reports more freely, which if you were known,
you could not with such confidence enquire, neither would they discourse and
satisfy, so that the next way to come nearest such, is to go farthest from
your self.

Thus,

Christ fell in the company of two Disciples in their way to Emaus, and
enquired of all, and they told him with this preface, Art thou only a Stranger
in Jerusalem?

Luke 24. 18. POLICY CCXXVI. When to inject the remembrance of ones self with
modesty on occasion.
WHen you are in company of those you deserve from, and if they fall into any
general laudatives or commendations, make use of the opportunity offered, and
modestly inject the remembrance of your self; such occasions puts your foot
into the stirrup, and it remains in you to get up and ride.

Thus,

When our Savior was discoursing what great rewards they should have who had
left house or kindred for his sake, Peter answered, I^o: we have left all and
followed thee,

Mark 10. 28. POLICY CCXXVII. How to apologize with authority.
IF you have a desire to move a discourse, or defense, and to renew some
anciently received custom, which you think now convenient, let some others
give the occasion, and so you may follow with more advantage in seconding, [ I
prae, sequar] is a wise Motto upon your action.

Thus,

When our Savior had a mind to rebuke the Pharisees superstition, he took
occasion from the Disciples plucking Ears of Corn to say, The Son of Man is
Lord also of the Sabbath,

Matthew. 12. 1, 8. POLICY CCXXVIII. Study the remove of the occasion of a
faction.
IF you see a faction much swaied and transported with any one occasion, study
the remove and extinction of the cause if evil.
; if the painter would not have birds come to his grapes, he might do well to
take away the picture.

Thus,

When the Pharisees saw the people go after Christ, when he had raised
Lazarus, they consulted not well.
to put Lazarus to death,

Joh. 12. 9, 10, 11. POLICY CCXXIX. Wicked men suborne false witnesses when
they are convicted.
WHen you observe your self to have got the better, and to have prevailed with
those you were at difference, be then most suspicious of their complots, for
conquest upon your* adversary embitters him more, and sets him upon the project
of mischief, and gives an appetite to his malice, and then he will not
scruple at any revenge, like the Sun, who though he set under a cloud at
night, yet may shine more stoutly the next morning.

Thus,

When the Synagogue of the Libortines disp^ted with Stephen, and were not able
to resist the wisdom and Spirit by which he spoke, they suborned men, who
said, We have heard him speak blasphemies,

Acts 6. 10, 11. POLICY CCXXX. How and when to use mildness in a factious
time.
WHen you see a faction succeed notably, so that you fear a danger in the
issue, entreat the parties with mildness and pretense of favor, for fiery
and passionate proceedings bring the people into suspicion, that it is not
justice which persecutes, but their own vindicative power of magistracy.

Thus,

When the Captain saw the Apostles succeed and doubted whereunto it would
grow, then went he with the Officers and brought them without violence, Acts 5.
26.

POLICY CCXXXI. Gam^els counsel was wise, but not always and altogether.
WHen Religion is pretended in a commotion, and is only the countenance,
suffer it, though yet in a wise care and caution that it spread not, and
therefore you may be plucking some feathers from the wing in the mean while,
and thus let it rather seem to die by its own unsoundnesse, than your
violence, and this argues the imposture of it more faithfully.

Thus,

Gamaliel gave wise counsel, Refrain from these men, says he, and let them
alone; for if this counsel or work be of men it will come to naught,

Acts 5. 38. POLICY CCXXXII. The Eu^uchs piety and zeal.
IF you would succeed in an action you are upon with any, observe when you see
a preparation or disposition which may advantage such a cause as yours, and
then go on, for where there is a congruity before, there is more aptness for
operation, even in natural subjects, the agent prevails best where there is a
predisposition.

Thus,

When the Eunuch was sitting and reading in his Chariot, the Spirit said to
Philip, Go near, and join thy self,

Acts 8. 27. POLICY CCXXXIII. When the principal authors are gained the
adherents will be also.
FOr the advancement of* any Religion, or opinion, or faction in Church and
State, labor the private conversion of the adversary who has been eminent in
the opposition and contradiction of the cause, for by this you may win all
the adherents whose opinions were concentred in him, stantque caduntque
standing and falling with him* and this advantage is like that in a battle, to
get the wind and Sun of the enemy, and it is as though you should sound a
victory in one of your enemies trumpets.

Thus,

When Saul was the only persecutor, God converts him, and all that heard him
were amazed, saying, Is not this he which destroyed them

Acts 9. 22. POLICY CCXXXIV. Not to believe rashly the conversion of an
adversary.
DO not trust too rashly the report of a converted adversary, till there be
some sufficient testimony to move you, for as it is the most exquisite fallacy
which is put upon you under face of a truth, so it is the most accurate enmity
which comes upon you in the attire of friendship, that Wolf is the worst of
all the heard, which was in Sheep clothing.

Thus,

When Saul came to Jerusalem, the Disciples were afraid of him, and believed
not that he was a Disciple, till Barnabas told how he had preached boldly in
the Name of Jesus at Damascus,

Acts 9. 26, 27. POLICY CCXXXV. When an escape is lawful.
WHen you are redacted to straights and necessities, and afraid of an ensuing
mischief, project your escape at the hole of any occasion, else you tempt God
by staying till your deliverance prove more desperate, and so you put him to
some special and extraordinary work; like those that let their Evil go on,
till none but the King can cure them.

Thus,

When they laid in wait to slay Paul at Damascus, the Disciples took him by
night and let him down by the wall in a basket,

Acts 9. 25. POLICY CCXXXVI. Memorial of persons may move wonderfully.
IF you would have any eminent act forgotten, such as may cause sorrow in the
remembrance or prove any other miserable occasion, raze out all memorials and
tokens which belonged to it, as that good King who made them cast their
idolatrous stuff and rubbish into the Brook K^dron, for so long as they are
extant, and to be seen, they refresh and keep wake the memory.

Thus,

When Peter came to raise the young maid to life, the Widows stood by him
weeping, and showing the Coats and Garments which Dorcas had made while she
was alive,

Acts 9. 39. POLICY CCXXXVII. How and when to use mediators.
WHen you perceive your self to have incurred the displeasure of any upon
whose favor you have dependence, work them into respect again by mediations
and intercessions of those which are near or familiar for making his friends
your own, you do like a cunning enemy, who takes the outworkes of a city,
that he may be more enabled to make his party good.

Thus,

They of Tire and Sidon came with one accord to Herod having made Blastus the
Kings Chamberlain their friend,

Acts 12. 20. POLICY CXXXVIII. How and when to punish Seducers.
WHen you see any one abused through the subtlety of ill instruments, put such
a disparagement or disgrace upon the instruments, as they may appear worthy
of, and so you may lessen them with those they are endeared: it is an arch
policy to poison the water or current which a country esteems or makes use of.

Thus,

Paul seeing Elymas the Sorcerer turn Sergius Paulus from the Faith, strikes
him blind with the language of, O thou Child of the Devil! and when the
Deputy saw what was done, he believed,

Acts 13. 12. POLICY CCXXXIX. Blasphemy not to be endured.
WHen you observe any one bent toward you, in a strong passion of indignation,
or too much admiration, use passionate importunity to decline them, and extreme
derogation of your abilities, Contraria contrariis curantur, contrary passions
are cured by their contraries.

Thus,

When they of Lystra would have done sacrifice to the Apostles, the Apostles
rent their clothes, and ^anne crying out, Sirs why do you these things? we
are men of like passions with ye,

Acts 14. 15. POLICY CCXL. Synods are necessary and profitable.
WHen factions or seditions grow ripe either in Church or State, convoke
assemblies and Synods, for consultations in such perplexities may relieve with
advice, what the heads of a few are not able to do by reason of present
distractions and apprehensions at the face of things; that light has the most
power which is gathered and straitened in the circle of a glass, where there
is a conventicle of Sunbeams.

Thus,

When the Sect of the Pharisees troubled the Church with urging Circumcision and
Moses Ceremonies, the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this
matter,

Acts 15. 5, 6. POLICY CCXLI. In recommending their persons, relate their acts.
WHen you desire to recommend any into respects and favors, relate those
things they are most notable and famous in, for opinions expect pleas, and
allegations, and arguments, and are not prevailed with by naked obtrusions.

Thus,

When the Apostles writ to the Brethren at Antioch by the hands of Paul and
Barnabas, they styled them men that hazarded their lives for the Name of our
Lord Jesus,

Acts 15. 25, 26. POLICY CCXLII. Entitle with the best authority what you
desire to be made authenticke.
IF you fear something may be slighted which you would have authenticke and
well reputed, entitle it to the best authority you are able, it is a kind of
signature to an action, as a seal to a writing, and if the image and
superscription be Caesar's, Give to Caesar, says Christ.

Thus,

When the Apostles writ their definitive Letters to the doubting Brethren, they
began thus, For it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us,

Acts 15. 28. POLICY CCXLIII. Injuries (...) offered, content not thy self
with private satisfaction.
WHen you perceive your self to have suffered injuriously, and yet have the
advantage on your side by reason of the wrong, do not acquit or release them,
though they would let you escape, till you let them know how they stand
disabled by the act, and this sheds a kind of obligation upon them for your
courtesy.

Thus,

When the Magi^strates had beaten Paul and Silas, and heard they were Romans,
they sent to release them, but Paul answered, Do they thrust us out privily
now they have beaten us openly? Nay verily, let them come themselves and fetch
us out,

Acts 16. 36, 37. POLICY CCXLIV. In tumultuary actions show the unlawfulness
and danger thereof.
IN seditious tumults and risings, still urge them that their cause shall have
public justice, and dissuade them from such violent actions by the danger and
unlawfulness of such proceeding, for so you remember them of the integrity
they violate.

Thus,

The Town Clearke smoothed the People whom Demetrius had raised against Paul,
The Law is open, and there are Deputies, Let them implead one another, there
being no cause, why we can give an account of this days uproare,

Acts 19. POLICY CCXLV. How and when to make a protestation of ones innocence.
IF you would leave any place, function or employment with credit and good
name, and secure your self from any after aspersion, make public protestation
of your sincere behaviors therein, and thus you remove like a light which is
not put out and choked in snuff, but taken from the socket of one
candlestick to blaze in another, and such translations are like those which
the Elect shall suffer at the last day, they shall not all sleep, but shall
all be changed. 1 Cor. 15. 51.


Thus,

When Paul took his leave of the Elders of Ephesus, he called them together
and said, you know from the first day that I came, after what manner I have
been with you.

Acts 20. 17, 18. POLICY CCXLVI. Forces to be raised with all expedition in
tumults.
IN tumults and factious stirs, if it be requisite, muster forces with all
expedition for appalling them, and thus you weigh down* the burden of one
scale with the weight of another.

Thus,

When Jerusalem was in an uproare, and saw the Captain and soldiers coming
to them, they left beating Paul,

Acts 21. POLICY CCXLVII. How to create a party for your self by making
division among your adversaries.
IF you observe an advantage by which you may create a party or faction for
your security, from the dissentions and divisions of others, make use of it,
for by that you draw more to side with you, and make the danger which before
was only yours more general, and then authority will grow more puzzled what to
do, and this is a policy to get a kingdom divided against it self, and our
Savior tells us, such a one cannot stand.

Thus,

When Paul perceived that on^ half was Pharisees and the other Sad^uces, he
cried out in the Council, Men and Brethren, I am a Pharisee, and when he had
said so, the multitude was divided,

Act. 23. 6, 7. POLICY CCXLVIII. What is sometimes material in the defense of
your justification.
IN false accusations and citations to judgment, if you see the first stirrers
recoile, and conceal themselves, and only some new incensed prosecute the
business, allege in defense of your justification being a very material
thing: this giving back of your adversary is a setting forward of your Cause,
and you may well sound at such a retreat.

Thus,

When Paul was brought before Felix, Certain Jews (said he) found me in the
Temple, who ought to have been here, and object if they had ought against me,

Acts 24. 18, 19. POLICY CCXLIX. How to decline your adversary that he be not
your judge.
IN trials and judgments of controversy provide so, that you fall not into
the audience of them, where you think there is malice and prejudice to prepare
authority against you, for so even your adversary may become your judge.

Thus,

When Paul was demanded if he would go up to Jerusalem and he judged, I stand
(says he) at Caesar's judgment seat,

Act. 25. 9, 10. POLICY CCL. Relate the success of things which are famous.
IF you would strengthen and confirm any cause with those which are interessed
and inclined to it, yet you fear may be alienated and drawn away by
disswasions and whispers of the adversary, relate the success and commodities
which have been known, and are famous in it, and this is as Mariners do with
their ships, when they arrive from great voyages, put on all their flagges and
streamers to grace their return.

Thus,

When the Apostles met and had gathered the Church together, they rehearsed all
that God had done for them,

Acts 14. 27. POLICY CCLI. An expedite way to pre^ent sinister constructions.
WHen you think your behaviors or actions may have given occasion of ill
constructions, which were neither in your intention nor desert, use some
expedite way of giving early satisfaction, and thus you shall outrunne
conjectures and suspicions by your faithful resolutions, this is to give
physic before the Disease.

Thus,

When Paul was brought to Rome, he called the chief of the Jews together, to
let them know, he appealed not unto Caesar for ought he had to accuse his
own Nation of.

Finis libri primi.
A SUPPEDITATION TO THE FORMER POLICIES.
The second Book.
POLICY I. How to put your self out of the danger of being seduced.
THough you do not keep your discourse at home, yet keep your opinion, and
though that walk abroad, yet let this stay within: go not out of your self,
to see another: it is dangerous for a tender and sick opinion, to be too
adventurous in airing it self; it is Christ's advice, If they say, Behold he is
in the Desert, Nolite exire, Go not out, Matthew. 24. 26.

POLICY II. How to try the ingenuity or generous condition of any.
MAke open protestation of their kindness and favors to themselves, and you
shall observe it will work a disclaiming and disavowing in the ingenuous, when
Christ said to the righteous, I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, they
replied, Lord when saw we thee an hungry, and fed thee? but the wicked reply,
Lord when did we see thee an hungry, and did not minister unto thee? Matthew. 25.
from 35 to the end

POLICY III. How to draw men to your humor.
Be often near and familiar in discourse and society, and be often infusing
your affections and more light passions: this is to cast your own garment upon
another. Eliah to make Elisha prophecy like himself, cast his cloak upon
him, 2 Kin. 2. 13, 14.

POLICY IV. When your adversary has favor in audience.
HEre would be some art used to draw the attention away that your adversary
obtaines, and by this, like Peter, you cut off M^lchus care, Luke 22. 50.

POLICY V. To appcase passions you raise.
IF recantations may stand with the credit of your person, they are surest and
most prevailing; the prodigal had this refuge, I will go to my Father, and
say, Father, I have sinned, Luke 15. 18.

POLICY VI. If you be in presence when favors are conferred upon any.
DO not seem to grudge or repine, for by that you insinuate some disability
and want of desert in him who is honored: Christ took it ill when Judas said
of Mary's Spikenard, To what end is this waste? Matthew. 26. 8.

POLICY VII. If you would have your entertainment please in general.
Be not too peremptory in laws or ceremonies in your feast, obliging others
to the observance, Ahasuerus feast was therefore commendable, For they gave
royal wine in abundance, yet none did compel, Esth. 1. 7, 8.

POLICY VIII. To prepare one to whom you have a suit.
MEn are freest and most cheerful in times of joy and mirth or pleasure,
therefore put them into these, or observe to take them at these times; When
Ahasuerus was at banquet with Queen Esther, What is thy request, says he? and
it shall be performed, even to the half of the Kingdom, Esth. 7. 2.

POLICY IX. When an opposition is of dangerous consequence.
IT is the safest not to let such go on, and enjoy the power they assume; when
Vasthi the Queen would not obey the King, She has not wronged the King
only, says Mamucan, but all the Princes, whose Wifes, if they hear of this
deed, shall despise them, Esth. 16. 17.

POLICY X. When general applause or honors are performed.
IT is policy to comply, and thus far to bow with Naaman in the house of
Rimmon: when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, Then was
H^man full of wrath, Esth. 3. 5.

POLICY XI. In business with Strangers.
Suspicion is a virtue where you have had no occasion to trust, credulity has
betrayed more than her opposite, Believe not every Spirit, 1 John 4. 1.

POLICY XII. In occasions of fears.
TO be fearful, is to do misfortune a courtesy, and to make us less able
to encounter what we fear: success or discomfiture often begin at the
heart, The fear of a man brings a snare, Prove. 29. 25.

POLICY XIII. In sudden assaults.
MAke them not more sudden by your apprehension, let not your project for
escape, be violent, but smoothly quick, for else it distracts, and in your
haste you may take out at a wrong door, Go not forth hastily to strive, Prove.
25. 8.

POLICY XIV. When misfortunes befall any of your own quality or condition.
IT is wisdom to look to your own house when your neighbors is on fire, and
to startle and awake at the passing bell of your friend, And great fear came
on all those and as many as heard those things, Acts 11. 5.

POLICY XV. To draw others into your assistance.
RElate your own alacrity, and cheerful resolution, the aid you have
already in present, or in promise, the countenance and quality of your
assistants; when Nehemiah would repair Jerusalem, he told the Priests and
Rulers the Kings words, and how God was with him, And let us rise up and build,
Nehem. 2. 18.

POLICY XVI. How to please the variety of company you discourse with.
GIve occasion for each to discourse in his own profession and art, so you
please the party, who delights to communicate his knowledge, and you enrich
your own, A wise man will hear and increase, Prove. 1. 5.

POLICY XVII. For public dispatch.
ANimate and cherish your agents and instruments with such arguments as fit the
nature of the business, either by gift, promise or extolling their merit, And
all the Wall was joined together, for the People had a mind to work, Nehem. 4.
6.

POLICY XVIII. In time of unexpected assaults.
Look about where your weaknesses and disadvantages lie, and there apply
forces, And they said unto us, from whence ye shall return they will be upon
you, therefore I set in lower places behind the Wall, and in the higher
places, I even set the People with their swords, their spears, and bows,
Nehem. 4. 12, 13.

POLICY XIX. In times of public danger.
Warm the bosoms of the people with exhortations, excite them with the right
of their cause, the dependancies, and supposed advantages, which are on their
side, Be not afraid, remember the Lord who is great, fight for your brethren,
your sons; and your daughters, your wives, and your houses, Neh. 4. 14.

POLICY XX. In some kind of soliciting.
IT is better to move by speech than letter; your face, your person, your
countenance, may get regard; Saint John deferres further writing to Gaius, I
trust I shall see thee shortly, and we shall speak face to face, 2 John 14.

POLICY XXI. In imploiment of Instruments.
Use the plainest, for they will work faithfully, and report truly; cunning
men will for your satisfaction sake and their own credit, adventure without
command, and from your business derive credit to themselves: Christ chose the
plainest for his spiritual business: God has chosen the weak things of the
world, 1 Cor. 1. 27.

POLICY XXII. What qualified instruments to employ.
IN general, fit your matter with a condition.

In business of expostulation.

Use a bold man, such an one will not easily be put off or daunted, God
imploies Paul to the obstinate Jews, Be not afraid but speak, Acts 18. 9.

POLICY XXIII. In business of persuasion.
WHere entreaties are of moment, use well Ianguaged men; thus were the men of
Lystra persuaded, and They called Paul Mercurius, because he was the chief
speaker, Acts 14. 12.

POLICY XXIV. In business of enquiry and observation.
Use subtle and crafty men, they will search, and skrew, and worm into business
of difficulty, Counsel in the heart of a man is like deep water, but a man of
understanding will draw it out, Prove. 20. 5.

POLICY XXV. Observation for imploiment.
Use such as have been lucky and fortunate, such will be industrious in your
business to keep up their reputation, The keeper of the prison employed
Joseph in all, for he saw what he did the Lord made it to prosper, Genesis 39. 23.

POLICY XXVI. In the first onset to any for a request or suit.
ONe way, 1. You may sound them a far off rather than touch upon it abruptly:
though our Savior intended to stay with his Disciples, yet He made as though
he would have gone farther, Luke 24. 2^.

POLICY XXVII.
A Second way is by unexpected coming upon them, and some quick question
which prevents long deliberations; when God prevailed with Paul in his
conversion, Suddenly there shined round about him a light from Heaven, Acts 9.
3.

POLICY XXVIII. How to discover the dispositions of others.
ONe way of discovery is by passion.

Passion is one casement through which men are seen, therefore the Wiseman
advised, The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, meaning, least he
discover himself, Prove. 19. 11.

POLICY XXIX.
ANother way is by trust. He that commits any thing to the faith of another
may observe his condition: the Servant in the parable by the talent committed
to him, discovered himself to his Lord, and heard from him, Thou have been
faithful over a few things, Matthew. 25. 21.

POLICY XXX.
A Third way is by your necessity.

When there is no pretext or color to be used, men are discovered, how they
stand affected; thus the Hypocrites for a while believed, but in time of
temptation fell away, Luke 8. 13.

POLICY XXXI. To work one to your bent.
One way,

IT may be done by knowing his nature and customs, and so you may win him;
thus* God disposes and orders men to his will, For he knows the hearts of the
children of men, Prove. 15. 11.

POLICY XXXII.
ANother way, you may do it, by observing their ends, and so draw them; Christ
saw Simon, and the rest also for fish, and he gave them their nets full at
draught, and persuades them to follow him thus, Ye shall henceforth catch men,
Luke 5. 10.

POLICY XXXIII.
A Third way, by knowing their faults and weaknesses, and so you may with awe
make them yours, when the woman of Samaria saw Christ knew her secret faults,
Whom thou have now (says he) is not thy Husband; I perceive thou art a Prophet
(says she) and then honored him, John 4. 18.

POLICY XXXIV. In dealing with subtle men.
THeir speeches must be interpreted by their ends and aims you perceive by
them, and do no^ expound them too much to the present sense they seem to
bear; the Pharisees end with Christ was to trap him, therefore he wisely
declined every fair question, and that of Tribute thus, Give Caesar the things
which are Cesars, Matthew. 22. 21.

POLICY XXXV. In occasions of expense.
IF you be fluent in one kind* be sparing in another, if in your diet, save
it elsewhere, keep one hand shut when the other is open, when Christ had been
prodigal in his Miracle of loaves and fishes, he concluded fiugally, Gather
up the fragments* that nothing be lost, Joh. 6. 12.

POLICY XXXVI. In occasions of praise and commendations.
TOo much magnifying and applauding moves envy and contradiction, when the
Officers said of Christ, Never man spoke like this man, the Pharisees replied,
Are ye also deceived? John 7. 46, 47.

POLICY XXXVII. In outward behaviors and demeanor.
TOuse a kind of ceremony is to teach others to be courteous too, and
demeanours most commonly are paid back in their own coin, Whatsoever a man
sows that shall he reap, Gal. 6. 7.

POLICY XXXVIII. In society.
Be not too much in any thing, by that you create satiety and become cheap,
Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, least he be weary of thee and so
hate thee, Prove. 25. 17.

POLICY XXXIX. In application or address to any.
APply your self so to any person of quality, as though it were more out of
regard than your own softness, least your good intention be expounded
flattery, therefore in discourse to acquit your self of this, interpose your
distinctions and reasons to his, and when you allow, do it with enlarging
those reasons which are his grounds: Christ commended the woman of Canaan when
she thus interposed, Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the crummes which fall
from their masters table: she yields to him, yet with an exception, Matthew. 15
27.

POLICY XL. When you would propose a thing to any.
IT is not so convenient to offer it your self as to lay some train for the
party to take at; when Nehemiah had a desire to tell the King a business, he
became sad, so as the King enquired, Now (says he) before that time I had not
been sad in his presence, Neh. 2. 1.

POLICY XLI. In conference with any.
IT is policy to watch him with your eye to whom you relate any thing of
consequence, for the secrets of many appear in by-motions of their countenance
and behaviors, therefore the eyes of God, whom no secrets escape, are said, To
run to and fro throughout the whole earth, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9.

POLICY XLII. In innovations or novelties.
AFfect not innovation too much, for there is an incongruity in all new things
with the old, and they piece not so well, and such experiments are dangerous,
unless the necessity be urgent, No man (says Christ) puts a piece of new
^l^th to an old garment, for the rent is mad worse, Matthew. 9 16.

POLICY XLI II. In reformations.
Look well that it be the necessity which calls for the reformation* and not
rather a desire of your own to change, and then Ask for the old paths. where
is the good way, and walk therein, Jer 6. 16.

POLICY XLIV. In dispatches.
TOo much haste makes false conclusions and clauses in business, stay a while
to make an end the sooner, The race is not to the swift, Eccl. 9. 11.

POLICY XLV. In discourse.
OBserve the quick and tart speeches of any, they are often sprung out of
covert and secret intentions, therefore Solomon condemns such, See thou a
man hasty in his words? there is more hope of a fool, Prove. 29. 20.

POLICY XLVI. In place or authority.
Think on those predecessors that have behaved themselves ill in the place
before, for a direction to thy self what to avoid, Now these things are our
examples to the intent we should not lust, as they also did, 1 Cor. 10. 6.

POLICY XLVII. When you are in place or authority.
A second way,

INvite and embrace helps and advices touching the practice of bu^^nesse, If
two lie together, then they have heat, but how can one be warm alone? Eccl.
4. 11.

POLICY XLVIII. When you are in place.
A third way,

GIve access freely, and be liberal of your presence, for concealment
stirs up passion in sutours; it is even one of the spiritual griefs, Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 7.

POLICY XLIX. When you are in place or authority.
A fourth way,

BE not swayed and led by easiness, importunity, or light respects, To respect
persons is not good, for such a man will transgress for a piece of bread,
Prove. 28. 21.

POLICY L. When you are in place or authority.
A fifth way,

IN conversation and private dispatches, be not too sensible of what you are,
of your place and honor, by humility you shall find grace and favor, God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, and our Advocate Christ
Jesus bids us, Step boldly ^^ the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16.

POLICY LI. In business of complaints.
Be not hasty to punish, but debate and examine, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah
is great, says God, I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the ery of it, Genesis 18. 30. 21.

POLICY LII. To avoid envy.
AVoid all unnecessary and ambitious engrossing of business, and all insolent
and proud affectations, He that exalts his gate seeks destruction, Prove.
17. 19.

POLICY LIII. To avoid envy.
A second way,

A Wise man will sometimes in businesses that do not much concern, suffer
himself to be crossed on purpose, and to be over-borne, that he may lessen
envy, It is good for me that I was afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71.

POLICY LIVE. In time of action:
DO not publish too much what you are to do, it is like a Trumpet to call up
and awake opposers or competitours, The prudent shall keep silence in that
time, Amos 5. 13.

POLICY LV. In affronts and disgraces.
One way,

STudy not revenge too much, neither meditate on the affront, for by this you
keep your wound green which would heal, It is honor for a man to cease from
strife, but every fool will be meddling, Prove. 20. 3.

POLICY LVI. In affronts and disgraces.
A second way,

Be not too witty in finding out circumstances of contempt, for they kindle
and aggravate, He that increases knowledge increases sorrow, Eccl. 1. 18.

POLICY LVII.
A Third way, consider that revenge makes thee but even with thy adversary,
but pardoning makes thee his better, it is the glory of a man to pass over a
transgression, Prove. 19. 11.

POLICY LVIII. In affronts and disgraces.
A fourth way,

IF he be a friend that provokes thee, think as Job did, when God afflicted
him, Shall I receive good at his hands? and shall I not receive evil? Job 2.
10.

POLICY LIX. In your dealings.
Use a kind of opennesse and freeness, such be haviour will make others free
to you* To communicate forget not: whatsoever you do, do it heartily: and as
in water* Face answers to face, so the heart of man to man, Prove. 27. 19.

POLICY LX. In your dealings.
A second way,

GEt the opinion of secrecy, for then like a sound and close vessel men will
power themselves into you; Let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak,
Jam. 1. 19.

POLICY LXI. In your dealings.
A third way,

GEt the report of upright dealing, and men will negotiate more freely with
you; do not affect the crooked courses of the Serpent, Renounce the hidden
things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, 2 Cor. 4. 2.

POLICY LXII. When favorites grow insolent and haughty.
IT is wisdom to raise another into favor, who may give check to the others
insolency and presuming; Ahasuerus caused Haman his favorite to take the
royal apparel and put it upon Mordecai, Esth. 6. 10.

POLICY LXIII. When things succeed fairly with you, as friendships or fortunes.
DO not rely too much on the fair weather below, nor suffer your self much
possessed with what you possess; the faster you are glued and bound, you are
then torn and rent from thence with more sorrow; when Haman was commanded to
honor Mordecai whom he hated, after he had done, He hasted to his house
mourning, Esth. 6. 12.

POLICY LXIV. When there is difficulty in obtaining a suit.
IF you cannot prevail for your entire solicit, go less for the present,
and importune a grant in part by way of experiment; when Daniel saw it was
difficult to enjoy his diet of pulse and water, he said to their president,
Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, and as thou s^est* deal with thy servants,
Dan. 1. 11, 12.

POLICY LXV. When pretenses and rumors are told you, which concern the
action you are upon.
EM^latours and secret Enemies will be dispersing these, to disparage your
attempt, or to fear you from proceeding, for such prevail much with a
timorous actour, but a wise and resolute agent will neglect them; Thus (said
Nehemiah) they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from
the work that it be not done, Neh. 6. 9.

POLICY LXVI. When you are solicited from any great or famous action by
pretenses.
YOu may safely suspect their plot, for it is either to entertain you with
parley and delay, and so to hinder the progress of your work, or else to
engage you in some other business, to make you remit in your industry and
action upon this; And Sanballet sent, saying, Come let us* meet together, and I
sent saying, I am doing a great work, Why should the work cease? and they
sent unto me four times, Neh. 6. 2, 3.

POLICY LXVII. In occasions of scandal.
Look what your scandal is you afford and occasion, whether it be
dishonorable to your profession, religion, or obligation, and then differ not
the reformation, least you continue it with too much disadvantage to the cause,
Also I said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not walk in the fear of our
God, because of the reproach of the Heathen our Enemies? Nehem. 5. 9.

POLICY LXVIII. In actions of great design.
SEt not both your eyes upon your business, but look abroad with one, be not
too secure in what you do; if your mattocke be in one hand, have a sword in
the other, be prepared for work and defense; And the builders every one had
his sword girded by his side, and so they builded, Neh. 4. 18.

POLICY LXIX. In times of Peoples or Commons complaint.
IF the cry and exclamations be high and grievous, delay not, but redress
exactions, by reforming the Officers and Rulers, and causing them to abstain;
There were that said, we have borrowed money for the Kings tribute: then I
consulted with my self, and rebuked the Nobles and Rulers, and I said, I pray
you, let us leave off this usury, Nehem. 5. 7. 10. 4.

POLICY LXX. How to use the favors of any.
Be not insolent and presuming, neither assume too much; it is Salomons, Put
not forth thy self in presence of the King, Prove. 25. and when Saint John
would have bowed himself, the Angel suffered him not, See thou do it not, for
I am thy fellow servant, Rev. 19. 10.

POLICY LXXI. In imparting a business which is not generally allowed.
IT is not safe to be too presumptuous no^ bold in communicating, especially
to common people, and those of mean rank, who are the very servants and
vassals of rumor and fame; make choice rather of persons of quality; when Paul
went to Jerusalem, I communicated (says he) the Gospel, but privately, to
them which were of reputation, Gal. 2. 2.

POLICY LXXII. In difficult affairs.
MUch counsel brings much safety, And God sat upon a throne, consulting how
to destroy Ahab, and all the Host of Heaven standing by him, 1 Kings 22. 19.

POLICY LXXIII. In the multitude of sollicitours and sutours.
REmission and reference is fit in such throng, and crowdes; when Paul in his
astonishment, asked GOD, What will thou I shall do? he referred him over to
Ananias: so Cornelius was set over in a vision to Peter, Acts 9. 6. 10. 5.

POLICY LXXIV. In giving favors.
Favors given with moderation and temper, keep them still in appetite and
attending for more, None returned to give thanks (says Christ) but this
stranger: so they that are strangers to your favors, that taste them seldom
are thankfullest.

When the Crow that Noah sent forth, found sure footing, he never returned.

POLICY LXXV. In carriage of a business.
SEcrecy and silence is the chief engine: these that hold not counsel, are
but Jays in action, and like bad gamesters, by not keeping close their Cards,
let their adversary win the game.

The heart of a fool is in his mouth.

POLICY LXXVI. In case of enquiry.
Be not too inquisitive after that you would be loath to find, it is like
one that pursues that which he desires to avoid, Take heed, -- least thou
hear thy servant curse thee, Eccl. 7. 21.

POLICY LXXVII. In dealing with a weak man.
Solomon forbids to exchange any air with such persons, there is neither
credit in the contention, nor conquest; Answer not a fool according to his
folly, Prove. 264.yet he allows after, what he here disapproves; therefore a
light meddling is not amiss, but no familiarity; Answer a fool (and so leave
him) according to his folly, least he be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26. 5.

POLICY LXXVIII. In times of displeasure of friends.
DO not retire and leave a displeasure to it self, it is as if you should see
your neighbors house on fire, and go away, no^ seeking to quench it; keep
still your prescription, there is an art to look ones self into the favor of
a displeased friend; like one that sheds his image into a looking-glass with
standing before it; if the spirit of the Ruler rise up against thee, leave not
thy place, for yielding pacifieth, Eccl. 10. 4.

POLICY LXXIX. In reconcilements and coming back of friends from wrath,
IT is more policy to pass over words and causes, which have occasioned the
difference, than to piece the rent with excuses and apologies.

It is a strange act to make the cause of your enmity your way to friendship,
and to send your old wrath on embassage for a new reconcilement, He that
covers a transgression seeks love, but he that repeateth a matter
separateth very friends, Prove. 17. 9.

POLICY LXXX. In discourse with the choterick and passionate.
Be smoothe and soft in your ^nswers and replies, and so you put off wrath,
and this is to blow upon the heat of another to cool him.

Sweet entreaties and calm phrase persuades such passions into friendship;
Surely the Serpent will bite without enchantment, Eccles. 10. 11.

POLICY LXXXI. In waiting for opportunities.
Be not too formal and punctual for occasions; as it is but a vain delicacy
in Religion, so it is in civil matters; Thomas his faith was the worse for
being so point-device, Except I shall see in his side the print of the nails,
and put my finger into the print of of the nails, I will not believe.

Do not regulate your devotion by the Calendar, nor wait for convenience by
the Almanacke; He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that
regards the cloud shall not reap, Eccl. 11. 4.

POLICY LXXXII. To know when fashions are pretended and dissembled.
THey are ever carried with timorousness and formality, and they come hardly
and unnaturally from the actours; Peter sat down among them, but a certain
Maid beheld him, as he sat, and looked earnestly upon him, and said, This
man was also with him, Luke 23. 55, 56.

POLICY LXXXIII. In use of friendships.
IF your friends be men humorous and uncertain, though not with you for the
present, yet date an alteration to your self; Ama tanquam inimi^us futurus,
love your friend as one that may be your enemy; Job describes the wisdom of
God in this clause, Behold he put no trust in his servants, even he charged
his Angels with folly; and says Zachary, I was wounded in the house of my
friend, Zach. 13 6.

POLICY LXXXIV. If you fail in your design upon any.
DO not therefore extinguish all your purposes upon them, saying, as Paul at
his farewell, From henceforth you shall see my face no more; if you fail in
the thing you desired, do not therefore casheere and turn their respect out
of service: that were asif you should break a bow, that would not hit the mark
you shot at.

Keep what you had still in tune for application, and remember, It is not for
you to know the times or the seasons, Acts 1. 7.

POLICY LXXXV. How affections and passions are incited.
PAssions are of light and subtle nature, like air and spirit, soon moved;
the motions which prevail with them must be according to their own nature,
sudden and subtle; Or ever I was aware, my Soul made me like the Chariots
of Aminadab, Cant. 6. 12.

POLICY LXXXVI. How they are be calmed.
THey are pacified by opposing passion to passion; I will turn their mourning
into joy* Jer. 31. 13.

By not opposing their first brunt, but suffering them to work out their first
form of violence; By long for bearing even a Prince is persuaded, Prove. 25. 15.

POLICY LXXXVII. To work any by hope.
STudy to create this passion in those you employ, by promises and fair
inducements, such will endure the distempers and agues of business, for hope
is like a pulse and spirit in the artery of negotiation; therefore the Apostle
says of Charity, that it hops all things, and end^reth all things, 1 Cor.
13. 7.

POLICY LXXXVIII. To work any by advantage of their dependances.
OBserve what influence dependances have upon men's natures.

Where dependence is, there is a servility and tenderness of behavior,
Therefore the chief Rulers, though they believed in Christ, durst not confess
him, because of the Pharisees, Joh. 12. 42.

Where dependence is, there is an Obligation from departures; men that depend
cannot be free and absolute in their actions and motions, The eyes of such
servants must still look unto the hand of their masters.

Where dependence is, there is a fear to make forfeit of prescriptions and
favors, to which they are entitled; therefore David in his spiritual
adherence says, In thy fear will I worship, Psalm. 5. 7.

By these advantages men are awed and swayed, and speak in the Language of our
Saviors obedience, Not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26. 39.

POLICY LXXXIX. How to enquire and inform your self.
HE that would see the closets or private walks of any, must procure the keys.

There is no informing your self in the secrets of another, without the help
of these that can open them.

A servant is one key, He reveals his secret to his servants, Amos 3. 7.

An espiall is another, A talebearer reveals secrets, Prove. 11. 13.

His own actions a third, thus God is discovered, Speak to the Earth, and it
shall teach thee, Job 1^. 7.

Common report a fourth, Ask now -- the Fowls of the air, and they shall
tell thee, Job. 12. 7.

Familiars and Counselors a fifth, Come (said Dalilah) for he has showed me
all his heart, Judge. 16. 18.

POLICY XC. How to know how men are affected.
IT is a pretty art of discovery, to put out some questions or cases which
import your project, and to observe how they assent or dissent; this is to dive
and wade for a secrecy, and to inform your self for accommodation; this
policy the Pharisees used often upon Christ, Is it lawful (say they) to heal
on the Sabbath Day? this they said tempting and trying him, Matthew. 12. 10.

POLICY XCI. How to make men tell some secret or private grievance.
IT is a prevailing practice, to pretend the like, and seem sick of the same
disea^e^men of a trade or profession will communicate most freely each to
other: We power out our selves freeliest to Christ, for he was like us in all
things, sin only excepted, Heb. 4. 15.

2. Another way is to appose* and question them in times and seasons of
alacrity and joy, for the spirits then come forth more from retiredness and
privacy, and have a subtle looseness and laxation, and are not so retentive
and difficult; therefore it is styled in Scripture, The Oil of joy, Isai 61.
3. because it makes the parts soft and supple to be wrought.

POLICY XCII.
A Third way, to pick a secret out, is to observe them in any fit of sorrow or
discontent; for though grief be a corrugation and contraction of the parts
within, yet it holds with the nature of strainings and squeesings; there is
something still expressed, and got out at such times; when David was in
heaviness, then says he, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, P sal. 32. 5.

POLICY XCIII. How to preserve a State from sedition and tumult.
LEt there be a free course for complaints, let the law be open and expedite;
this keeps favorites and great ones from daring, and doing wrong, and
restraines the people from seditious means of redress, when they observe any
wrong committed; Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, Isai. 1. 17.

POLICY XCIV. In secret calumniations and libellings.
APprehend always the first rumors, and catch at the breath of reproaches;
their spreading is like a malignant air, that infects where it blows: the
only course here is to force the libeller and calumniatour to turn accuser
and impleader, and to bring public proof for the private calumniation, and
so excuse, or condemn: Execute judgment in the morning, Jam. 4. 11. Jer. 21.
12.

POLICY XCV. In innovations and change of laws
INnovations are made two ways, either suddenly and at once, when the present
laws are then observed inconvenient; and this is scarce effected without
dislike and opposition and danger.

Or by degrees and slowly, by these which foresee inconveniences at a distance,
and even here is a hazard of dislike from these which are not equally sighted.

In general, the danger is great, and departures from customs unsafe and full
of hazard; Ab antiqua vivendi consuetudine non libenter discedamus; therefore
says the Wiseman, Meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24. 21.

POLICY XCVI. In time of peace.
EVen in a time of peace, it is a policy to have a noise of war: the exercise
of arms makes your peace brighter than them, and preparations for an enemy,
keeps your enemy at more distance, never none lost by antedating losses; Pa^is
tempore belli studia tractarentur, Watch therefore, for ye know not the day,
Matthew. 25. 13.

POLICY XCVII. How to make innovations takwith the people.
WHatsoever the change be, whither of form of government, or laws, or doctrine
and discipline, still things take better if they appear in the feature of
antiquity, and that your change seems still but to be a recovery of antiquity
which was lost, and a kind of reducement to the primitive integrity; therefore
give the same names and titles, vt eadem cum illis esse putentur, that they may
be thought the same still among the vulgar; for absolute innovations will take
from none but him, who said, Behold I make all things new, Revel. 21. 5.

POLICY XCVIII. What would be done at succeeding into a new state or fortune.
IF too much injury may not follow, or unlawfulness be committed by it, it is
policy to alter the state and fortunes of the greater sort, to transmite and
exchange the possessions and their lords, to put a new face upon all things,
that you may be the only man read there, and all dependances acknowledge you:
this action comes in a proportion to that of God, Who fills the hungry with
good things, but the rich he has sent empty away. Luke 1. 53.

POLICY XCIX. In great deserts and expectations of reward.
IT is the best not to seem assuming and arrogating, for then the obligation
ends in ingratitude, and where men have been most deserving, even those which
should requite, grow sick of two diseases which makes them ungrateful,
Avaritia and suspitione, avarice and envy, and Where envy is there is
confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3. 16.

POLICY C. When any faction or power grows great and dangerous.
IT is policy to suffer it with caution, for if you once show your dislike in
opposing, you stir it into combustion and strife, for many are often well
prepared to rebel, which fit still and content themselves in the contemplation
of the power they enjoy, like some birds which never stir nor offer upon
wing, while you seem to neglect, or not eye and stir them too much, but if
once you move, they move too; therefore in this case as the Prophet says, Your
strength is to sit still, Isai. 30 7.

POLICY CI. If you suppress your disposition for a time, it is policy to
change and show it self by degrees.
He that has occasion to suspend the discovery of himself, and thinks it no
time to make himself known, let him take heed when he has obtained what he
desired, that he change not too suddenly, but that his alteration seem
rather a work of the occasions which happen to him, and that he seems to
change because things require it, else he discovers his disguise and pretense
to his dishonor, but in the other way like Job, He even waits till his change
come, Job 14. 14.

POLICY CII. When you observe any Officer or favorite to express himself
free and noble generally.
TAke notice that two things may set such on work, therefore they are to be
eyed and observed.

The one may be an ambition to greatness and popularity.

The other, a fortifying themselves in the favors and opinions of others, that
they may be more able to struggle with the authority they fear.

Therefore observe, Ne beneficentiae aliqua specie mali quippiam m^liantur,
least what they pretend as a virtue, they use but to color their vice, for
Gifts are said even to blind the wise, Exodus 23. 8.

POLICY CIII. How to diminish or lessen a faction.
ENquire into their walks and advantages, and those they adhere to, win
those then by favors and promises from them in private, and this is to disable
them without noise or appearance of tumult: this the Apostle observes and
draws some from siding with the world by proposing Heaven and heavenly
comforts, From such withdraw thy self, but godliness is great gain, 1 Timothy
6. 5, 6.

POLICY CIV. When you are to receive favors or rewards from any.
DO not betray by your joy and alacrity any project which lies dormant in your
bosom, watching for this occasion; discover not your secret ends and purposes,
you intend upon the enjoying this favor, and give no occasion for suspicion;
he is unwise that makes suit for his enemies sword, and tells him he intends
to slay him therewith, Discover not a secret to another, Prove. 25. 9.

POLICY CV. In occasions of rebuke and increpation.
WHen you have occasion to reprove the errors and misbehaviours of any,
observe your season and phrase for it, if they be many who are interessed in
the guilt, reprove them smoothly and calmely; Saint Paul's method is
observeable, when he rebuked the Corinthians, What shall I say to you? Shall I
praise you in this? I praise you not, 1 Cor. 11. 22.

POLICY CVI. In employing formerly discontented spirits.
THey that work by such, are like those that shoot in a broken bow, which
will not hold the bending, it is not safe to employ any who have suffered ill
entreaty or disfavour from you, such keep a wound in memory, and they will
either fall upon some action which shall recover their honor, or express
their revenge, Using their liberty for a cloak: of maliciousness 1 Pet. 2. 16.

POLICY CVII. In counselling and advising.
THose counsels which are unfortunate, though they be prudent and faithful,
yet prove ever dangerous to the counselors themselves; therefore it is policy
to advise with moderation, and not with vehemence and importunity; and yet
however to propound your soundest reasons and arguments, that these which
embrace it may rather seem to come over to it, than be drawn, and when their
assent meets, they stand equally engaged themselves to share in the success;
it is not safe for any to counsel peremptorily, but for him Who works all
things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

POLICY CVIII. How to behave your self when you are envied.
IT is your safest to seek the remove of those which envy your attempts, yet
by honest and lawful ways, for so long as they are near you they will be a
cloud still to hinder the brightness and clearenesse of your actions; God took
away Korab and his accomplices, that Moses might do his service more accurately
and famously, Numb. 16. 31, 32, 33.

POLICY CIX.
DO not seem in your actions to refer all to your self, and to be too
much a center to what you do, attribute all your success to the Power above;
It is no more I, says Paul, but Christ that dwells in me; and make still
protestation, that your undertaking have respect to the benefit of others;
Whether we be comforted (say es the same Apostle) it is for your consolation,
-- or whether we be sober, it is for your cause, 2 Cor. 1. 65. 13.

POLICY CX. What you are to observe when you are to negotiate with any.
AS he is no wise physician, that will not study to know the full virtue of
every ingredient he uses, and all circumstances which concern the nature of
it, so he is no wise man for business, that will not study the knowledge of
him he deals with, for there are many things which have influence and make
impression upon the nature of man; the discovery of which may do much service.

It is necessary to consider the sex; the Feminine is more soft and easy, and
lighter things will move and prevail with it, therefore the Apostle calls Women
the weaker Vessel, 1 Pet. 3. 7.

Then consider the age: old age is more perverse and harsh to treat with;
See thou (says Solomon) an old -- King? there is more hope of a fool than
of him, Prove. 26. 12.

Consider the state or present condition, prosperity makes men more daring and
confident, I said, says David, in my prosperity, I shall never be moved, Psalm.
30. 6.

Consider their country or climate, for their inclination is a little
overruled by that; Paul bids Titus rebuke the Cretians sharply, because They
are liars, evil beasts, slow bellies, Tit. 1. 12, 13.

Consider the present disposition and humor they are in, the Apostles
observing that Christ was not disposed to be discovered; None of them, says
the Text, durst ask him, who art thou? Joh. 21. 12.

Consider where their advantages and disadvantages or weaknesses lie most, like
the light whose brightness examines the least chinke in a room, and there
shootes in; I gave my heart (says Solomon) to seek and search out by wisdom
concerning all things, Eccl. 1. 13.

POLICY CXI. How to enfavour your self with those you discourse with.
Be observant of the humor and disposition you see reigning and predominant
where you come, be not singular nor contradicting, discord advances all
music, but the music of society and correspondence: they that cannot comply
(and yet not betray too much easiness) are ignorant of the true symmetry and
proportion in society, and are like those in the parable, We have (...) to ye,
but ye have not danced, we have mourned to ye, but ye have not lamented, Matthew.
11. 17.

POLICY CXII. How to make one love your company.
Be not too locked up nor reserved, when there are occasions of freeness
offered, but let your behavior like a key open the double lock of your own
and your friends reservation; it is no right method to draw one near you, by
keeping your self at distance; and the way to have the vessel of another
opened, is to power forth your self in a sweet effusion, Because of the savor
of thy good ointments, therefore do the Virgins love thee, Cant. 1. 3.

POLICY CXIII. If you would be popular.
LEt your face be open and entertaining: there is an art to look ones self
into respect and honor: a plausible and liberal countenance is a pleasant
repose to these that perhaps shall never be admitted nearer you, as a hall or
dining chamber in a great man's house welcomes many which never come to be
acquainted with the lodging or inner rooms; The King has brought me into his
chamber (says the Spouse) we will be glad and rejoice, Cant. 1. 4.

POLICY CXIV. How to observe your times of freeness with great ones.
BE not unseasonable in broaching any pleasant humor, like intruding
Musicians, that strike up in a room where many are retired and busy: we know
Christ turned the music out of Jairus house for venting their lighter aires
at the serious time of a funeral, the best opportunities are meal times, and
some other by-houres of relaxation, others must be as well tuned for receiving
as you for giving, While the King sits at the table, my Spiknard sends
forth the smell, Cant. 1. 12.

POLICY CXV. How to behave your self toward your friend, that you become not
guilty to his exceptions.
Be punctual in finding out his times of sowrenesse and disaffection* for all
men have critical seasons and days, and are not always the same in humor
and disposition; let their behavior be the alarm to yours, and be observant
of their more secret motions and gestures, and awake with them at their first
summons, for you shall see, if you be an exact observer, the dawnings and day
break of their better dispositions: it was a wise command the Spouse gave, I
charge ye, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up nor awake my
beloved till he please, Cant. 2. 7.

POLICY CXVI. How to preserve your self fresh and acceptable to society.
DO not let your self loose so as to create any satiety or surfeit in those
you converse with, but leave them as near as you can in appetite and desire,
and it will not be amiss to make some sudden and unexpected departures, so
they seem not too affected and abrupt* thief that affect you will continue
after this inquisitive and restless to enjoy you: it is policy to shed a
pleasant sowrenesse in some of your actions, and to become an ingenious and
friendly tormentour* these are in Salomons language the true wounds of a
friend, and an ingredient of such bitterness will addulce and sweeten you
afterward; I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and
was gone, I called on him, but he (...) (...) no answer, Cant. 5 6.

POLICY CXVII. If you would have one th^nke you endeare them in special after
a reconcilement:
Labor to be guilty of an act (...) ^ay show some notable friendly respect;
in new reconcilements, it is not the exchanges of ordinary behaviors and
common entreaties which will do it, such are taken but for complements and
aires of the times, and like an echo find a return in the same accent, the
Spouse takes a* wise course with her beloved, I found him whom my Soul loved,
I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my mothers
house, and into the chambers of her that conceived me, Cant. 3. 4.

POLICY CXVIII. How to make any take notice you honor them.
IF you know any eminent occasion or solemnity wherein such may stand engaged,
show* your self an observer there as one that had brought a share of
congratulations to sacrifice at such a time: persons that are public and
famous, love to have things pass with notice and regard, Go forth, O ye
daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother
crowned him in the day of his ^sp^usals, and in the day of the gladness of his
heart, Cant. 3. 11.

POLICY CXIX. If you desire to see or hear experiments of the faculty wherein
one excels.
A Modest insinuation of your knowledge in their abilities, a smooth taking
notice how eminent they are, will invite them to communicate: there is a secret
to discourse men into a relation of themselves, Awake O North-winde, and come
thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out, Cant. 4.
16.

POLICY CXX. How to inform your self of the parts of any.
IF the party you discourse with be difficult in his relations, use a kind of
interrogatory enquiry, question him in an handsome way of diminution and
lessening that which you desire to see enlarged: the Daughters of Jerusalem
desirous to know what a Lover the Spouse had, What is thy Beloved (say they)
more than another Beloved? then she answers, My Beloved is white and ruddy,
the fairest among ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10.

POLICY CXXI. What to do in civil factions and commotions.
1. Consider their original. Civil contentions are occasioned by a double
fear, the Rebels hasten to Arms fearing a future revenge for their present
provocation, and the King or Princes of State hasten, fearing their surprisall,
and had rather overtake their violence with an early setting forth, than stay
at home for it, and Stay you not (says Joshua) but pursue, Josh. 10. 19.

2. Present need and necessity is another occasion, and then they envy the
fortunes and goods of the reft, and like Naboth, are sick of their neighbors
vinyards.

3. The luxury and licentiousness of times is a third occasion, and then a
faction rather, lascivit quam saevit, is more a wanton than a rebel, and like
a proud fed Horse corvets till he cast his Rider; the Apostle gives this same
reason for the spiritual revolt, They have begun to wax wanton against
Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 11.

POLICY CXXII. Consider now the parties in the commotion, and their quality.
AMbitious men are most stirrers, for troubled waters are fitter for their
nets than calmer streams, and they hope to shuffle into a place or station,
like men in crowdes, sooner in a tumult or disorder, than upon quieter terms:
David complains, The proud are risen against me, Psalm. 86. 14.

2. Men of desperate and broken fortunes, for such having run riot upon
themselves are readier to do the same upon others, and to set their neighbors
house on fire, that they may from their losses save something to themselves,
these that stirred once in a time of combustion, says the Scripture, was every
one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that
was discontented, 1 Samuel 22. 2.

3. Men inconstant and wavering are parties too, for to such it is tedious to
have things always the same, and like Copernicus, they never think things are
in right in motion, but when they run round, and then they are in most
appetite and expectation, and are ready to play the midwifes, when times are
big with new and doubtful actions, and to deliver them into strange events,
and thus the Apostle* observes it in the spiritual change too, The time will
come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts,
shall heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3.

4. Men confident and daring are great advancers of this cause, the more men in
these attempts put forward, the more the common rout put to them, and the worse
men are now, the better for such a cause,

-- ^n turbis pravus sortitur honorem.

The first men in the impiety, are the first in esteem and credit, The Leaders
of the People cause them to err, Isai. 9. 16.

5. Men disaffected and discontented with present affairs are not behind
here, these are eloquent in complaints of the times, and ingenious in
scattering suspicions and jealousies upon the King and Governors, being the
very turbamenta vulgi, incentives of the people; They dispose Government,
presumptuous are they, and are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, 2 Pet.
2. 10.

POLICY CXXIII. Consider the things that further the Faction.
KNow that meetings and private conventicles a^e the very Parliaments of
factious deliberations and resolutions, and are to be observed and dispersed,
The Rulers of the Earth were gathered together against the Lord and against*
his Church, Acts 4. 26.

2. Know also that the pretenses which Factions make use on are the recovery of
their liberties, which they complain to be taken in, and mode straiter, the
defense of their charters, with other reformations, these are the colors a
rebellion paints with, and sets them abroad to entertain the eyes of the
common people; the Elders and Scribes think to prevail against Stephen thus,
We have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and
charge the customs which Moses delivered us, Acts 6. 14.

POLICY CXXIV. What to do to becalme civil Factions and combustions.
KIll Factions betimes, as Herod did the infants in their cradles, if you let
them grow they may prove too strong for you, when a sedition is at age it is
more able, Fortior adulta seditio; a little Physic will disperse a gathering
Disease, which if it knot, has more danger and difficulty: it was enough to
make the Servant in the Parable bad, when he thought with himself, My Lord
delayeth his coming, Matthew. 24. 48.

2. Send some of authority, gravity, and of a graceful speech among them, who
may dissuade and exhort; And they were astonished, for his Word was with power,
Luke 4. 32.

3. Let the Prince or chief Governor reserve his own presence for the last
remedy; Last of all (says the Parable) he sent his Son, saying, they will
reverence my Son: the appearance of the greatest prove often happy
extinguishers to a civil flame, yet let it be done in all state and royal
circumstance, the personal presence of many Commanders have put a commotion
sometimes out of countenance, till they have turned as the Soldier from
Caesar, with a Non possum far fulmen^culorum, we cannot endure the
thunderbolt of your eye: know too, that common people are more ready to begin
opposition than continue it, more ready Ad rebellandum, quam bellandum: And
when they saw the chief Captain and Soldiers, they left beating of Paul,
Acts 21. 32.

4. Though the Faction gather and grow violent, yet let the weapons be the
last in your hands, give days of respit, and time for a calm; natural things
after a trouble will return to smoothness, and afterward reduce themselves to
a settled consistence; And remember that to sinners, God is gracious and
merciful, long-suffering, and of great kindness, Joel 2. 13.

5. Try experiments upon them with several passions, raise them with hopes by
fair entreaties, and promises, and cast them down with fears and menaces;
offenders are won with allurements, and awed with threatenings; God uses this
method, If my People shall humble themselves, and seek my face, I will hear,
and forgive, and heal their Land; but if ye turn away, then will I pluck
them out by the roots, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14, 19.

6. Try to draw away some of them with gifts and office of place or honor, and
thus you pull feathers out of the wing of a conspiracy, and imps your own.

7. Dispatch some of eminency to comply in the faction with them, and to be
parties among them, and their advices may find occasions and pretenses to pull
them behind or about in their practices, that you may gain ground and
advantage; David had his pensioner in Absaloms counsell-chamber, 2 Samuel 17. 5,
6.

8. Do not show your self too inquisitive into those you suspect guilty of
any adherence, neither make too much noise of revenge and punishment; pardons
are your best language to offenders, though many be in the guilt, there
should be but few in the suffering, Multorum culpa sit poena paucorum. If that
Nation (says God) against whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I
will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them, Jer. 18. 8.

POLICY CXXV. What to be observed before you embarque in business.
Calm such passionate motions as trouble your spirit, so long as smooth water
is troubled, there can be no clear reflection; passions shed an ill disposition
over the whole Soul, and distracts both your counsel and judgment, so as you
may then err, both in making choice of your end, and of your means to it, or
in your act of applying, and accommodating, or in the time you should take, or
the place where you should do it; thus the ambitious and envious men of
humors and passions often succeed ill; A man of counsel will be considerate,
Eccl. 32. 18.

2. They are not likely to succeed ill who make God of their counsel, go not
forth among affairs below till you have been above: David resolves wisely, I
will hear what God the Lord will speak, Psalm 85. 8.

POLICY CXXVI. What to do in calumniations.
Express neither your passion, nor revenge; if the reports be just, your
guilt is a privilege; if false, it is wisdom to take no notice, stir not
there, where you shall provoke sooner than appease; A wise man will pacify it,
Prove. 16. 14.

POLICY CXXVII. What you are to do in affairs in general.
FIrst consultation is requisite and election of what is to be done, then look
about for circumstances, as of place, time, persons, humors, dependancies,
occurrences which may happen, propose all reasons, suspicions, conjectures, and
improve them by a due examination, forecast impediments or what may hinder your
effecting, and consequences, what may follow and arise from thence, then look
to the conduct of your business, how to dispose all, and allow some
uncertainty to those events which are independent, for there is an instance of
succeeding in which providence reserves and reveals when and to whom she
pleases, There is a time when in their hands there is good success, Eccl. and
says Christ, cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find,
Joh. 21. 6. there is a right side for fishing, else your net may return empty.

First see what is to be done in each particular case.

2. Then enquire prudently the means how to compass it, then observe the just
measure and proportion you are to allow the action, that is, weigh the fittings
of the circumstance of time, place, and subject, then apply your self to the
felicity or dexterity of arriving where you intend: Let reason go before every
enterprise and counsel before every action Ecclef. 37. 16.

POLICY CXXVIII. How to quicken your judgment for dispatch of affairs.
IF you would have your judgment clear for the conduct of business; retire
home into your self, and keep sometimes a distance with business; your eye
sees not so distinctly things that are nearest and closest; Moses will be in
the Mount a far off, as well as below among the people; and your judgment or
word of your Soul should like the eternal Word of God, Never go out so, as
to depart from you.

POLICY CXXIX. How to obtain respect.
THe state of outward circumstances and retinue, will command a stooping and
bowing in opinions toward you, if you want these your own virtues, and good
qualities will do you that service, yet have them valued by others upon your
self, and keep them at home, and they will be more admired abroad, for
retirements and withdrawings in conversation is like a distance, to some scene
of a heaven which is presented with more admiration, and in your necessary
nearness with any that are your familiars, let not your face and language and
gesture too freely loose to your own or another mirth, you shall never bind
up strangers in a solid respect of you by too much unloosing your self, Numb.
11.

The plentiful showers of Manna caused a satiety, and made the people say, Now
our Souls are dried away that there is nothing besides this Manna, Number. 11. 6.

POLICY CXXX. What to do if you would have your counsels words or deeds
respected.
THere is a secret authority and power which has great influence over men's
spirits, and it is some individual thing within the party, some natural
graces besides the affluence of outward things which begets reputation and sets
a price upon him in the opinions and causes what he says or does to be
received; observe what you have of this in you, and then preserve and improve
it, for it is of great advantage; commanders, lawgivers, and magistrates,
professors in arts and sciences are famous for it; where men are of
reputation, others incline before hand to their opinion, belike for fear they
come too late, they attended to our Savior, for He spoke as one that had
authority, and not as the Scribes, Matthew. 7. 29.

POLICY CXXXI. How to gain respect and estimate.
NObility, wealth, dignities, favors, friends, are such outward things as
conduce to put you into respect; to these beauty, comeliness, and
gracefulness, to these the gifts of the Soul, as of knowledge, wisdom, or
what other virtue or grace may exalt you above the ordinary pitch of others,
these give men the empire and sovereignty over others, and above all these,
that special character which God imprints upon any whom he intends for place
or office, which ever commands veneration, and entitles to pre-eminence; David
was commended to Saul thus, I have seen a son of Jesse that is cunning in
playing, and a valiant man and prudent in matters, and a comely person, and the
Lord is with him, 1 Sa. 16. 18.

POLICY CXXXII. How to preserve the credit and good name you get.
AS in the spiritual estate perseverance preserves and advances that grace
which relapses weaken and loose, so in the temporal, the stream that will be
still pure must keep running; Philosophers say, Ex quibus nascimur nutrimur,
we are nourisht with such things as we are made on, thus in fortunes, the
same actions must be repeated for the preservation which were active in the
acquisition, Fortuna moribus immutatur, a change in your course will bring a
change on your estate, Meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24.
21. And a double minded man is unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1. 8.

POLICY CXXXIII. How to gain credit and esteem by your means.
Be liberal and magnificent, yet do it with special choice of persons,
causes, times, and places, the service of God and your country are the actions
which exalt you most in the eyes of all; God is magnified by David thus, He
has dealt bountifully, says he, and those to whom God himself says, Ye
are Gods, must keep in some fair proportion to make good their Divinity they
receive, He that sow^th bountifully shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6.

POLICY CXXXIV. How to know whether you be luckie and fortunate, and how to
continue so.
IF you find an happy concurrence of your affairs with time, place, and
persons which give success, be prudent and industrious to manage and dispose
this good fortune, your cooperation is necessary, and though God provide you
this harmony in your circumstances, yet your own pains and counsels must
manage them, and then you shall not be so much fortunate by contingency and
chance, as by industry and prudence, Neglect not the gift that is in thee, Tim.
4. 14.

POLICY CXXXV. How to keep you at your point of prosperity.
Be moderate, and be gracious to your friends and adherents, avoid insolency
and presumption, for those kindle you into scorn, and pride, and inflame into
emulations, and emulations into checkes and contradictions, and those bring on
improsperous events, therefore the highest have had the most fatal mischances,
Go on with thy business in meekness, so shall thou be approved, Eccl. 3. 17.
Let us not be de^^rous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another, Gal. 5. 26.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

T. Wykes.
Febr. 5. 1638.

