^ Ban wedy i dynny air yngair alla^ o hen gyfreith Howel tha / vap Cadell
brenhin Kymbry / ynghylch chwechant mlyneth aeth heibio wrth yr hwn van y
gellir theall bot yr offeiriait y pride hynny in priodi gwrageth in thichwith ac
in kyttal ac wynt in gyfreithlawn.

A CERTAIN CASE EXTRACTE out of the ancient Law of Hoel da, king of Wales in
the year of our Lord, nine hundred and fourtene passed: whereby it may
gathered that priests had lawfully married wives at that time.

i. Cor. vii. It is better to mary, than to burn. S. Ambrosse. The consent of
the will, is this burning. ^^^mas owner of Llantathun

heb law bod in rhydd er oed hyd heddiw wrth gyfreth ddeo / ac weithie wrth
anwadal gyfreith y Pap / a bod rhydd ac in gyfreithlawn yr owrhon wrth gyfreith
y Brenhyn / Lhyma heued Text o Grifreith howel da: wrth yr hwn y gellir dyall
bod yr offeireit yr amser hynny in priodi gwrageth / ac and oeth waherddedic
wrth y dywededic gyfreith / yr hon oeth wedy i chonffyrmio ae d^rbin in
gymradwy / in thedthfol ac in divei / trwy auturtot yr escop oeth yr amser
hynny in Ruuein: megis y kewch weled in eglurach wrth darllein y text o isot.

LYma lyuyr kyfreith a wnaeth hywel da in y Hwn ywr deunowuet hynaif ir b.
Edward y chwechet
ty gwyn ar daf / kyn bot heuit petheu erill in daw o gyfreithieu da a wnayth
doethion / a chyn no hynny a gwedy hynny.

A hyn a wnaythpwyt in erbin kyfreith hywel / Kyfreith hywel a deleir i chredu.
A chyt del yno o wys Hywel / chwegwer doethaf o Gymryf / o bob kymwt yng Gwilia
yr hen orgraph Cambereic.
kymry o leygyon / a says vgeint bacloc o Esgyb / ac archescyb / ac athraon da
/ ac Abadau. Or doethion hynny oll / kymryt a wnaythpuyt y deuddec doethaf ar
neilltu y wneuthur y Kyfreith. Ac un yscolhayl huotlaf o Gymryf olh y
yscriuenny y kyfreith. Ac edrych rac gwneuthur in erbyn kyfreith eccleis na
chifraith yr amerawdyr. A llymma henweu y gwyr hynny oll / nyd amgen. Morgeneu
enat Kyfnerth y vap. Gweir vap Rufawn. Gronwy vap Moridic. Retwyd enat. Iddic
enat. Gwyberi hen o is kenuen. Gwrnerth llwyt eu vap. Medwan ail kerist. Gwyn
vaer / y gwr oeth berche^nawc ar lann tathwn byoed y ty y gwnaythpwyt y
kyfreith yndaw. Gwgawn dyuet. Bledrus vap Bleythud.


A Blewgwaret archdiagawn Llantaf a oed yr yscolheyc / a doctor in kyfreith
Siuil / ac in kyfreith eccleis. A gwedy daruot gwnethyr y kefreith oll in
gwbyl. Of aeth Hywel a theyrnet o Gimryf gyt ac of a La^bert escop Mynyw: a
Mordef escop Bangor / a Chebur escop saint Assaph / a Blewgwaret archdiacon
Llandaf at Anastasius Pap hit in Ruuein / y darllen y Gyfreith: Ac y edrych a
oed dim in erbyn kyfreith Deo o honai hi. Ac am and oed dim in gwrthwyneb i di
/ hi a deilingwyt / ac i gelwyt in kyfreith howel da hi.

Oet Christ yna ydoeth. ix. C. mlyned a. viiii. Llyma y gwersi a wnaeth
Blewgawret yna in destiolaeth.

Explicit editus legibus Liber been finitus:
Quem regi scripsit languoridus et quoque fuit.
Hoeli turbe doctor, tunc legis in vrbe.
Gornardo cano, tunc iudice quotidiano
Rex dabat ad partem dextram, nam sumpserat artem.
Ac ychydic in ol hynny y darlleir in yr vnrhyw gyfreith val hynn.

Tri meip en dri brother un vam vndat ni dyleant kefran o tref eu tat can eu
braut un vam vndat. Un o na dunt yw map llwyn a pherth: a gwedi caffael y map
hwnnw / kemryt y wraic honno o roth kenedyl: Ny thyly hwnnw keuran tir ar map a
gaffat kyn nog of in llwyn ac ymperth.

Eil yw kymret gwreic o escolhayc o rod kenedyl / ac
odenya kemrut vrtheu effeyryadaeth: ac of in effeiriat / caffael map: Ny thyly
y map a gaffat kyn yr urdeuf / keuran tir a map a gaffat wedy yr urdeu. Trydid
yw mut / can ny thyly tir any attepo drostaw: ac ny roddir gwlad y vut.

The Englysh of the above written Brytyshe or Walshe as we now call it.
Besides that it was thought honest, laudable, and lawful by the law of God,
and sometime by the inconstant and unsteadfast law of the Pope: and now
established by the kings law also. Here is yet an other text (worthy to be
noted for the antiquity) of the ancient law of Hoel da, than king of Wales,
by the which ye may easily gather that priests at that time had married wives,
neither was it prohibited or forbidden by the law: which law was accepted,
confirmed, and auctorized by the bishop of Rome than, as ye may more evidently
perceive by readyng of the text under written.

This is the book of the law which This was the eightenth auncester from king
Edward the syxtt.
Hoel da made at Tuy gwyn ar daf: who did abrogat, repeal, and disanull all
the laws that were made before him, and stablished this Law in all his
dominions.

And though since and before there were diverse laws and estatutes
constituted and ordained, yet the law of Hoel da ought rather to be preferred.
For at the parliamente holden of the same Hoel at the said place, there were.
vi. of the most prudeut and wysest men of the lay fee of every Commote in
wales. And of the cleargye to the number of an. cxl. Bishops archebishops,
great doctors and Abbots. And of all this number. xii. of the best learned
and most prudent were selected and chosen, yt after consultation had they
might make the law. And the most notable learned man in all the contrie was
commanded to endite this law, and to forse and diligently marcke that no
sentence or clause thereof should be repngnant or contrary to the
ecclesiastical or civil law.

And these be the names of the law makers. Morgenewe the judge Kyfnerth his
son Gweir vap Rufaun. Gronoy vap Moridic. Retwyd the judge. Idic the judge.
Gwybery the old, of low kenyn. Gurthnerth Lhoyt his son. Gwyn Uaer, he that
was owner of Llantathun and of the house where they sat than in parliament.
Gogaune Diuet. Bledrus vap Bleydud.


And Bleguaret doctor of both the laws, and archdeacon of Llandaphe was
appointed to be pregnotarie. And immediatlye after that the law was fullye
made and perfeicted, Hoel tha^ brynging wh him a royal reward out of Wales
and being accompanied with Lamberte bishop of saint Dauies, Mordefe bishop of
Bangor, and Chebure bishop of. S Assaph and Bleyguaret archdeaken of Landaph:
took his journey to Rome to have the said law perused and examined by
Anastasius tha^ bishop there. Which thing advisedly done, and every part
thereof found to be consonant and agreeable with gods law, was ratified,
confirmed, and published by the bishop, and called the law of Hoel da. And this
was done in the year of our Lord. ixc. xiiii. In wytnes whereof, here be old
verses which were made at that time.

Explicit editus legibus Liber been finitus:
Quem regi scripsit languoridus et quoque fuit.
Hoeli turbe doctor, tunc legis in urbe.
Gornardo cano, tunc iudice quotidiauo
Rex dabat ad partem dextram, nam sumpserat artem.
And it follows a little after in the text of the said law where certain cases
are resolved by these words.

There be three sundry cases, where the brother (the father being tenant in
Gauel kind) shall not be perceuer with his brother of one venture and one father.
The first is, wha^ a man has issue two sons by one wife, one before the
espousels solemnised, and the other after* He that is borne before the
espousels, shall not be partener with him that is borne after. The second
is, when a Clarke being married has issue a son, and after that he
receives the order of priestehode, has issue an other son: the son that
is begoten after the orders ought not to part lands with his brother that was
begotten before the orders.

The third is when a man has issue two sons, whereof the one is mute or
dombe: He that is mute shall have no part of the land with his brother. For
that he is not a man personable in the law to enjoy land, according to the
old said law.

Raro terra datur, homini cui sermo negatur.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Roberte Crowley, dwelling in Elye rentes in Holburne.
The year of our Lord M. D. L. * *

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


