THE Two most worthy and Notable HISTORIES which remain vnmained to Posterity:
(viz:) The Conspiracy of CATELINE, undertaken against the government of the
Senate of ROME, AND The War which Iugurth for many years maintained against
the same State.

Both written by C.C. Salustius.

Historia est testis Temporum: Lux veritatis: Magistra vitae: Nuncia vetustatis.

Printed at London for John Iaggard, dwelling in Fleetstreet between the two
Temple gates, at the Sign of the Hand and Star, 1608.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY and valorous, Sir Thomas Summerset, Master of the Horse
to the Queens most excellent Majesty.
SIR, having no fitter occasion to manifest my duty to your Worthiness (though
I have often wished matter more expressiue both of my love and zeal) I have
adventured rather to tempt your acceptance in this small presentment, worthy
(no man will deny) in its proper Ornament, of an Honorable Patronage: Then by
perpetual neglect to incur the imputation of Ingratitude, a vice amongst the
Heathen punishable, amongst Christians, contemptible. Herein therefore (right
Generous) let me in lieu of all my friends, make confession of your many and
extraordinary favors, from time to time vouchsafed us. In acknowledgment
whereof, sithence we want power to deserve, yet give us leave with thankful
overtures to remember. Protesting, that if you daigne to accept of this
unpolished Translation, partly divulged under the shadow of your protection, for
the pleasure of your vacant hours, but especially for the general good of all
English Gentlemen, when, either Time or better judgment, shall furnish me with
a more desertfull project, to prostitute it soly to the approbation of your
most judicious censure. Thus far presuming, that if it pass your allowance, I
will adventure neither to fear the discourtesy of the Cinicke, nor the
sole-conceit of the Curious. In assurance whereof, being constantly warranted
by the generous carryage of your Heroycall disposition, I esteem it as rich in
value as I account it happy in acceptance, having in it nothing so worthy as
your favor, whereunto I wholly refer it.

Yours faithfully devoted, Tho. Heywood.

Of the choice of History, by way of Preface, dedicated to the Courteous
Reader, upon occasion of the frequent Translations of these latter times.
THe chiefest occasion that moved the Scythians so peremptorily to distaste
Learning and Antiquities, was for that they saw the walls painted, and the
Libraries of the Greeks and Romans stuffed, Bodin.
with the records of their own Atchieuements, but the memorable astions of
other Nations, either ouer-slipped, or satyrically disgraced. For all other
Nations (the Haebrewes excepted) committed nothing to writing concerning their
Fortunes. And surely (I know not upon what grounds.) It is a general fault
amongst al Martial men; to pen nothing of their own exploites: And those who
have somewhat inv^ed their minds to learning, for their excessive delight
therein, can hardly be drawn at any time to alter their studies. By which
perverseness of eithers error, those Nations which have bin famous for their
Military valor, have utterly lost their ancient reputation, after their
imbracement of Letters and learning.

The best reasons that I can give, are either to be grounded upon desire of
case, or else upon their proficiency in the precepts of Nature and Divinity;
which not only abhor the effusion of blood, but withal depose their former
infusion of Barbarism and cruelty; as in experience we have seen it come to
pass, first by the Greeks and Latins, and afterward by succeeding Nations.
The people of Asia, were ever accounted good Orators and penmen, but the
Lacedaemonians rude and rough fellows, utterly unlearned: and yet by war and
Conquest, at home and abroad, acquired worthy purchases, and had their fortunes
eternized to the world; not by themselves, but by strangers: Whereas the
memorable Actions, wars and Conquests of the Celts, the Germans, the Arabians
and Turks, are either buried in oblivion, or at least Ballated in one sheet of
paper, and that (for the most part) by their enemies. Better fortune had the
Graecians in setting forth the battle of Salamme or Marathon. For by the ample
discourses thereof, a man would imagine that a more honorable piece of service
was never atchiued in any age. But as Alexander sitting in Darius his chair of
Estate, pleasantly told the Ambassadors of Greece, aggravating the danger of
the present rebellion of all the Greek Cities, that those wars seemed unto
him but as conflicts of Mice and Rats. In like sort those easy wars that
Alexander managed against the effeminate Asians and Persians (to which C^to
spared not to give the epithites of Woomanish, and Caesar, Contemptible) hold
no comparis^^ with the bloody in counters of the Celts, the Germans, the
Turks and Tartars, as may easily be gathered by those who are disposed to
call to mind their overthrow given and taken, and finally written by each
others enemies.

Wherefore to make a judicious conjecture of the goodness of Histories, we
ought to remember the wise counsel of Aristotle, not only in our choose, but
also in our reading, That an Author ought not to be accepted with an
ouer-weening credulity, nor rejected with peremptory incredulity. For if we
credit al, in all writers, we cannot choose but oftentimes swallow things
false, for true, and so commit gross errors in dispatches of importance: So
again, if we should presentli^ condemn an History, as of no credit, we
should reap no profit, in counteruaile of time therein consumed. Yet let every
Author bear his own blame, whereof if they that have stuffed their m^numents
of memory with fabulous impostures, be guilty in one s^rt, in no less fault
are the Turks, who can say nothing of their descent or Original, neither will
suffer any writing thereof to be commended to posterity; believing, that no
Historiographer can write truly upon report, much less will they, who were
either in action, or in place over the action; every man being bewitched to
tell a smooth tale ^o his own credit: Or suppose, he be of an impartial
spirit, yet either the fear of great p^rsonages, or passion, or money, will
preuaricate his integrity. But what should discourage succeeding Ages, that
they should fear to write freely of their Equals? Surely in these times, it is
not probable that amongst such variety of Authors, no one should be found,
whose works were not void of affection, of corruption, of envy, of passion.
Let the judicious Reader therefore, between these extremes (of lightness and
Critique rashness) take the middle course, so shall he cul out of every good
Author singular purity. Neither let him censure the work, before he fully
understand the depth and sufficiency of the Author. But indeed this should be
the care of the state, to look into the argument and method of Books before
they come to the Press, least by the vulgar censuring of some deficient
labors, others of more sufficiency be dishartned from publishing their
writings. For in this choice of Authors, which every student ought to propose
unto himself, I would not have every one to be his own judge (for censure is a
gift of art and experience) but to moderate his opinion by coherence,
comparisons, and infallible reasons, which if they be not allowed by the mayor
party, let him never be ashamed to change his determination. For as those
which will spend their verdicts upon Pictures, their dimensions, lineaments and
colors (wherein the skilfullest eye is often cozened and deceived) ought not to
be ignorant of Symmetry, to give true judgment: So is it necessary for him
that will distinguish between the sufficiency and insufficiency of History,
not only to be well read in the Arts, but also much conversant in human
occurrances.

Of Writers in this kind there are three sorts, the first whereof being well
qualified by nature, but better by learning, have bin called unto Magistracy.
The second sort have wanted learning, and yet proved very sufficient by the
adjuncts of Nature and experience: and the letter being somewhat helped by
Nature, and wanting experimental imploiment, have notwithstanding by their
industry and integrity in their collection of History, even equalled those
who have spent the greatest portions of their days in the Counsell-house of
Princes. Of every one of these you shall find infinite variety, and so much the
greater, by how much every one sauoureth of more or less integrity, learning
and experience. The best are those which are best seen in all these, and free
from passion. I add passion, because it is hard for an upright conscience
discoursing of an evil subject, to abstain from hard language; or on the
other side, to attribute unto good actions a moderate commendation. For the
inserting medestly in praise of the good, and dispraise of the wicked, has
given no small ocasion for the amplifying of History. Whereof ^f good Authors
ought to be noted, what shall we say of Evil?

No slight consideration must therefore be taken, whether our Historiographer
has written of himself, or of others; of Fellow-Citizens or Strangers; of
Friends or Enemies; of Military discipline or Civil Government; of his
Equals or Inferiors; and lastly, of his own time, or of sore-passed ages. For
judgment in this employment, Secretaries, Priuy-Counsellors, and Presidents in
Courts of Justice are very sufficient: (for by these three the state is
balanced) but more sufficient is he^ who alone sits at the Helm; but most
of al he, that adioyneth much reading of Law and History to daily experience.
To the perfection whereof two things are most requisite; Books and Travail;
without the former, whereof, the difficile management of employment (in any
kind) is hardly attained to, and the date of man's life is ouer^short to
compass it by travail and wandering observation, as of old time did
Licurgus, Solon and Ulysses.

The last of whom Homer pronounced wise, For that he had seen the manners of
many people, and the customs of diverse Cities. In these days many dote upon
sight of strange countries, the Natures of living Creatures and plants, the
Fabrickes of Palaces and Pyramides, with the ouerworne sculptures of Ancient
coins, but the mysteries of public Government, and their alterations, they
never regard.

Next unto Books of humanity, and experiments of Travail, I commend insight
in Law. For those that are to determine suits and contentions (says Arcadius)
know all sorts of misdemeanors; and not misdemeanors only, but their
contraries, without the indifferent apprehension whereof, the one and the other
cannot be pried into and prevented. For in discerning between good and evil,
consists the fullness of human wisdom.

Whereupon we are to gather, that of all sorts of Historiographers those are
worst to be liked of, which with impure hands (as the Proverb is) presume to
write of History, being both unexperienced in affairs of importance, and
veterly unlearned. Of these is my chiefest Cave at in choice of History.

The next to beware of, is a railing or a passionate Writer (for you shall not
find all Authors free from this humor) and him suspect of flattery, by praising
himself, his favorites and Country men, and bitterly taunting his opposites,
or enemies. But when you meet with an Author, who gives his enemy his due
commendation, read him with trust and belief; and the rather, if he be a
stranger to both parties: esteem him as litigious persons do of Vmpiers in
Abitrementes, void of partiality. For it is aparant that Dionisius
Hallicarnasseus (a man of no eminent place in Government) wrote the History of
the Romans with better faith and more uprightness, then Fabius, Salust, or
Cato, men advanced to wealth and honor in their Commonweals. For Polibius a
Grecian in many places does tax Fabius and Philenus of falsehood, the one a
Roman the other a Carthaginian, and both writing upon the Punicke wars; the
one giving all the honor to the Romans, the other to the Carthaginians. These
are the words of Polibius. Philenus avoucheth that the Carthaginians behaved
themselves valiantly, and the Romans baselie and cowardly. But Fabius by the
censure of Polibius was a man of approved honesty, and wisdom, to whom the
proiects of the Romans, nor the counterplots of the enemy were hidden, or
unrevealed Yet both Orator like were very wary to say or do any thing to their
own irreputations. But let not any think, that in an History he can discharge
both the part of an Orator and Historiographer. For I cannot allow of those
writings which in praises and flattery are copious, in reprehension of vices,
brief and penurious; this maxim being most justifiable, that even the man of
best discretion and uprightness, commits manifold errors. Wherein Equinard
and Acciolus have so magnified Carolus Magnus, Eusebius Constancy, Nebrensis
Ferdinand, Iouius Cosmo Medices, Phillostratus Apollonius, Procopius
Bellisarius, Staphilus, and Leua, Charles the fifth, that herein they have
rather merited the sirnames of Orators, then of Historiographers. And therefore
let the judicious Censurer suspend his judgment not by the scale of Friends
and Countrymen, but by the verdict of enemies also. Against Phillip Comines,
in praising of Jews the XI. let him oppose Meir; and not Meir only, but
Paulus Aemilius; because the one is excessive in commending, the other as far
gone in discommending; the third in a mean. Meir terms him periurious and
fratricide, whose desire was above al things, without regard of the Laws of
God or man, to become sole Tyrant of the state. The same Author calls Comines
himself, Traitor and Fugitive. And therefore in these alterations, I wish
neither of them to be believed, because the one was highly advanced and
enriched, by the King, the other a professed enemy, and had his p^n deeplier
dipped in gall, then was seeming for an Historiographer. Aemilius was neither
friend nor foe (for he was of Verona) and wrote gravely and modestly in these
words. The Duke (says he) did envy the King, accusing him with the death of
his Brother, to have corrupted his Brothers children, and to work them to
poison their Father. He affirms nothing rashly, he omitted not repugnant
reports. They wrote in the life of Jews; this man an hundred years after,
impossible at that tim^ to be possessed with expectancy of grace, fear, or
envy. So Tacitus did avowe the actions of Tiberius, Claudius, Caius, and Nero,
reported in their life times to be full of flattery through fear, and after
they were dead, as full of despite, and both false. And therefore it was his
first prot^station, that he would write them without Envy or Flattery, as in a
time of more security. For he wrote an hundred years after their deaths, and
peradventure had read the saying of Aristotle, that New Histories were as
fabulous and distatiue as those of deepest Antiquity.

Surely those tha^ will write of the present, can hardly write truly, but they
must touch the credi^ and reputation of some men. And therefore Cicero in his
Catalogue of all the best Orators, remembered not one living, least they which
by chance or negligence were forgotten or omitted (as himself speaks) should
conceive displeasure. Who would then seek for truth amongst Authors conuersing
with such times, Wherein to write what a man would not, was accounted
dishonest: to write what he would, dangerous.

The best course is therefore without all fear to dedicate our Papers to
posterity, or if any think so well of his works, that he will publish them in
his life time, let his History consist of times past, collected out of the best
Commentaries public, private, and Ancient; As did Lyuy, Tranquillus, Tacitus,
Arrian, and Dionisius Hallicarnasseus, all, most approved Authors: and the last
of most credit, because he wrote of another state, not of his own, and saw
all men's Commentaries, and secrets of state by public permission.

Polibius.
In this rank also, are Polibius, Plutarch, Metasthenes, Ammianus, Polidor,
Ctesias, Aemilius, Aluaresius, and Lodowick Roman.

But of those which have nothing in the^ but reports, ek toon aloon akroamatoon
as Polibius speaks, and have not seen public Registers, let them be of no
Authority. For the better Authors to induce better belief, avouched their
authorities from public remembrances, as Ammianus, who brought to light the
Original of the Galls from their Public Monuments. So likewise Arrians
writes in his preface, That he read the Commentaries of King Ptholomy, an
eiewitnesse of the Acts of Alexander, never before set forth. Appian had the
like Fortune with the papers of Augustus. Metasthenes and Ctesias with the
Libraries of the Persians. Diodorus with the Arcana of the Egiptians.
Onasicratus and Aristobulus the Lieutenant of Alexander avow those things which
they saw with their eyes in Egypt and India. Not that I dare avouch that the
truth of History is to be sought for in the Commentaries of Kings, for they
are given to speak largely of their own praises, but to make use of those
Observations which are little or nothing interessed in their praise or
disgrace; as the Computations of times, the largeness and situation of
Provinces, the Government of Cities, the ages of Princes, their reigns and
successions, and in especial, their Policies; wherein the end of reading all in
all consists. For as Metasthenes affirms, All men that writ of Princes are
not to be believed, but especially the Priests, to whose fidelity and custody
the public Annals were incredited. Such a one was Berosus, who collected the
reigns of the Assyrians out of the Annals of his predecessors. This
Metasthenes.

Secondly, if a History have such and so many witnesses as cannot be contested,
it has the greater apparancie of truth, yea in seeming incredulities,
especially if it suffer examination and trial. For who would believe that
the Roman Senate at the motion of a Clown, who dreamed that Jupiter called
unto him in his sleep, and willed him to admonish the Senate that they should
renew the plays, because he that lead the dance in the former shawes had
daunced falsie. The Senate assented. One man perchance in relating this
triuiall accident would not be believed, but herein Plutarch, Lyuy, Dionisius,
Valerius and Pliny, do all agree; who in so uniform a consent of the Senate
and people could not relate a falsehood.

But methinkes I hear one say, the latter was deceived by the error of the
former; and so each after other. Surely and so it may be, not only in the
History of humanity, but also of Nature: For the old world reported, that
Swan^ approaching their ends, would sweetly sing their Funeral farewels; a
tradition not only received from the times of Eschilus by Poets and Painters,
but likewise by the chiefest of the Philosophers, Plato, Aristotle, Chrisippus,
Philostratus, Cicero and Seneca. And yet Pliny, and after him Athenaeus report
upon proof, that it is but a Fable, and so to this day it yet remains.

But as for natural History the validity thereof, whereof we mean not to
discourse, it soon experimented, which in human (for their infinite
confusions) can never be examined. As for example; Many good Writers, and not
one, or two, but almost twenty wrote that the Duke of Orliance was beheaded
for Treason, and that at Paris: and yet it was apparent, that XXX. years after
his imprisonment in England, he returned into France, and there peaceably died.
For which rashness my Countryman G. Bellay does sharply reprehend those
Historiographers, who will audaci^uslie commit to public belief the flying
reports of fame and the vulgar. Of this fault Strabo taxed Possidonius,
Erastosthenes and Metrodorus. They delivered for true history (says he) the
reports of the most inconstant people. But Possidonius used the Authority of
C. Pompey, so that I think he could write nothing unadvisedly.

Therefore when Authors disagree amongst themselves, I take it the safest
course to believe the latest, at leastwise if their reasons co-here
necessarily, and their Arguments are strong ^o prove what they say. For such is
the Nature and obscurity of truth, that unless it be raked from ancient and
fundamental Originals, it will hardly appear like it self, but best then,
when the reports, the flatteries and passions of the vulgar are buried with
their bodies.

As to Religion, because the Controversies between the professions and
professors thereof, are so irreconciable, I would not advise a man to seek
out the Opinions of the Heathen among the Jewish Writers, nor of the Jews
amongst the Christians, nor that of the Christians amongst the Moors or
Mahumetans, but to read the Authors of every sect and Religion by themselves,
to weigh the credit of the writer, and the validity of the thing written, and
how they agree or disagree amongst themselves. So much (concerning this
Argument) as has been set forth by diverse Authors, I will rather blanch with
the imputation of mistaking and ignorance in Antiquities, then with the foul
Title of untruth; even as the old Graecians dealt with the Romans and the
Celts, and the Romans with the Caldeans and Jews, ea^h one being ignorant in
the Antiquities of either Nation.

In reading the disgraces of an enemy, let our assertion be suspended until
we have examined the worth of the writer; for an adversaries report is not
rashly to be rejected, nor at first sight embraced; but herein let us imitate
Caligula, who commanded the History of Caesar written by Cassius and Labienus,
and condemned by the Senate, to be published; saying, That it was profitable
for the state, to have the Actions of every man, understood by all men. Yet for
my part, if the testimony of the one or the other concerning Caesar, were ^ow
extant, I would not altogether admit them to belief; no nor build confidence
on Caesar himself, when he writes, that the Pompeyans made no conscience of
Divine and human things, and le^t no Sacriligious violence unattempted,
whereas he himself without any fear of Religion or deity, sacked all the
Temples of the Gauls, and broake up the Treasury of the Holy Sanctuary, which
Pompey and his faction feared and refused to violate. But the reason that moved
Caesar to disperse these scandals on Pompey, was to make his enemy odious, that
so he might pretend a just cause of war, when to a good man no excuse can seem
reasonable to wage war against his Country.

As concerning his Commentaries, most men receive them with approved
allowance, and no marvel, when a General was forbidden by the Law Porcia to
give in to the Tribunes of the Treasury, a false report what number of enemies
he had slain. Wherein if he failed, he was to be deprived of his Generalship,
and denied his triumphall Ceremony; which rather then Caesar would give over,
he would not stick to account that lawful which made best for his purpose,
how unlawful soever. Which law, though he had not kept inviolably, yet the
fear of infamy so awed his ambition, that having many enemies, he knew they
would not have failed to indict him of falsehood, especially being resolved to
publish his books in his own life time. An instance whereof is to be seen in
Cicero his Anti-Cato, though he wrote says Tacitus) as persons accused are
accustomed to behave themselves before Judges.

This therefore that we have spoken touching the writings of Enemies, is to be
received, except in cases of corruption and transfugation. Such a one was
Froysard, who whether he sto^d m^re beholding to the English, Note the Author
(...) was a Frenchman.
or the English to him, many make question, he himself publicly acknoledging
their bounty and munificence. Such another was Aretine, who would glory that
he was well rewarded by th^se whom he praised; yea, though he did it against
his conscience: Yet thus much will I say for the (...), that it is not to be
doubted, but that he wrote truly, being either in action, or at least s^ending
the best part of his life amongst military men: the fault that I find is, for
that he altogether ^^^g^t the due deserts of his own Nation, which I think no
uncorrupted passion can do. For Polibius (accounted a most true Author) when he
came to discourse of his Countrymen, could not so moderate his p^n, b^t needs
it must break out into most bitter invectiues against Philarchus, for
extenuating the valor and fortitude of the Megalopolitans in their war
against Aristomachus. The same humor (if I be not deceived) provoked Plutarch
to write against Herodatus wherein he inu^yeth at nothing s^ sharply as at
those things which he wrote concerning the Boetians and Che^ronesians. But who
can refrain laughter that reads Sabellicus his comparisons of the Venetians
wa^res with those of the Romans? Even Donatus Gianotus, his Fellow-Cittizen
could not endure them. With this disease (if it may be termed a disease, with
an honest fallacy to maintain the reputation of our Countrymen) almost all
Historiographers are troubled. And therefore had I rather read Caesar
discoursing of the manners of the Galls, Tacitus of the Germans, Polibius of
the Romans, and Ammianus of the Frankes, for that they were strangers,
vnaduanced, uncorrupted, and were well acquainted with the Originals of those
things, whereof they presumed to write.

The next doubt that troubles my mind, is whether an Historiographer, ought to
praise, dispraise, show his opinion; Or leave all to the judgment of his
Reader. For either party I will lay down the best allega^^ons I can, and so
leave it to discretion.

History ought to be nothing but a representation of truth, and as it were a
Map of men's actions, set forth in the public view of all comers to be
examined; And therefore the predesca^ting opinion of the writer cannot but
bring much discredit to the Action, in that he presumes to prepossesse the
minds of Artists with imaginary assertions, seeming to teach those, who knew
better then himse^fe what belongs to such affairs, to the wiser sort, who
will not he deceived (for that he comes to Counsel before he be called) he
seems very suspicious.

No less guilty of another sault are many Historiographers, who in the midst
of their discourses, fall off from their intended Narrations, to play the
Orators or Rethoritians, so deluding the expectations, and confounding the
memories of their readers. Such a one was Timaeus, condemned for both; and for
his digradation from History to Satyrisme, vulgarly termed Istitimaios and
slanderer. For sithence there is nothing more difficile, then to Judge truly,
who would not be aggreeued to hear an Historiographer, having nothing to do in
Counsel or matter of state, to breath out his assertion of the chiefest
commanders in the Republicke? Or what can be more foolish then to listen to a
fellow who never saw f^^ld, reasoning of the victories and ouersights of
Generals and their Armies. Such a malepart part played he (I silence his name)
that wrote the wars between Henry and Charles the Emperor, by playing the
judge on both sides. He loded the King (or rather ouer-loded with such gross
flattery and praises, that his Majesty could not endure to hear them but
with loathing; Charles he condemned as a most wicked and Cowardly Captain,
omitting no words of reproach which his wit could imagine. Alas good man!
little considered he, that his reproaches redounded to the discredit of his
own partaking, to whom it could not be imputed a dishonor to contend with
such a Prince; more dishonorable to be by him overthrown: but most
dishonorable to contract affinity. Well, by this his oversight he lost the
credit of an Historiographer, and was by the consent of all good men condemned
for an unjust judge. No l^sse onerseene was Iouius in his rash and odious
comparisons of the lives of Selimus and Ismael the Sophi; of Charles the fifth,
Pope Paul, and diverse other great Princes.

Against these I oppose Xenophon, Thucidides, Tranquillus, Caesar, Guicciardin,
and Sleydan, who seldom, and that wisely, and upon occasions intermix their
Opinions. Truly Caesar for military discipline, being all praise-woorthie, and
a profound Artist in state-gouernement, though without reprehension he might
speak his mind in warlike Controversies, and that without imputation of
ignorance, yet when he did it, it was done with discretion and modesty. For
when some about him affirmed, that P. Scilla might have perfected his victory,
if he had pursued the troops of Pompey, Caesar made answer, That he allowed
of his proceedings: For (says he) the Office of a General and Lieutenant are
different; the one is to manage according to Commission, the other as occasions
shall importune. Again, in the battle of Pharsalia when Pompey commanded his
soldiers to standfast, and not to remove; to receive the enemy, and not to
charge: To do the like (says Caesar) I see not by any reason how it should
stand to our advantage, because Nature has infused into every man a certain
alacrity and courage of mind ready to quarrel: Thus a good General ought to
cherrish, not to pull backward. Here Caesar contended with Pompey not in arms
only, but in counsel also.

Many are the examples which may justify this policy of Caesar's, as the
victory of Epaminondas against the Lacedaemonians, and therefore what can be
more distastiue then to hear another Phormio, who never saw field, to give a
peremptory censure of such Personages, and their Fortunes; or a Schoole-man to
talk of the amendment of the Laws of Lycurgus and Solon, being the wisest
magistrates that ever bore office; which when Aristotle had done, he ran into
the dislike of many men for it; of Polibius sparingly, of Plutarch more f^eely;
how iudiciously I say not; but generally affirm, that to speak^ of things we
assuredly know not, is an argument of Leuity; Peremptori^y to judge, app^rantly
dangerou^. Viues the Schoolemaister of Charles blames Comines for the same
fault of leui^y, because he often digresseth from his History; then from the
lives and fortunes of Princes, and lastly f^lleth into discourse of an happy
life, after, the fashion of Philosophers.

This notwithstanding; Comines was a man that spent his whole time eith^r in
place of government, or in the wars, or in famous Embassies, and so did not
Viues. So that in my fancy, if any man might censure, su^ely he might. But
admit his reprehension justifiable, then would I advise an Historiograph^r to
resolve either to determine modestly, or for altogether to h^lde his peace, but
that the authority of Polibius does draw me to a contrary opinion For, the
reason wherefore he blames Philarchus, was for that he Silenced due deserts:
yea, and affirms the chiefest use of Annals to be, to inflame the good to
progression by the example of their likes, and to de^^r the wicked by d^slike
of former courses. Which reason both Tacitus and Procopius allow of, besides
that many grave Authors at end of their discourses have used the president; and
amongst the number, Agathias (a wonder to me) does compare a bare Relation, to
an old-wiues tale; but his authority does not so weigh with me, that thereby I
can be induced to consent; especially, since by the most grave censis of Cicero
Caesar who went beyond al other Historiographers in this kind of commendation,
That his history was naked, simple, and true, and without all Ornament of Art
laid open to every man's censure. Of like nature is the history of Xenophon,
which he annexed to Thucidides, wherein he interlaceth no Opinion of his own
makes no digression, neither uses any Ornaments of Oration. And to their
opinions, that suppose the praises of ve^tue, and the display of vices to be
the fruit of History, I answer, that it may more truly and properly be
handled by Philosophers (to whose element it pertains) then by
Historiographers. He disgraced Nero sufficiently, that penned his butchering of
most honest persons, His schoolemaister, his two wives, his Brother
Britannicus, and finally his mother. Al these, without further addit on of
words, Tranquillius writes purely and plainly: But Appian after he has showed
how Methridates slew his Mother, his brother, his three young sons, and so
many daughters; adds, A man bloody and merciless against al sorts of people.
He rein he no less detracted from the credit of his former discourse, then
Iouius, who for his long Oration, bitter and full of despite, against the
Tyranies of Selimus Prince of the Turks, seem^th unto me to have laid upon his
credit a pe^petuall disg^ace, for that it had b^n sufficient to have simply
related the murder of three Bassaes, of great integri^y and near alliance, two
Brethren, five Nephews, and his aged Father; and not aft^r the manner of
Orators (very imp^oper for an Historiographer) to run out into impertinent
discourses, which peradventure the Reader may conster to be false or
suspicious. And this under correction of those, who think nothing more
unprofitable, then a bare R^lation: for my part I dislike not ce^sures upon
great Potentates and their fortunes, so the censur^rs be men of judgment and
sufficiency. For discoursing of City government Dionisius Halicarnasseus,
Plutarch, Liuy, Zonaras, Dio and Appian are commended. For the Art mil^tary,
Caesar, Paterculus, Ammianus, Frossard, Hiricius, Bellay: For both, Xenophon,
Polibius, Thucidides, Tacitus, Comines, and Guicciardin: For policies and
Cour^ship, Tranquillus, Lampridius, Spartianus, Sleydan and Machiauel. For
manners of people and description of Countries, Diodorus, Mela, Strabo, Leo
Afer, Boemus Aluaresius: For religion, Philo, Iosippus, Eusebius, Theodoret,
Socrates, Sozomen, Nicephorus, Calistus, Orosius, Sidonius, Gregorius
Turonensis, Abasurspergensis, Gulielmus Bish. of Turi, Antonius Florentinus,
and the writers of the Magdeburg History.

But wisely spoke the Ancients, Ne suitor vltra crepidam, in which sense I would
not have a Polibius to discourse of Religion, Nor a Eusebius of the Art
military. Thus much in general of the duty of Historiographers, now of the
choice of the best of these: for to hope for better were madness; to wish it,
vanity. And as for those who Poetize unto themselves the Idea of an absolute
Historiograph^r: such a one as never has bin, nor ever will be, I say they
might have spent their times and studies to better purpose. For who makes
question, but that an Historiographer ought to be a man of gravity,
integrity, severity, of good intelligence, eloquent, and fully insighted into
the offices of public and private Government; I think none but fools will
fall in love with an Hi^^ory, which has nothing in it save eloquent words,
fained Orations, and merry digres^ions; verily supposing, that he that writes
but to please the care, cannot but neglect the truth, whereof Thucidides,
Plutarch and Diodorus accuse Herodotus; and yet Cicero (to me ^ wonder)
terms him the Parent of History, who^ all Antiquity accuses of falsity. And
therefore let him be as we find him, whom al Authors so universally condemn,
but not utterly reject. For besides his eloquent sale, and the sweet dialect of
the Ionique phrase, we shall find in him many remembrances of Antiquity: and to
speak freely, in his latter books diverse things most truly reported.

Therefore wit to be deceived in our choice, let those be embraced, who are by
all allowed, especially in those times wherein they lived, and were Actors in
the affairs. Of which rank in my judgment, are Thucidides, Thucidides
Salust, Xenophon, Comines, Guicciardin, Caesar, and Sleydan. Neither is it
material that the Athenians accused Thucidides, of affectionate partiality
toward the Lacedaemonians: for hereby being an Athenian and not a
Lacedemonian, they added to his credit. And besides, the man had bin employed
in diverse Imbassies and commands in the Peloponesian war; was rich, nobly
descended, had to do in all affairs of state, maintained Intelligenc^rs, and
lastly wrote of their actions, who then lived, and that in n^ free state: who
would call such an Author, or such an, History, into suspicion. Neither did
his favor toward the Lacedaemonians so drown the remembrance of his own
Countrymen, but that he gave them their due praises. And although he were by
the^ cast into banishment, when he wrote his History, yet he not only cleared
his only adversary and exile worker Pericles from public obloquy, but being
dead thought him so praiseworthy for his politic, government, that he
doubted not to prophecy, but that with his death the state would fall into a
present declination: yet Diodorus sticks not secretly to carpe at the method
of his Orations, as does Trogus Pompeius (witness Iustine) against Lyuy and
Salust: saying, That they exceeded the bounds of History, by inserting their
direct and indirect Orations. For (as Cicero says) nothing can be more
pleasing in History then simple and significant breuity.

But if we should go about to extract from Liuy al his Orations, we should
leave him but small fragments; which reason, Caligula pretended for defacing his
portraiture, and removing his writings out of all Libraries; which in truth to
me seems in some sort tolerable, for that he himself protests in his o^e
and fortifieth book, that he determined to write nothing but the Roman
History.

Salust.
Of Salust we can define nothing, because all his works are almsot lost: by
those which remain, we cann^t deny, but that he was a most sincere Author,
and deep Statist. For he took pains to travail into Affricke to be truly
informed of his Bellum Iugurthinum. And surely he wrote freely: for what
could be more freche spoken, then to c^rsine the man^fold sufficiency of the
whole Roman people then living, to consist in one only Caesar and Cato? So
Thucidides attributed to Pericles his true and most deserved commendations: So
did Sleydan his, to King Francis; to the Duke of Saxony, his; to Belay, and
Alasco, theirs, rejecting all odious comparisons. But if an Author will needs
descend into a bitter strain, then let him prove his assertions with pertinent
Arguments; for otherwise the world will grow into suspicion that he hat^
written but upon hearsay. Which course Guicciardin, Plutarch, Machiauel, and
Tacitus, have followed, whereby they have most clearelie laid open the
secre^est proiects and policies of diverse Princes. As for Sleydan he was King
Francis his interpreter, Sleydan
and often employed in Embassies by his Commonwealth^ and being a D^uine his
chief scope was to write of Religion, the controversies whereof as likewise the
Orations (direct and indirect) he included in as brief a method as possi^^y
he could: which to many men seem tedious; but to a spirit desirous to read
antiquities, and (...) of importance, nothing should be so taken. For in our
Authors (...)sard, and Carter you shall find a mass of leuitie, but withal
many (...) case to be rejected; which you shall not find in Emilius, who freely
confesses that he has witting he ouerpassed those things, which other men
have written. Of the same mold are the histories of Leo Afer, Aluarasius. M.
Gazus, which speak to all accidents, weighty, indifferent, triuiall; therewith
to satiate the itching ears of the curious. But this shall you seldom find
amongst the Greek or Latin writers, who only proposed to discourse of the
actions of war or peace, unless some memorable accident intervened; as with
Liuie, The burning of the Capitol in the sociall war; with Tacitus, That
furious fire which consumed twelve wards of the City.

As for Prodegies, not the basest, but even the most famous writers have noted
them, though flatly incredible; as Caesar himself; That in the civil war,
the statue did sweat at Traley: a man otherwise neither fearing God, nor much
regarding honesty. Herein Liuie most religiously (I had rather say
superstitiouslie) exceeded all others. For ye shall read of nothing so frequent,
as how Oxen spoke, Vines burnt, Statues sweated, Stars fell from heaven; how
God appeared to Hanniball: that a child of six months old, proclaimed a
Triumph, and such like. These writers, Polibius termed Tragoedos, and not
improperly: because they could not fetch Anniball out of Purgatory, they would
bring down the Gods on the stage by devises. But Polibius was an Atheist, and
wrote very irreverently of religion; the others are more charitably to be
censured. For it were better to be superstitious, then irreligious, and more
tolerable to adore some God, then to acknowledge no deity.

In other men's praises Liuie is also somewhat too prolix; for when he
prefers P. Sempronius before all others his Fellow-Citizens (wherein he
offreth an apparent wrong to the residue) he reports him To have all the
perfections that Nature or Fortune could possibly bestow upon Humanity. Nor
here ending, he proceeds to amplify particulers, as his descent, his
wealth, his eloquence, his complexion, his age, his Noble spirit, and
military knowledge. Next him, he eleuateth Furius Camillus to the Heavens;
Africanus higher; so that I see no man has cause to wonder, why Augustus gave
him the Epethi^e of Pompeianus, seeing he was excessive even above exc^sse in
the praises of that Man. But in reprehension he was modest and grave; as in the
contention between Marcus Liuius and C. Claudius for the censorship, wherein
the one most spightfully inveied against the other; It is an unseemly
contention (says he) where both parties depart the place with equal shipwreck
of reputation. And in another place speaking of the ancient reverence of the
Plebeians toward the Patricij: That modesty and carriage (says he) which you
shall now see in one, was in those times common to the Universal multitude.
The like modesty he uses of Caluinus Companus: What! shall I term him
wicked? No, but a Reprobate in the highest degree, who makes choice to
Tyranize, rather by his own fall, then to behold the prosperity of his country.

This Author is not only of one vain through his whole work, but ever like
himself, of an understanding capacity, grave, spare in commending, bitter in
reprehension, and like a politic Lawmakers and good Commander wrote worthily
of Military and civil government, with the Office of an Historiographer. His
histories entreat almost of al Nations which were of any reputation in his
time, or somewhat before, (viz) from the CXXIIII. Olimpiad: that is, from the
worlds Creation 3680. to the year three thousand seven hundred, sixty six,
but of forty Books which he wrote, four and thirty are lost. And as he was
an excellent Historiographer, so was he a very good Philosopher: for in the
treaty of peace with the Carthaginians, he forewarneth the Princes and
Governors of the state, to enter into special considerations, whether those
with whom they were to confederate, were compelled thereto by necessity, or
with desire of alliance. His sixth Book a^oundeth with the like observations,
wh^rein he discourses at large of the civil and military policy of the
Romans. For the Topography of countries and places none of the Ancients came
near him. The blind ignorance of times and former Historiographers, who put
many fabulous Narrations upon the Romans, he often reprehendeth: as this one
most shameful out of T: Liuius and Appian, who report, That Camillu^ defeated
the Legions of the Galls, with such an Universal slaughter, that no one was
left alive, to make report of the taking of the City.

Of the like error labored Iustine, Callimachus, and his Scholiasts, in their
untrue suggestion, That Brennus having wasted Italy, led his Army into Greece,
where it utterly perished by lightning from Heaven, for sacking the Temple of
Apollo at Delphi, whereas Polibius proves by forceable arguments, and
conclusions of necessity, That after the foresaid army had burned the City,
they traveled as far as Hellespont, where being allured by the situation of
the Country, they seated themselves about Bizantium, and overthrowing the
Thracians, possessed the Monarchy until the times of Clayaru. Which can be no
strange matter, considering that not long ago they took Bizantium with their
Captain Baldwin, and for a long time governed the Empire of the Graecians.

In our days Iouius imitated Polibius as concerning the General History of
his time, save herein is the difference, that Polibius was either an Actor or
Commander, or had the perusal of the public records: Iouius reported many
things upon hearsay, and at adventure. Polibius was trained in the military
discipline and offices of state, Iouius in neither. Polibius was a Noble man in
his Country, Iouius a Plebeian: Polibius a General, Iouius a Physician. The
one reports, that he had travailed thorough the greatest part of Europe, the
Coast of Affricke, and Asia the less, to learn the customs of those
different people. And to his own glory: That he sat in the Vatican seven and
thirty years, was of Counsel to Scipio African, and his continual associate
in war: Whereas the other, altogether kept company with Bishops: And being
asked why he coined false reports, and smothered true? he answered, For my
friends sakes: saying, That if those that be now alive will not believe me, I
am sure, those that come after, will afford me, and my favorites, expected
commendations. Gorraeus of Paris has dedicated this censure to Eternity: That
the rales of Amadis are as true and probable, as the writings of Iouius: Had he
fabled for the good of the state (which Xenophon and Plato do tolerate in
Magistrates) it had bin passable: but by lying to slatter, is unseemly for all
sorts, but most vile in an Historiographer. For as Bessarius the Cardinal when
he saw very many whose lives were questionable, canonized at Rome through
blind devotion, said; he doubted whether all were true which was related of
the ancient Saints: so fabulous Historiographers are often an occasion, that
those of desert are called into suspicion.

If he would have imitated Polibius, he should have bin mindful of his own
position set down in the Preface of his Histories: That he that swarueth from
the truth of his project, pulls out the eye of a most beautiful creature.
How well he observed this admonition, we will not make trial, by him, who
termed him an Author of Tales, neither by Sleydan, nor Brutus Venetus (who
often blame him for untruths) because the one was of a contrary religion, the
other peradventure excepted unto for imputation of Tirrany, but by Guicciardine
the Parent of History and an Author without all exception. Whose relations if
you please to compare with those of Iouius, you shall find them to agree as
square proportions do with round, especial^y in their Orations, Epistles,
Treaties, and Compositions: all which Iouius mouldeth out of his own brain,
but with such confusion of method, that even by the censure of Alciat (his only
Trumpet) the vnskilfullest soldiers have turned their tongues to Scholasticall
declamations against him. I w^ll ouerpasse the fond adhortation of Charles the
Emperor unto him, Expedire te, inquit I^ui. calames oportet etc. As also His
conference and Complaints with Iouius, which unto my apprehension seem as
true, as that Mulcasses should slay above two hundred Lions; six hundred
thousand of small Cattle to be pillaged out of the Territory of Brixium^ and
two hundred thousand of the greater sort to be driven ^ut of France, according
to his report. The like he sets down concerning the Empires of the
Persians, the Abessines, and the Turks, which whither they were true or false
he could never understand upon rumors and reports; and as for the Counsels of
Princes, their speeches, their Letters, their instructions, or public
monuments, he neue^ saw them, and yet notwithstanding he presumes to write as
con^idently, as if he had bin interessed in the ^usinesse.

Whereupon it is not to be doubted, but what he might have written truly, he
would not; as the affairs of Italy; what he would, he could not, as the
estates of foreign Princes. Nevertheless he protests that if he were
compared with any of the Writers of his own time, he could^ not but take it
unkindly. Which rash protestation (in my fancy) he broched by the president of
Arrianus, who thought himself by so much superior to any Historiographer
whatsoever, that writ the life of Alexander, by how much Alexander excelled all
other Emperors. Arrianus
Surely this Arrianus was a man learned and wise, as apeareth by his
Commentaries upon Epictetus; and moreover joined experience to his reading,
insomuch that Adrian Augustus for his singular sufficiency, preferred him to
the Consulship, having run through all other inferior offices, yea even in the
integrity of the state. I will silence his eloquence and Attique phrase, which
was so pure, that he was called a second Xenophon. Indeed if Iouius were in any
tittle to be compared to Arrian, then had he cause to take it in evil part to
be matched with others; which by his favor I mean to do it, not for that I
will affirm that those things which he wrote were untrue and barren, but that
for ever he shall carry this eare-marke of falshoode, that where ever he
writes truly, he shall be accounted but a suspected Author; yea, with this
one note, more satyricall, and of far greater indignity, That by prostituting
his Labors to sale, his lies yielded him better profit, then other men could
gain by speaking of the truth. And so I will leave him, and return to the
Ancients, whom I will compare with our Modern, and between Themselves, as the
lot falls.

The first man I meet withal is Dionisius Halicarnasseus, Dionisius
who besides his modest method of speech and his Attique dialect; wrote the
Antiquities of the Romans from the Original of their Cities foundation with
such integrity, as no Grecian or Latin has at any time done the like. For
whereas the Latins neglected things triuiall, as Sacrifices, Plays, Triumphs,
Ensigns of Magistracies, the general government of the state, Subsidies,
Auguries, Parliaments, and the difficile division of the people into wards and
Tribes; Lastly, the potencie of the Senate, the privileges of the Commons, the
Authority of Magistrates, and the power of the people, be in my judgment has
best performed them of any man living. And to make them the more easy to be
understood, he has compared the customs of the Greeks with the Laws of the
Latins, deriuing the privileges of Clyents which Romulus instituted (and
which Caesar notes to be common amongst the Gals) from the Athenians and
Thessalians; The Roman Dictator to be of equal power to the Haumoste of the
Lacedaemonians, to the Archon of the Thessalians and the Aesynmet of the
Mytilens: yea, had it not hin for this man's labors, the Laws of Romulus, Numa
and Seruius, together with the Original descent of the Romans, had bin long
since buried in forgetfulness, through the pride of the Romans, who accounted
and omitted these remembrances as base and vulgar (A fault almost common with all Authors) as if they were as well known to strangers, as to Natives.

The like diligence almost used Plutarch in his Roman Antiquities; Plutarch
what censure is to be given of him, I think every man knows. For seeing he
was the Schoole-maister of that excellent Prince Traian, an ancient Courtier,
and at last Governor of Istria, there is no question to be made, but he joined
practice and experience to his great wisdom. He wrote the History of the
two most famous people of the world, not methodically and in order, but
abruptly, and by way of Comparison. All that I admire in him is his so free
opinion in all matters, that to me he seems rather a censurer of Princes, then
an Historiographer; yet with this submission to his worth, that if any man may
be thought a fit Vmpire in business of such weight, I hold him to be Plutarch,
or no man. For what could be unknown to a man of so high a reach, so deep a
judgment? Which are very remarqueable in his most grave disputations of a
Republicke, and his profound Philosophy. The Original occasions of wars,
their openings, their progressions, overthrows, and victories, he handles
like an excellent Commander. And sometimes he discendeth to matters of meanest
moment, even of household affairs; as is that remembrance of Cato the Censor,
who of purpose set enmity between his servants, Least by their overmuch
licentiousness, they should busy their brains about proiects of far worse
consequence. The like he reme^breth of Pericles, who accustomed to sell to the
utmost advantage the revenues of his domaines, and to buy by the penny his
daily provision. Oftentimes he relates things incredible and merely
fabulous, but he uses the word Phasi, to forewarne rash belief. As in the
life of Licurgus, he writes, That a Lacedemonian Lad suffered the Rack even to
death, rather then he would reveal the theft of a Fox: And that Agesilaus was
amerced by the Ephori for populer dependancy.

That he sometimes committed an ouer-sight in the Antiquity of the Romans, for
that, being a Grecian, and not perfectly understanding the Latin tongue, (as
himself confesses in the life of Demosthenes) he is to be borne withal. As
where he writes, that in Judgments Gracchus by the Law Sempronia equalled the
Gentlemen with the Senators, when as by the same Law that prerogative was taken
from the Senate, and absolutely transferred to the Gentlemen; as Velleius,
Appian, Asconius, Tacitus and Florus testify: It is apparent that he mistook
Legem liuiam pro Sempronia, and Gracchus for Drusus. The like fault he
committed in valewing the Dram with the Roman Denarius, and the Mina with
Libra in the lives of Fabius and Anthony, which Budeus f^llowing, soon slipped
into error; As he could not choose, the quotient being false. etc.

Dio
For Dio who can make question of his excellency and sufficiency, being a man
that spent his whole time in affairs of the state, and running through all the
degrees of Office, was twice chosen Consul, and after that Proconsull; wherein
he governed the Provinces worthily, and no doubt joined experience to his great
learning. He it was, that collected the order of their Dyets, their
Magistracies, the course of their proceeding^ in law, the inauguration of their
Princes, and the policies of their state. Yet seems he to strive of purpose,
to maintain the factions of Caesar and Anthony, against Pompey and Cicero. And
those prodegies which happened in the borders of the Marconrani he attributes to
Arnulphus the Egiptian, and not to the Christians, whereat Turtullian,
Eusebius, Orosius, Iustine, Paulus Diaconus, and Marcus Aurelius himself
contested, in his letters to the Senate. Many are of opinion that Diodorus was
matcheable unto him; Diodorus
many, that he deserves precedencie; for my part I see no such reason, either
for phrase (the^ which, nothing could be penned more vulgar) or for method of
History. That whereof he means to relate, he disposes of truly, orderly and
bri^fely, in the beginning of every book: The proof whereof you may find in
his first book, wherein he divides his whole work into forty Books, and in
six, includes all the former time before the Trojan war; The eleven following
beginning at the Trojan war, end with the death of Alexander; the last four
and twenty, descend to the wars of the Gals. The which computation amounts to
about one thousand one hundred and thirty years, besides the reports before
the Trojan war, which the Ancients deemed fabulous. From whence, to the return
of the Heraclidae (according to the account of Apollodorus) he numbreth XC.
years: from thence to the first Olimpiad CCCXXVIII. from the first Olimpiad,
to the war of the Gals DCCXXX. Likewise, he only of all the Ancient, adi^ynd
unto his history the times wherein the most eminent Philosophers, Poets, and
Historiographers flourished. As in his fourteenth Book, he witness^th, that
Ctesias began his history at Ninus, Lysiades being Archon. He also collected
together six books of this Author concerning the Empire of the Assyrians, and
as many of the Persians, for the most part generally discenting from
Herodotus. Whose Authorities Plutarch, Pausanias, Athenaeus, and almost all the
Greek Authors do also follow. To us is nothing remaining but an Epitome.

Thucidides
Thucidides (he says) began his history ( Charites being Archon, Q. Furius,
and M. Papirius Consuls, (viz.) from the restoring of the Heraclidae to the
taking of Perinthus.

Theopo^pus
Theopompus began at the first year of Phillip King of Macedon, Calimedes being
Archo^, in the hundred and five Olimpiad ( C. Genutius and L. Aemilius being
Consuls. And for that which Diodorus reprehendeth in Theopomp, for the same may
another reprehend Diodore. Of eight and fifty Books (says he) since are
suspicious; So says Viues, of sorty of Diodors, we have scarce twelve
remaining, five whereof are stuffed with such idle matter, That nothing was
ever written more fabulous. And whereas he protests, to write an universal
History, he only discourses of the Greeks; and that with such prolixity
(that both forgetting his Laconique brevity, and his objection of tediousness
against Thucidides) he spends more Paper in reciting the Oration of one
Gilippus a Lacedemonian, than in the whole history of the wars managed
through Italy in three hundred years. His long digression upon the Pestilence
at Athens, and the conjectures thereof, who can endure? His exposition upon the
Lunary year is as absurd, whereby men were accounted to have lived one
thousand and two hundred years, as though even in those Ages many of the
Patriarchs did not exceed that limitation.

He avoweth, that he spent thirty years in travel, and writing his History:
which if it be true, then can I not but marvel why he wrote the affairs of
Italy, the next, adjoining Country so slenderly, considering be lived in the
times of the Romans highest prosperity (viz:) in Caesar's Dictator-ship. For if
you compare him to Lyuy or Dionisius, you shall find them varying almost in all
places, but especially in their computation of their Fasti and Olimpiads,
wherein he is most incertaine. Which peradventure might be occasioned through
his defect in the Latin tongue, apparently manifest in writing every where
Phourio^ for Furius, as if the Orthography had bin alone. And as ^o^ writing
Ancus Horatius for Marcus, Sp. Manius for Melius, Lactuca for Luctatius,
Trigemmus, for Tricostus, I could have imputed the error to the mistaking of
the Printer, were not they Persons of Consular rank, Decemvirs and Tribunes, in
the Catalogue of whom he sometimes ouer-leapeth three, sometimes four, etc.

But these mistakings are easily helped by the studious labors of Charles
Sigonius, and Onuphrius Panuinius, both worthily deserving the Epithites of
learning for their exquities searches of the Roman Antiquities.

Wherein Cornelius Tacitus has likewise played the part of ^o less commendable
an Author. Tacitus
For although he wrote the gests but of one Age, (viz:) from Tiberius to Ne^ua,
yet omitted he neither things of weightiest, indifferent, or of meanest
consequence. In his fourth book, though he protested to write neither of
battles, nor of taking of Cities, nor overthrows of A^mies, nor the
contentions between the people and the Nobility; concluding it to be a work
thought inglorious, yet profitable. And by and by after (says) we will annex
cruel edicts, daily arraignments, hippocriticall friendships, destruction of
Innocents, and the causes of these misfortunes. Yet describes he most fully,
all the wars which happened in those times, wherein he was either a Commander
or Actor. After the battle of Actium no man penned the Art of War and
pleading, in a larger method then he. For he spent the greatest part of his
time in military services, and employments of the City, and being chosen
Proconsull, he obtained the lower Germany: at which time he so perfectly and
truly set down the manners, Laws and Customs of that Nation, that at this
day the Germans do attribute their Antiquities to one only Tacitus. And to his
greater glory, that Tacitus Augustus, who f^r his excellent wisdom was
created Emperor by the Universal consent of the Lords and the Legions, derived
his descent from this our Author, and fill^d all Libraries with as many of his
works as were remaining unperished. In method of discourse he is marvelous
short, sententious, and full of wisdom: as appears for a taste by th^se few
ensuing sentences.

What could be pronounced with more breuity and more bitterness, (...) to say
of Sei^nus? That no man could stand in his good grace^ unless ^ee made his way
thereto by villainy. What of Poppea? That she put no difference between
married men and Adulterers, but there settled her fancy, where she saw most
profit arising. The Bl^ck^shnesse, the incontinenci^ and drunk^nnes of
Vitellius, he inueyeth against most bitterly; but indeed nothing could be
spoken bitter enough against such a person; who besides the manifold
imperfections of his nature persuaded the Lords to establish the Law of
incest, and Married the Uncle to his Sisters daughter. One day walking amongst
the dead bodies of slaughtered Citizens, when he saw every man to loath that
intolerable st^nch: Ob! says he, The dead enemy sauoureth sweet, but the
Citizen sweeter.

If you will have his opinion of Laws and Government, what could be more
gravely spoken, them to say^ That every great Magistrate ought to be acquainted
with somewhat that was evil, thereof to make use to the common good. Plato
differed not much from this assertion; They may as well go about to cut off all
Hydrates heads (says he) as to take away al Imperfections from Laws.

If you desire to look into the method of pleading, the Office of a Senator,
or the Antiquities, not of the Romans only, but of many other Nations, you
shall no where find so plentiful a Harvest. What should I say? Only this,
that for men of eminency, Magistrates and Judges, no Historiographer, can be
read with like profit.

And therefore it grieueth me, that some sew have censured him with
reprehension, whom I would not stand to refute, were not their Authorities of
good credit. As Alciat, who was so unadvised as to call his truly
praiseworthy History, Thorny, or ouer-growne with Briars, in that Epistle
which he wrote to Iouius.

The next are those, who cannot relish him for his hard phrase, but they are
such, who had rather be always plodding upon easy and trifling studies, then
erect their spirits to be perfect in those grave relations, which statesmen
and Princes have ante-acted, to future profit and example. As for Alciat, I see
not, why he should contemn an Author so generally allowed, and himself
notwithstanding boast of his own eloquence, unless for that Decius blotting
his name out of the Roll of the Lawyers, notwithstanding called him Ceceronian;
as Ierom writes, that he was scourged before the Tribunal of Christ, for that
he wrote like a Ciceronian, not like a Christian. Howeuer Ierom did suffer,
su^e I am Tacitus does suffer his hard censure without desert. But let this
pass for a jest, Budaeus with no less bitterness, terms him of all
writers the wickedest, because be wrote oprobriously against the Christians,
which was the reason indeed (as I think) that moved Turtullian to call him
Lier; Orosius Flatterer.

But as Marcellus answered the younger Cato, that a light woman did ever evil
in doing light, but not evil in taking her hire being once light: So Tacitus,
in that he was not a Christian, did euilly; but wrote not euilly against
Christians, being (as he was) an Heathen. I for my part should have censured
him wicked, if whatsoever Religion he adored, he had not labored to maintain
it with the overthrow of the opposite; especially when he saw the Christians
and Jews, as Sorcerers and men defamed f^r Adulteries and other heinous crimes
daily drawn to execution; what Histori^grapher could have moderated his pen?

For ignorance, if any Author may be excused, then surely may Tacitus, for
fetching Iudaeos, from Ida a Mountain in Creet, Quasi Idaeos; As well as
Nicholaus Damascenus for driving Hierosolyna quasi Ierosoula, pera for Iera
sulein. Well, if he des^rue so heavy a censure for this fault, what shall we
determine of Vlpian, who wrote seven Books De torquendis Christianis, and
those not to teach knowledge, but to devise exquisite torments.

Tra^quillus
Tranquillus must likewise undergo the very same censure, where he discourses
of the Christians, and yet has it bin his good hap for the residue of his
History to carry this report amongst the judicious, That never was any thing
better written by any Historiographer. Some men are displeased for his recital
of hase and triuiall matters; but such should remember, that amongst the
actions and speeches of Princes, nothing ought to seem light, nothing
unworthy observation, because they live in the eye of the multitude, and
according to their presidents the world will be conformable. That he took too
much pains in particular penning the incontinencies of Princes, which Tacitus
omi^ted, I will not excuse him.

But in this ouer-sight Lampridius did excel him. For he relates so many
bes^iall sorts of pleasures devised by Heliogabalus, and those in such open
terms, that he seems to have ^enned the^ rather for Imitation, then
Narration. Both of them served in the privy Counsels of Princes, but especially
Tranquillus, who was Secretary to Adrian, and deprived thereof, for being more
familiar with the Emperors wife, then the custom of Court-like modesty could
endure. The residue that wrote the lives of the succeeding Emperors, as Dio,
Spartianus, Capitolinus, Herodianus, Trebellius, Vopiscus, Entropius,
Lampridius, Volcatius, Ammianus, Pomponius Laetus, Orosius and Sextus Aurelius,
were not so highly employed in the state, as was Lampridius, which Vopiscus
does freely confess, calling him a most refined Author, and truly. For these
are his words: He was a man neither proud of his place, nor given to vice,
nor swayed by passion.

He writes, that Caligula in the beginning of his reign was as complete a
Prince, both for gifts of mind and body, as none more complete, but
afterward proved so unsatiate a licentia^ in all sorts of vices, that no
monster in Nature could be comparable unto him, So likewise he relates the
excellent first five years of Nero; and then discourses, how Claudius was of
so blockish a spirit, that even the basest at the Bar would call him Fool,
sitting upon the seat of judgment: and lastly, amplyfieth that notable
Judgment of the Emperor, before whom a woman being brought, which would not
acknowledge her own child, with Arguments enforced on both sides so strong
and doubtful, that hardly any man could tell what to determine; by commanding
the woman to marry the young man, she confessed the truth. What could have bin
more wisely decided by Solomon himself, the Master of wisdom?

The like industry for truth was not in Herodian, Herodian
though he had the means, but for that which he wrote, he is often noted of
error by Spartianus and Capitolinus.

Moreover, in Tranquillus you shall find many good instructions of the Roman
Antiquities, their ancient customs, their laws, their statutes, and such
Edicts of the Senate, as no where shall you meet with the like. The royali^es
and prerogatives of their Princes only he and Tacitus recorded.

The man whom we may match with Tranquillus, in my opinion is Velleius
Paterculus, Velleius Paterculus
who besid^s his great learning, bore Offices of Honor both in the field and
City. His sweet and elegant phrase I will not speak to, but avow his method
of breuity and perspicuity (if we had his whole works) in relating the Roman
Antiquities from utmost memory to be such, as therein second to no man he ought
to be judged. His Orations in the praises of Men of Mark, are excellent and
worthy himself, as you may read in his Encomions of Pompey, Caesar, Cicero,
which were not written as pertinent to the scope of his history, but by way of
preface to the understanding of his history.

Wherein G. Bellay vic^roy of Naples, Bellay
in a little Book of his, concerning the antiquities of the Galls has
imitated his method, and has left an excellent president for future
Historiographers to behold and follow. He wrote likewise in Latin and French
the exped^tion of Charles the fifte into Province; a workful of wit and
wisdom: as he could not otherwise do, being quick of conceit, w^ll learned,
and fully experimented in affairs of state: wherein he spent his whole time,
either employed in Counsel, in Ambassies, or in command of Armies: his vacant
hours he dedicated to the Muses. Insomuch, that amongst the French Nobility,
this glory ought only to be his; That he was the first man which gave weapons
to Learning, and Learning to weapons. But because no man shall accuse one being
his Countryma^ (for he was of Anioy) of flattery^ let him believe that Sleydan
ha^h spent much more paper in his commendation; upon whom, when he had said al
he could to his highest praise, he give this testimony; That he was not only
worthy to be called, Gallicae nobilitatis Decus. Wherefore let him march in
rank with Polibus, Thucidides, Xenophon, Caesar, and Tacitus, ^or that he
examined with an unstained pen the reasons of accide^ts, their beginnings, their
ripen^ngs, their ends; and with them their policies, their actions, their
Orations. For the Obi^ct^o^ that he wrote but little, that is not material in
choice of history, since every man may judge a Lion by his claw. Next copious
Guicciardin presents himself, Guicciardin
whom I would have said, had wrote in Imvation of the former, had they not bin
living at one time. And although he never traveled further then Italy, neither
was matchable to Bellay in military employments, yet notwithstanding by the
general verdict of many grauemen, he is adjudged to ante-cede all modern
Historiographers, if not the Ancient. For whatsoever falls within compass of
question, he it never so intricate, there shows he an admirable finenesse of
wit in discoursing upon accidents, every where interlacnig grave sentences to
good purpose: As in one place, he covertly taxes the French of improuidence,
for inuading Provinces like tempests, but keeping and maintaining them like
faint-harted Cowardes: giving them to understand, that military acquisitions
were not only unprofitable unto them, but likewise burdensome and full of
loss. A saying worthy so grave an Author, and fit to be thought upon by all
intruding Princes. In another place he glanceth at the ouer-weening conceits of
the Venetians in th^se words. The Venetians (says he) all Italy being in a
flaming fire, sat still, and without moving expected the issue of the war,
and their portion of prey, as if no man durst to have offended their Wisdoms.
But a temporizer ought to be superior in force, or else to run the same course
that the strongest does. The which reprehensions have in them no gall, no
obloquy; neither used he to praise or dispraise any man before he were dead,
and that without affection or flattery. As was manifest in Pope Leo, by whose
favors he parchased great wealth, Honor, and advancement. For he elected him
General of the Ecclesiastical forces, and chief Commander through his whole
Territories: And yet he gives him this censure, That he was a Prince endowed
with many Virtues, and as many vices. And of all writers he alone relates his
incons^ancie, in confederating first against King Francis, and after playing
the Fox with Charles the Emperor; That when by his help he had thrown the
French out of Italy, he might the easiler have dealt with the Spanish. Again,
what could be more truly spoken of Ferdinand, That colored all his insatiable
desires, with pretenses of Religion, and the common good. Another argument of
his integrity and unpassionate disposition, was his refutation of Paulus Iouius
his Oration de morbo gallico, in favor of the French: with whom he had good
cause to have bin offended, for the hard siege they gave him at Placentia,
wherein himself and his whole fortunes were engaged, had he not valiantly
defended the place. Reason it is (says he) to disburden the French of the
infamy of this disease, when as the Spanish broug^t it into Italy from the
western Islands. Such was his love, such his care, to write nothing but truth!
and therefore he either sets down nothing at adventure, or what he sets
down, he proves with reasons of necessity. For it is reported that he had
the transcripts of all Letters, Decrees, Confederacies, Treaties, and Orations;
and therefore boldly used these words. Such a one spoke in this manner: or
where he was doubtful, Such a one spoke to this or like purpose; wherein he
is altogether different from Iouius, who as he devised a great part of his
History, so coined he out of his own brain (as scholars use to do their
Schoolasticall declamations) all his Orations. A presumption most mani^es^ly
appearing by the Oration of Baylon, which Guicciardine extracted out of the
Original copy, and relates clean contrary to Iouius.

Besides, be was so diligent a searcher of Actions, persons, places, and
counsels, that he seemed to have traveled, through all the Cities, Borrough^,
Castles, and rivers of Italy, and (which is most effectual to have perused
their public Records.

What ever was reported by the vulgar, be never omitted; but noted it as he
found it; As in the battle of Maurit where the French defeated the Swizzers;
wherein he could not avouch certainly what numbers were slain, Because (says
he) some spoke upon envy, some upon savor, and others upon hearsay: many
reported XIIII. thousand, as many ten thousand: Some eight thousand, and others
but three thousand. His history of Italy contains the term of for^ie
yeare^; what was without the b^unds thereof, he touches sparingly and in
measure. The wars of the Turks and Persians, though his intelligence was much
better then Iouius, he wittingly le^ pass, least by affirming things of
doubtful certainty, he should incur suspicion; yet, that they should not
altogether he in ignorance, h^r^in inhreth them lightly, in this manner: It was
reported that Selimus invaded Syria and Egypt.

Some men note him of prolixity: but those, who either upon love or occasion,
are desirous to read affairs of state, and the vicissitude of wordlie
occurrants, let them never grow w^a^ie of that faul^; because no part of the
universal earth, presented more novelties, more alterarations, then Italy
alone did in those times. And how easy a matter it was for him to write
truly, who by the general suffragies of the Italian Nation, was endowed with
singular wisdom, learning, integrity, and experience, who knows not? For
without doubt, sithence some men wrote one thing, some another, and every one
after his own fancy, we cannot but make reckoning, that it proceeded from
divine providence, amongst such a rapsodie of penmen, to find one whose
credit soared so high, as utterly to eclipse, if not to extinguish, not
only the blind lights of vulgar fellows, but also the impostures of Iouius
and Bembus.

Bonibus
For although Benibus were a man of good place, eloquent, and long employed in
the General affairs of Italy, yet surely we must say, that he wrote many
things in favor of his Citizens otherwise then truth, or else suffer
Guicciardine to be convinced of many an untruth. Of which disputable
imputation, let this one president sway for either. After the French had
utterly broken the Venetians at Fornoue, and as the report went, had purchased
their way by the sword, Bembus concludes, that they neither ouerthr^vv, nor
were ouerthrown, but disgraceth their return into France, by the reproachful
name of a flight. Which Guicciardine more Soldier-like relates in this manner:
If it may be accounted victory, to bring our desires to their wished ends, then
surely the French were victors, because they undertook the battle to no other
end, but to bring the King in safety into France, which they performed. And
therefore, sithence they rowted their enemies, whereof some fell by the sword,
and others were drowned in the river Tarus, who would demand other tokens of
victory? In the battle of Rauenna, Bembus likewise dissembleth the truth; the
honor of which dai^s journey no man hitherto denied the French. For (says he)
of common soldiers and Horsemen, there were on both sides above eighteen
thousand slain; each party suffered like loss, but each party inioyed not
like fortune.

Wherefore in that he terms the Venetians the Bulwark of Italy, and the
Ornament of the Christian, Commonwealth, magnifying their Justice, their
faith, their greatness and power; yea, and the incredible pomp and strength
of every Venetian gally against the Turk, together with the Religion, modesty,
and piety of every private Citizen, I say, I can affirm nothing more true,
then that he plaide the part of a good Citizen, and not of a good
Historiographer. That every where he tannteth the French, for their
inconstancy and breach of oath with the Venetians and Alfonsus Auila, that
humor more discommendeth himself, then his enemy. For, if it be infamous by
the Law of arms, for a soldier to revile an adverse Nation, how much more
disgraceful is this humor in an Historiographer, especially if in that,
whereof he accuses another, he himselse be guilty. As without doubt, they were
of that accusation, which Guicciardin lays upon the Venetians for breach of
the league. Whom he accuses not with suspicions of double dealing, but flatly
affirms, That they received into their City Avila, even then Triumphing
over the French, and their sworn enemy. And that more is, did what they could
to include him in the league, the King of France being most unwilling thereto.
That therefore which he writes Oratour-like of the unfaithfulness of the
French, may go as current as his relation, That during the Venetian war in
Apulia, such Armies of Crows and Vultures combated in the Air, that twelve
Carts were numbered to be laden with their dead bodies. Of which report Bembus
speaks not doubtfully, but with much confidence.

By his own Testimony^ he was threescore years old, when he b^gan to writ his
History, at which age, he could hard'y endure to take that pa^ne^, which we
do exp^ct man Historiographer. His own words are: I am weary to set down the
matters of smallest moment in that war. And again, Who can endure to read
all without tediousness? Th^se are merely the phrases of Ora^ors, as was also
the Oration of Lauredan against Mimus ^^uouring of the same affectation;
wherein he stood so precisely upon the purity of a wo^d, that fi^ were not
true Grammar, he would refuse it, were it never so significant. The Emperor of
Turks he would style King of Thrace, being scarcely the twentieth part of his
Kingdom: and the Duke of Millaine, King: If he did it for phrase sake^ in my
Opinion he did worse for se^c^ sake.

But Procopius was far unlike Bembus: Procopius
for it should seem, that he neither neglected, or understood not the method
of History, nor the elegancie of the Greek tongue, but related the bare
accident with diligent observation of things of small moment. And for that he
always accompanied Bellisarius in Action, was of his Counsel, employed in
diverse Embassies, and indifferent well learned, I make no doubt to rank him
with the best. And again, I could not but allow him the credit of a most true
Author, because he sets down the Letters, the Counsels, the leagues, and
Orations in diverse and different style of speeches (infallable arguments of
true relations) but that he remembers his Bellisarius somewhat more often,
then modesty may warrant, and that many times very foolishly.

And yet no where so foolish, as where he excuses the murder of Constantianus,
master of the Horse to Justinian the Emperor, procured by Bellisarius, and
would have the world believe, That the destinies and not his Master had
decreed, that Constantianus should die in that manner, His conjectures of the
thirty Hogs and the Statue of Theodorus, I reckon as childish; As also his
dimension of Thule to be twice as great as Britain, being indeed not so, by
half. But his report, that Vesuvius, situated on this side Naples, should
disgorge ashes, which with the wind were carried as far as Bizantium, passes
all belief, being prodigies altogether sauouring of Grecian leuity, wherein
the Heathen Historiographers, are not only to be taxed, but likewise, the
Ecclesiastical.

Nicephorus
Nicephorus Calistus is stuffed with like Fables, and Zonoras, otherwise an
allowable Author, with Nicephorus Gregoras, are of the same strain, and now
and then Eusebus Caesariensis: As where with eagerness of protestation, he
affirms that he saw, a plant grow of his own accord at the base of a pillar.
Whereupon a brazen Statue of Christmas erected, and by the woman cured of her
issue of blood dedicated to our SAVIOVR three hundred years before. Which as
soon as by growth it had touched the extremest hem of the Statues engraven
garment, it proved to cure al manner of diseases.

The like estimate ought to be had of the works of Antoninus, Adonis, Saxo
Gra^maticus, Sigisbert, Phriculphus, Nauclerus, Marianus, Merlin, Vrspergensis,
Annonius, Turpin, Guaguin, and such like old Annals; which notwithstanding we
cannot utterly want, and of these too, some are better then other. For although
Gregory Turenensis, Antonius Florentine, Gulielmus Bishop of Tire, and Abbas
Vrspenge^sis, relate many prodigious miracles, yet amongst them shall you find
very profitable and good observations, especially for those times, which as a
man may say, were over whelmed with Barbarism. For they were men long and much
employed in affairs of state and public Counsels; And therefore it may well
beseem us amongst their Garbish, to cut out their best annotations, as men do
Gold out of Rocks and Rubbish; especially where better are not to be had.

As, for the History of the Tartars, if you will not credit Paulus Venetus and
Hayton, then must you al most believe no man. P. Venetus Haiton
And that which they wrote, is but little, and full of Fables; but of the two,
Hayton is the truer. P. Venetus writes, that the Caspian Sea is always
without Fish, except on fasting days: that Quinzay contains in circuit
seauenty miles, and has twelve thousand bridges, under which, For their
concauitie, Ships under sail may pass, and repasse. The Acts, Customs,
Laws, and Religion of the Tartars you must understand where you can.

The state of Aethiopia F. Aluarus has written with better integrity and more
wariness, being since confirmed by Strangers, F: Aluarus
good Authors, and late Travelers, and with great delight to be perused.

The late Histories of the Goths, Saxons, Neruians, Sarmatians or Polonians
and Danes, Ze^glerus, Cromerus, Crantzius and Olaus have published; al except
Olaus very probable Authors, who now and then tells wouders: whereof many,
by the Testimony of Authors and good witnesses may induce persuasion; as the
metamorphosing of men into Wolves, once set down by the Authority of
Herodotus, Pomponius Mela, and the Ancients, and now again verified by the
Modern. Which Gaspar Pencer, a man of great Learning, well advised, and one
that had traveled through most parts of Europe, did signify unto me, that
he heard it credibly reported by the Inhabitants to be true. Which whether
it be a secret of Nature, as is storied of Parrhasius, or an influence of
Divine punnishment, as it is recorded of Nabuchadnezar, I cannot yet resolve.

Leo Afer
After Aluaresius follows Leo Afer, and for similitude of subject, I will
compare him to Pomponius, Strabo, and Pausanias, whom I will hence-forward
term Geographistorici, for their Geographicall method of History. Strabo
lightly touches the kingdoms and Commonweales of the whole world, Pausanias
only the Provinces of Greece, but so exactly describes their greatness,
their declinings, the inhabitants, the Cities, Castles, Rivers, Hills,
Springs, Temples, and statues, that by all men's opinions in that kind, be
challenges precedence. So Leo Afer, by birth a Moor, by habitation a Spaniard,
first a Mahumetan and afterward a Christian, after he had Travailed almost the
better part of Affricke, Asia the less, and a good portion of Europe, was
taken Prisoner by Pirates, and presented to Pope Leo. During the term of which
captivity, be translated into the Italian tongue these remembrances, which with
infinite toil, he had gathered in the Arabian language concerning Africa,
the customs, laws, and diverse people thereof, with the situation and
description of the whole Region. The art military he seldom touches, but the
overthrows of their Kings, given and taken, he briesely relates, without
Orations or ornament of style, Geographically, not Historically, and yet with
pleasing delight of novelty, he co^fineth his unwilling Reader to studious
perseverance. He thrusts upon us no great impossibilities, unless it be the
admirable docility of the Egiptian Ass, of which himself was an eyewitness.
Likewise, that the tails of certain Sheep of Egypt, should weigh some
fifty pound, some one hundred and twenty pound: It is the report also of
Bellonius, Hieronimus, and Cardanus. At a word, be only of all men has
discovered that Nation, which lay buried in ignorance and Barbarism a thousand
years before his time.

Next after him approaches F. Leandrus and S. Munster; the former described
Italy, the other all Germany as lively to view, as if it were in Maps or
Tables, adjoining thereto the History of the various fashions and manners of the
people. But Munster had done well, if he had turned his Cosmographiam into
Germanographiam, being indeed nothing else to speak on, save a particular
description of Germany and Heluetia, their scituations, people, and descent.

But as our Geographistorici mingled Topography with story: Xenophon
so our Philosophistorici beutified their Narrations of Action with precepts of
wisdom. In which kind, great is the praise of Xenophon, yea, the greater, in
that he had no president to imitate (as Velleius witnesses of Homer) nor none
that shall be able to imitate him. Nearest approaches Plutarch, then Laertius,
and thirdly Philo Iudaeus, between whom and Plato the Ancients in my judgment
gave a most true censure.

Equal unto these is Iosippus; Iosippus
or if inferior in secrets of Philosophy, far superior in the searches of
Antiquity. At which Ierom does wonder, that such exquisit knowledge of the
Grecian discents, should be ^ound in a man of the Irish Nation. But the reason
thereof is apparent in his Books against Appion the Grammarian, wherein he so
verisieth the writings of Moses (though sufficient-full of credit themselves)
by the authorities of the Graecians, the Persians, the Egiptians and Caldaeans,
that nothing can be read with more profit, by those who are desirous to studio
Antiquities. The Ages of the old world related by Moses, he confirmed by the
Testimonies of twelve Historiographers, t^ take away all scandal of
incredulity. The Auncestry, says, Religion, learning and integrity of his
Contrymen, He not only prefers before all Nations, thereby to revive the
ecclipsed honor thereof, but also does his utmost to redeem from oblivion and
opposition, things of undoubted verity. For by his writings, the Fables of
Herodotus, Diodorus, and Iustine, are easily to be refuted.

After him, Hegesippus a Jew, Hegesippus
wrote fine Books of the Jewish wars, which Ambrose by report turned into
Latin. But Iosippus wrote better and truer, because he was both in Action and
command, and being prisoner to Vespahtian and Titus: Notwithstanding by their
favors purchased the freedom of the Cit^ie, and the Honor of a Statue. For
in him were invested these good parts of an Historiographer, which we have
mentioned before, (viz:) great learning, unpassionate integrity, and experience
of affairs. His integrity is apparent in this; That being a Jew, he gave
notwithstanding a grave, ve^e^ent, and La^dible Testimony of Christ; whereas
our Ecclesiastical writers discoursing upon the adversaries of our Religion,
are so far transported with Envy, that they not only conceal their
deserved commendations, but also disgrace them with most opprobrius and
indecent railings. Whereof, let Julian the Apostata be the plaintiff, who though
he were worthy both of blame and punishment, yet for th^se things which be
performed with good commendation and honor, he ought not to be silenced by an
Historiographer: Ammianus
wherein our writers have generally faulted: And certes, should rather have
imitated Ammianus Marcellinus his method and ardent desire of delivering in
Vtramque partem. nothing but truth: who after he had committed the neuer-dying
virtues of Princes to memory, then proceeded to display their vices, as every
good Author ought to do. And the accusations which he laid upon Julian, were,
that he mingled old Heathnish superstitions with the unspotted and simple (for
those be his words) religion of the Christians: that he bereft them of all
helps of learning, and cruely commanded the Countes Palatines of Constantius to
be murdered. These were his vices; His excellent virtues, as his temperance, his
fortitude, his continency, his favor to wisdom, and his Justice above
opinion, he proves by action and witness. As in this one example for many.
When Delphidius Gallus (a most sharp Orator) ^ad accused Numerius President of
Narbon in France, then lying at Paris, and was urged to bring forth his proofs
and witnesses: Most mighty Caesar (says he) what man will ever be found
guilty, if his bare denial be sufficient to clear him? To whom Caesar
answered, And what man shall ever depart innocent, if one man's accusation
should suffice to condemn him?

This Ammianus was a Grecian, a Knight, and a follower of Vrsicinus, master
of the horse in all the wars almost, which in those times were managed by the
Romans in Europ, or Asia. His works remain whole, and digested into eighteen
Books, beginning at the thirtieth year of the Emperor Constantius, and ending
with Valeus. The other thirteen are easy to be added out of other men's
writings. He had begun at Nerua where Tacitus ended, and whom of all men he
resolved to observe and imitate. Only herein is the difference, that Tacitus
(according to the times) had a special regard of the Roman el^gance, but
Ammianus used Italian phrases and som^^imes neither Latin nor Roman, but
plain Greek. He much and often digresseth from the maine history, a disease
whereunto even the greatest Authors are much inclined; and whereof Possidonius
does grievously complain against Cicero. But Ammianus regarding the matter
more then the phrase, salueth that Octiection against himself in this manner.
In that (says he) the text seems tedious, it profits our understanding to
the full: for whosoever affects overmuch breuity, where things of doubtful
knowledge are related, seeks after ease, but ripeneth not his judgment.

Wherefore amongst such diverse and different variety of Authors, it is most
necessary, for every man to make a true and advised choice of that learning
whereunto his study stands most adicted, least in this small and short
leisure of life, he seem not to have read much, and yet in points of amb^guity
cannot determine with himsel^e upon what to resolve.

As if he be thoroughly persuaded of Polidor for the affairs of England,
(although he be suspicious to the Scots and French) of Rhenanus for the
History of Germany, and Aemilius for the state of France, then shall he need
to take no great pains in Beda, Guagun, Gacus, Saxo, and such l^ke, who
handled the said Histories without method or order: and no marvel; for as those
Times afforded great plenty of writers, so their credits and reputations
quickly vanished. Plutarch reckons up three hundred that wrote the battle
of Marathon: And of thirty that committed to print the affairs of Italy, one
only man's credit and good method, have quite put the residue to the horn.

In these times the world swarmeth with such as commit to writing things of
base and vulgar Argument, whereas in times of greatest antiquity we had almost
none. And therefore because it were a labor infinite, to peruse every man's
papers, let the Judicious Reader, out of many, make choice of the better, by
the assistance of these directions, (or by better of his own, if he can) which
we have here before described.

Thus much for choice of History, which I avow not so positiuely to have
published, but that therein I am content to leave every man to his free election.

FINIS.
THE CONSPIRACY of Cateline,
written by C. Crispus Salustius.
The Proeme.
CHAP. 1.
BY how much Nature has created Man the worthiest of all living Creatures, by
so much, the rather ought Pli. Omni homini id faciendum est, quo se aliqua^do
vixi^^e testetur
he by Virtuous exercises to Dedicate to eternity, some Record of his
proficiency, and not to die in Scilence or Oblivion, like the Beasts of the
field, whom God has fashioned only of a Servile condition, Paululum admodum
sentiens praeterita, aut futura.
fit for no project, but to feed the belly. Our sufficiency consists as well
of a Soul, as of a Body; yea, more bountifully assisted by the Essence of the
One, then any way advanced by the faculties of the Other. For of the First, we
participate with the Gods; The Second, we enjoy in no fuller a measure, then
every other Base Creature. Whereupon ^ dare be bold to affirm, that it is
more commendable to Labor in quest of glory by Sen. In omnia pr^mittendus est
animus, cogitandumque, non quid sole^, sed quicquid potest sier^.
Learning and good Arts, (considering the shortness of our days bound, as I
said, to leave somewhat behind us to the eternizing of our remembrance) then
to purchase Fame by the dependancies of Valor and Fortitude. For Riches and
Strength of Body are fleeting and determinable: Virtue is only permanent, and
out-liueth Time.

But it has been much questioned amongst diverse sorts of men, whether Alterum
indiget auxilio alterius, corpus auxilio animi, and animus auxilio corporis.
strength or Policy, in the Art Military, has best balanced the affairs: The
conclusion whereof has bin, that Before Resolution, it is the wisest course to
advise slowly, but after mature advice, to proceed roundly. Whereby it should
seem, that the one, without the assistance of the other, can afford no true
safety. And therefore in Ancient time, Vt Trismegistus and Ptolomeus.
the Kings (for that was the first attribute of Honor in this world) did
some, take delight in the contemplation of Wisdom, and the Virtues of the
mind; others in exercises of Actiuity and strength of body. For as yet the
Vnde aurea secula feruntur sub Saturno fuisse.
Ambitious desire of Sovereignty, had not inthralled men's minds to Couetize:
every one passed his time with content of his private fortunes.

But after that Cyrus in Asia, and the Lacedaemonians with the Athenians in
Greece, began to force Cities, and to subdue Nations, then the love of
Sovereignty became a just Title for War and invasion, and the largest Empire
was enrolled for the most Honorable conquest. Even then, by dangers and
occurrances, experience gave proof, that Policy bore no small sway in Martial
exploits.

But if the carriages of Kings and Princes bore like moderation in times of
peace, as they afford in Tempests of War, surely the estates of Kingdoms,
and the affairs of this world would longer flourish, and be better governed.
And then should we neither behold Vsurpatio^s, nor mixture of Nations, nor
confusion of Languages: for it is doubtless true, that Kingdoms are safest
maintained by those means, by which they were at first acquired. But where as
Sloth is entertained instead of Labor; Lust, in lieu of Chastity, Hinc Cat^n^m
(a^^nt) cen^uisse de Carthagine non de^enda, vt inde inuentus Romana teneretur
in militia. Iuven. Nunc patimur longae pacis mala: saeuior armis Luxuria
incubuit.
and Pride makes scorn of Aequity, there of necessity must our hard Fortunes
participate of our manners and behauiours. And so it commonly falls out, that
all Empires at first (in themselves Valiant and virtuous) have degenerated and
declined. For let men assure themselves, that Whether they employ their Times
in Husbandry, Traffic, or gorgeous Buildinges, Perpetuity consists in
Plaut. Omnia assunt bona, quem penes est virtus.
Virtue. For as concerning those part^s of men, whose mind is their belly;
their delight, sleep; their body (against common sense) their Coyance; their
Nobler part, agreeuance; utterly unlearned, and worse nurtured, spending their
days as Idiots, and Qui transeunt non transigunt.
Strangers; of these, I say, I put no distinction between their living souls,
and their dead Carkases, for that Inglorij sunt and vin^ and mortui.
with their bodies their remembrance is buried. But the man that either
spends his time in public Office, in atchieuement of Honor, or advancement
of his name by the invention of some good and profitable Art, him will I
affirm truly to live, and essentially to participate of a reasonable soul.

But in this mixture and universe of humors, Nature has laid out to diverse
men, diversity of courses: as to meditate the prosperity and welfare of the
state, is exceeding commendable; no less praiseworthy is it, to speak well,
and to plead iudiciously; and to inuest posterity with the Titles of Honor in
merit of our good carriages, either in Peace or War, is no less allowable:
neither they that have been Actors, nor they that have been the Registers of
others honorable actions, are to be denied or defrauded of their Laurel
Girlands.

And in my Judgment, although the like commendation were to be bestowed upon
the Historiographer, as may seem deserved due to the Actor, yet thus much dare
I affirm, that it is a most difficult task, by writing to represent the Actions
of great Personages. First, for that words and style ought to equalize their
deeds. Secondly, for that many men are of opinion, that the reprehension of
faults proceeds from Spleen or Envy; whereas in recital of the Virtues and
generous passages of good men, every one according to his slender capacity,
opinionating the facility of performance, gives the belief, but what is more,
or goes beyond his incredulous understanding, he reputeth false, and therefore
fabulous.

Now I being a young man amongst others, was taken from my Book, and thrust
into the world, wherein I found many things were opposite to my disposition.
For, instead of modesty, abstinence, and frugall Liberality, I found all places
accustomed Vbi prisci Romani abstinebant a gradu altiore, quam digni
videbantur, nunc per largitionem omnia inuadebant.
to Impudence, Bribery, and Avarice. Which although my very soul did loath, as
a Virgin undefiled with these contagious abuses, yet by reason of my tender
years (as it could not otherwise fall out) in the very context of so many
fretting and enticing frailties, I could not escape the humor of Ambition. For
being spotless in all other Vanities, the same desire of preferment which had
atached others with boldness and ambition, Dociles imitandis turpibus et praui^
omnes sumus.
seized also upon me, and therefore as soon as I had quit my mind from cares
and dangers, and thereupon had resolved to spend my future days far from the
employments of the state, yet at last I resolved with my self that it was but a
base conceit, either to trifle out my times of leisure, in Vno modo otiosus
dicitur, qui penitus cessat, alio modo, qui in publico munere non est licet in
re priuata multum laboret.
Sloth and Clownish Ignorance; or to wear out the better powers of my body in
toylesome Husbandry, in disports of hunting, or any such servile pleasures.

Whereupon retyring my self to my Book, from whence idle ambition had once
almost withdrawn me, I have resolutely set me down, briefly to relate the
glorious actions of the Roman people, and that with the greater courage,
because my pen is free from hope, from fear, or any other the partialities of
the commonwealth. My subject shall be, The Conspiracy of Cateline, wherein, I
vow all possible Breuity. My reasons are, the Memory of the Action, the
Greatness of the Danger, the Foulness of the Fact, and the Strangeness of
the Plot. And first I will begin with the manners and disposition of the Agent.

CHAP. 2.
1. The Lineage, Life, and Conditions of Cateline. His Motives to engagement.

THis L. Cateline was descended of Honorable Parentage, a man of an able body,
and no less adorned with Gentleman-like qualities, but of an evil and froward
disposition. From his youth addicted to civil dissentions, to Quarrelling, to
Cheting and discord: these were merely the humors of his youth. His body
could well invre it self to undergo Want, Watching, and cold, more then
humane. Bold of Spirit, Subtle, Waywarde, a deep dissembler, greedy of another
man's Thrift, Prodigal of his own: Talkatiue enough, void of wisdom, of an
high mind, accompanied with desires vnfatigable, incredible, too too ambitious.

After the Tyranny of Silla recuperata Rep. Et oppressis Marianis, pulchermam
victoria^ crudelitate maxima inquinauit. Octo millia deditorum in via publica
trucidauit, tabulam proscriptionis posuit, vrbem and tota^ Italiam caedibus
repleuit.
Silla, his proud mind could take no rest, for Meditating, how he likewise
might usurp upon on the state; neither cared he how, or by what means he had
it, so he were sole-Lord in possession. His haughty spirit was every day more
trobled then other: his Poverty and guilty Conscience, did daily solicit
progression, and both these, were seconded by those his inclinations, whereof
we first related. Besides, the depraved and corrupted manners of the state did
animate his Nature, on which Riot, and Avarice, two the worst and most opposite
vices, did continually hammer.

And now (sithence we are fallen into Relation of the corruption of the state)
the course of the History does call upon me, somewhat to remember the times of
Antiquity and in few words to relate, how our Ancestors managed the state in
Peace and in War, De e^ins immensitate sic Liuius. Quae ab exigui^ profecta
imitijs, eo creuerit. vt ^am magnitudin^ laboret sua.
how glorious they bequeathed it, how in process of time it drooped, and of a
most fair, good, and beautiful Empire, it degenerated unto a most base, most
vile, and most ignominious Tyranie.

CHAP. 3.
The Original and declination of the Roman Empire. The commendation of those
Ancestors, who erected and enlarged it. A taxation of the present times.

THe first inhabitants and builders of the City of Rome ( Varia and incerta d^
ciuitatum conditoribus est opinio.
by report) were the Troains, who under the conduct of Aeneas, wandered as
fugitives about the world, in no place claiming any true propriety of
inhabitation. With them descended the Aborigines, Saluages, living without
Law, without Government, Free, and Resolute. But after they had incircled
themselves within the compass of a Wall, it were almost an incredible relation
to report, how lovingly they agreed, considring their difference in descent,
their diversity in Dialect, and contrariety of fashions. Yet after, their
estate grew respective by increase of Inhabitants, by Ciuility and augmentation
of Territory (a common accident in worldly affairs) factions and discontents
arose from superfluity. The Princes and the bordering nations invaded them, few
friends were found to assist them: in respect of the danger they were content
to Temporize. But the Romans provident in peace, and valourous in War,
neglected no Opportunity, prepared armor, encouraged one another, carried the
war into the enemies Country, reposed their liberty, the safety of their
Country, and the welfare of their Parents, in the valor of their arms: Yea,
after they had diuerted the Terror of war by their valiancy, they assisted
their alies and companions in arms, multiplying their leagues and
associations, rather by giving, then receiving of gratuities. Such power has
Lawful acquisition to add greatness unto Emperie.

To those, who by reason of their years, were unserviceable in body, yet very
sufficient for advice and counsel, were committed the cares of the City and
civil affairs; and these, in respect of their age, or simpathy of their
charges, were termed Fathers.

But after, that sole-Soueraignty (which at first was ordained for protection
of Liberty, and augmentation of Territory) degenerated into Pride, and
haereditary Titles: by change of that custom, they transferred the Government
of one, to the annual Election of two Consuls. By this form of limited
policy, they verily believed that they had utterly suppressed the minds of
mankind, from dreaming upon the imaginary humors of licentious Sovereignty.
But then, more then before, began every man to estimate his own worth, and to
hammer his head on high disseigns. For absolute Princes are always more
jealous of the good, then of the badde, because another man's Virtue (as they
take it) is a diminution of their respectiuenesse, and therefore dangerous.

But it is incredible to report, in how short a time, the City, having
obtained this form of Liberty in Government, increased and prospered; so
infinite a desire of glory, had possessed the minds of al sorts. For now the
youth, by years enabled to the Travels of Warfare, and by use invred,
accounted it no labor to learn to manage their weapons in the open field,
with a diversity of their delights, from Whores and Ordinaries, to gallant
Furnitures of service, and riding of warlike Horses. To such courages, no labor
was unwelcome, no place inaccessable, or vnassaultable; no nor the armed enemy,
dreadful or unmatchable. Valor was resolute, and at all times victorious Their
emulation was glorious: Every man's strife was, who should first attach the
enemy; give the Scalado: every one thrust forward, to effect such and such a
piece of service, in the eye of his General: These exploits they accounted
Riches, Reputation, and true Nobility. The eulogies and Reports of the people
best fitted their humors; of their Purses they were liberal; desirous of glory
above measure; content with competency.

Were it not that I should weary your ears too injuriously with this tedious
digression, I could point you out, in what places, even with Vt in Armenia, vbi
Lucullus Tigranem fudi^, and filium eius captivum in trium^hum duxit.
a handful of men, the Roman people roured huge battallions of their enemies,
and forced Vt Carthagine^ nouam, et Numantia^ in Hispania.
Cities, by Nature impregnable. But surely Vir. Incestans, fragilis, persida,
lubrica.
Fortune, blind Fortune, will have praedominancy in all our affayrs. In all
actions she it is, that aduanceth and debaseth all our proiects, more like a
Tyranness (according to will) then a Goddess relying upon merit.

The fortunes of the Athenians in my Judgment, were very honorable and
illustrious; yet sure, somewhat inferior to report: but by reason of the Inter
quos praecipua Thucidydes.
excellent Wits, which thence descended, their acts were famoused through the
whole world, to the utmost of commendation: yea, so far forth was the virtue
of the Actor, strained to reputation, as possibly those excellent wits could
deliniate it by writing. But with the Romans it fared far otherwise; for
never had they the good hap of such diversity of penmen, because the wisest and
most sufficientest spirits, were most employed in the affairs of the state.
The sufficiency of the wise man, was no privilege to exempt him from the
emploiment of his body; Every one of the better sort delighted to do, and not
to say, desiring rather to hear his own praises recorded from the mouth of a
stranger, then himself Minstrel-like, to be the Chaunter of another man's glory.

Liuius. Nulla vnquam resp. nec mayor, nec sanctior: nec in quam tam sero
auaritia, Luxuriaque immigrauerant: nec vbi tantus ac tam diu pauper^ati ac
parsimoniae honos fuerit.
Whereupon it came to pass, that Law and discipline were strictly reverenced
both in City and Camp. Their concord and unity were admirable, their
Covetousness scarce perceiuable. Aequity they embraced more for love, then for
fear of punishment: as for their Brawls, Ielousies, and Discontents, them they
wreaked upon their enemies. Their mutual contentions were one with another, in
quest of Virtue; their sacrifices Prince-like, their home-fare Parsimonious; in
friendship constant. Thus by Courage in War, and Justice in Peace, they
advanced and augmented themselves and their stare. Whereof these two Political
experiments do fully assure me; the first for that in War they more severely
punished those that fought properously with the enemy, either against, or
without, the command of the General, or retired from the pursuit more slowly,
then they ought; then those, who either forsook their colors, or being beaten
from their Stations, durst adventure to fly. Secondly, in Peace, they wrought
more by courtesy then fear, rather winking at wrongs, then willing to revenge.
Arts quibus imperium paratur, sunt prudentia, consilium, attentio,
Temperantia, continentia, abstine^tia, parsimonia, fortitudo, labor, vigilia,
industria, iustitia, fides, liberalitas, religio.
Thus by valor and Justice the state flourished: mighty Kings were by War
subdued; the barbarous Nations, and many potent Co^monweales by force
dispoiled; yea, Carthage, the Corriuall of the Roman Empire utterly ruinated:
All Seas were freed of Pirates, all Lands cleared of Enemies.

Now began Fortune to frown, to bring in confusion, to raise up innovation. To
those courageous spirits, which but yesterday made light of labor, of dangers,
and of difficult adventures, disvse of arms, and purchase of riches, (the
delights of foreign Nations) are now become Gives to inthrall their valors, and
the cause of all ensuing miseries: Where after followed the immoderate scraping
of money, with the ambitious desire of superiority. To speak truly, these
were the fatal bellows to kindle the fire of our future misfortunes. For
avarice, first taught us to violate our faiths, to scorn honesty, and all
other just proceedings, inuesting us in lieu thereof, with Pride, Cruelty,
Irreligion, and unconscionable sales of every thing vendible. Ambition withal,
made us false and brazen-faced, to retain one sense in our minds, and utter
another with our tongues: to estimate friendship and hatred, not by true merit,
but by profit: and finally to fashion our faces to the world, and our
consciences to hell. These abuses and impostures grew up by Iuven. Nemo repent
fuit turpis^imus.
leisure, and were sometimes punished.

But after that the contagion grew strong and violent, the state was presently
changed: and that form of Government, which whilom was most just and
excellent, became most cruel and intolerable. At first ambition, the nearest
counterfeit of virtue, raged more then Avarice. For as well the worthy, as the
unworthy, did strive to purchase Glory, preferment, and offices. But the one,
paced the right path, the other by reason of his insufficiency, practiced by
cunning and indirect bribery.

Avarice is an immoderate desire of riches, which never any wise man hunted
after: being so incorporated with unseen poisons, that it corrupts the body,
and alters the mind^ The love whereof is boundless, and insatiable, neither
assuaged with surplusage, nor diminished by want.

But after that L. Silla by arms had freed the state, by the defeature of
Marius; from these good and prosperous beginnings, proceeded disastrous
conclusions. For Appia: scribit illum 40. Senatores, equites mill et sexcentos
ad mortem condemnasse.
he, to make the army, suffered his followers to spoil, to rob, to defeat one
of his house, another of his possessions: the victors sword knew no mean, no
modesty: Prius 80. proscripsit: vno interiecto die ducentos and viginti alios
adiecit: tertio, non pauciores adi^ixit: dixitque se de nouo proscripturum eos
quorum tunc esset oblitus.
abominable and cruel, were the executions which they inflicted upon their
fellow Citizens. Unto these abuses the army which Silla himself led into
Asia, gave no small furtherance. For he, to assure the dependancies of his men
of War, contrary to the custom of his predecessors, behaved himself too
popularly and riotously, amongst them. Their pleasant incampings, and
voluptuous towns of Garrison, had ouer-wrought their fierce courages with
idleness. In this place, was the first overthrow of the Roman armies; for
here, they learned to Wench, to drink healths, and to grow into fancying of
Scutchions, Pictures, and inchased vtensils: yea, and to purloine publicly and
privately, to Pillage Temples, and to put no conscience between sacred and
profane Robberies. These were the soldiers, which after their purchase of
victory, pillaged their fellow Citizens and Countrymen with all extremities.
Certainly, prosperity blinds the Judgment of the wise; who then would
expect, that these men, being most dissolutely disciplined, could use their
victory with moderation?

Iuve. Qvandoquidem inter nos sanctissima diuitiarum, etc.
After that the Rich man was reputed for honorable, and that Worship,
Superiority, and Attendance, depended upon wealth, then began virtue to play
bankcrupt; Poverty to be disgraceful, and free Language to be accounted
malicious frowardness. Whereby it came to pass, that youth by superfluity,
grew Luxurious, proud, and yet penurious; given to Extortion, yet prodigal: Of
their own estates unthrifty, of another man's extreme covetous; of modesty and
civil behavior, exceeding neglectiue: in divine and human offices,
indifferent: in discretion and moderation, careless.

In compare of these times, wonder it were to behold our ancient edifices and
Villages, builte in fashion of Cities, with the magnificence of those Temples,
which our most religious ancestors erected: Truly, Per se, aut per stemmata
maioru^.
they adorned Religious habitations with devotion: their private Mansions with
fame: neither bereft they the conquered Enemy of any thing, save his apparent
Viz: arma, naues, equos. Interdu^ maeni^ diruebant Tributaria facta est
Carthago, prius quam deleta.
means of rebellion. On the contrary, these wretches, the basest of men,
ransacked their companions, and that most shamelessely, of all those their
necessaries, which (the other) most worthy victors, even spared to their
enemies; accounting it a disparagement to valor, and a point of heinous injury,
to do all that, that the conqueror might do.

But to what purpose, should I talk of those abuses, which no man will
believe, except he were an Eyewitness: either of mountains leuelled, or Vt
fecerat Lucullus Neapoli. vnde Flor. Contracta pisces equora sentiu^t, iactis
altum molibus.
seas made firm foundations, by the abilities of private purses? Wherein, if I
might sit judge, I could not but laugh at their follies, for that every one
made more have then other, indiscreetly to lavish that out, which honestly to
make use of, was good and lawful.

Moreover, the love of Women, of Gaming, and curiosity, had made no less a
breach into their vicious humors: the men behaved themselves like women, and
women Casta fuit, qua^ nemo rogauit.
made open prostitution of their reputation. Their travels, by Sea and by Land,
were only to see, not to observe: giving themselves to sleep, before Nature
refected it: and to satisfy their appetites, before that either hunger,
weariness, Thirst, or cold, attached their bodies. Then, how could it be
prevented, but that youth Iuve. Vnde habe^, nem^ q^^rat: sed ^p^rtet h^bere
must fling out, when ability is wanting? A mind thus affected, can not want
fit proiectes of pleasures, to the accomplishment whereof, it regards not what
it gets, nor how it spends^

CHAP. 4.
1. Catelines policies in entertainment of lewd Company. 2. The causes which
hastened the Conspiracy, and gave the fiercest motives of Resolution.

IN this so flourishing, so populous, and corrupted a state, Cateline gave
entertainment (a disseigne soon effected) to all the wickedest and disolutest
gallants of the City, retaining them near about his person, as if they had bin
the guards of his body. For whatsoever unchaste companion, Adulterer, or
Swagerer, had discipated his Patrimony, by lavish Liberality, by Surfeting, or
Letchery: whosoever stood engaged in bonds, Facinora redimabantur, tunc
pecunia, quia (vt visum est) ante Sillam non licebat interficere ci^es Romanos,
nisi in quibusdam criminibus.
so that his means were not able to purchase his freedom: all sorts of
Murderers, Church-robbers, such as stood convicted by Judgments, or, for fear
of Judgment, durst not show their faces before the seat of Justice: those,
whose tongues had been polluted with perjury, or had their hands tainted with
civil bloodshed: And last of all, whomsoever the remorse of a crying
conscience afflicted, Poverty oppressed, or a guiltly soul redargued of
offense, these were the friends, favorites and followers of Cateline. Ea est in
amicitia calamitas maxima, quod Amor praecedat iudicium.
But if it happened, that any true Gentleman, innocent of these misbehauiours,
chanced into his company, by daily use and example, he became in a trice,
fellow and fashionable to the residue of his Consorts. His especial project
was, to affect the acquaintance of the younger sort, because he knew their
minds to be soonest and readiest wrought to any impression. And therefore by
observation of every man's humor, Te. Quod pl^riqu^ faciu^^ adolescentuli, vt
animum ad aliquod stud^um adiungant, aut equos alere, aut can^s ad venandum.
some he would acquaint with beautiful Harlots, upon othersome he would
bestow Dogs of pleasure, and upon others galant horses, sparing for no cost,
no importunacy, first to engage their allegiances, and afterward to make use
of their loyalties.

2. I am not ignorant, that Historici est nihil af^irmare quod compertum and
explora^um non habeat.
many men were of opinion, that the youth which frequented the house of
Cateline abandoned their bodies to unchaste devices, but this surmise arose upon
other grounds, then were known to the vulgar. For it was long sithence, that
Cateline being a young man, had frequently defiled his body with a Noble
Virgin, a Nun of Vesta; and against the Laws and all Conscience, had
committed very many such like inormities: and at last, being overtaken in the
Love of Aurelia Oristella, (a Lady for no good part commendable, but a
beautiful visage) it was for certainty reported, that, because she stood
squeamish of marriage, in regard she feared what might happen, when his
child, and her son in law, should come to years, he made away the boy, and
by this scaelestious match, left his house Issuelesse. Which one only project,
to my understanding, was the principal and violentest motive, to hasten on the
Treason. For who knows not, that a Conscience accused of murder, hateful to
Gods and men, can neither take rest by day, nor by night, but is always
tormented with the appeal of its own guiltiness. And thereupon his
complexion changed, his eye grew dull, his pace variable, sometimes quick,
sometimes slow; surely his face bewrayed his troubled conscience. Then, in
deeper manner (then before) he meditated, to engage his youthful followers in
heinous offenses, teaching them to play knights of the Post, to forge bills and
conueyances, and to make no reckoning of Faith, Fortunes, or Dangers. When he
perceived them thus careless and shameless, he proceeded to points of higher
doctrine: and that was, that if a present occasion of ill doing presented not
it self at hand, that nethelesse, they should not desist to circumvent the
good as well as the bad^ no, not if their lives lay in hazard; for fear
forsooth, least disvse, should bring their hands out of temper, or their minds
to forgetfulness of actuating evil: training them up to deceit and cruelty, in
purchase of small game, rather then to sit out and do nothing.

CHAP. 5.
1. Cateline resolves to seize on the state. 2. His reasons. 3. What sorts of
men are to be noted prime-actors in Rebellion.

1 ASsiduity begat constancy: and therefore Cateline now firmly relying upon
the faith and assistance of these his confederates, and already having engaged
his credit thorough all countries, as deeply, as possible his assurance could
stretch unto; and withal, not vnpolitickly observing, that the remains of
Sillas army, by living more riotuously then the rapines of their late victory
could warrant them (whereof a fresh memory yet boiled in their stomachs) did
itch after a second civil War, roundly resolves with himself, to become
master of the state.

2. In Italy no Army was on foot. G. Pompeius Contra Tigrane^ and Methridatem.
managed the war in foreign countries. His hopes, in standing for the
Consul-ship, were not fewest. The Senate was secure; All men in peace, all
places devoted to good Correspondency. Fitter opportunities could not fortune
have heaped into Catelines bosom: He took hold, and therefore about the
Kalends of June, L. Caesar, and C. Figulus being Consulles, he sends for
every man aparr, some he entreats, others he comfort, and opposes to
their considerations their own strength) compared it with the weakness of the
state unprovided; and lastly, forgets not to insinuate the massinesse of
reward, which attended upon their purchase of victory.

3. After this private discourse, he finds a time to call a general Counsel,
of all those, whom either for Nobility, for deepenesse of interest in the plot,
or desperate dispositions, he durst best entrust.

Of the Order of Senators, appeared P. Lentulus Sura, P. Antronius, L. Cassius
Longinus, C. Cethegus, P. and Seruius, the sons of Silla Seruius, L:
Vergunteius, Q. Anntus, M. Porcius Lecca, Lucius Bestia, Q. Curious. Of the
order of Knights, M: Fuluius the Noble, L: Statilius, P: Gauinius Capito, C:
Cornelius. Besides these, many of the Colonies and infranchised Cities, men of
good esteem in their Countries; yea, and some great personages (but in more
secret manner) were a Counsel in the action, whom neither want nor any other
necessity drew in, but mere ambition, to share for their fortunes.

Moreover, the mayor part of the youth, and those especially of the Gentry,
were glad of the project, and favored the plot; such I mean, whose humors
desired to spend gallantly, or to live wantonly, affecting incertainties for
certainties, and bloodshed rather then peace.

Some lived in those days, who durst affirm, that M: Licinius Crassus was not
altogether a stranger unto that assembly, for that G: Pompeius his corriuall
and adversary, was then preferred to be Lord General of the Army, against
whose credit and greatness he cared not whose envy, or what power he
provoked: nothing mistrusting if the conspiracy prospered, but that he would
find means to become their leader.

Before this adventure, a former conspiracy had been on foot against the state,
wherein Cateline had likewise been an Actor, whereof (before I proceed
further) I will discourse with all truth to my utmost power.

CHAP. 6.
1. Cateline in suing for the Consulship, is denied. 2. His first Treason
discovered. 3. Piso is sent into Spain. 4. The reasons: his death.

1. LTullus, and Marcus Lepidus being Consuls, P. Antronius and P. Silla
Consuls elect, were accused of bribery, Quod per ambitum, aut alia via sinistra
ad magistratus pervenisse conuinc^bantur, et poenas dabaut, and a magistratu
abire cogebantur.
and therefore fined and disgraced. Not long after, Cateline being in office,
was also attainted for extortion, and prohibited to stand for the Consulship,
for that according to Law he could not trauers the accusation, and give in his
Quicumque magistra^um p^tebat, nomen suum immune dare oportebat.
name blameless within his ti^e limited.

At the same time lived G. Piso, a young Gentleman, descended of Honorable
parentage, but exceeding wild, poor, and factious. Penury and evil education
set his thoughts on working to innovation.

2. About the Nones of December; Cateline, this young Gentleman, and Antronius,
laid their heads together, in the Capitol to murder the two Consuls, L:
Torquatos and L. Cotta: upon the Kalends of January, and then, Correptis
facibus
they two seizing on the Ensigns of honor and office, to poast away this Piso
with an Army, for the retaining of both S. superiorem, and inferiorem.
Spaines to their uses. Which complot being discovered, they deferred the
second resolution of the murder until the Nones of February. Then, they
intended not the destruction of the two Consuls only, but the destruction also
of many of the Nobility. Wherein if Cateline had not made too much have to
Court, to have given his accomplices the watchword, without doubt, that day had
proved the bloudiest season, that ever the City of Rome had beheld, sithence
the laying of her first foundations. The N^ndum conveneran^, cum signu^ d^^et.
slow approach of the Conspirators, broke the neck of the intended enterprise.

3 Notwithstanding Piso was sent Lord President into the hither- Spain,
Viciniore^ Italiae.
not without the conniuance of Marcus Crassus, for that, he stood assured, that
Piso was no small adversary unto the greatness of C: Pompeius.

4. Neither yet could the Lords of the Senate be taxed of improuidence, for
intrusting the province to such a companion; for it was their policy to remove
so corrupt a member far from the more sounder and vital parts of the
Commonweal; partly, for that they mistrusted, that many good men, might houer
under the wing of his preferment; and partly, for that the power of Pompey, and
his credit with the army, were (with reason) grown very suspicious unto the
state. But this very Piso, in the midst of his journey, was slain, by those
horsemen over whom he commanded.

Some gave out, that the Barbarians could not digest Minus est, im^eratorem
iniustum esse, quam superbu^: Minus, superbum esse, qua^ crudelem
his iniust, imperious, and cruel government; Others, that those horsemen being
the ancient followers of Pompey, and his faithful seruitors, committed the
murder not without his priuity: affirming, that the Spaniards never committed
so execrable an homicide, and yet had endured many more severe Lieutenants. For
our parts, we will leave it, as we found it, and so end the Relation of this
first Treason.

CHAP. 7.
1. Cateline exhorts his accomplices to perseverance. 2. They require the
conditions of the war. 3. He gives them satisfaction.

1 CAteline, as soon as he perceived that those his accomplices (whom we
nominated before,) were now assembled, although he had often dealt in particular
with every one of them, yet supposing it a point of no small regard, to deal
with them in general, now or never to settle their resolutions, retired himself
into the remotest room of his house: from whence, all strangers excluded, thus
and thus he began his Oration.

Unless my very soul were fully persuaded of your valors and constancies, it
were impossible to hope that any Fortunate success should second these our
attempts, and those strong hopes of Liberty and power, whereof we account our
selves in better part of possession, were idle, and to no purpose; neither I,
for my part, would show my self so vain conceited, as thorough cowardi^e, or
any giddy strain of a running wit, to let slip certainties in hope of
incertaine adventures. But for that, in many, and most important dangers, I
have always found you valourous and faithful; as well, in those regards, has
my courage dared to adventure, upon this worthy and most honorable action, as
also for that it is now past dispute, that we are all alike engaged, and must
of necessity all drink of one Cup, be it good or evil. And therefore, in
general, to be all of one opinion, is the strongest bond of faith and
friendship. What my resolutions are, you have heretofore heard my private
discourses, but every day brings into my mind a new perplexity, with a desire
to understand, what course we shall run, unless we our selves should now be
resolute to purchase our own pardons. For sithence the Sovereignty has
diuolued, under the power and oppression of some few great men; Kings and
Tetrachs have bin glad to protest themselves their vassals: people and
Nations have paid them contribution; but as for the residue of us the
Nobility, how valorous, how good, how Noble or ignoble soever, we are
accounted of but as the vulgar: deprived of Honor, and subjected to those, unto
whom, if right might take place, we ought to be Lords, and to give the Law.
What should I say? All graces, offices, honor, and wealth, they assume unto
themselves, or at least al lies at their dispose: To us, is naught afforded,
save danger, denials, extents and misery: which disgraces, (o you my most
valiant companions) I pray you relate, how long shall we suffer? Is it not more
befitting our generous spirits, to die resolutely, then always to lead a
miserable and base life, subject to the scorn of an underlings pride?

By the faith which I owe unto God and the world, the victory is ours already
in possession: youth is on our side, our hearts as courageous; with our
enemies, all things are grown feeble and timorous, through age and abundance,
we shall only but take care for the onset, time it self will second the
progress.

Fellows in Arms, what mortal creature, that has but a scantling of human
courage, can endure, to see these men to wallowe in wealth, lauishly disbursed
in Inning of Seas, and leuelling of mountains, and our selves to want even
necessaries of life? They, to be Lords of two or more goodly palaces, we
scarce to possess one roof, wherewithal to cover our Nakedness? These are
they, that have naught to do with their wealth, save to bestow it on Pictures,
Images, and imbossed furnitures: Old fashions are odious, yet pull they down
their new Fabrics, and erect others more pleasing to their fancies. By all
direct and indirect means they procure money, and oppress, and nethelesse
their extreme expense is no diminution of their estates. But with us, at home
rages poverty, abroad wait executions: our credites are desperate, our hopes
worse: What then, I beseech ye remains us, save a tormented conscience, worst
of miseries?

Courage my Companions: Lo, that, that Liberty, which so long you have
expected, and so often implored, now calls on your valors. And not it alone,
for besides, you have wealth, a just cause, and honor on your sides. These are
your Trophies of victory: Fortune will have it so. Let the quality of the
Action, the opportunity of time, the greatness of the danger, and the
inestimable spoils of War, move ye, more then my speech; be it at your choice,
to use me as your leader, or as a private soldier. I will never fail ye in
Counsel or Action. And unless my Genius deceive me, I hope being Consul, to
perform what I have spoken, unless your spirits be so basely dejected, that
you had rather live in subjection, then command with Honor.

2. Notwithstanding the pithy and perswasiue delivery of this Oration, those
of the complot, which were in greatest distress, and least confirmed in hopes,
and yet believed, that plentiful aduancements could not but attend them upon
the trouble of the State; began to demand, that Cateline should give them
satisfaction, What should be the condition of the War: what their rewards: what
hopes induced him; what assistance they should rely upon.

3. Whereupon, he protested general acquitances, Peior est conditio
proscrortarum, quam exulum nam in exilio sunt tu^^, illi nusquam.
proscriptions of the richer sort, Magistracies, Priesthoods, Pillage, and all
other Reprisals, which the Liberty of war is accustomed to share unto the
pleasure of the victor. Hea^ quantum ad praemia.


Quantum ad auxilia.
For his Assistance, he showed them, that Piso in the hither Spain, and P.
Sitius Nucerinus in Mauritania, led sufficient sorces, both engaged in the
plot, and both privy of his counsels.

His Hopes were, that Quantum ad spem.

Alij, Antronium, participem prioris coniurationes.


C. Antonius would stand for the Consulship, and that he made no question, but
to become his fellow in office; a man of his familiar and inward acquaintance,
on all sides oppressed with necessities, and with him, in their Consulship, he
would not fail to open the war.

This done, he began maliciously to slander all honest men, and by name to
praise every Varlet of his own crew: one he put in mind of his poverty,
another of his longing, some of the danger and disgrace incident, and many
Speram consimile exitum Belli.
of Sillas victory; at what time it was lawful to make pillage of any thing
that Lust could seize upon.

Heerewith, observing their general alacrity, he requested them to have an
especial regard to satisfy his expectation, and so dismissed the assembly.

CHAP. 8.
1. Cateline administreth an Oath of secrecy. The manner, and reason. 2. Q.
Curious described.

1. IN those days lived some, who reported, that Cateline having finished his
speech in ministering the oath of confedracie to these his creatures, began a
carouse of wine brewed with humane blood. Whereof, when every party after
diverse execrations, had pledged him after the manner of solemn Sacrifices, then
began he to lay open the very depth of his proiects, and to conceal nothing,
to the intent, that every one being alike guilty of others engagement, they
should persevere the more constant each confederate to other.

Many again, did account these, and many such like reports, as false and
fabulous, devised by them, who by aggravating the heinous offenses of the
traitors, did endeavor to extenuate the scandal afterward imputed upon
Cicero, Q^ia iussit Romanos c^ues interfici sine Lege.
by reason of the severe punishment, inflicted upon the offenders. Et sic
seruatur fides Historiae, cuius prima lex est, vt sit vera.
In regard of the greatness of the Ambiguity, we know not well what to affirm.

In the conspiracy was one Quintus Curious, by birth a Gentleman, but wholly
addicted to dishonest courses and villainies, whom the Censors for his infamous
life had deposed from the Senate. Nothing inferior to this man's vanity, was his
rash and peremptory carriage: he could neither silence what he heard of other,
nor bury in oblivion his private offenses: taking no regard of his speech, or
action.

He had long bin acquainted with Fuluia, an honorable Lady, to whom after he
perceived that he was but coldly welcome, (for that his present poverty could
not answer her his former liberality) he resolved with himself to set al
upon boasts; sometime to promise mountains, sometime to menace her, and rather
then fail, sometime to use her more rudely, then he had been accustomed. But
Fuluia agreeued with these his insolences, and understanding the cause, how
the common wealth stood endangered, vowed no secrecy, but only supressing the
name of the reporter, revealed unto many of her acquaintance, where, and what,
she heard of the conspiracy of Cateline.

This sudden report first wrought the minds of most men to inuest M.T. Cicero,
with the honor of the Consulship: for before the greater part of the Nobility,
stomacked his preferment, yea they were of opinion, that the place had bin
polluted, if he (though deservedly) being no Gentleman by descent, had managed
that high place of dignity. But upon the approach of the storm, envy, and
Pride, lay buried in silence.

Whereupon the day of election being come, M. Tullius and C. Antonius were
saluted Consuls; which very creation did at first break the hearts of the
Conspirators. But the rashness of Cateline was never the more assuaged: every
day he went more forward then other; he prepared armor, and distributed it in
places of greatest importance throughout Italy: he took up as much money as the
credit of his friends, or his own assurance could procure, causing it to be
conveyed to one Manlius at Fesule, who afterward acted a principal part in the
rebellion.

It was reported, that at that time he labored men of al fashions, yea and
some women, who after their commodities were of no worth, by reason that age
had put a period to their fees, but not to their riot, were become deeply
indebted.

By these, Cateline stood in good hopes to drew in the slaves of the City, to
fire the Town, to unite their husbands to the action, or otherwise, to murder
them.

Amongst these was Sempronia, a Woman that had committed many virile outrages,
above the creation of her sex. In birth and beauty commendable, in marriage and
issue fortunate, well seen in the Greek and Latin languages, and more
curious-cunning in music and dancing, then well might stand with the
reputation of honesty. Adorned she was with many other qualities, but such, as
were rather to be reckoned prouokements unto Luxuric, (yet more familiar unto
her dispositon) then either sauoured of decency, or modest behavior. It were
hard to say, whether she were most prodigal, of her purse, or her honesty:
so hot of constitution, that she would sooner grant, then stay the asking of
a question: beewraying the confidence of those that trusted her, and
perfidiouslie dealing with those that credited her: Guilty of murder, and spent
by Luxury, the forerunner of poverty, without hope of recovery. Quick
Witted, a Versifier, frolic, discoursiue upon any vain, modest, amorous, or
swaggering; wholly given to jests and pleasant conceits.

CHAP. 9.
1. Cateline practices the death of Cicero. 2. Being disappointed, he
resolves to set all upon hazard. 3. Cicero preserved by the intelligence of
Fuluia. 4. Manlius ingageth the people of Hetruria.

Dictis Cons. quos limuerat, creatis.
1. Affairs being thus ordered, Cateline notwithstanding his former repulse,
resolves yet once again for the next year to stand for the Consulship:
wherein, if he sped, he doubted not but to make use of Antonius at his
pleasure. Neither here gave he ends to his discontents, but by all means
sought the destruction of Cicero, a man as vigilant and as polliticke as
himself, to countermine his devices; by great promises from the beginning of
his Consulship, continually working with Fuluia, to procure Q. Curious, to lay
open the deepest plot of the Conspiracy unto her. And besides that, had
firmly seized on the faith of Antonius his fellow in office (by the assurance
and exchange of the government of the Vnde pl^^ lucri, qua ex vrbe Cons.
obeuene^at, melius inde inopiae suae confulere.
province) in no point to waver for the good of his Minus commodi ex prouincia,
qua^ ex factione Catelinae consequi non potuit.
country: Ne videretur etiam regnum assectare, aut seditionem fouere.
secretly and circumspectly causing his friends and followers to be respective
of his safety.

2. The day of election being come, and that neither his suite succeeded, nor
his malices against the Ambos, postqua^ viderat A^t^n i^ contra remp. nu^^^
sentire.
Consulles prevailed, perceiving that what he had politickely determined, was
as cunningly frustrated; foorth-with, he resolves upon the two extremes;
War, and Hazard, and thereupon sets up his rest.

Whereupon, he dispatcheth C. Manlius unto Fesulae and the Country thereabouts.
One Septinius Camertes he sends into the borders of the Piceni, and C.
Julius he posteth to Apulia, and finally gives instructions to others of his
Accomplices, every man to betake himself unto those quarters, wherein he thought
his ability could afford the best means for his purpose. At Rome he gives
orders for his weightiest proiects: some he commands to lie in wait for the
Consuls; some to prepare wild-fires; and others, to disperse their armed
followers in places of best opportunity: he himself stands upon his guard.
These he commands and entreats, to be ready at an instant, to be vigilant,
to spare no pains, by night nor by day, to have an eye upon all occasions; and
finally, not to be dejected by the unaccustomed travails of watching and labor.
At length, revoluing in his mind, that his care of execution, had bin nothing
inferior to his directions, and yet of many, not one seconded expectation; once
again he summoneth the chief of the conspiracy by M. Porcius Lecca: When, being
assembled, he finds himself much agreeued at their backwardnes; shows
them, how for his part he has dispatched Manlius to those troops, who^ long
before he had prepared for arms: how he quartered others through the fittest
places of the City, upon the first watchword ready to enter into Action: and
that now his chiefest desire was to take his journey toward the Army, if
Cicero were dispatched, the only obstacle to all their proiects. At this
speech, his Auditory being at their wits ends, and obiecting many difficulties;
at last C. Cornelius and L. Vargunteius, the one a Knight, the other a Senator,
undertook the performance; devising, a little after Twilight, with their armed
servants, by way of duty, to go visit the Consul at his own house, whereinto
being admitted, they protested suddenly to murder him being unprovided, and
least of al suspecting any such intention. 3. Quintus Curious, no sooner
understood, unto what eminent danger the life of the Consul stood exposed, but
as swiftly he flies unto Fuluia, and reuealeth unto her the intended
execution. Upon intelligence whereof the traitors receiving a denial of
entrance, this their most heinous intention of murder sorted likewise to no
conclusion.

4. Mean while notwithstanding, Manlius acts his part in Hetruria, and
stirs up the Commons, desirous enough of themselves of innovation, in
remembrance of their poverty and hard usage; for that in the usurpation of
Silla, they had bin pillaged of al they had, lands, goods, and necessaries. And
besides, that the province swarmed with thieves and outlawes, whereof many of
the^ were of the Colonies of Silla, to whom riot and Luxury had left nothing of
their late rich and extortious booties remaining. Cicero being possessed of
these inteligences, and having his thoghts trobled with ambiguous resolutions,
for that neither by his private possibilities he could longer secure the city
from danger, nor be truly instructed what forces Manlius had levied, nor who
should be his abettor: he referred the determining of the business to the
wisedoms of the Lords of the Senate, enforcing his informations and induceme^ts
upon the general rumors and reports of the people. They again (as in times of
wonted dangers) give the Consuls authority to provide, that the state through
their defaults suffered no damage, acording to the ancient customs of the Roman
people. This verbal form of authority, committed to the Dictatoris edictum
promunine semper obseruutum
sovereign magistrate by the Senate, has at al times bin very powerful: for
hereby, has he sufficient warrant, to leuy an army, to make war, Abs quo non
licebat prouoiare, aut ad alium iudicem appellare.
to assesse confederats, Lord chief Justice in peace, L. general of the war;
otherwise, without the especial permission of the people, no Consul might be
suffered to exercise the meanest of these roialties. Some few days after
L^seuius a Senator, showed forth certain letters at the counsel table which he
received from Fesulae, and imported, that C. Manlius had bin in arms with no
co^temptible forces, before the 6. day of the Kalends of Nou. Besides (no
strange thing in like cases) one discoursed of wonders, another of prodigies,
some talked of Conuenticles, others of secret provisions of furnitures: some
reported that the slaves were up in Capua, others in Apulia. Whereupon by an act
of Senate, Q: Martius is dispatched to Fesulae, and Q. Metellus Creticus into
Apulia and the bordering countries. These two having born the office of L.
generals, had been denied their deserved triumphs through the city, by the
malicious calumnies of some such, to whom it was familiar to set suits of al
natures, to open sales. The two Praetors, Q. Pompeius Rufus, and Q. Metellus
Celer, had their commissions, the one for Capua, the other for the Piceni, with
authority likewise, for that time, and the diuersion of this danger, to inroll
an Army. Moreover, proclamation was made, that if any man could giue-in true
information of this Conspiracy, intended against the safety and Majesty of the
state, that he should be well and honestly rewarded: A Slave, to receive
liberty, and one 250 pounds.
hundred Sesterces: A free man his pardon, and two hundred thousand Sesterces.
And lastly, they made a decree, that in Capua, and the residue of the suspected
buroughs, every householder should entertain the companies Ne tumultum mouerent
vt antea sub Spartico factum est.
of the Fencers, every man in proportion, according to his ability. At Rome,
thorough the whole City, the Bourgers kept watch and ward, under the command of
inferior officers. At which novelties the City stood amazed, and the
countenance of the inhabitants dejected. Instead of iollity and retchlesnesse,
of which, assiduity of ease and security, had in a manner promised perpetuity,
forthwith entered all kinds of passions and distemperature: one made speed to
provide for his private safety, another trembled and had no power to resolve
upon any course: Some doubted their welfare in their own houses, and others
could not determine in whom to repose any answerable confidence. The times they
could not term peaceable, neither doubted they the war: and therefore fear
measured out every man his danger, according to his own apprehension. The
women, to whom, in regard of the long prosperity of the state, the rumors of
war were inacustomed, bewailed their fortunes, stretched their hands toward
heaven, co^passionated their little ones, instanced the Gods, feared al things,
and utterly forgetful of their yesterdaies pride and nicities, now distrusted
the safety of themselves and their country. Notwithstanding, the cruel and
unrelenting mind of Cateline stood resolute, yea, though his eye were his witness
of oposition and prevention, and that himself had bin in examination before L.
Paulus upon the statute Qua accusati coniurationis, statim respondere and se
purgare cogebantur.
Plautia. At last, either to set a good face on the matter, or to answer the
objected accusation, as a man touched in honor, he enters the Senate. When,
M. Tullie the Consul, either fearing his presence, or being moved at his
shameless impudency, made an excellent and profitable Oration, which
afterward he put forth in writing.

As Soon as he had taken his place, being by Nature of a prepared disposition
to dissimulation, with a submissiue countenance, and a suitable low voice, he
began to request the Lords, not rashly to believe whatsoever his ill-willers
suggested against a man of his Rank: That from his Adolency he had behaved
himself so, as in Honor they could not but make good constructions of his
carriage: That they could not but wrong his calling, (sithence both himself
and his Ancestors had well deserved of the state) once to immagine that he
would practice the destruction thereof, when such a one forsooth, M. Tullius
Cicero, an vpstart and a stranger, should labor to preserve it.

In the highest of which his calumnious expostulations, the whole Senate
interrupted him, protesting him a Traitor and Quia patria charior quam parens
nobis debet esse, ideo Catelina inpatria^ coniura^us, hic paricida dicitur.
parricide to his Country. Then all enraged, (quoth he) Sithence I am
violently ouer-borne by the fury of mine enemies, nothing but ruin shall put
an end to this quarrel. And thereupon, leaving the Court, he retired to his
house. Where, reuoluing with himself, that neither the intended murder of the
Consul sorted to purpose, neither that the fiering of the City could be
effected, by reason of the strong watches: foreseeing now, that but one only
course, and that of bad the best was left him, which was, to reenforce his
army, and to take up whatsoever warlike provision was necessary for his people,
before the state had levied their armed Legions; at midnight in the company of
a few, he takes his journey toward the camp of Manlius: before his
departure, entreating and commanding Cethegus, Lentulus, and the most
desperate of the crewe, by all means possible to contain the faction in
strength and vigor, to hasten the death of the Consul, to be resolute, for
slaughter fire, and the like miseries of war; for within a day or two he would
not fail to approach the City with a powerful army.

These were the passages at Rome: from the Camp C. Manlius had sent certain
Agents of his rout unto Q. Martius, with these Ouertures.

CHAP. 10.
1. The Letters of Manlius to the General. 2. His answer. 3. Catelines
colorable excuse of his iourny. 4. His letter to the contrary.

I Call God and Man (most Worthy General) to witness, that we have taken Arms
neither against our Country, neither to the perrill of any private subject, but
only to free our needy and mis^rabe carcasses from injuries from violence,
and the oppression of Usurers: the most of us not daring to show our faces in
our own Country, and all of us in general without credit or relief. In
which estate, it was not lawful for any of us (according to the freedom of our
Ancestors) to prosecute the clemency of our ancient Laws: neither (having
forfetted our Patrimonies) to keep our bodies from imprisonment; so rigorously
has the Usurer and the Praetor oppressed us.

In former times, the compassion of our Elders, has often acquitted the
disabilities of the Roman people by acts of Parliament: And even but S.
recentissime.
yesterday in our remembrance, by the general applause of all good men, order
has bin taken, by reason of the excessive interest, to pay the principal out
of the public Treasury: yea, the very Comminaltie, either seduced by desire
of superiority, or underhand armed by the Ambition of Great men, has often
disunited it self from the Union of the Fathers: but we (neither Ambitious of
Empery, nor desirous of Riches) the motives of all Wars and discourtesies
amongst mortal Creatures, request only Liberty, the want whereof, no honest
man can tolerate, but with the loss of his dearest life.

Wherefore, upon our bended knees we entreat your worthiness, together with
the Lords of the Senate, to provide for our miseries, and to restore us to
that advantage of Law, of the which the partiality of the Praetor has
defrauded us: not enforcing us injuriously to that desperate extremity, wherein
we can but only study how to satiate our insatiable swords with execution of
deepest revenge. Vna sal^^ miseris nullam sperare salutem.



2. To these Q. Martius made no other answer, but that, if they expected
favor from the Lords of the Senate, they should not implore it in armed
manner, but submissiuely to travel to Rome, where they might be assured, to
find such clemency and courtesy before the Lords of the Senate, and the Roman
people, as never any man ye^ importuned their mercy, that departed away at any
time unpardoned.

3. But Cateline from diverse stages in his iourny Vt i^cautos opprimeret.
dispatcheth away Letters to many of the Consulare dignity, and to every
gentleman of quality; besides, intimating thereby, that (since he was not of
power to make his party good, against the faction of his Adversaries, who most
falsely and malliciously had suggested many slanderous accusations against him)
he was contented to yeilde to time, and to choose Vrbem, antiquissimo fad^re
Romany coniunctam
Massilia for the place of his voluntary exile; not for that, forsooth, he was
any way guilty of so heinous an imputation, but for the good and welfare of the
state; least by his presence, peradventure some seditious partiality might
arise in the state.

Contrary unto these Q. Catulus read other Letters before the Lords of the
Senate, which (as he affirmed) were dated unto him under the name of Cateline.
The Transcript whereof follows.

L. Cateline to Q. Catulus health.
4. THy assured constancy, by trial experimented, and in my most weighty
dangers never omitted, has co^fidently waranted these my commendations unto
thine unspotted loyalty. For what reasons, I listed not, to frame my defense
in that new Counsel, I am now determined to yield you satisfaction; and that,
not out of a guilty conscience, which upon mine honor I protest to be true,
but being first provoked by injurious disgraces; for that being denied the
rewards of my labors and deserts, I could not obtain the place of dignity
duly diuolued to me, according unto my wonted custom. I have now taken upon
me the public defense of the oppressed people; not for that, out of mine own
revenues I could not satisfy my own debts, since the only liberality of
Aurelia Oristilla and her daughter, was not only sufficient to discharge my
self and my sureties; but for that I observed men of no worth to be preferred
to places of honor, and my self upon false suggestions, too injuriously
rejected. Upon these terms I make no question, but to be able to preserve the
remainder of my reputation. I was determined to have written more at large, but
I was informed, that warrant, were out to attach me. I not only commend, but
also entrust unto thy loyalty Oristilla: Defend her from wrong, (I beseech
thee,) even for the love of thy dearest children, Farewell.


CHAP. 11.
1. Cateline comes to the camp of Manlius. 2. The estate of Rome and the
bordering Countries after his departure.

1. But Cateline having made some small stay with C. Flaminius in the country
Ciuitas municipalis in Hetruria.
of Aretium, and leaving the City (before prepared) well fortified, departs
toward the camp of Manlius, accompanied with the Fasces, and other the
Ensigns of Honor. Upon intelligence whereof at Rome, the Senate proclaims
Cateline and Manlius Traitors. To the residue of their partakers they limit a
day, by which, if they surceased their arms, Quod prudentia S. factum est, vt
sine periculo reip. principes coniurationis punirentur.
all offenses past were pardoned, except to those, who by name were condemned
of Treason.

The Consuls themselus were commanded to leuy forces: Caius Antonius with all
expedition to pursue Cateline, and Cicero to guard the City.

2. At that time, in my judgment, the condition of the Roman people appeared
most miserable: Unto whom, notwithstanding that all places from East to West
were subjected by Arms, and that at home they wallowed in ease and riches (the
only two contents which all flesh affects:) yet fostered they within their
own bowels a viperous consort of fellow-Cittizens, who rather then they would
surcease the obstinacy of their private Humors, cared not what became of
themselves and their country. For, after the two proclamations, divulged by
authority from the Senate, it was not known that any one man of such a
multitude, neither for lucre of the proposed reward, revealed any part of the
conspiracy, neither upon assurance of pardon, sought to fly from the party.
So desperate a contagio^ of revolt, like to a Pestilential Fever had possessed
the minds of the greater part of the people; and worse then that, the zeal of
those, who were guilty of the project, was not only estranged, but the
Universal body of the Commons in affectatio^ of novelties, did as farforth as
they durst, allow of the business. But this could be termed no new accident;
for in all Commonweales, you shall ever find some (who have little to lose) to
malice their betters, to speak well of the wicked, to mislike the present, to
affect novelties, and in contempt of their own Fortunes, to desire change. In
tumults and vprores they take least care for their livings; how ever the world
goes, they can be no loosers.

But the Comminalties of Cities were led upon other respects and diversity of
occasions: First, all those who were infamous for life and behavior; secondly,
such as had wasted their stocks; And lastly, those that durst not show their
heads for some notorious offenses, (these I say) flocked into Rome, as into a
common receptacle.

In the next rank followed such as had not yet forgotten Sillas victory; some
of their companions they beheld raised from the degree of common soldiers, to
the honor of Senators: Others, so advanced in wealth, that thereby they were
now enabled to maintain a bountiful Table, and to wear rich apparel. If
the matter were once again triable by Arms, every one hoped to share in like
Fortune. As for those strong and youthful bodies, whose hands could scarcely
find them a living by the day labor of the plough, (and in that respect had
their fingers itching to be dealing in private and public rewards) were soon
enticed to prefer the idle games of the city, before the thriftlesse ^oile
of the country: such were the hopes both of these and the former; the public
spoil was the mark they al shot at. So that (as before) it is no new matter,
to see the poorest, basest, and worst-bred sort of people, to expect spoil and
their own inrichment, by the general confusion of the state.

Yet remained they whose parents the victory of Silla had proscribed, defrauded
of their goods, and disinfranchised of their freedoms; These, as the residue,
lived likewise in hope to purchase some better fortune by the event of this
war.

Lastly, whosoever was of any other faction, save that of the Senate, did
rather in his heart wish more welfare to the league, then good to the state.
Thus forepassed corruptions, after many years, began again to return into the
City.

For after the Tribunitiall authority ( G. Pompeius and M. Crassus being
Consuls) was restored, certain young men (whose blood was hot, and their
courages violent) preferred to sovereign jurisdiction, began, by Sub praetentu
boni publici. Sic Virg. Coniugium vocat: hoc pretexit nomi^^ culpam. etc.
accusing the Lords of the Senate, first, to subborne the Commons, and
afterward, by bribes and promises to provoke them to fury.

Thus they gate them a name, and were mighty in the state. Against these men
(under the protection of the Senate,) the Mayor part of the Nobility stoutly
opposed, to retain their pristinate greatness. For to speak truth in a word,
after these times, whomsoever ambition persuaded to trouble the state, he would
be sure to color his pretext with an honest title; as some, The defense of
Liberty, others The reverent authority of the Senate.

Every one pretended the common good, whilst he took most care to raise his
private estate, and that without all modesty or measure: In contention, either
side used their victories without any indifferency.

But after that C: Pompeius had his Commissions for the War at Sea, and
against Methridates, the Plebeian power fainted and the Greatness of a few
increased, Contra pirata^, quos intra Quadrag^ssimos di^^ subegit.
who immediately seized upon Magistracies, Provinces, and all other offices:
Fearelesse of Competitors, Honorable in Titles, and grown old without any
touch of adversity. The inferior sort they terrified with exemplarie
punnishments, the better to keep them in awe of their Superiority.

But upon the first budding of innovation, their prestinat prerogatives brought
passed sorances to remembrance. Wherein, if in his first attempt, Cateline had
had the better, or at least had departed upon equal terms, without
contradiction, a miserable misfortune and calamity had befallen the
Commonwealth. For assuredly, the Conquerors should not long have triumphed of
their victory, a stronger party Sic Augustus t^^umphabit de Antonia and Lepido.
being prepared and determined to bereave the weak, weary, and wounded
conspiratour of his new purchased command and victory. There were many men
besides, that knew nothing of the conspiracy, and yet in the beginning
associated Cateline. Amongst these, was Fuluius, the son of a Senator, whom
being retired, the father nethelesse commanded to execution.

CHAP. 12.
1. Lentulus in the absence of Cateline, to his utmost strengthens the
faction. 2. Vmbrenus acquainteth the French Ambassadors with the Plot. 3.
Sanga (an Intelligencer) cunningly procures a draught of the confederacy.

1. Mean time Lentulus (acording to his instructions delivered him by
Cateline) soliciteth by himself, or his Agents, who^soeuer in his immagination
conceited either dissoluteness of manners or pennurie, an apt instrument to
entertain novelties: and herein, he not only practices with Citizens, but
generally with all sorts of creatures; provided, that their service might any
way stand in sted for the war. Whereupon he deals with Vmbrenus to sound
the Ambassadors of the Strabo Quorum metropolis erat vienna ^^u^tas in
Delph^natu.
Allobroges, and if he possibly could, to draw them to the action: which he
conceited might with no great difficulty be effected: first, because he knew
them to be deeply indebted, as well for their state, as for their private uses;
and secondly, for that the French Nation by nature is inclinable to listen to
innovation.

This Vmbrenus, for that he had Traffiqued in France, did know, and was known
unto most of the principal governors of the Cities, so that immediately after
meeting with the Legates in the common Hall, he began to question them of the
estate of their city, and (in a manner condoling their hard adventure) began
to ask them, what remedy they expected to cure such, so great and insufferable
greeuances.

For answer whereunto, when he observed, that by their complaints they taxed
the Magistrates of Avarice, and accused the Senate, as neglectiue of their
redress, and that they hoped for no release but by death: Q. d. mori vltima
lina rerum.
Why then my Masters (quoth he) if you will but show your selves men, I will
teach you, how you shall easily acquit your selves of these evils. The
Allobroges no sooner herd him to use these speeches, but they importune
Vmbrenus, that he would take compassion of their miseries, protesting no
command to be so difficult or dangerous, but they would attempt it with
earnest resolution, so as the performance might make satisfaction for the debts
of their city.

Hereupon he conducteth them to the house of Decius Brutus, adjoining to the
Towne-house, a man not altogether unacquainted with the complot, by reason of
his wife Sempronia: but at this time out of town.

Here, to add further credit to his speeches, he sends for Gabinius. In
his presence he relates the full project of the Conspiracy, and nominateth
the associates, and amongst them he interproseth the names of many of all
degrees; yea, Innocents, the readier to give courage and assurance to the
misinformed Legates: Then taking his leave with promise of his utmost
service, he dismissed them home.

The Allobroges stood long doubtful, upon what to resolve: On one side, their
great debts, their inclination to war, and the hope of rich spoils presented
secrecy: but on the other side, a stronger party, a safer course, and more
assured rewards (in lieu of uncertain hopes) persuaded discovery.

In midst of which their ambiguous reuolutions, at last, by good hap the
consideration of the commonwealth fortunately prevailed.

3. And so with speed they fully discovered what they had heard, unto Q. Fabius
Sanga, a man unto whose service the City had stood much beholden. And Cicero
understanding by Sanga, how far forth matters had passed, commands the
Agents to dissemble an extraordinary affection to the plot; to take a more
strict occasion of acquaintance with the residue; to protest good liking and
Constancy, and by all means so to diue into the secretest of the business,
that, when time should serve, they might be able to give in a most clear
evidence.

CHAP. 13.
1. Metellus and Murena prevent the Conspirators in their Lieutenantships. 2.
The wicked and desperate conclusions of Traitors.

AT this very instaunt diverse commotions were afoot, in the further and hither
Gallia, in the Country of Piceni, amongst the Bruttans, and in Apulia. For
those, whom Ca^teline had at first dismissed and dispersed, now like mad men
without forecast or consideration, began to make night-assemblies, to dispose
of armor and weapons, to hasten their dispatches, to disquiet all places, and
that with more show of fear, then appearance of danger. Of this rout Quintus
Metellus Celer the Praetor, by authority from the Lords of the Senate, had
committed diverse to prison upon examination: The like did Caius Murena,
Lieutenant of the hither Gallia.

2. But at Rome, Lentulus had plotted with the chiefest of the Conspiracy, that
as soon as intelligence came, that Cateline had openly showed himself in
arms in the Territory of Fesulae, that forthwith L. Bestia being Tribune of
the people, should in the midst of their united forces, in a set and
premeditated Oration, disgracefully complain upon the actions of Cicero, and by
injurious imputation, maintain the Original of this most unkind war, to have
first proceeded from the malice of this most worthy Consul. This was the
precedent Watchword, whereby the residue of the Conspirators the night next
ensuing, should every man dispose of his imposed charge: which was said to be
thus ordered. That Statilius and Gabinius with a strong retinue, had in command
to fire the City in twelve such places of opportunity, as should by concourse of
people thereunto, give best and easiest means of access to dispatch their
other intended executions, upon the Consul and his associates. That, Cethegus
should attend his gate, and charge him resolutely with his forces. That no man
should be vnimployed but rather, then any villainy should be left unattempted,
they wrought with the children of their acquaintance, (the greatest number
whereof were of the Nobility) to slay their own parents: that so, all places
being in confusion, and all persons amazed with fire and slaughter, they might
without opposition, troop toward Cateline.

Amidst these conclusions and executions, Cethegus incessantly taxes the
cowardice of his Companions, co^plaining that between their doubts and
delays, opportunity to do great matters, ouerslipped their fortunes: that now
being so deeply engaged, it were more then time to do, Lucan Toll moras
nocuit semper differ parati^.
and not to talk: that himself, if some few would assist, (though the
general fainted,) would give the onset on the whole Court. The man by nature
was fierce, sudden, and quick in execution, resolving with himself that all
good fortune attended expedition.

CHAP. 14.
1. The Allobroges prosecute according to Ciceroes directions. 2. The project
succeeds. 3. Lentulus arraigned.

But the Allobroges, by the instructions of Cicero, entreat Gabinius to
assemble his nominated companions, At what time they require an oath of
Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius and Cassius, which they would under Seal present
unto their Contrymen; for otherwise, it were not likely, that without
credence they would inconsiderately enter into so dangerous an Action. All of
them, save Cassius, mistrusting no deceit, held it reasonable: He craves
absence, and promises speedy return, but in truth departs the city
somewhat before the Allobroges.

At their departure, Lentulus sends in their company one Titus Vulturcius of
Croton, with instructions to take Cateline in their way homeward, and with him
face to face by reciprocal oths, to confirm this their new engagement. By him
he also dateth his Letters to Cateline, the Tenor whereof, is as follows:

Who I am, you shall understand by the messenger, that I send unto you. S. v^de
tuto regredi nequeas.
Forget not upon what terms your welfare now depends, and remember to play
the man: Consider the nature of your besinesse, and scorn not to implore
assistaunce of any man; yea, of the meanest.

Then he insinuates by word of mouth, that sithence he is proclaimed Traitor
by authority from the Senate, he should seriously debate upon what confidence
he should forsake or abandon the service of the Slaves: that in the City, his
directions were at point of execution, and therefore, that he should not fail
to make all his approaches with all possible celerity.

All matters being thus ordered, and Cicero fully instructed by the Agents, he
commands L. Valerius Flaccus, and C. Promptinius Praetors, upon the
appointed night of the departure of the Allobroges, to set a secret and strong
watch on the Miluian bridge, authorizing them to attach whomsoever they found
traveling more then their own company: and therewithal makes them privy, for
whose sake, and upon what considerations he inioyneth them this charge; other
occurrances he committed to time and their discretions, and so dismissed them
with their limited forces: they again without tumult, dispose of their
watches, and secretly, according to their charge beset the bridge on all sides.

As Soon as the Agents with Vulturtius approached the place, and the usual
question on both sides demanded, the Galls presently apprehending the
meaning, forthwith yielded their bodies to the Officers: But Vulturtius, at
first incorageth his company, draws his sword, and defends himself against
the multitude: but afterward finding himself forsaken of the Agents, he began
to capitulate with Promptinius (his ancient acquaintance) upon points of
good usage; but after that growing fearful, and distrusting his life, he
yielded simply to the Praetors, as to a professed enemy, which business is no
sooner thus ended, but word thereof is forthwith carried to the Consul.

Him infinite cares and infinite joys do jointly possess: he rejoiced upon true
grounds, for that the suspicion of the Conspiracy was now made evident, and
thereby the Commonwealth as good as already delivered: he grew pensive, for
that, he could not resolve what course to take, such men, of such rank and
quality being appeached of so heinous a Treason. He well foresaw, that
punnishment would procure him scandal; and Pardon, his Countries ruin.

But taking courage unto him, he commands Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius,
Gabinius and Q. Ceparius also (who was even now booted and spurd for his iourny
into Apulia, there to move the bond-slaues) to apeare before him. All save
Ceparius, obey without excuse: he, by chance being abroad, and hearing of the
adventure, flies. The Consul hand in hand leads Lentulus (for that he had
bin Praetor) into the Senate. The residue he wills under safe custody to
appear in the Temple of Concored: whether he summoneth the Senate, and there
before a general assembly of the Lords, presents Vulturtius with the Agents.
Then commands he Flaccus to open the Packet, which upon the way he took
from the Allobroges, which being read, Vulturtius was demanded: first, the
cause of his journey, and who gave him those letters: and lastly, who was of
Counsel with him in the business.

At first, he began to excuse and conceal many points touching the Conspiracy:
at last, upon promise of pardon by public oath, he discloseth all things as
they had passed; protesting that he as a companion was sent for but a few days
before, and that he could say no more, then could the Agents, but only, that
he had heard from the mouth of Gabinius, that P. Antonius, Seruius Silla, and
L. Vargunteius, with many more were privy to the Conspiracy. The Galls
affirmed as much.

3. The Lords accused Lentulus, (who stood sliffe in denial) that besides
these Letters, he had bin often heard to vouch certain verses out of the
Sibels: that The Sovereignty of Rome, was destined unto three Cornelij, whereof
Cinna and Silla were two, himself the third, whom fate would have to be
sole-Lord of the City. Moreover, since the burning of the Capitol, that this
was the twentieth year, which the prodigies of the Aruspices prognosticated a
year of blood and civil discord.

Whereupon, the Letters being read, and every man confessing and acknowledging
his seal, the Lords passed sentence, that Lentulus should be degraded, and
together with the residue, committed to honorable custody: Lentulus to P.
Lentulus Spinther: then Aedile, Cethegus, to Q Cornificius: Statilius to C.
Caesar: Gabinius to M. Crassus: and Ceparius (by pursuit lately taken) to Gn.
Terentius a Senator.

CHAP. 15.
1. The Humor of the Commons in cases of danger. 2. M. Crassus is accused:
how cleared. 3. Caesar accused: the causes.

THe Virg. Sinditur incertum studia in coutraria vulgar.
Commons constant, in inconstancy, and who at first in their inherent
dispositions to novelties, wished well to the war, now as soon as the plot was
discovered, with change of opinions, changed likewise their prayers into
curses against Cateline and his Counsels, extolling Cicero to the heavens, and
as people newly redeemed into liberty, made public demonstrations of joy and
iollity; amplifying the conceits of their happiness in this, that whereas all
foreign Wars, are managed rather for spoil then ruin: the resolution of
fire was cruel, merciless, and most miserable, because it neither spared the
beauty of their houses, Quibus quotidie vtebantur.
neither the daily necessaries of their bodies therein contained.

After this, one L. Tarquinius was brought before the Lords of the Counsel,
being taken (as men said) in his journey toward Cateline. Who upon assurance
of the public faith, protesting to reveal what he knew, touching the
conspiracy, in a manner revealed the same things which Vulturtius before had
discovered, concerning the preparation of wildfire, the slaughter of
Innocents, and the journey of the conspirators: but withal, that he was sent
by Mark Crassus, to wish Cateline not to be any thing troubled at the
aprehension of Lentulus, Cethegus, and the residue of the Conspirators, but the
rather to redouble his have of approach toward the city, both to revive the
declining courages of those that fainted, as also, to work deliverance to
those that were in durance.

But after that Tarquinius had appeached Crassus, so Noble a Personage, so
rich, and so powerful; some at no hand would believe it: but othersom, though
they thought it to be true, yet considring the times, Ob d^bita and co^me^^^
priuata.
their private engagements, and the greatness of the man (rather to be winked
at, then any way exasperated) gave a general censure, that the accusation was
false; and so prayed the matter to be adiourned to another season. Whereupon,
by the approbation of Cicero, the more part of the Lords decreed, that the
information of Tarquinius was false, that he should be committed unto prison,
without allowance of making his further Purgation, unless he would disclose by
whose counsel and advice, he had bin seduced, to frame so notorious and false
a scandal.

Some were of opinion, that this accusation was first devised by P: Antonius,
of policy (by engaging Crassus as a companion in danger) to protect the
residue as copartners of like favor.

Others reported, that Tarquinius was sent abroad by Cicero, to deter Crassus
from entertaining his accustomed defense of evil causes, to the disquiet of the
state. And, I my self have heard Crassus avouch, that this was a trick of
Cicero, to bring him into utter defamation and scandal.

3. At the same time Q. Catulus and Gn: Piso, exceedingly labored Cicero,
falsely to appeach Caesar, either by the Allobroges, or any other witness; but
they could never effect it, neither by entreaty, by flattery, nor bribery: both
these persons, at that time did deadly hate him, Piso for that Plena curia he
had been condemned in damages for an unjust punishment inflicted upon a
certain Transpadan. Catulus took it to heart, for that, being an old man, and
borne the most Honorable Offices in the state, now in his suite for the
Pontificacy, he should be opposed and displanted by Caesar, a young man. But
the matter was excusable, for that his private Liberality, had procured him
public friends, and by that means, infinite debts.

But being utterly unable to work the Consul unto so heinous a project; by
private conference, and false suggestions, enforced what they heard Vulturtius
and the Allobroges report, they provoked every man's evil opinion against him;
so farforth, that many Roman knights, which kept watch and ward before the
Temple of Concord, either moved at the greatness of the danger, or inflamed by
the Nobleness of their minds, to manifest their loves to their Country, drew
their irefull swords against Caesar as he arose from the Senate.

CHAP. 16.
1. The condemnation of the Traitors. 2. Caesar's Oration.

THese matters being thus debated in the Senate house, and the Lords as yet in
Counsel about the bestowing of rewards upon the Allobroges and Vulturtius,
with approbation of their testimonies, the freed men (with some few
well-willers) of Lentulus, diversely solicited the Slaves and tradesmen of the
City to rescue the Prisoner: Others of his familiars, inquired after the
Ringleaders of the Rascalitie, who in such times were accustomed for money to
disturb the peace of the City.

But Cethegus by Messengers, desired his acquaintance, his choicest freed men,
and his readiest followers, now or never to be resolute, and in troop with
their naked swords to make way for his rescue.

The Consul having understanding of these designements, disposes the Warders
as time and place advised, and assembling the Senate, demanded of the Lords,
what order they pleased to take with those who were already attached and
remained in prison. A full counsel had already declared them guilty of Treason.

Thereupon D: Iunius Sillanus (Consul elect) being first asked his opinion,
what he would advise concerning the Prisoners, as likewise how the residue, in
case they could be apprehended, L. Cassius, P. Furius, P. Vmbrenus and Q.
Annius.
should be censured; gave sentence, that they should all suffer punishment.
And afterward (being moved at the speech of Caesar) he protested that he would
singly avouch the sentence, with Tiberius Nero. As touching the Marshalling of
secret companies, he thought it fit to adiourne it to further deliberation:
But Caesar, whose turn was now to speak, by request of the Consul, used
this or the like Oration.

HOnorable Fathers, it befitteth all men, who are to consult of doubtful
cases, Sic Maro: N^que ^lie aut dolu^t miseran^ i^opem, aut inuidet habenti.
to be free from hatred, friendship, passion, and pity: where these
contrarieties happen, the Judgment can hardly make distinction between truth
and falsehood: neither lives the man, which can flatter his affection, and
judge uprightly. Our inclinations follow our fancies: if Liberty possess
them, then Will predonominateth and Reason is of no regard. Honorable Lords, my
memory is yet very fresh, torelate what Kings, and what Nations, being seduced
by wrath or pity, Vt Caesero ipsi postea ^ontigit, qui per clementiam illis
pepercit, a quibus postea interfectus est.
have run unfortunate courses: But it is a greater pleasure unto me, to relate
how our predecessors governed their affairs orderly and iudiciously, by
subiecting the fury of their passions, to the mild persuasions of Reason.

In the Macedonian war, which we managed with King Perseus, the stately and
populer City of the Rhodians, (famoused by our assistance) became enemy and
revolted from us. The war being ended, the question arose, in what manner
the Rhodians should be punished. Our Ancestors, least the world should give
out, that they made wars, rather for wealth then in revenge of injuries, freely
pardoned their follies, So likewise, in all the Punique wars, when the
Carthaginians both in times of peace and truces, had committed many outrages,
Sub quibus classem Romanam inuaserunt, and quos caeperet, virgis caeciderunt,
and tamen legati ad Scipione^ missi, intacti ab eo ad S^natum suno remissi, and
inde incolumes and iudemnes Carthaginem sunt reuersi.
our forefathers never gave out Letters of reprisall, but always studied
rather what became their greatness, then what severity of Law or arms,
required.

Honorable Lords, as I take it, this should be your case, let not the offenses
of P. Lentulus and his associates, more prevail with your passions, then
becomes the greatness of your callings: neither, let wrath be said to
esclipse your Honorable reports. For, if a sufficient punnishment can be
devised to equalize their defaults, I cannot but approve this new Counsel:
But if the quality of the offense exceed all immagination, then my opinion is,
that they be punished according to the prescript form of our ancient Laws.

Many, who before me have spoken their minds, have laid out in very eloquent
and rhethoricall terms, the miserable estate of the commonwealth, the cruelty
of War, the fortune of the conquered: agrauating their discourses with the
rauishment of Virgins, the tearing of children from the bosoms of their
parents, the abusing of Matrons, the robbing of Temples, the Pillaging of
houses; withal, not forgetting to move compassion, and passion, by recital of
wounds, fieringes, arms, slaughtred carcasses, and bloody Funerals: Good God!
to what end tended these their Orations, but to inflame your displeasures
against the offenders? As if any speech, could exasperate that dull spirit,
whom the least remembrance of so heinous a Treason (of it self) could not
irritate. A Suppositio^ impossible. Private injuries take deepest impression,
yea with some men deeper then reason should Warrant.

But Honorable Lords, in diverse men, diverse sorts of offenses are tolerable.
To those that live in inferior callinges, if thorough passion they commit an
oversight, few observe it: their eminences outshine not their fortunes: But the
errors of great personages and men of quality, the whole Commonwealth does
forthwith take into examination. And this I speak, to prove that highest
Fortunes have meanest privileges to offend, neither ought they to be induced
by favor, nor moved by hatred, June. Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se
crime^ habet, quanto mayor qui peccat habetur.
and least of all, to be guided by anger. That which the Vulgar term Anger in
mean men, with greater Persons is censured to be pride and cruelty.

Verily, (Honorable Fathers,) I am of this opinion, that no punishment, can be
aunswerable to the quality of their offenses: but the Natures of most men are
given to remember the last ends of their familiars, and forgetting the fact,
they comment on the punishment, if it never so little exeeede moderation.

I cannot but acknowledge, that whatsoever the good and resolute D. Sillanus
has spoken, has proceeded from zeal to his Country: and in this weighty
business, I confess, his integrity and modesty to be such, that thereunto,
his Nature has neither bin induced by flattery, neither ouerwrought by
partiality. Neither can I justly say, that his censure any way sauoureth of
cruelty: for what can be termed cruel, that Justice can inflict upon such
offenders. But surely, the president is not usual in our Commonwealth; and
therefore, either fear, or private injury has ouerwrought thee, (o Decius
Sillanus Consul elect) to give thy consent to this new form of punishment.

Offeare, it were idle to discourse, sithence such strong assistance is in
arms, by the especial providence of this our worthy Consul. As touching the
punshment, I can speak truth as the case now stands: That to men in
distress and misery, death is the end of sorrow, life a torment: Death
dissolueth al mortal misfortunes: Beyond, there is no remembrance of grief,
nor place for joy.

By the immortal Gods, I wonder, that in giving your sentence, you did not
give direction, that first, they should be whipped with rods! was it for that
the Law Portia did forbid it? Or that you had regard to some other, late Law?
Why? The Laws do impose banishment, not death; but upon a condemned Citizen?
Or was it, because you esteemed whipping to be a more grievous punnishment,
then beheading? If so, then what can be bitter or ouer-greeuous against men
convicted of so heinous a Conspiracy? But if you ouer-slipped the direction for
stripes, as of a punishment too too gentle, how comes it to pass then, that
in the loss, you make a conscience of equity, when in the greater, you
proceed without doub^ or scruple?

But why should any man be offended at that which is by Law decreed against
Traitors to their Country? Time, alterations, and fortune, so powerful amongst
mortal Creatures, will ratify that nothing has happened unto these men beyond
their deserts.

Many evil conclusions have arisen from good Principles: as where the Helm
has bin entrusted to indiscreet and insufficient Pilots, these new
Presidents, have been commonly transferred from worthy and well-minded
Citizens, to base and incapable Ministers. So, the Lacedaemonians having
overthrown the Athenians, committed the administration of their Commonwealth,
to thirty Governors: At first; they attached the most notorious offenders, men
generally hated, and executed them without Process. The people applauded and
commended the course, but by little and little Liberty swarned into Lust: The
Innocent and Nocent were condemned at their pleasures: the vulgar were
terrified, and so the City oppressed with servitude, now miserably smarted for
her foolish ouersights.

In our days, when the victorious Silla, commanded Damasippes, and his damned
crew, who had no means to live, but upon the general spoil, to be worthily
slain; who commended not his judgment? Every man cried, it was Nobly done to
free the Commonwealth of such merciless, thriftles, and seditious Rascals:
but what followed, this was the Original of a cruel massacre: For, as any of
his followers affected the mansion, the Lordshippe, yea, at last the plate or
apparel of any of the Comminalty, his course was, to do his endeavor to
inroll him in the number of the Proscripts.

Honorable Lords, I speak not this, for that I suspect the like in Marcus
Tullius, no nor in these times, but in this huge and populous City, it is not
unknown to you, that many and variable humors lie lurking continually.

And so, at some other time, and some other being Consul, with an Army at
command, a false report may happen to pass for truth; when, upon this
president, if the Consul by Commission from the Senate, should vnsheath his
sword, what end I pray you, should the state expect of this rash
determination? Who shall limit his power? Who shall moderate his arms?

Honorable Lords, our predecessors, were never to seek of Counsel nor
Courage, neither did Pride preuaricate their minds from following another man's
advice, so it were profitable. To forge arms, and warlike furnitures they
learned from the Samnits. The Ensigns of Magistracy, (for the most part) they
borrowed from the Thuscanes: yea, whatsoever they saw fitting amongst their
allies, or Enemies, they took great care to bring the use thereof into the
City. They admired Virtue in all men, they envied it in none: but in those
times, in imitation of the Greeks, they punished a Citizen with stripes, a
condemned man, with death.

But in process of time, as the commonwealth began to grow great by the
multitude of inhabitants, iealousies incresed, innocence was circu^vented, and
such like enormities were daily committed. For remedy whereof, the Law Porcia,
and diverse other wholesome statutes were enacted; by which banishment was
provided in cases of condemnation.

These Authorities (Honorable Fathers) in my Opinion should be Motives
exceeding perswasiue, to alter or frustrate these your new determinations.
Believe it, the valors and wisdom of those men, who from so slender
foundations have established so great, so glorious an Empire, could not be,
but much more eminent in them, then in us, who can hardly maintain that, which
they most prouidently bequeathed us. How then Sir? Will you have the Prisoners
discharged, and the troops of Cateline re-enforced? No surely. But my censure
is, that their goods be forfeyted, and their bodies sequestered under safe
custody in the best and strongest Towns of our Associats. With this Prouiso,
that no one of them hereafter be so bold, as to dare to motion means of
redemption, before the Lords of the Senate, neither to mediate his pardon with
the people. Him that violateth this Ordinance, let the Senate proclaim him
Traitor to the State, and enemy to all loyal Subjects.

When this Oration was ended, each man looked upon other; some assented, every
man's mind was diversely distracted.

But at last Marcus Cato, being commanded to speak his opinion; thus began
his Oration.

Catoes Oration.
Honorable Lords, reuoluing with my self, the Nature of this weighty
business: the goodly Arguments (I must be plain) which other men have
thereuppon framed, are of no validity with me to move approbation. For, in my
judgment, they have but only spent time in discoursing, what punnishment were
fitting for men intending the ruin of their Country, the undoing of their
parents, the spoil of private houses, and the overthrow of Religion.

But Noble Lords, this storm calls unto us for a speedy prevention, not a
lingering Consultation. Offenses already committed may be punnished at leisure;
but it will be too late to talk of Justice, when remedy is past, and offenders
grown puissant. If the City be gained, what power (I beseech you) remains
to the Conquered?

For the love of the immortal Gods, let me entreat you all, to whom
beautiful houses, goodly revenues, pictures, and costly hangings are more in
admiration, then the Common-good; if you have any desire longer to be Lords of
these vanities (of what esteem soever) if it be but to continue the means of
these your delights, now at the last pinch assume your courages, and let a
true remorse of the general Welfare wholly possess your irresolute opinions.
It is no time now to take order for impositions, or to talk of the injuries of
our Associats; Our lives and Liberties at this instant are questionable.
Honorable Lords, I have often spoken my mind freely in this thrice-Honorable
assembly; I have made sundry motions touching the Ryots and Covetousness of
this state, procuring to my self no small hatred thereby: but I, who could
never flatter mine own imperfections, could less endure the insolency of
Others. And though you gave but small credit to my sayings, and nothelesse the
Common wealth slorished; yet (believe it) Prosperity only excused your
remissness.

I speak not this, as if time now served to dilate, whether we are degenerated
in manners or no: Neither how great, or how glorious the Roman Empire is, or
has bin: But whether this greatness, this glory (be they more, be they less)
are like to continue ours, or we enforced to part stakes with our enemies. I
know some of you by your silences, would interrupt me, with Mercy and
Mildness^! But alas: we have long agon lost the true Etimologies of those
words: for, now adays, to be prodigal of another man's goods is to be
bountiful doing to do deeds unlawful, unseemly, etc, is to be valourous. In
such extremes does the (...) now stand. Well, let us tolerate their abuses,
because they are inueterate, and time has made them fashionable; let men be
wastfull of that which is none of their own: Let us be merciful unto Thieves
and robbers of our public treasure: yet, I pray you, let them not likewise
be prodigals of our bloods, and we, by foolish pity extended to a few
desperats, undo millions of honest Citizens. I confess that C. Caesar has
showed great learning before this Honorable Court, in his distinctions of life
and death: supposing (as I conceit) that the received Opinions of hell are
false; or that, evil doers separated from the good, and destinated to places
obscure, vile, stinking, unclean and full of horror: And so drawing toward an
end, he would have their goods forfeited, and their bodies committed to safe
custody in the Borroughes of our associates, fearing (belike) that if they
remained in Rome, they might happen to be rescued either by popular commotions,
or waged multitudes: as though forsooth all evil disposed persons resided
only in Rome, and none lay dispersed throughout the towns of Italy. Surely
wise men know, that rash and violent attempts are easiest affected, where least
means of opposition are feared: And therefore, if his fears arise upon such
like surmises, his plot is ridiculous: Or, if he only in so universal an
apprehension of fear, fear nothing at all; because I am so much the rather
induced to be fearful both of mine own safety, and of yours also. Therefore
(Honorable Lords) whenever it shall be your pleasures to ratify your
Judgment against Lentulus, and his associats, believe it with constancy, that
then you undo Cateline, and disperse his confederates: the sooner ye do it,
the sooner you break them: Delay is dangerous; it hops it resolves. Never
let it enter your Opinions, that by arms our forefathers augmented our
Patrimonies: For, if that were true, then at this day would it prove far more
glorious, in that, time has given us, not only advantage, but also surplusage
of Allies, of Citizens, of warlike furnitures, and Horses of service: No, no,
my Lords, of those virtues, which made them so powerful, and so fortunate, we
have not one left us; Thrift in Private, Justice in Public; free Language in
Parliament; Lives spotless, Minds unpassionate. In lieu whereof we possess
Riot and Avarice: In times of Service, pretensed poverty: to serve our own
turns, abundance and plenty. We admire Riches, and embrace Sloth: between
Virtue and Vice we put no difference: Ambition incrocheth, where desert only
should have pre-eminence. And no marvel! for every one of us hold Counsels
apart: At home we work for our private interests: here we speak for Meed or
favor. So on all sides the Commonwealth wringeth: But no more of these
greeuances.

Our fellow-Cittizens, and those descended of most Noble families, have
conspired the invasion of their Country! They have done their utmost in the
quarrel, to engage the French, a Nation always in deadly hatred of the Roman
name. The Captain of the War, in person braueth you at your gates: and yet,
you stand looking one upon another; doubtful and irresolute what to do, with
those whom you have apprehended within your walls. Shall I inform you? Then
thus: They are young Gentlemen, deceived thorough foolish Ambition: Let them
find favor: yea, let them depart armed; without doubt, this your lenity, and
pity, upon the next occasions, shall turn you to misery.

The maine is bitter, full of horror, but you fear it not! Yes iwis, and that
extremely: why then like cowards and men of basest would stand you still,
straining courtesy who shall march foremost? Well, I know the reasons. Now, as in
former times, in most iminent dangers you trust that the immortal Gods will
turn all to the best. Fools that we are! To think that the Gods will be won
by Womanish vows and idle Sacrifices, without watching, without pains-taking,
and good Counsel. Where these stand jointly employed, al things come to happy
ends. At Sloth and Cowardice the heavenly powers are off^nded.

In the days of our Ancestors, A.M. Torquatus adjudged his son to death, for
that against the command of his general, he had happily fought with his
enemy. And he, (most vvorthie young Gentleman) accordingly suffered the
punishment of rash valor: And do you now ask, what shall be done unto these
most merciless Traitors?

Sir, their fore-passed life merriteth some mittigation. Be it so: Deal
favorably with Lentulus for the honor of his house, if he at any time
favored his own good name, his calling, Gods, or men. Let the adolescencie of
Cethegus, be a Motive of mercy, if this be not the second rebellion wherein he
has been interessed.

What should I say for Gabinius, S^atilius, Ceparius?

If they had bin men of any moderation, they would never have engaged their
estates in such dangerous complots against their country.

Honorable Lords, if I could discern any mean hopes, I could be well
content to see you moderately beaten with your own negligences, for that
you regard not good Counsel. But since we are beleaguered on every side:
Cateline houereth over our heads with an armed power: his associates are within
our walls, even in the heart of our City, and nothing can be dispatched in
Counsel with secrecy: (weighty inducements of speedy resolution) For these
reasons, and for that (most Honorable Fathers) the Commonwealth has run
into apparent danger, by the practices of these Traitorous Citizens, already
convicted by the Testimonies of T. Vulturtius and the Allobroges: and
themselves have confessed their intentions to kill, to burn, and to commit
many other lamentable and unspeakable outrages against the City, and this
state. My censure is, that More maioru^, punishment be inflicted upon them, as
upon Traitors condemned of high Treason, by their own confession.

Cato being set down, the Consuls, with the greater part of the Senate,
approved his sentence, and highly praised his courage. And while one accuses
the other of faint and remiss courage, Cato obtains the atributes of Great,
and Excellent. According to his censure they pass a Decree.

And because these two, M. Cato, and C. Caesar (men of excellent parts, but of
diverse Natures) lived in my time, I think it not admisse, to add unto this my
discourse, a Comparison of their lives and actions.

A Comparison of M. Cato, and Ca. Caesar.
IN descent, in years, and eloquence they were almost equal: in greatness of
mind and populer commendation alike, but diversely. Caesar affected the Surname
of Great, by Largess and Bounty. Cato by Integrity of life. Caesar became
famous for his courtesy and gentleness; Cato for his stern carriage and
severity. Caesar grew popular by giving, by forgiving, by releeuing: Cato by
contraries. The one professed refuge to the oppressed: the other, inexorable to
offenders. The one was praised for affability: the other for gravity. Caesar's
chiefest felicity was, to labor, to watch, to prefer the ^uits of his
favorites, to be careless of his own, to deny nothing worth giving: of command,
of Soldiery, of difficult wars (wherein valor and good conduct showed the man)
very desirous: But Catoes studies were modesty, grave carriage, and above all,
severity. With the rich, he contended not for Riches, neither with the
factious, for followers; but with the valourous, by imitation: with the modest,
in Conscience, and with the good man, in abstinence. He coueted to be, not to
seem. The less he sought praise, the more it followed him. Thus much for this:

CHAP. 17.
1. The counsel resolved to follow Catoes opinion: command their sentence to
be executed upon the Offenders.

AFter the Senate (as I told you before) had resolved to follow Catoes
opinion, the Consul letting no time slip, to prevent al disturbances, made
every thing ready against night, which now drew on apace. He commanded the
three executioners to prepare themselves: he disposes the warders, and leads
Lentulus to prison: So are the residue by the Shirifs. In the prison is a
dungeon called Tullianum, into which, after a man is a little entered, upon the
left side, is a room scarce twelve foot high, walled round about, and
ouerhead vaulted with a stone Arch, exceeding dark, unsavory, and able to
amaze any man's senses. Into this place was Lentulus commanded, where the
executioner did forthwith strangle him. So this Noble Gentleman descended of
the ancient house of the Cornelij, and once Consul, ended his life according to
his deserts: so did Cethegus, Statilius, Gabinius, and Ceparius, after the same
manner.

CHAP. 18.
1. Cateline joins with Manlius, and supplying his Legions with men of better
condition, casseth the slaves: 2. He understands the discovery of the Plot,
and how his friends fared at Rome: 3. He flies.

AS these things thus passed at Rome, Cateline by uniting his forces with
Manlius, makes two Companies, with wings proportionable to his numbers. And
as his companies increased, either of voluntaries, or of such as were sent unto
the camp from the confederats, he divided them equally betwixt the Legions,
and so at length supplied their defects, which in the beginning were not above
two thousand strong. The fourth parts of his people were not souldier-like
armed, Vt in quolibet tumulin et seditione fie^^ sole^.
every man took what came next to hand; some Darts, some Lances; others very
sharp and keen Bore-speares.

And now hearing of the approaches of Anthony, Virg. Hic torre armatus e^usto,
Stipitis (...) grauidi nodis, etc.
he iournieth by the mountains; sometimes bending toward the City, sometimes
toward France, cunningly avoiding all occasions of hazard, upon assurance,
that if his Accomplices had once brought their determinations to execution in the
City, that forthwith his forces would be strongly reenforced. Ignanum and
infidele hominu^ genus
Upon which his imagination he casseth the slaves; of which sort of people, no
small numbers trusting to the report of the strength of the confederacie^ had
in the beginning flocked unto him, knowing in his conscience, that to
communicate his cause, and the good estate of the city, to slaves and
fugitives, could not but with reason impair the credit of the action.

3. By this time news arrived at the camp, how the conspiracy was detected,
the Noblemen executed, and their followers (whom either the giddy Love of
war, or the hopes of spoil had animated) were dispersed and discouraged.
Whereupon, Cateline without expectation of further assistance, with his present
forces, by long marches and the rough mountains, takes his way toward
Pistoia, of purpo^e, by by-waies secretly to have fled into Gallia Transalna.
But Quintus Metellus Celer, who lay about Picenum with three Legions, by
circumstances of casualties, judging of events, and understanding by certain
fugitives, what way the Rebels took, dislodged, and pitched his Camp at the
foo^e of those hills, by which Cateline must of necessity descend, to pass
into Gallia. Anthony (for that he followed the flying enemy by beaten and
usual Highwaies) soonest arrived: which when Cateline perceived, as also, how
he was incircled by the vast Mountains, and the enemies Caualry, so that he
could no ways fly, and to expect further succors was bootlesse; he there
resolved to hazard the fortune of the battle. To his Soldiers he made this
Oration.

CHAP. 19.
1. Catelines Oration to his followers. 2. The description of the battle.

COmpanions in Arms, full well I know that words inflame not Noble hearts,
neither that a cowardly and base Soldier, is any whit animated by his
Generals speeches. For, what portion of courage Nature has implanted in a
valourous breast, such will it show it self in times of trial. But the mind,
that is neither incited by Honor, nor made resolute by danger, will never be
moved by generous speeches: for fear anticipateth hearing.

But (Noble soldiers) I have called you to this assembly, partly to give you
a few instructions, partly to acquaint you with my determinations. It is not
unknown to you, what mischiefs the cowardice and irresolution of Lentulus has
heaped both upon himself and us; and by our daily expectation of succors from
the City, we have lost the opportunity of passing into Gallia. In what estate
we stand thereby, you may all conjecture.

Two Armies pursue us; One, from the City, another from Gallia. To stay long
in these deserts (how endurable soever your courages may persuade you) poverty
of all necessaries, and want of food, will forbid us; and ye^, the way to give
remedy to these miseries, must nethlesse be wrought by your swords.
Wherefore, I entreat you, to take courage and comfort, that as I shall lead you
to the charge, so you would remember, that you carry in your right hands your
fortunes, your honors, your Glory, your Country, and your Pardons.

If the day be ours, we are made for ever: we shall soon get food in
abundance, to sustain our hungry carcasses; Towns and Colonies shall be
assigned us; but if we yield to base fear, we shall find all things
contrary: Neither place, nor friend will protect him, whom his own sword
cannot succor. Besides, their case and ours is not alike: Our quarrel is for
the good of our Country, for the general defense of Liberty^ for the safeguard
of our lives: Theirs, for the pleasures and greatness of a few private
persons. Wherefore, let the insinesse of the quarrel, stir up our greater
resolution, by the remembrance of our ancient valors.

Time was, we might have spent the remainder of our days in disgraceful
banishment, and many of you might still have lived in Rome, upon expectation
of (I know not what fortunes) having nothing of your own (but Beggary to trust
unto: but because such men as we are, cannot but scorn such base courses, we
have made choice of this; which, if you mean to make good, then show deeds
correspondent. None but the Conqueror can convert war into peace, and to
think to find safety in flight, by forsaking your Arms, or abandoning your
naked bodies to your enemies, were a point of madness beyond extreme. In a
set battle, no danger is comparable to fear; Resolution is unconquerable.

(Valiant Companions) even the opinion of your woorthes, your former exploits,
and your years fit for war, warrant my conceits of good fortune.

I will silence necessities, true motives to make Cowardes courageous: the
streights of the Mountains forbid our Enemies to enclose us; and therefore, if
our destinies be to die, set your lives at a dear rate: die not unrevenged,
neither suffer your selves to be taken Prisoners, afterward to be cut in
pieces rather like Dogs, then men of service. Leave nothing to your enemies
to boast of, save a Lamentable and bloody victory.

2. After a little pausing, he commands to sound to the charge, and
Marshalling his battallions in very seemly order, approaches the place of
encounter. Where being arrived, he causes every man to dismiss his horse,
that the danger being alike, their hopes and constancy should be equal; yea,
himself on foot, rangeth his people, as the Nature of the place and his
numbers would permit.

The plain was fortified on the left hand with Mountains; on the right, with
a steep rock: Between these he brought the vauntgard consisting of eight
Cohortes: the Areregard he commanded to march more close, and in it he placed
the chief and choicest Centurions.

The Mercinaries and best armed, made the first ranks of the battle: Caius
Manlius, marched on the right hand, a certain Fesulan on the left: Himself
with his fellow-Cittizens, all free men borne, and the aides of the Colonies,
stood next unto the standard of the Eagle, the same, they say, that C. Marius
displaied in the Cimbrian war.

On the other side, C. Antonius being sick of the Gout, could not be at the
combat, and therefore made M. Petreyus his Lieutenant General. Of old
soldiers (pressed out for the suddenness of the business) he made the
voward; the residue he placed behind for succor and advantage. Then gallopping
through the ranks, calling upon every Captain by name, he coniureth, he
commands, he entreats, that that day they would show themselves men, and
call to remembrance that they were to fight but against a rabble of unarmed
fugitives, for their Country, their children, their Religion. This Martial
man had bin above thirty years Tribune, and either as General, Lieutenant, or
Colonel had borne the Offices in many fortunate battles, wherein he knew the
insufficiency of his followers, and their valiant exploits; by repitition
whereof, he doubled their courages.

All places thus ordered, he sounds the signal, he marches somewhat
forward, and then makes a stand: the like does Cateline. Then the battles
aproching within shot, they run fiercely to the shocke, with diverse clamors,
and deadly hatred. The shot being spent, they fall to their swords. The old
Soldiers disdaining to be foiled, go resolutely to the charge, Laus optimi
imperatoris.

Resolve I cannot whether he, A better Chief, or Soldier be.


and are as valiantly received, both doing their utmost. At last, Cateline
coming in with his light armed followers, into the head of the battalions,
refreshes the weary, planteth fresh soldiers in the places of the wounded,
has an eye upon all chances, gives and takes many strokes: and finally,
performs the part of a valiant soldier, and an excellent Commander.

Petreyus, as soon as he pereciued the station of Cateline, imagining that
there his people should be forcst traveled; without more ado, charge into
the midst of his enemies with the Pretorian Cohort, speedily disordereth their
ranks, and slays as many as make resistance. Then turns he head upon the
wings, and at the first shocke slays Manlius and Fesulanus.

When Cateline saw this miserable spectacle, his army defeated, and few left
about him; calling to mind the Honor of his house, and his ancient dignity,
thrusts into the thickest of his enemies, and there valiantly fighting, was
slain.

The battle being ended, what valor and courage had bin in Catelines
people, was plainly to be discerned. For what parcel of ground any one made
choice of, to stand on in fight, the same being slain, his slaughtered
carcass covered. Only a few, violently ouerborn by the fresh charge of the
Pretorian cohort, lay somewhat farther removed; yet al with their deaths-wounds
upon the foreparts of their bodies.

The body of Cateline was at length found dead amongst the slaughter of his
slain enemies, not yet altogether breathless, but in countenance showing some
tokens of his living fierceness.

At a word, not one free Citizen was taken alive, either in fight or flight;
neither party made spare of their own bloods: So far forth, that the
victory proved neither joyful, nor unbloody to the Roman people. For the
brauest men were either slain in fight, or dangerously wounded. Of many, that
went out of their Tents, whether to gaze upon the place of the battle, or to
rifle the dead bodies of their Adversaries: some found their friends, some
their Hosts, some their Kinsmen, and amongst them many of their known enemies.
Insomuch, that the whole Camp was replenished with diversity of humors; of
joy, of heaviness, of Triumph, of Mourning.

FINIS.
C. C. SALVSTIVS his History of the War of IVGVRTH.

Printed at London Anno MDCIX.

A Breuiat of the History.
Now the Realm of Tu^is in Barbary.
NVMIDIA, contains that part of Afric, wherein Massinissa the faithful
friend and confederate of the Roman people, sometime reigned. This Massinissa
had three Sons; Micipsa, Manastaball and Gulussa. Manastaball and Gulussa
died; by whose death the Kingdom entirely descended to Micipsa. Micipsa had
issue, Adherbal and Hiempsal; Iugurth, he fostered as the Son of his Brother
Manastabal, for that his Grandfather Massinissa had left him vnaduanced, as
his base Grandchild begotten on the body of a Concubine. The man was
ambitious, well qualified, of a ready wit, and great spirit, elder then
Adherbal or Hiempsal. In jealousy whereof, Micipsa, fearing that if he should
die during the minority of his children, that their Cousin Iugurth might happen
ambiciously to usurp the Kingdom, resolved to oppose him to dangerous
adventures, in hope by these means to see him miscarry.

About the same time it happened, that the Romans, under the conduct of Scipio,
besieged Numantia in Spain, whereunto Micipsa sent certain Regiments of Horse
and foot, under the command of his Kinsman Iugurth, their General; making
full account in this journey, to hear news answerable to his plotted
desseignements, but Fortune had otherwise decreed: for in this war, the
reputation of Iugurth more and more increased; yea, he made so many fair
proofs of his valor in this Action, that Scipio not only commended him in a
public Oration, but (the war ended, and Numantia razed) he invested him
with many military honors; by his Letters commending his service to Micipsa, in
very worthy and honorable terms, which bred so sudden an alteration in the
King, that whereas before, he fully minded his destruction, he now wishes and
intends nothing so much as his welfare and advancement; adopteth him his
Son, and shortly after dying, left him Co-heire with his Children, throughout
his whole estates and dominions. After whose disease, the three Roytelets,
Adherbal, Hiempsal and Iugurth, devising with themselves about the portion of
the Kingdom, Iugurth traitorously slays Hiempsal, the younger of the twain,
and casting in his haughty mind, how by the death of the other, he might become
sole Lord of the whole, firmly resolves to leuy an Army, wherewith he gives
the overthrow to the elder Brother Adherbal. Who after this defeature, flies
to Rome, and there aggravating his Brothers death, his own banishment, and
Iugurths treasons, beseeches aid of the Lords of the Senate. The Lords
accord, and send ten Commissioners into Affricke, to make division of the
Kingdom between them: who had no sooner ended the business, and turned their
backs, but Iugurth entertained his former practices, and a new inuadeth his
Brothers portion with war and slaughter. To repress this his insolency,
Adherbal of mere necessity is driven to leuy an Army, and to march against
Iugurth, but is again overthrown, and with a few Horsemen in his company
forced to fly unto Cirtha, whether Iugurth aduaunceth his forces, and besieges
the City. Hereof Adherbal by Letters certifieth the Lords of the Senate,
giving them to understand, upon what desperate terms his estate depended,
how he was deprived of his kingdom by Iugurth, and forced by war and famine
to undergo such utmost extremities, that long time he was not able to make
good the place of his refuge, even the sanctuary of his life: That his
adversary little regarded the censures of the Senate: finally, that they would
vouchsafe to send him potent and speedy succors. Upon the opening of these
Letters many gave their opinions, in favor of the distressed estate of
Adherbal, but others corrupted by the Numidian, advised rather to send
Commissioners unto Iugurth, with authority to command him in the name of the
Lords and people of Rome, to abstain from farther violence. Iugurth gave
these Commissioners during their employment in Affricke, fair language and
faithful protestations, but after their departure fell a fresh to his former
proiects. Whereupon, the besieged, desire Adherbal to pity the estates of so
many innocent people in the Town, that seeing he could not otherwise provide
for his safety, that he would yield the place upon assurance of his life
only. Which being granted, and the town surrendered, without respect of Oath or
kindred, Iugurth falsifieth his Faith, and cruelly murdereth his innocent
Brother. The news whereof much disquieted the Lords of the Senate, and
therefore they posted away Lucius Calphurnius Bestia (the Consul) with an Army
into Affricke, to give stop to his further proceedinges: but he being corrupted
by Iugurth, in stead of punishing the Traitor, concluded a most dishonorable
peace. Wherewith the Lords of the Senate being much more moved then before,
dispatched away Albinius the Consul, with order and authority to repress the
Traitors insolences: but him Iugurth so long deluded with promises and
counterfeit demonstrations of submission and conformity, that the year being
spent, without doing any thing, he was enforced to leave all as he found it,
and to hasten to Rome against the day of election, nominating his brother Aulus
Lieutenant of the Army and Province. This man, either on a foolish opinion to
reap the glory of finishing this war, or upon avarice to fill his private
Coffers, in January, in the depth of Winter, leads the Army into the open
field. Iugurth quickly finding the insufficiency of this new General,
pretending fear and cowardice, trayneth his enemy into woody and mountanous
Countries; yea, and to color his subtilty, sends his humble petition to the
Roman General, with offers of submission and satisfaction. The faster he fled,
the more eager was Aulus in pursuit, until Iugurth taking the benefit of time,
and the advantage of the place, found easy means to rout the whole Romain
Army. The day following, they fell to composition: First, that the Roman
Prisoners should be dismissed Sub iugum: Secondly, the whole army within ten
days clearly to depart the bounds of Numidia. This daunted the people, for the
present, but gathering again their spirits (notwithstanding the composition of
Aulus, and his peoples overthrow) they dimitted Numidia to Metellus (the
Consul) for his Province. This excellent Commander finding the Army corrupted
by the remiss carriage of his Predecessors, first restored the Ancient
discipline, and then by hazarding a set-battell with Iugurth, put him to the
worse. After him, Marius (Consul elect) succeeded in this Province of Numidia,
who persecuting the war with courage and good Fortune, utterly undid the
Numidian, and getting him into his possession by policy, led him through Rome
as a Captive, before his Triumphall Chariot.

C. C. SALVSTIVS his History of the War of IVGVRTH.
The Proeme.
FAlse and frivolous is this general complaint of Mankind: That Nature has
not only endowed us with weak bodies, and those of short continuance; but
also has subi^cted the^ more to the influence of Fortune then to the
predominance of Virtue. Clamantes vt poeta. Fortuna immeritos auget honoribus:
Iustos illa viros pauperie grauat: Indignos eadem diuitij^ beat, etc.
For, upon mature advice, if we could call our indowments into consideration,
we should find no Planet to be of like operation, or greater efficacy to
preferment. To the atchieument whereof, we may more truly lay to blame upon our
want of industry, then either upon the shortness of life, or indigence of
means. For without doubt, the Animum rectum, bonum quid aliud voces, quam deam
in humano corpore hospitem.
Mind is Lord and Monarch of Mortality: which whenever it resolves to climb
the aduenturous passage of Advancement by the path of Sen. Neminem dedignatur,
qui modo se dignum illa iudicaueri^.
Virtue, it shall find it self abundantly furnished with sufficiency, and
favors powerful and eminent; without any way being beholding to the
inconstancy of that disgraceful Goddess; for that she has neither means to
give, nor power to bereave us of our good reputation, of our industry, no nor
of the least of any of our virtuous inclinations. But when we enthrall these so
powerful instincts to sloth, base motions, and bodily pleasures; and therein
have worn out our strong bodies, our irrecouerable youth, and excellent wits:
then is it Error, and no just complaint to accuse Nature of weakness and
infirmity, our selves being the workers of our own woe by pretense of
impotencie and difficulty.

But had we the like alacrity, to aim at the fairest objects, as we have
inclination to affect the basest courses, and those of no worth, yet full of
hazards; we should be as ready to resist fortune, as fortune were Nullum numen
habe^, si sit prudentia, etc.
able to cross our intendments: yea we should share so far forth with glory
and greatness, that in despite of Oblivion our names after death should
participate of eternity.

For as we are compacted of Soul and body: so all our thoughts, words, and
actions; follow some the frailties of the flesh, some the virtues of the Soul.
And therefore by the infallible law of Nature, beauteous faces, immeasurable
riches, and strongest bodies, shall in short time decline and perish: All
things that have a beginning, must of necessity have an ending: sometime
falling before they are blossomed; but how ever, wayning before they are fully
come to perfection. But the gifts of a virtuous mind are subject to no such
limitations; they are, as the Soul, Immortal, Time-scorners, the guids of
life; resisting all things, commanding all things, containing all things, yet
uncommanded and vncontained of any.

Which high and Sovereign Prerogatives make me the more to wonder, to see men
spend the whole date of their days, Dum seruitur libidini facta est
consuetudo: and dum consuetudini non resistitur, facta est necessitas.
in Reuelling, Riot and Idleness, suffering their wits, (the richest Ornament
of humane bodies) for want of courage and employment, to rest base and vulgar,
especially sithence the mind affords such store and diversity of means to
rise to advancement.

But it should seem, that men thus qualified in these days, affect not
Offices, Superiority, and employment in the state, because virtue is neither
countenanced, nor those who have attained preferment by indirect courses, the
freer from Cum non justice sufragijs ius obtinuerint.
Disgrace, nor accounted more honest. For although by their supereminence they
have jurisdiction over their country and parents, and may punish offenses, yet
is the President distasteful, In Magistratibus neque salus nec requ^es, nisi
been vtentibus.
for that all Hoc est, regi per Magistratus non electo^ liberis suffragijs.
innovation irritateth Discontents, Ielousies, Quarrels, and Scandal. Whereas
on the other side again, to gape after a thankelesse Office, and to reap for
our labors nothing but Envy, is as extreme a part of madness; unless it be
for him, whom a preiudicate and factions Vt fecere aliqui in fauorem Caesaris,
Po^peij et Augusti.
humor of power possesses, thereby to gratify the ambition, abuses, and
partialities of a few great personages.

But to come to my purpose: of all taskes that the mind can undertake, I hold
none to be of greater use, then Historia est testis tem poru^, lux veritatis,
magistra vitae, nuncia vetustatis.
History: of whose excellency, because many famous men have worthily discoursed
thereof, I will forbear to speak, least some severe censurer, should tax me
of affectation for praising the profession wherein (I confess) I take most
delight: Yea, and I am in perfect belief, that othersome (for that I was once
determined to spend the remainder of my days in vacancy from State-Affayres)
will not stick to write upon the forhead of these my laborious and profitable
studies, the Titles of Quia absque magno labor (sed non sine Art) videtur
seribi Historia.
Sloth. But my best hope is, they will prove only such, who only account it a
work of industry to complement with the people; or by making good cheer, to
captiuate men's favors: Who, if it please them to remember in what times I was
chosen to Office, and what men at the same times were put by, with the
insufficiences of such, as afterward were chosen into Parliament, they cannot
but acknowledge that I Sapientis est mutiare propositum, sires mutentur.
changed my mind upon due considerations, and not upon any inclination to
Sloth: and that the commonwealth is likely to reap more profit by my times of
leisure, then by the continual employments of some other. For, I have often
heard Q. Maximus, P. Scipio, and others our honorable Predecessors report, that
the intentive contemplation of the Vnde dici solet picturas et coelaturas
illiteratorum esse libros.
Medalls of their Ancestors, has often inflamed their minds to Emulation: not
that the painting, or the liueles protraiture had any such influences in the^,
but that the recording of their glorious actions, did disperse such a Bout-feau
of imitation in their spirits, that it could never be extinguished, until
they had equalized their highest Virtues.

But in these times of corruption, what man lives, that contendeth not with
his forefathers in acquisition of riches and expense, but neither in honesty,
nor industry? Even vpstarts, who in the old world were accustomed to enter the
rank of Nobility, Quorum maiores nunquam fuere in to Magistrat^.
by worth and sufficiency; in these days, lay their plots for preferment by
sinister endeavors, and not by virtuous courses: As if the Praetership,
Consul-ship, and such like offices, were in themselves simply Noble, and not
graced by their worths who manage such places. Tet. Qui ista bona vocant,
perin^e sunt atqua qui illis vtuntur.
Thus have I given my pen her liberty, confessing, that the corrupt and
degenerate manners of the City, has made it forgetful of duty; for
recompense whereof, I will now betake me to my task.

CHAP. 1.
1. Reasons inducing the Author to write this History. 2. Massinissa enters
aliance with the Romans. 3. The vexation and cares of Misipsa his Son and
successor. 4. The commendation and qualities of Iugurth. 5. His fortunes.

IN this Book, my purpose is, to write the War which the Roman people
undertook against Iugurth King of Numidia: First, because it was weighty,
cruel, and doubtful: Secondly, for that about this time, the people avowed
their first discontents against the surquedrie of the Roman Nobility: a
contention whereby al Divine and human laws were wrapped in confusion; and
afterward proceeded into such raging fits of succeeding madness, that Italy
was almost wasted, before their civil wars ended.

But for the Readers better understanding and more satisfaction; before I enter
into the maine of the History, I will first begin with matter of more ancient
discourse.

In the second Punique wars, wherein Hanniball the Carthaginian Captain, had
after their manifold good fortunes almost laid desolate the Italian Provinces,
and wasted their forces: Masinissa king of Numidia, was received by Scipio
(afterward for subduing Africa, Surnamed Affricanus) into the Roman
alliance. A man for Military prowess and valor much renowned, and whom, after
the overthrow of the Carthaginians and the taking of Sciphax (a Lord of a
spacious kingdom in Affricke) the Roman people in reward of his good and loyal
service, frankly invested with those cities and provinces, which by force he
had gained from Sciphax. By this means, the friendship of Masinissa, continued
profitable and constant: Quia tam parum durauit successoru^ regnum, vt non
regnass^ v^dea^tur.
but he finished his life no sooner then his Empire took ending. Manastaball
and Gulussa, his Brethren, being dead, the kingdom diuolued unto Micipsa, as
sole-heyre. He had two Sons Adherbal and Hiempsal. Iugurth, the son of his
Brother Manastabal, whom (being base borne) Masinissa had left in private
estate, he brought up in his own house with like allowance as he proportioned
to his own children; who coming unto man's estate, grew strong of body,
comely of feature, and quick of apprehension: not giving himself to riot or
wantonness, but according to the custom of that Nation, addicted to riding, to
cast Darts, or to run matches with his Compeeres: wherein although he always
carried the prize from the residue, yet was he nevertheless generally beloved.

Thus spent he his youth, sometime in rowsing the Lion and other wild Beasts,
wherein he would be sure to be the man, that should give the first stroke. In
these disports, he would do most; and being ended, speak least to himself.
Of which Princely carriages, although in the beginning Micipsa rejoiced,
esteeming his Virtues as an Ornament of his Court, yet reuoluing his old age
and the minority of his Children, with the popular applause, which he observed
every day more then other, to increase by the youth and towardly disposition of
Iugurth, being much disquieted in mind, he began to forecast many casualties
in his thoughts. The frail Nature of man thirsty of soueraignety, and
headstrong to execute the deseigns of ambition, did present him his first
fears. The second, arose from the consideration of his own years, and the
nonage of his children, the opportunity whereof only, were of maruailous
efficacy to transport men or mean discents and aspiring spirits to hopes of
high places; the last scruple that possessed his imaginations, was the populer
love and dependancie of the Numidians: from whom, if by some polliticke plot,
he should make away so worthy a subject by immature death, he stood far
more doubtful of ensuing wars and vprores.

Being confounded in these passions, and well weighing that a Man in so
Gracious acceptance of the people for his ready service, and love to martial
Adventures, Quae res bellic^sae genti maximae admirations est.
could not with safety be wronged neither by law nor subtil^e; resolved to
oppose him to dangers, therein to undergo the fate of his fortunes. And
thereupon Micipsa creates him Lord General of those horse and foot, which
were sent for Sp^in in ^ssistaunce of the Roman people: hoping either by rash
valor, or some blow from the enemy, to hear news of his kinsmans death. The
event crossed expectation For Iugurth as he was of a quick and apprehensiue
wit, observing the Nature of Scipio his General, and the behavior of the
enemy, with especial care and performance, modestly obeying the commands and
wills of the Officers, did oftentimes oppose against and prevent many eminent
dangers: insomuch that in short time the Name of Iugurth only grew famous
thorough the Army, highly beloved of our people, most dreadful to the
Numantines. vnde dicit Seruius Quibus sanguis calodus, vt Afr^^, mayor est
prude^tia, sed minor audacia in bello: Contra quibus frigidu^: vt Teulonibus.
And to give him his due, a thing not often seen; the man was valiant in
action, and wise in counsel (for the most part;) the first, assisted by
providence begets fear; the second, enforced by boldness produces
rashness. Which his good parts the General taking in notice, entrusted unto
Iugurth almost all his difficult deseigns, inrold him in the rank of his
friends, and every day grace^ him with extraordinary favors; and not without
desert; for whatsoeeuer he advised, Sen. Diuitiae apud sapientum in seruitute
su^t apud stultum in imperio.
he performd with honor. To these his good parts were also adjoined Bounty, and
dexterity of conceit, Qualities that brought him in liking and familiar
acquaintance with the better sort of the Roman Gentry.

At that very instant, many both ancient and new vpstart Gentlemen, served in
our Army, unto whom bribes were more in esteem then upright or honorable
carriage: whose humors being factious, and at Court in credit with their
followers, more admired for their discents, then worthes; These were they, that
by proposing high dignities first inflamed the mind of Iugurth, persuading him
that if Micipsa were once dead, he might easily become sole-Lord of Numidia;
That he worthily deserved a Crown, That in Rome al things were saleable for
money.

5. Numantia now razed, P. Scipio determined to dismiss his Auxiliaries, and
to make his return to Rome: Coronis et Insignitus victoribus.
at what time after he had graced Iugurth with due Trophies of desert, and
honorably commended him by word of mouth, he led him into his imperial
Pauillion, where he gives him these secret Instructions: Rather in public
then private to show his affections toward the Roman people: not to be
bountiful to particulars: That friendship bought of a few, was more uncertain
then that which is entertained by many. That if he proceeded as he began, that
glory and honor would attent him above expectation: But if he made more have
then good speed, that both riches and himself would headlong run unto
destruction. This was all the General spoke, and so dismissed him, committing
to his deliverance certain Letters subscribed to Micipsa: the Tenor whereof was
as follows.

The valor of your kinsman Iugurth, has deserved no small commendation in the
war of Numantia: which news I know assuredly will be welcome unto you. His
deserts deserve no less of us, we will do our utmost to work the like
acceptance with the people and the Lords of the Senate. I salute you for our
ancient friendship. And in the word of truth, I re-send you a Gentleman worthy
of your favors, and the descent of his Grandfather Massinissa.


As soon as the king understood by Letters from the General, that Fame had
bin no liar, partly moved by the report of his kinsmans excellency, and partly
by his good carriage, he changed his mind, and seeking to win the man by grace
and favors, forthwith adopteth him his son, and by testament makes him
co-heire with the residue of his children. Then growing old with years, and
perceiving by sickness and course of nature, that he had no long time to live,
he is reported to have thus discoursed with Iugurth, in the presence of his
friends, kins-folke, and sons, Adherbal and Hempsal.

OIugurth: It is well known, that after the death of thy Father, even in thine
Infancy, I received thee into the Tutelage of my House, left as thou were to
the world, without means or possibilities of advancement: expecting no less
content from thy loyalty, in requital of those Honors which I have bestowed
upon thee, then I hoped from the Loves of mine own Children, for the benefit
of their Births. Wherein I have been nothing deceived. For, to silence many
thy famous and former exploits, I confess that thy late employment and return
from Numantia, has perfected the honorable Testimonies of us, and our Nation:
Thy valor, of fautors, has made the Roman people most constant friends unto
us, and in Spain thou have revived the remembrance of our deceased
Progenitors: Mas^inissae, qui claruit sub Hasdrubaie.
Above all (a work most difficult) thy Virtues have ouertopped Envy.

And now, for that I perceive that my life draws toward an end, I admonish
and adjure thee by this right hand, and the allegiance which thou owe to thy
country, Quam ad tunc tenuit.
that thou estrange not thy love and service from these thy kinsmen, whom by
favor and adoption I have created thy Brethren: neither covet thou, in
government to admit of strangers, rather then of those who are allied unto thee
in blood and parentage. Loyal friends, not the armed Soldier, nor the Richest
Treasure, are the surest guards of Kingdoms: True friendship which thou can
neither allure by practice, nor buy with gold, is purchased by respect and
fidelity. And who I pray thee, should be more indeered, then one Brother to
another? Or what stranger shall that man find confident, who proves a Traitor
to his own blood? Surely if you continue virtuous, I bequeath you a strong
Kingdom, if ye turn evil, a weak Patrimony. By Unity small things are
multiplied: by Dissension, the greatest kingdoms are ruinated.

Believe me Iugurth, it is thy Office (for that thou art eldest in years and
experience) to take care that nothing happen contrary to these my latest
Counsels: for in all controversies, the man that is most powerful (though he
receive an injury) yet will it be supposed, that he has given it, because he
is best able to do it.

Again (you my sons,) see that you Honor and advance this your worthy
Kinsman: Imitate and out-strippe hins in virtue, least it be said by me, that I
have adopted brauer Children, then I have begotten.


Although Iugurth conceited that the King spoke not this from his heart, having
his mind busied upon far higher and different cogitations; yet for the
present, he gave courteous and gracious language. Within a few dates after
Micipsa dyed.

CHAP. 2.
1. The Roytelets assemble about partition of the Kingdom. 2. Hiempsal
disgraceth Iugurth. 3. His revenge. 4. And preparation to war. 5. His course
after victory. 6. Adherbals Accusation. 7. Iugurths excuse. 8. Order taken to
content both Parties. 9. The issue.

AFter the three Roytelets, according to the custom of their Ancestors, had
Royally interred the body of Micipsa, they appointed a time of meeting there to
take order for their further affairs. Where Hiempsal (the youngest of three,
but by Nature the proudest) now, as before time, scorning the base descent of
Iugurth, by his mother, took place upon the right hand of Adherbal, that
Iugurth might not sit in the midst; which amongst the Numidians is accounted
the most Honorable place. Neither could he by his Brothers earnest
importunity, without apparent discontent, be persuaded to remove on the other
hand.

Where, amongst many particulars proposed of government, Iugurth affirmed,
that whatsoever Micipsa had decreed, five years before his death, ought to be
of no validity: for that, by reason of his aged years, during those times, his
senses had failed him. Wherewithal Hyempsal was well pleased: for within the
space of these three years last past, (quoth he) you were adopted as co-heire
into the Kingdom. Which words took deeper impression in the heart of Iugurth,
then any man present would have suspected.

3 This disgrace, from this time forward provoked Iugurth, (irresolute
between wrath and fear) to study and plot in his mind how to surprise
Hyempsal by Treason; Which determination working but to slow effects, and his
enraged passion nothing the less by time assuaged, he now resolves to
dispatch it upon any occasion.

At their first meeting (showed you before) to avoid all causes of contention,
they took Order to divide the Treasure, and to limit out every man the bounds
of his portion. A time certain is set down to perfect both these Decrees, but
with order, to have the division of the money first dispatched.

Whereupon the Roytelets severally remove to places nearly adjoining to that
place where the Treasures were stored. Hiempsal took up his lodging, by great
chance, in his house, who was Captain of the Guard to Iugurth, a man very
inward and gracious with his master.

Him (by fortune thus making a fit Instrument for Treason) Iugurth solliciteth,
by massy promises corrupts, and without denial importuneth to forge and
deliver him the counterfeit keys of his house, for the true keys were nightly
carried up into Hiempsals Chamber. The remainder, as occasion served, himself
with his armed retinue would take order to dispose of.

The Numidian speedily executes his masters commands, and according to his
instructions at night, gives entrance unto Iugurths Soldiers: who were no
sooner in possession of the house, but they disperse themselves, some to seek
the King, some to murder Hiempsals servants, and others to make good their
entrance, in case any person made resistance. This done, they left no secret
place vnransaked; they broke up Presses, and diued into every blind corner,
confounding all places with noise and uproar; and at last, lighted upon
Hiempsal, hidden in the lodging of a poor Maide-seruant, whether the sudden
apprehension of fear and ignorance of the place, in the beginning of the
tumult, had frighted him to fly unto. The Murderers, as they had in command,
strike off his head, and present it to Iugurth. The fame whereof in a trice
flies over all Affrique.

4. Adherbal, and the Subjects of Micipsa, stand astonished at the report of so
heinous a treachery: The people in general fall to partes-taking: The greater
number continue constant to Adherbal, the men of War follow Iugurth.
Whereupon, without further delay, he raysest the strongest forces he can, he
seizes upon Towns, some by force, and some by faite speeches: he unites
them to his former portion, and casts in his mind how to become sole-Lord of
Numidia.

Adherbal, notwithstanding that he had sent his messengers to Rome, to inform
the Lords of the Senate of the death of his Brother, and his particular
misfortunes; yet seeing himself well accompanied with armed troops, he
doubts not the adventure of his welfare, upon the hazard of a battle. But
coming unto trial, his army was defeated, and himself glad to fly into his
own province; from whence he took his way toward Rome.

5 Now Iugurth being Master of his desires, and peaceable Lord of al Numidia,
reuoluing in his mind the future scandal of this heinous murder, saw none, of
whom he should need to stand in fear of, but the Roman people: To mitigate
whose wrath, no hopes remained, but such, as Money and the avarice of the
Nobility afforded. Wherefore to prevent storms on that side, he within a few
days after dispatcheth his Ambassadors toward Rome, plentifully laden with
Gold and Silver: giving them instructions: First, to present his ancient
acquaintance: Secondly, to draw in New; And lastly, to be sparing toward no
man, so he were in place to countenance his practices. So ariuing at Rome,
according to the direction of their Lord, they saluted their Patrons, and the
greatest of authority in the Senate with rich presents. A sudden alteration
followed: the greater part of the gentry which but even now, were most
violently carried in passion against Iugurth, forthwith became a Protector and
fauorer of his cause. Some in hope, and others upon resceipt, privately
labored every Lord of the Senate, to lay no heavy or unsupportable pressure
upon Iugurth.

This done, the Ambassadors are confirmed, and a day of hearing set down for
both parties: wherein Adherbal thus laid open his cause.

Adherbals Oration.
6 Honorable Lords, my Father upon his deathbed gave me in charge, that I
should carry my self, but as Lieutenant of the kingdom of Numidia. It was his
last will, that the Sovereignty should remain at your devotions.

Moreover, he commanded me, to do you my utmost service in times of peace and
war, as also to make no other account of your fidelities, then of the
loyalties of so many friends and Kinsmen; which precepts (said he) if you
observe, By the security of their friendships, you shall never be to seek of
an Army, of Riches, and the protection of a Kingdom. These rules had I no
sooner planted in my mind, with determination of obedience, but Iugurth, the
most impious man, that breaths upon the circuit of the earth, in despite
of your imperial prerogatives, has utterly disabled me the Nephew of
Masinissa, yea friend and confederate of the Roman people, Suadet Senatum vt
sibi suppetias ferri iubeat.
to accomplish these duties, by him, being expulsed from my kingdom and Native
Country.

Yet (Honorable Lords:) such is my estate, that I had rather implore your
assistaunce to these my present miseries, in remorse of mine own calamities,
then in respect of any my Ancestors deserts: rather wishing that these favors
were due unto me by the Roman people for mine own sake (though I had no
occasion to use them) or if I had, that my self might only remain their
debtor.

But for that a good conscience (for it selfs sake) is smally regarded, and
fortune has not showed like favors to me as she has to Iugurth; Honorable
Lords, my self have made choice to make my resort to your favorable
protections, wherein, my only grief is, that misery has enforced me,
first, to be burdensome, before I have bin profitable to your state.

Other Kings have bin admitted into your friendship, either after their
overthrows, or at best, have requested it, doubtful and desperate pinches;
but our house ventured their alliance in the hottest of the Carthaginian wars,
at what times their singular good wills, were rather to be accepted, then
their forces valued. The issues of such men (and me the Nephew of Masinissa)
suffer not (Honorable Lords) to implore aid in vain, but rather, if there
were no other reasons of satisfaction, then my distressed fortunes (who whilome
was a King, happy in descent, famous in renown, and powerful in substance,
now base, miserable, needy, and begging assistance of another;) yet let the
Majesty of the Roman Empire prohibit injuries, and restrain a wicked varlet to
usurp upon another man's right, Honestum, quia id pater and a^us meriti sunt.
wrongfully. For (Honorable Lords) I am dispoiled of that inheritance which
the Roman people allotted my Ancestors, and whereof my Father and Grandfather
stood seized jointly with you, after the expulsion of Sciphax and the
Carthaginians.

These your Noble donatiues (Honorable Lords) are injuriously taken from me,
and you in my disgraces shamefully dishonored. Wretch that I am! O father
Micipsa, how are thy favors requited! Shall the man whom thou broughtest in
to be coheire of thy kingdom, and of mecre favor aduancst to equal dignity
with thy children, become the chief instrument to destroy thy Progeny? What!
shall our house never see quiet days? Shall we always converse with blood,
war, and banishment?

As long as the Carthaginians, flourished, we endured the greeuances of all
hostility without complaint: then our enemies lay upon our backs, your aid
was far remote, and therefore our hopes resided in our own valors; we
knew what to trust to. But after that Affrique was disburdened of that plague,
every man reioyned in the security of peace, because no enemy remained, Vtile,
quia socius Rom^^ imperii permaner^t.
but him perhaps whom you might have given in commandment to be defied.

But behold contrary to expectation, this Iugurth, bewraying his insufferable
presumption, his bloody Conscience, and his ambitious spirit, in the slaughter
of my brother and his own kinsman, did make his kingdom the first purchase of
his wicked disposition: His second proiects were, to circumvent me by like
Treason; which when he could not effect, nethlesse, by force and war, he
has now dispoiled me, (mistrusting no such violence) of mine inheritance, of
my birthright, and (as you can witness) enforced me to undergo the miserable
casualties of want and beggerie, being in every place more secure, then in
mine own kingdom.

Of your assistance (my Lords) I make this construction, that (as I have often
heard my Father say) those who with integrity regard your friendship, took much
pains in obtaining their suits, B. Pater and avu^.
but of all people living, their estate is securest. Our family never failed in
the one; in all your wars their assistance has bin at your service: now lies
it in your power to requite me with the other.

S. ab infidiis Iugurthae.
Honorable Lords, Our Father left us two brethren, the third, this Iugurth, By
his bounty he supposed to have left likewise a Brother devoted to our good;
but the one he has already slain; my self, the other, has hardly escaped
his blood-thirstie cruelty. In this distress what shall I do? Unfortunate
that I am! to what especial friend shall I turn my complaints? The assistance
of my kinsmen, lies buried with their bodies, in the grave: my Father is
departed this world: (the decree of Nature) my brother slaughtered by the
treason of this his Kinsman, a murder most unnatural: the remainder of my
affinity, consanguinity, friends, and followers, he has by diverse practices
oppressed: some he has put to ransom; some he has dispatched at the
Gallows; and others he has cast before the hungry jaws of ravenous beasts.
A few (yet beholding unto him for their lives) he has imprisoned in dark
dungeons, there to spend the date of their days in sighs and laments; a life
far more intolerable then death it self.

Thus honorable Lords, if I had neither lost some part of my people, neither
had cause to complain of the revolt of others: yet, if any misfortune should
have against expectation befallen me, I would have implored the protection of
your favors, unto whom, for the majesty of your Empire, every Subiests right
or wrong ought to be regardfull. But being (as I am) a banished man from my
native soil, from mine own House, alone, and in extremity, whether shall I
go? Whom shall I appeal unto? Unto our Neighbor Commonweals, or Kings? My
Lords, they all hate us in regard of your alliance. In those places, on no side
can I turn my visage, but I shall behold many hostile remembrances of our
Ancestors service. Can they then take compassion of him, who was once their
capitol enemy? No my Lords: Micipsa taught us to crouch to no men, but to the
Roman people: yea, to defy strange leagues and alliances. Your friendships
were Bulwarks impregnable to secure us.

If fortune should frown upon this Empire, then I know our estate were also
desperate: but by your own prowess, and the favors of the Gods, your
Commonweal flourishes in wealth and increase; prosperity tryumpheth in your
Cities, and loyalty in your Provinces: blessings which make easy the relief
of your associate.

Whereof I despair not, but only fear, least the private insinuation of
Iugurth (of whom you have yet made small trial) pervert the judgment of some,
whom (as I hear) with tooth and nail he severally labors to work, to
corrupt, to inueigle, not to pass any decree in his absence, without hearing
his answers: obiecting that my complaints are false, my flight dissimulation,
and that I might have stayed with security in any kingdom, if it had so been
my pleasure. O! I would to God, I might but live to see the same man, who has
by his impious treachery, inwrapped me in this conflict of miseries, in like
case dissembling: that these humane Controversies might at some one time or
other be referred, either to your decisions, or to the justice of the immortal
Gods: That so, being now proud and famosed for his villainies, and as a man
exposed to all calamities, he might suffer the deserved reward of his impieties
committed against our Father; of murder inflicted upon our Brother; and of
Treason, the source of my miseries.

Dearest Brother, although thy death were untimely, and thou of life bereaved
by him, whom of all men living it worst beseemed, yet am I of opinion, that
this thy misfortune, is rather to be ioyed at, the^ lamented. For with thy
life, thou lost but thy kingdom: of flight, of banishment, of poverty, and al
such afflictions, Sic Virg. ^ terq^ quaterque be^ti, Queis ante ora patrum,
Troia sub montibus altis, Contigi^ oppetere.
which oppress my very soul, thou art insensible. But I unhappy man, thrown
headlong out of my Patrimony into an Ocean of miseries, wander the world as a
spectacle of human change, uncertain what course to run. Shall I revenge thy
wrongs; Alas! I am not of power. Shall I do good to our Country? Ah! My life
and death slandeth at the devotion of others, for death I wish, It were an
honorable period to my misfortunes, rather then by affecting of longer life,
to make show; that in love thereof, being quite spent with miseries, I lived
content to brook his insolent injuries.

But as I am, I have neither pleasure to live, nor means to die without
impeachment of mine honor. And therefore, (thrice-Honourable Lords) I adjure
you, by your children and parents, Sueto. Neque me, neque liber^^ meos
chariores habebo quam, etc.
yea, by the majesty of the Roman Empire, to put redress to my miserable
estate, to prevent these wrongs, and not to suffer this your kingdom of
Numidia to be ruinated by Treason, and the blood of our family.

After the King had made an end of his speech, the Agents of Iugurth, more
confident in their gold, then the goodness of their cause, Callide tacent quod
iussu Iugurthae.
made this short reply. That Hyempsall was slain by certain Numidians for his
cruelty. That Adherbal had begun the war unprovoked: and being overcome,
Quia natura s^rox and superbus re vera erat.
fell to complaints, having no further means to prosecute his envy. That
Iugurth humbly petitioned, the Lords of the Counsel would be pleased to make
no other construction of his upright carriage, Vnde laudatissimus redierat.
then of such as he showed in their service at Numantia: neither yet to
prefer the words of his enemy, Iugurthae mores Scipioni imperatori,
popul^que Romano iampridem no^i essent.
before his deeds. Which ended, both parties are commanded to depart the Court.

Whereupon the Lords demand opinions. The favorites of Iugurth, and with
them, the mayor part of the Senate, traduced by gifts, made small account of
Adherbals complaints. The deserts of Iugurth they advanced with favor,
commendation, allowance, and thanks, no less outstriuing by all means
possible to extenuate so apparent a treason and villainy committed by a
Stranger; then if they had bin pleading in a righteous cause, to reap glory and
commendation.

But in opposition; some few, to whom right and indifferency, were more
respective then rewards, gave sentence with Adherbal. That he was to be
succored, and the murder of Hyempsal to be severely punished. Amongst the^ of
especial note was Emilius Scaurus, a Gentleman, stout of courage, factious,
and ambitious of rule, honor, and riches, but close and cunning of carriage.
This man, after he had observed the infamous, and abominable bribery of
Iugurth, fearing (as in like cases happens) that free speech against the
abuses of corrupted greatness, might procure envy, contained his humors from
their accustomed Liberty.

8. Notwithstanding, in Senate the greater part prevailed: Meed and favor
ouerswayed Equity; and an order recorded, that ten Commissioners should be sent
into the province of Micipsa, to make a division thereof between Adherbal and
Iugurth.

The president of this Embassy was L. Opinius, a man Honorable by birth, and
great in Senate, who being Consul, after the deaths of C. Graccus, and M.
Flaccus, made sharp and cruel use of that victory which the Nobility gained
against the Commons. Him, at Rome, his professed adversary Iugurth,
notwithstanding entertaineth with especial courtesy.

9. By Largess and promises he likewise suborneth him, to set more by profit,
then fame, faith or reputation; he attempteth the residue by like cunning: Some
he works, a few made more Conscience of Honesty, then of Money.

In the division of the kingdom, the portion thereof, that bordereth
Mauritania, populous, and fertile, is assigned to Iugurth: the other part
(fairer in show then profit) but beautified with havens, and adorned with
costly buildings, was given to Adherbal.

CHAP. 2.
1. The description of Affricke. 2. The first inhabitants.

ORder calls upon me briefly to discourse of the situation of Affrique, as
also to show what Nations lived with us in war, or amity. But as for those
places and countries, which either for their extreme rough mountains, or vast
deserts, lie unfrequented, I will but point at randon: the residue I will
discourse of in shortest manner.

In the division of the Terrestrial Globe, some attribute unto Afric a third
part: othersome, speaking only of Asia and Europe, contain Affrique in
Europe. Westward it boundeth upon the Mediterranean and Ocean seas: Eastward
upon those steep mountains, which the inhabitants term Catabathmon. The sea
is stormy, the shores without havens, the soil fertile of grain, plentiful
for Catell, but unapt for trees. It has few springs, and little rain: The
people are heathfull of body, swift of foot, and indurable of labor. Many,
who come not to untimely deaths, by the sword or wild beasts, would outliue
the accustomed course of man's age, if nature failed not; for it is sildome
heard that any die by sickness: yet is the whole land stored with infinite
swarms of venomous worms, and beasts of prey.

But what people possessed the Pauca ci^itates, ^^rint Origin^m.
Country in the beginning: who afterward arrived, or how they becam mingled
one with another, though diversity of opinions possess private fancies, yet as
we are letten to understand by the interpretation of those Punique books,
which were said to be Hiempsals, we will as briefly as we may, relate as the
case stands what the Natives report for truth in this matter. Let every man
give credit, as he pleases to fancy it.

2 The Getuli and Libians, an uncivil and barbarous people, feeding upon raw
flesh, and the fruits of the Earth (as Beasts) did first inhabit this
Country. They were neither governed by Nature, neither by Law, nor
superiority: wild, straggling, without leader, and there resting, where night
ouertooke them. But after that Hercules (says the Affricans) dyed in Spain,
his Army composed of diverse Nations, having lost their Captain, in short time
disbanded, by reason of the disagreement, and ambition of their Leaders. Of
these companies the Medes, Persians, and Armenians, being transported into
Affrique by shipping, seized upon the Sea-coastes of the Mediterranean. The
Persians took up their Seats more inward toward the Ocean, and turning the
Keeles of their Boats upwards, used them, in liew of better buildinges: for
neither the soil affoorded Timber, neither was it lawful to buy or barter for
any in Spain. Further Traffic, the Great Sea and ignorance of foreign
languages, prohibited.

In process of time, by intermariages with the Getuli, they became one Nation,
and for their wandering from place to place, to prove the goodness of
pasturage for their Cattaile, they termed themselves A Graeca voce vemein, i.
pascers: vnde d^rmatur dictio, Nomades, i. vagab^ndi pascentes.
Numidae. Even unto this day, those vpland buildinges of the Numidians, which
they term Mapalia, Cottages, are a kind of building edgelong on the top, and
broad-wasted below, in a manner resembling the bottomes of overwhelmed Shipping.

Unto the Medes and Armenians, arrived the Libians, for they conuersed more
nearer the Affrican Sea. The Getuli lived more near the Sun, almost under
the Tropique; and by reason of the small distance of Sea between Spain and
them, they built Towns in short time, and gave themselves to Traffic and
Navigations. By assiduity the Libians corrupted their Names, and of Medi in
their barbarous languages, called them Mauri.

The fortunes of the Persians in short time flourished: whereupon under the
name of Numidae, in regard of their multitudes, taking leave of their Parents,
they seated the^selue, in the Territories next adjoining to Carthage, and after
their own names Numidia.

After some continuance of Numidae Carthagiu^^ sium, and Carthaginensis
Numidarum.
time, the one Nation making use of the other, they enforced their neighbors
either for love or fear to subjection. They became famous, and augmented their
glories in greater measure, then those that were nearer seated toward d our
Seas. For the Lybians were not so warlike as the Getuli. So for the most part,
the lower part of Africa was wholly possessed by the Numidians, and the Viclis
victorum nomen inditur.
victor imposed his own name upon the conquered people and country.

Again, the Phaeniceans, some to diminish their homebred multitudes, and some
of the Comminalty desirous of advancement, and other some, in love of
novelties, arrived upon the Sea-costs, and there built Hippon, Adrumetum,
Leptis and many other Cities, which in short time grew admirable famous; many
whereof in future ages at some seasons, gave great assistance, and at all times
continued an honor to their first and ancient Countrymen.

I hold it more wisdom to silence the Original of Cum eius Origo and fama
factaru^, ingentem deposcat historiam.
Carthage, then to write thereof sparingly, because time calls me to make
have of another discourse.

Near unto Cathabathmon (the frontier between Affricke and Egypt) in the
higher sea, first appears Ciren, Colonia Thereon, the two Duo arenosa loca in
mari.
Sirtes, between them Leptis, and then Arae philenorum: Here ends the
Carthaginian Dominion toward Egypt: Beyond, are some Cities of the Punique
jurisdiction; the residue, the Numidians possess as far as Mauritania. The
Moors lie nearest Spain. Beyond the Numidians (men say) that the Getuli
live, some in homely Cottages, some, more rudely, to wander as Vagarants.
Beyond them, the Ethiopians, and beyond them again, all places to be scorched
with extremity of heat.

CHAP. 3.
1. The estate of Affrique in the beginning of these wars. 2 Iugurths cunning
carriage. 3. He provoke his Brother to fight, and routeth his Army.

1. IN this war, the Roman people did govern many of the Punique Towns, and
al those Territories, which were lately conquered from the Carthaginians, by
their Lieutenantes: A great part of the Getuli and the Numidians, (as far as
the flood Mulucha) were Subject to Iugurth: King Bochus was Lord of the
Moors, by report only known to the Romans; otherways, never heard of
either in times of war, or treaties of peace. Thus have I spoken enough to
purpose, as concerning the situation of Affricke, and the people who inhabit
it.

2. The division of the kingdom being determined, the Commissioners returned,
and Iugurth contrary to his own fears, having obtained a reward for his
Treason, began to call unto mind, how he had heard his friends at Numantia
report, That all things were vendible at Rome. Upon assurance whereof,
concurring with the late protestations of his corrupted favorites, being
encouraged, he resolved to make a proof upon the kingdom of Adherbal. The
inuader was violent, and valourous: the invaded, peaceable; No soldier; Of a
frolic disposition; Disgistiue of injuries; Fearful, rather then to be
feared.

Whereupon, Iugurth takes the occasion, and upon the sudden strongly inuadeth
his frontiers, makes booty of men and Cattle, fiereth villages, and shows
himself in warlike array with his horsemen before many good towns. This Brauado
performed, he retireth with his people into his own kingdom, coniecturing,
that Adherbal could not but take this hostile outrage to heart, and in like
measure cry quittance: which if he did, then was his desires satisfied, for
this would he pretend to be the cause of the quarrel.

But Adherbal, for that he knew himself inferior in forces, and reposed
greater confidence in the friendship of the Roman people, then in his
Numidians, dispatcheth Messengers to Iugurth, to complain of these outrages.
Who although they reported nothing back again, save contumelious Language, yet
sat he still, with full resolution to suffer all manner of disgraces, rather
then to begin the War, because to his loss he had lately felt the smart
thereof. The ambition of Iugurth never the more relented, he had already in
conceit swallowed the whole kingdom: And thereupon, not now, as before, he
makes a cursory and pillaging iourny into the Country, Lucan. Nulla fides
regni soci^s, omnis qu^ po^e^^as impatiens consortis erit.
but marches souldier-like in the midst of his armed battalions, and lays
an open claim to the Crown of al Numidia. As he goes, he wastes Cities, and
depopulateth Villages, takes prizes, incorageth his followers, and danteth his
enemies.

3 Adherbal perceiving no mean courses available, but that he must either
fight, or fly, upon very necessity leuieth forces, and resolves to seek
Iugurth. They had not marched many days, but both Armies approaches near
unto Cirtha, a Town situated not far from the sea. This happened toward the
Evening, no fit time to darraigne a battle. But about midnight, after the
going down of the Moon, upon a signal given, the soldiers of Iugurth give a
Camisado upon the camp of Adherbal, some they slay half awakened in their
beds, others running to their arms, they put to flight, and cut in pieces.
Adherbal with some few horsemen posteth unto Cirtha, where, if a strong troop
of Citizens had not forced the pursuing Numidians to retire from the walls,
without doubt one day had decided the quarrel of a kingdom, Iugurth lays his
siege round about the Town, prepares vines, raises Towers, and begins a
breach with all sorts of Engines; yea, and to frustrate the arrival of the
Ambassadors, who as he heard say, were sent from Adherball toward Rome,
before the day of battle, he hasteneth the siedge with all possible diligence.

CHAP. 4.
1. Ambassadors are the second time sent into Africa with sharper
Instructions. 2. Iugurths cunning and fayning excuses. 3. After the Ambassadors
departure, he again besiedgeth his Brother.

As Soon Nihil decenter in hac ^e gevi^ur: copo^si^r ex^^ci^u^, no^ legat^, ne
^lli ^ebebant ad in^u^ia^ vindicandam.
as the Senate had understanding of their differences, they dispatched three
young Gentlemen into Affrique, with Commandment, to go personally to both
the Kings, and in the name of the Senate and Roman people, by word of mouth to
say unto them; That It was their will and pleasure, that they should both lay
down their Arms. In so doing, they should perform a work Digrum se^atu,
que^ ^^cis (...) esse d^cuit et dig^ii ^^li^, qui inter se tam propinqui essent.
worthy their Friends and themselves.

The Ambassadors make the more have toward Affrique, for that the news was
in Rome before their departure, that the Princes had fought, and that Cirtha
was besiedged. But that rumor was sparingly verified.

2. Iugurth having understood the Tenor of their Ambassy protested, That
nothing could be of greater worth, or more dear unto him, then the authority
of the Senate: that such had been his carriage from his youth, that the love of
al good men had voluntarily befallen him: that he had been gracious unto P.
Sci^io, that worthy Gentleman, for his virtues, not for perverseness: And
lastly, That for these qualities, and not for want of Issue, Micipsa had
adopted him into the Kingdom. So that, by how much the more he had showed
himself a good man in civil behavior, and a valiant Captain Captain in
service, by so much the less could his great spirit brook to pocket up a
wrong. Inferring, that Adherbal had laid weight traitorously to murder him;
upon discovery whereof, Magna ingenia agree seru^t iniurias
he had but taken the course of prevention: which if the Roman people gain
said, they neither used him according to his calling, nor affoorded him
Justice; to forbid him to apply those remedies which the Law s. vim vi repelle.
of Nations and nature provided. Finally, he protests, that in good time he
would send his Agents to Rome, to give ample satisfaction to all parties: and so
takes his leave. License of reply Adherbal could not obtaine^

3 Now, Iugurth coniecturing about what time the Ambassadors might take
shipping to depart, returns again to Cirtha, and for that the Situation
thereof was impregnable by nature to be forced, he inuesteth it round with a
trench and a ditch, he errecteth Towers, and manneth them: Night and day he
proffereth assaults, and works Stratagems: Sometime he loadeth the
defendantes with Mountains of fair words, and other times he adiureth all
terrible punishments: his own people he prays to be resolute, and for his
own part, is negligent in nothing that might put life to the enterprise.

Adherbal now perceiving upon what desperate terms his safety consisted, that
the enemy pressed hard upon him, no hope of raising the siedge; as also, that
for want of meat and munition the war could not be prolonged, of those, that
fled with him in company into Cirtha, he makes choice of two lusty and trusty
companions, inducing thence by great promises and his miserable estate, by
night to feign flight into the enemies trenches, from them to pass to the
seaside, and so to take passage for Rome. Within a few days these Numidians
execute their masters command: Adherbals Letters are delivered in the Senate,
the Tenor whereof, was as follows.

It is not my default (Honorable Lords) that I thus often trouble your Honors
with petitions, the violence of Iugurth is the motive: Him, so incompatible a
thirst of my blood possesses, that neither your prescripts, nor the
remembrance of heaven, can turn his mind unto consideration of duty. My life
above all earthly things he aymeth at: Cuius vlt. ^ ^^nt ^, sed ^a no g^a^^ur.
Five months are now past, sithence I (your friend and confederate) have
endured his siedge: the favors of my father Micipsa are forgotten; your
Injunctions, no defense: I cannot resolve you, whether war or hunger do most
torment me. Pa^um creditur m^s^^is.
My hard fortunes do diswade me to write more concerning this Iugurth: I have
already made trial, that miserable men find small credence: Only this I dare
assure you, that he affects somewhat else, besides my life: you know he
cannot bereave me of my kingdom, and neth less stand in your good grace, d.
grauius ferret remit t^re regnum meum, quam anncitiam vestram.
which he would make choice of to lose, who doubts? He has already slain my
brother Hiempsal, and dispoiled me of my fathers kingdom: These are my private
injuries, they concern not you. But now he usurps upon the whole; the Man,
who you have made Lord Governor of Numidia, he besiedgeth, and how he has
scorned the behests of your Ambassadors, my perils plead publication. What one
remedy is left, but your assistance; yet such, as were of power to raise him
from this siedge? Surely I could wish, that these my present lines, as also my
former complaints in Senate, were causlesse, so that my misery might win you to
credit. But sithence the destinies have reserved me to this hour, wherein I am
made a laughing stock and matter of triumph, to the disloialty of Iugurth, I do
not now think upon death, nor the diuersion of miseries, but only pray that I
might share in his punishments, so I were sure to participate of his fortunes.
As for the kingdom of Numidia (which I confess is yours) provide for it, as
you think best; let me entreat you thus much, for the majesty of your Empire,
and our plighted faiths in friendship, only to deliver my body from the
tyranny of this impious conspirator: And this, as you tender the remembrance of
my Grandfather Massinissa.


CHAP. 5.
1. Ambassadors of greater quality are again sent into Affrique. 2. Remisly
they leave things as they find them. 3. Cirtha is forced. 4. Adherbal slain.

Upon the reading of these Letters, some of the Lords were very hot, to have an
Army forthwith levied for Affrique: affirming, that they were in honor engaged
to send present succors to Adherbal, and at leisure to consult upon Iugurths
contempt, for disobeying the order of the Ambassadors: But on the contrary, his
favorites with much ado bestird them, to dash this decree. Thus (as in like
cases) private favor perverted public honesty.

Notwithstanding, least they should seem to do nothing, they have in
Embassage grauer personages, men of great place and quality again into
Affricke; amongst whom, was M: Scanus, of Consulare dignity, and powerful in
Senate; of whom we told you before. These men, for that Iugurth had incurred
the Qua legatis non parnisset.
general hatred, and the Numidians also with no less importunity did
solicit, a speedy departure, in three days space were got a shippebord, and
with a fair passage arrived at Vtica: whence, in have they posted away their
Letters to Iugurth, with intimation, tha^ he should (all excuses and delays
set apart) upon sight thereof, retire into his own province: not forgetting
likewise to acquaint him, how they were especially sent unto him from the Lords
of the Senate.

2 Iugurth hearing that such eminent persons, and of such authority in Rome,
were employed, to cross his disseignes; at first, somewhat perplexed between
fear and perseverance, stood diversely distracted what to determine. He feared
the displeasure of the Senate for his contempt toward the former Ambassadors:
but lastly, the blind humor of Ambition ouermastred his senses: And so an
ungracious Counsel, forced out of a rash resolve, prevailed to the worst.

Whereupon, giving a general assault to the Town, he labored his utmost, to
become master thereof: confidently hoping, that by drawing his enemies forces
to to diverse defenses, either the sword, or policy, would cast upon him the
Trophy of victory. Which not succeeding; neither his proiects of circumventing
Adherbal, (before he should come to Negotiation with the Ambassadors) sorting
to effect, fearing by longer stay further to exasperate Scaurus his anger, whom
he much feared; in the company of some few horsemen he retired into his own
Province: where being given to understand in the name of the Senate, in what
heinous measure, they took his contumacy, in not desisting from the siege of
Cirtha, and what grievous punnishment they threatened, after much debating on
both sides, the Ambassadors retired toward Rome Quia ^alses in^^p^i ratiou^s,
and causas friuolas adduceret Iugurtha.
without accomplishing any agreement to purpose.

3 After news hereof was brought unto Cirtha, the Cirthae pro presidio
imbositi, post diuisionem regni.
Italians, upon whose Virtue the safety of the Town consisted, persuaded
themselves, that if they motioned a composition and yielded the place, they (in
regard of the Roman name) should be sure to find good dealing, move Adherbal
to give his consent to yield himself and the Town to Iugurth, with
conditions of security for his life; All other the Controversies to be referred
unto the good pleasure of the Senate.

Adherbal though he had rather have undergone any extremity then trusted
Iugurths oath, yet because it lay in their powers to constrain him, how
obstinat soever, yielded to accept of whatsoever Articles the Italians did
think meetest.

4 The first sacrifice that Iugurth offers, after some cruel tortures,
Inermibus, verefim^le est, pepercit, an tamen Italicis, non constat.
is his brothers blood: the second, a promiscuous slaughter of the young
Numidians and Merchants, as any one happened to meet with his armed enemy.

CHAP. 6.
1. The Humor of the Lords, the opposition of Memmius, the subtility of
Iugurth 2. The Romans first preparation to war. 3. frustrated by Iugurth.

AFter intelligence heerof was certified at Rome, and the matter began to be
expostulated in Senate, the old favorites of the King, sometime by
interuption, and sometime by fair speeches, intermingled with foul, found
occasions by protraction of time to add hopes of mittigation of the offense.
And if C. Memmius In proximum annum.
Tribune elect of the people, a man of an undaunted spirit, and much offended
at the insolences of the Gentry, had not preferred an information to the
people against Iugurth, how matters were carried, (viz:) that by a few
factious Citizens the offender was likely to be pardoned; without doubt all
displeasure had bin forgotten by procrastination of consultations: Of so great
moment were favor and Money.

2 But the popular fear awakeneth the Drousie spirits of the Lords of the
Senate, to recall to their memories the inexcusable management of this foul
fact. By the Law Sempronia, Numidia and Italy, are the appointed provinces for
the future Consuls: P. Scipio Nasica, and L. Calphurnius Bestia are nominated.
The lot of Numidia fell upon Calphurnius; of Italy, upon Scipio. Wages and al
other ammonitions necessary for war are proportioned for the Army of
Affricke: Iugurth, contrary to immagination (being beyond doubt persuaded that
all things would to contentment be managed at Rome for money) by message
hearing hereof, sends his own son with two of his trustiest Counselors in
Embassage to the Senate. To these he gives in strict charge (as he had done at
the death of Hyempsal) to work upon all creatures with money.

After their arrival at Rome, the Senate was demanded by Bestia, if it were
their pleasures that Iugurths Messengers should be suffered to enter within
their walls. For answer, they replied, that unless he would personally
appear before the Counsel Table, and there simply surrender himself and his
kingdom; that his Legates within ten days next immediately following, should
get them packing out of the confines of Italy; at peril. The Consul
acquainteth the Numidians with the decree of the Counsel: acordingly they
departed without satisfaction to any thing they demanded.

Mean time Calphurnius, mustreth his army, entertaineth gentlemen, and amongst
them some factious spirits, whose greatness he made account should be his
protection, against errors and calumnies: of these Scaurus made one, of whose
carriage and behavior we have already related.

The Consul by nature was qualified with many good parts, both of mind and
body, if Avarice only had not blemished their purities: Indurable of labor,
quick of apprehension, reasonable circumspect, an indifferent soldiour, and
valourous in dangers and sudden enterprises.

By this time the legions were arrived at Oppidu^ Calabriae
Rhegium, from thence they set sail for Sicill, and so to Affrique.

3. In the beginning of his first arrival, being well provided of necessaries,
he made sharp war upon Numidia, took Prisoners, and some Cities by strong
hand. But after he had once talked with the bribing Messengers of Iugurth, who
made the sharpness of the present war the color of their Embassage, the mind
of Calphurnius, distempred with the Lethargy of Avarice, relented^ Scaurus was
taken to be the Prime-moter and Minister of al his Counsels: who although in
the beginning he had opposed with no small integrite against Iugurths faction,
notwithstanding at last, the Massi^ mineral of Gold, from Good and Virtuous,
gave him the imputation of wicked and Impious.

The next Stratagem that Iugurth bribed for, was only a surcease from Arms:
Upon hopes that time by rewards or favor would produce some milder fortune.

But lastly, when he heard that Scaurus was put in ioynt-Commissioner to take
order in the business, his former hopes were redoubled, to recover an assured
peace, and thereupon grew resolute personally, to fall to composition
concerning all Controversies.

Hereupon (for good-meanings-sake) Sextus the Treasurer, is sent as a pleadge
to Vacca, Iugurths Town, but under pretense of receiving the corn which
Calphurnius had commanded the Messengers Vt vulti^ne, iub^tisne cum Iugurtha
bellum componatur.
in open audience to provide, for that the treaty of truce was to be prolonged,
according to Iugurths delay in capitulating.

Whereupon the King (according to promise) makes his appearance in the Camp,
where speaking some few words before the Council, in extenuation of the harsh
construction which men made of his offense, he desires to be received to
mercy: what he had more to say, he communicates with Bestia and Scaurus in
secret.

And so the day following, a general opinion being Ne quid sinistri vulgus
suspicaretur.
demanded, according to the Law Satyra, he yields, and is received, with
condition set down by the Counsel, that he should pay thirty Elephants, a
proportion of Cattle, like number of Horses, and no small quantity of Silver;
which were accordingly delivered unto the Treasurer. This done, Calphurnius
iournyeth toward Rome, to procure allowance of the decreed truce from the
Senate, leaving good directions, both in Numidia, and our army, for observation
of the peace.

CHAP. 7.
1. The Commons repine at the peace concluded with Iugurth. 2. Incited by C.
Memmius.

But after that same had made report of the occurrances of this war, and how
it was managed, at Rome in every place, and in all companies, every man's head
was busied with the behavior of the Consul. The commons, as a woman with
Child, labored with envy; The Lords could not resolve whether they should
ratify or disanull, so dishonorable a composition concluded by a Consul. The
greatness of Scaurus, who was reported to be the Author and chief Counselor
of this business, to Bestia, perverted all right and Justice.

2 But C. Memnius, of whose free form of speech, and distaste of the Gentry, we
have already spoken, observing the timorousness and procrastination of the
Senate, in his Orations ceased not to encourage the people to revenge the
disgrace: he aduized them not to set light by their Privileges of Liberty:
he aggrauated the cruel, proud, and manifold insolences of the Nobility:
finally, his whole Orations tended to no other scope, but to irritate the
corages of the vulgar. And because in those times, his eloquence was famous and
much spoken of in Rome, amongst many, I think it not amiss, to acquaint you
with the Transcript of one, and especially with that which he made after the
return of Bestia. Thus it was.

C. Memmius his Oration.
FEllow Citizens, many are the perturbations of my mind, which do accounsell
me to forsake you, if my zeal to the common cause prevailed not above all
other passions: that is to say, the powerful greatness of the faction, your
slavish patience, and the suppression of Justice: but the grief, that most
curbeth me, is, to see that Innocence is sooner rewarded with perrill, than
graced by desert.

How these fifteen years last past, you have lived as a scorn to the Pride
of a few; how basely without revenge, and in dangers you have for saken your T.
Gracchus. C. Gracchus. M. Fuluius.
Protectors, it greeueth me to record. But how comes it to pass, that as yet
your minds are corrupted with the same sloth and cowardice, that being now
interessed in like defense of Justice against your adversaries, you rouse not
up your courages, and become awful unto those (as is meet) who with might and
main strive to dominere over you? Well, let the reasons be what they will,
notwithstanding, my mind strongly persuades me to enterprise some course of
indifferency, against this the pride of the Gentry, Surely, I will not be
afraid to make public profession of that liberty, which by descent accrued
unto me from my cradle. But whether I shall lose my labor, or speak to
purpose, the issue lies in your election, worshipful Citizens.

Yet is it not my meaning, that by Discesionem in montem acru^, aut Auentinum.
violence, as your predecessors did, you should seek redress of injuries: For
at this time, there is neither need of Arms, nor disunion; no, let Faction run
headlong after the accustomed manner, to its own destruction.

Probat exemplis
After the death of Tiberius Graccus (who as men report aimed at the Monarchy)
many cruel informations were preferred against the Commons. After the
slaughter of C. Graccus and M: Fuluius, diverse of your Tres fuere ordines
Romanorum, s. Senatorius, equester, plebeius.
rank were executed in prison: To both pressures, s. Portia quae vetat in Ciuem
animaduertere poena sanguinis.
not law, but licentious satiety put ending.

But be it, that to restore the people to their ancient privileges, were for
the good of the Commonwealth; or, that the redress of those enormities which
cannot be reformed without the effusion of blood, were justifiable: yet have
you presidents of former ages, that your ancestors (as it were with silence)
disdained to see the Exchequer pillaged, or Kings or foreign Nations to bestow
pensions upon private gentlemen. By means whereof, although superiority and
infinite wealth accompanied their greatness, yet made they small account to
escape unpunished for their misdemeanors.

In these days, equity, your prerogatives, and all divine and humaue royalties
are yielded up to such your enemies, who are neither weary nor ashamed to
commit the like, if not worse, insolences: In the open streets their carriage
is Prince-like, and some there are, who do nothing but boast of their
Sacerdoties, their Consulships and triumphs, as if they had obtained them by
reprisall, and not deserved them in honor.

Slaves bought with money, can hardly brook the imperious commands of proud
masters, and can you ( Roman citizens) borne in freedom, tolerate so vile a
servitude with patience? And I pray you, what kind of men are these, which sway
thus in the State? surely, the worst of all other: Bloody in action, insatiable
in avarice, the greatest offenders, and the proudest companions? with whom
faith, piety, honesty and dishonesty are mercinary. Some whereof had laid
violent hands upon your Tribunes, some preferred forged indictments, and
others accounted it a strong piece of policy, to have trussed you up at the
Gallows. The worser the pressure committed against you, the Quia maxim
tim^r^tur.
securer the party: Believe it, your remissness has quitted all their fears
of daring to do evil: so that now: their desires, their hatreds, and fears are
one and alike. Haec. optima am^^^^a (...) bono^.
Indeed, amongst good men, those are the seals of truest frendshippe; amongst
evil men the stratagems of faction.

But if like care of Liberty had possessed your courages, as Ambition of
superiority has inflamed their spirits, assuredly, the Commonwealth should
not, as now lie disgraced, nor your presentiments to advancement bin employed
upon men most audacious, but most upon the meritorious.

q. d. vobis imitandi.
Your Ancestors falling to disunion, by arms in the quarrel of Laws and
Reformation of Officers, twice seized upon Vnum ex septe^ collibus Romae.
Auentine, and will not you once do your utmost to redeem your hereditary
Liberty? Yea and with so much the greater courage, by how much it is the
greater disgrace, rather to loose that which by virtue has to your hands bin
gained formerly, then to have sat still, and done nothing at all.

Some man will say, Sir, what is then your opinion: That you call for redress
against those that have wronged the state, not uncivilly, nor by strong hand;
for this were more dishonorable to you the Actors, then to them the sufferers:
but to proceed by information and the confession of Iugurth himself: who, if
he be your Prisoner indeed, it were but reason, that he should obey your
behests.

Which if he contemn, the matter is answered, you may soon guess, what
manner of peace and surrendry this is, by which Iugurth is now at Liberty,
unpunished; the great men plentifully enriched, and the common wealth a looser
and dishonored.

This is my opinion, unless peradventure, you are not yet weary of their
predominancie, and those times do better please you then the present, wherein
Kingdoms, Provinces, Laws, decrees, Judgments, wars, treaties, and
finally, all Offices, in Church and Commonwealth are at the dispose of a few.

And so it seems to me: that you whose forces no envy is able to confront, as
being sole Commanders of infinite Nations, are notwithstanding content to have
well escaped with the safeties of your bare lives. For which of you dare make
refusal of his imposed servitude? s^ extens per pan^^^ potent^^. s. Iugurtha.


For mine own part although I am fully persuaded, that that most wicked man
escaped, against all conscience vnpunnished for his villainies, yet with a right
good will could I give my consent, that you should pardon his most faulty
inconnivences (because they are s. Calphurnia, S^a^io (...) similibus
Citizens) but that this president of foolish pity might happen to a future
mischief. For with them it will be soon forgotten (such is their
unconscionable impudency) that they escaped punnishment for their misdemeanors,
unless future occasions of committing the like, be henceforth quite bereaved
them.

As for your selves, you shall ramaine in perpetual suspense, either to become
slaves, or to maintain your liberty by force of Arms. For I pray you, what
hope of good meaning or concord can you assure unto your selves, when they will
be grands, you free: They will commit wrongs, you will seek to redress them:
they will use your associats as enemies, your enemies as associats. Can there
be any security or true friendship in such diversity of humors? Upon
premeditation of all which contrarieties, I cannot but admonish and entreat
you, not to let pass so presumptuous a scandal unexamined.

The pillaging of the public treasure is not now questioned, nor moneys by
extortion drawn from our confederates complained of. These enormities though
(vile and odious) use makes them familiar. But in our case, the majesty of the
Senate is betrayed to a most cruel enemy, your Privileges broken, and the
common cause set to sale here at home, and in foreign Countries: Which abuses
unless they be examined, and exemplary severity inflicted upon the offenders;
what remains, but that hereafter we content our selves to live in allegiance to
those, who have committed the fault? Nom^n invisum Romany.
For to dare upon confidence of impunity, is no less than to usurp upon the
title of a Kingdom.

Worshipful Citizens, mistake me not; I would not have you to tolerate evil
rather then good, in your fellow Citizens, but my advice is, that you prevent
it in the good, by not pardoning it in the bad. For the good of the state, it
were better in this point, to be unmindful of a benefit, then to tolerate a
mischief. A good man is only made more secure by conniue^ce, an evil man more
lewd. If wrongs were not, counsel were needless.

CHAP. 8.
1 Cassius is sent to Iugurth. 2 The misdemeanour of the Officers of the Army
in Affrique. 3 Memmius obiecteth against Iugurth. 4 Countenanced by Bebius.

BY reiteration of these and such like speeches, Memmius persuades the people
to send L: Cassius the Praetor to Iugurth, with Commission, upon reciprocal
pleighting of public faith, to bring him unto Rome; to the intent that by his
evidence, the offenses of Scaurus, and the residue, accused of subornation,
might be publicly examined.

Matters being thus managed at Rome, the Colonels and Captains of the Army
left behind by Bestia, imitating the examples of their General, perpetrated
many heinous and dishonorable enormities: Some, for money re-sold the Elephants
to Iugurth: Some made Merchandise of Fugitives, and others went a boot-haling
into the confederate countries: a general contagion of Avarice (like a
pestilentiall Fever) had impoisoned their spirits in general.

^. A plebisci^^.
The Decree ratified, and the whole Nobility daunted, at the motion of Memmius,
Cassius is commanded to repair unto Iugurth: finds him fearful, and his
conscience accusing his cause, for that he had yielded himself unto the Roman
people: which Cassius perceiving, notwithstanding persuades and incourageth
him to make trial of clemency, rather then of obstinacy. Moreover, he
interposeth his private faith, which Iugurth accepted with as great confidence
as if it had been the Public: In those times, such was the repute of Cassius.

Iugurth (contrary to the customs of Kings) attired in most base apparel,
accompanied Cassius to Rome: where being arrived, although his mind was
nothing dejected in regard of comfort received from those his patrons (by whose
greatness and conniuence he had already waded through the scandals before
spoken of) yet, by bribery he prepares to preoccupy C: Bebius the other
Tribune of the people; by whose opposition (gained) he made full acount against
just objections, or injurious accusations, to be strongly guarded.

Qu^rum auxilio fretus, ea scelera perpetrare ausus est.
3 C: Memmius, summoneth the assembly (a party most malicious against Iugurth:)
Some give advice to commit him to prison; Others, to punish him as a professed
enemy more maiorum, unless he would disclose his accouncellers and
countenancers in the Action. Quia contra ius gentium esset, fide publica
interposita supplicium sumi de eo qui sponte sua venerat.
But Memmius more respecting the public honor, then private fury, by mild
persuasions lenifieth their fierceness, asswageth their swollen courages, and
lastly protests, that for his part, he will preserve the public faith
engaged, in highest purity. After silence proclaimed: and Iugurth at the bar:
he thus began to expostulate. He made a recital of his offenses practiced at
Rome, and committed in Numidia; he published his impieties against his Father
and brethrene: by whose counsel, and by the corruption of what Ministers, he
was encouraged to execution.

Of the particulars whereof, although the Roman people were fully instructed,
yet their desire was, to have them given in evidence out of his own mouth. If
he spoke truth, upon the faith and clemency of the Roman people, the greater
would be his hopes: but if he consealed them, it would prove dangerous to his
favorites, and desperate to himself, and his future fortunes. 4. As Soon as
Memmius had ended his speech, and Iugurth commanded to reply, C. Bebius the
other Tribune, who^ (as we told you before) Iugurth had corrupted, enjoined him
to silence, whereat the present Commons being vehemently moved began to be
clamorous, to bend the browe, to threaten force, and to make use of al those
insolences, which a popular passion for the instant accounselleth.
Notwithstanding, impudency prevailed: and the people standing there but for
Ciphers, at last departed: Iugurth, Bestia, and the residue (which the
information concerned and terrified) began now to take courage.

CHAP. 9.
1. Massiua incited by Albinus, studieth to become King of Numidia. 2. Iugurth
procures his death. And returns into Affrique.

AT the same season a certain Numidian, called Massiua, the son of Gulussa,
the Nephew of Massinissa, upon the dissension of the Kings, taking party
against Iugurth, after the yielding up of Cirtha and the murder of Adherbal,
retired to Rome. This man, Sp. Albinus (who the year ensuing after Bestia was
Consul with Q. Minutius Ruffus) for that he was of the blood of Masinissa,
accounselled to become humble suter unto the Lords of the Senate, for the
kingdom of Numidia; and the rather, for that a general envy did prosecute
Iugurth for his manifold impieties. The old covetous Consul, was far more
desirous to be in action, and to manage arms, rather then to end his days in
peace and quiet. Numidia by lot fell to Albinus: Macedonia to Minutius.

2 Massiua no sooner made open profession of his determination, but Iugurth in
his mind reuoluing the instability and weak assistance of his Patrons (of
whom, one was attached in conscience, another mindful of his good name, and
all affraide of the people) commands Bomilchar, his inward and trustiest
friend, for money (his ordinary refuge) to procure some Ruffians to murder the
Numidian. But how? Ne si res palam fiat, contra fidem publicam fecisse
iudicatur.
in most secret and insuspicious manner: if it could not be cleanly so
effected, then to dispatch it any ways; Sieve ^lam, sieve palam.
no matter how: Bomilchar swift to shed blood, obeys, and procures
fellows, Crafts-maisters in such like service, to watch, first, his gooing
abroad, and coming home; secondly, the places of his resort, and lastly his
times of abode. Upon the next opportunity, he conducteth these his Mercinarie
murderers to lie in weight. One of the crew, thus resolved for blood, more rash
then Quia non pros^^xerat sibi de fuga.
advised, incountreth Massina, and runs him through. The varlet is
apprehended, and at the instances of many, but especially of Albinus the
Consul, is dealt with to appeach his Abettors.

Upon confession, it is thought best that Bomilchar be rather brought to his
trial upon equity, then dismis^ed without punishment by the law of Nations,
Quia Iugurtha venit Romam fide publica interposuta, sic quod iure gentium
liceret ei impune cum ^uit redire.
because he acompanied Iugurth to Rome, under the protection of the public
faith. As for Iugurth himself (of all men best acquainted with the drift of
this murder) he never gives over to deny and contest the fact, before he
clearly perceived, that envy ouerswayed grace and Gold.

Whereupon being put to his plunge, although in the former information he had
delivered fifty of his friends for Vat, dictus est, qui iniudicio sp^^ et pro
alio.
pledges, yet being more in love with a kingdom, then careful for the
redemption of his sureties, he conueyeth Bomilcar secretly into Numidia,
mistrusting that the fear of his appearance should disquiet the residue of his
associates, if punishment were executed upon him. Within a few days after he
himself followed, being commanded by the Senate to depart out of Italy. As he
went out of Rome, it is reported, that without word speaking he often looked
behind him: and at last brake out into these speeches, Farewell fair City,
exposed to sale and sudden ruin, if thou could find an able Chapman.

CHAP. 10.
1. Albinus hasteneth into Afric. 2. deluded by Iugurth. 3. Aulus is left
Lieutenant of the Army. 4. routed by Iugurth.

THe war is renewed, and Albinus taking order for victuales, wages, and all
other ammonitions necessary for all Soldiers, hasteneth their transportation
into Affrique. Himself follows with speed, in hope either by Arms or
composition to finish this War, before the time of Elections, which now grew
on apace.

2. Iugurth on the contrary, drew all things out at length, sometime pretending
one excuse of delay, and sometimes another. He protests composition, and
again falls off, by interlacing of fears and doubts. Now he retireth, and
presently (not to discourage his fellows) he makes a stand, and dares his
enemy: and so sometime by seeming to accept the battle, and sometimes by
motioning treaties of accord, at all times he deludeth the expectations of the
Consul.

Some were of opinion, that Albinus was no Stranger, to these driftes of
Iugurth, for considering his have, they could not be brought to believe, but
the War was prolonged more by the default of the Consul, then by the cunning
of Iugurth. Well, the season was spent to no purpose, and the day of Elections
at hand, Whereupon Albinus retired to Rome, leaving his Brother Aulus
Lieutenant in his stead. At Rome the Tribunitiall contentions did infinitely
disquiet the state of the Commonwealth. P. Lucullus and L. Annius Tribunes of
the people, obstinately stood against their Colleagues, for further continuance
of their offices. This difference proroged the elections for a whole year.

This Iterim set Aulus (who as before we told you, was left Lieutenant in
Affrique) on a fire, either to finish the War, or by the terror of his Army,
to extort some Masses of Money from Iugurth. And therefore in January he
brings his Soldiers out of their winter Garrisons into the field, and by
great iournies in every sharp season, he presents his forces before Suthul,
the place where Iugurth had bestowed his Treasure. Which, although in regard of
the season, and the strong situation of the place, it should neither be
forced nor beseeged, (for a slimy plain, now become by the Winter Waters, a
mere marish, incirled the Wall built upon the utmost clife of a ragged Rock)
yet for countenance-sake, either to astonish the k. or bewitched with blind
hopes of gaining the town, without delay he omitted nothing to further his
intention. Iugurth taking hold of the vanity and insufficiency of the man,
cunningly to draw him to further points of madness, sends out certain
Messengers to offer his submission, and withal at the same instant, faining
fear and flight, leads his Army into woody and unfrequented places. This
offer of a conceited composition, so bewitched Aulus, that needs will he
leave Suthul, and pursue his false-flying enemy into unknown Countries: upon
what reason, I cannot conjecture, unless in such a place his ouersights might
prove less subject to disclosure. Qula exercitus nesciret quid agere^ur.
All the way of his march, Iugurth ceased not day nor night, by certain crafty
espyals to sound the soldiers: and to corrupt the Captains and Centurions of
bands, either to revolt, or in the day of the fight, upon a signal given, to
forsake their stations.

4 Which, when he had brought to pass according to desire, about midnight he
incompasseth the camp of Aulus with his troops of Numidians. Quia nox erat,
and siluae vlcinae.
The soldiers were amazed at this so inexpected an alarm: some betook them
to their weapons, some to hide their heads: Some encouraged the fearful,
others stood quiuering, as men at their wits ends, for that the enemy pressed
hard upon all places. The sky was ouercast with clouds and darkness, and
the danger alike doubtful: Vtinque periculosum erat nescient^bus regionem.
finally, the hardiest could not resolve, whether the safest course consisted
in flight, or fight. Of those which were before corrupted, one Cohort of
Ligurians, with two companies of Thracians, and a few common soldiers
revolted to the King. In like manner the Centurion primiple of the third
Legion, qaue entrance to the enemy, by that quarter which was assigned him to
defend: upon that side all the Numidians thrust in. Quia interea multi saeluti
co^sulucre.
The flight on our part was shameful; some retired to the next hill without any
weapons. Night and the rifling of our Tents, gave us some advantage to the
prejudice of their victory: but the next day Iugurth calls unto Albinus;
Although (says he) I now beseech thee, distressed by war and famine, with
mine Army, yet being mindful of humane casualties, I will capitulate with
these, that (your lives saved) you shall all pass i. sub basta^ tra^suersam
inter duas has^a^ erectas, patibulum representans.
sub iugum, and within ten days after, clearly depart Numidia. These
conditions, although they were Quia poena capituli digna, vt ipsis cecidit,
quia S^mitibus sub ^ugum missi fuere.
hard and dishonorable, yet because, denial was death, the composition was
accepted and ratified, according to the Kings pleasure.

CHAP. 11.
1 The Romans re-enforce their Army. 2. The Tribune prefers a bill against
bribery.

1 As Soon as the news arrived at Rome, fear and sadness possessed the
City. Some were pensive for the honor of the Empire; Others not acustomed to
hear of the variable events of war, mistrusted no less the^ the loss of
their Quia Adherbal praemonuerat, quod Iugurtha altius animum inte^deret.
liberty. All were offended at Aulus, and specially those, that had been
brought up in service, for that he preferred a dishonorable composition,
before a valourous adventure of his life. Which the Consul Albinus well
observing, and fearing that his brothers misaduenture would prove his disgrace
and procure him envy, propounded the question in Senate, concerning the
validity of the Treaty; mean while, not foreslowing to leuy new supplies, and
to pray in aid the Italians and their associates. In this they used all
possible celerity.

The Lords (it was but reason) decreed, that no treaty could be ratified
without the approbation of the Senate and the people.

The Consul being forbidden by the Tribunes to transport these supplies, within
a few days after ariueth in Afrique. For the relics of the Army, according to
the articles, being retired out of Numidia, did now winter in the Province.

Upon his first arrival, although his mind were good, both to prosecute
Iugurth, as also to redeem his brothers upon his first arriual, although his
mind were good, both to prosecute Iugurth, as also to redeem his Brothers
disgrace by revenge, yet upon notice that the soldiers, besides their revolt,
fratris. Deteriores sumus omnes licentia.
were corrupted by loose government, and licenciousnesse, arising from
superfluity, he changed his mind, and resolved to do no more for that year.

2 Mean time at Rome, C. Manlius Limetanus, Tribune of the people, preferred a
bil for inquisition against those, by whose countenance Iugurth presumed to
contemn the Decrees of the Senate: who they were that redeliuered the
Elephants and fugitives: and likewise who they were, that either in their
Ambassages, Messages, or Generalships had been corrupted by bribery: or lastly
had without warrant capitulated with the enemy, of peace or war. To this
bill, some for that in their consciences they knew themselves guilty, and
others in regard of the general envy, misdoubting danger, for that with
safety they could not make open resistance, made answer, that both this bill,
and all others of like nature pleased them. But under hand by their friends,
especially the Latins and the Italians, Quod aut alia negotia interrogabant:
aut ad plebem and tribunes plebis instabant, ne in tanta Commosions, talis
^ogatio promulgaretur.
they procured means of evasion. But with what obstinacy the Commons
perseuered, and in what riotous manner they commanded the Inquisition, more in
hate of the Gentry (against whom these malicious seuerities were pretended)
then in true zeal to the common cause it is a thing incredible to relate.
Such, and so violent was the perverseness of both parties. Whereupon every man
being daunted, Marcus Scaurus the fore-recited procurator of Bestia, between
the insultinges of the people, and the frights of the Gentry (the City also
quaking for fear) amongst, the three informers, petitioned by the bill of
Manlius, procured himself to be the third in Commission.

Howsoever, the Inquisition was so bitterly and violently urged by the clamors
and lincentiousnesse of the people at this assembly, that look what insolency
the Nobility in former times in their potencies, exercised upon the people; the
people at this time were nothing behind in requital of the like outrage
toward the Gentry.

CHAP. 12.
A disgression of the Author upon the cause of the corruption and declination
of the Roman Empire.

THis bandying of parties by the people, and the partiality of the Gentry, with
the accustomary assiduity of corrupt passages, took their first original in
Rome not many years sithence, from the disuse of war, and enioyment of those
vanities (wealth and idleness) which all mortal men do most seek after. For
before the razing of Carthage, the Senate and Roman people ruled the state with
indifferency, in quiet and mutual modesty: Seruabat cas^as humilis fortuna
Latinas
contentions of Superiority and greatness were not heard of amongst
fellow-Cittizens: forrayne fears retained the city within bounds of
mediocrity. Quondam, nec vitus contingi parua sinebat


As fear vanished, so those vanities (which accompany prosperity) wantonness
and pride approached: Tec^^ labor, somnique breues.
Insomuch that in adverse times, the fruition of peace and idleness was most
bitter and burdensome to them. For the Nobility converted the institution of
their superiority into arrogance, and the Cominalty, their privileges into
liberty. Each party made shift for themselves, to usurp, to rauine, to bandy.
There were but two factions; the Commonwealth, which consisted in medio, was
wronged on both sides: whereof the Nobility interessed by faction, prevailed
most, the strength of the Commons disiointed and dispersed in multitudes, could
do little.

The people were kept low by poverty and imploime^ts in service: The spoils of
war the Generals shared unto themselves and their favorites, whilst in the
mean time the parents and infants of the soldiers, were disseized of their
inheritances, as they happened to lie adjoining near the confines of some great
personage. Thus avarice incorporated with Greatness, laid claim, and made
prize of all things without mean in all places, until it ran headlong into
desperate ruin. For after, Some of the Nobility were found to affect true
glory before usurped power, the City began to be disquieted, and civil
dissension as dust carried with a whirlewind, invaded men's sancies. Tiberius
and C. Gracchus (whose Ancestors had done many good services to the state, both
in the Punique, and other wars) were the first, that endeavored to restore the
people to liberty, and to call the offenses of some few into question. The
Nobility being guilty, and therefore fearful, sometimes sound means to
frustrate the devises of the Tribunes by their associats, and the Latins, and
sometimes by the Roman Knights, whom the hope of equality had exempted from
siding with the vulgar. First they slew Tiberius, and with in few years after
C. Gracchus, with M. Fuluius Flaccus: the one colourably, for moving sedition;
the other, for producing the Law of sending forth Colonies. To speak uprightly,
the Gracchi were too too violent in their desires of prevailing: for it is a
wiser course, to yield in a good cause, rather then to wreck our injuries in an
evil measure. Upon this victory, the Nobility according to their pleasures and
particulars, either massacred or banished many Quiae ex populalaribus nullus
eis faueret.
mortal creatures, for future ages procuring unto themselves, more fear then
power. A project which has ruinated many great cities, wherein the one has
studied by all Per fas et nefas.
means to ouer-master the other, and after victory, to proceed with cruelty.
Let this suffice for the partialities and state of the City, the multiplicity
whereof, if I should address my self in particular to remember, time rather
then Copy would fail my endeavors. Wherefore I will retire my pen to purpose.

CHAP. 13.
1. Metellus is made Lord General of the Army in Affrique. 2. He reformeth the
Army. The description of a worthy General.

1 AFter the composition of Aulus, and the foul discomfiture of our people, Q.
Metellus, and M. Sillanus Consuls elect, cast lots for the Provinces. Numidia
fell to Metellus, a man of action; who although he took part against the
proceedinges of the poeple, yet neither party could blemish his honor or good
report. At his first entry into Office, he set order in all businesses which
concerned his colleague, as well as himself, and afterward wholly bent his
mind to the disposing of the present war.

Whereupon growing into despair of the old Army, he presses and inrolleth new
soldiers, desires aid on al hands, prepares armor, weapons, horse, and all
other warlike necessaries, with plentiful provision of victuals and all things
else, which he knew would be otherwise wanting in a variable war, subject to
the penury of accustomed supplies. To make up which his proportions (by the
good leave of the Senate) the associates, the Italians and foreign kings, of
their own free wills, adjoined their aids. So did every City, even to
emulation.

So having all things in a readiness, and prepared to his own content, he
departs toward Numidia, with the general applause of the City, partly
moved thereunto by hopes of his good carriage and honorable disposition;
partly for his invincible neglect of extorsiue riches; but most of all, for
that, by the Avarice of our former Governors, our forces had bin broken and
dishartned, and the enemies increased and encouraged in Numidia.

At his arriual in Affricke Sp: Albinus the Pronconsull resigneth the Army, but
vndisciplind, out of heart, neither endurable of danger nor labor: brave in
tongue, slow in action: Driving preyes out of their friends countries, it
self, a prey to the spoiling enemy: utterly destitute of obedience and modest
carriage: So far out of Order, that the new General became more pensive to
reclaim them from this inured absurdities, then any way hopeful either to
receive assistaunce or good service by their tumultuary multitudes.

Notwithstanding, although the delays of the Per discensionem inpeditae.
Summer Elections had deceived his intentions, and although he knew that the
peoples ears itched with expectation of good news, yet stood he resolved not
to begin the war, before he had trained his soldiers to their ancient
discipline.

For Albinus being terrified at the disasterous overthrow of his Brother and
the Army, during so much of the Summer season as he spent in the Province, had
set up his rest, not to dislodge; but billeted his soldiers in (as it were)
standing camps without any remove, until stinch, or want of forage enforced
him thereto. And then neither, according unto military discipline, he set
forth Sentinels, but suffered every man to forsake his Ensign at his own
pleasure: Water carriers base grooms were loosely permitted to accompany the
horsemen as well by day as by night without conduct accustomed to forage the
Countries, to pillage the Villages, to drive Troops of Prisoners, and herds
of Cattle; and then to barter them with Merchants foreign for Wines, and such
like trifles.

Lastly, they were not ashamed to sell their public allowance, and yet to buy
every days bread: whatsoever disgraces, the scandals of Sloth and Riot could
either impose, or possibly devise against profession of soldiery, al these,
and more were really to be found in this our Army.

Admidst all these difficulties, I find Metellus to be a man no less
sufficient, then wise and politic in warlike accidents; iudicially was his
desire of reformation mixed with severity.

2 By his first proclamation he prohibited all motives to idleness (viz:) That
no man in the camp should bring bread to sell, or flesh ready sodden: that no
grooms should follow the Army, neither, that the common soldier should have a
slave or a Beast in camp or in march. To what remained, by discretion he
limited measure. This done, by interchangeable dislodgings he made daily
remoues, and entrenched his camp with a Pallisado and a ditch, nethl^sse he
relieved the watch continually; and himself with the Officers would go the
round. In his marches he would sometimes show himself in the head of his
battallions, sometime in the Arereward, but oftener in the midst.

He would suffer no man to straggle out of order. The Ensigns, he would be
sure, should be strongly accompanied. The soldier must carry both his Arms
and prouant. Thus rather by prohibiting and forwarning of Offenses, then by
exemplary punishment, in short time he brought his Soldiers to perfect
discipline.

CHAP. 14.
Metellus rejects the messengers of Iugurth. 2. The stratagems of a sly
Enemy Metellus taxes in Vacca.

1. IVgurth by his espyals coming to notice of Metellus his courses, as also
understanding what was the repute of his integrity at Rome; began to take his
own weakness into distrust, and in truth now labored a final composition:
Which to mediate, he sent certain Messengers unto the Consul with these
Ouertures; That he would simply yield, with reservation of his own and his
Childrens lives: what ever he held dear in the world besides, he would
frankely refer it to the good pleasures of the Roman people.

But experienee had taught the Roman General, that the Numidians were a
perfidious Nation, of a variable disposition, and evermore inclined to Nouelty.
And therefore he sounde^h every one of the Messengers apart, and upon good
conjectures, finding naught but plain dealing; he makes the^ great promises
to betray Iugurth alive or dead, but especially alive (if possibly they could)
into his hands: with the remainder of his determinations, concerning the Kings
message, he aquainteth them in open audience.

Upon these terms he begins his first march into the enemies Country with
his army as well prepared to charge as to receive the chargi^g enemy.

2 Here, contrary to the face of war, the cottages were replenished with
people, the fields with Cattle and husbandmen: The Kings officers of the
Towns and villages, in honorable semblance welcomed the Consul, offered to
give him corn, and to furnish him with carriages: yea, and with good will to
accomplish whatsoever was given them in command. For all these fair shows,
Metellus was nothing the more careless; he marched in such order, as if the
enemy had been at hand; he sent out his vaunt-currers on every side, far and
wide, all the messages of surrendry he took for mockage, and used them but as
stratagems of policy to the plotting of mischief.

And therefore he himself marched in the voward with the readiest Cohort,
accompanied with a choice band of Slinges and Archers: C. Marius his Lieutenant
led the Rereward with the horsemen. Upon both sides he equally divided the
Auxiliary horse, under the conduct of the Tribunes of the Legions, and the
captains of the Cohorts; that being intermingled with the light harnessed
footmen, they might be ready at all assaies to repulse the enemies Chiualry.
For Iugurth was so subtle, and so well acquainted with the Situation of places,
and the Art of soldiery, that it was hard to resolve, whether he were more to
be doubted absent or present, entreating of peace, or menacing of war.

3 Not far out of the way by which Metellus should march, lay Vacca, the
principal and best frequented Mart-towne of the Numidian kingdom, and the
staple of the Italian Nation. Here into the Consul made proof either to put a
garrison, or upon denial to force the place, if opportunity seemed to advise
him thereto. And therefore he commanded the inhabitants to provide him corn,
and other such necessaries, which the wantes of war required: supposing (as
experience made proof) that the credit of the Merchants, and the place fit
for the stowage of his provision, would become very aduantagious to his future
preparations. Amidst these devises, Iugurth by submissiue messengers, and with
far more earnestness then before, beseeches peace, offering unto Metellus an
absolute surrendry of al, except his own life, and his childrens.

These as the former, the Consul motiueth, and dismisseth to betray their
master, and neither grants, nor denies the petitioned Articles: holding the
King in susspence by delays, in expectation of they issue of the Messengers
promises.

Iugurth comparing the deeds of Metellus with the reports of his Messengers,
found himself now ouerreached in his own devises; that peace in words were
pretended, but in effect the War was most rigorously prosecuted: A good Town
was alienated; the Country discovered: and the good wills of the people
anticipated. Upon the necessitous considerations whereof he was constrained
to betake himself to the resolve of War.

CHAP. 15.
Iugurth resolves for war: The description of an excellent fought battle.

THen by espyals discovering what ways his enemies took, of all sorts of
people he leuyeth as great forces, as possibly he could, in good hope to do
good by the opportunity of the s. Aptus insidiis.
place: and so by ways and unknown passages he ouertaketh the Army of
Metellus. In that part of Numidia, which upon the division fell unto the share
of Adherbal, sourthwarde rises the River Muthul. From thence, a famous
Mountain almost one thousand and twenty paces distant of equal extension
showed it self. It was by Nature barren, vnmanned, and dispeopled: but from
the midst arose an exceeding high Hillocke, beset with Olives, Mirtils, and
such like diversity of such trees, as are accustomed to grow in dry and sandy
Countries. The midst of the adjoining plain for want of water lay desert:
the remnant, as much as lay near the River, beset with bushes and shrubs, was
frequented by men and Cattle: upon this hill, thus diversely situated in the
midst thereof Iugurth shows his Army thinly marshalled, and makes Bomilchar
Governor over this remainder of his foo^men and the Elephants: and so leaves
him with instructions how to dispose of his people.

Himself with the whole body of his Chiualry and his choicest footmen
approaches near unto the mountain. And then turning to his people, he goes
from one company to another, Severally admonishing and entreating them to bear
in memory their ancient prowess, and by being victors free their kingdom from
the Avarice of the Romans. Then he put them in mind, how they were but to
deal with those fellows, whom heretofore they had routed, and enforced to
pass sub iugum. Sub s^r came ab hactis, ad summa^ ignominiam, vt ante.
That they had but only made change of their Captain, not of their Cowardice:
That, as their Geeneral, he had had an eye and care upon al accidents, as
became him; That he had taken the advantage of the higher ground. That he had
intermingled the trained men with raw nouices so that they need not to be
affraide, that few should be ouermatched with many, neither that undisciplined
Soldiers should cope with their betters, and therefore they should stand
resolute and intentive to charge their enemies, as soon as the signal were
sounded. This day (quoth he) you shall either put end to your travails by
victory, or for ever hereafter begin the Tragedy of your miseries.

Lastly, he adresseth his speech to those, whom either he had advanced by
reward or Office unto military honors, and prays them, man by man to be
mindful of his favors, and they to say the like unto their followers. From
words he applies to diversity of humors: some he promises, some he
threatens, others he emboldneth, and generally encourages all sorts by one
means or other.

All this while Metellus marching down the hill, and ignorant of this the
enemies approach, was with his army fully discovered to Iugurth. At first the
unusual apparition begat doubt, what the matter should signify: for the
Numidians and the horse were couched amongst the bushes, yet not fully hid
by the lowness of the bows. Notwithstanding the truce continued a while
uncertain, both by the Nature of the place, and the enemies cunning, for they
had obscured all their military ensigns: But at length upon further
discovery, the Ambush was discerned, and the battle ordered.

The Battallion which by his first direction marched entire upon the right
hand, being now nearest advanced toward the enemy, he changes, and divides
it into three parts, in relief each of other. Between every band he places
his Archers and Slings, and rangeth his Caualrie upon the head of the battle.
Then for shortness of time, not permitted to use many words of encouragement,
he brings his Army into the plain without alteration of order, save that in
the first ranks the soldiers turned their faces. Nam a latere erant a dex^ra.
At his approach, when he perceives that the Numidians lay quiet and stirred
not from the hill, he dispatched Colonel Rutilius with the readiest Footmen,
and some horse toward the River, to prevent the enemies commodious encamping;
upon conjecture, that by light skirmishes and often alarms, Iugurth would do
his worst to stay their dislodge; but if he found no proof by force, then he
would try to weary the soldier by hear and thirst. After Rutilius followed
the General, slowly descending the hill, as the nature of the place would give
leave. Marius guided the rereward, himself marched with the horsemen of the
left wing; Eo quod a dextro latere erant hosts
those in the battle made the vant-guard.

Iugurth observing that the tail of the enemies Army had passed his foremost
ranks, makes have to take that part of the hill from whence Metellus had
descended, with a troop of some two thousand footmen, fearing least the
departed enemy would thither return again for refuge, and fortify. This
done, he suddenly gives the signal to charge. Some of the Numidians begin
with the hindermost, and cut them in pieces, whilst others of their companions
charge in in flanck, sometime upon the left side, and sometime upon the right.
They show themselves every where with their menacing weapons: They press hard
in, and in all places make trial to disorder the Roman ranks.

Those of best courage, who not able to endure these Branadoes, offered to
answer the insulting Numidian, were deluded by the uncertain fight of the
enemy. For they were wounded a far off, and found no means of revenge by
striking or advancing to join. For the horsemen were instructed before by
Iugurth, that when any troops of Romans pursued them in flight, they should not
retire in thick companies, or in one entire body, but that one troop should fly
this way, another that, and far assunder: that so finding themselves superior
in number, they might attach either upon their sides, or at their backs, some
separated or dismounted companions, in case they were not able to make their
party good with the whole troop. But if they found that the h^^ was more
aduantagious for their retraite then the plains, to those places the Numidian
horses were also accustomed, to make quick way through the bushes. But these
thickits and rough passages prohibited the pursuit of the Romans.

The whole business seemed long doubtful, variable, bloody, and lamentable:
some fled, others pursued, neither the Ensigns were followed, nor order kept:
every man, as danger attached him, there received the charge and made his best
resistance. Corslets, Weapons, Horses, Men, Friends and Enemies lay
intermingled in one another gore: in the medly, counsel and command were of no
use: fortune governed all.

By this time a great part of the day was spent, and yet the victory
uncertain: All sorts languished with labor and heat. But Metellus perceiving
that the Numidians began somewhat to faint, by some and some he gathered his
scattered Troops into one Battallion: he relyeth the ranks, and faceth the
adverse footmen with four Legionary cohorts. These, Metellus finding after
their toylesome labor breathing themselves in the higher grounds, Generally
beseeches and entreats not to forsake their fellow Soldiers, neither to
suffer their enemies, already as good as defeated, to wrest the victory out of
their possessions: he tells them, that they have neither Camp nor fortified
place to retire unto. The safety of their lives consisted only in their Swords.

Neither all this while was Iugurth idle: he visited every place, he entreated,
he re-enforced: yea, even himself with certain choice companions proved an
onset upon every quarter. He relieved the wearied, h^e charged the wavering,
and fighting a far off, in proper person he repulsed the bands which fought
most courageous. Thus these two excellent Generals behaved themselves: in
sufficiencies equal, in forces unequal. In soldiery Metellus had the
advantage, s. vbi pugnatu^ est.
the place was disco^modious^ except in goodness of soldiery, Iugurth had the
better in all points. But the Romans understanding that they had neither place
of refuge, neither that the enemy would be brought at any hand to fight in
gross, for that it now grew late, acording to the generals, behest seized upon
the hill where the enemy fought. The Numidians having lost their footing,
disbanded, and fled, few perished: a swift pair of heels, and a country
unknown to the Romans, saved many man's carcass. During the time of this
medly, Bomilchar who as we told you before, was by Iugurth made Governor of
the Elephants and certain foot companies, as soon as he perceived that Rutilius
was past him, by little and little aduanceth his soldiers into the plain. And
as the Colonel without noise (as was requisite) hastneth toward the river,
whereunto by command he was formerly dispatched, Bomilcar orders his bat^el,
without sending forth of any espials to discover how the enemy proceeded in
either of both places. But as soon as he had intelligence, that Rutilius was
arrived, and without fear encamped, as also he heard the reports of the cries
from the camp of Iugurth (as a signal that the battle was begun, upon
mistrust left the Colonel, being likewise advertised of the cause, and manner)
should arise, and so succor his distressed companions; the battallion (which
upon distrust of their valor, he had first closd, ranged by Art, he now
extends in breadth, the readier to give stoppage to the enemies iourny. Thus
marches Bo^milchar toward the camp of Rutilius. Upon a sudden the Romans
perceive a huge rising of dust: the Country thick of bushes, hindered their
perfect discovery. At first, they supposed it to be the sand raised by wind,
but after they saw continuance, and that as the army came forward, the nearer
the smoke approached, upon true knowledge of the cause, they betake them to
their weapons, and according to commandment, they stand armed before the gates
of their camp. By this time they attached one another, and both parties
eagerly join with usual clamours. The Numidians stood fast as long as they
saw hope in their Elephants, but as soon as they perceived, that they could
not perform their Offices, for the thickness of the branches of Trees, but
were overthrown and encompassed, they betook them to flight, and casting away
the^r Arms, what by the nearenesse of the hill, and what by the darkness of
the night (now at hand) many escaped in safety: Four Elephants were taken, the
residue in number forty were all slain.

This business thus dispatched, the Soldiers though weary and faint with
their journey, with enclosing of the Camp, and the late fight, yet, for that
Metellus delayed his coming beyond opinion, in the same order and equipage,
wh^rewith they lately fought, they march out to meet him. For the subtle
aproch of the Numidians would neither suffer remissness, nor give leisure to
trifle.

At their first approach about midnight, by the noise which they made, being
taken for enemies, some began to fear, others to cry to Arms: and surely a
great mischance had happened by improuidence, if the horsemen, sent out on both
sides, had not discovered the error. Now in stead of fear, the joy is
general. The soldiers merrily call one to another, they tell and are told of
their adventures: each party praises his own valor to the heavens. So, so
stand mortal affairs: In prosperity the coward shareth of glory: in adversity
the best only undergo the scandal.

Metellus stays four days in this place to cure the wounded. According to
warlike discipline he rewarded those that had well deserved in the battle. In
an Oration he praises every man's action, and gives thanks: He exhorts
them to retain the like courage against future brunts, which will prove more
easy. For by this victory hazard is ended; the remainder is but matter of
prey. Then he dispatcheth fugitives and fit spies into the enemies Country, to
learn what course Iugurth took: whether he conuersed with a few, or retained
the face of an Army, and how he carried himself now after the loss of this
victory.

But Iugurth had retired himself into Woody and strong situated places: and
there had levied an Army, in number far exceeding the first, but base and
cowardly, fitter for the plough then the field.

This so fell out upon occasion, that no man of the Numidian Nation followed
the King in his flight, save only his own Horsemen. In such cases every one
retir^th, whither himself pleases. Neither is it accounted any Souldierlike
disgarce, for that it is and has been the custom of the Country.

Upon which aduertisements Metellus perceiving that the Kings courage nothing
relented, and that if the war were renewed, it stood in Iugurths pleasure, how
it should be managed.

Moreover, that he was to fight against an unequal enemy, to whom it was
less loss to be overthrown, then to Conquer: determined to make no more
experimentes by fights and raunged battailions, but to carry the War in another
fashion:

Accordingly, he marches unto the wealthyest places of Numidia, he wastes the
Country, and forces and fiereth many Castles and Towns, some without
Garrison, some stuffed with Soldiers pressed hand ouer-head: He sleyeth the
youth, and gives all in prey to the Soldiers mercy. The people being
terrified with these extreamities yielded, gave pledges, and in plentiful
manner supplied Corn, and all other necessaries. Wheresoever a Garrison was
thought needful, there one was thrust in.

These passages danted the King more then an unfortunate battle. For, whereas
before, flight was his safety, now was he constrained to follow. And he that
of late could not make good the place for fight of his own choosing, Inimicum
deuasi antem.
is now compelled to defend himself at peril in another man's Country.

Notwithstanding, he takes counsel from Necessity his best Counselor: he
commands his people to stay his return in the foresaid places: himself
undiscerned with some chosen Horsemen, by bywaie and nightly iournies follows
Metellus; at a sudden he assaulteth the Roman forragers: slays some unarmed:
takes many prisoners, and not one returns unwounded. This done, before
relief could be ministered, as they had in command, they retired into the
fastness of the adjoining Mountains.

CHAP. 14.
1. The joy of the City for the good news of Affrique. 2. The unquiet spirit
of Iugurth.

GReat was the joy in Rome, first for the good fortune of Metellus: secondly,
for that he had reduced the army to its ancient discipline. That
notwithstanding the disadvantage of place, he had nethlesse overthrown the
enemy by pure valor: that he kept the field, and lastly, that Iugurth late
grown insolent by the Cowardice of Aulus, was now constrained to protect his
life by flight, and in deserts.

Hereupon the Senate decrees an humble thanksgigiuing to the immortal Gods
for these prosperous successes. The City which before stood quaking and
pensive in event of the war, now makes festiual, and extolleth Metellus to
the ski^s.

Metellus again with greater intension labors an absolute victory: he
makes have on al hands, and takes care not to be taken tardy in any place. He
caleth to mind that Eunie is the companion of Glory: and therefore by how much
the more his reputation was augmented, by so much the more were his cares
increased: the reason, wherefore after the ambushes of Iug^rth, he would not
suffer the Army to forage at Liberty. When the Cohorts wanted Corn or stouer,
he stood Sentinel with all the Horse: Himself led the Army, Marius the
residue. The country now suffered more wast by fire, then by d^iuing of
preyes. They pitched their camp in two places, not far assunder: if
assistance were needful, all were ready; but when they meant to spread the
terror of their Arms, by procuring of flight or fear, they made their remoues
of greater distance.

All this while, Iugurth follows by the Mountains: watches for times and
places of advantage, and where upon likelihood he thinks that the enemy will
resort, he destroys the ^o^rage, and impoysoneth those few waters, which
nature had bestowed upon those sandy places. Somet^me he shows himself to
Metellus, sometime to Marius, sometime he makes a Brauado to charge in troop,
and for^hwith retireth again into the Mountain. He comes out again, and
now threatne^h one, then another: he neither extends battle, nor can away
with rest, his only project was to hinder his enemies des^eignes.

CHAP. 17.
1. Metellus besieges Zama. 2. Iugurth almost recovered Sicca. 3. Repulsed by
Marius. 4. Distresseth the Roman camp. 5 Relieved by Marius.

THe Roman General perceiving that neither by policy he could weary his
enemy, neither by injuries provoke him to fight; undertakes to besiege a great
City, being the chief fortress of defense in that part of the kingdom called
Zama: supposing (for ^he weight of the business) that Iugurth would not
forslow to relieve his distressed Subjects: and there he meant to fight with
him.

But Iugurth by certain fugitives having learned the intent of the Consul, by
great journey, preuenteth him: He encourages the inhabitants to defend their
walls valiantly, and gives them these fugitives in assistance. Of his whole
army he accounted these the strongest party, for that he was sure they could
not deceive him. Moreouer^ he promises to relieve them in person in convenient
time. And so having composed the business he came for, he retireth again unto
his desert abode: where he had made no long tariance, but he gets
understanding, that Marius was upon his journey, commanded Sicca to provide
wh^at with a few Cohorts. This City was the first that forsook the king after
his overthrow.

2 Hither he comes by night with his choice horsemen: he charge the Romans
in their very entering out of the gates; and at the same instant, incourageth
the Sicce^ses to assault the cohorts on their backs. He c^yeth out, that now
fortune has offered them a notable occasion by some famous deed to blot out
their former defection, which if they would perform, that he should be able
to spend the remainder of his life in the kingdom, and they in liberty,
without fear and danger. 3 Surely, if Marius had not brought on the ensigns,
and made way through the midst of his enemies, without doubt all, or the
greatest part of the Siccenses, had changed their allegiance: so mutable is the
faith of a Numidian.

The Iugurthines being a while sustained by the King, when they saw, that
nevertheless their enemies with more eager courage pressed upon them, with the
loss of some few, provide for flight. Marius comes safe to Zama.

The Town was situated in a plain, stronger fortified by man's industry then
Art, in want of no necessary provision, but full stored both with men and
armor. According to time and place Metellus having all things in readiness,
e^uironeth the walls with his Army: he commands the Colonels every man to
take care of his charge, and upon a sign given, a great and general clamor
is raised. This nothing terrifieth the Numidians, they stand fast and prepared
without tumult. The assault is begun: The Romans do the utmost of their
endeavors: Some a far off fight with stones and missile engines, some invade and
sap the wall. Some set up scaling Ladders, and desire to bring the fight to
handy-strokes.

On the contrary the Townsmen tumble down Massy stones, sharp piles and long
darts, with flaming firebrands besmeared with pitch and sulphur upon those
that stand nearest: such was their violence, that those which stood farthest
off had not the best courages; for these darts discharged from Engines, or
shot from hand, had wounded many. The valiant and cowardes were in like danger,
but not in like repute. 4. The game going thus at Zama, behold on a sudden
Iugurth assaulteth the Roman camp with a strong company. They that had the
custody thereof lay careless, expecting nothing less then battle. Iugurth
enters: and our people standing amassed at the sodennesse of the event, for
fashion sake, ask counsel one of another what is to be done. Some fly, some
betake them to arms, the greatest part are either slain or wounded: of the
whole rabble not above forty being mindful of the Roman name, casting
themselves in a ring, recovered a place somewhat higher then their enemies, and
could not by much ado he driven to forsake their standing. The shot that was
sent them, they resent again: being but few, the seldomer their weapons fell
frustrate amongst many.

If the Numidians drew nigh, then they made proofs of their valor, by
slaughter, overthrows and repulses.

Metellus in the hottest of his business, hears a clamor at his back:
whereupon turning his horse, he perceived that the flight makes toward
him: a token, that they were of his friends. In all have he commands the
horse to make toward the camp, and forthwith dispatcheth C. Marius with the
cohorts of the associates, beseeching him with tears in his eyes, that he
would not suffer any disgrace now to attaint the victorious Army, neither that
he would suffer the enemy to escape without revenge. Marius executes his
generals command with speed. Iugurth being somewhat hindered by the
fortification of the camp, with the loss of many of his followers, escaped
into his solitary strong places. Some of his people leaped headlong over the
trenches; others in streit places making more have, then good speed, were
actors of their own ruins.

Metellus leaning the Town untaken, as soon as night approached, returned with
the Army into the camp. The next day before his going to the siege, he
commands the whole Caualry to watch and ward before the gates of the Camp
upon that side, whereon the enemies approach was feared. The gates, and
adjoining Bulwarks he quartered to the Tribunes; and then coming before the
Town, as the day before, he attempteth the wall.

Iugurth again undiscovered, and on the soddaine invadeth our people: they
that stood nearest were somewhat daunted, the residue came quickly in to
succors. Neither could the Numidians have long held out, but that by the
mixture of their footmen with their horse, they had given a great check to the
Romans at the first on set. By whose assistance; they used not now (as in
accustomed fight of horse) first to charge, and then to retire, but in full
cariere to affront any that came, so to entangle and disorder the Army. Thus
with these ready and trained footmen, they had almost routed their enemies.

This very instant Zama, was strongly pressed^ the Colonels and Tribunes
discharged their duties most valiantly: other hopes they expected none, but
such as their own prowess could afford each other.

In like manner the Townsmen resisted as valiantly: they fought stoutly, and
prepared for all events.

One party was more violent to wound another, then careful to defend their
own bodies. The cry was mixed with contrary encouragements, with contrary,
joys and contrary sorrows. The noise of Weapons ascended the Air, and no
spare of shot was made on either side. Those upon the walls, as soon as the heat
of the fight a little slaked took leisure to behold the horse fight of Iugurth:
As the Iugurthines either prospered or had the worse, so might a man perceive
in their faces, courage or fears: and as they could either be seen or heard by
their fellows, some they taught, some they encouraged, made signs with their
hands, and like moveable gestures with their bodies as men are constrained to
do in avoiding, or weilding their missile weapons.

Which being made known to Marius, (for upon that quarter lay his charge) he
began of purpose to slaken the assault, and to dissemble a distrust of
prevailing, permitting the Numidians at pleasure to behold the Kings encounter.

Whilst the Zamenses stood thus earnestly gazing upon their fellows, upon the
sudden Marius attempteth the wall with great violence: the soldiers by
Scalado had almost gained the curtain. The Townsmen run to defense: stones,
fireworkes, and shot, fly thick and threefold. The Romans at first received
them valiantly, but after that one or two ladders were broken and ouerthrown,
those that stood upon them were pitifully bruised. The residue as well as they
could retired, some sound, the greater part wounded. And thus night parted the
fray.

CHAP. 18.
1 Metellus rises from Zama. 2 Wintereth his army. 3 turns force into
policy. 4 Iugurth yields, flies off again.

MEtellus perceived that he spent time and men to no purpose, that the Town
was impregnable, that Iugurth could not be forced to fight but by ambushes,
and in places of his own choice, and lastly, that Summer was spent, he arose
from Zama, and into those towns which had revolted from Iugurth (being by
nature or art any way fortified) he thrust in sufficient garrisons.

2 The residue of his Troops he led into the province, there to spend the
Winter in garrison. Being there, as others had done, he suffered them not to
spend their times in sloth and laziness: but sithence he could not prevail by
force, he works the Kings friends by policy, and prepares to make use of
their traiterous minds in stead of fight.

3 Acquaintance is the Anuile, on which this project must be hammered Bomilchar
the man. This was he, that had accompanied Iugurth to Rome, and after giving in
of sureties, had notwithstanding secretly made an escape in fear of process,
for the death of Massiua. Him he means to make proof of by fair words and
golden promises.

First he sounds, and secretly eff^cteth a private conference, and then upon
oath, he auoweth to procure him pardon, and performance of all other promises
from the Lords of the Senate, if he would undertake to deliver him Iugurth
alive, or dead.

The Numidian, being partly of a perfidious disposition, and partly
misdoubting, that if the Romans and his Lord Iugurth fell into terms of
peace, himself by the Articles of agreement, might happen to be demanded,
and delivered to punishment, was quickly persuaded.

Upon the first occasion, Bomilchar finding Iugurth troubled and perplexed for
his evil fortune, comes unto him, and with tears in his eyes, mouth and
beseeches him, that he would now at length look upon the compassiona^e
estate of himself, his Children, and the whole Kingdom of Numidia, which had
so well deserved at his hands. He fails not to put him in mind, that in all
fights they had carried away the worst, that the Country lay wasted, that much
people were either slain, or carried away Prisoners: that the wealth of the
Kingdom was exhausted. By this time (says he) you have made trial enough
what your Soldiers can do, what your fortunes can promise: I could wish you
to advise, lest your hopes upon aelayes fail you not, the Numidians take some
course to provide for themselves.

By these and like reasons, he insinuates with the kings humors, to fa^l to
composition. Messengers are sent to show the General, that Iugurth is ready
to perform whatsoever is commaunded^ that without capitulation he will simply
yield himself and his kingdom to his discretion.

4 The General speedily causes all the Gentlemen of Senators rank to be
sent for out of their wintering places, with them others whom he thinks meet,
he goes to counsel: according to ancient custom by an order set down by the
Counsel, Iugurth is commanded by Messengets, to bring in two hundred thousand
weight of silver, all his Elephants, and a proportion of horse and munition.
Which being perfomed with expedition, the Consul likewise commands the
fugitives to be brought bound before him. According to command the greater
part are so presented: upon the first motion of the composition; some few
departed into Mauritania toward king Bocchus.

5 Thus Iugurth, being bereaved of his Arms, men and money, is summoned to
Tisidium to perform the Articles; when again he began to repent him of his
bargain and by the sting of his own conscience to grow suspicious of
deserved punishment.

His doubts wore out many days, sometime he recounted, that in the irkesomnesse
of adverse fortune, all miseries were lighter then the pressures of war, at
another time, his mind was perplexed to think upon the hard estate of those,
who from a kingdom, were dejected to servitude. At last, being not yet
furnished with many and great means of assistants vncashiered, he begins
the war afresh.

At Rome the Lords going to Counsel, concerning the provinces, Numidia is
again decreed to Metellus.

CHAP. 17.
Marius affects the Consulship: his politic proceeding.

IN these times, by chance C: Marius offered Sacrifice to the gods at Vtica.
The Auruspex declared that the signs portended great and wonderful events.
These the favors of the Gods he laid up in his mind, and other times making
like trial of his fortunes, he always found the tokens answerable.

An immeasurable desire of attaining the Consulship, had long ago possessed the
man: to the atchiuing whereof, besides the descent of his house, he had good
gifts at will: Industrious, honest, a great soldier, high minded,
Parsimonious in private, a contemner of wealth and pleasure in public; only
greedy of glory.

Notwithstanding his birth, and his bringing up at Arpinas in his Childhood
(where he first learnt to undergo the labor of war) he spent his youth in
service for wages, and not in learning the Greek tongue, or City-complements.
And thus by being conversant among virtuous exercises, his experience in short
time grew up to be absolute.

At his first standing for a amilitary Tribuneship before the people, (when
many knowing him not by face, at length knew his name) he easily carried it with
the general suffrage of all the Tribes. By this step he ascended from one to
another, so sufficiently managing his carriage in office, that he was by all
men censured worthy of a better, then the present he inioyed: yet durst not so
worthy a personage make suit for the Consulship before his time. Qu^, ab
aruspice ad altiora petonda animad verteretur
Afterward his ambition was bounded by no limit.

Even in these times the Nobility, conferred the Consulship either by
partiality or succession: the Comminalty, all other inferior offices. No new
man, how sufficient soever, Quia non ex patribus ortus.
nor any grown honorable by desert, were thought worthy of that honorable
calling; yea the place was censured to be discredited, if any such person
attained it. But after Marius grew confident, that the southsaiers prophesies
concurred with the imagination of his thoghts, he desires dismission of
Metellus, s. Metellus.
with intention to go for Rome there to make suite for the Consular dignity.
The man although he were virtuous, honorable, and endowed with many excellent
qualities yet were they accompanied with disdain and pride. Influences
general to all Nobility: who at first being moved at the nouelty, Quia nouus
homo, and municipalis.
took occasion to wonder at the enterprise, and by way of friendship to
dissuade him not to begin so unlawful a suite, neither to rack his thoghts
above his fortunes. Al things were not to be desired of all men: and your place
(quoth he) is a sufficient recompense for your deserts. Lastly, he wished him
to be well advised, before he motioned a request of so high a nature before
the Roman people, from whom by Law, nothing but a just repulse was to be
expected.

When these, nor many like speeches, could direct the mind of Marius, Metellus
answered: that as soon as the common cause would admit permission, he would
yeilde to his request.

Again, being at sundry times after importunate to be gone, it is reported,
that, he wished him not to make over much have. For (quoth he) there is no time
past for you nor my Son to stand for the Consulship. The Gentleman served at
the same time in his fathers Pauilion, being about twenty years old.

This quip, partly in regard of the place affected, and partly for the denial
of departure, extremely exasperated the mind of Marius against his General.
Ambition and wrath (two the worst Counselors) wholly possessed him, all his
deeds and words now tended to popularity. The soldiers under his Regiment
lived more loosely then accustomed: to the Marchantes of Vtica he would
sometimes scandal the war, and sometime bost of himself; That, if he were
Governor but of half such an Army, within few days he would present Iugurth
in chains: That, the General prolonged the War of purpose: That the man was
of no worth, but only desirous too too long to retain the command of proud
sovereignty. All which imputations seemed to them the more credible, for that
by the continuance of war their traffic was hindered. For to a mind set
upon covetousness nothing seems to be performed with sufficient dispatch.

Moreover in our Army conuersed one Gauda a Numidian, the son of Manastabel,
and Nephew of Massinissa, a sickly man, and thereby somewhat crasie of mind,
whom Micipsa had declared second heir of the kingdom. This man had requested
of Metellus, first that he would give him leave according to the custom of
Kings, to set his chair next to the Generals seat; secondly, that he would
appoint him a troop of Roman horsemen to guard his body. Metellus denied both:
the Honor, for that it represented that majesty, which the Romans termed, and
hated, Kingly: and the Guard, for that it was disgraceful, to deliver a band
of Roman horse for the safeguard of a Numidian.

To this Numidian perplexed in mind, Marius addresseth his speech; and advises
him to be revenged on the Consul, according to his instructions. He
incourageth the man (weak God wot by sickness,) with pleasing courtshippe;
calls him King, Honorable, and the Nephew of Masinissa; and that shortly he
should be invested in the kingdom of Numidia, if Iugurth were once slain or
taken. Which should the sooner come to pass, if fortune so favored him, that
he his friend, might once be sent as Consul to manage the war. By this
Stratagem he works Gauda, the Roman horsemen, the soldiers, the merchants,
and diverse others gulled with shadows of peace; to write their scandalous
letters to their friends at Rome, against Metellus: ma^y, with this conclusion,
That they should require Marius for General. Thus was the Consulshippe labored
in his behalf, by the suffrage of many an honest and upright man, yea (and as
luck served that very season) the nobility being curbed by the law Manlia, Ad
magistratu^ re male g^st^ a nobilibus.
new men were nominated by the Pleibeians. And so all things fell out happily
for Marius.

CHAP. 20.
Iugurth falls to his old prastises, and recouereth Vacca, to the great
confusion and disgrace of the Romans.

AFter Iugurth had falsified his promise of personal submission, he opens
the war, he prepares all necessaries with admirable diligence, he slaketh no
time, he traineth his soldiers, and sounds the revolted cities by bribes and
menacies. Those which yet remained at his devotion, he fortifieth, and renueth
or buyeth armours, weapons, and the like ammonitions, as by the former treaty
of peace he had diminished.

He allureth the Roman slaves, and tempts the Garrisons with ready money:
Finally, he leauieth no course unthought on, nor unproven. Now the Vaccenses
(into whose city Metellus upon the first motion of the treaty, had thrust in a
garrison) being ouercom by the kings fair entreaties, and to speak truth, the
better sort in mind never estranged from his service, began a conspiracy. As
for the vulgar (a frequent accident, especially among the Numidians) being by
nature of a variable disposition, seditious, quarrelsome, desirous of
novelties, and contemners of peace and ciuility, they were soon drawn in for
company. The match is made, and the third day following proclaimed the
feastiuall throughout all Affricke. Upon the day they present sports and
daunces, without any appearance or imagination of fear, but watching their
best opportunities, they inuit the Centurions, the Tribunes, and the Governor
of the Town T. Turpilius Sillanus, some to one house, some to another. In the
midst of their metriment they murder them all, except Turpilius: this done, in
a trice they set upon the disarmed and straggling soldiers, observing then no
military discipline because of the day. The common people, whereof some were
made before hand by the Nobility, other some upon a natural inclination to
inconstancies, seconded their leaders. To those that knew nothing of the plot
and combination, novelty and the tumult a foot gave matter of consent and good
liking. The Romans stood amazd at the sodennes of the uproar, and not knowing
what course of safety to take, were in an extreme ecstasy. To fly unto the
town castle, where their colors and shields were remaining, was to run upon
their deaths, a garrison of enemies already in possession, had shut the gates,
and denied retrait. Boys and women cast stones, and such like stuff upon
their heads in abundance from the tops of houses. No man could prevent these
uncertain blows, no nor the valiantest soldier come to be revenged on this
weak and cowardly rabble: so that good and evil, cowards and valiant soldiers
in this medly died like deaths in great numbers. Of all the Italians, Turpilius
the Governor escaped alone untouched through all the barborous Numidians and
their closed gates.

Whether it so happened by the favor of his host, by ransom, or by chance,
we never could discover: only thus much, a man may say; that Turpilius showed
himself a base and inconstant fellow, in preferring at such a pinch
disgraceful life before a bed of fame.

CHAP. 21.
1. Vacca recovered. 2. Turpilius beheadded.

MEtellus being given to understand of the regaining of Vacca, was somewhat
moved at the accident, Ne signum virili animo indignum ostenderet.
and retired out of sight. But upon the digestion of wrath and grief, at last
he hasteneth with extraordinary diligence to take revenge upon so disloyal a
treason. By Sunne-set he takes the field with the Legion, with which he
wintered, and as many light Horsemen Numidians, as he possibly could raise.

The next day, about the third hour, he arrived in a cortaine plain,
incircled about with indifferent heigh Banks. Here, to his Soldiers grown
weary by their long march, and refusing to pass further, he discovers his
intention: That Vacca was not above a mile distant; That they were obliged in
duty to undergo the remainder of the journey with patience, if it were but to
inflict deserved punnishment upon Traitors, for the miserable death of such
their loyal and valiant fellow-Cittizens.

So by these speeches, as also by permission of prey, having regained their
courages, in the forefront he plac^th his Horsemen, and commands his
Footmen to march close, without discovering their ensigns.

The people of Vacca observed, that the company approached their Town; at
first (as indeed it was) suspected Metellus, and shut their Gates: But
afterward, for that they neither wasted; and those that came first to view
were their Contrymen, the Numidians, changing opinion, they supposed it to
be Iugurth, and needs would issue to congratulate their friends and fellows.

Upon signal given, the horsemen and foot beat back the vulgar people toward
the City: some sieze upon the gates, and some upon the bulwarks. Thus wrath
and hope of spoil can make wearied bodies forget lazines.

The Vaccenses had only two days to rejoice for their Treason: The City being
great and rich, was sacked, and punished. Turpilius the governor, the sole man
(as we told you) that escaped, Non ex vrbe qua^^m lex Port^a v^^bat ad
supplicium posci. vt ante Caesar.
was called before the General to answer the revolt: Praefectu^ decet per
vigilem esse, nemini credere sed arce^ semper tenere.
He made some excuses, but was condemned to be whipped with rods, and then to
be beheaded. For he was a Citizen of Italy.

CHAP. 22.
The treason of Bomilchar discovered, and the party executed.

ABout this time Bomilchar, by whose solicitation Iugurth had condisce^ded
unto the composition, now disauowed for pretexts of fear, began to grow
ielous of the King, and the King of him. Bomilchar deuiseth new occasions:
practices to put his intended promise to Metellus in execution night and day,
wearieth his mind upon the project: and at last upon mature deliberation,
associateth one Nabdalsa a welthy Gentleman, and one well-beloved of his
conntreymen, into the conspiracy. His place was commonly to march somewhat
disioyned from the Kings troops, and to execute those directions which
Iugurth, either for wearines, or upon imploiment of other weighty affairs,
could not himself attend. By these imploiments the man attained to wealth and
reputation.

They both by joint consent agree upon the day: the execution they refer to
time and opportunity. Nabdalsa retireth to his charge by commandment
appointed to affront the winter garrisons of the Romans, so to awe them from
wasting the adjoining territory without impediment.

At leisure, the gentlemen by reuoluing the foulness of the fact, kept not
time: To speak truth, fear dissuaded performance. Bomilchar in like manner
being desirous of dispatch, and perplexed at the irresolution of his
associate, Consilium de iudicio faciendo.
least peradventure by revealing the old Treason, he might affect new pardon,
by trusty Messengers conueyeth Letters unto him; wherein he taxes him of base
fear and carelessness: that he should remember his oath to the Gods by whom he
had sworn; and lastly, to be very circumspect least the rewards of Metellus
by his default turned not to their destruction. He failed not in a manner to
prophecy, that the destruction of Iugurth was at hand, the question only
rested in this, whether it should be finished by their Virtue, or the Generals
good fortune, and therefore he wished him to take counsel with his pillow,
whether he had rather receive a reward, or undergo a shameful death.

Upon the arrival of these Letters, by great adventure Nabdalsa being wearied
with travel and exercise, was cast upon his bed: where after he had well
weighed the words of Bomilchar, first care, and then sleep (the oppressors of
perplexed consciences) attached his senses. His Secretary (a Numidian,) trusty
and gracious unto his master, and partaker of all his counsels (excepting this
last) hearing of the delivery of certain Letters, as at ^ormer times,
supposing that his service was expected, entered the tent: where finding his
Lord sleeping and the letter carelessly laid upon his pillow, he took and read
it. He posteth to the King.

Nabdalsa awaking, missing the Letter, and by swifte messengers understanding
from point to point how matters were carried, first commands to pursue his
Secretary, but in vain. Whereupon he himself in person goes unto Iugurth,
craves pardon, and protests that what he had prepared and resolved to
disclose, his servant had prevented. With tears he craves reconcilement, and
in recompense of his former service, he beseeches him not to bury the
suspicion of so foul a treason in further remembrance.

The king contrary to his acustomed humor, beningly answers; that Bomilchar
and many other^ (whom he knew were guilty of the conspiracy) had suffered
death: and that not to exasperate any further dislike upon this occasion,
Animus Tiranni nunquam quietus
he had taken truce with his indignation.

After this disaster, no day, no night could afford Iugurth any rest: place,
men, and time, were suspicious unto him. He feared his subjects and enemies
alike. He looked strangely upon all men, Omnes timet^ et timetur ab omnibus
and started at every noise, contrary to the honor of a King: By night he
took up his lodging, sometime in one place, sometime in another. And sometime
being disquieted in his sleep, he would rise, lay hold on his sword, and
disquiet all others. This fear resembled frenzy.

CHAP. 23.
Marius in despite of the Nobility, is elected Consul by the people.

MEtelus being given to understand by certain fugiti^es of the death of
Bomilchar, and the discovery of the complot, prepares and hasteneth all
warlike provisions, with as speedy diligence, as he did in the beginning at
his first setting forth.

He likewise dismisseth Marius, whom for his untoward and cross behavior he
now envied, supposing his service would smally sted him.

The common people at Rome, De Mario, quod accuss^s^e Metellum, de Metello,
quod in crimen ^itacetur.
by the aforesaid Letters understanding what fame gave out, concerning the
General and Marius, where glad to hear the reports of either.

Nobility, which but lately adua^ced the credit of Metellus, now procured him
envy: a vulgar descent, to Marius gained infinite favor: yet this by the way^
partialities toward both counterpoised the balance; Virtues or vices were
never questioned. Seditious Magistrates put fuel to the popular fire. In all
their orations they brand Metellus with desert of death: Marius they extol as
fast above desert.

Of the vulgar, being thus generally incensed, the Mechaniques and husbandmen
(whose wealth and credit consisted in their manuel labors) forsake their
trades to countenance Marius, preferring his welfare before their thrift:
whereat the gentry stood so amassed, that after many a bitter controversy, they
were glad to confer the consular dignity upon this new man Marius. Quia
maiores nu^quam obtinuerant.


Then arose L. Manlius Mancinus, and petitioned the people whom they did please
to make choice off, for General in the war against Iugurth: with one voice
they answered, Marius; although the Senate but a while before had appointed
Numidia for Metellus his province: But the faction was too weak, it prevailed
nothing.

CHAP. 24.
1. Iugurth after his discomfiture, wholly relieth upon the fastnes of the
deserts. 2. Flies to Thala. 3. Metellus follows, and forces Thala. 4. The
resolute Tragedy of the Fugitives.

BY this time Iugurth having lost the hearts of his friends (some of whom he
had slain, and some for fear were fled to the Romans, and others to King
Bocchus) began to be extremely disquieted with doubts and ielousies. War he
could make none without sufficient commanders: and to make trial of new,
sithence the old prove so perfidious, was a choice full of danger. Neither the
plot, the Counsel, nor the presence of any man could please him. His iornies
and remoues he changed every day, sometimes toward the enemy sometime toward
the deserts: to day he was of opinion, that flight was his safest refuge:
tomorrow, arms. The like ielouzie he fostered of the sufficiency, and loyalty
of his people. Thus^ upon what side soever he resolved, all things fell out
preposterous.

Admidst these contrarieties of his perplexed conscience, the enemies Army
shows it self on a sudden. The Numidians, according as the shortness of
the time permitted, and Iugurth instructed, stand ready to receive the charge.
The battle is begun, and well maintained in that part where Iugurth
commanded: As for the residue of his followers, at their first approach they
took their heels, and fled. Of Ensigns, weapons, and Prisoners, the Romans
took few: for commonly in all fights, the Numidians repose greater confidence in
their feet, then honor in their Arms.

2 After the rout, Romani, qui eum derilinquere non audebant.
the first stage that Iugurth (now more then at any time before, mistrusting
the success of the action) breathed at, with the fugitives and part of the
horsemen, were the Deserts; the second, Thala; a great and wealthy Borrough,
the chamber of his Treasure, and the wardrobe of his childrens furniture.

Whereof when Metellus was advertised, although he knew that the nearest river
was fifty miles distant from the Town, and the territory adjacent was
waterlesse and barren, and dispeopled: yet such were his hopes to finish the
war, if he might become Lord of the place, that without further
temporizing, he resolves to overcome all difficulties: yea rather then to
desist; to wrestle his utmost against Nature.

3 In dispatch whereof, he commands all his beasts of carriage to be laden
with baggage, save ten days sustenance for horse and man. He makes the
greatest provision he can for bottles and caske: Does as much for tame Cattle
throughout the Villages, and upon their backes' lays Vessailes of all
contents: most of them were made of wood, taken out of the Numidian cottages.
To the borderers, after the flight, he inioyneth subjection, and to furnish him
with water from the nearest rivers. The Randeuow of delivery he proscribeth:
and burdeneth not his own Cattle, until he came to the River nearest the town,
whereof we spoke but now.

Now is Metellus upon his march toward Thala, when arriving at the place,
where he had commanded the Numidians to attend him with water; by that time he
had pitched and fortified his camp, so violent a storm of rain is reported
to have fallen from the heavens, that it yielded water enough, and to spare,
for him and his people. Victuals were as plentiful above expectation, for that
(as it commonly falls out) in alterations of State, Principium feruet medium
caelet, and tepet imum.
every man proves extraordinary officious.

The soldiers reputed of the chance, as of a divine Omen: and upon confidence
that the Gods were careful of their fortunes, they doubled their courages.

The next day (contrary to all imagination of Iugurth) they arrive at Thala:
the Townsmen, who till now believed that they had bin out of gunshot by their
inaccessible situation, stood astonished of so unlooked for an accident, but
with all, make never the less preparation to maintain war; the Romans do
the like.

But the King verily believing, that nothing was impossible to Metellus, as the
only man, who by industry had overcome Arms, Engines, time, places, and
Nature her self, the Conquerors of all other creatures; with his children and
an infinite mass of money flies out of the Town by night. Afterward staying
in no one place above a day and a night, upon cunning he gave out that his
affairs urged for expedition, but truth was, that he hoped by continual and
speedy change of abode, to prevent Treason, which he feared extremely: for
who knows not that negligence inciteth ill counsel to make use of opportunity.

Metellus perceiving in what sort the Townsmen prepared for his welcome; and
that the Town likewise was fortified by Art and Nature, incircleth the walls
with a ditch and a rampart. Then commands he his soldiers, as the soil
would give them leave, to raise their Vines against the fittest places, and
upon them a mount, and upon the mount, Towers: and quartereth out the works to
the defense of his Pioners.

4 The Townsmen labor as fast to frustrate these devises: on either side
nothing could be better performed to conquer, to defend. The Romans almost out
of heart by infinite labor, and daily conflicts, the fortieth day after their
first ariuall, gained only the town, the Fugitives consumed the treasure. For
after they perceived, that the Ram played upon the wall, and that with them
there was no way but one, gold, silver, and what ever mortal people account
precious, they stowed in the kings palace: and then loading their senses with
wine and good cheer, they fiered it, themselves, and the Palace.

Thus, the punishment which the conquered expected at their enemies hand, they
wreaked voluntarily upon their own carcases.

CHAP. 25.
1 Metellus succoureth Leptis. 2 A digression upon occasion of the strange
death of two Carthaginean brethren.

1 AS Thala was in saccage, certain Ambassadors from Leptis arrived before
Metellus, entreating him to send a President with some companies into their
town, for that one Amilchar, a Noble man of the Cit^y, went about to alienat
the allegiances of the inhabitants from the Romans. From this his insolency,
neither the authority of the Magistrate, nor the terror of the laws, could
deter him: unless they made have, the safety of the Town with the loyalty
of the Roman associates, was greatly to be doubted of.

From the beginning of the Iugurthian war, the people of Leptis entered a
league of confederacy with the Consul Bestia; and after him, they sent to Rome
to perfect the Articles. After the confirmation whereof, they always remained
loyal confederats to the Roman people, yea and performed their utmost services
to Bestia, Albinus and Metellus.

In regard whereof, at the first motion, they obtained their request of
Metellus, who presently dispatched away four Ligurian cohorts with C. Annius
their Captain.

The town was first built by the Sidonians, who (as report goes) arrived
there by shippinge, being bannished their country for their civil dissentions.

It is situated between two sands, and seems to derive its name from the
place. For upon the utmost bounds of Africa two baies extend themselves, in
hugenes unequal, in condition equal; sometime as the wind stands,
Nauigable, at an other time dry and passable. For as the Sea proves high and
tempestuous, so do the waves drive the sands, the people and the rockie
stones. Thus the use of the place depends upon the casualites of the storms.

The language of the people is changed by the proximitie of the Numidians, but
their laws and religion remain merely Sidonian, which they have retained the
better uncorrupted, for that they lived far remote from the Court; many vaste
and desert countries lying between them and the inhabited parts of Numidia.

2. And now sithence the affairs of the Leptitans has drawn my pen into
these Regions, I think the worthy and memorable exploit of two Carthaginians
there happening worth relation. The very place enforces me to write of the
accident.

At what time, the Carthaginians were Lords over the greater part of Affrique,
the Cyrenians were also a state rich and powerful. The vacable Country
between them was sandye, by color or nature nothing discernable; no river, no
mountain distinguished their borders. This indifferency was cause of long
wars to both parties, wherein after they had wasted their Legions, sunk and
torn their nauies, and almost ruinated both their estates, fearing least a
third party taking the advantage, should prey as well upon the conqueror as the
conquered, by a mutual truce they fell to agreement, each party to send their
ambassadors from home upon a day prefixed: look where both chanced to meet,
there should be the bonds of each others territory.

Two brethren named Phileni were sent from Carthage: The Carthaginians made all
possible have; the Lirenians iornied slowly: whether to attribute the cause to
negligenc^, or chance, I cannot resolve. For in these deserts the eyes and
faces of travelers are no less molested with tempests of lands, raised by the
winds upon these level, barrain, and vast plains, then are the Mariners
without compass in outrageous gustes at Sea. These for want of true kenning
might be impediments to their speed.

Which when the Cirenians perceived, and for their negligence feared upon their
return to be punished, they cauilled at the Carthaginians, charging the^, that
they had departed from home, before the time appointed. The matter became
litigious: The Cirenians, were content to accept of any condition, rather then
to return with imputation of private disgrace. The Carthaginians aduow to
refuse no condition, so it were just and reasonable. The Cirenians make this
ouerture: That either the Carthaginians should suffer themselves to be buried
alive in the place, which they desired to make the limit of their State: or
else to suffer them (the Cirenians) upon like tea^mes, to pass further on to
the end of their intended voyage. The Phileni accepted the match, and
sacrificed their lives to the honor of their Country, and there made choice to
be buried. To these Brethren, the Carthaginians in that very place erected two
alters: at home they recorded their memories with other ceremonies. Now return
I to my matter.

CHAP. 26.
Iugurth flies to King Bocchus, and procures him to make War against the
Romans.

AFter the loss of Thala, Iugurth supposing that no place could afford him
sufficient security, against the good conduct of Metellus; with small
attendance, he resolves to pass over the vast deserts, to the Getuli; a
people rude and barbarous; who before that time, had never heard of the Roman
name. Of these, he allureth a tumultuary multitude; by little and little
invreth them to discipline; to follow their Ensigns, to hearken to their
commanders, and finally to observe all other points of soldiery.

Secondly, by present entertainment, and far greater promises, he procures
the favorites of King Bocchus, to be a means to his Majesty in favor of so
distressed a neighbor, to begin the war against the Romans.

His sure was the sooner and easier harkened unto, upon occasion, that in the
beginning of this War, the King had sent his Ambassadors to Rome, to desire
their love and friendship.

Which Ouerture most aduantagious for the time, some few men blind, through
Avarice; and accustomed to make all suites saleable, in the beginning
frustrated.

Honesta, et inhonesta.
Moreover, Iugurth had married the daughter of Bocchus: but that bond is little
accounted of amongst the Moors and Numidians; for that every man, according
to his ability, may have as many wives as him list: some ten, some more; Kings
most of all: who having their minds thus distracted by variety, reckon no one
for their lawful spouse, but account all alike, vile and contemptible.

Both kings, both Armies, make their enterview in an appointed place with equal
goodliking: There they plight reciprocal oaths, and Iugurth the more to
exasperate the mind of Bocchus by his Oration, Terms the Romans to be an
iniust people, of insatiable Avarice, a common enemy to al men: That, the same
reasons upon which they grounded the pretense of war against Iugurth, and
many other Nations, the same they would enforce for good, against Bocchus,
(viz:) their Ambition of Sovereignty. Quam calida vtitur inductione a ^^ibus
temporibus: ^ praeterito, per Carthaginenses. a praesenti per se, a ^utur^, per
Bocchu^ nisi prospexerit.
In which their imperious humors, they account all kings their enemies, at this
instant, Himself; a little before, the Carthaginians, and king Perses, yea, and
hereafter every one as he grows by wealth or greatness to be a mote in
their eyes.

After these speeches, they take their journey toward Cirtha, for that
Quintus Metellus had made that City the seat of the War, and therein had
bestowed his spoils, his Prisoners, and the baggage of the Army. His reasons
were, first, that if he forced the place, the spoil would prove exceeding
profitable; secondly, if Metellus should offer to succor the besieged, then
was he sure, both Armies should not part without blows. For his policies did
only aim by celerity to engage Bocchus, least by delay (the King not yet
utterly despairing of peace) might change his mind, and accept of any
conditions, rather then of war.

The General understanding of these Combinations, accepts not rashly of
every proffer of fight and place, ad placitum hostis
as oftentimes he had accustomed to do after he had once overthrown Iugurth,
but fortifying his camp not far from Cirtha, makes prooffe of the enemies
courage, accounting it more safe (seeing he had to do with a newcome Nation)
after some trial of the Moorish valor, to fight at pleasure to his best
advantage.

By this time he receives advertisement, that at Rome Numidia is fallen by lot
to Marius, that he had attained the Consulship, he had learned long before.
The news whereof so moved him beyond all mean and measure, that he could not
forbear tears, neither (being so worthy a personage, adorned with all other
virtues) moderat his tongue, or bear this cross with manlike behavior: for
which, some scandalized him with pride: others excused him, with reply, that
his generous Nature was only agreeued at the disgrace; for that the victory
now already as good as gained, ^. Authori.
was injuriously wrested out of his hands. To us, it is sufficiently known,
that the honor of Marius, more then any conceit of disgrace, disquieted his
mind: for if the province had befallen to any man besides, he could have
brooked it with requisite patience.

But howeuer, Metellus stomacking his successor, and acounting it a fond part
by indangering himself to pleasure another, sends Ambassadors to entreat
Bocchus, that without cause he would not show himself an enemy to the Roman
people: that at this present he had fair opportunity to renew his suite of
alliance, and friendship, which at any hand were to be preferred before war.
Yea although his abilities might in a manner promise assurance, yet were it not
wisdom, to hazard certainties for incertainiies. The beginning of all wars were
plausible, but their ends distasteful. They are in no one man's power to begin
and end, at pleasure. Even Cowards may take Arms when they please; lay them
down, they cannot, but by sufferance of the victor. And therefore he advised
him, to bethink himself of his own, and his kingdoms, safety, rather then to
entangle his flourishing and prosperous estate with the desperate courses of
Iugurth.

Heereunto the King gave a very courteous reply; That his desire was only
peace: but withal took compassion on the hard estate of Iugurth. If like
Ouerture might be offered him, without doubt, they should soon compound all
controversies. The General returns this answer to Bocchus; That something
he allowed, something he refused. So, in this manner by sending and resending of
Messages, time wasted, and by the cautellous conniuency of Metellus the War
was protracted, and nothing set forward.

CHAP. 27.
Marius by the mere favor of the people is declared Consul against the minds
of the Nobility. And sent into Affrique. His demeanor in the service.

Marius (as we told you before) by the tumultuous and most affectionate
assistance of the people, being created Consul, and Numidia also allotted him
for his province. If before he were severe against the Nobility, now was he
much more fierce and incompatible: sometimes wronging them in particular,
sometimes in general. He would often boast, that he carried the Consulship as
a spotle from his conquered enemies; many times breathing out high words
concerning his own worth, and to their disgrace. Well, his first cares he
turns to preparations for war; he requires new supplies for the Legions;
and calls unto the populer estates, unto kings, and alies, fo^aids. In Italy,
he sends for every valiant gentleman, most, before known unto him for their
sufficiency, few by report; and amongst them, by ^rece, non imp^^io.
fair words and promises he constrains the Cum ob senium essent requie and
(...) donati.
cashiered seruitors to go along likewise: Neither durst the Senate, although
they misliked the president, withstand him in any thing. But with right good
will they decreed him supplies, in hope that by forcing the vulgar to service,
Quando legio^es explebantur, supplementum dicitur
he should either be deceived in their use, or wholly lose their affections: but
the winding up of all fell out far otherwise; so ardent a desire had possessed
most men, to accompany Marius, with hopes that they should return victors,
laden with rich spoils, and military honors.

To these suppositions, the Oration of Marius had added no small encouragement:
for after that all allowances were decreed him, which he could or would demand,
he enrolled his soldiers; and as well to insinuate with the vulgar, as to
nettle the Nobility (his accustomed humor) he calls an assembly of the
people: Before whom he reasoned to this, or like purpose.

Marius Oration.
I Know worthy Romans, that the behauiours of most men far differ in the
request and execution of honorable offices. They pretend at first an exterior
habit of industry, temperance and humility: But confirmed in authority, pass
their time in pride, arrogance and idleness. For my part I am of a contrary
opinion: for by how much the universal body of this Common wealth is of
greater consequence, then either a Consulship, or the dignity of a Praetor: by
so much the more ought that to be respectively governed, then this so earnestly
desired. Nor am I ignorant, how burdensome a charge I have with your exceeding
favor undertaken: as namely, to wage war, and that, without exhausting your
Treasury. To compel even those to bear Arms, unto whom you would by no
means be offensive: and in a word, to manage the whole affairs of your
estate, as well domestical as foreign: The performance whereof, resting amongst
so many turbulent, envious and thwarting spirits, Dear Citizens is a burden
beyond imagination, grievous.

Moreover, whereas the abuses of other magistrates, are perchance countena^ced
with their titles of Ancient Nobility, the prowess of their Ancestors, power
of their allies, or multitude of their retinue: my hope and assurance rests
on my self alone; which I must necessarily maintain by Virtue and Innocence.
For other means are unprofitable. Again, I know well, that the eyes of all men
are fixed upon me; that good and just men love me, as one whose deeds have
tended to the advancement of this Commonwealth; but the Greatest watch
opportunity to disgrace me; My uttermost endeavors are therefore now to be
employed, that both your expectation may be satisfied, and they frustrated. I
have hitherto from mine infancy voluntarily accustomed my self to labor, and
exposed my youth to peril: Wherefore being now honored with so large a
recompense, I am not determined to forgo those courses, which before I
undertook unrewarded. Temperance and Authority seldom concur in those, whom
Ambition only furnishes with apparances and shadows of honesty; but in me
that have always been conversant in the best actions, a familiar custom of
doing well is become natural.

By your Commission I am to war with Iugurth: The Nobility heereat repine: be
therefore well advised, whether it be meet to alter your determination, or not:
and from out this confused heap of Gentry, to commit the direction of these
and such like businesses, to some one or other of ancient race, and many
glorious discents, but no experience^ to the end, that thorough ignorance and
weakness he may tremble under the weight of so great a charge; and be
enforced to entertain any mean fellow to instruct him in his Office. By which
it often falls out, that he whom you have made a Commander, shall himself be
subject to the command of another.

I know there are many that even after they are made Consuls, begin first to
peruse the monuments of their predecessors, and to read the military precepts
of the Grecian discipline. But these preposterously pervert all order; since
the knowledge how to govern ought to precede the practice of government: Now
therefore (worthy Romans) compare me, scarce yet a Gentleman with their
presumptuous and proud arrogancy: what they have either heard or read, I have
partly seen, partly put in execution, and what they from written volumes have
gathered, I have abroad in warfare purchased by experience. Be you then
Judges, whether is of greater value: deeds or words? The obscurity of my
birth is to them contemptible: to me, their Cowardice: they vpbraid me, with
fortune, I them, with dishonesty. It is true, we are all sprung from one and
the same Universal Nature, yet the most valiant ought to be reputed the most
generous and Noble. If the Fathers of Albinus or Calphurnius Bestia, were now
to be demanded, whether they had rather have had children like me, or those.
What should we conceit, would have bin their answer? doubtless to have had the
woorthiest. So that by Embas^^ng me, they likewise traduce the worth of their
own Ancestors, whose first Nobility like mine was Originally derived from their
own virtues. They envy my promotion, let them likewise envy my labors, mine
innocence and my dangers, for by these was I first raised. But men transported
with Pride and selfe-conceite so live, as if they disdained your dignities, and
yet so desire the^, as if they were men of a most sincere and uncorrupted
integrity. But their hopes beguil them, and vainly they expect the fruition of
a most manifest Contrariety, the pleasure of sloth, and the meed of Virtue.
Moreover, in public assemblies, either before you or the Senate, their
Orations are for the most part full fraught with the glory of their
forefathers, imagining that something may be added to their own worths by the
Narration of their exploites; when contrarily, by how much the more their
Virtues surmounted others, by so much the more base are these their degenerate
and sluggish offspring. For noble Ancestry is as a light shining on
posterity, which exposes all their actions, whether good or bad to the
interpretation and survey of the world. In these matters albeit I am needy,
yet, which is far more rich and honorable, I may justly boast of mine own
deeds. But behold their partiality; they allow me not that respect for mine
own virtues, which themselves (unjust usurpers) arrogate for other men's And
vvhy' My Galleries are not beset with statues, my Gentilitie is yet but
sprouting, which truly in me is more worthy to have begun, then in them to have
defaced what was hereditary.

I doubt not but if they were to answer me, you should find them abounding
with adornate elegancy of speech, and well composed Orations: yet since they
never cease, to vomit the poison of their toongs, both against you (worthy
Romans) and my self, for these dignities bestowed upon me, I list no longer to
refrain, least modesty and silence argue a guilty conscience: For mine own
part, their slanders hurt me not, since necessity shall compel them to speak
the truth, when as the uprightness of my life and conversation shall confute
their falsehoodes.

But, insomuch as they have taxed your Counsels and Decrees, in authorizing me,
for the dispatch of so great a business, be ye therefore thoroughly advised,
whether ye shall ever have cause to repent your selves of this appointment. I
confess, I am not able to allege (as witnesses of my desert) either a long
drawn pedigree, tryumphall Chariots, or the Consulships of my progenitors; But
if need were, of Spears, Ensigns, Barbes for Horses, and other such like
rewards and ornaments of Chiualry: to which, if ye also add, a body mangled
with scarres and wounds, I could produce abundance. These are my
Atchieuments; This my Nobility, not lineallie descending by course of
inheritance, but with industry, sweat, and the expense of much blood, atchiued.

My speeches are not well featured, I want Eloquence, but I reguard it not: my
virtue is sufficient to show it self: only there shameful actions require
the couerture of glosing phrases. I understand not the Grecians, nor am I able
to spel their characters! In truth I desire it not: sithence the knowledge
thereof has toward the purchase of virtue, so little auailed her professors.
But in that which more aduantageth our estate; To assail the Enemy, to chase
their Garrisons, to be affrighted only with infamy, to lie hard, and finally
with equal patience to endure Heat, Cold, Hunger, thirst and travail;
herein I am expert: with these rudiments will I instruct my soldiers, without
either austere usage toward them, or daintiness in my self, nor by their
labors aiming only at the advancement of mine own peculiar credit or
reputation.

These rules are profitable, and establish a right civil government; but
whereas effeminate men, are themselves couched and nuzled in soft delicacie,
yet rigorously entreat their soldiers, they are rather masters than
Captains. Their worthy Ancestors of famous memory, have only by those
means before recited; enobled both themselves and their Countries, whom whilst
we endeavor to trace in those steps of honor, these their succeeding issues,
unlike in conditions, only confident in the merits of their ancestors, contemn
our proceedings, as reputing all Offices of command due only to their birthes,
nothing to deserts. But (proud men) they are far deceived: for albeit their
fathers gave them wealth, left them Crestes, and their vndying memories, yet
virtue, which may neither be given or taken, they were unable to bequeath unto
them. Amongst these men I am esteemed barbarous and uncivil, because I affect
not their neat fashion of banqueting, maintain not a stage player, or some
ridiculous Zannie; keep not a more exquisite Cook, and such like: All which I
am well pleased to acknowledge. For I have often heard my father, and other
honest men say, that curiosity is meet for a woman, but labor for a man, and
that unto generous and heroycall minds, renown is more valewable then wealth,
and Arms a more beseeming Ornament, then household furniture.

But let them proceed: That which pleases them, that which they so highly
fancy, let them always follow. Let them Lust, Drink, Feast, and riot, and
having thus spent their youth, so likewise let their old age be as dissolute;
devoted to banquets^ bellycheare, and most beastly sensuality: As for sweat,
industry and toil, let them be shared amongst us, unto whom they are far
more delectable, then all their choice variety of Iunkets.

But alas it will not be, for these unworthy, and vile people, thus tainted
with villainy, thus dishonested with baseness, are yet most forward to assume
unto themselves those rewards, which are only proper to the wel-deseruing:
such (most unjustly) is the propriety of those vices, Sloth and Luxury, that
they endamage only the Commonwealth, not their professors.

So then, having as far forth, as my modesty, though not the heynousnesse of
their abuses, might permit me, briefly answered unto your Nobility, I will now
speak a few words touching our present employment. And first, dear Romans,
be ye all confident in the affairs of Numidia: for ye have now removed those
Obstacles which before were advantages unto Iugurth; Pride, Avarice, and
Ignorance, Moreover ye have there an Army that know well the Country: But in
truth I esteem them more valiant then fortunate; For the most part of them
have bin cut off by the Avarice and inconsiderate rashness of their
Commanders. Wherefore all ye, whose able bodies may brook the wars, now
enforce your selves with me, that our joint endeavors may labor in the defense
of our Commonwealth: nor let your conrage droope, either for the miseries of
other men, or foolish Pride of their Captains, my self will be your guide, and
in all your Marches, and in every battle, will be both a Counselor and a
Companion unto you, my Government equally extending to you as to my self,
without regard of difference: so that heavens assisting our enterprise, we
shall not fail of speedy victory, fair honor, and wealthy booties. Which
albeit they may rest doubtful and remote, yet it becomes good men, even in
regard of common honesty to assist their Country. Sloth never purchased
immortality, neither do fathers pray that their children might live for ever,
but live honestly. More I would say, if words could encourage Cowards: To the
valourous I have spoken sufficient.

Marius having finished this Oration and hereby perceiving the minds of the
Comminalty erected, forthwith caused ships to be laden, with Victuals,
Treasure, munition, and other necessaries. With these he commands Aulus
Manlius his Lieutenant to set forward, mean while himself raised men, not
according to the ancient custom, nor out of the degrees and ranks of people
(as was used by his predecessors) but according to every man's good will and
liking; men for the most part (by reason of their poverty) exempted from
contribution to public taxations: The which some imputed to the want of other
sufficient soldiers, others to the ambition of the Consul, who by such kind of
people had been most adua^ced and magnified: For to an aspiring spirit, the
most needy persons are the most fit instruments, as being such that have no
care of their own, because they have nothing, and in that regard esteem all
things honest that savor of profit. Marius therefore accompanied with a
greater number then was decreed him, went into Africa, and in few days
arrived at Vtica. Where the Army was delivered up unto him by P. Rutilius the
Lieutenant. For Metellus would by no means brook the presence of Marius,
unwilling to see, what in his heart he could not endure to hear. But the
Consul Marius having supplied his Legions and auxiliary Cohorts, or bands of
succor, led his army into a fruitful Country, stored with rich preyes and
boo^ies, and bestowed the pillage thereof upon his soldiers. This done, he
assaulted such Castles and Towns, as both for their situation and strength of
men, were least able to make defense: In other places likewise he had many
battles and light skirmishes: In the mean while his new soldiers began to
grow hardy, and to enter into fight without any fear of peril, as well
perceiving, that all such as fled, were either slain or taken captives: that
every man's assurance of safety rested in his strength and sufficience: that
upon Arms and prowess their welfare depended: That their Liberty, their
Country, their Kindred, and whatsouer they had, consisted herein: and finally,
that this was the way to acquire glory and riches. By reason whereof, in short
space, both new and old alike grew valourous, and their virtues became equal.

But the two Kings advertised of the approach of Marius, dividing their Army;
severally departed unto the most inaccessable and difficult places, which was
done by the advice of Iugurth, hoping by these means that the Roman Army,
scattering it self and straggling abroad, might the more easily be invaded,
and that they like the most part of men, secure and void of fear, would become
the more improuident and less circumspect.

Metellus in this mean season arrived at Rome: where, contrary to his
expectation, he was joyfully welcomed by the Romans, and after the envy raised
against him, was ouerblowne, was alike held dear unto the people, and the
Senate.

CHAP. 28.
1 Marius in sundry small bikeringes distresseth Iugurth and Bocchus. 2
Alters the course of the war. 3 And without loss takes and sacketh Capsa. 4
His praises.

But Marius like a prudent and industrious Captain, had an eye both on his
own Army and his enemies: he well perceiud what most aduantaged or
disadua^taged the one or other side: he set spies to observe what ways the
kings took, and ouerreached all their counsels and stratagems: he suffered
nothing to be slack or unprovided on his part, or any thing to remain safe
and secure to the other side. By reason whereof, many times on his way he
charged and defeated Iugurth, and the Getulians as he found them forraging and
spoiling our confederates, and not far from the Town of Cirtha forced the King
himself to leave his arms behind him.

But at length perceiving, that these exploits were only glorious, and no way
furthered him to force Iugurth to battle whereby at one blow he might impose
an end unto these lingering wars, he determined to besiege all such Towns,
as either for strength of men or natural defense, were of greatest importance
and succor to the enemy, and contrarily most prejudicial to the Romans:
Imagining, that Iugurth, if he endured this, should be debarred of his
strongest forts and places of refuge, or at least, be heerby provoked to a
pitched battle. For Bocchus by sundry Messengers had before signified unto
Marius, that for his part he was desirous of amity and friendship with the
Romans, and that he should not fear him as an enemy.

But whether he dissembled heerin, to the end, that surprising the Romans
unawares, he might give them the greater blow, or whether through the
inconstancy and instability of his mind, it was usual with him to change war
for peace, it is uncertain.

But the Consul proceeding in his former resolution, began to assault towns
and fortified castles; some whereof he took by force, some through fear, and
others by promise of reward and bounty: at first he dealt with the smaller
sort, supposing that Iugurth would for their defense be drawn to a battle:
but receiving intelligence, that he was gone far off, and employed in other
affairs, he thought it high time to attempt matters of greater consequence,
and more difficulty.

3 There was a Town large and strong, situate in the vast and wild deserts,
named Capsa: of which Hercules Lybius was said to be the first founder. The
Inhabitants hereof, under the government of Iugurth, were gently and peaceably
ruled, free from tribute, and in that regard remained most firm and true unto
him.

They were furnished against foreign invasion, not only with walls, Arms,
and Men, but which was much more, by the difficulty of the place and
situation. For excepting those fields that lay near unto the Town, all the
Region about, was wild, desert, and vnmannured; wanting Water, and anoyed with
Serpents, who (as all other wild beasts) become enraged for want of meat.
Moreover, the mischievous Nature of those Serpents, is by nothing more then by
drought provoked.

Marius was maruailously enflamed with a desire to take this Town, as well for
the service of the War, as for that it seemed a very hard and difficult
enterprise, and partly for that Metellus had formerly with great applause taken
the Town of Thala, not much unlike this place, either for situation or
defense: Only the difference was, that not far from the Wales of Thala
were certain Springes and Fountains; whereas the Capsians had but one
continual water-spring, and that within their walls: those without using no
other then rainwater, which both there, and in all other places of Affrique,
remote from the Sea, that are wild and desert, is the more easily endured, for
that the Numidians for the most part feed on Mike, and the flesh of savage
beasts; desiring neither Salt, nor other Sauce to whet there stomachs, as
having provision sufficient to appease hunget and thirst, but not for
superfluity or daintiness.

The Consul therefore having enquired the truth of these matters; becam
confident, I think on the help of the gods. For it was impossible he should
either in wit or policy have been sufficiently provided to encounter so many
difficulties, especially having there but small store of Corn (for as much as
the Numidians employ their grounds rather in pasture then tillage) and that
quantity which they had, was by the Commandment of their king conveyed into
their strong holds. Their fields were also dry and barren without fruit, it
being then the latter end of Summer: Howbeit, Marius made sufficient provision
as his ocasions required. He committed to his auxiliary troops of horse the
conuoy of such Cattle, as formerly he had taken from the enemy, and sent his
Lieutenant Aulus Manlius with his lightest armed Cohorts to the Town of Laris,
where he had laid in his soldiers pay, and victuals: alleging that he
himself would go a forraging, and within few days meet him there.

Thus concealing his purpose, he led his army toward the River Tanais: and made
daily in his iournies equal and ratable distribution of his Cattle amongst his
Army, as they were divided by hundreds, and troops of thirties, or other small
companies. taking order that of the hides of those beasts, should be made
vessels for the carriage of Water: And moreover (no man knowing his pretense) he
provided such store of Corn and other necessaries as shortly should be
requisite for his intended enterprise. In a word, on the sixth day arriving at
the river, he had a great number of those vessels made of the hides of beasts:
There pitching his Tents slightly fortified, he commanded his soldiers to
take their repast, and be ready to depart by the setting of the Sun; willing
them further to leave all their baggage behind, and charge their carriages
only with water.

At length, when he saw his time, he departed from his Tents, and traveling,
all that night, rested on the morning with his Army: The like he did the second
night, and the third night, long before day, he arrived at a place full of
Hillocks, not above two miles distant from the Town of Capsa; where, as
covertly as he could, he ambushed his army. But the day approaching, and a great
part of the Numidians not mistrusting any enemy, being issued out of the Town,
Marius suddenly caused all his Horse, and with those, his lightest footmen to
make have, and seize upon the gates of the City: Immdiately himself follow^d,
giving express charge to his Soldiers to refrain from pillage. Which when
the Townsmen perceived, there estate standing on such dangerous terms,
extreme fear, a mischief so unlooked for, and moreover, a great part of their
fellow-cittizens surprised, and in the power of their enemies, moved the^ to
yield the town to Marius. Forthwith the City was fired, all of the age of
fourteen years and vpwardes put to the Sword, the rest sold, and the prey
divided amongst the Soldiers. Which injurious act, contrary to the Law of
arms, was not committed either for avarice, or barbarous cruelty in the
Consul, but because the place was most commodious for Iugurth, and almost
inaccessable to the Romans: Moreover, they were a kind of people inconstant and
faithless, and in former times could not be contained in obedience, neither
through fear or favor. 4. Marius having so speedily finished so great an
enterprise, without any loss of his own, albeit he was renowned before, yet
now began to be of greater fame and estimation: now al his designs and
proiects, as well such as were put in execution through good advise, as such
also, as inconsiderately and by chance were adventured, were ascribed wholly to
his virtue and policy: His Soldiers over whom he mildely commanded, being
likewise enriched by these services, extolled his name to the heavens, and the
Numidians feared him, as if he had bin more then mortal. Finally, as well his
companions as his enemies, were of opinion, that he had either a divine
understanding, or at least, that by the Gods appointment, the events of his
enterprises were revealed unto him.

CHAP. 29.
The fortunate suprising of a strong Castle by a strange adventure. 2, An
honorable testimony of Sillaes worthiness.

But these matters having thus fortunately succeeded, the Consul sets forward
to other Towns, some few whereof he took by force, the Numidians resisting;
but the greater number were abandoned and left desolate by reason of the former
calamities of the Capsians destroyed by fire, every place was filled with
grief and slaughter. At length, having gained many places, and those for the
most part, without loss of any Roman blood, he undertook another exploit, not
altogether so toilsome as was that of the Capsians, yet no less difficult. Not
far from the River of Mulucha, that deuides the kingdom of Iugurth and
Bocchus, there is a rock or stony mountain in the midst of a plain, whereon
was situated a rude castle, large enough, but of an incredible height, having
one only narrow entrance into it: The descent of this rock was naturally so
steep, as if purposely it had been so built by the hands of workmen; Marius
with all his endeavors intended to force this Castle, for that the Kings
treasure lay there, which he effected, (but rather by chance than cunning) for
in the Castle was sufficient provision, both of men, munition and corn, as
also a spring of water.

Moreover, the situation thereof was such, as by no means was assaultable,
either by Mounts, Towers, Turrets, or other warlike Engines, the entry
thereinto being very narrow, trauersed and cut on both sides: Our approches
also were made to no purpose, and with great perril, for as they came near the
wall, they were beaten down and destroyed with fire and stones; So as the
Soldiers could neither perform their works for the steepness of the place,
nor serve without peril in their approches: The valiantest were either slain
or wounded, and fear augmented in the rest.

But Marius after many days, and much labor, with great perisiuenesse
pondered with himself, whether he should for go this enterprise, wherein he
seemed to labor in vain, or attend his fortune, which had often times proved
succesfull unto him: These things having many days and nights reuolued in his
mind, it fell out that a certain Ligurian, a common souldior of his auxiliary
cohorts, by chance coming to a water not far from that side of of the
Castle, which was opposite to the besiege^s, found certain Periwinckles
creeping among the stones: whereof when he had taken up first one, then
another, and so sought others, was by this desire of gathering more, by little
and little brought up to the top of the Mountain: where seeing the coast
clear and void of people, forthwith (according to the condition of men) a
desire of exploiting great matters entered into his conceit. There grew in the
same place a great Holme-tree amongst the stones, being a little bended down
toward the ground, and forthwith winding upward (as is the Nature of all
Vegitalles) and shoottng it self on high toward the top of the Castle: by the
help whereof, the Ligurian sometimes taking hold on the arms thereof,
sometimes on the outmost stones of the wall, climbed to the top, where
vndisc^rued of any, he descried the whole plain of the Castle, for that the
Numidians were then absent, busily employed in fight against the besiegers. The
soldier having searched and spyed out all things which he thought needful,
returned the same way he came, not rashly as he ascended, but with great
regard and Caution. Forthwith he retired to Marius, declaring what he had
done, and advised him to attempt the Castle on that side, from whence he had
disce^ded, offering himself for a guide, and alleging that there was no hazard
or perril in the enterprise. Marius forthwith commanded such as were then
present to go with the Ligurian, to try the truth of this information: who
returning made diverse reports thereof, every man according to his fancy, some
esteeming it to be an easy, some a difficult enterprise. But the Consul began
to be of better cheer, and forthwith out of his number of Trumpiters and
Cornets he selected five, the most nimble and light amongst them, and withal
four Centuries for their aid and succor: All which he willed to be at the
command of the Ligurian, unto whom he appointed the next day for the
execution of this service, who at the time limited, according to his
commandment, having prepared and ordered all things necessary, repaired unto
the said place.

The Centurions by the direction of their guide, changed both their arms and
apparel, and went with their heads and feet bare, to the end that they might
the better see about them, and climb with more steadiness. Their swords as
also their Targets (which according to the Numidian fashion were made of
Leather, as well for their lightness, as for that in their clashing together
they made the least noise) were fastened at their backs. The Ligurian then
climbing up before the rest, tied cords unto such stones, and old Mores or
roots, as hung out beyond the rest of the wall, that the soldiers taking
hold thereon, might the more easily ascend: such as were fearful thorough
the strangeness of the way, he help up with his hands, and where the ascent
was steepest, he caused them to climb unarmed, himself following with their
armor. Such places as to the eye seemed most dangerous, himself chiefly
assaved; ascending, descending, and going forwards, encouraging the rest to
follow. At length, but late and sore wearied, they became Masters of the
Castle, which on that side was left unregarded, for that those of the castle,
were then, as at other times employed in fight against their enemies.

Marius having by Messengers understood what the Ligurian had done, albeit he
had all that day entertained fight with the Numidians, yet then encouraging his
soldiers, issued out from his defenses, and with Engines approached the
Walls, threatening them also aloof with slings, Artillery, and other
Ordinance. But the Numidians having formerly broken down and burnt the
approches of the Romans, contained not themselves within the walls of the
Castle, but day and night passed to an fro on the outside thereof, railing at
the Romans and reproching Marius with cowardice; menacing our soldiers to make
them bond-slaues unto Iugurth, and by means of their good fortune grew fierce
and insolent.

But now as the Romans and Numidians were in earnest conflict, each encountering
other with great violence, these fighting for glory and Empire, they for their
lives and safeties; the Ligurian on the sudden sounded an alarm at their
backs, whereat, first ran away the women and children, that were placed to
behold the battle; next, such as were nearest unto the walls, and lastly the
whole company, as well armed as disarmed, betook themselves to flight: The which
so chancing, the Romans began to charge the more furiously; they slew and
wounded diverse, and trampling on their dead bodies, enforced themselves to
ascend the wall. Thus Fortune still favored the ouerweening rashness of
Marius, and in his own error, he found glory.

2 These passages thus depending, mean time Lucius Silla the Questor arrived
in the Camp, with a great troop of Horse. He had been left behind in Rome,
to raise an Army of Latins and Allies their confederates; But for so much as we
are now fallen into discourse of so renowned a man, it will not be amiss to
treat somewhat of his Nature and conditions, for hence-forward we shall have no
occasion to speak of his actions: and Lucius Sisenna, who of all others that
have written of him, has with greatest diligence, and most faith pursued the
History, seems to me, not to have spoken liberally and freely enough of his
worthiness.

Scilla then was nobly descended from the race of a Patrician, but his Gentry
was almost extinct and worn out by the sloth of his ancestors. He was alike
and excellently learned, both in Greek and Latin; of a haughty courage,
addicted to his pleasures, but more to glory: his vacant hours were spent in
Luxury, yet pleasure never hindered his affairs: Only he might have better
advised him self in the choice of a more honest wife. He was eloque^t,
subtle, sociable, and in dissembling or disguising his intents, the depth of
his wit was incredible: He was liberal in gifts, chiefly of his money: and
before the civil Conquest (albeit he was the most happy of all others) yet
fortune never exceeded his industry, insomuch as many doubted, whether he was
more virtuous or fortunate: But for his latter actions, I am uncertain whether
it will more shame or grieve me to repeat them.

Then as is before said, when he came with his troop of horse into Affricke,
and the camp of Marius (being before a Nouice and unexperienced in the wars)
in a short season with few bickerings, became the most cunning and expert
leader amongst the Romans. Moreover, he would kindly entreat his soldiers,
give liberally to such as demanded, as also voluntary to others: he could
hardly be drawn to take any thing; but more ready to return it with
recompense, then to pay a just debt. He never redemanded any thing lent, but
rather endeavored to have as many as he could, remain his debtors. His fashion
was to discourse both pleasantly and seriously, with the basest and men of
meanest rank, and would very often be amongst them in their labors, their
marches, and their watchings, neither in the mean while (as lewd ambition is
accustomed) would he with slanders wound the honor and reputation, either of
the Consul, or any other. In direction or execution he suffered no man to go
beyond him, but herein himself excelled the most part: and by these means in
a short space, he became indeared both unto Marius and the soldiers.

CHAP. 30.
Bocchus joins with Iugurth, assaulteth Marius upon the sudden, and is
notwithstanding defeated.

But to return where we left, Iugurth having lost the Town of Capsa, and
other fortified places of importance, as also great store of Treasure;
dispatched messengers unto Bocchus, signifying that he should forthwith bring
his forces into Numidia; That the season of the year summoned to field.

But hearing that the King made small have, and stood doubtful between the
events of peace and war, once again, as before, he corrupts with presents
the greatest and nearest persons about Bocchus: promising the King for his
share, the third part of Numidia, if either the Romans were clean expulsed
Affricke; or the war compounded without diminution of his Patrimony.

Bocchus being caught with so golden a bait, comes unto Iugurth with a world
of people. When joining both their armies (the tenth part of the day yet scarce
remaining) they charge Marius, as he iournied toward his Winter stations:
forecasting that the approach of the night, in case they were overthrown,
would stand them in great stead; but if they fortuned to have the bett^r, it
would prove to them no disadua^tage, for that they were well acquainted with
the ways: But contrarily, howeuer the world went, Quia iguari essent Locarum.
the dark night would prove very troublesome unto the Roman Army.

No sooner had the Consul notice of the enemies approach, but the enemy was
discovered to follow him at the heels: And before the battle could be
ranged, the luggage discharged and secured, the signal given, or any order
taken; the Moorish and Getulian Horsemen had charged our people: not in order
and warlike manner, but by troops and scattering companies, at adventure.

The soldiers at first, being thus taken unprovided, stood amazed, but now
calling to mind their wonted valor, did either betake them to their weapons,
or defended others against the insulting enemy, whilst they ran to arm. The
horsemen gat to horse, and did what they could to stay the enemies course. The
fight rather resembled an incursion, then a battle. The footmen without
Ensigns or ranks were mixed amongst the Horse; Some ran away, some were
slain, some making obstinate resistance were circumvented behind, by the
enemy: neither valor nor steel could warrant life, the enemy pressed so fast
on with inequality of numbers, and dispersion on all quarters. For remedy
whereof, the old and new Roman soldiers instructing one another, had no other
shift, then as place or chance directed them, to cast themselves into an Orb,
or circle; whereby being covered and prepared upon al sides, they enabled
themselves to sustain the enemies fury.

At this hard bargain, Hinc dignosc^tur quanti momenti sit dux validus in
exercitu.
Marius showed no more token of a fearful or dejected spirit, then at another
season; but with his own company, which he had culled (not out of his
favorites and familiars, but of choicest fellows) he scoureth up and down
the field: sometimes releeuing his wearied people, sometimes charging in upon
the thickest troops of his enemy: sometime giving his advice: for command he
could not in so general a confusion. ^ manu, aut alio signo.


The day by this time was well nigh spent, yet the barbarous poeple slackned
nothing of their fury, but by the Kings persuasions, relying upon the
advantages of the night, seemed to press on with fresher courages.

But Marius, taking Counsel upon necessity, commands his soldiers to retire
unto two hills nearely adjoining. Upon the one, hardly of sufficient capacity
to pitch their Tents, was a large Fountain of Water; the other was more
aduantagious, by reason of his eminency, and some natural fortifications.
Upon that with the Water, he commands Silla with the horsemen to keep good
watch all that night: himself by some and some, withdraws his dispersed
soldiers in troops from amongst their enemies, in no less confusion, then
themselves. This done, with a full march he retireth them al unto the aforesaid
hill.

The Kings being discouraged by the difficulty of the place, sound likewise
the retrait, and suffer not their soldiers to lodge far from the place, but
enuironing the hills with multitudes, confusedly set them down. Then making
many fires after their barbarous custom, al night long they begin to make
merry, to dance, and with their feet and voices to stir up strange noises. The
kings themselves grew proud, either for that the Romans could not put them to
flight, Qui in tenebris sunt, vident q. fiu^t in luce, et non ipsi videntur.
or for that they accounted the victory in sure possession. These passages by
reason of the darkness, and the eminency of the hill, were very discernable to
the Romans, and gave them no small encouragements to hope for victory.

For Marius being very confident, upon the rawnesse of the enemy, gives a
strict command for keeping of silence all the night; so far forth, as not to
sound the trumpet according to custom, at the setting or relieuing of the
watch. Then upon the approach of the dawning (the Enemy being now weary, and
not long before overtaken with sleep) Marius wills the Mercinary Trumpeters,
and the Drums of all the Cohorts, wings and Legions, upon the sudden to
sound, as also the Soldiers violently to rush out of the Ports of the camp,
with the greatest clamor that they possibly could raise.

The Moors and Getuli being suddenly awaked with the unknown and terrible
alarm, had neither stomach to fly, not to fight, nor were able to resolve
what to do, or what to prevent: insomuch as the whole rabble stood astonished at
the noise and clamor, as men frayed out of their wits, not one offering to
relieve his fellow, although the Romans fiercely pressed in with tumult,
terror and slaughter. So the whole Army was quickly rowted and dispersed; and
much armor with many Ensigns taken: yea, more were slain in this conflict,
then in all the former battails. For they were so heavy asleep, and stood
amazed with such an unusual ecstasy, that they had not so much memory left
them, as to provide for flight.

CHAP. 31.
A President for Commanders not to march careless, upon any terms of
security, in the Enemie-countrey.

AFter this defeature, Marius (as he had determined) iournieth toward his
Winter stations, and for the conueniency of provision, minds to billet his
companies in the maritime Buroughs. And taking never the more ease, nor yet
become forgetful of his affairs, by reason of his late victory, marches in a
square battle, as if he had been in the face of his enemy.

Upon the right hand Silla commanded over the horsemen; upon the left, marched
A. Manlius with the Slings, Archers, and the Cohorts of the Lygurians. In front
and Rear, he placed the Tribunes, with the readiest and light armed companies.
The Fugitives that best knew the country, were employed to discover the enemies
march.

The Consul confined to no place, had an eye to all: was present with all:
commended the valiant, and blamed the coward. Himself rode armed, and at all
assayes he ordered the soldiers as he used to do in ordinary travail: he saw
to the fortifieng of the camp, and himself in person placed selected Cohorts
out of the Legions to ward within the Ports: and without, the auxiliary
horsemen.

In the bastils upon the rampart he would appoint others, and himself go the
round; not upon diffidence that his commands entrusted to others, would be the
insufficienter executed, but that the Soldier seeing his General to share in
labor, might undergo the like with more willing courage.

To speak uprightly, Marius both at this season, and at other times of his War,
awed his army more by example, then by severity. Which some men attribute to
Pride; others by extenuation excused him; That being from his Cradle invred to
hardness, he took delight in that, which others accounted misery: but
howsoever, surely he discharged his duty with as great honor and glory to the
state, as ever did the seuerest Commander of the state.

Upon the fourth day, the light-mounted vant-currers of Iugurth, show
themselves in troops, not far from the Town Cirtha; An alarm is given, that
the enemy is not far off. Marius sends out his Scouts^ all agree, but differ
upon the side of approach. Whereupon the Consul being incertaine how to
provide, without any alteration of his former imbatteling, being prepared for
all adventures, resolves in that place to receive the enemy.

By this form of sight, the hopes of Iugurth were utterly frustrated; for by
dividing his battallion into four parts, he made an account, with one half to
have charged in the face, with the other half, equally divided, to have come
upon the backs of the Romans.

Silla, whom the enemy first attached, using some few words to his followers,
taking certain troops unto him, with their Horses as close ranged as they
possibly could, receives the Moors; The residue standing fast in their
places, cover their bodies from the enemies shot, and if any chance to fall
within reach, they presently sley him.

Whilst the Horsemen on this fashion charge, and are charged, Bocchus with the
footmen (whom his Son Volux led, and were not at the last rout, for their delay
upon the way) inuadeth the rereward of the Romans.

At that instant Marius chanced to be in the head of the battle, because
Iugurth with a great company laid hard charge thereunto. The Numidian
perceiving that Bocchus had now charged in the rear, privily retiring with
some few horsemen unto the footmen, cries out in Latin (the Language he had
learned at Numantia) that the Romans resisted in vain; and that but even now
with his own hands he had slain the Consul: And therewithal lifted up his
sword, as yet reeking in blood; which in truth by the slaughter of one of our
footmen with sufficient proof of valiancy, he had so stained in fight. Quam
necessariu^ sit rebut bellicit intentos, Historias legere, hinc apparet: nam
vnius voce mendacis, paru^ absuerit quin qui victores erant, vincerentur
The Romans receiving the word, were more astonished at the cruelty of the
fact, then the relation of the reporter: and the Barbarians doubling their
courages, gave in more lustily to augment the terror. Now stood the footmen
wavering, when Silla (returning from the flight of those whom he first charged)
charge in upon the flank of the Moors. Bocchus forthwith turns tail: but
Iugurth performing all the parts of a valiant captain in relieuing his
distressed followers, by all means laboreth to retain the advantage of a
victory almost gained; until such time, as being incircled in the thickest of
the horsemen, and his followers on each hand slain, he himself made his escape
through the weapons of his enemies. By this time Marius likewise having routed
the horsemen, runs to the aid of his people, but by the way receives news
of their flight. Thus was the enemy utterly broken, and a most hideous
spectacle presented through the whole field. Graphica descriptio Belli, sugae
cedis
Some pursued, some fled; some were slain, some taken: horse and men lay
promiscuously mingled in one another gore: Many being wounded could neither
fly, nor procure help: now they striued, presently they fell down and fainted.
Surely, as far as sight could view, the field was covered with weapons,
armours, and carcasses: the Earth, with blood.

CHAP. 32.
Bocchus relenteth, harkeneth to peace, and again wauereth.

BY this time the Consul being in full possession of victory, arriueth at
Cirtha, the place of his first determined progres. The 5. day after, his second
and unfortunate fight of the Barbarians, Ambassadors are hither dispatched from
Bocchus: who in the king their masters name of the General, that he would
vouchsafe to send over unto him two most sufficient Commisioners, to treat of
those Articles which should concern their mutual safety, and welfare. The
General forthwith commands L. Silla and Aulus Manlius to prepare for the
journey.

These Gentlemen, though they came before his presence by Et ideo audituri,
quid ipse vellet
message, yet they deemed it their fittest course, first to offer parle; upon
intention, that if they found his disposition addicted unto further hazard,
they might take occasion, to lenifie his courage; but if desirous of peace,
that then they might proceed, to confirm it with feruencie. Whereupon Silla
(unto whose perswasiue eloquence, not to age, nor due of precedence, Manlius
submitted) thus began a short Oration.

Sillas Oration.
Noble King Bocchus, the comfort that we have taken, to see so worthy a
personage, no doubt (not without the special direction of heaven) now at
last, not only to make choice of peace, rather then War; but also to free
himself from the protection of Iugurth, of all men living the worst, and Vnde
regem attentum faciat, cum admoneat quanti periculi sit cum homine saepius
victo commisceri.
most miserable: has in no small measure bin pleasing unto us. For heerby thou
have utterly bereaved us of an inevitable necessity, as severely to chastise q.
d. deceptu^ ab eo
thy errors, as his Treason and disloialtie.

Noble Lord, even in the infancy of the Roman state, being as then but weak
and obscure, our Forefathers made choice to acquire friends, rather then to
subdue slaves, holding it a principle in policy, that greater benefittes
accrued from free will, then Nullum violentum diuturnum.
from forced subjection.

Our favors can prove to no mortal creature more available, then to your
self: first, for that we are far remote: Qui enim long absunt oneribus and
exactionibus Curiae minus grauantur.
wherein consists least opportunity of offense: and yet in our bounty may
become as indifferent, as if we were nearest neighbors.

Secondly, for that we abound in viz. Carthagine^se^, Macedones, and al^os.
Subjects: And yet I must confess, that neither we, nor any man living, can
boast to have found more friends then he needed.

I would to God your Majesty had apprehended this in the beginning: then surely
by this time, you had not failed to have reaped far more pleasures from the
Roman people, then hitherto you have suffered damages.

But because Fortune sits Lady Regent of all humane proiects, whose fancy
forsooth it has been, that you should make trial as well of our force, as of
our favor: Now, for that she has offered Ad gratiam populi To: ineunda^.
the means, I beseech you, make have to embrace it, and give not over, to
perfect these your good ouertures.

Tacit innuit, quod postea petiturus est s. vt lugurtham tradat.
In your power consist many kind offices, by which to good purpose you may
redeem all fore-passed misprisions.

Lastly, closet up this my counsel with deepest confidence, Tacit etia^
inuitat per a^arit^a^, sc^ens (...) ab ^or^e^ regui promissam multa fecisse in
gratiam Iugurthae
That the Roman people were never ouer-ballanced in renumeration of thankful
services: Rhetorice in sine promit^it, and minatur.
what their valor is in war, your self can make best report.

The answer of Bocchus.
Hereunto Bocchus in extenuation of his ouersights makes a short, but a
plausible reply: That he made choice of Arms, not upon any fancy that might
move him to make trial of war, but only to secure the kingdom,
Intelligendu^ est, quod antiquam, Iugurtha illi filla^ suam daret, mota^ fuisse
lit^m de con fraibus regun and partem a Buc^ho inuas^m, illi pro dote ab
Iugurtha concessam, propter Bellum quod ^ Romany metuebat
which now after the expulsion of Iugurth, being by the law of conquest
diuolued unto him, he could not brook to see harried by Marius. Secondly, he
complained of the disgrace, and refusal of his friendship, offered unto the
Romans in former time, by his Ambassadors. But he was content, now to silence
old greeuances, and promised again to send his people in embassy to Rome, so
it might stand with Marius his good liking.

Whereupon, leave being granted, the mind of the Barbarian became again
distated, by the mediation of those his followers, whom Iugurth, upon
intelligence of the embassy of Silla and Manlius, and distrust of that, which
in truth was s. animum Bocchi a bello diuertere
intended, had already corrupted by guiftes and bribery.

CHAP. 33.
Bocchus once again sends Ambassadors to Marius. 2. How entertained by
Silla. 3 Sent to Rome, and there answered.

BY this time Marius having quartered his soldiers in their Winter Garrisons,
with part of his horsemen, and lightest Cohorts, he takes his journey toward
the wilderness, there to besiege the Kings Tower, in safeguard whereof, Iugurth
has thrust in all the renegado fugitives.

1 When again, Bocchus either upon mature deliberation of what he had suffered
at the hands of the Romans in two pitched batailes; or accounselled by others
of his friends, whose services were not obliged to the pensions of Iugurth,
resolves, out of the choice of variety, amongst al his kinsmen, to nominate
five, upon whose assured fidelity and tried wisdom, he durst adventure to
repose his utmost confidence.

These he dispatcheth to Marius, and from him, if he so please, he commands
to pass for Rome: with ample authority to compound all controversies; so upon
any terms, to put an end to the war; with exquisit diligence they take their
way toward the wintering places of the Romans: but being beset and robbed in
their iourny by certain Getulian Outlawes in fear and base estate, they make
their repair before Silla, whom Marius the Consul (being upon service) had
lest for his Lieutenant.

2 According to desert, Silla entertaineth them as gidly headed fellows, and
enemies; but withal, did bountifully supply their hard misfortunes. In regard
whereof, the Barbarians quite changed their pristinate conceits of the Roman
Avarice, and that more is, acounted Silla, for his bounteous clemency, their
especial good Patron. For in these times few men knew what pensions meant: no
man was deemed bountiful, unless it proceeded from mere good-wil. All gifts
were accepted as remembraunces of love and kindness.

This done, they make relation of their Imbassie to Silla, and first beseech
him in the business to stand their good friend and Counselor. Then they fall
into speech upon the streng^h, the integrity, and the majesty of their Master,
not omitting any title, that might either prove aduantagious to the
capitulation, or move good liking in the Lieutenant.

Silla made no scruple to satisfy their desires, and after he had given them
instructions how they should carry their affairs before Marius, and how, before
the Lords of the Senate, he stayed them there about the space of forty days.

3 Marius, without speeding in his intended enterprise, returned to Cirtha:
where having intelligence of the arrival of the Ambassadors, he commands
both them and Silla, to dislodge from Vtica, and to repair unto Cirtha. The
like commandment is directed unto L. Bilienus the Praetor, Ex omni part vbi
Inberna egerint.
and the residue of the Nobility. In presence of whom he gives audience to the
Moorish Ambassadors, and withal, his pass for their journey to Rome. During
the time of which their absence, they entreat the Consul for a surcease from
arms.

These passages were well approved by Silla, and some others: a few were of a
more severe opinion; little (God knows) experimented in human affairs, Sen.
si miserum videris, homine^ scias.
which being always casual and uncertain, for the most part are
counterchanged from better to worse.

All which their petitions being granted, three of them take their iourny
toward Rome, in the company of C. Octauius Rufo, the Treasurer at Wars in
Afric. The other two return back to the King, who seemed very well to like
of the behavior of the Consul, but especially of the courtesy and affection
of Silla.

At Rome after the Legates had submissiuely confessed the errors of their
master, as induced thereunto by the insinuation of Iugurth; the conclusion of
their speech was knit up, with a desire to be received into the Roman aliance:
Unto whom it was thus answered; That the Romans could as well remember to
requite courtesies, as to revenge wrongs: That the King, because he showed
himself sorrowful for his faults, was received into grace: As for friendship
and alliance, they were to be vouchsafed only upon merit.

CHAP. 34.
1. Silla is sent by Marius to capitulate with Bocchus. 2. Is in honor met
upon the way by Volux, and by him accompanied to his Fathers Court, not without
great mistrust of disloyalty.

OF which determinations Bocchus having received intelligence, by Letters he
requesteth Marius, to send Silla unto him: with whom he meant to treat a final
composition of all difficulties.

Silla is sent, guarded with a regiment of horse and foot, accompanied with
their Slingers and Enginers. In like manner the Archers and the Italian Cohort,
with their lightest Arms, for speed sake, were commanded to march. And the
reason, why they iournied, armed at no stronger proof on their enemies
country, was, for that the weapons of the Barbarians were light and voydable.

2 The fifth day of the iourny, Volux the son of Bocchus, upon the sudden
shows himself in the open field, with a troop at most of one thousand
horse: who riding upon the spur, and out of order to salute Silla, at first
seemed unto him and the residue, to be more in number, as also to represent a
kind of warlike distrust.

Whereupon, every man began to fall into rank, to put on his Armor, to draw
his Weapon, and to expect the enemy. The fear was indifferent; their hopes
better resolved (as befalls victours) and especially, because the fight was
to be managed against those whom they had formerly so often vanquished.

But the horsemen being sent out to discover, brought word of the truth, and so
all things were quieted.

Volux approaching, calls unto the Quester, and certifieth him, that his
father had sent him both to honor and assist him in his journey. So that day
and the next, they both marched in one troop without distrust.

But after they had pitched their Tents, and the day began now to close; the
Moore all fearful, with his color going and coming, runs toward Silla,
and reports that he is assertained by his Discouerers, that Iugurth
approached^ And therefore entreats; yea, and importunateth him secretly in
the dead of the night to make shift for himself by speedy flight.

Silla all enraged, advowed that he nothing feared the Numidian, whom he had
so often heretofore rowted: That his resolution was settled upon the valor of
his people: yea, if assured destruction lay before his face, That he would
abide by it, rather then betray the lives of so many soldiers committed unto
his conduct by a base and unsure flight; to make spare of that frail carcass,
which peradventure by casualty of sickness, might soon afterward miscarry.
But withal, Vt hosts existi mare^t eos vigilias agere, and post dec^ssum
visis ignibus adhuc illie esse
follows his Counsel to dislodge by night: and thereupon, commands the
army forthwith to fall to Supper, to fill the Camp with fires, and at the
first watch without noise or tumult to make ready to march.

Now both Silla, and his troops, being thoroughly wearied by this nights
journey, with the rising of the sun pitcheth his Tents: when as the Moorish
vant-currers bring word to the Camp, that Iugurth has taken up his lodgings
scarce one league before the^. Which news were no sooner divulged, but an
unusual fear attached the whole body of our army; mistrusting that they had
bin betrayed by Volux, and brought into ambush by his treachery: yea, there
were some that advowed, that Death was his meed; and that so manifest and
notorious a Treason ought not to be suffered to escape unpunished.

Although Silla in secret did iumpe in Opinion, yet gave he commandment that
no man should be so hardy as to wrong the Moore: but encorageth his people to
carry a valiant conc^it of the issue. Putting them in mind, That a few
courageous soldiers have heretofore happily encountered a tumultuary multitude,
and that not seldom. The less spare any man made of his carcass, the better
he sped. That it be seemed not the armed hand to expect safety from the unarmed
foot, Abiects armis
by turning the naked body at all No^ perspicie^s quo s^ praecipitet.
adventures through rash fear, from the face Vt faciunt fugientes.
of the enemy.

Then calling upon Jupiter Fidelitatis and hospitalitatis conseruatorem.
Max. to be a witness of the falsehood and treachery of Bocchus, he commands
Volux as an enemy to depart the camp. The young Gentleman with tears in his
eyes, beseeches the General not to give ear to such envious reports:
protests, that nothing was fraudulently contrived: but rather, that he should
persuade himself, that all proceeded from the subtilty of Iugurth, by whose
wary watchfulness the course of his journey was discovered. And the rather,
for that he had neither forces sufficient, and all his welfare depended upon
his good carriage toward his father. More, that he would be fully possessed,
that Iugurth durst not enterprise any open hostility against the Army, S. Silla.
as long as he his son was present as a witness of the outrage.

And therefore to amoue all mistrust, he supposes it the best course, to pass
in open sight through the midst of Iugurths camp; leaving it to the choice
of the General whether he will place his Moors in front or in rear: he
himself is content without consort, to submit himself to Sillaes sole dispose.

The course proposed (as happens in like cases) is allowed: and the army
forthwith moves: The suddennes of the accident stroke Iugurth to his wits end,
and so they passed in safety; within few days after they arrived at their
intended Rende-vow.

CHAP. 35.
The irresolution of a barbarous enemy. Iugurth betrayed, and delivered captive
to Silla.

AT that time there lived in the Court of Bocchus, a certain Numidian called
Aspar, a man in very gracious acceptance with his Majesty, whom Iugurth
(hearing of the sending for of Silla to Court) had employed as an Ambassador,
closely and cunningly to observe what passed in counsel. To him was adjoined
Dabar, the son of Massugrada, a kinsman of Massinissas, but not by the
mother. For his mother was begotten on a Concubine. This man for his many good
services, was in high favor with Bocchus: and for the experience of his former
fidelity, now made choice of to be forthwith sent unto Silla, to make
demonstration, on his masters behalf; That Bocchus was ready to perform
whatsoever the Roman people should command him. That Silla should nominate the
day, the place, and time for conference: That he would hold good coresponde^cy
upon all ocasions. That he needed not to take any exceptions against the
Ambassador of Iugurth, for that he had bin purposely sent for, Bocchus.
the better to compound their common Controversies. For otherwise (he gave out)
that he could not prevent the trains of Iugurth.

But I am of Opinion, that with more then a Punique disloyalty, Bocchus
entertained the treaty, both with the Romans and the Numidian for other
respects, then those which he publickely pretended. For it did much perplex
his mind, whether he should deliver Iugurth to the Romans, or Silla to Iugurth.
Hatred to us ward was a potent enemy; Fear our friend.

Whereupon Silla replied, that he would speak to some few points in the presence
of Aspar; the residue privately, or at leastwise not in the hearing of many.
Coram Aspare.
Likewise he makes report, what answer he expected.

At their next meeting, being at Sillas own apointment, He says, That being
sent from Marius the Consul, he was arrived in these parts to be ascertained
from the Kings own mouth, whether he were desirous of peace or war.

Whereunto the king (as he had bin advised) made no other reply, Per hoc
consilium spes paces datur Iugurthae, and ocsio Sillae liberius de rebus suis
censulendis.
but commanded him to make his appearance the tenth day after. That as yet he
had not consulted with his Counsel: but upon that day he would not fail to
resolve him. So each party retired to their Pauilions.

About midnight, Silla is secretly sent for by Bocchus: Faithful trucemen are
employed on both sides, And Dabar the intercurrour, a very honest Gentleman
sworn to both their good likings. Which ceremonies performed, the King thus
began his Oration.

Bocchus his Oration.
MY mind never gave me, that I in this world so powerful a Prince, (as of all
men to my knowledge the most potent,) should at any time have stood beholding
to a private Gentleman. For in the word of a Prince, before I knew thee (O
Silla) I have to some upon entreaty; unto others voluntarily, extended
supplies; and never again implored the assistance of any.

That the world is now changed, whereas Others grieve, I rejoice. The gain of
thy acquaintance, has with surplusage recompensed my losses: then the which my
very soul accounts nothing more indeared. Heerof make trial: Ask Arms,
men, or money; yea, whatsoever thy fancy can affect, take it, use it. During
thy life, never think but I will always reckon my self thy debtor: in which
account I will persevere faithful to the end. In a word, I will deny thee
nothing that to my knowledge may pleasure thee. For my mind assures me, that
it is less dishonorable for a King to be overcome by Arms, then by Bounty.

As concerning the business of your Commonwealth, whose Procurator you are,
take this in brief.

War against the Roman people I neither levied, nor suffered others to levy: I
only opposed force against force. But I will cease to beat upon that strain,
because such is your pleasures: At your choice be it, what wars you think good
to undertake against Iugurth: I will not pass the River Mulucha, (the bounder
betvveene me and Iugurth) neither will I suffer Iugurth to pass beyond it. If
you can think upon any thing besides, befitting your Honors and mine, spare
not to speak; you shall not depart with repulse.

Silla made answer: for his particular, briefly and modestly: for the Peace
and the General, he argued copiously. And at last he made it known to the
King, that the Senate and people of Rome could not take it in good part, to be
offered barely that, which by their superiority in Arms, they alone were able to
accomplish: s. se discedere ab arm^^, cum victus esset and rebus Iugurtha
diffideret.
Somewhat else was to be performed, which might produce liuelier arguments that
he aff^cted the Roman welfare, Nam quod ab armis desistat, plus esset ad
vtilitatem Bocchi iam penevicti, quam Roma^orum.
more then his private respects; considering the means were not far to
seek, as long as Iugurth was at his dispose: whom if he would surrender, then
should the Roman people infinitely account themselves bound unto him. This
good service would procure friendship, and aliance, yea and that part of
Numidia which he now requested, would then come voluntarily offered unto him.
At first the King denied, pleaded affinity, consanguinity, and lastly the
breach of his league. Then pretended he fear, least by the falsifieng of his
faith, he should divert the love of his people, unto whom Iugurth was very
gracious, the Romans hateful: Being ouer-wrought by importunacy, he yields,
and promises to dispatch businesses, according to the counsel of Silla. And
so concluding upon all things to serve their own turns, they proceed to a
counterfeit peace, whereof the Numidian (being weary of the war) was most
desirous. The plot thus laid, they take their leaves.

The day following, the king calls for Asper, and wills him to show his
master, that Dabar had learned from Silla, that the war might be compounded
upon certain conditions: And that withal he should provide to return an
answer of his mind.

Aspar gladly takes his journey toward the Camp of Iugurth: where being
fully instructed of his masters determinations, by poast at eight days he
returns to Bocchus: and declares, that Iugurth is ready to perform all
commands, saving that he durst not safely trust Marius. For (says he) I have
often made trial, that peace concluded with the Roman Generals, has bin of no
validity: But, if Bocchus desired to procure an assured and profitable peace
for both their best securities, that then he should do his endeavor, to appoint
a general assembly under the pretext of peace, and there deliver Silla into
his power. When he had such a personage at his dispose, then might he stand
assured, that by special commandment from the Senate and Roman people, the
league would be solemnly ratified: Neither would they suffer a man of his
quality (not captiuated by his own default, but in service of the State) to
lie in durance under the enemies imprisonment.

The Moore stood long perplexed, but at last consented; whether in show, or
earnest, we could never learn certainly: but for the most part, as the
determinatio^s of kings are soddaine, so are they variable; yea many times
repugnant.

After this, at the appointed time and place, under the color of conference,
Bocchus sometime sends for Silla, sometime for the Ambassador of Iugurth.
He shows himself alike gracious, and makes to both one self-same promise;
whereupon being full of hope, both of them depart with like satisfaction.

But the night preceding, the day appointed for conference, the Moore sent for
his friends, and presently changing his mind, dismissing them all, is reported
to have bin infinitely disquieted in spirit. His countenance, his complexion,
his bodily motion, and his very senses were maruelously distracted; which his
only carriage, even in his deepest silence, did bewray in manner of speech,
the very secrets of his heart.

Lastly, he sends for Silla, and by his direction lays the plot to entrap
Iugurth. The time being come, and he ascertained that Iugurth approached, as it
were for honors sake, accompanied with a few of his friends and the Questor, he
goes to meet him, and ascends an easy Hillock situated to open view of an
ambush: Thither likewise Iugurth with some few of his followers unarmed
(according to agreement) advanced: where he was no sooner arrived, but the
ambush breaking out on all sides, attach him: His companions are al cut in
pieces, himself in bonds is delivered to Silla; and by him conducted to Marius.

About the same time, our Leaders, Q. Cepio, and C. Manlius fought
unfortunately against the Galls. With the terror whereof al Italy stood
amazed. So that both they and all the Roman posterity, even unto our days, made
this account: That all other enterprises were possible to the Roman virtue;
with the Galls only they contended for safety, not for glory.

But after the news came, that the war of Numidia was ended, and Iugurth
approached to Rome-wardes in chains, Marius (though absent) was ratified
Consul, and Galia allotted him for his prouinee. Upon the Calendes of January
(being Consul) he performed his Triumph with admirable glory. From that time,
the hope and prosperity of the City wholly relied upon him.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOl. 2. for coyance, read ioyance. fol, 3. for were to be bestowed, read were
not, ibid. for context, read center. fol. 5. for vnfatigable, read insatiable.
fol, 13, for loyalties, read disloyalties. fol, 20, for distress, read
distrust. fol, 28. for, of bad the best was left him which was, read, of badde
the best which was left him, was to, etc. for games, read gains. fol. 44. for
enforced, read enforcing. fol, 51 for evil doers separated, read evil doers
are separated. fol, 59, for insufficiencies, read sufficiencies. Bellum Iug.

Fol, 13, in any kingdom, read my kingdom. fol, 15, for bordereth Mauricania,
read upon Mauritania. fol, 22, from them to pass, read, from thence to pass.
fol, 35, for which the information concerned, read whom the information
concerned fol, 37, for in every sharp season, read in a very sharp season.
fol, 38. for beseech, read besiege. fol, 59, for constrained, read accustomed.
fol, eod, for perceived read perceiving. fol, 61, for with them others, read
with them and others. fol, eod, for furnished, read unfurnished. fol, 62. for
from one to another, read from one degree to another. fol. 63 for direct, read
divert fol, 66, for observed, read observing. fol, 71, for with baggage, read
with no baggage. fol, 73, for palace, read place. fol. 85, for, or bands of
succor, read with bands of succor. fol, 91, for the Ligurian, unto whom, read,
the Ligurian whom.

Caetera, et in annotationibus marginalibus, Tipographi esse credas

