The baterie of the Popes Botereulx, commonly called the high Altar. Compiled
by W. S. in the year of our Lord. 1550.

ii. Cor. x. The wapons of our war are not fleshly, but mighty before God to
cast down strong holds, wherwyth we overthrow ymaginacions, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knoweledge of God, and bring in
captivity al understanding to the obedience of Christ and are ready to take
ve^geaunce on all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

To his singular good Lord, sir Richard Rich, Lord Rich, and Lord
Chauncelloure of England: his most fayethfull and humble servant Wyllyam
Salesburye wysheth everlasting felicity.
EVen as I can not refrayn but disclose and openly publish it, so can I not
worthyly express or declare, how ioyouse a thing it is to our ears, how
confortable to our heart, and how pleasant to our eyes, to hear, under stand,
and se: that your lordshyppe (having such power given you of God and your
Prince to suppress, beat down, and utterly abolish, al vain supersticion
and false religion, as you have) does now, by the abundaunte grace of
almighty God workinge in your heart, openly repugne, suppres, and beat down
those vain ceremonies, and supersticiouse obseruaunces founded by the Bishop
of Rome, that heretofore ye have (to the most part of men) been thought to
favor, uphold, and maintain.

In very deed. These manifest tokens that do now appear in your good
Lordeshyp, are very joyous unto all such men, as delight to se al superstition
abolished, and true religion set forth and maintened: but much more joyous to
me and such other, as be toward your lordship in service. For now (ye lord
be thanked therefore) we have aboundau^tlye inoughe wherewyth to stop the
mouths of the evil speakers, so that if they will not otherwise be answered,
we may say as Christ did to the froward Jews. Operibus credit. Let the
worckes (which ye se openly done) cause you to leave of your evil speaking,
and to learn to speak well of such as god has set in authority.

And to declare mine opinion of your Lordshippe, I have thought it my duty
(being moved in conscience to write against the deuilish abuse of altares, so
stifelie mayntened by the stifenecked Papists) to dedicate the same mi labors
unto your good Lordeshyppe, trusting that if you will vouchesalfe to set it
forth under your name, the people will with better will embrace it and be the
more edified by it.

With full trust therefore, that your Lordeshyp will be my buckeler and shylde
of defense, whylse I fight under the banner of the lord of Hosts: I have
couragiouselye given the onset upon the Romish Enemies, bendynge mine
ordinance against the strong and mighty Botereulx of their Bulwark (the high
altar I mean) which beiyng shaken down, I doubt not the forte will sone be
yielded unto my grande captain Jesus Christ. Who preserve your lordship to his
honor, and your lordships everlasting wealth. Amen.

William Salesburye to the christen Reader.
FOr as much (good christian Reader) as since the first beginning of the
derogacyon of the Popes Laws in England, and since the first segregacion and
seueringe of his vain supersticyons from Christ's true religion here among
us, I have not lightly seen the least toye, the most folyshe fantasye, nor the
most unfruitful ceremonye, forbidden and taken away by ye godly maiestrates
without much detraction, and backebitinge of such papystes as had any
learning, nor without secret murmuracion, and often stumblynge of the unlearned and
simple people, who are nothing so soore to be blamed therefore, as the learned
and crafty Papists, which will neither (eue^ as the Phariseis) receive the
word of God them selves, nor yet suffer other to do it. Therefore have I
always not only detested the stubburne manner of the one sort, lame^tynge the
miserable state of the other, but also did ever misdread the verification of
the Prognosticatio^ to truly calculed by ye said papists under the meridia^ of
their Romish proceadinges. But now because I would (in as much as in me mayly)
put to my helpyng hand, to falsify or rather to prevent al such inconveniences
and mischiues (as now by experience every man might prognosticate to happen of
the untaught, ignorance, of the simple people) I have here made a rude, and a
simple little book, eue^ for the rude and simple people, that (as I have now
signified before) they being the better persuaded by manifestes textes of
holy scripture, shall not have the like occasion, to murmr to grudge or to be
offended, neither with the godly proceadynges of the victorious Metropolitan
of England (who as redoubted grand captain has first enterprised on this
most notable feact) nor with any other bishop or lawful officer yt attemteth
the like affairs: that is, Allusio sieve periphrasis e ticolai Nepiscopi
Lo^doniensium
to pluck down and remove ye popish alters out of Christ's churches or temples.

And moreover because I perceived (as one of the best learned papistical doctors
in England gave me occasion by defending his aultares, and that with toth and
nail and fumishe fearcenes, rather with the authority of wrested Scryptures)
and was full persuaded that all the learnede papists will styflye continue in
the mayntenaunce of their hallowed aulters: therefore was I constreyned to make
ye said little book more pithy and substauncial and so more diffuse and harder
to be understand then I wyllingly had intended.

Wherefore who so ever will understand it, let him read it thorowlye and if he
thereby get any more light or perfect knowledge in the matter entreated, let him
thank and praise God the grauntor thereof. To whom be all honor and glory.
Amen.

The baterye of the Popes Botereulx.
AS it is a point of infamye in a valiant warryour to steal on his enymyes ere
they be ware, or to go about to entrappe them, and have them at a vauntage,
unless he do first give them a notable warnyng, either by the thunderinge of
a bombarde, either by the bounchynge on a drumslade, either by scrikinge of a
trumpet, either else by some other couragiousse alarm, noise, or shoutynge,
whereby his audacitie, hardynes, and confidence of victory, might rather be
insituated unto his enemies than crafty wyles, sely cowardnes and distruste of
having the upper hand: so mine enemies peradventure would impute unto me the
like in glory and reproach, if I do not admonysh the^ before hand of my proposed
conflict in besieging their Botereulx. Forth auoidinge whereof (and for yt in no
wise I may be faint or false hearted, as long as I war under ye most
triu^pha^testa^dert blased with the gioriouse arms of ye most victoriouse Lyo^
of ye trybe of Iehuda) let the^ therefore take this for a warning piece yt now I
inte^d furthwt (for every man knows ye open war is proclaimed betwixt us long
ago) to batter, bet down, and arase not ye oldma^ nor ye yo^g man, but an other
like fortres of the old ma^s making, for the only defense of his made god:
which fortres ye papists call an alter: ye god the sacrament of the alter. But
they might as well and as anagogicalli call their alter ye tower, and their
houeri^ge god hanged therouer, ye hawk of the tower. But as I ca^ give their
god no propre name: (so at this time for the pariforme, proporcio^, and
situatio^ of it I will name their alter a Botereulx, which if we by might of ye
lord of hosts ca^ bater down to ye ground the popes church shall greatly
stagger, ye papists wo^derously waver, and their god ever houer.

Now therefore ye Papists take heed to your Botereulx, for now I go in hand to
charge my baterynge pieces, and say not but that I give you warnyng that
neither the outworne puisau^ce of ye douty captain Moses, who was so mighty
for a time, nor yet ye presence of your erthly God, the glitteringe of his
triple crown, ne yet ye co^iuring charecters crosewise graue^ shall be a
sufficient fortification for to defend your said Botereulx: No though ye
cluster and daube it round about with woll, clods turfes, earth, mire, dyrt, and
such trishtrashe: no no though ye pray in aid the great Turk, the Soulden
the Sophy and all the Saracens, yea and though all the heretical sects of the
whole world came to you and practyse on your side all the wicked sects that
their high general Satan shall suggerate into their brains. Take heed
therefore yet ne left yt your Botereulx have not a steadfast fou^dacion: For if we
can prove that it be founded upon Moses and not on Christ: than was it
destroyed in effect. M.D.lxxvii. year a goo.

But first or we go about ye demolicion of this Botereulx, by the good
dylygence of master Grammar the chief vndermyner, we will search what
foundacio^ it is of: and because ye first Botereulx or altar was used amongst
the Hebrews: we will see what was the primative name that they gave it (for
thereby we may happen to thrust open one window) for truly they according to
the very use thereof, in their holy la^gage, named ye alter Midhsbach, yt is the
sacrary or the place to offer up sacrifice on. The priest, the offycer or the
doer thereof, they called medhsa beach The sacrifice or ye offering they named
it Dhsebach. So likewise the grace of the Greek tongue shall declare unto them the
self nature of ye same vocables and that by the help of these words:
Thysiasterio^, Thyscos or Thytes, Thysia. Which words a man shall not lightly
express with the like concinnitie another in latin nor English except a man would
speak on this wise, Sacrariu^, sacrificus, sacrificiu^: yt is sacrari,
sacraficer, sacrifice. And than do we take this word sacrarye for an altar,
which word altar and none other, all Nations that received the faith at
their hands of the sea of Rome: do usurp still in this significacion.
Nevertheless ye do now perceive by the Etimology and true exposition of ye above
said Hebrew and greek words: that they be so nighe of kin in betokening, and
so like in speakinge in those languages, as be these three words in English:
House, husband, and husbandry. So ye ye can not well deny but that they be so
co^iugate, yoked, and knitte together, as well in signification as in
syllabication, that uneath one of them can not be severed from an other: nor
the nature of one of them can be declared without making mention of the
other: nor one can be abolished, forbidden or destroyed: except the other two
be abolyshed, forbidden and distroyed also. Therefore may you gather that we do
not greatly stray from our high way, at what time so ever we speak of
sacrificer, or of sacrifice beside this term Altar.

Now therefore O thou Lord of Hoostes, make my face to prevail against all
lyinge braggers faces: and harden thou my forhed against their forheades: so
that my forhead be harder than an adamant or flynt stone, that I may be less
afraid of them. O thou most myghtie Lord Iah, defend me against the cankred
malice and wicked pollecye of the Popes soldiers, who (I dare well say) will
not only stand styflye in defense of their popysh fortres, but with a
terrible countenance by gnasshing their tethe together will step forth, vibrate
and shake their venymous darts toward me thretenyng me after this sort.
Thou unexercised tyron, thou fresh water soldyoure: thou yongeman I say:
dareste thou approach us? dare thou assault us? dareste thou once adventure to
assiege our invincible fortress? Yea, or think thou it possible for any
gunne shote to brose the weakesse part of the walls, which continued so many.
M. years unassaulted, unviolated, and untouched? whose mortare is waxen as
hard as the flint stone, whose stones are as hard as stele, and whose timbre
is as toughe and as durable as it were of fyr tree. Recule therefore my good
son recule. But because we perceive the to be so desperate a fellow that thou will sance remedy, other sink or swymme, and either take a fall or give a fall,
and either hab or nab, we think it best for us (least peradventure thy captain
come with greater force upon us tha^ we look for) to make our selves in a redines
to defend our holy altar which ye calleste Botereulx, yea this Botereulx
shall not pass on thy baterye (but god forgive me to misname so holy a thing)
but now I perceive the old said saw to be to true. Qui taug^t picem,
comquinabitur ab ea. I will say no more, but good enough.

And now not to dissemble, ye are a starcke heritike, in that you do fantasy
to have our altares throwe^ down in all churches. But this is a wonderful
matter, that we must be feign to prove yt which our mother the holy church of
Rome had never in question, but let us alone with this matter, and would god we
could prove our transubstanciation, our purgatory fire, our popes primacy and
other like matters of no less importance as well and as euide^tli as we ca^
prove this. The manner of the papists in wrestyng the scripturs
For we ca^ prove how our altares had their beginning.ii. M. and odd.C. years
passed, as any Christen man that lists may read Genesis capitulo octauo. How
the holy Patriarch Noe, after that he had come out of the Arc, builded an
altar to the lord and took of every clean beast, and of every clean foul,
and offered sacrifices in the altar. And the lord smelled a sweet savor: And
the Lord said in his heart: I will not proceed to curse ye ground any more for
man's sake, for the imaginacion of man's heart is evil from his youth etc. And
Abraham likewise builded an altar unto the lord even in that place where he
had appeared unto him and did call on the name of the Lord. And Jacob also
being commanded of the Lord and because he had heard him in the day of his
tribulacyon, builded an altar unto the Lord: and called the place the God of
Bethell: because that God had apeared unto him there, when he fled from he
face of his brother. etc.

And farther ye shall read how that God after that he had yeuen the ten
Commandments, by the hand of Moses commanded also thus. An altar of earth
thou shall make unto me, and thereon offer thy burnt offringes, and thy peace
offringes, thy sheep and thine oxen in all places where I shall put the in
remembrance of my name, thithir will I come unto the, and bless the. Item.
Exodi. xxix. Seven days (says the lord) thou shall reconcile upon the altar
and sanctify it, and it shall be an altermost holy. Exo. xxx. And you shall make
an altar to burn ince^ce. Of Sethim wood shall you make it, a cubit long and
a cubite breadth: even four square shall it be, and.ii. cubits hye. etc.

Item.iii. Reg. xviii. The holy Prophet Elias utterly to bring to confusion ye
false God Baall and his prophets and to set forth the glory of the living
God: took xii. stones according to the number of the twelve Tribes of the
Sons of Jacob, and with ye stones he made an altar, in the name of the lord
etc.

We could allege.vi. hundred places out of ye bible beside these yt we now
recited, which should still make on our part if need required, but because they
are so comenly known of all me^ we will at this time ouerpasse them: for we
trust yt we have already brought auctorities enough to prove the au^cientie, the
laudabilitie, and continual acteptau^ce of alters before almighti God in the
old law. But now to prove the confirmacio^ of them by the new law ye shall read
these other textes. But first marcke well how that Christ himself said Mat. v.
If you offrest thy gift at ye altar, and there remembrest yt thy brother has
ought against ye: leave the^ thine offringe before the altar, and go thy way
first and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Lo
ye may se here how the altar is twyse spoken of, and yt where the reason
consysteth but of very few words. Ite^ ye shall read of this word altar in ye
xxiii. chapt. of ye same Evangelist, where Christ himself also says: from the
blood of the rightouse Abel, unto ye blood of zacharias the son of Barachias
whom ye slew between the temple and the altar, Ite^ Lu. i. There appeared unto
zacharias an Angel of the lord standing on ye right side of the altar, of
ince^se. Ite^ Act. xvii. As I passed by (says. s. Paul) and beheld ye manner
how ye worship your gods, I found an alter wherein was written: to the unknown
god. And again, the holy Apostell Paul to put us herein out of all doubts,
says:

Do not you know how that they which minister about holy things live of the
sacrifice? and they which wait on ye alter, are partakers of the alter?

More over in the sixte chapter of the Apocalipsis ye shall read of an altar
to.

And when he had opened the fifth seal (says John) I saw under the altar the
souls of them that were killed for the word of god, and for the testimonye
which they had. etc. And in the eight chapter of ye same Apocalipsis, you
shall read of three altares, and so nighe together, that they fall wtin ye
compass of three lines almost, and one of them being a golden altar. etc.
Item Apoca. xi.

Than was given me a reed (says this holy Euaungelist) like unto a rod, and
an angel stood and said. Rise and measure the temple of God and the altar, and
the^ that worship therein: and the quyre that is within the temple. etc. Lo sir,
here ye may playnelye read in the very text of a temple, of an altar, and
of a quyre to, and yet these me^ of the new learning, will nether have temple,
altar, nor quyre, or at the least ways if they must have a temple, they by
their will, would have it to be without quyre, wtoute altar, without images,
and without any manner of holy orname^tes, vestimentes, and deckynges. Yea, they
would have it like a barn, or like a man's dwelling house, having neither
respect to the fashyon of the tabernacles, nor the temples of the Hebrews,
nether to the temples of the church of Rome

But blessed be God, that left us in the holy write such manifest
testimonies as we have now rehearsed, whereby we may easilye confou^d all
such naughty heritikes as will presume to talk against our laudable ceremonies,
or any other decent things which have been accustomed to be had in our temples
and have continued among all nations since Christ was borne, and many hundred
years before, as I have already declared by so^dry textes of the scripture, as
well of the new testament, as of ye old. And beside all this we might ratifye
the same by diverse places of our Canon law, unless it were now abrogated, and
by thauctoriti of very ancient doctors For does not the holy doctor. S.
Augustine. Li. xxi. cap. x. De ciui. dei (speaking of the infideles) wryght
thus. They unto their gods have builded temples also, and have set up alters,
and have offered sacrifices. Now because these fellows of ye new lerning ca^
sca^t away with the lerning of old catholic doctors, we will cite no more of
their work: But shall we not be as blameles as.s. Paul to bring in for our
purpose such places of noble Poets, as may be thought convenient. For as I
remember Ovid in a certain place of his worckes writes much after this sense.

When Medea was come home, without the doors she stood,

Using no man's company, while she was in that mode.

Twey alters tha^ of soddes she made, and garnished with bows:

And a black Kamme she Sacrificed, to twey great Goddases.

Ye may read also in the chiefeste Poet among the Latins, as thus.

First with these three thru^mes of three hewes, I the enuiron do,

And round about these altares eke, with thine image I go.

But because me^ now a days give no credit in a manner to poetry and not very
much to ye gloses of ye old fathers we will allege no mo places of them another:
trusting ye al good catholic people will be established by these sufficient
proves which are brought hitherto, and seeing ye alters have be^ used and had in
such co^digne reverence ever since Noes floude (and who is it that can tell the
contrary but that Cain and Abel the sons of Adam offered their oblacions upon
altares?) And where al manner of nations through out the wide world (were they
never so ignorant in true knowledge) either by the instinction of the Law of
Nature printed by Gods fyngere in their hertes, either by imitacion of Gods own
elect people, the Hebrews thought it very expedyent and no less necessary to
build them altares whereupon they might offer their sacrifices to worship,
pacify, and gratify their Gods wythall. Without which altares as most
agreeable instruments every man knows no sacryfce can be co^uenie^tlye offered
or orderly freque^ted. Wherefore let al the^ yt do regard the good and holsom
constitucions of the holy church of Rome: harken, embrace and cleave unto the^
that mainteigne altares as things most necessary and most fetest to minister
the sacrament of the altar upon: in which sacrament for a sacrifice (as
says. s. Augustine) al christen men offer up them selves in the self same
offering, which the church does celebrate. Ergo to conclude of the whole sum
of all the prymisses, altares must needs be had in all churches to minister the
sacrament of the alter upon. Now therefore hence fourth let us have no more ado
about this matter, for ye se how plainly how largely and how truly we have
taken pains to discuss it: yea and I warrant you that this ergo shall grieve
to the guts (if they so escap) all those altary heretics specially ye
bragger which would so feign bater our Botereulx (as he terms it) nay I
wara^t you we have batered him out of ye way: where art you I say you baterer of
our Botereulx? where art thou? yt is to the that we speak? No? The Papists
triumph before the victory.
not as much as one word? why tha^ mum bouget, and we are content. Heih let
us be of good chere, our fortress shall not yet down.

And if your fortress shall not yet down, I tell you, I the self man yt you
thought you had now of late slain or at the lest wayse put to silence, it is
even he that tells you again that your fortress shall down if not yet, yet
shortli. And it shall not only be thrown down, but it shall be arraced and made
eue^ handsmothe with the ground. For now I have you by ye back, I have spied, al
your succor, all your refuge, all your pore pieces, your disordered ordinance
and your harmeles harneys. For your pieces are so pore yt eue^ shortly you
shall not drink a half penyworth of ale by them: your ordinance are so
disordered yt they are liker to destroy your own men than others: and your
harneys are so harmeles that their werers some hornwode or dronke^. For the
head piece lies cast down and troaden: the gauntletes are worn on the fete,
the sappodines on ye hands, the collar on the ancles, the va^braces on the
legs: the greues on the arms: and all the rest are no righter placed.
Neither will I denaye but that all your armoure be very strong of them selves,
of the right making, and of great force if ye could welde them: but because
you have stolen them out of our Captayn his armory, and entend also so
unshamefastly to abuse them agein his honor and magnyfycence they shall stand
you in no stead (and how can they, seeing ye can not rightlye use them?) when
ye shall have most need of them.

But now to put on our armor that we may immediatlye go through with this our
begone combat, and to speak more plainly. All the testimonies that you
brought on your behalf out of the old testamente, are as true, as nothing
is more true: neither (as I signified before) do I doubt any thing of the
truth of them: and I think no less of ye other textes which you alleged out
of the new testamente.

Nevertheless I am not so dull, so far seduced, nor so void of al godly
understanding, but that I perceive how craftily, and how subtly ye go
about by your long recital of all the said textes, to blind and cast duste
in the eyes of the unlearned and simple people, who have not that capacity
that they (by comparynge together the old law and the new) can comprehend how
to sever the one from the other, or to know in what point ye one agreyth or
disagreeth with the other, or how to accord them together: for they both are
one in effect, though diversely set forth. They both tend to one end: but the
one is consu^mate and ended, the other endures to the last day.

Neither is it any wonder at all, if the unlearned people, or the carnally
learned attain not the descretion to examine the exact difference between the
law and the Gospel, or ca^ not justly discuss after what sort the law is
abrogated, and after what sort the observation of the law is damnable in a
christian. Yea it is no wonder I say, though the worldly wise manne can not
right lie judge in such divine matters, saying that some of the holy apostles
were in the same taking, whiles it pleased the gloriousse majesty of GOD as
it were to wythdrawe his Spirit from them (therefore good Lord do not thou
put us out of thy presence, neither take away thy holy Spirit from us) for
what caused Peter and James to attribute over much unto the law of Moses, but
that they were destituted (for that while) of the spirit of God: which Spirit
never abode (I mean continually) upon any man saving on christ only.

And what made so many vain ceremonies and damnable supersticions as well
out of the Law of Moses as out of Hethens rites to crepe into Christ's
religion, but because that the spirit of GOD had departed from the
maynteners thereof, and for that the pure gospel ne was not discretely severed
from Moses his law, nor well purged of the Heathen and infidels their folyshe
traditions? As for an exemple. To pray and our faces turned eastwarde, to
fast these imbringe days, have we taken of the Heathen, or infideles.

And to trust that we do a good deed in restinge and ceassinge only from
bodilye labor and exercise, on Sondayes or Holy days and not rather to the
entente that we might give our selves wholly to rest and cease to work or
excercyse our own carnal worckes, and to hear the word of GOD preached,
occupiynge our selves in prayers and meditation to godwarde.

Such ungodly idle rest and mock holy day, have we sucked out of the dug of
Moses law, and to offer bodilye sacrifices, is to be fathered upon the same
Moses, and not upon Jesus Christ: which misfatherynge has filled Christ's
church with so many popyshe altares, as we shall anon begin to declare more
particulerly, according to the measure or gift which we received of Christ.
But because ye altares were made but for Sacrifices sake, we shall first speak
so^what of sacrifices

And in as much as this word sacrifice is but a borrowed term in English,
and therefore the signification thereof not co^munely known, we shall open to
the unlearned what is mente by sacrifice. What sacrifice is
Sacrifice is an offering up of our work, which we exhibit to God, whom we
acknowledge to be such one, yt worthily we ought to present this our service
or worship unto. Which service, worship, or reverence (as is before said) is
naturallye planted in the hertes of all men, as well of the Heathen as of the
Jews, of the learned as of the unlearned: and even in the hertes of the^ that
never heard of god, which thing causes such as have not ye true knowledge of
gods word (as it were children by making of babes, or the like trifeling
imitatio^s) to inue^t so^dry kinds of sacrificing or worshippi^g him who^ they
take for god. All which sacrifices and worshipping being inverted by ye fa^tasy
of ye corrupt and sinful nature of man, and not grounded on true faieth, is no
better esteemed for acceptable worship before god, tha^ is ye babe or ye pupet
of ye child's maki^g thought to be a perfect workema^ship in ye iugme^t of a
severe and a sage old father. And therefore (me thinks) it is no less folli
for us, who profess Christ's doctrine to learn of the Heathen people (to whom
the misterye of the euangelye is not reueiled) any point of religion, then if
prudente princes, learned lawiers, honest husband men, would consulte with
infantes or children of two or three year of age, how to rule their Realms,
plead their pleadings, or to husband their husbandrye. For it is to evident
as well by profane as holy scripture, how the Heathen nations did not only
swerve from the true worshipinge of god, but did grievously displease his divine
majesty. And though God showed him self unto them by the work of the
Creation of the world, yet they have not praised nor thanked him accordinglye,
but became vain in their imaginatio^s and their folyshe hertes were blinded.
When they counted them selves wise, they became foles: and turned the glory of
the incorruptible god, into the image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and
four foted, and of creping beasts. Wherefore god likewise gave them up unto
their hertes lust, into uncleanness, which turned the truth of god into a lie,
and worshipped and served the creature more the^ the creator, which is blessed
for ever. Ame^. Therefore god gave them up unto shameful lusts. For their
women changed the natural lusts into the unnatural: likewise the men also
left ye natural use of the woman, and bre^t in their lusts one on another, and
man with man wroughte filthiness, and received in the^ selves the reward of their
error, as it was according. And as they regarded not to know God, even so
God delivered them up unto a leude mind, that they should do those things
which were not comely, being full of all unrighteousness, fornicacyon,
wyckednes, covetousness, maliciousnes full of envy, murder, debate, disceite,
euel co^dicioned, whisperers, backbyters, haters of god, disdainful, proud,
boasters, bryngers up of evil things, disobediente to father and mother,
without understanding, covenant breakers, vnlouinge truce breakers,
unmerciful.

Which men though they knew the righteousness of God, considered not how that
they which commit such things, are worthy of death, not only they ye do the
same, but also they which have pleasure in them yt do them. And fathermore
beside all this mischeuous absurdity that S. Paul declared by them, ye wicked
imaginacion of their corrupt nature being not regenerate of the spirit of
God did so far contrary to nature it self, Psa. cvi. Leui. xx.
yt they killed men yea their own begotten children and sacrificed them not
to God nor yet to the creatures of god, but even to very deuyls. And if you (I
mean you altar pryestes) do delyght to learn the Heathens manner of
sacrificynge, record well these verses in your mind.

Et capita inferno et, A memora^du^ for the Papists.
patri transmittite lumen.

Give heads to Pluto the God infernal. And Saturn his father, the fire iustral.

But how hydeouse, how terrible and how deuelish a thing it is for any
Christian to follow any such men's rites or ceremonies: I leave to the judgment
of any godly man.

Neither will I deny but yt the Heathen had altares amongst the^, but only
invented, made, and occupied for no better purpose, than is now before said:
which is to say, to offer up Sacrifices unto Deuelis.

And as many so ever as list to offer up sacrifices unto Deuilis: they may
full well grownde their procedyngs upon the heathe^s learning, and so build as
many altares as shall please them and mayntane the same as long as they may.

But now to return to the sacrifices of the Jews. The Jews had diverse
sacrifices or sorts of offerynges (whose names in the Hebrew tongue I will now
omit, for these Englysh printars are so thryfty as to have never an Hebrew
letter to printe wythal.

But I will name them as they be communely englyshed, that is: Peace
offering, Sin offering, Meat offering, Drink offering, Wave offering,
Heave offering.

All which sacrifices or offerings are comprehendyd in these two names:
Pacifiyng Sacrifice, and Gratifiyng Sacrifice.

The occasion of the Pacifiynge Sacrifice, Thoccatio^ of the pacifiyng
sacrifice.
was the laps or fall of our forefather Adam, by whose fall all mankind
halteth, hoppeth and walloweth in the dyrty Puddle of sin, lyith cheyned with
the Iron cheynes of Gods Wrath and vengeance, taken Captyues of the Prince of
this world, and become Enemies and Rebels against the God of might.

For whose presumptuouse Defiau^ce and sturdy Rebellion, it lay in no man's
power to make a loue-daye between God and man, nor pay so great a ransom as
was justly to be demaundyd.

Therefore if man would recover his old fall, go an upright gate again, arise up
out of the fyllthye puddle of sin, be released of the intolerable cheynes
of Gods wrath and vengeance, and be delivered out of the captivity of the
deuel, and brought again into the amytie, favor and frendshyp of God: than by all justice it behooved him to pacify the ire and indignacion of God with as full
satisfaction and with as dew and as plentiful compensacyon as should
counteruayle the transgressyon and displeasure which was perpetrated against
the gloriouse majesty of ye great god. But now who was able to make
satisfaction for so heynouse a displeasure? Was there any man upon earth able
to do it? no not one. Was there any Angel in heaven able to do it? no not one
another: for why should any other creature then man satisfy or make ame^des for
man's fault?

And it rests now that man is utterly like to remain out of the fauouor of
god and so consequently, to continue in the miserable thraldu^ of the deuell.
But alas for sorrow to se how man is deservedly condemned by the righteouse
judgment of god which no ma^s conscience ca^ justly gaynsay. Oh is there than
no help? is there no remedi? is there no refuge? No surely: there is no refuge at
all: unless this only shyft may be allowed, that is to appeal from the severe
justice of God, unto his great mercy, and to make an humble and an herty
peticyon unto his grace to send his dear son into the world to be incarnate
and to become man to pay a full rau^sume unto God for man to deliver man out of
the Deuyls captivity, to reco^cyle, and make at one God and man, and to offer
him self up for a pacifiynge Sacrifice unto his father for man's
transgression.

Which thing the unspeakable mercy and the natural kindness of God being
not required did undeservedly grant unto man as he was yet his very enemy and
most disobedient rebel.

And this was the sole and only ransom that redeemed Adam and all his
posteritye out of the greadye chawes of the old Serpente, All the pacifiyng
sacrifices of Moses law were but significations of christ's sacrifice.
this was the sole and only propiciatory sacrifice that pacified the ire of
god, that wholly satisfied for man's sins, and restored man again into
frendeship and favor of God.

And so all the Pacifiynge Sacrifices that ever GOD instituted and commanded
his Servant Moses to publyshe and set forth to the Israelites or Jews did
alonelye signifye the said Sacrifice of Christ.

For after that the world had continued about two thousand years without
law, or any other prescribed manner of living, than nature it self did
minyster: at the last it pleased the high majesty of God (that the mooe
might be saved) to establyshe a law, The b^^ of Moses law.
which should as it were declare and open the Law that was obscurate,
darckened, and far degenerated by the sinister corruption, which liniallye
did issue from the first father Adam into all his ofsprynge.

Howebeit as God did not give this law, unto all Nations, but only to the
Jews being but a few in number in comparison of all the people in the world,
so did not he forthwith open the mysteries contained therein, but over shadowed
them with manifold sacrifices, and diffuse rites and ceremonies being
significations of good things to come.

And moreover as ye lord went before the^ in ye wilderness ye day time in a
pillar of a cloud to lead the^ the way, and the night time in a pyller of
fire to give their corporal eyes light, that they might journey both day and
night toward the la^d of promise: so likewise did the tender love of God
practice in furtheringe them to the very land of promission: for he did so
tempre his traditions which he commanded unto the^ yt they which were never
wont before to be grouerned by the light of any moral law (and therefore
gross, rude, and pore blind) might be traded under a clowdye and mystical
doctrine, but yet having many sparcles of his sunny bright gospel, and so the
eyes of their mind being another vnmeasurably darkened nor noseled in blindness,
nor yet ouermuche daseled and overcome with the eyeing of shyning brightness,
they might rather atchiue the end of their spiritual progress.

And therefore all the ceremonies contained in this law were none other thing,
The ceremonies of ye law
but introductio^s to lead unto Christ.

And all these flesh sacrifices betokened the flesh sacrifice of Christ's
body, once offered upon thaltare of ye cross. But now to beat down the
Iewishe bulwark that the Popes soldiers have round about their fortress, we
will recite certain testimonies, as well out of the old testamente, as of the
new, which shall evidently prove yt god delights not (though he required them
for a time) in the externe oblation or the utter offering of the sacrifices
commanded by him in Moses his law. The abrogation of sacrifice.


Wherefore he declared the same by the mouth of diverse of his prophets, as it
is written. Mala. i. I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of hosts: and
as for your meat offering. I will not accept it at your hand. Again. Ose v.
They kill sacrifices by heaps: and turn far from the lord, and I have been
a rebuker of them all. And again. Prou. xv. The lord abhors the sacrifice
of the ungodly. etc. Item Eccle. xxxiiii. The hiest does not allow the gifts
of the wicked. And God has no delight in the offerings of the ungodly, nether
may sin be reconsiled in the multitude of oblations. Who so brings an
offering out of the goods of the pore, does eue^ as one yt kills the son
before the fathers eyes. And in the.l. Psalm. I will not reprove the (says ye
lord) because of thy sacrifices, or for thy burnt offerings, because they were
not always before me. I will take no bullock out of thy house: nor no he goats
out of thy fold. For all the beasts of the foreste are mine, and so are the
cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls upon the mountains:
and the wild beasts of the field are in my sight. If I be hungry, I will not
tell the: for the whole world is mine, and all that therein is. Think thou
that I will eat Bulls flesh, and drink the blood of goats?

And in Jeremy.iii. Chapter you shall read, not of the abrogation of Sacrifices
only, but also of the abrogation, and disanullynge of all the law, The
abrogation of the old law.
and of the old testamente wtall. The text goes this. When ye are increased
and multiplied in the land, than (says the Lord) there shall no more boaste
be made of the arcke of the Lords testament. No man shall think upon it,
nether shall any man make mention of it: For from thence forth it shall neither
be visited nor honored with gifts.

Moreover in the.xxxi. Chapter of the same prophet, you shall not alonely
read, of resoluyng and repellyng of the old covenant or testamente and the
cause thereof, but also of the substitution of the new, and of the description,
nature, and tenure of the same.

The new testament prophesied of.
And the words of ye text be these: Behold, the days will come (says the
Lord) that I will make a new couenaunte with the house of Israel, and with the
house of Judah: not after the couenaunte which I made with their fathers, when
I took them by the hand, and led them out of the land of Egypt, which
covenant they brake: Yea even when I as an husband had rule over them, says
the Lord.

But this shall be the couenaunte that I will make with the house of Israel
after those days, says the Lord. I will plant my law in the inner part of
them, and write it in their hertes, and will be their god, and they shall be my
people, and from thence forth, shall no man teach his neighbor or his brother,
and say: know the Lord, but they shall all know me, from the loweste to the
hyeste, says the Lord. For I will forgive their misdedes, and will never
remember their sins any more.

These testimonies (I thyncke) shall easilye persuade every true christian
(which has not a very Iewyshe heart) to be certified that as well the carnal
gratifiyng sacrifices required in Moses law, be as vtterli determined, and as
clearly abolished, as ye other pacifiynge sacrifices, whom most specially we
treated of hitherto.

And if the gunne shote of these old culuerynge pieces and double Cannons have
not sufficientlye overthrown the bulworcke of the said Popyshe forteresse, we
will yet shote of a piece or two of strong new ordinance of Sacres and
Apostles: whereof we shall furnyshe this for one.

Hebr. viii ix.
The new testamente wears out the old: Now that which is worn out and
waxed old, is ready to vanishe away. For that first tabernacle verily had
ordinances and seruynges of GOD and outewarde holiness. etc. But into the
second went the hye Priest alone, once in the year, not without blood which
he offered for him self, and for the ignorance of the people.

Wherewyth the holy gooste this signifies, that the way of holiness was not
yet opened, while as yet the first tabernacle was standing. which was a
similitude for the time than present, in which were offered gifts and
Sacrifices, and could not make perfect (as perteynyng to the conscience) him
that did the gods service only with meats and drynckes, and diverse washinges
and iustifiynges of the flesh, which were ordained unto the time of
reformation. Hebru. x.
For it is impossible that the blood of Oxen and of Goats should take away
sins.

Wherefore wha^ he comes into ye the world, he says. Sacrifice and offeringe
thou would not have, but a body have thou ordained me. Burnte Sacrifices and
sin offeringes haste thou not allowed. Tha^ said I, Lo I come: in the
chiefeste of the book, it is written of me, that I should do thy will, O God.
Above when he had said. Sacrifice and offering, and burnt sacrifices and
sin offeryngs thou would not have, neither haste allowed, which yet are
offered after the law: than said he: Lo, I come to do thy will O God. There
takes he away the first, Al bodily sacrifices ended in Christ.
to establyshe the later. In which will we are sanctified by the offeringe up of
the body of Jesus Christ once for all.

So than now, if it be a clear case, and that by the plain textes of holy
scripture, that since Christ was once offered on the altar of the cross, al
carnal sacrifices and al manner of offerynges that ever were wont to be offered
upon the altares be wholly extinguished, vtterli void and of none effect. And in
as much as no man (being in his right wit, when he advisedly perceyueth,
and plainly understands that the cause of the first Invention and buildynge
of the Altares was for none other purpose, That altares discontinue with the
sacrifices
but to burn, or to offer sacrifices or oblations upon, which manner of
sacrifices God will no longer accept) but he will straight ways acknowledge that
there ought not any altar to remain to any use among us christians, after
the death and passion of our master Christ: at which time as he protested him
self, saying: Consummatum est, it is finished, signifiynge thereby, that Moses
law was not only by him prevented, fulfilled and finished: but that ye same
law, or any commandment, rite, ceremony, or any other part therein
contained (as concerning any burthening or jurisdiction over the christians)
was to al intentes tolled, taken away, and fully determined and ended, and the
gospel as it were a new law surrogated, confirmed, and established in stead
of the old. The temporal lawiers.
You se how the temporal lawiers can tell on their fingers ends which is the
aunciente commune law of the Realm, which be the customs of old boroughes,
territories, and contries, which is statute law, and which not, what estatutes
be exspired, what statutes be mitigated, what repealed, and what euiued. Or
what statutes continue but from parliament to parliament, and what statute
expounds an other, yea or what branches of any statute is cut away by the
vygoure and egged force of an other statute: How many do agree and concur in
one thing, and how many be contrary one to an other.

They know farther (even as redilye as their Pater noster) all the book cases
that remain in writing the year of the raygne of the king, and the Term
also, and the better opinion of the Judges, and what case ruled and what not.

And I know well that such knowledge requires as great, as diligente, and as
industrious a study, as for to be perfect in the bible and all the good writers
and expositers thereof.

Yet you, who glory to be called by the name and title of doctors of
divinity, or bachiler of divinity, and profess the exact knoweledge
thereof, The divines.
are not (as it seems by the confuse hotchepotte that you have made of your
learning) so perfitelye seen in your science, as they in theyrs. And yet their
ignorance is more excusable than yours, and their Practice more tolerable
also than yours, for their ignorance or practice: shall only prejudice or
endomag a man of his worldely goods, disherite him of his earthly lands, or
loss of his body, which is nothing in comparison of the soul, whom your
ignorance and preposterous practice shall disinherite of the land of promise,
which is the kingdom of heaven.

But shall we be folishe, gross, and unapt in spiritual feats, and in
things longing to the Soul, and only wise and circumspect, polityke and
fit in all worldely matters which appertain to bodily affairs? That the
learned papists be more indiscreet and folysh, the^ the unlearned si^ple people.
Or shall the learned be more fond than the unlearned? or does much
learning make a man mad or doultishe? For what husbandma^ (be he never so
simple) will be about to plow his land with a whelebarowe, to harrowe it with a
slede, or to carye with an harow? What husbandman, I say is so folyshe, as to
go about to wede his corn with a sith, to mow his hey with a wedinge hoke,
and to tedde the same with a rake? Is a leaden cesterne made for to sail on ye
sea? is a ship made to be drawn of horses as a waggen upon the land? do noble
men build sumptuous palaces for their horses to stand in, and lie them selves
in old ruinous stables? or do men ordain fetherbeds for their dogs, and lie
themselves in kennellis? Who makes a Garnar of an Oue^, or an Oue^ of a
Garnat? Or who makes a threshynge flore in his dwelling house, and a herth in
his barn? Who can make a pleasant and a soote ba^ketyng house, of fylthy
Schamebles or of a stynking Slaughter house?

Yea or who had not rather have his supper laid on a fair Table before him
than on a bloody Butchars Cradle?

And so like wise (to apply some of these straing Anagogies and dark saynges
to our purpose) is not a Garnar more mete to lay up grain in, than an Oven? Is
it not more mete to make a threshynge flore in a barn than in a man's dwelling
house? And to make an herth to ke^dle fire on in the mids of a ma^s house,
tha^ by ye mowes side in his barn? And so who ca^ make ye Jews old slaughter
Synagoge to serve for the new Euangelyke banketynge. Temple? Or who had rather
ease ye heavenly ba^ket of the Lordis Supper on a Jewish, a heathelyk or a
Popysh altar: then on a decent and a fair comely Table?

The unbelieving Jew defiyth Christ's Table and his supper also. The
unfaithful heathen think scorn of the same. The pope and his papists make of
it a god or a popet

The Jew abhorryth utterly our Religion. The Heathen in no sauce can away with
it.

The Pope is well contented to be called a christian, The pope dissembleth.
yea to be thought to be Christ him self, so that ye give him leave to live like
a Jew or an Heathen. And shall we seek upon the^? Shall we be partakers of
their damnable Ceremonies, of their execrable Rites, and cursed Vsages? Or is
Christ's religion so imperfect of it self, so neady and beggarly that it must
borowe imbring fastes of the Heathen, borowe altares of the Pope, and borowe
vestimentes of the Jews? beside an innumerable sort of other like baggage,
Wedes in our religion.
which has been weded now of late out of Christ's religion, and now restored
home to the owners thereof.

Therefore let us either render home again unto the Heathen, the
supersticion of the imbrynge days and to ye pope his hallowed altares and unto
the Jews, Exo. xxix.
their Aarons vestimentes: or else let us like good Companions join together in
a league with the^, The wicked provision of man's fa^tasye.
and be tenauntes in commune, and put our religion with theirs in hotche
potche, and according to ye lawiers vulgar term Qui primum happat primum
cappat. And by my fey that peradventure were great wisdom: for so did our
fathers and ancesters: and were it not good fellowship to do as they did? Yea
were it not good policy to hold on the bigger side? And are not more in number
of ye Papists Heathens and Jews than of the Christians? yea no doubt, thrice
so many at the least: why then let us be of one religion with them, and they
will take us as their friends, and we likewise will take their part. And so, we
being than so many in number, and gathered together and rayed in a puisaunt and
a mighty army, shall rushe into heaven, whether God and his angels will or no.
And if all fail, after that we have made merry by the way, in the dominion of
the Popes purgatory, we will march forward and come to the large and wide
kyngedome of the Prince of this world, even the mighty prince Satan (who
refuses no man) and there shall we be so curtesly enterteyned, so choisely
cherished, and so much made of, as though we were his own dear children. For
he loves them alyfe who be at defiaunce with Jesus Christ, and have forsaken
him for their sovereign. Now as ye have heard the fa^tasticall aduiseme^t, and
brayneles council of man's natural wit, (who perceyueth not the things that
belong to the spirit of god) so harken what the spirit of god speaks by the
mouth of his chose^ vessel, s. Cor. ii.
s. Paul, even by these words.

Dearlye beloved, fle from worshippinge of idols. s. Cor. x
I speak unto them that have discretion, judge ye what I say. The cup of
thanks geuynge, wherwyth ye give thanks, is it not the partakynge of the
blood of Christ? The bread that we break, is it not the partakinge of the
body of Christ? For we being many are one bread and one body, in as much
as we are partakers of one bread. Behold Israel after the flesh. They that
eat sacrifices, are they not partakers of the altar? What shall I now say
then? Shall I say that the idol is any thing? Or that which is offered unto
the idol is any thing? Nay. But this I say, that look what ye Hethen offer,
ye offer they to devils and not to god. Ye ca^ not drink of ye cup of the lord,
and of ye cup of ye devils. Now would I not yt ye should be in ye fellowship with
devils, Ye can not be partaker of ye lords table, and of ye devils? Or will ye
provoke the lord? Are we stronger the^ he? I may do al things, but al things
are not expedient. I may do al things, but all things edifye not.

Now I trust yt as many of us as have received the spirit of God shall sone
perceive by the meaning of the text now before rehearsed, that the christians
in no wise may be partakers with the Heathens or Jews in idols, altares,
sacrifices offerynges, or such other vnchristenlyke ceremonies.

For (as the same Apostle says) what fellowship has ryghtuousenes with
vnrightuousenes? ii. Cor. vi
what company has light with darckenes? how agrreeth Christ and Belial? or
what part has the beleuer with the unbeliever? how accords the temple of god
with images? etc.

But now I pray you, do you not see with what a care, with what a diligence,
and with what an earneste affection the holy Apostle of Christ exhorts, The
great ^iligence ^f saint
counceleth, and calls upon the christians, lest they should keep company or
be yoked with the Heathen or the Jews, Paul ye Christ's religion should not be
mingled.
or lest they should admit and receive any of their supersticious rites, or
wicked ceremonies, and myngle the same with Christ's religion?

Yea, and the Apostles did so much abhor, eschew and fear, lest such confuse
mingle mangle of strange supersticions (whether they were of the Heathens
vain rites, or of the Jews law) in so much that they bade not only
farewell to all the ceremonial and Judicial law of Moses, but also (because
they would differ from the Jews in keeping holyday) they translated and
changed the celebration of the saboth from Saturdaye to So^day. For the
seventh day whereupon by one of his ten commandments God commanded us to
rest, was on Saturday, and not on So^day. The like affection and mind was
Constantine the Emperor of (abhorrynge the memorial of the vain Heathens
Gods) when he sued unto one Siluester the first, Bishop of Rome, that it
might be decreed, that the days of the weke which had before the names and
tytles of the Su^ne, The names of ye days in the weke by a decre altered.
Moan, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, should be called the first
ferye, the second ferye, the third fery, the fourth, the fyfte, the syxte,
the seventh: in like manner as ye Jews counted their days from the Saboth day.

But it pleased him that the first fery might be called Dies Dominicus also,
which we name Sunday, and that Saturday should be called Sabatum, of the old
holydaye and rest of the Hebrews.

And if such vigilante circumspection and careful mind to flee from having
any mutual conversation (as well in words as in things) with the Jews and other
infidels had still continued in christen men's hertes ever since the Apostles
time hitherto: Master Negligence careless, help the Pope to set up his altares.
than neded no man to travail at this present day to write or inueyghe
against the unjust intrusion of altares.

But well worth the time of the old prymatiue church, when every thing (as
Polidorus Vergilius records) in the administration of the Lords supper was
plain,
sincere, and without any minling of ceremonies, contaynynge more virtue than
solemnity.

Harken than to this testimonye (al ye Papists) and give good credit unto it,
(for he that first wrote it) is the Pope his own country manne.

For surely he speaks herein as truly as did the bishop Cayphas when he
affirmed that it was better that one man should dye for the people, than all
the people should peryshe.

But would God it had pleased his holy Spirit to speak by the mouth of the
pope, as he has done by the mouth of Balaam, Cayphas and of other as evil
men. Than should not all the people have perished, but rather one manne. And
would God I say, that this Polidorie of Polidorus had been more liberally
bestowed on the common people in England. Than would they more frelye and with
a better will obey and embrace the ecclesiastical proceadynges of the higher
powers. And seeing than that of a very truth (according to the golden
se^te^ce of Polidorus) the religion of Christ was replenished with more
unfeigned holiness, and garnished with many mooe godly virtues, before it knew
any thing of these new found solemn ceremonies, and holylyke traditions.

What the devil than was it, that put into the Popes brains, to over charge
ye religion with so many fold vain ceremonies, and so diverse pernicious
traditions? it was but even the same devil that set a work Mahometh the
notorious false prophet to play the like part. Yea it was the self same blind
devil that makes even at this day all the Papists and the Mahumethistes to
adhere and stycke to their false gods the Popes and Mahamethes disceitful
laws and vain traditions, more than to the Lord Christ, and his healthsome
gospel.

But now to let pass these two great usurpers of Christ's dignity and most
high power, and to let them syncke in their own sin and to talk no more of
them but rather styckinge steadfast to our tacklynge to defend our selves
from the darts whom we se already directed, and shaken against us by our
adversaries the poysonfull Papystes.

How be it because my chiefest entente is, to write this treactyse for them
that be unlearned, I will first open and declare somewhat of the nature of one
term lately borrowed of the Latins, and therefore not so well known of every
English Reader: which term peradventure I shall have occasion to use now
and than, ere I shall have done with this matter.

What is ^o allude
The term is to Allude. And a man does allude, when he speaks that which
has a priuye respect or resemblaunce to an other thing: as sometime a man
alludeth to a word as thus.

The good mome is fool a town, meaning that the good manne is forth of the
town. Here the allusion is in mome and fool, for man and forth. Sometime a
man alludeth to a practice or a deed doing, as when I say: Let me alone with
him for I will walk him, I will dress him like a Lennarde, I will make
Stockefishe of him. etc. And sometime a man alludeth to an history as thus.

By like our King (God save his grace) after his fathers departing, did ask
of GOD in his prayer Wisdom, and understanding and not long life, neither
riches neither reuengment on his enemies seeing the Lord has so endued his
heart with such unspeakable wisdom and understanding etc. and his majesty
with such riches and honor etc.

Now in so saying the allusion is had unto the history of Solomon iii. Reg.
iii. And so at the last to re: turn from alludyng to defe^dyng.

Where soever therefore, ye do read in the new testament of this word altar:
if ye mark it well and circu^spectly, ye shall clearly perceive that the use
thereof is not there awhyt renewyd or confirmyd, but by some occasion spoken of,
and rather determined, ended, and adnulled.

As in the.v. of Math. The text I will not rehearse now, because it is here once
before rehearsed, the se^ce whereof (though in many words) is not far
disagreable from this.

(...) place of Math. expounded
You Jews, says Christ, which received a Law of my Father by the ministry
of Moses: by which Law ye were commanded to use certain outwade ceremonies,
as it were to enure your selfs in a religion and that it should appear to all
nations, that you were my fathers own peculiar People.

And ye were also co^maundyd by the same Law, that when so ever you should
transgress or break the same or any Article thereof: that the^ you should
offer up Sacrifices or Offeryngs unto my Father where ye might be blameless,
holden excused and be acquitted by the same law, al your former trespaces and
sins notwithstanding, and rather justified before the world, than in the
presence of God.

But sense ye have altogether abused the said sacrifices, chewynge the Barcke
thereof, and grossly fedynge on the utter part of it, taking no fode of the
inner pyth, neither haueynge any regard to those things which were chiefly
signified by the same sacrifices: my father has warned already by the mouth of
his Prophets, that he passethe naught of your sacrifices and offerynges that
you offer unto him on Altares (which were but tokyns of inward holiness) but
the sacrifices and offerynges which he is reconciled and pleased with al, are
these: Psalm. ii.
a stomach broken with repentance, and a heart smytten and wounded with sorrow,
Ose. vi.
and to show mercy one to an other. And if ye will offer up these, my Father
shall never despise them. Therefore thou Jew wha^ so ever thou brekest any of
the x. commandments, as when thou kyllest any man, other by thought or
deed: when thou art angrye with thy brother by his fault or misdemeanour, or
else when thou have given him occasion (by reuilyng, scofyng or calling him
knave or other wise by vseyng or practiseyng any dispytfull word or deed
toward him) to be moved to wrath and to be displeased with the.

Than if thou wylt pacifye the wrath and Indignation of my Father for the
Injury and displeasur that thou have don to his servant: verilye I tell the
it avails the nothing at all, to come and offer any manner of bodily
sacrifices or oblations upon the altar: yea and though thou be come nere unto
the altar and thy gift with the, even ready to be offered (if it chance the
than to remember any manner of displeasure betwixt the and thy brother) thou
must not, I say, offer up thy gift immediately (as though thy offeri^g should
rather pacify and more please my father than brotherly love and concord) thou
must not I say go that way to work: but thou must leave thy gift (as a
thing naught worth of it self) before the altar: and than go thy way to
satisfye thy brother, to please thy brother, and to reconcile the to thy
brother. And when thou have after this sort pleased the servant, tha^ may
thou the bolder approach to the presence of the master: s. Ioh. iii
and than if thou will neades offer up thy gift, he will rather accept it,
and take it in good worth.

Now have you heard how little Christ does attribute unto sacrifices and
offerynges, for whose use altares are ordained, and only serve. For ye must
specially note this, that Christ in this place expounded and opened unto the
Jews most chyeflye, the true understanding and meaning of their law with
the right use of the ceremonies thereof.

For it fared than with them as it did with me, when I was a holy Papiste, at
what time I was at this point with god. That if I had heard mass boeth
sunday and holy day, The chiefest poi^ts of the popes religion.
had said our Lady mattens, or our ladies psalter, kissed and lycked devoutly
saints fete (for so called they their images) and besprynkeled my self well
fauouredlye with coniured water, and had done the supersticious penance
enjoined to me by my goostly, shall I say enemy or father? Than I say was I
at such point with God, I thought it, and assuredly believed that I had done my
full duty unto him, though I never once called to remembrance the benefit
of Christ's death, as well in satisfiyng and pacifiynge for all the trespaces
and sins of my former evil life, and naughty conversation.

Yea besides all this popysh and deuillishe presumption, I thought farther,
that if I had done the said vain works and such other no better, The wicked
vntha^kefulnes of a Papiste.
that I was no more beholden unto god tha^ he was to me; neither gave I him
more thanks for par, donyng me of my sins: than one merchant man gives to
another for the optaynynge a penny worth for a penie.

But thanks be unto the Lord who of his mere clemency, delivered me out of
this blind popyshe heresye, and vouchsafe of his like goodness to work the
semblable miracle in as many as yet continue in such damnable error.

But now again to come to the purpose.

And as I was thus tangeled, and abhominablye deceived, and trained, and
brought up in tender age, in the Popes holilyke Religion before Christ's
second birth here in England, even so were the Jews before his first
birth in Judea wonderously deceived, and shamefully seduced and that by the
feigned new Doctrine that their Popes I mean their scribes and Pharisees had
brought into their church.

And for to root that doctrine out of the Jews law, was the occasion of
Christ's Sermon in the said place of Matthew.

So likewise in the.xxiii. chapter of the same Euangeliste he exhorts the
Jews for to do all things both great or small that the Scribes and
Phariseis preached unto them, as long as they tu^ble not out of Moses chair,
nor swerve not from teaching the sincere and pure law of Moses. There among
other matters he does sharply condemn their blind doctors for a certain
constitucion that they had made, being led with avarice or couetuousenes:
The sum and effect of which constitution which they had made be contained
in these few words.

Who so ever swereth by the temple that is nothing: but who so ever swereth by
the gold of the temple, he is bound by his oath. And who so ever swereth by
the Altar that is nothing, but who so ever swereth by the offering that is
upon the altar, he is bound by his Oath.

This co^stitution of theirs does Christ confute with natural reason calling
them foles and wondrous blind, that they would institute so gross, and so
far from reason, a tradition as this is.

But I think that Christ will never say to the Pope for his fine Canons,
decrees, and constitutio^s (though they were made for the like purpose) as he
did to ye scribes and phariseis: But I will not undertake that he will not (as
he called Herod) say unto him on this wise. Thou wyly Fox, why did thou
loose that, which I bound? or why dideste thou bind what I did loose?

Now I pray the gentle Reader do not blame me for this short digressio^, but
rather the fox, whose craftye wiles caused the same. And thus from Pope to
Papiste. Thou Papist, even thou that of late would defend thine altar with
this text and so thou may in deed if thou will subdue thy neck unto the
heavy yoke of Moses his law, under which law al those people were subject to
who^ Christ preached as is aforesaid. And if you wylt be content to live under
the law of Moses, tha^ has Christ dyed in vain for the: and therefore get
the hence unto the Jews, which still look for a worldely Christ to come.

But thou good Papist that art willing to renounce thy Poperye and to receive
Christianitye, thou must consider, that where so ever Christ does inculcate
the law of Moses unto his country men after the flesh (I mean the Jews) that
he does it chieflye to this entente, that they should wythdrawe their necks
from the intolerable yocke and heavy burden of the law and receive the easy
yocke and the lig^^ burden of his most blessed gospel.

For the law, M^^ (...). John. i
as Saynct John says, was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ.

Every good christian therefore must marcke this also. That the merciful lord
Jesus Christ (whose nature and propertye was not to strive nor to break a
brosed read) though the strength and vygoure of the law and prophets extended
no longer but to the time of John the Baptiste as Christ him self did
signifye the same unto them, and declarynge that the kingdom of heaven being
the Gospel succeaded and was at hand even before his passion: yet did he
rather permit or somewhat derogate than utterly abrogate ye law of Moses
until such time as he through his blood and Death sealed up and stablyshed
his new Testamente, which then immediately did wearout the old. Therefore
every Christian yt is as prudent as the Serpent first (all the circumstancis
being well perpensed) will be ware to believe every sentence and every word
written in the new Testament as part thereof, or confirmyd by the same: as
where Christ declares the Law etc. or where Christ in the same.xxiii. cha.
speaks of an altar menyng nothing less then to confirm or renew the use
of altars emonge his christians but all together to vpbrayde ye Jews for
succedyng their wicked au^cesters cruelnes in kyllyng of Prophetis.

Here his own words are these. Behold I send you Prophetis and Wise men,
and Scribes and some of the^ you shall kill and crucify and some of them shall
you scourge in your Synnagoges, and persecute them from City to City: that
upon you may come all the ryghtuouse blood, which has been shed upon earth,
from the blood of rightuouse Abell, unto the blood of zathe son of Barachias
whom ye slew bitwene the Temple and the altar etc. But full little (god
knows) wotteth he what an Altar meanith that wol alledg this place for an
altar.

And even of like force be the.ii. places before rehearsed, in the biginyng of
the book, on the papists behalf, which places were chopped out of ye first
cha. of.s. Luks gospel and of the.xvii. of his book of ye acts. But I can not
denay but one might gather thereof such an argument as this. The Jews had
their altares, and the Heathen had their altares, Ergo ye christians must have
altares. But either I am a simple Logician or else the argument would better
frame, and a more true consequent follow after this sort. The Jews had
altares, and the Heathen had altares also, ergo the Pope being a participle
must have halteres likewise. But I promise you there be two places, one.i. Cor.
ix. and the other, Heb. xiii. which might happen to make one yt is not somewhat
travailed in ye scriptures to think verili ye alters be there spoken of as
things apertaining to us yt hold of Christ's new Testament, where it is
nothing so. For the text to the Corh. has thus. An nescitis quoniam qui in
sacrario opera^tur, que de sacrario sunt edunt? Et qui in altario deseruiunt,
cum altario participant? Ita et Dominus ordinauit ^is qui Eua^gelium anu^ciant,
de Eua^gelio viuere. Where ye greek text for Altario has Thysiasterion, which
signifies Sacrarium a place for holy things, as well as Altarist an altar.
But to make no more words than need: Preachers of ye gospel.
all the argument of.s. Paul in this place tends to prove that they wych
preach ye gospel, ought of duitie to have a co^pete^t living thereby. And to
perswad the Corhinth. thereto: he uses this Induction. Why, you Corhinthians,
do you not remember how you your selfs before ye had received ye preaching of
Christ's gospel, did find such as ministered in ye temples of the Idols? And
do you not se emonge the Jews also how the priests and the Levites which
wait on the altar, have the offerings divided among the^ toward their
sustinau^ce and living? And why should not he likewise that takes pains to
preach ye gospel have a living also?

The author of the gospel willed and ordained that the true gospellers
should have a living: yet had I rather use great scarcity, and work with
mine own hands, than to be onerous and chargeable unto you.

Nevertheless if ye denay a living to an other that shall require it of you, if
he preach the Gospel unto you, ye must needs be adjudged to contemn and set
naught by the holy words that are preached unto you, and even despise the
authoure thereof, which is the Lord Jesus Christ. etc.

And. S. Thomas and Remigius (as we have now declared this place according to
their mind) do think that Sacrarium here has a relation unto the idols of
the heathen, and Altarium unto the sacrifices of the Jews. Now therefore who so
deliteth in ye heathens deuillyshe idolatry, or Jewish sacrifices he may well
inoughe wreste this place to maintane his altares: which thing I had lever he
did tha^ I. But now or we set upon to bater, and beat down the head corner
stone of their Popish Botereulx: we will first declare yet one grammar term
mooe, for the unlearned sake, which though it be no high point of divinity,
nevertheless who so has not ye knowledge thereof, his divinity is but humaniti,
or rather carnalitie, than true knowledge in divine matters.

And so the grammarians call it a speech spoken by a figure called Metonimya,
when the thing contained is mente by the name of the thing that contains it.
Metonymia or d^nomination.
As when we say, reach hither the cup: meaning to have the drink
contained in the cup. This figuratyue speech used Christ him self when he
said. Luke xxii.
This cup is the new testament in my blood. Where he meant of the wine, and not
of the cup. And likewise Matthew.xxiii where he speaks by the name of the
City unto them that dwelled in the city, saying: Jerusalem Jerusalem, thou
that slayest the prophets. etc. Such manner of speech is also much used in
the old Testamente. As Esai. i. Hear O heaven and herke^ O earth. And in an
other place. Howl ye ships of Tharsis.

And so the Papists must either grant that, that kind of speech is used in
the text, that we shall anon rehearse hereafter, or else must they grant that
the Jews (whose altares or rather Sacrifices and forbidden meat, the writer
of the Epistle alludeth unto) were wont to eat up their altares being made
of stones or of other metal harder tha^ stones. And yt were hard meat in deed.
Yea that were meat alone for Ostriches? Yea or rather stone meat were more
mete for such as have stony hertes, Ostriche is a beast that swaloweth gaddes
of stele and digesteth them.
as have al Papisticall Doctors who against their conscience, knoweledge, and
learning, and being all destitute of the spirit of God, cry and shoute for
the defense of their well-beloved altares, Habemus altar, Habemus altar,
Habemus altar.

Yea and I may tell you this Habemus altar, is their iudgelynge stick,
whereby they do Iuggle unto the unlearned, it is al their hibernacle and
only refuge against all tempests, and this is as well their shote anchor as
their halow at their hoysinge up of their ankore.

But to hale in my sail and to la^d at the proposed haue^. The english text
of Habemus altar written. Hebrew.xiii. is this: Be not carried about with
diverse and straung learnynges: for it is a good thing that the heart be
stablished with grace, and not with meats, which have not profited them that
have had their pastyme in them.

We have an altar, of the which they have no power to eat, which serve in the
tabernacle. etc.

Here he does in a manner make a brief rehearsal of all the chiefest matters
that he entreated of before, adding thereto diverse godly sentences to
persuade the Hebrews to abide in this learning: Inducynge them also, by
alludynge unto their law being but a shadow to cleave unto the gospel, and
to let go ye shadow. And therefore he says thus unto them. And as you had
certain Sacrifices offered on the altares whereof it was not laweful even for
the very offerers to eat: so likewise have we a Sacrifice once offered upon
the altar of ye cross, whereof it is not lawful for as many of you as be yet
duskened with the shaddowe of the law to eat, nor to be patakers of it at al.

Now therefore must the Papystes be thought not only to be of to childyshe a
wit and of no understanding, but rather furiouse and mad, if they continue
to prove their stony altares by this text.

And therefore would I think it an exceadyng good deed for such as inioye
their right wit, to pick out from amongst them selves as many as are vexed
with the spirit of the said kind of phrenesy, and se^d them to Bedlem, or to
their own city of Rome. For else they shall still infect other, and do more
hurt then every man is ware of.

At the last to draw toward an end in this matter. Where this word altar
is read in the.vi. viii. and.xi. Chapters of the revelation of saint John: if
altar in those places, admittynge the like trope and figurative speech, do
not signifye Christ also (God knows) it signifies nothing less than the
confirmation of such Altares as the Pope has filled every corner of
Christ's church wythall.

And if the Papystes (after that all the testimonies, as well of thold and the
new testament have failed them) go about to wreste the saying of the old
doctors, for the stablyshyng of their altares, they shall get nothing thereby,
but still utter their own gross ignorance, or their perverse blyndnes. For
where so ever thold catholyke doctors, used this word altar for the lords
Table, than alluded they unto the Jews altar and mente thereby the cross
which served as an altar to offer upon the sacrifice of Christ's natural
body.

And forsooth, ye Papistical priests, as many of you as understood the Latin,
and marked what you read (and if ye had been Bees, The Be gathers honi on
ye same flour yt the Spider gathers poison.
and not Spiders) you might have gathered the nature of this manner of allusion
or resemblau^ce of Christ's cross unto the Altares of the Jews even out of
your own poisoned mass.

Which well might be called Massa, farrago, vel Chaos, quo sacra prophanis,
miscebat Papa.

Even a very hotch pot, in ye which the Pope put al manner of religions and al
manner of rites and ceremonies, both good and bad, and lessons of holy
scripture, and of unholy scripture: this hotch pot I say ordained he, even
for his dear children, and catch who catch may: hap good or badde: hap
holy, hap unholy, hap godly, hap deuillyshe.

For do you not remember how ye mu^bled (how ye read I would say) in a
certain ryme of your said hotche pot which began. Lauds crucis
extollamus, nos qui crucis crult^mus. etc. O qua^ feli^ quam pre clara, fuit
hec salutis ara, rubens agni sanguine.

O how excellent and how happy, was this Altar of tree, besprynckeled with
Lambs blood?

And again in an other prose.

Ara crucis, lampas lucis, vera salus hominum. Whose sense in English word
for word is this. The altar of the cross, the lamp of light and the very
health of men.

Now though your own time makers of your Popyshe service have used so many
Metaphories, so many tropes, and so many borrowed speches, usurping one word
for an other, until at the last they ran on the rock of inexcusable
Idolatrye, and plain superstition: you must not therefore thyncke that the
holy Doctors ran so headlynge in their worckes, that they abused any one
term of Christ's religion, wherbi ye same might be a stomblinge block unto
any, saving unto the children of perdition, who continually stumble at the
very word of God.

And to confess the truth, the old holy fathers and catholyke writers no
doubt are worthy much commendation, for that they greatly traueyled in
reuolutynge and expoundynge the sacred Scriptures committyng to writing their
censures thereof: willing and requyrynge that al their posterity should give
no farther credit thereto, tha^ their censures and interpretations should
seem to be agreeable unto fayeth.

Whose worthy antiquity and grave authority notwythstanding, we yet neades
must prefer and esteem of more importau^ce, and believe also that he is a
great deal of a more infallible and vndeceyuable judgment, Act. ix. Galat.
ii.
whom the Euangeliste saint Luke so to be, does bear witness unto us.

And I mean none other, but even our Apostle Saint Paul who calls the
board where the Spiritual feast of the Lords Supper is celebrated and eaten
upon, the table of the Lord.

O the depenes of ye riches, both of the wisdom and knoweledge of GOD, who so
many hundredth years passed, did fore see that his most holy word ne
should not be set to a fall, Luke. ii.
but to an vprisyng to all his chosen people?

And of this place we may gather, that it pleased God to pour more
abundance of foreknoweledge in his Apostle Paul's compendious doctrine, tha^
in the large writing of ye notable learned doctor Saint Augustine.

For saint Paul through the secret advertisement of the holy Gooste did
know before hand, that if he had given the name of an Altar unto the LORD
his Table, that there would be in time to come certain Iewysh teachers that
would build and set up Popyshe altares instead of tables to serve the
Lords supper upon.

And surely the holy doctor. s. Augustyne nor any other godly writer would
never have used this term altar so often after that sort as they did, if they
had had but the least inckelynge in the world of foreknowlege what
absurdity, what inconvenience and what mischief and abomination have been
grounded on their translated terms.

And I pray you what though saint Augustine or other doctors used to term
the lords supper the Sacrament of the altar, Sacrament of ye altar.
which if it be as I take it (I take it after the most sound and fayeth
fulliste understanding) the unlearned people should not be greatelye beholden
unto them for their strange terms being so far fetched. For thus I
understand them.

The Sacrament of the altar that is to say: the sign of the Altar, which
altar betokens the cross, which cross betokens the Sacrifice that was
offered on the cross, or the passion and death of Jesus Christ.

Wherefore good Christen breathre^ let us that are homely fellows not be
ashamed of the old terms that we have at our home in the text of holy
scripture, which calls the reverend and healthful remembrance of the
Lords death by breakinge of bread, i. Cor. x. i. Cor. xi.
by the name of the Lords supper, or the communion and partakynge of the body
and blood of Christ.

And the thing whereat we Vel propter arto latriam vita^dam tutius erit vt
sedensquam genu flecte^s mense dominice populus accu^bere assuesca^t.
sit deuoutlye to eat the Lords supper, let us boeth have it, and call it
the Lords board, or the Lords table, and not a borrowed towell, nor a Popyshe
stone altar, nor yet a wodden altar, with a Superhaltare. And let us
Present with so far fetched terms and so dearelye boughte, the Popes glace,
and his fair Ladies of Rome.

Now because I trust that we have vaunquished and given an overthrow to the
chiefest part of the Popes soldiers, batered and beaten down to the ground
the only Botereulx, and the great stay of his strong hold and Fortecesse:
therefore shall our trumpet blow a retreit in this battle. Praised be the
Lord. Amen.

ii. Cor. ii. Thanckes be unto God which always gives us the vyctorye in
Christ, and opened the Sauoure of his knoweledge by us in every place.

For we are unto God ye sweet savor of Christ, boeth among the^ yt are saved,
and among them yt perish. To these ye savor of death to death: to ye other ye
savor of life to life.


Imprinted at London by Robert Crowley, dwelling in Elye rentes in Holburne.
The year of our Lord. M.D.L.

*



*

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


