THE ENGLISH MAN'S DOCTOR. OR The School of Salerne. OR ^YSICALL OBSERVA^ON FOR
THE PERfect p^sreuing of the body of Man in continual Health.

^ereunto (...) adjoined Precepts for the p^seruation of Health.

Written by ^NRICVS RONSOVIVS for (...) private use of his Sons.

And now p^ed for all those that desire to (...) their bodies in (...) health.

LONDON, (...)by William Stansby, f^ the Widow Helme^ (...) are to be sold at
her Shoope in Sa^ Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-streete. 1617.

THE PRINTER TO the Reader.
REader, the care that I have of thy health, appears in bestowing these
Physical rules upon thee: neither need thou be ashamed to take lessons out
of this School: for our best ^octors scorn not to read the instructions. It
is a little Academie, where every man may be a Graduate, and proceed Doctor in
the ordering of his own body. It is a Garden, where all things grow that are
necessary for thy health. This medicinal Tree grew first in Salerne; from
thence it was removed, and has borne fruit and blossoms along time in
England. It is now replanted in a wholesome ground, and new earth cast about it
by the hand of a cunning Gardener, to keep it still in flourishing. Much good
husbandry is bestowed upon it: yet whatsoever the cost be, thou reapest the
sweetness of it for a small value. It came to me by chance, as a Jewel that
is found, whereof notwithstandi^ ^ am not covetous, but part the Treasu^
amongst my Countrymen. The Auth^ the pains, is to me unknown, and I p^ this
Child of his into the open world wit^out his consent. Bring it up therefore
we^ I beseech thee, and hope (as I do) that he will not be angry, finding
this a Traveler abroad, when by this travel so many of his own Country are
so manifoldly benefited.

Farewell.
Ad Librum.
GO Book, and (like a Merchant) new (...)
Tell in how strange a traffic thou have (...)
Upon the Country which the Sea-god saues
And loves so dear; he binds it round with w^
Cast Anchor thou, and impost pay to him
Whose Swans upon the breast of ISIS swim.
But to the people that do love to buy,
(It skills not for how much) each nouelty
Proclaim an open Mart, and sell good cheap,
What thou by travel and much cost do reap,
Bid the gay Courtier, and coy Lady come,
The Lawyer, Townsman, and the country groom
It Is ware for all: yet thus much let them know,
There are no drugs here fetched from Mex^o,
Nor gold from India, nor that stinking smoke,
Which English gallants buy, themselves to choke,
Nor silks of Turkey, nor of Barbary,
Those luscious Canes, where our rich Sug^rs lie.
Nor those hot drinks that make our wits to dance
The wild Canaries: nor those Grapes of France,
^ich make us clip our English, nor those wares
(...) fertile Belgia, whose womb compares
^th all the world for fruit, tho now with scarres
^r body be all ore defaced by wars:
(...), tell them what thou bringst exceeds the wealth
^f al these Countries for thou bringst them health
In Librum.
WIt, Learning, Order, Elegance of Phrase,
Health, and the Art to lengthen out our day
Philosophy, Physic, and Poesy,
And that skill which death loves not, (Surgery)
Walks to refresh us, Airs most sweet and clear,
A thriftie Table, and the wholesom'st cheer,
All sorts of grain, all sorts of flesh, of fish,
Of Foul, and (last of all) of fruits a sever all dish:
Good Breakefasts, Dinners, Suppers, after-meales,
The herb for Sallads, and the herb that heales,
Physicions Counsel, Pothecaries pills,
Without the summing up of costly bills,
Wines that the brain shall never intoxicate,
Strong Ale and Beer at a more easier rate,
Then Water from the Fountain: clothes (nor dear)
For the four several quarters of the year,
Meats both for Protestant and Puritan,
With means sufficient to maintain a man.
If all these things thou want, no farther look,
All this, and more then this, lies in this Book.
In Laudem Operis.
THe Gods upon a time in counsel sitting,
To rule the world what creature was most fitting,
At length from God to God this sentence ran,
^o form a creature like themselves (called Man)
^ng made, the world was given him built so rarely,
(...) workman can come near it: hung so fairly,
that the Gods viewing it, were ^uer-ioyed:
(...) grieved that it should one day be d^stroyed:
^ardens had Man to walk in, set with trees
that still were bearing: But (neglecting these)
(...) longed for fruits unlawful, ^ell to riots,
(...) body by ill dyets.
^pent (what was (...) him) like a prodigal heir,
And had of earth, of hell, or heaven no care,
^or which the earth was cursed, and brought forth w^ds,
^oyson even lurking in our fairest s^ds,
(...) heaven was hid, and did in darkness m^ne:
^hilst hell kept fires continual, that should burn
(...) very soul, if still it w^nt ^ry,
And give it torments that should never die,
(...); How blessed is (...) the Deities,
Built up the School of Health, to make him wise.
THE SALERNE School.
THe Salerne School does by these lines impa^
All health to Englands King, and does advise
From care his head to keep, from wrath his heart,
Drink not much wine, sup light, and soon arise,
When meat is gone, long sitting breeds smart
And afternoon still waking keep your eyes.
When moved you find your self to Natures Ne^
Forbear them not, for that much danger breeds,
Use three Physicions still; first Doctor Quiet,
Next Doctor Merry-man, and Doctor Diet.
Rise carely in the morn, and straight remember,
With water cold to wash your hands and eyes,
In gentle fashion retching enery member,
And to refresh your brain when as you rise,
In heat, in cold, in July and December.
Both comb your head, and rub your teeth likewis^
If bled you have, keep cool, if bathed keep warm^
If dined, to stand or walk will do no harm.
Three things preserve the sight, Grass, Glass, and fou^tain^
At Ene'n springs, at morning visit mountains.
(...) R. be in the month, their judgments err,
^at think that sleep in afternoon is good:
(...) R. be not therein, some men there are
^at think a little nap breeds no ill blood:
^t if you shall herein exceed too far,
(...) hurts your health, it cannot be with stood:
^ong sleep at after-noones by stirring sumes,
^reeds Sloth, and Agues, Aching heads and Rheumes,
^he morsture bred in Breast, in Jaws and Nose,
Are eal'd Catars, or Tysique, or the Pose.
Great harms have grown, and maladies exceeding,
By keeping in a little blast of wind:
So Cramps, and Dropsies, Collickes have their breeding,
And Mazed Brames for want of vent behind:
Besides we find in stories worth the reading,
A certain Remane Emperor was so kind,
Claudius by name, he made a Proclamation,
A Escape to be no loss of reputation.
Great suppers do the stomach much offend,
Sup light if quiet you to sleep intend.
To keep good diet, you should never feed
Until you find your stomach clean and void
Of former eaten meat, for they do breed
Repletion, and will cause you soon be cloid,
None other rule but appetite should need,
When from your mouth a moisture clear dot^ void
All Pears and Apples, Peaches, Milk and Cheese,
Salt meats, red Dear, Hare, Beef and Goat: all the^
Are meats, that breed ill blood, and Melancholy,
If sick you be, to feed on them were folly.
Eggs newly laid, are nutritive to eat,
And roasted Rear are easy to digest,
* Fresh Gascoigne wine is good to drink with mea^
Broth strengthens nature above all the rest,
But broth prepared with flower of finest wheat,
Well boild, and full of sat fat for such are best.
* The Priests rule is (a Priests rule should be true)
Those Eggs are best, are long, and white and new
Remember eating new laid Eggs and soft,
For every Egg you eat you drink as often.
^ine Manchet feeds too fat, Milk fills the veins,
New Cheese does nourish, so does flesh of Swine;
^he Dowcets of some beasts, the marrow, brains,
And all sweet tasting flesh, and pleasant wine,
^oft Eggs (a cleanely dish in house of Swains)
Ripe Figs and Raysins, late come from the Vine:
^huse wine you mean shall serve you all the ye^
Well-sauo^d, tasting well, and colored clear.
^iue qualities there are, wines praise advancing,
Strong, Beautiful, and Fragrant, cool and dancing.
White Muskadel, and C^ wine, and Greek,
Do make men's wits and bodies gross and fat;
Red wine does make the voice oft-time to seek,
And has a binding quality to that;
^anarie, and Madera, both are like
To make one lean indeed: (but wot you what)
Who say they make one lean, would make one laffe
They mean, They make one lean upon a staff.
Wine, women, Baths, by Art or Nature warm,
Used or abused do men much good or harm.
Six things, that here in order shall ensue,
Against all poisons have a secret power,
Pear, Garlic, Reddish roots, Nuts, Rape, and Rue,
But Garlic chief; for they that it devour,
May drink, and care not who their drink do brew:
May walk in aires infected every hour.
Since Garlic then has power to save from death,
Bear with it though it make unsavory breath,
And scorn not Garlic, like to some that think,
If only makes men wink, and drink, and stink.
Though all ill savors do not breed infection,
Yet sure infection comes most by smelling,
Who smells still perfumed, his complexion
Is not perfumed by Poet M^tials telling,
Yet for your lodging rooms give this direction,
In houses where you mind to make your dwelling,
That near the same there be no evil sents
^f puddle-waters, or of excrements,
^t air be clear and light, and free from faults,
^at come of secret passages and vaults.
(...) wine have over night a surfeit brought,
^ thing we wish to you should happen seeld:
^hen early in the morning drink a draught,
and that a kind of remedy shall yield,
^ut against all surfets, virtues school has taught
^o make the gift of temperance a shield:
^he better wines do breed the better humors,
The worse, are causes of unwholesome tumors,
In measure drink, let wine be ripe, not thick,
But clear and well alaid, and fresh and quick,
The like advice we give you for your Beer,
We will it be not sour, and yet be stale:
Well boild, of hearty grain, and old and clear,
Nor drink too much nor let it be too stale:
And as there be four seasons in the year,
In each a several order keep you shall.
In Spring your dinner must not much exceed,
In Summers heat but little meat shall need:
In Autumn ware you eat not too much fruit:
With Winters cold full meats do fittest suite.
If in your drink you mingle Rue with Sage,
All poison is expeld by power of those,
And if you would withal Lusts heat assuage,
Add to them two the gentle flower of Rose:
^ Would not be sea-sicke when seas do rage,
Sage-water drink with wine before he goes.
* Salt, Garlic, Parsley, Pepper, Sage, and Wine,
Make sawces for all meats both course and fine,
Of washing of your hands much good does rise,
It Is wholesome, cleanely, and relieues your eyes.
Eat not your bread too stale, nor eat it hot,
A little Leuend, hollow-bak't and light:
Not fresh, of purest grain that can be got,
The crust breeds choler both of brown and white,
Yet let it be well baked or eat it not,
How er'e your taste therein may take delight.
* Porke without wine is not so good to eat,
As Sheep with wine, it medicine is and meat,
Tho Intrailes of a beast be not the best,
^et are some intrailes better then the rest.
^me love to drink new wine not fully fined,
(...) for your health we wish that you drink none,
(...) such to dangerous sluxes are inclined,
^sides, the Lees of wine do breed the stone,
^me to drink only water are assigned,
^t such by our consent shall drink alone.
^r water and small beer we make no question,
^e enemies to health and good digestion:
^d Horace in a verse of his rehearses,
^at Water-drinkers never made good verses.
^he choice of meat to health does much avail,
^rst Veale is wholesome meat, and breeds good blood
(...) Capon, Hen, and Chicken, Partridge, Quail,
^e Phesant, Woodcock, Lark, and Thrush be good,
^he Heath-cocke wholesome is, the dove, the rail,
and all that do not much delight in mud.
^aire swans such love your beauties make me bear you,
that in the dish I easily could forbear you.
^ood sport it is to see a Mallard killed,
^ut with their flesh, your flesh should not be filled,
As choice you make of Foul, so make of Fish,
If so that kind be soft, the great be best,
If firm, then small, and many in a dish:
I need not name, all kinds are in request.
Pike, Trowt, and Perch, from water fresh I wish,
From Sea, Bace, Mullet, Brean, and Souls are best
The Pyke a ravening tyrant is in water,
Yet he on land yields good fish never the later,
If Eeles and Cheese you eat, they make you hoarse
But drink apace thereto, and then no force.
Some love at meals to drink small draughts and often,
But fancy may herein and custom guide,
If Eggs you eat, they must be new and soft.
In Pease good qualities and bad are tried,
To take them with the skin that grows aloft,
They windy be, but good without their hide.
In great consumptions learned Physicions think,
It Is good a Goat or Camels milk to drink,
Cowes-milke and Sheep do well, but yet an Asses
Is best of all, and all the other passes.
Milk is for Agues and for Headache naught,
^t if from Agues fit you feel you free,
^eete-butter wholesome is, as some have taught,
(...) cleanse and purge some pains that inward be.
^ Whay, though it be contemned, yet it is thought
^o scour and cleanse, and purge in due degree:
^ For healthie men may Cheese be wholesome food,
^ut for the weak and sickly it is not good,
^heese is an heavy meat, both gross and cold,
and breeds Costinesse both new and old.
Cheese makes complaint that men on wrong suspicions
Do slander it, and say it does such harm,
That they conceal his many good conditions,
How often it helps a stomach cold to warm,
How fasting it is prescribed by some Physicions,
To those to whom the flux does give alarm:
We see the better sort thereof does eat,
To make as 'twere a period of their meat;
The poorer sort, when other meat is scant,
For hunger eat it to relieve their want.
Although you may drink often while you dine,
Yet after dinner touch not once the cup,
I know that some Physicions do assign
To take some liquor straight before they sup:
But whether this be meant by broth or wine,
A controversy it is not yet taken up:
To close your stomach well, this order suits,
Cheese after flesh, Nuts after fish or fruits.
Yet some have said, (belecue them as you will)
One Nut does good, two hurt, the third does kill.
Some Nut against poison is preservative:
Pears wanting wine, are poison from the tree,
But baked Pears counted are restoratiue,
Raw Pears a poison, baked a medicine be,
Baked Pears a weak dead stomach do revive,
Raw Pears are heavy to digest we see,
Drink after Pears, take after Apples order
To have a place to purge your self of ordure.
Ripe Cherries breed good blood, and help the stone,
If Cherry you do eat and Cherry-stone.
^ole Damsens are, and good for health, by reason
^ey make your intrailes soluble and slack,
^t Peaches steep in wine of newest season,
^uts hurt the teeth, that with their teeth they crack,
^ith every Nut it is good to eat a Raison.
^r though they hurt the spleen, they help the back,
^ plaster made of Figs, by some men's telling,
^s good against all kernels, boyles and swelling,
With Poppy joined, it draws out bones are broken,
By Figs are lice engendered, Lust prouoken.
Eat Medlers, if you have a looseness gotten,
They bind, and yet your urine they augment,
They have one name more fit to be forgotten,
While hard and sound they be, they be not spent,
Good Medlers are not ripe, till seeming rotten,
For meddling much with Medlers some are shent.
New Renish-wine stirs urine, does not bind:
But rather loose the Belly breeding wind,
Ale humors breeds, it adds both flesh and force;
It Is loosing, cool, and vrin does enforce.
Sharp vinegar does cool, withal it dries,
And gives to some ill humor good correction:
It makes one melancholy, hurts their eyes,
Not making fat, nor mending their complexion
It lessons sperme, makes appetite to rise,
Both taste and scent is good against infection,
* The Turnep hurts the stomach, wind it breed^
Stirs urine, hurts his teeth thereon that feedet^
Who much thereof will feed, may wish our Nat^
Would well allow of Claudius proclamation.
It follows now what part of every beast
Is good to eat: first know the Heart is ill,
It is both hard and heavy to digest.
The Tripe with no good juice our flesh does fill:
The Lites are light, yet but in small request:
But outer parts are best in Physics skill.
* If any brains be good, (which is a question)
Hens brain is best and lightest of digestion.
^ In Fennel-seed, this virtue you shall find,
Forth of your lower parts to drive the wind.
(...) ^ennell, virtues four they do recite,
(...) it has power some poisons to expel,
(...), burning Agues it will put to flight,
(...) stomach it does cleanse and comfort well:
(...) fourthly, it does keep and cleanse the sight,
(...) thus the seed and herb does both excel.
(...) for the two last told, if any seed
^h Fennel may compare, it is Annis-seed:
^e Annis-seed be sweet, and some more bitter,
(...) pleasure these, for medicine those are fitter.
^me Natures reason, far surmounts our reading,
^e feel effects the causes often unknown,
^ho knows the cause why Spodium stancheth bleeding?
^podium but ashes of an Oxes bone)
(...) learn herein to praise his power exceeding,
that virtue gave to wood, to herbs, to stone;
^he Liver, Spodium; Mace, the heart delights,
^he brain likes Musk, and Lycoras the Lites;
^he Spleen is thought much comforted with Capers,
^n stomach, Gallingale, always ill vapors.
Sauce would be set with meat upon the table,
Salt is good sauce, and had with great facility:
Salt makes unsavory vyands manducable,
To drive some poisons out, Salt has ability,
Yet things too salt are never commendable:
They hurt the sight, in nature cause debilitie,
The scab and itch on them are ever breeding,
The which on meats too salt are often feeding:
Salt should be first removed, and first set down
At table of the Knight, and of the Clown.
As tastes are diverse, so Physicions hold
They have as sundry qualities and power,
Some burning are, some temperate, some cold,
Cold are these three, the Tart, the Sharp, the sowr^
Salt, bitter, biting, burn as has been told,
Sweet, fat and fresh, are temperate every hour.
* Four special virtues has a sop in wine,
It makes the teeth white, it cleares the eyne,
It adds unto an empty stomach fullness,
And from a stomach filled, it takes the dullness.
(...) to an use you have your self betaken,
(...) any diet, make no sudden change,
^ custom is not easily forsaken,
^a though it better were, yet seems it strange,
^ng use is as a second nature taken,
^ith nature custom walks in equal range,
^ Good diet is a perfect way of curing:
^d worthy much regard and health assuring.
^ King that cannot rule him in his diet,
^ill hardly rule his Realm in peace and quiet.
^y that in Physic will prescribe you food,
^x things must note we here in order touch,
^rst what it is, and then for what it is good,
and when and where, how often, and how much.
^ho note not this, it cannot be with-stood,
^hey hurt, not heal, yet are too many such.
^ Col^rts broth does loose, the substance bind,
^hus play they fast and loose, and all behind:
^ut yet if at one time you take them both,
^he substance shall give place unto the broth.
In Physic Mallows have much reputation,
The very name of Mallow seems to sound,
The root thereof will give a kind purgation,
By them both men and women good have found,
To women's monthly flowers they give laxation,
They make men soluble that have been bound.
And lest we seem in Mallows praises partial,
Long since has Horace praised them and Martial
* The worms that gnaw the womb and never stint,
Are killed, and purged, and driven away with Mint.
But who can write thy worth (O sovereign Sage!)
Some ask how man can die, where thou do grow,
Oh that there were a medicine curing age,
Death comes at last, tho death comes never so slow:
Sage strengths the sinews, seuers heat does swage,
The Palsy helps, and rids of mickle woe.
In Lattin (Salu^) takes the name of safety,
In English (Sage) is rather wise then crafty.
Since then the name betokens wise and saving,
We count it natures friend and worth the having.
^ke Sage and Primrose, Lauender and Cresses,
^ith Walwort that does grow twixt lime and stone,
^r he that of these herbs the juice expresses,
^d mix with powder of a Castor-stone,
^ay breed their ease whom palsy much oppresses,
^r if this breed not help, then look for none.
^ Rue is a noble herb to give it right,
^o chew it fasting, it will purge the sight.
^ne quality thereof yet blame I must,
^t makes men chaste, and women fills with lust.
Fair Ladies, if these Physic rules be true,
That Rue has such strange qualities as these.
Eat little Rue, lest your good husband, (RUE)
And breed between you both a shrewd disease,
Rue whets the wit, and more to pleasure you,
In water boyld, it rids the room of fleas.
I would not to you Ladies, Onyons praise,
Save that they make one fair ( Aesclapius says)
Yet taking them requires some good direction,
They are not good alike for each complexion.
If unto Choler men be much inclined,
It Is thought that Onyons are not good for those,
But if a man be flegmatique (by kind)
It does his stomach good, as some suppose:
For Ointment juice of Onyons is assigned,
To heads whose hair falls faster then it grows:
If Onyons cannot help in such mishap,
A man must get him a Gregorian cap.
And if your hound by hap should bite his master,
With Honey, Rue, and Onyons make a plaster.
The seed of Mustard is the smallest grain,
And yet the force thereof is very great,
It has a present power to purge the brain,
It adds unto the stomach force and heat:
All poison it expels, and it is plain,
With sugar it is a passing sauce for meat.
She that has hap a husband bad to bury,
And is therefore in heart not sad, but merry,
Yet if in show good manners she will keep,
Onyons and Mustard Seed will make her weep.
though Violets smell sweet, Nettles offensive,
^et each in several kind much good procures,
^he first does purge the heavy head and pensive,
^ecouers surfets, falling sickness cures:
^ho Nettles stink, yet make they recompense,
^f your belly by the Collicke pain endures,
Against the Collicke Nettle-seed and honey
Is Physic: better none is had for money.
It breeds sleep stays vomits, fleams does soften,
It helps him of the Gowte that eats it often.
Clean Hysop is an herb to purge and cleanse
Raw flegmes, and hurtful humors from the breast,
The same unto the lungs great comfort lends,
With honey boiled: but far above the rest,
It gives good color, and complexion mends,
And is therefore with women in request:
With Honey mixed, Cinquefoyle cures the Canker,
That eats out inward parts with cruel ranker,
But mixed with wine, it helps a grieved side,
And stays the vomit, and the laske beside.
Ellecompane strengthens each inward part,
A little looseness is thereby prouoken,
It swageth grief of mind, it cheeres the heart,
Allaieth wrath, and makes a man fair spoken:
And drunk with Rue in wine, it does impart
Great help to those that have their bellies broken,
Let them that unto choler much incline,
Drink Penny-royall steeped in their wine.
And some affirm that they have found by trial,
The pain of Gowt is cured by Penny-royall.
To tell all Cresses virtues long it were,
But diverse patients unto that are debtor:
It helps the teeth, it gives to bald men hair,
With Honey mixed, it Ring worms kills and Tetter:
But let not women that would children bear
Feed much thereof, for they to fast were better.
An herb there is takes of the Swallows name,
And by the Swallows gets no little fame,
For Pliny writes (^ho some thereof make doubt)
It helps young Swallows eyes when they are out.
^reene Willow though in scorn it often is used,
^et some are there in it not scornful parts,
^t kills worms, the juice in ears infused,
With Vinegar: the bark destroys warts:
But at one quality I much have mused,
That adds and bates much of his good deserts.
For writers old and new, both ours and foreign,
Affirm the seed make women chaste and barren.
Take Saffron if your heat make glad you will,
But not too much for that the heart may kill.
Green Leekes are good, as some Physicians say,
Yet would I choose how er'e I them believe,
To wear Leekes rather on Saint David's day,
Then eat the Leeke upon Saint David's Eve,
The bleeding at the nose Leekes juice will stay,
And women bearing children much relieve.
* Black Pepper beaten gross you good shall find,
If cold your stomach be, or full of wind:
White Pepper helps the cough, and fleame it riddeth
And Agues fit to come it often forbids.
Our hearing is a choice and dainty sense,
And hard to men, yet soon it may be mard,
These are the things that breed it most offense,
To sleep on stomach full and drinking hard,
Blows, falls, and noise, and fasting violence,
Great heat and sudden cooling afterward;
All these, as is by sundry proofs appearing,
Breed tingling in our ears, and hurt our hearing:
Then think it good advice, not idle talk,
That after Supper bids us stand or walk.
You heard before what is for hearing naught,
Now shall you see what hurtful is for sight:
Wine, women, Bathes, by art to nature wrought,
Leekes, Onions, Garlic, Mustard Seed, fire and light,
Smoke, bruises, dust, Pepper to powder brought,
Beans, Lentiles, strains, Wind, Tears, and Phoebus bright,
And all sharp things our eyesight do molest:
Yet watching hurts them more then all the rest;
* Of Fennel, Veruin, Kellidon, Roses, Rue:
Is water made, that will the sight renew.
(...) in your teeth you hap to be tormented,
(...) mean some little worms therein do breed:
which pain (if heed be taken) may be prevented,
^y keeping clean your teeth when as you feed,
^urne Frankincense (a gum not evil sented)
^t Henbane unto this, and Onyon seed,
and in a Tunnell to the Tooth that is hollow,
^onuey the smoke thereof, and ease shall follow.
^ By Nuts, Oil, Eeles, and cold in head,
^y Apples and raw fruits is hoarsenesse bred.
To show you how to shun raw running Rheumes,
Exceed not much in meat, in drink, and sleep,
For all excess is cause of hurtful fumes,
Eat warm broth warm, strive in your breath to keep,
Use exercise that vapors ill consumes:
In Northern winds abroad do never peep.
If Fistula do rise in any part,
And so procure your danger and your smart,
Take Arsenicke, Brimstone, mixed with Lime and Soap,
And make a tent, and then of cure there is hope.
If so your head do pain you often with aching,
Fair water or small beer drink then or never,
So may you escape the burning fits and shaking
That wonted are to company the Fever.
* If with much heat your head be ill in aching,
To rub your head and temples full persevere,
And make a bath of Morrell (boiled warm)
And it shall keep your head from further harm,
* A Flix dangerous evil is, and common,
In it shun cold, much drink, and strain of women.
To fast in Summer does the body dry,
Yet does it good, if thereto you enure it,
Against a surfeit vomiting to try,
Is remedy, but some cannot endure it.
Yet some so much themselves found help thereby,
They go to sea a purpose to procure it.
^ Four seasons of the year there are in all,
The Summer and the Winter, Spring and Fall:
In every one of these, the rule of reason
Bids keep good diet, suiting every season.
^e spring is moist, of temper good and warm,
^hen best it is to bathe, to sweat, and purge,
^hen may one open a vein in either arm,
(...) boiling blood or fear of agues urge:
^hen Venus recreation does no harm,
^et may too much thereof turn to a scourge.
^n Summers heat (when choler has dominion)
^oole meats and moist are best in some opinion:
^he Fall is like the Spring, but ends colder,
With Wines and Spice the Winter may be bolder.
Now if perhaps some have desire to know,
The number of our bones, our teeth, our veins,
This verse ensuing plainly does it show,
To him that does observe, it takes pains:
The teeth thrice ten, and two, twice eight arow.
Eleu'n score bones save one in us remains:
For veins, that all may vain in us appear,
A vein we have for each day in the year:
All these are like in number and connection.
The difference grows in bigness and complexion.
Four humors reign within our bodies wholly,
And these compared to four Elements,
The Sanguine, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy,
The latter two are heavy, dull of sense,
The Other two are more Iouiall, quick and Jolly,
And may be likened thus without offense,
Like air both warm and moist, is Sanguine clea^
Like fire does Choler hot and dry appear.
Like water cold and moist is Flegmatique,
The Melancholy cold, dry earth is like.
Complexions cannot virtue breed or vice,
Yet may they unto both give inclination,
The Sanguine game-some is, and nothing nice,
Love Wine, and Women, and all recreation,
Likes pleasant tales, and news, plays, cards and dice
Fit for all company, and every fashion:
Though bold, not apt to take offense, not irefull,
But bountiful and kind, and looking cheerful:
Inclining to be fat, and prone to laughter,
Loves mirth, and Music, cares not what comes after
^rpe Choler is an humor most pernicious,
(...) violent, and fierce, and full of fire,
(...) quick conceit, and therewithal ambitious,
^ir thoughts to greater fortunes still aspire,
^ud, bountiful enough, yet often malicious,
^ight bold speaker, and as bold a liar,
(...) little cause to anger great inclined,
^ch eating still, yet ever looking pined:
(...) younger years they use to grow apace,
(...) Elder hairie on their breast and face.
^he Flegmatique are most of no great growth,
^clining to be rather fat and square:
Given much unto their ease, to rest and sloth,
Content in knowledge to take little share,
To put themselves to any pain most loath.
So dead their spirits, so dull their senses are:
Still either sitting, like to folk that dream,
Or else still spitting, to avoid the phlegm:
One quality does yet these harms repair,
That for the most part Flegmatique are fair.
The Melancholy from the rest do vary,
Both sport and ease, and company refusing,
Exceeding studious, ever solitary,
Inclining pensive still to be, and musing,
A secret hate to others apt to carry:
Most constant in his choice, tho long a choosing,
Extreme in love sometime, yet seldom lustful,
Suspicious in his nature, and mistrustfull,
A wary wit, a hand much given to sparing,
A heavy look, a spirit little daring.
Now though we give these humors several names
Yet all men are of all participant,
But all have not in quantity the same,
For some (in some) are more predominant,
The color shows from whence it lightly came,
Or whether they have blood too much or want.
The watrie Flegmatique are fair and white,
The Sanguine Roses joined to Lillies bright,
The Chollerick more red; the Melancholy,
Alluding to their name, are swart and colly.
^f Sanguine humor do too much abound,
These signs will be thereof appearing chief,
The face will swell, the cheeks grow red and round
With staring eyes, the pulse beat soft and brief,
The veins exceed, the belly will be bound,
The temples and the forehead full of grief,
Unquiet sleeps, that so strange dreams will make
To cause one blush to tell when he does wake:
Besides the moisture of the mouth and spittle,
Will taste too sweet, and seem the throat to tickle
If Choler do exceed, as may sometimes,
Your ears will ring, and make you to be wakefull,
Your tongue will seem all rough, and oftentimes
Cause vomits, unaccustomed and hateful.
Great thirst, your excrements are full of slime,
The stomach squeamish, sustenance ungrateful:
Your appetite will seem in naught delighting,
Your heart still grieved with continual biting,
The pulse beat hard and swift, all hot extreme,
Your spittle sour, of fire-worke often you dream.
If Phlegm abundance have due limits past,
These signs are here set down will plainly she^
The mouth will seem to you quite out of taste,
And apt with moisture still to ouer-flow:
Your sides will seem all sore down to the wast,
Your meat wax loathsome, your digestion slow:
Your head and stomach both in so ill taking,
One seeming ever griping the other aching:
With empty veins the pulse beat slow and soft,
In sleep, of Seas and rivers dreaming often.
But if that dangerous humor ouer-raigne,
Of Melancholy, sometime making mad,
These tokens then will be appearing plain,
The pulse beat hard, the color dark and bad:
The water thin, a weak fantastic brain,
False grounded joy, or else perpetual sad;
Affrighted oftentimes with dreams like visions,
Presenting to the thoughts ill apparitions,
Of bitter belches from the stomach coming,
His ear (the left especial) ever burning.
^inst these several humors ouerflowing,
(...) several kinds of Physic may be good,
(...) diet, drink, hot baths, whence sweat is growing
^th purging, vomiting, and letting blood:
^ich taken, in due time, not ouerflowing,
^ch malladies infection is withstood.
^e last of these is best, if skill and reason,
^spect age, strength, quantity, and season,
^f seventy from seventeen, if blood abound,
^he opening of a vein is healthful found.
Of Bleeding many profits grow and great,
The spirits and senses are renewed thereby:
Tho these men slowly by the strength of meat,
But these with wine restored are by and by.
By bleeding, to the marrow comes heat,
It makes clean your brain, relieues your eye,
It mends your appetite, restores sleep,
Correcting humors that do waking keep:
All inward parts and senses also clearing,
It mends the voice, touch, smell and taste, and hearing.
Three special Months (September, April, May)
There are, in which it is good to open a vein;
In these 3 Months the Moon bears greatest swa^
Then old or young that store of blood contain,
May bleed now, though some older wizards say
Some days are ill in these, I hold it vain:
September, April, May, have days a piece,
That bleeding do forbid, and eating Geese,
And those are they forsooth of May the first,
Of other two, the last of each are worst.
But yet those days I grant, and all the rest,
Have in some cases just impediment:
As first, if nature be with cold oppressed,
Or if the Region, I Will, or Continent
Do scorch or freize, if stomach meat detest:
If Baths or Venus late you did frequent,
Nor old, nor young, nor drinkers great are fit,
No^ in long sickness, nor in raging fit,
Or in this case if you will venture bleeding,
The quantity must then be most exceeding.
^hen you to bleed intend, you must prepare
^me needful things both after and before,
^arme water and sweet oil, both needful are,
^d wine, the fainting spirit to restore:
^e binding clothes of linen, and beware,
^at all the morning you do sleep no more:
^me gentle motion helps after bleeding,
^d on light meats a spare and temperate feeding:
^o bleed does cheer the pensive, and remove
^he raging suries bred by burning love.
^ake your incision large and not too deep,
that blood have speedy issue with the fume,
^o that from sinews you all hurt do keep,
^or may you (as I touched before) presume
(...) six ensuing hours at all to sleep,
^est some slight bruise in sleep cause an apostume:
^ate not of milk, nor ought of milk compounded,
Nor let your brain with much drink be confounded
^ate no cold meats, for such the strength impaires,
and shun all misty and v^holesome aires.
Besides the former rules for such as pleases,
Of letting blood to take more observation,
Know in beginning of all sharp diseases,
It Is counted best to make euacuation:
To^ old, to^ young, both letting blood displeases.
By years and sickness make your computation.
First in the Spring for quantity, you shall,
Of blood take twice as much as in the Fall:
In Spring and Summer let the right arm blood,
The Fall and Winter for the left are good.
The Heart and Liver, Spring and Summers bleeding*
The Fall and Winter, hand and foot does mend,
One vein cut in the hand, does help exceeding,
Unto the spleen, voice, breast, and intrailes lend,
And swages griefs that in the heart are breeding.
But here the Salerne School does make an end:
And here I cease to write, but will not cease
To wish you hue in health, and die in peace:
And ye our Physic rules that friendly read,
God grant that Physic you may never need.
FINIS.
De valetudine conseruanda, OR ^HE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH, OR A DIET FOR THE
HEALTHFVLL MAN. Collected out of HENRICUS RONSOVIVS, which he wrought for the
use of his Sons: And now published for the help of all those, that desire
their own HEALTHS.

By S. H.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby, for the Widow Helmes. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful SIR EDWARD PIT, Knight, of Keere Court, one of his
MAJESTY'S Justices of Peace, in the County of Worcester, etc. And to the right
Worshipful SIR JAMES PIT, his Son.
AMongst all the parts of physic (Right Worshipful) I suppose there is none
to be preferred before that part, which preserves health, and preuenteth
sickness, for as Tully says, Health is the most perfect state of man's body in
this life, and the only end and intention, whereunto the Physician diuerteth
all his doings, which state to continue and to enjoy, is much better then to
hazard the recovery of a sickness, that by ill diet is taken, as it is better
to stand fast, ^hen to fall, and rise again; and better to ^epe still a
Fortress or a Castle, then when we have suffered the Enemy to enter, to rescue
it again, for as the Poet says: Aegrius eijcitur quam non admittitur hospes.


And because as Cornelius Celsus says, that all medicines do in a manner hurt
the stomach, and be of evil nutriment. And therefore Aesclipiades did endeavor
most to cure his Patients by diet; which diet, Right Worshipful, I have here
described and published to the view of the world, and have sheltered it under
the title of your Name, praying you to accept the same with a willing mind,
considering that I have no better thing to present you with: And as that
Persian Monarch did dayne to receive from a poor man a handful of cold water,
so your Worship will accept this poor labor, which I now present you with,
which shall encourage me hereafter to present you with some other labors of
more worth. In the mean while, I humbly take my leave, committing both you and
all yours unto the protection of the Almighty.

Your Worships most obseruant S. H.

THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH, OR A DIET FOR THE HEALTHFVL MAN.
CHAP. I. The causes of corruption and destruction of our humane bodies.
THAT we may come to our purpose, the first and chiefest cause of corruption
and destruction of our Bodies, of old Age, Death, and all other miseries, which
do happen unto us in this life, is the fall of our first Parents, and the
relics of Sin, remaining in our corrupt Nature, as the Apostle does
witness in the eighth Chapter of the Romans: Corpus nostrum, morti destinatum
est propter pcccatum. For, even as death is the last of all evils, which may
afflict us in this life; even so, by the name of Death we endure in this life
all miseries and afflictions; Heere-hence come our errors which lead us by
our blind will, and through the persuasion of the Devil drive us to commit
all wickedness and evil, whereby we accumulate and heap up the just wrath and
indignation of God, to afflict us with every kind of disease, misery, and
calamity.

Another cause of diseases, destruction, and deprauation of our bodies, is the
sinister and maleuolent influence of the celestial Planets, and the
infelicitie of our temperaments: for, as in every thing there are certain
natural properties, which God from everlasting has endued with natural
effects; so every effect and virtue is incited in our bodies from Heaven, which
God created not only in a certain order and greatness, that we should
discern the Years, Days, and Months, but that there should be signs also
from whence we might take certain Arguments of things to come.

For the inferior bodies do depend upon the Superior, and are contained in a
certain mutual knowledge amongst themselves; for the Superior does infuse a
certain secret force and virtue into the Inferior bodies, by which the humors
of our bodies are changed, increased, and diminished according to the placing
and quality of the Stars: and this is more clearly and evidently taught us
by daily experience the Mistress of all things, then that it needs farther
demonstration. If no man will give credit to our words, let him consider the
Moon which does challenge unto her self the chief dominion in Humors, and
they shall well perceive their error. Seeing then it is manifest, that the
humors of our bodies are governed by the Superior bodies: And of the evil
humors of our bodies to grow Diseases, and from disease death; therefore not
unworthily of death: and the cause of other diseases to depend in some part
upon the celestial bodies, is declared.

Besides this there are two other kinds of causes, that do change and destroy
our bodies, which do grow from the superior Planets.

One kind is that, that is engendered with us, and is therefore said to be
Interne, necessary, and inevitable, and they are in number three, that is,
Dryness, which by the course of Age brings to death, a daily wasting of
substance, or the great variety and mobilitie of the matter in our bodies, and
the abundance of excrements.

Another kind of them are, which happen outward, and therefore are called
Externe, of which the reason is said to be twofold, for some of them are which
does not change or affect our bodies of necessity; for although when these
things happen, their hurt may be by us avoided, notwithstanding, there are some
of them that our life may be safe without them. They are such things which do
bruise, hurt, and wound our bodies, which for the most part happens by some
outward force, as in the wars, and other cases of Fortune, as either being
drowned or made away with poison.

There are other things also, which are said of necessity to alter Man's body,
which although we may avoid particularly, yet generally we cannot, when we
cannot live without them. These things, I say, do destroy and overthrow the
temperature, constitution, and natural health of man, if they be not rightly
used as necessity and the state of the body requires. And those are those six
things, which are called not natural, which we will consider in particular;
which six things are placed in our power and election, and they are of six
kinds.

1.
The first is, Air, Water, and Fire.

2.
The second is, Meat and Drink, and all those things which are given the body
for nourishment.

3.
The third is, Motion and Rest, both of the whole body, as of every part thereof.

4.
The fourth is, Sleep and Watchfulness.

5.
The fifth is, Excretion or Expulsion of excrements or retention, under which is
contained the opening of a vein, Purgation, Vomit, avoiding of Urin, Sweat,
Bathing, the act of Generation, and such like.

6
The sixth are, the Symptoms, Perturbations, Affections or Accidents of the
mind, such as are Fear, Anger, Sorrow, Joy, and such like, of which we will
speak more afterward.

These things being duly and rightly used, do conserve man in good health,
but used contrarily, they destroy; for, as health does consist in a mean and a
mediocritie, so also in a mean use of things necessary it is conserved.

CHAP. II. General precepts to conserve the Health.
I Have declared unto you the chief causes, through which the diverse
mutations, destructions, and corruptions of our bodies do arise. Now, on the
contrary I will declare unto you also those things, which if we use them in
right order and manner, do contain the safety of life, restore health lost,
and diminish some kinds of diseases and expel them.

For this thing it is first needful and requisite, that you know certainly
and be sure of, that although the celestial bodies do exercise a certain
force and admirable virtue, in the affairs of Man, yet notwithstanding, GOD
Almighty, the Worke-man and Creator of all Nature and Humane things, being the
Lord of Life and Death, who has the government of all Inferior bodies that
cannot be removed, but that he does govern and rule the influence of all Stars
and Planets, and remove the course and efficacy of them; and likewise does
moderate all inclinations that grow from the Planets, and oftentimes according
to his great goodness, does turn away diseases, and change them into better:
sometimes also according to his secret and just judgment for our sins, to
exasperate and turn them into worse.

For the divine Majesty is not in the Stars, which the Godhead has framed
for the profit and conservation of mankind, neither is it enclosed within a
certain fatal necessity, as it were shut up in prison, but does work
freely, and as the chief cause does govern and moderate all other causes.
This therefore eternal God, the most loving Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which proroged the life of King Hazechias for fifteen years, is humbly to be
prayed unto daily, that he would bestow upon us also a long and a safe life,
with a right constitution as well of body as strength of mind, and to preserve
the same: for rightly is it said: Astra valent aliquid, plus pia vota valent,
Astra regunt mundum, sed regit astra Deus.
Cedunt astra Deo, precibus Deus ipse piorum.
Next, when for our sins our bodies are affected with often and diverse kinds
of diseases, we must carefully strive that we govern the inclinations and
wandering motions of our minds, and that we use a bridle to our outward
members, and that we do not only fly wickedness, but that we avoid the
occasions also thereof. It becomes you, my dear Sons, to use this
diligence in the government of your life and manners, and chiefly to embrace
true Religion, and due obedience and love to your Parents, which if you shall
do, God will in like manner, as he has promised in the Decalogue, give unto
you happiness and long life: for as S. Paul says truly in the 1. of Tim. 4.
Pietas ad omnia vtilis est, etc. Godliness is profitable unto all things,
which has the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come: the
which in some manner was understood by an Ethnic, Zoroaster King of the
Bactrians, where he says, Qui mentem ardenum ad opus pietatis intenderit,
labile corpus seruabit: and Cicero says, Pietatem esse matrem, and fundamentum
omnium virtutum: That Godliness is the mother and foundation of all virtues.
Secondly, when it is said, that the Stars be the working causes of
destruction and mutation, and the causes of diverse diseases in our bodies: and
whereas the observation of the celestial effects is not forbidden, I will that
you take this care, that as well the yearly directions, as the figures of your
nativity be observed, which I have diligently and exactly computated, I leave
to every one of you: which notwithstanding you shall examine without all
superstition, and shall be advised by the judgment of the learned Astrologians
and Physicians, that you may the better avoid the evil foreseen, and the good
things shall be brought to their wished event, for that is true which some do
affirm, that coelum esse fatalem picturam in coel^sti tabula; and very well
was it said by Hipp. and Galen, the Princes of Physicians, that the Art of
physic, without the supportation of the Heavens, to be oftentimes in vain,
yea also oftentimes to be hurtful.

This observation does profit very much for the preservation of the health, and
for the prevention of diseases; therefore you must regard the more your
natural inclination, with the greater vigilance, that you may be the better
able to govern your manners, and the events of which we are admonished by
Astrologers, and which we foreknow, we may the more easier bear. Avoid and
decline them more wisely, that you may seem to pass them over prouidently and
discreetly, without grief or tediousness: for, free will and election is left
to us, so farforth that by the help of God, a mind supported, may be able to
resist the allurements of the Flesh and the Devil, to rule and govern the
affections* and if some great calamity against an^ man may be presaged and
declared by the Stars, we may be able to fly and avoid it; notwithstanding
in which matter ^ would that you should regard the couns^ of honesty: for if
we may fly and auoi^ the peril that hangs over our heads, without shame, we
shall not refuse it, for better is it with honesty to die quickly, then with
shame to live long: therefore, we must think that Reason, and the best
Intellect, to be governed by the Heavens, neither is the liberty of the mind,
and our actions, restrained to the necessity of the Stars.

Hitherto in general, we have briefly declared, by what means we may defend
us from evils, and diseases of every kind: and to defend us from the other
destructions of our bodies, which diligence, if the children of God shall
diligently invoke him, they shall happily avoid them.

Now, that we may follow our purpose, I will entreat of those things, which in
some manner rests in our industry, of which if we use them rightly and
lawfully we shall nourish health, and conserve it, but otherwise we shall
overthrow and destroy it.

CHAP. III. Special precepts of preserving Health.
THat we may begin from the definition, Health is a constitution of the body,
in which we are neither tormented with griefs, nor hindered in the actions of
our life, for if the body shall decline from that constitution, it is
sickness: to perserue health, according to Rasis in Almansore, is in motion
and rest, meat and drink, neither to observe a just measure in superfluities
and expulsions, the house and other places wherein we live, to be made sweet
with odors, according as reason requires, and agreeing with the time, and to
meet with evil accidents before they take their increase, and to refrain
voluptuousness and delightful pleasures, and to conserve custom. Cicero
says, That health is preserved with the knowledge of a man's own body, as well
in those things which are wont to profit as hurt, for in those things in which
consists conservation, from them corruption springs, for as conservation is
made by the like thing, so curation is made by its contrary a little otherwise
says Isidore, where he says, Eam esse integritatem corporis, and temperantiam
naturae ex calido and humido, in quibus cum illa consistit. Sequitur, qui
plurimum calidi and humidi habent, hos maxim esse longaeuos: qui vero
contrariae sunt naturae, frigidi and sirci, hos citius senescere and mori.

For as healthful men are governed by the four Humors, so the infirm are
hurt, and when humors increase more then of equity they should, they bring
forth sickness: so those that are by nature only gross, do sooner die then
thinner bodies, for they have little blood and spirits. But as the conservation
of health does consist in the order of every thing, being lawfully used, the
just quality, quantity, and time being observed, we have spoken of: Now of
the air that does incompasse our bodies, we will speak of.

CHAP. IIII. Of the air.
THe air by it self is hot and moist, and the attraction thereof is so
necessary unto all living creatures, that if the ways of respiration be
intercepted, and occluded, they presently die, and all of us have experience,
that the constitution of the body is often changed, either by the temperature
or distemperature of the air: therefore we must provide with all our study, to
choose the best air, as much as may be.

For that is the best air which to every one is native, for as the
Philosopher says, Vniuscuiusque locus naturalis sui est locati conseruantius:
besides, a temperate air, pure, clear, and thin, which lies open, and is
free from stinkes, infection, or putrefaction; is to be chosen. And on the
contrary, that air is most bad and hurtful, which is troublesome, cloudie,
impure, stinking, showrie, putride, close, which neither wind nor Sun does
penetrate, nor purge: in like manner, that is good air, which takes neither
venenosity, nor other malign^ quality, through the standing waters which in
the Summer time are corrupte^ with a pestilent air, or with the vapor o^
exhalations, or infected with foeculent excretions: so that air is most
maliciou^ which springs from dunghills, sincke^ and other pestiferous places,
which dot^ oppress the heart, and make a difficulty (...) breathing, which is
over hot, or over cold, for an hot air dissolueth the spirits, it generateth
thirst, it diminishes the vital faculties, and hinders digestion. A cold
air does engender the Asthma and Catarrhes: and as this impure air does
vitiat the vital spirits, so must we be careful by all means to beware of
it; so then we must draw an air that is pure and temperate, for except a good
air be drawn in daily, whereby our natural heat may be ventilated, tempered
and cooled, our health must needs be troubled and endangered, of which it
appears, where it is said: Satius esse sub dio versari, quam
Cubiculis vndique clausis immorari.


It behooves also for us to observe this thing, that in cold seasons it shall
be fit to use an hot air, or fire for hot things in a cold time: moist in a
dry, and dry in a moist air, is chiefly fitting and agreeing: also in daily
diseases, we see it is sometimes very profitable to change the air, for
sometimes change of air and place does recover health that is lost. But
whereas the air oftentimes is moved and changed with the winds, and odors,
for the wind is no other thing then the air moved with the stirring and
provoking of vapors, of which, and of sweet smells, it shall not be amiss
somewhat to speak of.

Of winds, and sweet smelling savors.
THe North Wind of al other is accounted the best and wholesomest, and the East
does challenge to it self the next place, and what wind soever does
moderately cool, does dry and make clear our habitations: therefore it must
be toward the North and East, for the temperature of the air and the wind;
for too much wind is hurtful very much to the sense, both of the lungs, the
eyes and ears: but that which attaineth to odoraments, and sweet smells: it is
manifest, as it were, the air to be nourished by the spirits, but most
quickly by odors the brain and heart is strengthened, and the mind refreshed;
which refreshment the body also does feel the pleasure and recreation.

A naughty stinking air, is corrected and amended by odoraments and
suffumigations; but there is a very great difference: for look what air we
draw in, such and the like spirits go out from us.

Odors and smells that are oner-hot, are not by me approved, because it fills
the head, and ingendreth the catarrh, for the temperature it self of the
brain, being a mean between hot and cold, does chiefly rejoice in things
that are temperate: and on the other side it is much offended and hurt by the
contrary: therefore sometimes those odors are to be mixed and changed, as if
cold does reign, let the odors decline to heat; and if heat does bear sway,
then frame that they may be of cold operation.

Of Roses therefore, Violets and Myrtels, Campher, Sanders and Rose Water,
which are cold things: on the other side, of Cinnamon, Citron rynds, Orange
peeles, Aloes, Amber, Musk, which are hot; of which you may use at your
pleasure. Odors are not only drawn by the nostrills, but there must be
application to the breast and stomach, Treacle, Mithridate, Frankincence,
Amber, Angelica, and such like, which are thought to have virtue against
venom: no less comfort to recreate your spirits, arises out of gardens,
where-hence arises sweet smells and savors: also to use sweet smelling
herbs, flowers and rushes at the time of the year, convenient to the
constitution and state of the body, and to cast about the court, and in the
chambers, the leaves of Withies, of Roses, Violets, Vine-leaues, Origanum,
wild Time, Time, Lauender, Myrtils, Quinces, Pears, the flowers of Orenges,
Pomegranates, and other such like: and also to sprinkle the chamber with
Rose Water, or the water of the flowers of Orenges, and other like: also to
euaporate the place with vinegar, and sometimes also in your chambers to burn
perfumes, fragrant and sweet smelling.

What sweet smells, fumes or torches I am wont to use; I will here set down,
that having a care to the temperature and state of the body, you may use also.

A description of an odoriferous water.
TAke an equal weight of Rose Water, with the best white wine, Rose-viniger
the fourth part, Suger-candie, a third part; dissolve it in those things; some
add a little Saffron: with this water wash the hands and face, the joints and
eyes, and therewith cleanse the teeth, and besprinkle the rest of the clothes.

CHAP. V. Of Meats and Drinks.
IN meat and drink we must consider these six things, first, the Substance:
then the Quantity: third, the Quality: fourth, Custom: fifth, the Time: and
lastly, Order. We must also understand, that it is best and most wholesome to
use meats that be simple: for meats that be simple are most wholesome and
profitable; but many and sundry sorts of meats are very unhealthful and
hurtful to our bodies: our elders, which lived very long, and without
sickness, were wont to eat at one meal flesh only, and at another bread
only: yet would I not wish you (my sons) to accustom your selves to one only
meat, especially if you be young; for Galen expounding the Aphorism of Hipp.
says, That such things as we have of long time been used to, although they
be not of the best nourishment, they are not so dangerous as other things
which are far better, whereunto we have not been accustomed: we must
therefore now and then alter our diet, and use to eat such meats as before
we used not; neither must we bind our selves to any one kind, lest we be
driven at any time to change our custom, and so we fall sick presently
thereupon. Cornelius Celsus, a good Physicion, gives counsel, that such as
be in health, should use their ordinary fore, and plain usual diet: and to
forbear much variety of meats, is best and wholesomest, because the stomach
set a work, too too much labors, greatly in the digesture of sundry meats
at one time. It is thought good to mix moist with dry things, cold with hot,
and hot with cold; and those meats which are in the mean or mediocritie of all
excess, to be most commendable: of which sort, is bread made of clean corn,
sufficiently leauened and moderately baked. Also the flesh of Hens and Capons,
Phesants, Partriges, Woodcocks, young Pigeons, Blackbirds, Thrushes, Turtles,
and such like small birds. In like manner Fishes bred amongst rocks and stones,
or about the sea side, and such as in taste are neither unpleasant and
unsavory, nor yet clammie and unctious, of the which we will speak
particularly hereafter. Now in meats, nothing so well increases good blood, as
when they are well digested, for thereby is ended more easily the second
concoction, which is in the veins and liver, and also admits the third
digestion, which is in the particular members and parts which be nourished.
Also there be some meats, between whom there is but small difference of
digestion, as is between a Hen and a sucking Calfe, a Chicken and a Kid, the
flesh of an old Calfe and a young Bullock: in such respects as these, where the
difference is so small, it skilleth not greatly, if they which be somewhat hard
to digest, be eaten before that which is of lighter digestion. And this, I
suppose, was the opinion of Galen, for heavy meats, and such as be slow of
digestion, require a stronger and greater power digestive: therefore meats of
easy digestion are first to be taken, before those which do differ so far
from them in easiness of concoction.

And also you must take heed of crude and raw meats, and that the same be
both thoroughly boiled or roasted, but in any wise beware of stuffing of your
selves too much with meat and drink, nor to irritate and provoke your
appetite with delicious sawces, for meats excessiuely eaten, although they be
of good nourishment, commonly they do engender crudities, lasks, and vomits.
Again, to take less then necessity and nature does require, is the cause why
the body is not nourished, but weakened and made unable to do his business:
for even as repletum hinders nourishment and hurts nature, so all sorts of
too much abstinence causes vomits, hurts the stomach, resolves the powers
of the body, and increases ill humors. And even as an ill diet brings
heaviness to the body, and dullness to the senses, so a good diet refreshes
the spirits and reuiueth the mind, making it more able and active to know and
practice virtues operations.

Of Drink.
COncerning drink at meals, it would not be taken before something has been
eaten, and at the beginning the drink would be strongest, and so toward the
end more small, if it be Ale or Beer. And if it be Wine, more and more allayed
with Water, and the best Physicians hold, the drink would rather be mixed with
the meat by sundry small draughts, then with one great draught at the end of
the meal, for the mixture tempereth well the meat without hindrance. A great
draught drowneth the meat, and hurts natural heat, that then works in
concoction, and with the weight drives down the meat ouer-hastily. Hot wines
and sweet or co^fectioned with spices, or very strong Ale or Beer is not good
at meals, for thereby the meat is rather corrupted then digested, and they
make hot and stinking vapors to ascend up to the brains; thus I suppose, I
have spoken enough of meat and drink: I will now end with the counsel of
Cornelius Celsus, which says, that a healthful man shall not bind himself
to the rules of physic or diet, but a man whose stomach is feeble, there ought
to be a greater regard that the meat be such, as that either in quality or
quantity nature be not rebuked or to much oppressed.

CHAP. VI. Of Exercise and Labor.
BEcause a great part of health does consist in ^ fit and convenient exercise
of the body, as Auicen, Hippocrates, and Galen, do witness, it is therefore
needful to have a diligent and careful consideration thereunto: labor then
or exercise is a vehement moving, the end whereof is the alteration of the
breath or wind of man: of exercise do proceed many commodities: And
especially three, the first is hardness and strength of the members, whereby
labor shall the less grieve, and the body be more strengthened to endure
labor. And that exercise or labor does strengthen the body, as Galen
witnesses in his book de Sanitate tuenda. It is proved by experience in
laborers, who for the most part be stronger then men that live at ease, and
can endure greater toil, as may be observed in the example of Milo
Crotoniatos, who by the use of carrying a Calfe every day certain furlongs,
was able to carry the same being a Bull. The second commodity of labor is,
the increase of heat, whereby happens the more alteration of things to be
digested; also more quick alteration and better nourishment. The third is more
violence of the breath or wind, whereby the pores are cleansed, and the
excrements of the body naturally expelled. These things are so necessary to the
preservation of health, that without them no man may long be without sickness:
for as the flowing water does not lightly corrupt, but that which stands
still, even so, bodies exercised are for the most part more helthfull, and such
as be idle more subject to sickness, according to the saying of the Poer Ovid,
Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus,
Vt capiunt vitium ni moucantur aquae.
The which thing also Cornelius Celsus affirms, where he says, Slothfulness
dulleth the body, it is strengthened by labor, the one does make us soon old,
the other does make us long young.

Notwithstanding in exercise ought four things to be considered, that is to
say, the Time, the things preceding the Quality, and the quantity of
exercise. As concerning the time convenient to exercise in, there ought four
things to be diligently considered, first, the time, the things preceding the
quality, and the quantity of exercise. First, as concerning the time, that the
stomach and bowels be ouer-burdened, and the meat not digested, or the humors
crude or raw, lest thereby peril might follow by their conueyance into all
the members. Galen does say, that the time most fit for exercise, is when both
the first and second digestion is fulfilled, as well in the stomach as in the
veins, and that a desire of eating does draw near: for if the exercise be
sooner or later, the body shall either be filled with raw and crude humors, or
else yellow choler shall be increased. The knowledge of this time is well
known by the color of the Urine, for that which is like unto clear water,
shows that the Juice which comes from the stomach, is crude and raw in the
veins: that which is well colored, neither too high or too low, shows that
the second digestion is performed perfectly: where the color is very high or
red, it declares the concoction is too much. Wherefore, when the Urine
appears in a temperate color, neither too red nor too pale, but as it were,
gilt, then should we begin our exercise.

CHAP. VII. Of Sleep and Watch.
THe commodities of moderate sleep, do appear by this, that natural heat
which is busied about the matter, whereof proceeds nourishment, is comforted
in the places of digestion, and so the digestion is made better and more
perfect by sleep, the body is fatter, and the mind more quiet, the humors
more temperate. But by much watch all things happen the clean contrary. The
moderation of sleep must be measured by health and sickness, by age, time,
emptiness, or fullness of the body, and by natural complexions: as first to
a man in health, having no weakness of nature, and a perfect digesture of the
meat he eats, a little sleep is sufficient, but to them which have weak
stomakes, the sleep may be the longer. In like manner, temperance is required
both in youth and age at all seasons, winter and Summer. The body being full of
ill humors, very little sleep is sufficient, except the humors be crude and
raw, for then sleep is necessary, which digesteth them better then labor.

In like manner, where the body is long empty, by long sickness or abstinence,
sleep comfort nature as well in the principal members, as in all the other.
As for the length of sleep, al Authors do agree, that to strong bodies, seven
hours in the night is sufficient, and to those that are weaker, eight hours
is enough at the most. Plato in Timaeo, says, When the world shuts up her
eye, we should also close up our eyes: the eye of the world is the Sun,
therefore sleep is not long to be deserred after the Sun setting, neither
presently after supper can sleep be wholesome, for as Galen says in lib.
Aphorismorum, a cibis ad some number conuersis, caput impletur. Moreover,
immoderate sleep makes the body apt to Palsies, Apoplexies,
Falling Sickness, Rhumes and Apostumes: also it makes a dull wit, and a slow
body, and unapt to honest exercise: as also immoderate watch dries too much
the body, and does weake^ the Animal powers, hinders digestion, and makes
the body apt to co^sumptions. Wherefore, in these two things, as well as all
other, a diligent care is to be used, the moderation is best coniected (for it
is hard perfectly to know it) by the sensible lightness of all the body,
especially of the brain, the brows, and the eyes, the passage down of the
meat from the stomach, the will to make Urine, and to go to the stool:
contrariwise heaviness in the body, and also in the eyes, and savor of the
mean before eaten, does signify that the sleep was not sufficient. They that
are in health, must first sleep on the right side, because the meat may come
to the liver, which is to the stomach as a fire under the pot, and thereby is
digested. To them which have but weak digestion, it is good to sleep
prostrate on their bellies, or to have their pare hands on their stomachs, and
to lie upright on the back, is to be utterly abhorred.

CHAP. VIII. Of Accidents and Affections of the mind.
THose things being already declared, by the which the health of the body is
to be preserved: I will now proceed to the Physike of the mind: for as the
perturbations of the mind do follow the passions of the body, as we may see
and behold in drunkards, as Horace says, -- nam corpus onustum
Hesternis vitijs animum quoque praegrauat ipsum
Atque affligit humi aiuinae particulam aurae.


So on the other side, the body is affected from the passions of the mind, and
is said therewith to consent, as is manifest in the affects of love and sorrow.
And seeing therefore the passions of the mind, and body, are so conioined and
linked together with a natural band, we must as Auicen says, have a diligent
care to our mind, if we desire to avoid diseases, which also Galen held before
him, saying, that we must abstain from the intemperance and deformity of all
the passions and affections of the mind: anger and sorrow, furiousness and
fear, envy and thought, do alienate and bring a man from the use of reason,
and do greatly transform him from the state and order, that is according to
nature, for moderate mirth helps very much to accomplish all the offices and
functions of the mind, to further and make excellent the concoction. As on the
contrary, sorrow and heaviness is the greatest hinderance and let to it:
beware therefore of heaviness and desperation, for as Solomon says, Spiritus
tristis exiccat ossa: cor laetum exhilerat mentem. Therefore give your selves
to honest mirth and Christianlike joy: for as Auicen says, the often use of
mirth disposes a man to be merry, and thereof comes no small profit, but
commodities very many. Sorrow also is so great an Enemy to nature and bodily
health, that to resist the malice and the violence thereof, remedies as well
out of the holy Scripture, as examples out of moral Philosophy are needful.
Also there be certain herbs, fruits, and spices, that have the property to
resist melancholy, and to comfort the lively spirits. Such are simples that do
comfort the heart and spirits: as for example, the beholding of fair shows
and things that are beautiful, the hearing of melodious music, smelling of
sweet savors and fragrant odors, such as in the Summer, the smell of
Rose Water; and in Winter with the smell of Lignum Aloes, which does comfort
the heart and the brain, and all the other senses very much. But beware of too
hot and sharp savors, for they send vapors to the brain. The tasting, as
that which is confected of Sugar, and the juice of Pomegranates, of Quinces, or
some other of like temperature, being not harmefull, neither exceeding in the
excess of any quality.

CHAP. IX. Of Joy.
Joy or gladness of heart does prolong the life, it makes the body fat, that
is grown lean with care and trouble: And look what effect happens by sorrow,
the same happens by sudden joy. And Valerius Maximus reports, that a Woman
of Rome dyed with suddayne joy. This being considered, we must avoid such
extraordinary gladness and suddayne joy. And we must remember that there is
nothing in this world can rejoice us so much, but that some occasion or other
may cause the same to be displeasant unto us.

CHAP. X. Of Venus or the act of generation.
NOw that I have spoken of Labor, Meat, Drink, and Sleep, it now rests
that I speak somewhat of the act of Generation, which delectation must be well
measured by a mean: for if it do exceed and be used intemperately, it does
resolve the spirits and natural heat about measure, and dries up the
radical moisture, and so dangerous diseases happen to man sooner, then
otherwise by nature they would: Therefore, seeing in the act of Generation
there is so great resolution of Spirits, the excess thereof is carefully to be
avoided, nevertheless great regard must be had of custom. The commodities
that come by moderate evacuation are great, for it procures appetite to meat,
and helps digestion, it makes the body more light and nimble, it purges
phlegm, it quickneth the mind, it refreshes the wit, renews the senses, and
drives away sadness, madness, anger, melancholy: finally, it does deliver us
altogether from leacherous imaginations, and nightly pollutions, which although
some men suppose that there is no offense thereby, because of the abundance of
nature, yet let us consider what is said in Deuter. cap. 23. If there be
amongst you any that is unclean, by that which comes from him by night, he
shall go out of the Host, and shall not enter into the Host: but for this
matter let every man use all honest and lawful means, to suppress the
violent force and fury of his burning lust. Also if a man will abstain from
meats that be hot and windy, and the drinking of sweet headie wines, and
avoid the imaginations of Venus and such like, he shall not easily be much
assailed and tempted with the desire of any carnal appetite; likewise if he
earnestly apply himself to the study of the holy Scriptures, and moral
Phylosophie, banishing idleness, and fly the company of beautiful and amorous
Women, he shall easily avoid the desire of lustful concupiscence.

Moreover, there be also other means to overcome carnal lust, mentioned in
Galen, as to anoint the reins with some cooling ointment made of wax, oil of
Roses, and the juice of some cooling herb, as House-leeke, Lettuce, Purslane,
Nightshade or plates of Lead, applied upon the reins, or else Agnus castus, or
to eat daily the seed thereof, or the seed of Rue, or the herbs themselves.
Also Arnoldus gives counsel, If thou will quench the heat of lust, anoint the
genitories with the juice of Rue or Persly, or drink the juice of those herbs.
Also to smell oftentimes to Camphire, is good for the same purpose, and to sit
upon the very cold eart(...) or a cold stone, also to plunge the members in
cold water or in strong vinegar, and therewith to wash the reins of the back
and about the lower part of the belly.

And to end this discourse of Venery, fly idleness, the greatest occasion of
lechery, for as the Poet says, with which I will end: Otia si tollas, periere
cupidinis arcus,
Contemptaeque iacent and sine luce faces.


CHAP. XI. Certain precepts for diet to be observed every day.
HItherto we have spoken of those things and their lawful use, which things,
if they be not rightly used, they do alter and change the body, and overthrow
the natural state thereof; I will now deliver certain precepts of the order
of diet to be kept for every day, weeks, months, and years, and first I will
begin with the diet for every day.

In the beginning when you arise from the bed, extend forth all your members,
for by this means the animal spirits are drawn to the outward members, the
brain is made subtle, and the body strengthened. Then rub the whole body
somewhat with the palms, the breast, back and belly gently, but the arms and
legs with the hands, either with warm linen: next, the head is to be scrubbed
from the fore part to the hinder part very lightly. After you are risen, I will
that you defend with all care and diligence your head, neck, and feet from
all cold in the morning; for there is no doubt, but in the morning and evening
the cold does offend more, then it does about noone tide, by reason of the
weakness of the Sunne-beames. Put on your clothes neat and clean: in the
Summer season, first wash with clean pure water, before described; but in the
Winter season sit somewhat by the fire, not made with turfe or stinking coal,
but with oak or other wood that burns clear, for our bodies are somewhat
affected with our clothes, and as strength is increased by the use of meat and
drink, and our life defended and preserved; even so our garments do conserve
the heat of our bodies, and do drive away colds: so that as diet and apparel
may seem alike, so in either of them a like diligence is to be preferred.

In the Summertime I chiefly comme^ garments of Harts-skinnes, and
Calues-skinnes, for the Heart is a creature of long life, and resists poison
and Serpents; therefore I my self use garments of the like sort for the winter
season, also, nevertheless lined with good linen. Next, I do, judge it not to
be much amiss to use garments of Silk or Bombace, or of purple; also of
Martyn or Wolfe-skinnes, or made of Fox skins, I suppose to be good for the
winter; notwithstanding in the time of Pestilence, apparel of Silk and
skins is condemned, because it does easily admit and receive the contagious
air, and does retain it long. After the body is well clothed, kembe your head
well with an Iuory comb from the forehead to the back-part, drawing the comb
some forty times at the least, then wash all the instruments of the senses, as
the eyes, the ears, the nostrils, the month, the tongue, the teeth, and all the
face with cold water; and the eyes are not only to be washed, but being open
plainly, immerg'd: and the gum and foulnes of the eie-lids that do there
stick, to remove; sometimes also to besprinkle the water with rose water or
Fenel-water, also rub the neek well with a linen napkin somewhat coorse, for
these things do confirm the whole body, it makes the mind more cheerful,
and conserueth the sight. In this place it pleases me to adioyne some
dentifrices or clensers of teeth, waters not only to make the teeth white, but
also to conserve them with some medicines, also to conserve the sight.

A powder to preserve the whiteness of the teeth.
TAke three egge-shels, three drams of red coral, two drams of white silk
burnt to powder in a new earthen pot, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves one dram,
Pellitorie of Spain two drammes. These being beaten to fine powder, rub the
teeth every day evening and morning.

The description of a Dentifrice, which Messelina Augusta used: ex scribonio
largo.
TAke Hearts horn burnt in a new earthen pot, and reduced into powder one ounce
and a half, Mastick one ounce and a half, Sal Armoniack six drammes.

To whiten the teeth, and to preserve them from heat, which was used by a
woman of great name.
TAke Aloes one ounce and a half, perles one ounce, red Coral and white,
Lignum Aloes, red Sanders, of every of them one ounce, Dragons blood, fine
Purslane one ounce and a half, Roch Alum washed so long in fair water, that
it be as clear as crystal, one ounce, mastick, amber, Myrrh, of either half
an ounce, the shells of water Crabs two drams: let every one be beaten by it
self into fine powder: then take pure honey of Roses seventeen ounces, and
with the powder aforesaid let it boil ge^tly at the fire, except the Mastick,
and the Myrrh, which afterward mix therewith, and when it shall come to a
conserve in thickness, let it be always stirred with a stick in the boiling:
and when it shall be removed from the fire, let it rest till it wax cold; then
add the Myrrh and the Mastick, then afterward keep it to your use in a
vessel of glass: with this Dentifrice if the teeth be rubbed in the morning
with a piece of course linen, it does comfort them, and make them very white.

Another Dentifrice.
TAke red and white Coral, of each one ounce, Pellitory, Mace, Mastick, of
each one ounce, Pomis stone and Bole-armonick, of either one ounce; make these
things into fine powder.

A Medicine that does comfort the sight.
TAke perles, which beat into fine powder, then strain them through a linen
cloth with rose water, then instill into the eyes certain drops of the same
water: some in stead of the perls, do use of the finest Sugar with Rose Water,
but I judge the use of Perles to be the better. These things following do very
much profit the eyes, if ye keep them from dust, smoke, remaining out of the
air, the Sun, the cold, from strong winds, from beholding the Sun, also to
avoid the multitude of Venery, and repletion of meat and drink, nor presently
after dinner or supper to sleep; and as it is before said, to bathe and wash
the eyes with cold clear water, although this Medicine following be very much
approved.

Take waters of Veruayne, Betony and Fenell, of every one, one ounce and a
half, white wine one ounce, Tutla prepared one dram, Sugar-candie two drams,
Aloes epatic one dram, woman's milk two drams, Camphire half a scruple: powder
that that is to be powdered, and let it remain in infusion for four and
twenty hours, then let them be strained, and therewith wash the eyes, being
shut.

Also to prosecute our former purpose, when you arise in the morning, to avoid
all superfluities, as well by urine as by the belly, which do at the least
once every day. Avoid also from the nostrills and the lungs all filthy matter,
as well by cleansing, as by spittle, and cleanse the face, head and whole body;
and love you to be clean and well apparelled, for from our cradles let us
abhor uncleanness, which neither nature or reason can endure. When you have done
these things, remember to power forth your prayers unto God with a clear
voice, that the day may be happy and prosperous unto you, that God may direct
your actions to the glory of his name, the profit of your Country, and the
conservation of your bodies. The walk ye gently, and what excreme^ts soever do
slip down to the inferior parts, being excited by natural heat, the
excretion thereof shall the better succeed.

As for your businesses, whether they be public or private, let them be done
with a certain honesty, then afterward let your hunting iourneyes be
performed: apply your selves to study and serious business the hours of the
fore-noone, and so likewise in the afternoon, till two or three hours before
supper, always in your hands use either Coral or yellow Amber, or a
Chalcedonium, or a sweet Pommander, or some like precious stone to be worn in
a ring upon the little finger of the left hand; have in your rings either a
Smaragd, a Sapphire, or a Draconites, which you shall bear for an ornament; for
in stones, as also in herbs, there is great efficacy and virtue, but they
are not altogether perceived by us: hold sometime in your mouth either a
Hyacinth, or a Crystal, or a Granat, or pure Gold, or Silver, or else
sometimes pure Suger-candy. For Aristotle does affirm, and so does Albertus
Magnus, that a Smaragd worn about the neck, is good against the
Falling-sicknes: for surely the virtue of an herb is great, but much more the
virtue of a precious stone, which is very likely that they are endued with
occult and hidden virtues.

Feed only twice a day, when ye are at man's age; nevertheless to those that
are subject to choler, it is lawful to feed often: begin always your
dinner and supper with the more liquid meats, sometimes with drinks. In the
time between dinner and supper, abstain altogether from cups, unless
necessity or custom do require the same; notwithstanding the same custom
being so vicious, must be by little and little changed.

I would not that you should observe a certain hour, either for dinners or
suppers, as I have sufficiently told you before, lest that daily custom should
be altered into nature: and after this intermission of this custom of nature,
hurt may follow; for custom does imitate nature, and that which is
accustomable, the very same thing is now become natural.

Take your meat in the hot time of Summer in cold places, but in the Winter
let there be a bright fire, and take it in hot places, your parlours or
chambers being first purged and ayred with suffumigations, which I would not
have you to enter before the suffumigation be plainly extinct, lest you draw
the fume by reason of the odor.

And seeing one and the same order of diet does not promiscuously agree with all
men: take your meat in order, as is before said, and sometimes also intermit
the use of meats for a whole day together, because through hunger, the faults
of the stomach which have been taken either by much drinking or surfeiting, or
by any other means, may be depelled and removed.

By this means also your bodies shall be better accustomed to endure and suffer
hunger and fasting, either in iourneyes or wars. Let your suppers be more
larger then your dinners, unless nightly diseases or some distillations do
afflict you.

After meat taken, neither labor in body nor mind must be used, and wash the
face and mouth with cold water, cleanse the teeth either with Iuory, or of a
Hearts horn, or some picker of pure silver or gold.

After your banquets, pass an hour or two in pleasant talks, or walk ye
very gently and soberly, neither use much watchings long in the night, but the
space of two hours go to your bed; but if honest business do require you to
watch, then sleep afterward so much the longer, that your sleep may well
recompense your former watchings. Before that you go to your bed, gently
smooth down your head, arms, and shoulders, the back and all the body, with
a gentle and soft rubbing, unless you mean to do it in the morning to move
distribution, whose time is best to be done in the morning.

In the Winter sitting by the fire, put off your garments and dry your feet
by the sire, nevertheless avoid the heat and the smoke, because it is very
hurtful both to the lungs and the eyes.

In the Winter time warm well your garments at the fire, and warm the linings
of the same, for it helps concoction, and remoueth all humiditie and
moisture. But my father did not allow of this custom, warning men of strength,
and those that are borne for the Commonwealth, not to accustom themselves to
such kind of softness, which do weaken our bodies. Also when you put off your
garments to go to bed, then put away all your weighty cogitations, and lay
them aside, whether they (...) public or private, for when all your members be
free from all cares, you shall then sleep the quieter, concoction and the
other natural actions shall best be performed.

But in the morning when you rise again, resume to your selves your form
days thoughts and cares, for this precep my Father had often in his mouth,
there fore I deliver it unto you, as the mo^ worthy of your observation.

Certain precepts against Heat and Dryness.
Even as cold is hurtful to trauailers, so is heat also, for thereby
trauailers be offended, for it happens by the want of moisture, and abundant
heat, for when too much heat does infest trauailers, they do thereby
oftentimes grow into sickness, and the natural moisture and strength is
dissolved. Therefore my advice is, first when you travel, not to use much
vociferation or talk, for thereby is wont to be drawn thirst and dryness,
against which detayne in the mouth crystal, coral, silver, sugar candy, or a
flint-stone that lies in cold water, the Iulep of Roses an^ Violets with cold
water, in like mann^ new stick of lickoras, taken fresh out of the earth and
chawed, or the drinking of water quenches the thirst, also new ligs do
mitigate thirstinesse, and cool the heat. Pine kernels, the leaves of
Purslane held in the mouth, Straw-berries, Pears, Pruines, Cherries, the
seeds of Quinces, seeds of Lettuce and cucumbers, do very well diminish
thirst.

What Age is, and what difference in Age.
IN Age there are five parts or differences: first, childhood from our birth
to fifteen years, and is hot and moist. The second, adolescence from fifteen
to five and twenty, a mean and perfect temperature: then youth, from five and
twenty to five and thirty, and is hot and dry: then middle age, or man's
state, from five and thirty to forty nine, declining to cold and dry: from
nine and forty, the end of ^he life, all cold and dry: in all this course ^f
the life, there is a continual change of (...) body, but especially every
seventh ^re is called Annus criticus, the year of ^ment. In which time we are
in greatest danger, touching life and death. Therefore I would advise you, to
have regard to the change of those times, and to use all means to preserve the
shortness of life, as much as may be.

FINIS.

