THE Works of Caius Crispus Salustius

Containing the Conspiracy of Cateline The War of Iugurth. V Books of
Historical fragments.

II Orations to Caesar for the Institution of a Com^on wealth And one against
Cicero*

Cicero. Cateline.

Cedant arma togae.

Are to be sold at the Eagle and Chi^d in Britains Burse by Tho. Walkley

Vis expers consilij expers.

R Vaughan fecit 1629.



TO THE right Honorable the Lord Marquis of Hamilton, William Cross wishes
all temporal, and spiritual happiness.
RIght Honorable, the contemplation of your Worth reflected from the
circumstance of report and action, together with that respect, which I owe unto
that Illustrious Family, with a Branch whereof you have contracted alliance,
have invited me to tender this Translation of Salust to your Noble hand, unto
which no vulgar thing ought to be presented. If this Roman Masterpiece be
clothed in an English habit, without loss of his primitive elegancie, the
Renderer may boldly claim this praise, that olet lucernam, his work smelles
of the Lamp. Thus desiring the God of all power to bless You, and your most
Honorable Lady, with a numerous and hopeful Issue, with a long and prosperous
life, and after that, with eternal happiness, I and, and remain,

Your Honors most devoted servant, William Cross.

TO HIS FRIEND Mr. CROSS, upon his translation of SALVST.
Cross, thou have taught Salust our English tongue,
Nay to write to us in a polisht style;
A Masterpiece became a pen so strong*
For few but thou these two could reconcile:
'Twas Native love d^rst such a Geniu^ ^aise*
To tell Romes virtue in our sluggish ^ayes.
In this thy Map the weakest eye may see*
The trust of Friends, the force of gold and fate,
The curious w^bbes of humane policy,
How they supply, but not support a State;
Glorious foundations cemented with blood,
Though n^r so deeply laid, prove seldom good.
See here the horrid plots of faithless Kings,
Whose jealous fears never wanted Instrument,
That durst attempt, protect such impious things:
See Rome, Heavens scourge, and yet not innocent,
Called to revenge by Justice, and by fate
Her self to raise, all else to ruinate.
If this well rendered please; then thank his brains,
Who has inricht thee with his studious pains.
Francis Wortley Knight Baronet.

When I behold thy Muse in Roman tire,
Or in the Belgian complete armature:
I cannot choose but wonder at that fire,
Which does inform a pen, a style so pure,
The monuments whereof time, chance, and fate,
Shall disinabled be to ruinate.
F. D. Knight.

What in thy labor may I most approve,
And show as well my judgment as my love?
Shall I commend thy wise election
Of such a subi^ct? which in right is one
Of Romes best Histories and rendered here
May please the best, the wisest, shar* est ear.
Or shall I praise thy faith in rendering,
Thine elegance in clothing every thing,
Or join them all in one, since ^ere I see,
They all in this translation do agree?
A noble subject fit to be begun,
Is faithfully, and elegantly done.
Thomas May Esquire.

IF rendering of grave Salusts knotty phrase,
Into smooth English without any loss
Of Latin sa^t, deserve Phaebaean bays,
Then thou may justly claim the laurel Cross,
To wreath thy learned temples, for thy merit
This guerdon from the Muses shall inherit,
When after ages shall profess and say,
Such are the works, which li^e another day.
James Saul Barrester of Graies Inn.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, when thou see this long Errata, think not rashly of the
work, nor printing* since errors in both can hardly be avoided by the most
careful. Thus I end, and remain,

Thine if thou be thy own in censure, WILLIAM CROSS.

ERRATA.
FOr stire read style, p. 5. for plant read plow, p. 17. For disease read
disuse, p. 49. For thereupon read thereunto, p. 50. For serving read suing, p.
51. For Camertaine read Camertine, p. 81. For designed read design, p 85. For
chap. 4. and 13. read 9. and 10. For be fortified read fortified, p. 103. For
branches read bundles, p. 104. For Deputy Lieutenant read Lieutenant, p. 122.
For Cathegus in all places read Cethegus. For which, read on which, p. 129. For
tyranny read the tyranny, p. 193. For let read set, p. 220. For does an end
read does put an end, p. 232. For his Province read the Province, p. 242. After
Ancestors read merits, p. 246. For Libsians read Libians, p. 266. For raised
and assured, read raises and assures, p. 284. For these Italians, read the
Italians, p. 293. For substites read substitures, p. 299.

For some read fame, p. 304. For submit up read submit, p. 362. For Met^llus
read Rutilius p. 383. for and chase read and chase them, p. 405. Betwixt
passage and Metellus read having lost many, he retired himself into places of
strength, p. 406. For Lieutenant of a Legion read Lieutenant, p. 407. For
descent read desert, p. 448. For fathered read farthered, p. 456. For Jugurths
read Bocchus, p. 469. For of higher read higher, p. 491. For rouneth read
roundeth, p. 540. For Barbarian read Balearian p. 5^9. For suptitious read
suspicious, p. 562. For Ariobarzuris read A^iobarzanes, p. 630. For wasted read
is wasted, p. 652. For rozud read rouzed, p. 666. For rauing read roauing, p.
677. For venals read venall, p. 686. For conti^ueth read contemns, p. ^88.
For Iudicatures in all places read Judgments.

The life of Salust, collected out of Petrus Crinitus and other approved
Authors.
Caius Crispus Salustius; (according to the report of the Roman Annals) was
borne at Amiternum, in the Sabine territory, the same year that Atheis was
taken and spoiled by Syllaes Soldiers. He was descended of the noble Salustian
Family, which for a long continuance of time retained the splendor of her
ancient dignity. It is held for certain; that he had his first education in
the City of Rome, and that from his tender years, the bent of his endeauours
was wholly sixth upon the studies of ingenious Arts. But happening to live in
those unfortunate times, wherein the corrupted manners of the State bended
toward faction and popular siding, and both virtue and learning wanting their
due rewards: his disposition being depraved in a City so much vnciuilized (as
Salust himself confesses) was easily vanquished by voluptuous allurements. So
that being called to the affairs of the State, as soon as his age was capable
of employment, he suffered many sad misfortunes, through the iniquity of the
times and factious people: for as then the Commonwealth was much turmoiled,
being ouerset with Syllaes party.

It is manifest that Salust had a ready wit, and that he was well verst in all
kind of litterature, but his special way was in writing of History. He had for
his Tutour, amongst others famous for learning, one Atteius Praetextalus,
surnamed Philologus, by whom he was instructed (as Suetonius Tranquillus
reports) in the rules of writing well and methodically. He was much taken with
M. Catoes style, out of whose Commentaries, he culled forth many selected
Sentences, which he kept as a Breuiate for his proper use. Concerning his
works, Catilines conspiracy, and his Iugurthine war, are the two
master-peeces of those that are exstant. Besides these, he wrote the History of
Marius and Sylla, unto which he annexed the atchieuements of Pompeie in the
Mithridaticke war; this work he finished and divided into sundry Tomes, the
relics whereof as yet remain to posterity, and like the parcels of a broken
picture, express the Authors gravity and diligence. He applied himself so
studiously unto the writing of the Punicke History, that for that purpose
alone, he travailed into the African Regions, to find out the truth with more
assurance; which industrious diligence of his is much commended by Autenus
Rufus. Gellius a Roman borne (who for his Criticisme was held the Aristarchus
of ancient learning) delivers thus much of Salusts stite. His elegancie, (says
he) eloquence of speech, and affectation of novelty were accompanied with much
envy. In so much that diverse able wits, who were his Contemporaries, did
reprehend and detract his writings. But this aspersion proceeded either from
ignorance or a preiudicate malice, Gellius judgment being clear in this
point, that he was a strict obseruer of the propriety of the Latin Language.

Titus Liuius was so unjust to Salust, by the testimony of Annaeus Seneca, that
he accused him for intrenching upon Theucidides, and for usurping many parcels
of his History, which he translated out of the Greek, and applied for
himself, with a borrowed elegancy. Neither does Asinius Pollio spare the brand
of his censure, but lays diverse imputations upon Salusts works; especially
because with too forced an affectatio^ he traced the steps of the ancient
writers. Quintilian a man of a most solid judgment affirms, that in the
censure of learned and vnprepossessed Readers, nothing can be added to Salusts
speech and brief delivery. Neither was he scrupulous to parallel Salust with
Thucidides, the Father and Prince of the Grecian Historiographers, as he did
Titus Liuius with Herodotus.

In respect of our Authors unusual Dialect, it came to pass, that many
imitated, but few attained to his perfection: for his phrase is pithie, chaste,
and innocent; so that not without cause, it is termed by some, A divine
Brevity. In regard whereof, A^untius, who wrote the History of the
Carthaginian war, honored him with his strictest imitation, as being a
Pattern that had nothing defective, nothing superfluous.

He had these friends renowned for their wit, and learning: Cor: Nepos,
Messala, and Nigidius Figulus, the last of whom dyed in exile. He honored
Julius Caesar with much respect, by whose means he was invested with the
dignity of a Provincial Lord Deputy. This incited Lenaeus the Gra^marian
Pompeies freedman, to compose certain inuectiue Satyrs against Sallust, in
which bitter and virulent Poem, he calls him a glutton, leacher, varlet, and
debaucht person, a mo^ster of contrarieties, both in his life and writings, and
an illiterate thief of Catoes fragments. The mortal hatred and unreconciled
opposition betwixt him and Mar. Cicero, is a subject so well known to the
world, that it needs no farther co^memoration^, their inuectiue Orations
bearing witness against both of them, that they more then seemed to neglect
their own, whilst they detracted from each others credit. But most certain
it is, that Salusts manners were so corrupt, and his youthful inclination so
prone to Riot, that he sold his Patrimony in his fathers lifetime, at a low
and undervalued rate: a fault which amongst others, was objected against him by
his adversaries. He had often been honored with public employments, and
amongst the rest, he had been Treasurour and Tribune, but he was so wedded
to his desires, that these dignities procured him more envy then glory.

He was a great Favorite of Ca. Caesar, who preferred him to a Pretourship in
the inland Countries of Africa; by which Office he was so enriched, that
returning to Rome, he purchased the village of Tiburte, together with those
richand delightful Gardens, which lie in the same territory, near to the
Pomegranate-tree. He married Terentia, Ciceroes wife, after her diuorcement
from her former husband, who remarried afterward ( Salust being dead) with
Messala Coruinus, a man much reuowned for eloquence: he lived until he was
three score years old, and deceased not long after Cesaers death, that
Country giving him his sepulture, which gave him his nativity. This
Panegyricall Disticke was published of him at Rome after his death.

Hic-erit, vt perhibent doctorum corda virorum,

Crispus Romana primus in historia.

Here by consent of learned men's decree,

Shall Crispus chief, among Romes Historians be.

CHAP. 1.
Catilines Conspiracy.
The Proeme or Introduction to Catilines conspiracy.
ALL men, who desire to excel other living creatures, ought to strive with
their chiefest indeiour, that they pass nor over this life in obscurity: like
beasts, whom nature has framed prone, and slaves to their bellies. But all our
sufficiency resides both in the soul and body* we use the sway of the soul,
the service more o^ the body: the one of them makes us to communicate with the
gods, that other with beasts. From whence it seems to me the directest course
to pursue glory, rather with the abilities of wit, then those of strength, and
since the life it self, which we enjoy, is short, to extend our memories to
the greatest length. For the renown of riches and beauty is fleeting and
frail; virtue is accounted illustrious and eternal.

Yet has it been for a long time, a great controversy amongst mortals
whether Military Affairs were more managed by the strength of the body, then
the virtue of the mind. For first of all, counsel before you begin, and after
consultation had, mature execution is most needful. Thus both of them being
incomplete by themselves, they stand in need of each others help.

Therefore the Kings of the first times, (for that title of command was the
first on earth) differing in their ways, some of them exercised the mind,
others the body: Yea, then the life of man was not troubled with couetuous
desires: every man's own pleased sufficiently.

But after that Cyrus in Asia, the Lacedaemonians, and Athenians in Greece
surprised Cities, and conquered Nations, then the desire of rule became the
ground of war, the largest Empire being reputed the greatest glory: then at
length it was found by danger and experiments, that wisdom in war was of most
preuale^ce.

But if the virtue of mind in Kings and Emperors, were as powerful in peace,
as it is in war; humane affairs would be more Ieuell and constant: neither
should you see this transferred thither, nor all things changed and confounded
together. For rule is easily preserved by those Arts, by which it was gotten at
first. But whereas for industry, sloth, for moderation and equity, lust and
pride have entered themselves: Fortune together with manners suffers alteration.
Thus dominion is generally translated from him that is least good, to him who
excels in goodness. Whether men plant, sail, or build, all success depends
upon virtue.

Yet many mortals given over to sloth and gluttony, being unlearned and
vncultiued, have passed over this life like Pilgrims, to whom, even against
nature, the soul was a burden. Their life and death I esteem alike, because
both of them are silenced.

But truly, he at length to me seems to live, and to enjoy his soul, who
being bent upon some imploiment, seeks the reputation of any great exploit,
or ingenuous science. But in the great variety of things, nature to diverse
shows different ways. It is glorious to do well for the Republicke, neither
is it improper to speak well for it; you may be renowned either by peace or
war; and of those who have done, and of those who have wrote other men's doings
many are praised. And in my judgment, although a proportionable glory does not
attend the doer and writer of things; yet it is very difficult to relate
actions forepast: first, because the deeds ought to carry proportion with the
words: Secondly, because most men, what faults, you reprehend, think you
speak out of maleuolence and envy. When you discourse of the large virtue and
glory of good men, what any man thinks easy to be achieved by himself, he
receives with good approbation: if it be above that, he esteems their reports
fained for counterfeites.

But I being a young man at first, was (as many men are) thrust from my study
into public affairs, and there I suffered many calamities, for in steed of
honesty, abstinence, and virtue, boldness, bribery, and avarice flourished,
which vices, although my soul detested, being a stranger to evil courses, yet
amongst such a confluence of them, my tender age being corrupted, was
inthralled by ambition: and me, although I kept distance from other crimes, the
same desire of glory, like others troubled, together with infamy and envy.

Thereupon, as soon as my mind, after many miseries and dangers, took some
repose, and that I had resolved to spend the remainder of my time far from
the Commonwealth: it was not my determination to waste this commodious vacancy
in sloth and idleness, neither to wear out my years, being bent upon
tillage, hunting, and servile employments: but from what purpose and study
wicked ambition had detained me, thither returning, I decreed to write the
exploits of the Roman people, succinctly, and as they seemed worthy of
remembrance: the sooner, for that my mind was free from hope, fear, and
State-factions.

Therefore of Catilines conspiracy, as truly as I can, in few words, I mean
to treat; for that action I esteem most memorable, for the novelty of the
crime and danger. Of which man's conditions, some particulars are first to be
unfolded, before I begin the Discourse it self.

CHAP. 2.
Catilines life, lineage, and condition.
LVcius Catiline was descended of a Noble family, his abilities both of body
and mind were great, but his disposition was evil and corrupt, from the age of
a stripling, intestine broils, murders, rapines, and civil discords were his
pleasures, and in these he exercised his riper youth: his body was patient of
hunger, cold, and watching, beyond the reach of humane belief. His mind was
daring, subtle and various* He could (...) pline was strictly observed, both
in the City and Camp. There was an uniform concord without the least blemish
of covetousness equity and goodness were maintained amongst them, more by the
instinct of nature, then by the written Tables.

Their strifes, discordes, angers, and enmities, they wraked upon their
enemies: Citizens contended with Citizens in the emulation of virtue: they were
magnificent in divine ceremonies, frugall in domesticke expenses, faithful to
their friends. By these two courses of courage in warfare, and equity after
peace, was concluded, they provided for their own and the public safety. Of
these particulars, I have this especial proof; because in the time of war,
more severity was for the most part exercised against those, who engaged sight
without command, or retired too slowly, the retreat being sounded, then upon
such as forsook their Ensigns, or fled, being beaten from their appointed
stations. But in the time of peace, they swayed the Government more by bounty
then terror, being willing to forgive, rather then revenge injuries. Thus as
soon as industry, and justice had enlarged the State, mighty Kings were
conquered by their Arms fierce Nations, and multitudes of people were subdued
by their Forces; yea, Carthage, emulous of the Roman Empire, was razed without
hope of recovery; all Seas and Lands gave way to their Armies.

Then fortune began to frown, and to blend all things with confusion. Those
men who had suffered without disturbance labors, dangers, hard and harsh
fortunes, to them ease and wealth, things to be wished for of others, became a
burden and calamity. Then first the desire of money, and after that, of
Soueraignety began to increase: these proved the materials of all mischiefs:
for avarice subverted faith, honesty, and other good practices: instead of them
it taught pride, cruelty, irreligion, and bribery, with all ambition made many
men hollow-hearted, they reserved one thing in their breasts, expressed another
with promptness of language. They valued amity and enmity not by desert, but
by profit, and more affected a good show then substauce. These abuses at first,
crept foreward by degrees, being sometimes subject to punishment: after, when
the contagion spread it self like a pestilence, the face of the City was
changed, and the form of Government which was most just and excellent, grew to
be tyrannous and insufferable.

But first of all, ambition (which vice is virtues next counterfeit) exercised
men's affections, more then covetousness, for glory, honor, and dominion, are
desired indifferently by the good and evil: but the first of these takes the
direct way, the other, because he wants fit means, pursues their inquest with
deceit and false-hood.

Covetousness has with it an immoderate desire of riches, which never any
wise man did affect: she as if infected with virulent humors, effeminates both
men's bodies and minds, she is always unlimited, and insatiable, not lessened
with plenty, nor penury.

Now, after that Locius Sylla had recovered by Arms, the sway of the
Republicke, from good beginnings, ill events attended him, for all men gave
themselves to rapine and pillage: this man longed for a house, that other for a
field: the victours knew neither mean nor modesty: barbarous and bloody
executions were inflicted upon their fellow Citizens. This mischief was
furthered by another, because that Sylla, to the intent he might oblige the
Army to his service, which he commanded in Asia, had contrary to the discipline
of his Ancestors, entertained them with too much luxury and freedom. Places
of pleasure, and voluptuous allurements, had easily mollified in this time of
vacancy, the fierce courage of his Soldiers. There first the Roman Army
learned to whore, to carowse, and to fancy scutcheons, pictures, and inchased
vtensils: these they purloyned privately and publicly; withal they pillaged
the Temples, and polluted all divine and profane ordinances: so that these were
the Soldiers, who after they had gotten the victory, left nothing to be
possessed by the vanquished. Prosperity for certain, cloyes the minds of
wise men, much less could those men, whose conditions were dissolute, moderate
themselves after the victory.

From thence foreward riches were accounted honorable, and these were courted
by Domination, glory and and power. Then the edge of virtue was abated, poverty
was thought a disgrace, and innocence was esteemed a sin. Therefore by the
causall means of riches, riot, avarice, and pride, corrupted the youth, who
made large spoils and expenses, being careless of their own estates, yet
covetous after other men's. They confounded promiscuously, shame and modesty
together, with the Laws of God and man: they were neither moderate, nor
provident in their actions.

It is a subject worth the observation, when you shall behold houses and
private dwellings, enlarged with buildings in the manner of Cities, to suruay
therewithal the Temples of the Gods, which our most religious Predecessors
erected. But these they beautified with piety, as they did their own houses
with glory. Neither did they take any thing from the conquered, but the liberty
of doing wrong. But these debaucht persons took most injuriously from their
associates, these proprieties, which those valiant Conquerours spared to their
enemies; as though the doing of injury were a true argument of command. But why
should I recount those abuses, which are not credible to any that have not
seen them, as the leuelling of mountains, and the damming up of seas at
private men's charges; who made wealth the scorn of their folly, because they
were lewd, and lavish of that, the honest fruition whereof had been lawful?

Besides, their lusts, ryots, and other lewd practices, were not inferior to
their former crimes: men inured themselves to feminine sufferances, and women
publikly prostituted their honors. To please their palates, both lands and
seas were searched from far: they went to sleep before natural desire urged
it. They could not brook hunger, thirst, cold, nor weariness, but did
anticipate all of them with luxury. These motives incited the youth to
dangerous attempts, as soon as their properstore was exhausted. A mind
infected with this variety of vices, could hardly restrain the invasion of
lusts. By means whereof the ways of getting and spending were affected with
more profusion.

CHAP. 4.
Catilines ways, by which he draws in Associates, the causes which forwarded
the Conspiracy; and gave the strongest means of resolution.
IN this so great, and so depraved a State, Catiline entertained (a matter
which was easily compassed) a rabble of most wicked and dangerous persons, as
if they had been guardians of his body: for whatsoever Ruffian, Leacher, or
Glutton, had wasted his Patrimony, with gaming, banqueting, or whoring;
whosoever was deeply engaged in debt, for redeeming some punishable offense:
besides all parricides, Church-robbers, convicted persons, and such as did
fear conviction: moreover, all such whose hands and tongues got them
maintenance by their periuries, and civil blood-sheddings, and lastly all
those, whom wickedness, want, or a guilty conscience did exasperate, became
Catilines bosome-friends and familiars. But if any man innocent of these crimes
fell casually into his near acquaintance, by daily use and allurements, he
became suitable and like to them. He desired most of all the familiarity of
young men, because their effeminate spirits, and tender years, were soonest
caught with his wiles. And as every man's disposition did incline according to
his age, he procured whores for some, bought dogs and horses for others.
Neither did he spare cost nor modesty in seeking to assure their service and
fidelity.

I know, there were some who were of this opinion, that the youth which
frequented Catilines house, abandoned themselves to unmanly lusts. But this
report was confirmed rather by the circumstance of other presumptions, then by
the certainty of any man's knowledge. Now for Catiline himself, he had in his
youth committed many notorious whoredoms; as with a Noble virgin, and with a
Vestall Nume, and had aggrauated this with other crimes as heinous, contrary to
all law and equity.

At length being taken with the love of Aurelia Orestilla, (a woman in whom no
good man commended any thing but beauty) because she seemed scrupulous to
marry, as being fearful of his son, who was grown to full years, it is
held for certain, that by ^^^ioidiall murder he left his house empty, for
her wicked nuptials, which accident (as it seems to me) was the chiefest cause
that forwarded the Conspiracy. For his polluted mind being hateful to God and
man, could take no rest sleeping nor waking, but was always perplexed with a
guilty conscience: Thereupon his complexion grew pale, his eyes hollow, and
his pace variable, sometimes swift, and sometimes slow; distraction being wholly
seated in his face and countenance. Then he instructed the youth whom he had
brought to his lure (as has been formerly declared) in crimes various and
heinous, by rules of different prescriptions. Out of these he furnished his
friends with false witnesses and sureties, of whose credit, fortunes, and
dangers he made the lowest estimation that could be. Afterward having
bankerupted their honor and honesty, he enioined them actions worse then the
former. And that was, if occasion did not minister a present means of ill
doing, to circumuent and murder the innocent, as well as the nocent: being
resolved to be mischievous and cruel for bare thanks only, rather then
disease should make their hands and spirits inactive.

CHAP. 5.
Catilines resolution confirmed by diverse inducements, what kind of men he did
choose for his associates.
CAtiline being confident in these friends and Confederates conspired to usurp
upon the Commonwealth: being urged thereupon through the greatness of men's
debts, which were general in all Provinces and because Syllaes Soldiers
having spent lauishly their own perquisites, and being mindful of their
former rapines and victories, did wish for nothing more then a Civil war.
There was as then no Army resident in Italy. Pompeie the great was engaged
far off in foreign service: his hopes were not mean in serving for the
Cons^lship. The Senate was not sufficiently careful, all things were
established in tranquillity and safety, which occurrences served opportunely
for Catiline.

Therefore about the Calends of June L. Caesar, and Caius ^igulus being
Co^suls, he first sp^ke withal the Conspiratours apart; persuaded some, and
sounded others; then he remonstrates their own strength, the weak provisions
of the State, and the great rewards depending on the action. Thus having
sifted all things to his hearts desire, he conuents all those together, whose
necessities were most pressing, and courages most daring. There met in this
assembly of the Senatorian order, P. Lentulus Sura, P. Antronius; L. Cassius
Longinus, C. Cethegus, Pub. and Ser. Sylle, the sons of Seruius, L.
Vargunteius. Q. Annius, M. Porcius Lecca, Lucius Bestia, Quintus Curious.
Besides there came these Knights M. Fuluius, the Nobler, L. Statilius, P.
Gabinius Capito, C. Cornelius. And with these, there joined themselves diverse
others out of the Colonies and infranchised Cities, being men much honored
both at home and abroad: yea there were many more partakers of this counsel in
secret, whom ambitious hopes did rather inuit, then want or any other
necessity. Moreover, the greatest part of the youth, and those specially that
were Noble, did favor Catilines designs, I mean such, who being accustomed
to live idly in pomp and pleasure, preferred casualties, before certainties,
and war before peace.

There were some also, living in those times, who did believe that M. Licinus
Crassus was not ignorant of this counsel: because his adversary ^neius
Pompeius did command a great Army, whose power he was willing that any
growing opposite should ouer-top and withal he was confident, that if the
conspiracy did succeed, that he should easily inuest himself with the
principal command. But before this there were others, who conspired, in which
list Catiline was one. Of which subject I mean to treat, as punctually as I
can.

CHAP. 6.
Catiline is prohibited from suing for the Consull-ship, Piso is sent Treasurer
into Spain, he is slain by his own Soldiers.
LV. Tullus, and Mar. Lepidus being Consuls, Pu. Antronius and Pu. Sylla
Consuls elect, being indicted upon the Laws of canuasing for Offices, suffered
punishment. Not long after, Catiline being attainted for extortion of moneies,
in his province, was prohibited to sue for the Consullship, because he could
not clear himself within a prefixed time. There lived then at Rome one Cu.
Piso, a young man nobly descended, of a most daring spirit, poor, and
factious: want and an evil disposition, did incite him to disturb the
Commonwealth.

Catiline and Antronius, having communicated their counsels with this Piso
about the Nones of December, they resolved to murder the two Consuls, L.
Torquatus, and L. Cotta in the Capitol, on the Kalends of January. And then
having seized on the Consular Ensigns, they two were to dispatch Piso with an
Army to take possession of both the Spaines. But this plot being discovered,
they deferred the execution of the murder until the Nones of Febr^ary. Then
they intended not only to kill the Consuls, but diverse others of the Senators.
So that if Catiline had not too soon given the signal at Court to his
Confederates, never since the building of Rome, such an outrage had been
committed; for because the conspiratours did not meet armed in full numbers,
that anticipation dissolved the plot.

After this, Piso was sent Treasurer into the hither Spain, for the Praetour
Crassus laboring in the suite, because he knew him to be a mortal enemy to
C. Pompeius. Neither did the Senate unwillingly obtrude him to this place,
being desirous to remove this dangerous person far from the near employments
of State. The sooner, because many good men made him their Protector, and even
then Pompeies greatness became fearful. But this Piso was slain, as he
marched into the Province, by the Spanish Horsemen over whom he commanded.
There were some which reported, that these Barbarians could not endure his
vn^ust, proud, and tyrannous government. Others again did affirm, that these
Horsemen having been Pompeies ancient and faithful seruitours, attempted
this upon Piso with his consent: the Spaniards being otherwise unaccustomed to
commit offenses of that nature, yet they had been formerly subject to many as
rigorous Commanders. But we will leave this matter doubtful, as we found it.

CHAP. 7.
Catilines Oration to his Confederates. They demand the conditions of the
war, in which point he gives them satisfaction.
CAtiline perceiving his Accomplices to be assembled (of whom we have made
mention heretofore) although he had treated with them severally about sundry
matters, yet supposing that it did much conduce to his ends, to encourage them
altogether, he retires into the secretest room of his house, and there all
those who were not of the complot being removed, he began this, or the like
Oration.

Unless your valor and fidelity were sufficiently known unto me, the
opportunity would be of no importance, and this great hope of commanding all,
would even rust in our hands. Neither should I through want of imploiment, or
any other various conceit, entertain casual adventures for certainties. But
since I have known you valiant, and faithful to me me, in many and great
occurrences, I am thereby encouraged to undertake this most high and honorable
e^terprise: the sooner also, because I understand your resolutions are
conformable to mine in the election of good and evil, for to concur jointly,
in willing or not willing, that is the firmest friendship that can be, what I
have formerly conceived in my mind, all of you have heard before this in
private conferences. But now my courage is every day more and more inflamed,
when I consider the conditions that shall attend our lives, except we our
selves vindicate our liberties; for sithence the Commonwealth is fallen into
the power and preeminence of some few great men; Kings and Tetrachs have been
their tributaries, Peoples and Nations have paid them pensions; but as for the
rest of us, how valiant or good, how noble or ignoble, we have been ranked
amongst the vulgar, living without respect, without authority; obnoxious unto
those, to whom, if the Weal public took place, we should be the subjects of
terror. Hence it is, that all favor, power, honor and riches, are become
theirs, or at least theirs, on whom they please to confer them. But to us,
they have left repulses, dangers, judgments; and poverty: which grieuances,
how long will ye suffer, O you my most valiant friends? Is it not more
honorable to dye virtuously, then to protracte a miserable and despised life
with infamy, after it has been made the scorn of other men's pride?

But assuredly, by that faith which I owe to God and man, the victory is
seated in our hands: we have youth for our advantage, and hearts full of
courage; contrariwise through age and abundance of wealth, all abilities are
decayed in them. It remains only for us to begin; as for the rest, time will
accomplish. Can any man living, whose disposition is manly, endure to see these
men abound with riches, which they lavish out in damming up the seas, and
leuelling of mountains, and that we should want means for our present
necessities? That they should possess two or three houses, and that we should
want a roof for our heads, so that whereas they buy pictures, skutcheous and
imbossed furniture; whereas they neglect the old, demolish the new, raise up
other edifices in their places, and last of all, by all means get and consume
money; yet cannot they by their lavishness bring their fortunes to an ebb.
But we have poverty at home, debts abroad, our estates are low, our hopes are
more desperate. Finally, what have we left, but the miseries of a perplexed
mind? Therefore rowze up your selves, behold that, that liberty (I say) which
you have so long wished for, together with riches, renown and glory, are now
represented unto you, fortune has proposed all these rewards for the
Conquerours. The subject, time, dangers, wants, and magnificent spoils of the
war, have more reason to encourage you, then my speech; for my self, use me
as your General, or Fellow-souldier: neither my body nor mind shall fail you.
These things (as I conceive) I shall be able to perform by your coassistance
in the time of my Consul-ship; except my judgment deceiues me, and that you
had rather serve then command.

After the Conspiratours had heard this discourse; those whose wants were most
abundant, but whose fortunes and hopes were quite forlorn (although the
disturbance of the publcke peace, seemed to them a sufficient reward,) yet did
they for the most part require, that Catiline would propose the conditions of
the war, as also what rewards they should have for their service, what aids
and hopes they were to expect.

Upon this motion Catiline promises them new Laws, proscriptions of the Rich,
Magistracies, Priest-hoods, spoils, and all other privileges, which war and
the Conquerours insolency, are wont to inflict. Moreover he tells them, that
Piso was in the hither Spain, and that Pub. Sitius Nucerinus was in Mauritania
with an Army, both of them being partakers of his Counsel. That Ca. Antonius
also did sue for the Co^sull-ship, whom he did desire to have for his
Colleague, as being a man of his familiar acquaintance, and one likewise
pressed with all kind of necessities: with him being Consul, he meant to open
the beginning of this enterprise. Besides, he inueyes with scandalous speeches
against the good Patriots, and praises every man by name of his own
Confederates; he does admonish one of his wants, another of his desires, some
of the danger and disgrace, diverse others of Sillaes victory, who by the
advantage thereof, had got much pillage. After this when he had observed a
general alacrity in their spirits, he exhortes them to be careful of his
request, and so dismisseth the assembly.

CHAP. 8.
Catiline ministers an oath to his Confederates, Curious bewrayes the
Conspiracy, to his Concubine Fulura.
THere lived some in those times, who reported, that Catiline having finished
his speech, when he rendered the oath to the partakers of his Conspiracy, that
he ministered to them round, bowls of wine brewed with humane blood. And when
all of them had carrowsed of it with execrations, according to the custom of
solemn Sacrifices, he revealed the depth of his Counsels: and to this end,
they say, he did it, that being conscious alike of one another engagements, in
so great a crime, they might be more faithful amongst themselves, yet many men
thought these and sundry others reports, to be purposely fained by them, who
thought to extenuate the envy, which was afterward raised against Cicero, by
aggravating the heinousness of their offense, who had formerly suffered for
it. But in regard of the difficulty, we know no certainty of this matter.

There was one Qu. Curious of this Conspiracy, a man of no obscure parentage;
but otherwise debauched with all kind of lewdness and villainy, whom the
Censours, in regard of the scandal, had removed out of the Senate. This man
had no less vanity then boldness, he could not be silent of what he heard,
nor conceal his own delinquencies. Neither was he regardfull of what he said
or did. There had been an ancient League of whoredom betwixt him and Fuluia,
a noble Dame, unto whom when he was less welcome then before, (because his
poverty disinabled his bounty,) he presently vaunting of him self, began to
promise her seas and mountains. Then he menaced her with his drawn sword, to
make her yield unto his pleasure: and finally used her with more insolency,
then he was formerly wont to do. But Fuluia having drawn the knowledge of
the cause, from the insolent demeanor of Curious, would not conceal from the
State, such a dangerous secret: but the Author being unmentioned, she
disclosed to diverse, what particulars she had heard, and after what manner
concerning the Conspiracy of Catiline.

This occasion, first wrought the minds of men to confer the Consular
dignity on Mar. Tul. Cicero. For before the greatest part of the Nobility did
swell with envy against him, and thought that the honor of the Consul-ship
would be blemished, if a new vpstart (although well deserving) should be
invested in the dignity. But danger making his approach, injustice, and pride
became disrespected. Whereupon the assembly, for the election being met, Mar.
Tullius, and Ca. Antonius were declared Consuls, which Act did vnioynt the
Confederates designs: yet was not Catilines fury any thing remitted: but every
day he meditated new mischiefs: he disposed arms throughout Italy in
convenient places, he conveyed money taken up upon his own, or his friends
credit, to one Manlius at Fesulae, who afterward proved a principal party in
the rebellion. He is said to have wrought about this season, men of all
conditions to his faction: yea and some women also, who in the prime of their
youth, having made large profit, by prostituting their bodies; afterward when
their age had put a period to their lucre, but not to their luxury, were
deeply engaged in other men's debts. By these she-Agents, Cat^line was
confident to procure the Roman slaves to fire the City, to draw^ their
husbands into the Conspiracy, or otherwise to murder them.

In this list, there was one Sempronia, who had often committed many masculine
exploits: this woman was fortunate in her birth, beauty, husband, and children:
she was learned in the Greek and Latin languages: she could sing and dance
more elegantly, then was fitting for a modest matrone; she had sundry other
qualities, which served as instruments for her luxury. But unto her all things
were dearer, then the repute of Honor, and honesty. It were difficult for you
to define, whether she were more lavish of her coin or credit: so itchingly,
lustful, that she would oftener court men, then stay their courting: before
this she had dealt perfidiously, had abiured her debts, had been conscious of
murder, and precipitated her self into Riot, and want, yet was not her wit
despicable: she could compose verses, break jests, discourse of any subject,
whether modest, loose, or abusiue; she was altogether made of mirth and iollity.

CHAP. 4.
Catiline resolves the death of Cicero, but is prevented by Fuluiaes
intelligence. Manlius raises a rebellion in Hetruria.
THese provisions being made, Catiline resolves notwithstanding all opposition,
to sue for the Consul-ship the next year, hoping if he were elected, that he
should be able to deal with Antonius according to his pleasure. Neither was
he quiet in the mean time, but sought to intrappe Cicero by all possible
means, who wanted neither fraud nor subtletie, to assure himself against his
plots, for from the beginning of his Consullship, he had dealt with Fuluia, by
promising her largely, that Qu. Curious (of whom we have spoken before) should
bewray to him the depth of Catilines Counsels. His Colleague Antonius he had
likewise obliged by the exchange of his Province, that he should not entertain
any thoughts of innovation against the Commonwealth. Besides he had Guardes of
his friends and Clients attending in secret upon his person.

The day of election being now come, and Catilines suite and plot against the
Consul, wanting both success, he resolves to make open war, and to hazard
all extremities; because those attempts which he made in Covert, proved vain
and without success. Upon this he dispatcheth C. Menlius to Fesulae, and to
the adjacent parts of Hetruria. He sends Septimius a certain Camertaine into
the Picenian territory, as he did C. Julius into Apulia, and others into other
places, where he thought they could best opportune his purpose. In the mean
time he proiects many things at Rome, he lies in wait for the Consul;
prepares Incendiaries, surprizeth places of advantage with his armed followers;
he himself standing upon his guard in arms. Again, he commands some, and
persuades others to be provident and ready to be forward and vigilant at all
seasons, being neither tired with watching not labor. At length, when as
nothing succeeded in his several undertakings, he summons again late in the
night the principals of the Conspiracy, by his Agent M. Portius Lecca, and
there having complained much of their slacknesse, he shows, that he for his
part, had already sent Manlius to those troops, which he had formerly provided
for this war; that others were dispersed into other convenient places, to lay
the foundation of the war: that his chief desire was to visit the Army;
conditionally that Cicero were first slain; he being the greatest obstacle of
all his proceedings.

Upon this the residue being terrified and wavering, Cornelius a Roman Knight,
and with him L. Vargunteius^ Senator, having promised their best assistance,
determined forthwith to visit Cicero the same night, under the color of
salutation, and to kill him suddenly in his own house, being unprovided for
defense. Curious no sooner understood the greatness of the danger impe^dant
over the Consul, but opportunely by Fului^, he discloseth the intended plot to
Cicero; upon which intelligence they being restrained at the gate, this attempt
of theirs was then frustrated.

In this intercourse of time, Manlius solicited the Commons in Hetruria, being
of themselves desirous of innovation through their poverty, and former
greeuances of wrong, for that during Syllaes tyrannical government, they had
lost all their lands and mouables. Besides these, he drew to his party, Thieves
of all sorts, with diverse malcontents of the Syllan Colonies, to whom lust and
and luxury had left no remainder of their former rapines. When these
occurrences were related to Cicero, he was much troubled with the doubtfulnesse
of the danger, because that neither by his counsel could he free the City
from further treachery; neither could he be sufficiently informed, of what
numbers Manlius Army consisted, nor what was the scope of his designed.
Therefore he referres the matter to the Senate, being now rumoured every where
by the vulgar report.

They again, (as it is usual in times of most danger) did forthwith decree,
that the Consuls should endeavor themselves to the utmost, that the Republicke
suffered no detriment. That power is granted by the Senate, unto the chiefest
Magistrate after the Roman custom: by which he is enabled to wage war, to
levy at his discretion, both allies and Citizens: withal, to command in
chief, both at home and abroad. Otherwise, without the peoples authorizing,
none of these privileges are permitted to the Consuls. Some few days after,
Lu. Seruius, a Senator, recited certain letters, which he said, were brought
unto him from Fesulae, by Quin. Fabius. In these thus it was written: That C.
Manlius had taken Arms with great numbers, before the sixth day of the Kalends
of November. Upon this (as it is usual in such events) some spoke of
portentuous signs and prodigies. Others discoursed or unlawful assemblies, of
transportation of Arms, and of a servile commotion in Capua, and Apulta.

Whereupon by the Decree of the Senate, Quin. Martius Rex, was sent into
Fesulae, and Quin. Metellus Creticus into Apulia and the neighboring Regions.
Both these having been Generals of the field, were hindered from triumphing, by
the calumniation of some few, unto whom all suites, whether good or bad, were
wont to be venall. But as for the Praetours, Qu. Pompeius Rufus was
commissioned to go to Capua, and Quintus Metellus Celer, for the Picenian
territory, and these had power by permission to raise an Army, as the occasion
and case required. Moreover, if any man could reveal any thing concerning this
Conspiracy (intended against the safety of the State) it was decreed he should
have a large reward; a servant his freedom, and a hundred Sesterties: ^
freeman impunity of the fact, and two hundred Sesterties. They decreed
besides, that the families of the Sword-players, should be billetted in Capua,
and other infranchised Towns, according to the ability of the inhabitants;
that watch and ward should be kept at Rome, and that the inferior Magistrates
should have the command thereof. With these novelties the City was amazed, and
the face of it was changed; in stead of mirth and frollicknesse, which
diuturnall ease had produced, forthwith there followed a general sadness.
This man speedes to prevent, that man trembles, neither place nor person could
assure their di^^idence. Neither had they open war, nor certain peace: every
man esteemed the dangers according to, his own fearful apprehension. Besides
this, the weaker sex, to whom (in regard of the majesty of the State) the
terror of war was unusual, did bewail their hard fortunes, they lifted up
their suppliant hands to heaven, commiserated their little children, prayed
frequently, and feared the worst in all things, so that their pride and
pleasures being neglected, they began to distrust themselves, and their
Countries safety.

Amidst these disturbances, Catilines fierce mind still prosecuted the same
courses, yea, although gardes were provided, and that he was examined by Lu.
Paulus, upon the breach of the Plautian Law. At last for palliations sake, and
under the pretense of purging himself, as though he had been provoked thither
by injurious dealing, he makes his appearance in the Senate, upon this the
Consul M. Tullius, whether fearing his presence, or incensed with anger, made
a pithy and profitable Oration for the good of the Commonwealth, which
afterward he published in writing. But as soon as he was set down, Catiline
being one that could readily counterfeit al shapes, began to petition the
Fathers with a dejected countenance, and supplaint voice, that they would not
without just cause, give credit to any thing that might be suspected against
him. That he being extracted from such noble a family, had so demeaned his
conversation from his youth upward; that only, that which was good, had been
harbored in his hopes: neither should they conceive thus of him, that he being
a Patrician borne, (who together with his Ancestors, had merited well of the
Roman people) could not subsist without the ruin of the Commonwealth: when
as, forsooth, M. Tullius a petty Inmate in the City of Rome, must be thought
to preserve the same.

When he superadded other scandals to these, all the house hushed at his speech,
calling him Traitor and parricide publicly. Then all enraged he replies,
because being circumuented I am ouerborne by mine enemies, nothing but ruin
shall determine my revenge. Thereupon, from the Court he poasteth to his own
dwelling house: there pondering many things seriously with himself, as that
his plots against the Co^sull did not succeed, and that his Intelligencers
assured him, that the City by reason of the Guardes, was secured from firing:
he thinking it the best expedient, to reinforce his Army, before more Legions
were enrolled, and to anticipate all advantages, which might be useful for him
in the war, he takes his journey late in the night toward Manlius Camp, with
some few persons in his retenue. But before this he had charged Cethegus,
Lentulus and others, whose courage he knew to be most active, that by all
means possible they should assure the strength of the faction, that they
should hasten their treacheries designed against the Consul, and dispose
beforehand slaughter, firings, and other mischiefs incident to war: as for
himself, he would martch speedily to the City with an Army of sufficient
force.

Whilst these things were acted at Rome, C. Manlius sends certain Agents of his
own retinue unto Q. Martius ex, with this message following:

We call both gods and men to witness (most noble General) that we have not
taken Arms against our Country, nor that we might heap danger upon other
men: but only to secure our bodies from violence, who being wretched and
wanting through the oppression and cruelty of usurious creditours, have for the
most part lost our Country, as all of us have our Fame and fortunes. Neither
is it permitted to any of us to take the benefit of the Law (according to the
custom of our Ancestors) nor to keep our bodies free, our Patrimonies being
forfeited. So great has been the rigor of the Usurers and Praetour. Our
Predecessors oftentimes taking compassion of the Plebe^ an Romans, by
public Decrees relieved their poverty; and of late, even in our memories, in
regard of them excessive debts, it was agreed upon by the consent of all good
men, that they should be paid out of the common stock.

Oftentimes has the very Commonalty disivnited themselves from the Fathers;
either induced by the desire of superiority, or otherwise armed through the
pride of the Magistrates. But we affect neither rule nor Riches, by whose
causing all wars and quarrels arise amongst mortals: we only desire liberty,
which no free nature can endure to lose, except it be with the loss of life.
We importune both thee and the Senate, that you would relieve us, your
miserable fellow Citizens, and restore unto us the benefit of the Law, from
which the injustice of the Praetour seeks, to debar us; not imposing upon us
the last of all extremities, that we should seek the means, by which we
should die, having first fully revenged our deaths.

To these demands Q. Martius replied, that they would request any favor from
the Senate, they should surcease from Arms, and go to Rome in the nature of
suppliants; that there both the Senate and people were of such clemency and
compassion, that never any man required their help in vain.

But Catilene being upon his journey, wrote to diverse of the Confular order,
and to sundry other persons of quality. His letters imported, that he was
wronged by false aspersions, that because he could not resist the powerfulness
of his enemies, he gave way to his hard fortune, that he would go to Marselles
to live in exile: not because he was conscious to himself of so heinous a
crime, but that the State might remain undisturbed, and that no sedition might
proceed from his quarrel, far contrary to the tenure of these. Q. Cat^lus
did read others letters in the Senate, which he avouched to be delivered unto
him in Catilines name: The Copy of them is here underwritten.

Lu. Catiline to Qu. Catulus, wishes health.
Thy remarkable constancy, confirmed by experience, which has come acceptably
to me in my greatest dangers, warrants confidence to these my commendations.
For what cause I did not resolve to undertake my own defense in that new
Counsel, I mean to give thee satisfaction, yet not out of the guiltiness of
any crime. This (so God help me) you may receive for a truth: being provoked
with injuries and disgraces, withal deprived of the fruit of my labor and
industry, because I failed in obtaining the Consular dignity, I have
undertaken, according to my custom, the protection of distressed men. Not
because I was insufficient to satisfy my debts upon my own credit, and out of
my own Revenues: since upon other men's credit, the mere liberality of Aurelia
Orestilla was able to discharge them all, out of her own and her daughters
store. But for that I saw unworthy persons dignified with honor, and my self
rejected upon false suspicions: for this cause I have prosecuted these hopes of
preserving the remainder of my reputation, they being honest enough for my
present fortune. Being willing to write more, it is related to me, that
provisions are made to force me. Now I commend Orestilla to thee, and deliver
her to thy trust. Defend her from wrong, being coniured by the love of thy
children. Farewell.


CHAP. 11.
Catiline arriues in Manlius Camp. Orders are given out for his pursuit.
But Catiline himself, having stayed some few days with C. Flaminius in the
Reatine territory, whilst he be fortified that City with Arms, being before
solicited to his party, he speedes from thence to Manlius Camp, with the
branches of rods, and other Ensigns of the Consular command. These things were
no sooner known at Rome, but the Senate proclaims Catiline and Manlius.
Traitors; to all besides them, a prefixed day is limited, before which time
it might be lawful for them to lay down their Arms, without any faudulent
reservation, excepting such, who were condemned of capital offenses. Moreover
it was decreed, that the Consuls should make a new Leuy, that Antonius should
pursue Catiline with an Army volant, and that Cicero should guarde the City.

At that time the face of the Roman Empire seemed most miserable unto me; for
although al places were subjected by their Arms, from the rising of the Sun
to the setting thereof, and that they wallowed at home in ease and wealth,
(things which man's nature does most affect) yet did the City nourish some ill
members, who were obstinately bent to (...) themselves, and the Republike: For
after two Decrees of the Senate published, there was not one man of to great a
multitude, so far moved with the promised reward, that he would discover any
thing concerning the conspiracy, neither was there any fugitive known to fly
from Catilines Camp, so great was the violence of this malady, which like a
pestilent contagion had dispersed it self almost through the generality.
Neither were their minds alienated alone, who were knowing of this complot, but
even the whole body of the Commonalty, being desirous of innovation, did
approve Catilines undertakings, and this seems to be done according to
custom; for always in a Commonwealth, those men whose fortunes are low, envy
the good, magnify the bad, mislike antiquities, wish for novelties, and in
disdain of their proper estates, they desire a general alteration, feeding
themselves securely with troubles and tumults; because their poverty could
hardly be damnified.

But as for the Plebeians of the City, they precipitated themselves into this
action through sundry motives. First of all, those who most exceeded in
lewdness and petulancy; then, those who had shamefully wasted their
Patrimonies: and lastly, all snch, whom some notorious offense or outrage, had
expelled from their owue dwellings, the confluence of these repaired to Rome,
as if it had been a sink of receite. Besides, many others being mindful of
Syllaes victory, because they had seen some common Soldiers made Senators,
and others so enriched, that in diet and apparel, they lived after a Royal
manner, hoped to reap such fruits by the victory, if that were purchased by
their Arms. Moreover, the Peazant youth, who by the hire of their hands had
got their livings in the fields; being allured with the hope of private and
public largesses, had preferred the Cities ease, before the thriftlesse
Country labor. These and all others of this kind; did feed on the public
calamity. It being a matter not much to be wondered at, that penurious persons,
of evil conditions, and aspiring minds, should equally neglect themselves and
the Commonwealth. Moreover, such as had their parents proscribed, their goods
confiscated, and the privilege of their liberties entrenched upon by the
rigor of Syllaes victory, did attend the event of this war, with a
resolution answerable to the former. Again, whosoever were of any faction,
except of the Senatorian, did rather desire the trouble then the tranquillity
of the State. This mischief, after many forepassed years, made his reuerse
again into the City.

For after the Tribunitiall power was restored, Cn. Pompeius, and M. Crassus
being Consuls; certain young men having gotten the sovereign authority (whose
years and spirits were disposed to violence) they began by traducing the
Senate to exasperate the common people, and then to engage them further by
their large gifts and promises: by which popular courses they themselves became
renowned and powerful. Against these Innouatours, the greatest part of the
Nobility opposed themselves, with the strongest means that they could, under
the pretense of maintaining the Senate, but indeed for the support of their
own greatness. For (that I may briefly deliver the truth) whosoever in these
times disturbed the public peace, counterfeiting the care of the
Commonwealth, under the favor of honest names; as to be protectours of the
peoples privileges, or aduancers of the Senates authority, all of them strove
to enlarge their own power. Neither was there any mean nor modesty in their
contentious courses, and being victorious, they were ever unmerciful.

But after that Cn. Pompeius was sent unto the maritime and Mithrida^icke
wars, the Plebeian faction declined, all greatness being engrossed by some
few. These intrested themselves with Magistracies, Provinces, and all other
dignities. Then they spent their time in security, flourishing without any man's
disturbance.

As for the rest, they terrified them with their severity, the means by which
they thought to rule the people best, in this their usurped Magistracy. But as
soon as the first hope of innovation presented it self, the former quarrel
inflamed their courages: so that if Catiline had been superior in the first
Battle, or had fallen off upon equal terms, for certain a miserable
slaughter and calamity had oppressed the Roman State: for those who had
vanquished, should not long have inioyed the benefit of the victory; but a
stronger party would have extorted from them, being weary and wounded, their
acquired Empire and liberty.

There were many men besides not listed in the Conspiracy, who with the first
went forth to Catiline. Amongst these, there was one A. Fuluius the son of a
Senator, who being fetched back, as he was upon his journey, was slain by his
fathers command.

CHAP. 12.
Lentulus strengthens his party at Rome. Vmbrenus acquaints the Ambassadors
of the Allobroges with the plot. Sanga gets a draught of it.
DVring the time of these occurences, Lentulus solicited at Rome, either by
himself or his Agents, (according as Catiline had given order) all those,
whom for their conditions, or fortune, he thought fit instruments for his
purpose. Neither did he deal with the Citizens alone, but with all sorts of
men that were serviceable for the wars. To this end he gives instructions to
P. Vmbrenus, that he should found the Ambassadors of the Allobroges, and draw
them, if he could, into the society of this action: thinking that they would
easily be persuaded to join, as being in private and public much indebted:
and besides, the nation of the Gauls is by nature in clined to Arms.

Vmbrenus, by reason he had negotiated in Gaul, did know, and was known unto
most of their principal Citizens. Therefore as soon as he saw the
Ambassadors in the Common Hall, having made some few demands, concerning the
State of their City, and seeming to deplore her wrerched case, he began to
inquire, what end they did expect of these their great greeuances. When he
perceived, that they complained by way of reply, of the covetousness of the
Magistrates, and blamed the Senate, because they could have no redress from
them, and that they expected no remedy for their miseries, but by death only.
Why then (says he) if you will show your selves men, I will put you into a
course, by which you may shun all these inconveniences. As soon as he had
delivered these words, the Allobroges being possessed with great hopes, importune
Vmbrenus to take compassion on them: for there was nothing so dreadful nor
difficult, but they would undertake to do it willingly, so that the
performance of it would free their City from her debts. Thence he brings them
into the house of D. Brutus, as being near to the Common Hall, and by means
of Sempronia no stranger unto the plot. And Brutus was as then absent from Rome.

Besides, that his speech might carry the more authority, he sends for
Galinius. He being present, Vmbrenus discloseth the conspiracy at large. He
names the confederates, and with them many men of sundry degrees, being
altogether innocent; and this he did, to give further encouragement to the
Ambassadors. Then he dismisseth them home, after they had promised their best
assistance. But as for the Allobroges, they stuck long upon doubtful
resolutions. On the one side stood their debts, their inclination to war, and
the large rewards expected from the victory. On the other side they beheld a
stronger party, safe courses, and certain rewards, for uncertain hopes. They
pondering these things in their minds, the fortune of the Republicke at length
prevailed. And so they delivered unto Q. Fabius Sanga, (a man whose patronage
their City much used) a full draught of the Conspiracy, according as they had
heard it related. Cicero, informed of this secret by Sanga, commands the
Ambassadors, that they should deeply counterfeit their affections to the
design, that they should visit the rest of the Conspiratours, should promise
largely, and endeavor to the utmost, to detect all the Accomplices.

CHAP. 13.
Metellus and Murena apprehend diverse of the Conspiratours. Lentulus and
Cethegus dispose themselnes for action.
Near about this season, there were sundry tumults stirring in the hither and
further Gaul, as also in the Picemian, Brutian, and (...) ter^itories. For
those whom Catiline had before sent out, vncounsellably like mad men, shuffled
all their businesses together: with their night counsels, with their carriage
of Arms and weapons, with their posting to and fro, and disquieting of all
places, they had caused more fear then danger. Of this number, the Praetour Q.
Metellus Celer had committed diverse to prison, they being found guilty upon the
examination of their Confederates. The like did C. Muraena in the hither Gaul,
he being Deputy Lieutenant of that Province. But at Rome Lentulus had
determined with other principal Conspiratours, (great Forces being provided
for that purpose) that when Catiline should advance with his Army into the
Fesulan Tract, Lu. Bestia, Tribune of the people, should reprehend Ciceroes
actions in a public Oration, and should impose the envy of this dangerous
war upon the well-deseruing Consul. And that this serving for a signal, all
the rest of the Conspiratours were to execute their several charges the next
night following. The division whereof was said to be in this manner. Statilius
and Gabinius being strongly accompanied, were to fire at once twelve convenient
places of the City; in the tumult whereof they might facilitate their means
of passage to the Consul and the rest, against whom their plots were intended
Cathegus was to beset Ciceroes gate, and to assail him forcibly: others were
to do the like to others. Besides, the sons of sundry families (most of whom
were of the Nobility) had orders given to massacre their own parents, and in
the general terror of fire and slaughter to make their escape to Catiline.

In the passage of these preparations and designs, Cathegus still blames the
cowardice of his companions; telling them, that by their doubts and dilatory
courses, they neglected fair opportunities: that in a danger of that nature it
was more behoofefull to do, then deliberate. That himself, if some few would
assist, would not fail to set upon the Court, although the rest fainted in
courage. This man was by nature violent, and prompt of hand: he esteemed
celerity for the spirit of action.

CHAP. 14.
The Allobroges follow Ciceroes instructions. His project succeeds, Lentulus
is arraigned.
NOw the Allobroges (according to Ciceroes directions) meet by Gabinius
procureme^t with the other Conspiratours: they demand an oath of Lentulus,
Cathegus, Statilius, and Cassius, the tenure whereof being subsigned, they
might present to their Citizens: for otherwise they would hardly be drawn
into a business of that consequence. All the rest without suspicion did
condescend: only Cassius promises to repair thither speedily, and remoues
from the City somewhat before the Ambassadors. Lentulus sends one Titus
Vulturtius of Crotona, to accompany them: to the intent, that the Allobroges
before they returned home, might confirm this League with Catiline, by faith
given and taken interchangeably. He delivers letters to Vulturtius for
Catiline: the copy whereof is as follows.

Who I am, you may understand by this Messenger, which I have sent unto you:
see that you think upon the great extremity you are in, and remember to play
the men, consider what your affairs require, and implore aid of all, yea,
even of the meanest.

Besides, he gives instructions to him by word of mouth, that since he was
adjudged a Traitor by the Lords of the Senate, he should be well advised in
rejecting the service of the slaves in the City; all his commands were upon
the point of execution, that he should not fail to approach nearer with
expedition.

These affairs standing thus, on the night appointed which they were to
depart, Cicero being instructed by the Ambassadors, he gives order to the
Praetours L. Valerius Flaccus, and C. Pomptinus, to apprehend (by way of
ambushment) all the retinue of the Allobroges on the Miluian bridge. Then he
opens the whole circumstance of the business, for which they were employed: as
for the rest, he wished them to proceed as occasion should require. These
military men following their instructions, and having disposed the Guardes
without tumult, did covertly beset the Miluian bridge. After the Ambassadors,
together with Vulturtius were comme to that place, a confused noise was raised
on both sides: the Gauls knowing the plot beforehand, forthwith rendered
themselves to the Praetours. Vulturtius having first encouraged the residue,
defends himself with his sword against the multitude; at length seeing
himself forsaken of the Ambassadors, having first required many things of
Pomptinus concerning his safety, (for that the other was a man well known unto
him) he yields at last, growing fearful and diffident of life, unto the
discretion of the Praetours, as if it had been to his professed enemies.

This business being thus effected, all the passages thereof were speedily
signified to the Consul. But him a mighty care and ioyfulnesse possesses
together. He rejoices, for that the City was freed from dangers: besides he
was careful, such Citizens being detected of so heinous a crime, what might
be most requisite for him to do. Their punishment would be a burden to him,
their impunity, the Republickes ruin. At length having confirmed his mind, he
commands Lentulus, Cathegus, Statilius, Gabinius, and Ceparius of Terracina,
to be summoned before him. The last of whom was ready to take his journey into
Apulia, for raising of a servile commotion there. All the rest appear without
delay: only Ceparius, being gone abroad, and the disconery being known unto
him, was already fled from the City. The Consul leading Lentulus by the hand,
in regard he was Praetour, brought him into the Senate house: the rest he
commands to come with their Keepers into the Temple of Concord. Thither he
summons the Senators, and in a frequent assembly of that Order, he brings in
Vulturtius with the Ambassadors. He bids ^laccus the Praetour, to produce the
Box with the packet of letters, which he had formerly taken from them.
Vulturtius being examined upon Interrogatories, concerning his Journey, his
letters, and last of all about his Intentions, what they were, and for what
end; at first, he faineth all excuses that could be, he dissembleth his
knowledge of the Conspiracy; afterward being commanded to confess upon the
assurance of the public faith, he tells them, that he knew nothing more then
did the Ambassadors: only he had heard frequently from Gabinius, that P.
Antronius, Seruius Sylla, and L. Varguntius were of the Conspiracy: the Gauls
confessed the same. The Lords taxed Lentulus dissembling deeply, besides the
letters, with speeches which he was wont to utter out of the Sibilline books;
as that the Empire of Rome was portended to three Cornelij; Cinna, and Sylla,
were gone before, himself was the third, who was destined to rule the City.
Moreover this was the twentieth year from the burning of the Capitol, of
which the Soothsayers out of the prodigies had often foretold, that it should
prove bloody by Civil war.

Upon this, the letters being read, when all of them acknowledged their own
seals, the Senate decreed that Lentulus resigning his Magistracy, should with
the rest be kept under free custody. Therefore Lentulus was committed to P.
Lentulus Sphinther, (who was then Aedile) Cathegus to Q. Cornificius,
Statilius, to C. Caesar, Gabinius, to M. Crassus, Ceparius, (for he was a
little before retracted from his flight) to Cn. Terencius a Senator.

CHAP. 15.
The Commons measuring all things by the event, detest the Conspiracy.
IN the mean time, the Commons, the Conspiracy being detected, (who at the
first, longing after innouatio^ too much favored the war) retracting their
opinions detested Catilines counsels; they extolled Cicero even to the skies,
and like men freed from bondage, gave themselves to joy and frollicknesse: for
that they esteemed other outrages of war to be bent more upon pillage then
ruin, but the execution of fire was held cruel, extreme, and most hurfull to
them, all whose wealth served but for quotidian use, and their bodies
sustenance.

After this, one Lucius Tarquinus was brought before the Lords of the Senate,
being fetched back (as they said) as he was upon his journey toward Catiline.
When this man promised to discover the Conspiracy, if the public faith were
assured unto him: being commanded by the Consul to deliver what he knew, he
confesses almost the same in effect unto the Lords of the Senate, that
Vulturtius did: about the preparation of fire, the slaughter of the good, and
the Rebels expedition. Moreover, that he was sent by M. Crassus to tell
Catiline, that he shonld not be terrified with the apprehension of Lentulus,
Cethegus and other Conspiratours; but should the rather make speed in his
journey, toward the City, to the intent he might revive the courage of the
residue, and that their delivery from danger might be the sooner accomplished.

But as soon as Tarquinius had appeached Crassus, a man of noble descent,
great wealth, and much power, some thought it a matter incredible, others,
although they esteemed it for a truth, yet because the powerfulness of such a
man, seemed fitter to be reconciled, then exasperated at such a season, (most
of them also being engaged to Crassus for private respects) they cried out all
together that the accuser lied, and required, that there might be a reference
of this matter. Whereupon by the advice of Cicero, a frequent Senate decreed,
that Tarquinius accusation seemed false, that he should be kept in bonds,
neither should he have any further power granted to himself, except he would
reveal him, by whose suggestion he had forged this notorious scandal. There
were some in those times, who thought this accusation, to be first devised by
P. An^ronius, of purpose, that Crassus being appeached, his power might portect
the rest through the Community of the danger: others reported, that Tarquinus
was suborned by Cicero; lest Crassus, according to his custom, should disturb
the Commonwealth, by undertaking the protection of wicked persons. I heard
Crassus himself afterward publish, that this great disgrace was imposed upon
him by Cicero. yet at the same time Q. Catulus, and Cn. Piso could not persuade
Cicero, either with request or reward, that by the Allobroges, or any other
accuser, C. Caesar should be wrongfully questioned: for both these were at
mortal enmity with him: Piso for that he was overthrown in Judgment, for the
extortion of money in his Province, upon the unjust punishment of a certain
Transpadan: Catulus was offended about his suite for the Pontificacy, because
in his old age, having borne many honorable Offices, he received the repulse
from Caesar, being but a young man. Besides, the occasion seemed opportune, for
that he by his great liberality in private, and by his excessive largesses in
public, did owe great sums of money. But when as they could not draw the
Confull to such a crime, they themselves by soliciting severally, and by
faining such things as they were to say, they had heard from Vulturtius, and
the Allobroges, had procured him much envy: in so much, that some Roman
Knights, who with their Arms had the Guard about the Temple of Concord, either
moved with the greatness of the danger, or the forwardness of their minds, so
to make their zeal to the Commonwealth to appear more clearly, threatened
Caesar with their swords, as he went forth of the Senate.

CHAP. 16.
The Traitors are condemned. Caesar's Oration.
VVHilest these things passed thus in the Senate, and that rewards were decreed
for the Ambassadors of the Allobroges, and T. Vulturtius, their information
being generally allowed. the freed-men and some few of Lentulus dependants,
taking their iourneies severally, solicited the day-labourers and slaves in
the villages, for his rescue. Others suborned the Ringleaders of the
multitude, who for bribes were wont to disturb the Commonwealth. As for
Cathegus, he requires by messengers his domestics and freedmen, (choice
fellows and exercised in boldness) that trouping together they would make
(...) them with impunity. Likewise in all the Punicke wars, when the
Carthaginians in the times of Peace and Truce, did often commit many grievous
outrages, they did never for this occasion requite them with the like: they
rather pursued that, which was worthy of themselves, then that, which with
Justice might have been inflicted upon them. This also ye ought to provide for
(C. F.) that the Treason of B. Lentulus and the rest, do not prevail more
with you, then your own dignity; neither ought you to be more careful of
revenge then reputation: for if an equal punishment can be found out for their
offenses, I, allow this new counsel: but if the heinousness of the crime
exceedes all imagination, I think it expedient to take those courses, which
are prescribed by the Laws.

Most of them, who before me have delivered their minds, have lamented the
state of the Commonwealth, in eloquent and high language: they have related,
what the cruelty of the war might be, what miseries might be fall the
vanquished: as virgins, and boys to be ravished, children to be pulled from
their parents imbracements, mothers of families to be defiled at the victours
pleasure, Temples and houses to be spoiled, murder and fire to range freely;
and lastly all places to be filled with Arms, Carkeises, blood shed and
mourning. But by the immortal gods, to what end tended their speech? was it to
make you offended with the Conspiracy? as though, forsooth, he could be
provoked with words, whom so high and heinous a crime could not move: The
supposition is untrue: for no mortal man lessens the estimation of his own
wrongs, yea many men interpret it too rigorously.

But in diverse men the license of this is different (ye conscript Fathers) for
those who live low in an obscure calling, if through anger they have committed
any error, few men take notice of it, their fame and fortune being both alike.
As for those, who being invested with great commands, spend their time in high
employments, their actions are manifested to all men's knowledge. So that in the
greatest fortune, the privilege of offending is least: neither does it beseem
those who have it, to be partial in favor or hatred, much less to be angry:
for that which is termed anger in others, in men of command is called pride,
and cruelty.

I think verily (ye C. F.) that their offense exceeds all punishment: but most
men remember the next occurrences, so that in wicked men's censures forgetting
the crime, they dispute of the punishment, if that seem never so little too
rigorous. I know for certain, that whatsoever D. Sillanus a valiant and
resolute man has said, that it proceeded from his zeal to the Commonwealth:
neither has he in so important a matter exercised his private amity or hatred:
I have known the conditions and modesty of the man to be such: as for his
Sentence it seems nor cruel) to me (for what cruelty can be inflicted upon
such male factours?) but unusual it is in our form of government: for
questionless, fear or wrong have enforced thee ( O Sillanus) being Consul
Elect, to decree this new kind of punishment. It were superfluous to discourse
of fear, since by the present diligence of our most worthy Consul so many
strong Aids are now in Arms. Of the punishment I can truly say that, which
the case requires. That death to men in anguish and misery, is no torment, but
the period of calamities: It dissolues all the terrors of mortality, beyond
that, there is no place for grief or gladness.

But by the immortal gods, why did you not add to the Sentence, that first of
all they should be scourged with rods? was it because the Portia^ Law forbids
it? but other Laws also impose exile, not death upon condemned Citizens: or
was it because scourging is more grievous then beheading? If it be so, what
censure can be too bitter, and cruel, against persons convicted of so heinous
a fact? But if because the punishment is gentler then that, how then should it
be convenient to observe the Law in small matters, when you neglect it in the
greater? But should any man reprehend that, which is decreed against Traitors
to the Commonwealth? Time, occasion, and fortune will determine, whose swaye
moderates all Nations, that whatsoever may befall them, shall befall deservedly.

Besides, I would have you to consider (ye Conscript Fathers) what you may
decree against others All evil examples proceeded from good beginnings: but
when the Government is diuolued to men not knowing, or not good enough, this
new example is transferred from worthy and capable persons, to those that are
unworthy and incapable. The Lacedaemonians, the Athenians being vanquished,
appointed thirty men to govern that State. These at first began to put to
death every man that was most wicked and generally, hated, although he were
uncondemned. The people applauded this course, and said it was urged from their
deserts. after, when this liberty by degrees increased, they murdered at their
pleasure both the good and bad, and terrified the rest with fear. Thus the
City being oppressed with servitude, suffered grievously for her inconsiderate
joy.

When as in our memory Sylla the Conqueror commanded Damasippus and others of
the like condition to be slain, that were grown great by the public
calamity, who did not commend this act of his? They reported, that these wicked
and factious men^, who had troubled the State with their seditions, where
justly put to death. But this was the beginning of a great massacre: for when
any man affected the house, farm, vtensill, or apparel of another, he
endeavored to list him in the number of the proscribed. So that those, who
formerly rejoiced at Da masippus death, were dragged not long after to the same
block: neither was there first an end of slaughtering, before that Sylla had
enriched all his partakers. I fear not this in M. Tullius, nor in these times:
yet in this great City, there are many and various humors. At another time,
another man being Consul, who has also an Army to command, a falsehood may be
misinterpreted for a truth. When from this precedent, by the Decree of the
Senate, the Consul shall vnsheath his sword, who shall then prescribe an end,
or moderate the execution of it?

Our Predecessors (ye Conscript Fathers) never wanted counsel, nor courage;
neither did pride hinder them from imitating foreign institutions, if they
were honest. They borrowed their Arms and military weapons from the Samnites,
their Ensigns of Magistracy from the Tuscans. Lastly, whatsoever seemed
convenient, were it in use with their Allies or enemies, they practiced it at
home with exceeding industry. They were more willing to imitate then envy the
good. But in that time, following the custom of Greece, they punished
Citizens with stripes, upon the condemned they executed capital punishment.
After this, when the Commonwealth grew strong, and factions were of force
through the multitude of Citizens, the innocent were circumuented, and other
like abuses began to be committed. Then the Portian Law, and other Laws were
enacted, by the benefit whereof, banishment was permitted to the condemned. I
think this to be a sufficient cause (ye Conscript Fathers) for which we
should not embrace any new resolution: for certain there was more virtue and
wisdom in them, who from such mean foundations have established so glorious
an Empire, then in us, who do hardly retain their lawful acquisitions.

Is it therefore my pleasure to have them dismissed, and Catilines Army to be
thus reinforced? nothing less: but this is my censure: That their goods should
be co^fiscated, themselves be kept in bonds in the infranchised (Towns of best
ability, and that no man shall make any reference for them to the Senate, nor
mediate with the people: he that shall do otherwise, the Senate should adiudge
him to undertake against the Commonwealth, and the public safety.

After Caesar had finished his speech, some assented to it by Voting, others
otherwise amongst themselves. M. Portius Cato being required to deliver his
mind, he uttered this or the like Oration:

My mind far differs in it self (ye Conscript Fathers) when I consider our
occasions and dangers, and when I balance with my self some men's opinions:
they to me seem to have argued about their punishment, who have sought to
bring war upon their Co^ntry, Parents, Temples, and Families. But the
occasion does admonish us, rather to be cautelous of them, then to consult,
what is to be decreed against them. For other crimes you may then punish, when
they are committed: except you provide that this does not happen, being happened
you implore Justice in vain. The City being taken, no power remains to the
conquered.

But by the immortal gods I appeal to you, who have always esteemed your
Houses, Farms, Skutcheons, and Pictures, more then the Commonwealth, if you
will retain those things, which you so much embrace, of what condition so ever
they be; if you will give full scope to your pleasures; rouse up your selves at
length, and undertake for the Republicke. Our tributes are not questioned, nor
the wrongs of our Confederates, our liberties and lives are become doubtful.
Often have I spoken at large (ye Conscript Fathers) in this Assembly, and have
frequently complained of the luxury and avarice of our Citizens; for which
cause I have many enemies: I that could never favor any offense in my self,
or my own soul, did hardly remit faults to the lust of others. But although
you meanly regarded my words, yet the State stood firm; prosperity bore out
our negligence. But now it is not questioned, whether we live in a good
condition or bad; neither how great and glorious is the Empire of the Roman
people; but whether these, whatsoever they be, shall be entirely ours, or ours
together with our enemies. Here will any man name to me lenity and mercy? we
have for certain lost already the proper appellatio^s of things: for the
donation of other men's goods is termed liberality: a mischievous daring
fortitude. To such extremities is the State now reduced. Well, let them be
(since such are the customs) liberal out of their friends fortunes; let them
be merciful to the Robbers of the public Treasure, yet let not them lauishly
give our blood; and whilst they spare some few wicked, seek to ruin all good
Patriots.

Well, and learnedly has C. Caesar discoursed not long since in this Assembly
concerning life, and death; as I conceive, thinking those things to be false,
which are reported of the infernal places, that the evil in a Region remote
from the good, have loathsome, rude, filthy, and fearful habitations.
Therefore has he censured, that their goods should be confiscated, that
themselves should be kept prisoners in the infranchised Towns: forsooth, lest
being at Rome they might be forcibly freed, either by their fellow
Conspiratours, or by the suborned multitude: as though wicked and lewd men were
only in the City, and not throughout all Italy, or that boldness could not
there do most, where the means to defend are weakest. Vain therefore is this
counsel, if he doubt any danger from them: but if he alone fears, not in a
general fear, by so much the more it conce^nes me to be fearful both for my
self and you. Wherefore when you shall determine of Lentulus, and the rest:
hold it for a certainty, that you have decreed of all the Conspiratours. By how
much the more you shall be careful in this, by so much their spirits will be
the more dejected: but if they shall see you to faint never so little, all of
them will forthwith insult with more fierceness.

Do not think that our Ancestors, made from a small one this Republicke
great by Arms: if it were so, we should enjoy it more flourishing by far; in
that we abound more then they in Allies, Citizens, Armor and horses. No,
there were other advantages, which made them great, and are wanting to us:
industry at home, Justice abroad, a Judgment free in Counsel; neither
obnoxious to error or passion. In lieu of these we have entertained luxury and
avarice, with sordidnesse in the public, and abundance in our private
expenses. We commend Riches, follow sloth: there is no distinction made between
good and evil men: ambition usurps all the rewards of virtue. Neither is it
strange, since all of you for your selves, hold your Counsels a part, since at
home you are slaves to your pleasures, here to money or favor; so that wrong
is enforced upon the neglected Commonwealth. But these things I omit.

Citizens most nobly descended, have conspired to ruin their Country, they
inuit the Gauls (a Nation most adverse to the Roman name) unto the war:
the Captain of the Rebels with his Army houers over your heads: you protract
time, and even now you doubt what to do with these Traitors, being
apprehended within the walls. I think you pity them: being young men,
forsooth, they have offended through ambition, and therefore you may dismiss
them armed. But assuredly this meekness and mercy, if they shall once take
Arms, will turn to your calamity.

For certain the case is dangerous, yet you fear it not: yes verily, nothing
more. But through sloth and softness of spirit, expecting one another, you
make delays; relying belike on the immortal gods, who have preserved this
Commonwealth in many and most great dangers. Not by vows, nor womanish
prayers the succor of the gods is procured, through vigilance, action, and
good counsel, all designs succeed well. Whereas you abandon your selves to
sloth and idleness, you implore the gods in vain: they by this are offended
and angered.

Amongst our Predecessors A. Manlius Torquatus in the Gallicke war, commanded
his son to be slain, because against command he had fought with an enemy; and
thus this brave young man suffered mortal punishment for his immoderate
valor. Do you delay, what you shall decree of these most cruel parricides?
Perchance their former life mitigates this offense. But spare Lentulus dignity,
if ever he spared his modesty, reputation, the gods or men: pardon the
youthfulness of Cethegus, if this be not the second time, that he has made
war against his Country. For of Gabinius, Statilius, and Ceparius, what shall
I speak? unto whom if any thing had ever been respective, they would never
have entertained such counsels against the State.

Last of all (ye Conscript Fathers) if indeed there could be any suffrance of
this mischief, I could well endure, that you should be corrected by the event
it self: but every where we are circumuented: Catiline with his Army braues
us to our teeth: other Traitors are within the walls, and in the bosom of the
City. Nothing can be prepared nor counseled with secrecy: for which cause,
the more expedition is to be made* wherefore thus I censure: That since by the
mischievous counsel of some wicked Citizens, the Commonwealth has bin
brought into the greatest dangers, and these men are convicted by the
deposition of Ti. Vulturtius, and the Ambassadors of the Allobroges; and have
confessed, that they intended slaughter, fire, and other outrages, horrid and
heinous against their Citizens and Country; that upon them confessing, as men
apparently guilty, punishment should be inflicted according to the custom of
our Ancestors.

After Cato was set down, all those who had been Consuls, and a great part of
the Senate besides, commended his Sentence, and even to the Heavens extol his
virtue: some of them blaming others, call them dastards: Cato is reputed great
and excellent.

CHAP. 17.
A digression of the Author, occasioned from the premises, with a true
description and comparison of M. Cato, and C. Caesar.
But unto me reading and hearing many things, which the Roman people in peace
and war; on the land and sea, have achieved bravely; it seemed good to
consider, what means had supported such great enterprises. I knew that with
small Forces, they have oftentimes incountred great Armies of their enemies: I
knew that with contemptible numbers, they have warred against mighty Kings,
besides they have frequently suffered the violence of fortune. The Greeks in
eloquence, the Gauls in military renown excelled the Romans. Yet unto me
pondering many things it appears plainly, that the remarkable virtue of a
few Citizens brought all these things to pass; and so it befell, that
poverty overcame riches, the few the multitude.

But after, when the City was corrupted with Riot and sloth, the Commonwealth
again through her proper greatness sustained the vices of her Generals and
Magistrates; and as though she had lately brought forth all her Patriots, there
was not any man found at Rome for a long season of eminent virtue.

But in my memory, there lived two men of much virtue, yet of different
conditions, M. Cato, and C. Caesar, whom, because the occasion presents it
self, I do not resolve to pass over in silence, but will deliver their lives
and manners, as far as my wit will enable me.

Therefore the parentage, years and eloquence of these men were almost equal,
their greatness of mind and glory were alike, but other things they pursued
otherwise: Caesar for his benefits and munificence, was reputed great, Cato for
the integrity of his life: the one was renowned for his meekness and mercy;
to this man, severity added dignity. Caesar by giving, releeuing and pardoning,
Cato by parsimony got renown. The one of them was a Sanctuary to the
oppressed, the other, the ruin of malefactors. This man's facility, that man's
constancy was commended. Last of all, Caesar was resolved in mind to labor,
watch, to be intentive on his friends affairs, with neglect of his own: to
deny nothing that was worth the giving; he desired excessiuely a great command,
Army, and new wars, where his virtue might express it self. But Catoes
study was modesty seemelinesse, and above all, severity. He did not strive with
the rich man in riches, nor with the factious man in faction, but with the
valiant in valor, with the modest in modesty, and with the innocent in
abstinence. He had rather be, then seem good: so that, by how much the less
he pursued glory, by so much the more he purchased it.

CHAP. 18.
The Senate resolving to follow Catoes counsel, commandes execution to be done
upon the Traitors.
AFter the Senate (as I have said) condescended to Catoes opinion, the Consul
thinking it the best expedient, to anticipate the next night; lest any thing
might be innouated in the mean time, he commands the Triumuirs to prepare
provisions needful for the execution: he himself, the Guardes being disposed,
conducts Lentulus unto the prison, the like is done to the rest by the
Praetours. There is a place in the prison called Tullianum, as soon as you are
ascended a little toward the left hand, it stands about twelve foot deep in
the ground, the walls fortify it round about, and above, a vault bound
together with stone Arches: but the aspect of it is filthy and fearful
through darkness, stench and neglect of cleansing. Lentulus being brought
thither, the Executioners for capital crimes, to whom this was enjoined,
strangled him with a halter. Thus this man being a Patrician, of the most Noble
Corn^lian Family, having born Consular command in Rome, found out a death
worthy of his conditions and actions: the like punishment was taken upon
Cethegus, Statilius, Gabinius, and Ceparius.

CHAP. 19.
Catiline joins his Forces with Manlius. He deuides his Army into two
Legions. Being pursued by Antonius, he takes the Mountains.
VVHilest these things pass at Rome Catiline out of all the Forces, which
himself brought, and Manlius had, ordaines two Legions, he makes his Cohorts
complete for the number of Soldiers, and as any of the Volunteers, or of the
Confederates came into the Ca^p, he distributed them equally, and in a short
space, had filled up his Legions to the just numbers; whereas at the first, he
had no more then two thousand. But of all this multitude; there was about a
fourth part furnished with military arms, the rest as chance armed each one,
carried Iauelines, Lances, or sharpe-pointed staves.

But after Antonius approached with his Army, Catiline marched through the
monntaines, he removed his Tents, sometimes toward the City, sometimes
toward Gaul, he presented no occasion of fighting to the enemies. He did
hope that forthwith he should have great Forces, if his associates at Rome
could effect their designs. In the mean time he cassiereth the slaves, (of
whom at first great numbers repaired unto him) relying on the Aids of the
Confederacy. Besides, it seemed inexpedient for his ends, to communicate the
cause of Citizens with fugitive slaves. But when a Messenger came to the
Camp, with tidings, that the Conspiracy was detected at Rome, that upon
Lentulus, Cethegus, and the rest, (whom we have before remembered) punishment
was inflicted: the most part of those, whom hope of pillage, or the desire of
innovation had allured to the war, stole away secretly: the residue Catiline
leads through the rough mountains, with large marches, into the Pistorian
territory, of purpose that by Deuious ways he might unperceived fly into
Gaul. But Q. Metellus Celer commanded with three Legions in the Picenian
tract, who thought that Catiline through the difficulty of his affairs, did
meditate that means of escape, which we have formerly rehearsed.

Therefore as soon as he was informed of his journey by the fugitives, he
remoues his Camp in haste, and sits down under the very foot of the
mountains, whereas the others descent was flying into Gaul. Neither yet was
Antonius far off; as following with a great Army, through more even ways,
those that were wholly disposed for flight. But Catiline after he saw himself
enclosed with the mountains, and Forces of his enemies: that in the City
things were adverse: that there was neither hope of flight, nor aid: thinking
it the best course in this case, to hazard the fortune of war, he resolves
to fight with Antonius upon the first occasion: therefore an assembly being
called, he makes this Oration.

CHAP. 20.
Catilines Oration to the Rebels. A description of the battle.
I Have found by experience, fellow Soldiers, that words infuse not valor
into men, nor that an Army becomes strenuous from dastardly, nor valiant from
fearful, by the Oration of a General. How much courage is seated in each
man's soul, either by nature or custom, so much manifests it self in war.
whom neither glory nor danger excite, him you may persuade in vain: the fear
of the mind hinders attention. But I have called you together, with intent, to
admonish some few things, and withal that I might unfold the reasons of my
counsel. You know full well (my Soldiers) what mischief the solution and
cowardice of Lentulus brought to himself and us, and by what means, (whilst I
expected Aids from the City,) I was hindered from going into Gaul. But now
you perceive all, as well as my self, in what extremity our affairs are: two
Armies of our enemies debar us; one from the City, the other from Gaul: to
stay longer here, if our resolution could bear it, the want of corn and other
necessaries prohibites; wheresoever we mean to go, the way must be opened by
the sword.

Therefore be of a valiant and prepared mind, and when you shall begin the
battle, remember that you carry in your right hands riches, renown, and glory,
with your liberty and Country besides. If we overcome, all things will be
secured to us; abundant provisions, the privileged Towns and Colonies will
discover: but if we shrink for fear, these will all prove our enemies.
Neither will any place or friend shelter him, whom his arms shall not protect.
Besides, (my Soldiers) the same necessity is not impendent over us and them:
we contend for Country, liberty, and life: they are at leisure to fight for
tyranny of some few. For which cause fall on more courageously, being mindful
of your ancient virtue.

It had been lawful for us, to have protracted our lives in exile with the
most disgrace that could be: some of you at Rome, having lost your own, might
have expected other men's riches. Because these courses seemed base and
insufferable for men, you resolved to pursue these other. If you will
relinquish these, there is need of courage. No man, except the Conqueror, has
changed war for peace. For to seek safety by flight, when you shall divert
your arms from your enemies, by which the body is defended, that is madness
indeed. Always in a battle, their danger is greatest, who fear most: courage
is accounted for a wall.

When I consider you (my Soldiers) and when I esteem your brave acts, a
great hope of victory does possess me: your resolution, age, and virtue,
persuade me, besides the necessity, which also makes the cowards valiant. For
that the multitude of our enemies may not enclose us, the fastness of the
place forbids: but if fortune shall envy your valor, beware that you lose not
your lives unrevenged, nor that being taken, you be slain like beasts, rather
then fighting like men, to leave a bloody and mournful victory unto the
enemies.

As soon as he had spoken thus, pausing a little, he commands the warlike
instruments to sound, and draws out his Troops in order unto a convenient
place: then all the horses being removed, to the intent, that the danger being
made equal, courage might be amplified in his Soldiers, he himself on foot
arangeth his Army, as the place, and his numbers required. For whereas the
plain was seated between mountains on the left hand, and on the right hand it
was rough with rocks: he places eight Cohorts in front; his other Troops he
imbattailes for succor in a more close order. Out of these he draws all the
Centurions, and the selected men that had served out their years, besides
every one of the common Soldiers, that was best armed, into the Van of the
Vanguard. He commands C. Manlius to take charge in the right wing, and a
certain Fesilan in the left; he himself with the freedmen and those of the
Colonies took up his station before the Standard of the Eagle, which Marius
was said to have in his Army in the Cimbrian war.

But on the other side, C. Antonius, because being lame of his feet, he could
not be present at the battle, commits the whole charge of his Army to M.
Petreius his Lieutenant. He imbatailes the old Cohortes which were enrolled
because of this tumult, in the Frount, after them he disposes the rest of his
Forces for aids of reserve. He himself riding round about on horseback,
naming every Commander severally, coniures, persuades, and intreates, that they
would remember, how that they were to fight against unarmed Thieves, for their
Country, children, Temples, and Families. This Martial man, because for more
then thirty years, he had been with great glory, either Tribune, Provost
Marshall, Lieutenant, or Pretour in the Army, knew most of the Soldiers, and
their valiant exploits: by rehearsing these, he inflamed their courages.

But as soon as Petreius, all things being thus ordered, had given the signal
by sound of Trumpet, he commands the Cohorts to advance a little, the enemies.
Army does the like. After they came to that distance, from whence the light
armed skirmishers might begin the battle, they encounter one another with a
mighty noise, and hateful signs: they leave their Piles, and try the matter
at swords point. The Veteranes mindful of their ancient virtue, press them
hardly at hand fight, the others resist without fear, on both sides they
fought with much fierceness.

In the mean time, Catiline with the readiest Soldiers is engaged in the
point of the Van-garde: he succors the distressed, sends in fresh supplies for
the wounded, prouides for all events: he himself fights bravely, and charge
the enemy often: he performs together all the Offices of a valiant Soldier,
and worthy General.

Petreius, as soon as he saw Catiline, contrary to his expectation, to make a
forcible impression, he brings on the Praetorian Cohort upon the midst of his
enemies, and kills them being disordered, resisting here and there: then he
assailes the rest on both sides, in flancke, Manlius and the Fesulan fall with
the first.

After that Catiline saw his Troops broken, and himself with some few
remaining; being mind. full of his parentage and former dignity, he runs
amongst the thickest of his enemies, and fighting there is slain. But the
battle being ended, then might you discern, how much courage; and strength of
spirit had bin in Catilines Army. For almost the same place, which each man
maintained fighting, the same his soul being departed; he covered with his
body. But some few, through the midst of whom the Proetorian Cohort broke,
made a stand differently in diverse places; yet all of them fell by fair
wounds. As for Catiline, he was found amongst the carkeises of his foes, far
from his own men, breathing as yet his last; and that fierceness of mind,
which he possessed living, he retained then in his countenance.

Lastly of all that number, neither in the fight nor flight was any free
Citizen taken prisoner. Thus all of them alike spared their own, and their
enemies lives. Neither yet did the Army of the Roman people obtain a joyful
and unbloody victory. For every man that was most valiant, was either slain,
or went from the field grievously wounded. But many who issued out of the Camp
for view or pillage, turning up the enemies carkeises, found some a friend,
others a guest or a near kinsman, yea there were those who knew their very
foes. Thus variously gladness and grief, mirth and mourning, were moved
throughout all the Army.

The end of Catilines Conspiracy.
THE WAR OF IVGVRTH: Rendered into English by William Cross, Master of
Arts, of Saint Mary-hall, in Oxford.



LONDON, Printed for Tho. Walkley, and are to be sold at the Eagle and Child,
in Britains. Bursse. 1629.

To the right Honorable the Lord Harbert of Castle Island, William Cross
wishes the fullness of temporal and eternal happiness.
RIght Honorable, your gracious, though undeserved favors, encourage me to
present this piece of the Iugurthine war, to your most Noble hand, and able
Judgment. The Royal pen of Queen Elizabeth, has been formerly Verst in
this Translation, but this being like to herself, and too good for the world,
was never published. The subject is high, copious, and full of variety: such
are the sallies of the Authors wit, such his expressions of language: both
which are so well suited together, that without any Hyperbole or excess of
speech, I may boldly say, if there be any difference: Materiam superabat opus,
the Worke-man-ship exceeds the matter. If this Work may pass to public
view, through the favor of your Patronage, the Labourer thinks his endeavors
recompensed with a fair Harvest, and will for ever remain

Your Honors devoted Servant, William Cross.

The Proeme or Introduction.
FAlsely mankind complains of his nature, that being feeble, and of short
continuance, it is ruled more by fortune then virtue. For by a contrary
estimation, you can find nothing more great nor excellent; and rather to
nature, humane industry is wanting, then time or ability. But the guide and
ruler of man's life is the mind: which when it pursues glory by the way of
virtue, it becommes abundantly able, powerful and illustrious. Neither sta^ds
it in need of fortune: for because honesty, industry, and other good Arts, she
can neither give nor take from any man. But if seduced with evil desires, it
inclines lewdly to sloth, and bodily pleasures, using pernicious lust for a
season; when through idleness, strong the time and wit are decayed, in vain
is natures infirmity accused. All Authors impute their faults to the occasions.

But if men had as much regard of goodness, as with earnestness they pursue
things impertinent, profitlesse, yea exceeding dangerous, neither should they
be more governed, then govern chances: and should proceed to that pitch of
greatness, whereas for mortals they should be eternized with glory.

For as mankind is composed of body and soul, so all our actions and
endeavors follow some the disposition of the body, some of the soul.
Therefore a fair face, great riches, corporal strength, and all other things
of this kind, fade away in a short time, but the glorious monuments of wit,
like as the soul, are immortal: Finally, for the indowments of the body, and
fortune, as there is a beginning, so there is an end: and all of them being
borne, dye, and increased, wax old. The mind is uncorrupted, eternal, the
governor of mankind, it does and possesses all things, neither is it self
possessed.

By how much the more their wickedness is to be wondered at, who being addicted
to carnal delights, waste their time in sloth and riot; but the wit, then
which there is nothing better, nor greater in humane nature, they suffer to
rust, through idleness and want of manuring; when especially there are so many
and so different Arts of the mind, by which the chiefest renown is procured.

But amongst these, Magistracies, commands, and all care of public
employments seem not fit to be desired of me at this present: for that neither
honor is given to virtue, nor they, who by falsehood have got any power, were
thereby the more secured or honested: For by violence to rule your Country,
and parents, although you can, and may reform abuses; yet is it unseasonable:
when especially all alterations do forboade murder, flight, and other
hostilities. But to labor in vain, and to purchase nothing else but hatred
for our pains, is a part of extreme folly; unless perchance in such a man,
whom a dishonest and hurtful desire does enforce to prostitute his honor and
freedom unto the power of some few.

Now, amongst other employments exercised by the wit, the memory of things
done, serves for most special use; of whose worth, because many men have
treated, I resolve to pass it over; withal, lest any man might think me to
commend my own study. And I do believe there will be some, who, for that I
have decreed, to spend my remaining years far from the Commonwealth, will
impose the name of idleness on this my so great and profitable work: such
verily, to whom it seems a chief point of industry to salute the common
people, and by feasting to procure favor: who if they did but thoroughly
consider, in what times I obtained the Magistracy, and what men could not
attain it then: and after, what persons came to be Senators; truly they would
conjecture, that rather deservedly then out of sloth, I had altered my
determination: and that more profit would redound to the Commonwealth wealth
out of my retirements, then other men's employments.

For I have often heard Qu. Maximus, P. Scipio, with many other famous men of
this City, usually say, when they beheld the statues of their Ancestors, that
their minds were most vehemently inflamed to virtue. Certainly, not that wax
nor figure had such efficacy in it: but through the memory of things formerly
done, this flame was kindled in these brave men's breasts, neither could it be
first allayed before their own worthiness had equallized the others renown
and glory.

But contrariwise who amongst you all is of this condition, but would rather
contend with his Ancestors in wealth and expense, then in goodness, or
industry? yea, vpstarts, who by virtue were wont to usher home nobility, by
stealth, nay, plain robbery rather, advance themselves to commands and
honors: as though, the Praetourship, Consulship, and other like dignities were
in themselves worthy and magnificent; and were not esteemed according to their
virtue which manage them. But I have ranged too freely and too far, whilst
the manners of the City grieve and irke me. Now I return to the matter in
hand.

CHAP. 1.
Micipsa sends his nephew Massinissa to Numantia: he behaues himself worthily
in that service. He is accepted and made coheire with his sons. Micipsa dies.
I Am writing the war, which with Iugurth King of the Numidians, the Roman
people waged: first, because it was great and cruel, and doubtful for the
victory. Secondly, because then the pride of the Nobility was first opposed:
which contention confounded all divine and humane respects: and proceeded to
that height of madness, that to these civil broiles, war, and the wasting
of Italy must set a period. But before I begin to treat of this subject, let
me repeat some few things more ancient, that so to your knowledge, all the
sequel may appear more plain and manifest.

In the second Punicke war, in which Hannibal the Carthaginian Captain, had
after the greatness of the Roman name, much wasted the wealth of Italy;
Massinissa King of the Numidians, being received into friendship by P. Scipio,
(whose surname from his virtue, was afterward the African,) achieved many
glorious exploits of war: in regard whereof, the Carthaginians being
vanquished, and Siphax taken, (whose Empire was great in Afric, and of large
extent) the people of Rome gave for a donatiue to the King, whatsoever Cities,
and territories they had got in this conquest: for which cause Massinissaes
friend-ship remained firm and faithful unto us. But his life and Empire ended
together.

After him his son Micipsa obtained the Kingdom alone, Mastanabal, and Gulussa
his brethren being dead of sickness. He begot Adherbal and Hiempsal, and
brought up Iugurth the son of his brother Mastanabal, (whom because borne of
a Concubine, Massinissa had left private) with the same education that he did
his own children. who as soon as he came to ripe years, excelling with
strength, and comeliness of countenance, but most of all with an able wit, he
gave not himself over to the corruptions of luxury and sloth; but (as the
custom of that Nation is) to riding, darting, and in race matches to contend
with his equals; and though he out-went all men in glory, yet was he dear to
them all: Besides he spent most of his time in hunting: he would assail the
Lion, and other wild beasts, first, or with the first: he did the most, and
spoke least of himself.

For which causes, although Micipsa rejoiced at the beginning, as deeming that
Iugurths virtue would be an honor to his Kingdom: yet when he considered,
that this young man, (he himself being old, and his children little,) improued
himself more and more; being much moved with the occasion, he pondered many
things in his mind. The nature of men being covetous of command, and prone to
fulfill their own desires; besides, the opportunity of his own and his
childrens age, (which also for hope of gain, alters the course of temperate
men) afforded him matter of terror; as likewise did the Numidians affections
wholly bent upon Iugurth; from whom he was doubtful, that some sedition or
war would proceed, if he should treacherously kill so worthy a person.

Being environed with these difficulties, when he saw that neither by force nor
fraud, he could oppress a man so popularly beloved, he resolves, for that
Iugurth was valiant of hand, and desirous of military glory, to expose him to
dangers, and that way to try his fortunes. Thereupon in the Numantine war,
when as Micipsa was to send Aids of Horse and Foot unto the people of Rome:
hoping that either by the ostentation of his valor, or the enemies fury he
would be soon slain, he gives him the chief command over those Numidians,
which he sent into Spain. But the event of this was far otherwise then he
expected: For Iugurth, as he was of an active and sharp conceit, when he
found out the disposition of Pu. Scipio, General as then for the Romans, and
withal, the enemies behavior: by much labor and much care, besides by
obeying modestly, and incountring dangers willlingly, he came to that renoune
in a short time, that to our men he was very dear, to the Numantines very
dreadful: and for certain (which is a thing most difficult) he was valiant in
battle, and wise in counsel; one of which commonly out of providence begets
fear, the other out of boldness begets temerity.

Therefore the General performed for the most part all difficult affairs by
Iugurth, he rankt him amongst his friends, and honored him every day more then
other; as one whose counsel and undertaking never failed. To these were
adioined munificence of mind, and dexterity of wit, by which qualities he
aduantaged himself with the familiar friendship of many Romans.

At that time sundry vpstarts, and Noblemen served in our Army, who preferred
riches, before that which was good and decent: being factious and powerful at
home, more popular amongst their companions, then honest in themselves: who by
promises had kindled great hopes in Iugurth, that when King Micipsa once dyed,
he alone should enjoy the Kingdom of Numidia: in him there was a large portion
of virtue: at Rome all things were to be sold.

But after that, when Numantia being destroyed, P. Scipio resolved to dismiss
his Aids, and to return home himself, he brought Iugurth (with intent to
reward and honor him) before the assembly, into the Praetorian Tent: And there
in secret gave him these admonitions: that he should rather publicly then
privately observe the friendship of the Roman people, that he should not
accustom himself to particular largesses: those favors would be bought
dangerously from some few, in which many were interessed: if he would be
constant to his own courses, renown and the Kingdom would come to him
freely: but if he should proceed with too much haste, he and his money would
be ruined together.

Having spoken thus, he dismissed him with letters, which he was to deliver
unto Micispa. The contents of them were these.

The valor of thy Iugurth in the Numantine war, has been most remarkable:
which for certain I know rejoices thee: he is for his merits dear to us;
that he may be so to the Senate and people of Rome, we shall endeavor with all
our power: I am sincerely thankful to thee for our friendship. Behold, you
have a man worthy of your self, and his grandfather Massinissa.

Therefore the King, as soon as he saw those things confirmed by the Generals
letters, which he had formerly heard by a common fame, moved with the worth and
respect of the man, resolves to win Iugurth with his bounty: thereupon he
adopted him, and by his testament ordained him coheire with his sons: But he
himself after some few years, being spent with sickness and old age, when
he perceived his end of life to approach, was said to have had these words with
Iugurth, his friends, and kinsmen, and his sons being present.

I entertained thee into my Kingdom (O Iugurth) being a child left without
hope, without fortunes; conceiving that I should be as much indeared to thee
for my benefits, as if I had been thy natural father: neither has this
opinion deceived me. For to omit others of thy great and glorious exploits,
returning lately from Numantia, thou have honored both me and my Kingdom with
glory; and by thy virtue have made the Romans of Confederates, most intimate
friends. The name of our family is renewed in Spain: finally, which is a thing
most difficult amongst mortals, with glory thou have vanquished envy.

Now because nature does an end to my life, I do warn and conjure thee by
this right hand, and the Kingdoms allegiance, that thou will regard lovingly
these my children, who are thy kinsmen by birth, thy brethren by the benefit of
my adoption; nor that thou would rather adioyne strangers unto thee, then
retain them conjoined in blood. Not Armies, nor treasure are the safeguards of
a Kingdom, but friends: whom thou can neither force by Arms, nor get with
gold: by good offices and fidelity they are procured. But who can be more a
friend then a brother to a brother? or what stranger shall you find faithful,
when you shall be an enemy to your own flesh and blood? Surely I leave you a
Kingdom strong, if you be good; weak, if you be wicked: for by concord small
things increase, bydiscord the greatest are dissolved.

Besides it becomes thee, (O Iugurth) since thou art their elder in years, and
wisdom, to foresee, that nothing fall out otherwise then well. For in every
controversy, he that is most powerful, although he receives the wrong, yet
because he is most able, he is thought to do it. But as for you Adherbal,
and Hiempsal, love and observe this so worthy a man imitate his virtue, and
endeavor to the utmost, that I may not seem to have adopted better children,
then I have begotten.

To this Iugurth, although he knew the King dissembled in his speech, and his
own thoughts were far otherwise, answered respectively for the present:
within some few days Micipsa dies.

CHAP. 2.
The three Kings assemble about the partition of the Kingdom. Iugurth is
disgraced. by Hiempsal: his revenge and victory.
AFter they, according to the manner of Kings, had performed his obsequies
magnificently, the Princes met all together, that they might consult amongst
themselves of their affairs. But Hiempsal, who was the youngest of them all,
being proud by nature, and formerly despising Iugurths ignobilitie, because on
the mothers side, his descent was mean, sat down on the right hand of
Adherbal, left Iugurth should be the middlemost of the three, which is
accounted the place of honor amongst the Numidians. Yet at length being
importuned by his brother to yield it to the elder, he was hardly removed from
thence to the other side.

There when many things were discussed for the administration of the Kingdom,
Iugurth amongst other assertions maintains, that all their consultations and
decrees for five years last past ought to be nullified: for during all that
time, Micipsa being-spent with age, was scarce sound in mind. Then Hiempsal
answered, that this pleased him: for that he himself within these last three
years came by adoption to be coheire of the Kingdom: which speech sunk
deeper into Iugurths breast, then any man thought. Therefore from that time
being perplexed with anger and fear, he labors, prepares, and only plots the
means, by which Hiempsal might be treacherously surprised. The proceedings
whereof being slow, and his fierce mind unappeased, he resolves howsoever to
execute his purpose.

In the first assembly before mentioned, it was agreed upon by the Kings, in
regard of their dissension, that the treasures should be divided, and that the
bounds of each ones Dominion should be limited. Thereupon a time for both ^hese
is prefixed, but the money was to be soonest distributed: The Kings in the mean
time removed severally into places adjoining near to the treasures. But
Hiempsal by chance took up his lodging in ones house in the town of Thermida,
who being chiefest Sergeant at Arms to Iugurth, was much beloved and esteemed
of him: whom being offered for an instrument by fortune, he loades with
promises, and persuades: that under the color of visiting his house, he should
forge false keys for the gates, for the true ones were delivered to Hiempsal:
Moreover, when occasion should serve, he himself would come with sufficient
Forces.

The Numidian speedily executes his commands: and as he was instructed, brings
in Iugurths Soldiers by night: they dispersing themselves, seek the King: they
kill some sleeping, others incountring them: they search the secretest places,
break up the barred doors, and confound all things with noise and tumult:
when in the mean time Hiempsal is found out, being hid in the cottage of a
woman servant, whither at the first being frighted, and ignorant of the place,
he was fled. The Numidians, as they were commanded, brought his head to Iugurth.

Now the fame of so great an outrage is quickly divulged throughout all
Afric: a sudden fear surpriseth Adherbal and all those, who had been under
Micipsaes government. The Numidians are divided into two parts: the most follow
Adherbal, but that other the best men of war. whereupon Iugurth leuyeth the
greatest Forces that he could* the Cities, partly by force, and partly by
voluntary surrender he adioines to his own Dominions: and makes preparations
to subject all Numidia^

B^t Adherbal, although he had sent Ambassadors to Rome, which were to inform
the Senate of his brothers murders, and his own estate, yet trusting in the
multitude of his Soldiers, he prouides a trial by Arms: when the matter came
to debatement, being overcome he flies out of the battle into his Province,
and from thence he poasteth to Rome. Then Iugurth his designs being
compassed, after he got the Soueraignety of all Numidia, considering at leisure
the fact by him committed, he much feared the people of Rome; nor against their
indignation could he assure any hope, except it were from the avarice of the
Nobility, and his own money. Therefore some few days after, he sends his
Ambassadors to Rome with much gold and silver, to whom he gave in charge;
that first with gifts they should satisfy his old friends: then they should
procure new: finally, that they should not delay to corrupt with bribes,
whomsoever they could.

But as soon as the Ambassadors were arrived at Rome, and according to their
Kings command had sent rich presents unto their Patrons and others, whose
authority as then was most powerful in Senate: such an alteration forthwith
insued, that Iugurth from their highest displeasure, was received into the
grace and favor of the Nobility: Part of whom being induced with hopes, part
with rewards, labored by suing to the Senators severally, that no rigorous
Decree might pass against him. Thereupon as soon as the Ambassadors were
fully confirmed, an Audience in Senate, upon an appointed day is granted to
both parties: Then Adherbal (as we have heard) spoke after this manner.

CHAP. 3.
Adherbals Oration to the Senate. The reply of Iugurths Ambassadors.
YE Fathers Conscript, Micipsa my father enjoined me, that I should think the
deputed Government of the Kingdom of Numidia to be only mine; that the right
and Sovereignty was entirely yours: withal that I should strive to the utmost
both in peace and ^^arre, to be most seruicea^^ unto you: That I (...) esteem
you in the place of kinsmen and Allies. If I did thus, I should possess by
your friendship Armies, riches, and the fortresses of my Kingdom* Which
precepts of my fa^then, whilst observed, Iugurth a man of all; whom the earth
bears, the most wicked, has thrust out me Massenissaes nephew, and your
Confederate and friend, as it were by inheritance, out of my Kingdom, and all
my fortunes.

And since (ye Fathers Conscript) I was to arrive at this point of misery, I
would that rather for my own, then my Ancestors, I could claim^^ ^^^sistance
from you; But especially, that good offices might be due to me from the Roman
people, of which I stood not any ways necessitated; next to this I would, if
they were to be wished for, that I might use them as debts of duty. But because
goodness is hardly safe in itself, neither was I assured, what Iugurths
demeanor would be, I fled to you for refuge (ye Fathers Conscript) unto whom,
which is the greatest misery to me, I am compelled to be a burden, before I
could be useful.

Other Kings either subdued by war, have been by you admitted into
friendship, or else in their doubtful, affairs, have required your alliance.
Our Family contracted friendship with the people of Rome in the Carthaginian
war, at what time their faith was more to be valued, then their fortune,
whose offspring, me and Massinissaes nephew do not suffer (ye Fathers
Conscript) to implore your Aid in vain. If I had no other cause to require it
besides my wretched fortune: in that, being not long since a King powerful in
lineage, renown and forces; now deformed with troubles, and poor, I do expect
other men's helps: yet had it concerned the Majesty of the Roman people to
repel this injury, and not to suffer any man's Kingdom to be enlarged by
villainy.

But I am expelled out of those territories which the Roman people gave to my
Ancestors; from whence my father and grandfather, jointly with you, chased
Siphat and the Carthaginians: Your benefits are wrested from me (ye Fathers
Conscript) you in my wrong are despised. Ay me wretched man. To this issue, (
Micipsa my father) are thy benefits come; that whom thou have made equal with
thy children, and partaker of the Kingdom, he should be the chief suppresser
of thy progeny? never therefore shall our Family rest? shall we always
converse with blood, arms, and flights?

Whilst the Carthaginians flourished in safety, all grieuances* we justly
suffered. The enemy on each side: you our friends were far off, all hope lay
in our arms. But after that plague was rid out of Afric, we exercised peace
securely; as unto whom there was no foe, except perchance such a one, whom you
would inioyne. But behold Iugurth advancing himself with insufferable
boldness, pride, and villainy (my brother and the same his kinsman being
slain) first, made his Kingdom the reward of his wickedness: after, when he
could not circumuent me with the same wiles, expecting nothing less then war
or violence; in your Empire, as you see, he has made me live in exile from my
house and Country, being poor, and overwhelmed with miseries; so that any
where my abode may be safer, then within my own Kingdom.

I thought so (ye Conscript Fathers) as I had heard my father relate; that they
who should observe your friendship strictly, undertook a laborious task, but
that of all men they were the safest. What lay in our families power, it
performed, to assist you in all your wars; it lies in your hands (ye Conscript
Fathers) to safeguard us at your leisure. Our father left: us two brethren,
this third Iugurth he thought by his benefits to allye unto us: one of the two
is slain, the other has hardly escaped his impious hands.

What shall I do? or whither, wretch that I am, shall I address my self? all
supports of alliance are lost: my Father by the decree of nature is deceased: a
kinsman, whom it least beseemed, has villanously murdered my brother: the
rest of my Confederates, friends, and kinsmen, this or that mischief has
severally oppressed. Those whom Iugurth has attached, some have been
crucified, others have been exposed to wild beasts: a few whose souls are
only left, being shut up in darkness with anguish and grief, lead a life
more grievous then death.

If all those proprieties, which I have either lost, or from being useful, are
become hurtful, remained entire: yet if any unexpected calamity happened, I
should implore you (ye Fathers Conscript) to whom for the Majesty of your
Empire, all right and wrong ought to be regardfull. But now being banished from
my house and Country, or ^orne, and wanting an honest accommodations, whither
shall I go? or to whom shall I appeal? unto the Nations and Kings, all of
whom hate our family in regard of your friendship? what, can I go to any place
where there are not many hostile monuments of my Ancestors? will any
commiserate us, who was ever an enemy to you? finally, Massinissa taught us
thus (ye Fathers Conscript) that we should observe none but the people of Rome,
that we should contract no new Confederacies and Leagues, that in your
friendship we should have sufficient assurance. If the fortune of your state
suffered alteration, we must perish with you.

By your own virtue, and the favor of the gods you are mighty and powerful;
all things are prosperous and obedient unto you: so that you may with more ease
relieve the wrongs of your Confederates. Only this I fear, that Iugurths
private insinuation (as yet not well discovered) may pervert some men's
judgments, who, as I hear, do with all their power labor, sue, and
solicit you severally, that you would not decree any thing of him being
absent, and his cause unheard, pretending that I disguise my speech, and
counterfeit flight, who if I list, might remain in my Kingdom. But would to
God I might see him, by whose unnatural treason, I am thrown into these
miseries, dissembling after the same manner: and that this care of humane
affairs might be took by you, or by the immortal gods, that he, who is now
grown proud, and honored for his villainies, being tortured with all kind of
mischiefs, might for his impiety toward my father, for the murmer of my
brother, and for my calamities, ^ender sufficient punishment.

Already (brother most dear to my soul) although thy life has been taken
from thee untimely, and by ill beseeming means, yet I think this, thy fortune
to be rather rejoiced at then lamented: for not a Kingdom, but flight, exile,
want, and all other miseries, which vex me, thou have lost together with thy
life. But I unhappy man, precipitated into such misfortunes, and beaten out of
my fathers Kingdom, do represent a spectacle of man's estate: unresolved what
to do, whether I shall persecute thy wrongs, being my self destitute of
help, or provide for my Kingdoms good, the power of whose life and death lies
at the mercy of others. Would to God to dye, were an end proper for my
fortunes; that I might not seem to live despised, if tired with troubles, I
yielded to injury.

Now, because I have no pleasure to live, nor power to dye without disgrace (ye
Fathers Conscript) coniured by your selves, by your children, your parents and
the Majesty of the Roman people, relieve me a man distressed, prevent my
wrong, and suffer not the Kingdom of Numidia, which is yours, to be polluted
with Treason and the blood of our family.

After the King had finished his speech, Iugurths Ambassadors more confident
in their gifts, then goodness of cause, answer briefly: that Hiempsal for his
cruelty was slain by the Numidians: that Adherbal of his own accord making
war, being overcome complained, because he was disinabled to do wrong; that
Iugurth requested the Senate, that they would take him for no other, then he
was known at Numantia: nor that they would value his enemies words before his
deeds.

Upon this, both of them depart the Court, forthwith the Senate takes
counsel: the Patrones of the Ambassadors, besides a great party corrupted
with favor, vilified Adherbal in their speeches: with praises they magnify
Iugurths virtue (...) with countenance, words, and all other means, they
strove to defend another man's treason and wickedness, as if it had concerned
their own honor.

But oppositely some few, to whom goodness and equity, were dearer then
riches, gave sentence, that Adherbal was to be succored, and Hiempsals death
was severely to be punished. But of them all, most earnest was Aemilius
Scaurus, a Noble man, of an active spirit, factious, covetous of rule, and
honor; yet one that could cunningly palliate his vices. He having observed the
Kings notorious and impudent bribery, fearing (as it falls out in like cases)
that with too much liberty of language, he might procure envy, he restrained
his mind from that wonted humor. Notwithstanding in Senate that part
prevailed, which before right preferred reward or favor. A Decree is made,
that ten Delegates should divide the Kingdom which Micipsa held, between
Iugurth and Adherbal. The chief of this Ambassie, was Lu. Opimius, a man much
esteemed, and powerful in Senate, because being Consul, when as C. Graccus,
and Mar. Fuluius were slain, he did rigorously prosecute the revenge of the
Nobility against the Commons. Him Iugurth, although he had formerly been his
friend at Rome, entertained with great respect: by giving and promising much he
wrought so, that before reputation, loyalty, nay all his own fortunes, he
preferred the Kings profit. The rest of the Delegates he attempted with the
like practice: to some few, faith was more respected then money.

In the division, that part of Numidia, which bordereth Mauritania, being more
opulent in soil and people, is assigned unto Iugurth: that other, (more
commended for show then profit, as having more Harbors, and fairer houses,)
fell to Adherbals lot.

CHAP. 4.
Afric described as was then known to the Romans. Her first Inhabitants.
THe occasion seems to require, that I should briefly deliver the situation of
Afric, and touch the conditions of those Nations, with whom we have had war
or peace. But what places and people have been scarce frequented, through the
skortching heat, mountains, and deserts, of them I will relate nothing for^
certain: the residue^ I will in few words unsold.

In the division of the terrestrial Globe, most men allow Afric for a third
part: some few would have only Asia and Europe: but Afric in Europe. Her
borders on the West are the Ocean, and Mediterranean seas; on the East a
spacious breadth of declining land, which place the Inhabitants call
Carabathmon. The sea is rough without havens: the soil is fertile of grain,
fit for Cattle, scant of trees. In the Air and earth, there is scarcity of
water. The people are healthful of body, swift of foot, patient of labor Old
age dissolues most of them, except perchance, such who perish by the sword or
wild beasts. For seldom sickness kills any. Besides there are many creatures
of venomous kinds.

But what people inhabited Afric at first, and who afterward arrived, and how
they were intermingled one with another, although it differs from the common
report; yet as it has been interpreted unto us out of the Punicke books,
which were said to be King Hiempsals, and as the natives of that Country think
to be, I will discourse in brief. But the credit of it shall be required of
the Authors.

In the beginning, the Getulians and Libians inhabited Afric, a rough and
barbarous people: whose food was the flesh of wild beasts, and such fruits of
the earth, as Cattle eat. These men were governed neither by customs, Laws,
nor Magistrates: wandering dispersed, they lodged there where night enforced. But
after that Hercules dyed in Spain (as the Africans do conjecture,) his Army
being composed of sundry Nations (having lost their Captain, and many of the
Leaders affecting the chief command) disbanded shortly after. Of this number
the Medes, Persains, and Armenians transported into Affricke by shipping,
seized upon the Regions confining on the Mediterranean sea; the Persians were
inmost from the Ocean; and they dwelt in the Hulles of their ships turned
vpside down, in lieu of Cottages: for neither the soil afforded materials for
building, neither had they means to buy or barter any from the Spaniards. The
great Sea, and an unknown language prohibited all commerce.

These by degrees, marrying with the Getulians, intermingled themselves with
them; and because trying the goodness of the pasture, they wandered from one
place to another, they called themselves Numidae. Now even to this day, the
houses of the Peazart Numidians, which they term Mapalia, being very large,
and covered with crooked tiles, do resemble the bottomes of ships.

Unto the Medes and Armenians, the Lybians adjoined themselves, for they lived
next the African Sea; the Getulians more near the Sun, not far from the
skortching heat, and these soonest inhabited Towns: For being divided from
Spain by a narrow sea, they resolved to traffic one with another. The
Lybians not long after corrupted their names, calling them in their barbarous
language, Mauri, for Medi.

But the estate of the Persians soon flourished; and after that the
Nomo-Numidians, because of multitude forsaking their parents, possessed that
territory, which lying next to Carthage is named Numidia. Then relying on each
others support, they enforced their neighbors, either by Arms, or the terror
of them, unto subjection: they got a name and renown: those especially which
were seated nearest to the Mediterranean sea. Because the Lybians were less
warlike then the Getulians: besides, for that all nether Afric is possessed
by the Numidians; all the vanquished were incorporated into the name and Nation
of the Conquerours.

Afterward the Phaenicians, some for lessening the multitude at home, some
through the desire of rule having solicited the Commons, and others longing
after novelties, built Hippon, Adrumetum, Leptis, and other Cities on the
seacoast; and these in short time being much augmented, became partly a safe
guard, partly an honor unto their first Progenitors.

For to be silent of Carthage, I hold it more pertinent, then to speak of
sparingly, since time warnes me to speed to another discourse.

Near therefore unto Catabathmon, which is the frountier dividing Egypt from
Afric, in the lower sea, first of all appears Cirene a Colony of the
Thereans; then the two Syrtes, and between them Leptis: last of all the A^tars
of the Philenian brethren, which place toward Egypt the Carthaginians had for
a border of their Empire: beyond are some Punicke Cities: the rest of those
Regions the Numidians possess, as far as Mauritania. The Moors are next to
Spain. Above Numidia we have heard the Ge^ulians are living partly in
Cottages, others of them wandering more wildly. Behind them are the Aethiopians,
then the Countries skortched with the Solar heat.

CHAP. 5.
The estate of the African affairs, when these Wars began. Iugurth ingageth
Adherbal to fight, and defeateth his Army.
THerefore in the Iugurthine war, the Roman people governed most part of the
Punicke Towns, and the territories of the Carthaginians last conquered, by
their Magistrates. A great part of the Gerulians, and the Numidians as far as
the river Mulucha, were under Iugurths rule: All the Moors King Bocchus
commanded, but by report, being wholly ignorant of the Roman people, and never
before known to us by any occasion of war or peace. Of Africa, and her
Inhabitants enough is spoken for the present use.

After that the Kingdom being divided, the Delegates were departed from
Afric; and Iugurth contrary to his own fear, saw that he had obtained the
rewards of his villainy; besides deeming as he had heard, from his friends at
Numantia, that all things at Rome were venall: and withal being inflamed with
their promises, whom before he had loaded with gifts, he bends his thoughts
wholly upon Adherbals Kingdom. He himself was fierce and warlike, but that
other whom he invaded, was peaceable, no Soldier, of a soft disposition, a fit
subject for wrong, more fearing, then to be feared.

Whereupon, Iugurth on the sudden does invade his Frountiers with a strong
Army: he takes many men prisoners, with Cattle and other booty; he burns
houses, and in hostile manner surprizeth many places with his Cauallery. Then
he retires with all his Troops into his own Kingdom; coniecturing that
Adherbal provoked with indignation, would forcibly revenge these wrongs, and
that would be a sufficient pretense for war.

But he, for that he esteemed himself no match for the other in Arms, and
because he relied more on the friendship of the Roman people, then on the
Numidians; he sends Ambassadors to Iugurth, to complain of these injuries who
although they returned a reproachful answer, yet first to suffer all things
was he resolved, then to undertake the war, because being formerly tried, it
had sorted to his loss. Neither for that was Iugurths ambition any whit
lessened, as one who in his conceit had swallowed the others whole Kingdom:
wherefore not as before with a predatory Troop, but with a mighty Army levied,
he began to make war, and openly claimed the whole Kingdom of Numidia.

Then whersoeuer he marched, he wasted the Cities and fields: he drives
preyes; in his own men he amplifieth courage, in his enemies terror.

Adherbal, when he perceived his affairs brought to this issue, that he must
either relinquish his Kingdom, or retain it by Arms, out of mere necessity
he raises Forces, and aduanceth to meet Iugurth: upon this not far from the
sea, near to the town of Cirtha, both Armies encamped: and because the day
was then closing, they did not begin the battle. But as soon as more then
midnight was past, the light being then obs^nre, the Iugurth^e Soldiers, a
signal being given, assailed the enemies Camp: some half sleeping, others
taking arms they chase and defeat: Adherbal with some few Horsemen escapes to
Cirtha: and except great numbers of Citizens had from the walls, stayed the
pursuing Numidians, in one day the war between these two Kings had been
begun and ended.

Thereupon Iugurth beleaguers the Town: with vine works, Towers and all other
warlike engines he endeavors to take it: making all possible speed to
anticipate the return of the Ambassadors, who before the battle fought, he
heard were sent to Rome by Adberbal. But after the Senate was informed of this
war, three young men are dispatched for Afric, who should go to both the
Kings, and deliver this message by word of mouth, That the Senate and people of
Rome, did will and require them to lay down their Arms: thus to do, was an
act worthy of themselves, and them their friends.

CHAP. 6.
Three young men dispatched from Rome unto the two Kings, arrive in Afric.
Iugurths deep dissimulation. After their departure he reinuesteth Cirtha.
THe Ambassadors came with more speed into Afric, because at Rome, whilst
they were preparing to go, they heard of the battle fought, and the besieging
of Cirtha. But that rumor was favorable.

Iugurth having understood the tenor of their message, answered: That to
himself not any thing was more esteemed, nor dearer then the authority of the
Senate: that from his youth upward he had so endeavored himself, that he might
get the approbation of all good men: that for his virtue, not his ill deeds, he
was gracious to P. Scipio, that man of men: for the same respects, he was
adopted by Micipsa into the Kingdom, not for any want of Issue. Besides, by
how much the more he had done things well and bravely, by so much the less
could his spirit digest wrongs. That Adherbal had treacherously laid wait for
his life, which as soon as he discoue^ed, he had but preuen^ed his villainy:
that the people of Rome should not deal according to justice nor honesty, if
^hey should debar him from the Law of Nations. Finally, that for the set^ing
of all his affairs, he would speedily send Ambassadors to Rome: Thus both of
them sever themselves. License of speaking with Adherbal was not granted.

Iugurth, as soon as he thought they were departed from Afric, for that in
regard of its natural situation, he could not force Cirtha by Arms: he
enuirones the walls with a Ditch and Rampire: he raised Towers, and assured
them with strong guards; more over, day and night he^ makes trial of his
fortune either by force or fraud he presents to those who defended the walls,
some times rewards, some times terror: by encouraging his own men he does
raise their valor he is wholly bent upon all needful preparations.

When Adherbal understood that all his fortunes were reduced unto a desperate
extremity, that the enemy was implacable, that there was no hope of Aid, that
for want of necessary means the wars could not be prolonged: of them, which
with him fled to Cirtha, he selected two of a most active disposition; them by
large promises, and commiseration of his estate, he induces, that through the
enemies works they should make an escape to the nearest sea, and from thence
to Rome. The Numidians in some few days perform his commands: The letters of
Adherbal were recited in the Senate: whose tenor was this:

Not through my own default (ye Fathers Conscript) do I send so often to
petition you: the violence of Iugurth, does enforce it: whom so strong a
desire of murdering me has possessed, that he has neither you, nor the
immortal gods in his mind; he does more thirst for my blood, then for all
things else. Wherefore now this fifth month, I being a Confederate and friend
of the Roman people, am besieged by force of Arms: neither the benefits of my
father Micip^a, nor your Decrees are auailable: whether with sword or famine he
does most press me, I am uncertain. To write more of this Iugurth, my fortune
does dissuade me: I have already tried, that small credit is given to miserable
men. But yet I do sufficiently conceive, that he aymeth at some thing above
that which I am, neither does he hope at once for your friendship and my
Kingdom: whether he pro^ects any thing more heinous, there is no man but
knows.

For at first, he murdered Hiempsal my brother: then he drove me out of my
fathers Kingdom. What injuries were solely ours, did nothing pertain to you.
But now he usurps my Kingdom by Arms: me whom you have appointed to rule
over the Numidians, he keeps shut up, and besieged. How much he valued your
Ambassadors speeches, my dangers declare. What remedy is left, but your power,
by which he may be removed? for verily I could wish, that those things, which I
now write, and those of which I have formerly complained in Senate, were all
false, rather then my misery should give credit to my words.

But because I was borne for this purpose, that I should be the scoff of
Iugurths vilanies, I do not now deprecate death and miseries, but only my
enemies tyranny, and bodily to ments. For the Kingdom of Numidia which is
yours, provide as you please: deliver me out of his impious hands, by the
Majesty of your Empire, by the faith of your friendship, if any remembrance
abides with you of my grandfather Massinissa.

CHAP. 7.
Ambassadors of greater quality are commissioned to go for Afric. They are
slack in their charge. Cirtha yields upon composition. Adherbal is slain.
THese letters being read, some were of opinion, that an Army was to be sent
into Africa, and Adherbal was to be forthwith succored: that they should
advise themselves concerning Iugurth, because he had disobeyed the
Ambassadors. But the very same favorers of the King labored with all their
power, that no such Decree should pass. Thus the public good (as it
oftentimes falls out) was overcome by private favor. Yet were there sent into
Afticke other Noble men, elder then the first, who had undergone most
honorable charges: amongst whom was M. Scaurus, (of whom we have formerly
spoken) one who had been Consul, and was as then President of the Senate.
These, because the foulness of the fact was subject to much hatred, and
withal being importuned by the Numidians, embarked themselves the third day
following; then landing not long after at Vtica, they dispatched letters to
Iugurth importing, that with all, possible speed, he should come to them into
the Province.

He as soon as he understood, that men of honor, whose authority he heard was
powerful at Rome, came purposely to cross his proceedings; being at first
much perplexed, he was diversely distracted with fear and desire. He feared the
displeasure of the Senate, if he showed himself disobedient to the
Ambassadors: again his mind being blinded with ambition, did violently
transport him toward the intended treason: yet evil counsel prevailed over
his headstrong disposition.

Thereupon his Army having surrounded Cirtha, he endeavors to force it to the
utmost of his power, being very hopeful, that the enemies Troops being thus
divided, he should by assault, or stratagem, find out some way of victory for
himself: which falling out otherwise, and being unable to effect, what he
intended, about the surprising of Adherbal, before he visited the Ambassadors;
lest by further delays he might offend Scaurus, who^ he much feared, with a
few Horsemen he comes into the Province. And although to the orders of the
Senate heavy comminations were added, in case he should not desist from the
siege, yet after much talk in vain, they departed without any further effect.

After these things were related at Cirtha, these Italians (by whose valor the
walls were defended) being confident, that upon a surrender made, they should
in regard of the Majesty of the Roman name, be dismissed without any further
hurt, do persuade Adherbal, that he should yield himself and the town to
Iugurth: only he should condition with him for his life, that as for the rest,
the Senate would be careful. But he, although he deemed all things safer then
Iugurths faith, yet because they had power in themselves to force him, if he
should be refractory, he makes a surrender. Thereupon Iugurth having first
tortured Adherbal, puts him to death; then he murders all the Numidian youth,
and merchants promiscuously, as any man incountred his armed Soldiers.

After which massacre was published at Rome, and the matter began to be debated
in Senate, the very same ministers of the King, by interposing themselves, and
protracting time, now by favor, then again by their cauils, did mitigate the
foulenes of the fact: so that except C. Memius Tribune of the people elect,
(being a man of courage, and much offended with the power of the Nobility) had
fully informed the people of Rome, that a plot was laid, for procuring Iugurths
pardon, by some few of his faction, without question all the hatred of this his
offense, had vanished into nothing, through their dilatory consultations. So
powerfully wrought the Kings favor and money.

But as soon as the Senate, through the conscience of their own error, grew
fearful of the people: by the Sempronian Law, Numidia and Italy were decreed
for Provinces to the future Cousuls. P. Scipio Nasica, L. Bestia Calpurnius,
were declared Consuls: to Calpurnius Numidia, to Scipio Italy fell by lot.
forthwith an Army is enrolled to be transported into Afric: pay and all
other provisions requisite for the war are appointed.

But Iugurth, contrary to his expectation, being informed of this by a
messenger; for because he was fully persuaded that all things were venall at
Rome: he sends his son, and with him two of his familiar friends Ambassadors
to the Senate, and gives them in charge, as he had done to those, whom he had
sent after Hiempsal was slain, that they should corrupt whomsoever they could
with money. who when they were come to Rome, the Senates advice was demanded of
Bestia whether it were their pleasures, that Iugurths Ambassadors should be
received into the City: and then the Lords decreed, that except they came to
surrender the Kingdom, and Iugurth himself, they should depart out of Italy
within ten days next following. The Consul out of the Decree of the Senate,
commands this to be reported to the Numidians: Thus they return home without
any success in their suite.

CHAP. 8.
Calpurnius is sent with an Army into Affricke. He is corrupted by Iugurth.
IN the mean time Calpurnius, an Army being leuyed, substitutes under himself
some Noble men, given to faction, by whose authority he hopes to fortify his
own faults: amongst whom was Scaurus, of whose nature and condition we have
formerly spoken. For in this our Consul, there were many good indowme^ts of
body and mind, all which Avarice choked. He was patient of labor, of a sharp
wit, provident enough, no ill Soldier, most firm against dangers and deceits.

But the Legions passing thro^gh Italy to Rhegium, and from thence into Sicily,
were finally transported from Sicily into Afric. Thereupon Calpurnius, having
first made provision of victuals, invaded Numidia fiercely: many men, and some
Cities he took there by plain force. But as soon as Iugurth by his
Ambassadors, began to tempt him with bribes, and to remonstrate the difficulty
of the war, which he now waged, his weak mind was soon corrupted through
Avarice.

Besides Scaurus is entertained for a Partner, and Administratour of all his
counsels: who although from the very beginning he had eagerly opposed the King,
when most of the faction were wrought to his hand; yet by a mighty mass of
money he was withdrawn from being good and honest, to be as bad as the worst.
But Iugurth only at first purchased a cessation from arms thinking that in
the intercourse thereof, he should compass something at Rome either by bribes
or favor: after when he heard that Scaurus was made a party in his cause, he
having great hopes of procuring peace, resolved to mediate with them personally
for a final agreement. But in this mean time Sextus the Treasurer was sent by
the Consul for an hostage into Vacca, a town of Iugurths: the color of this
mission was the receite of corn that Calpurnius had publicly imposed on the
Ambassadors; because through the delay of their surrender the truce was
prolonged.

Thereupon the King according to appointment, comes into the Camp: and having
delivered some few words, the Counsel being present, concerning the hatred of
his fact, and withal, that he might be received to mercy: the rest he
communicates with Bestia and Scaurus in secret, then the rest of their opinions
being demanded by a promiscuous voting, he is received upon terms of
composition. But as it was ordered before the Counsel, thirty Elephants, much
Cattle and Horses, with no small sums of money are delivered to the
Treasurer. Calpurnius goes to Rome for the election of Magistrates: in Numidia,
and our Army peace was observed.

When some had diuulged the passage and the manner of these African affairs:
at Rome in all places, and all assemblies, the Consuls demeanor was much
spoken of: the Commons were deeply incensed: the Fathers were much troubled:
whether they should approve a crime of such a high condition, or nullify the
Co^suls Decree. And chiefly the power of Scaurus, because he was reported to be
author of this to Bestia and his confederate, hindered them from courses of
equity and conueniency.

But Caius Memnius, (of the freedom of whose nature, and hatred of the
Nobilities greatness, we have formerly spoken) between the doubts and delays
of the Senate, exhorts the people in his Orations to revenge: he does
admonish them, that they should not forsake the Commonwealth, nor their own
liberty: he represents many insolent and cruel outrages of the Nobility: being
wholly bent to exasperate the minds of the Commons. But because Memnius
eloquence in those times was much spoken of, and renowned at Rome, I thought it
expedient, to render in writing one of his Orations amongst so many: and
especially, I will relate that, which he uttered in the assembly after Bestiaes
return, in these or the like words.

CHAP. 9.
The Eloquent Oration of C. Memmius to the people of Rome.
YE men of Rome, many reasons dissuade me from you, if the care of the
Republicke did not surmount them all: as the strength of the Faction, your
patience, and want of Justice; but specially that Innocence has more danger,
then Honor: for it greeues me verily to relate, how these fifteen years, you
have been the scoff of some few men's pride, how poorly and unrevenged your
protectours perished: so that through sloth and cowardice your spirits are
tainted: who not even now, rouse up your selves against these obnoxious
enemies; but withal ye fear those, whose terror ye ought to be: yet
howsoever these things stand, my mind is perforce resolved to oppose the power
of the Faction. Surely I will make an experience of that liberty, which
descended to me from my father; but whether I shall do this in vain or to the
purpose, it lie in your hands, O ye Romans!

Neither do I persuade you, which our Ancestors have often done that you
should encounter injuries with Arms there is no need of force, nor of
disunion: requisite it is, that they should run headlong in their own
courses. Tiberius Graccus being slain, (whom they reported to aim at the
Kingdom) grievous informations were preferred against the Co^monalty of Rome.
Besides after the murder of C. Graccus, and M. Fuluius, many men of your rank
were slain in prison. Of both these massacres, not law, but their lust limited
the period.

But verily it shall be making way to the Kingdom, to restore the Commons to
their own: whatsoever revenge cannot be exercised without civil blood, let it
be thought rightfully done.

In these former years you were secretly offended, that the Treasury should be
pillaged, that Kings and Free-states should be tributaries to some few Noble
men: that with them should remain the highest honor, and greatest weath: yet
to have committed these so great outrages without impunity, they have made it a
matter of small account. Therefore at length the Laws, your Majesty, all
divine, and humane privileges are betrayed unto your enemies: neither are
they, who have done thus, either ashamed or grieved: but they brave it in pomp
even to your teeth: some vanting their Priesthoodes, and Consulships, othersome
their Triumphs: as though forsooth they had these for marks of honor, not of
rapine.

Slaves bought with money do not well digest the unjust commands of their
Masters: do you (O ye Romans) borne to command, with patience suffer
servitude? But who are those, who have usurped upon the Commonwealth? The
worst of men, whose hands are bloody, whose Avarice is infinite, being most
nocent, and withal most insolent: by whom faith, honor, and religion, finally
all things honest and dishonest are accounted lawful sales. One part of them
for killing the Tribunes of the people: others for wrongful examinations, the
most part for murderous plots against you, challenge protections for
themselves. Thus, by how much every man has done worst, by so much the more is
he safe. The terror of this they have transferred from their own wickedness
to your cowardice. All of whom it has combined in one to desire, hate, and
fear alike. But this amongst good men is friendship, amongst evil faction.

But if you had so great a care of liberty, as they are ambitious to rule,
without doubt the Commonwealth should not, as it is now; be wasted; and your
benefits should be bestowed upon the best, not the boldest. Your Ancestors for
procuring their right, and establishing their greatness, twice disuniting
themselves, in warrelike manner possessed mount Auentine: will not you for the
liberty, which ye have received from them, strive with your best endeavors?
and by so much the more eagerly, by how much it is a greater dishonor, to lose
acquisitions, then to acquire nothing at all.

Some man will say, What therefore is to be done? do you give sentence to
take revenge upon them, who have betrayed the Commonwealth to the enemy? not
by the hand, nor by violence, which is more unworthy for you to do, then for
them to suffer? but by the examination and confession of Iugurth himself, who
if he surrenders himself, no doubt but he will obey your commands: but if he
contemnes them, then shall you make a true conjecture, what manner of peace, or
surrender that may be; by which to Iugurth impunity of his villainies, to some
few great men the greatest riches, to the Commonwealth damage and dishonor
does redound.

Except perchance as yet the same pleasure of their tyranny does possess you:
and those former times delight you more then these, in which Kingdoms,
Provinces, laws, rights, judgments, wars, and peace; finally all divine and
human rights were in the power of some few. But ye, that is, the Roman
people, being unvanquished by your enemies, and the rulers of all Nations,
thought it enough for your selves to live: for servitude which of you durst to
refuse?

And though I think it most loathsome to a man, to suffer wrong without
revenge, yet could I endure with patience, that you should pardon these
notorious malefactors, because they are Cit^izens; if this mercy would not
^urne to your ruin. For with them it works small effects, (how much
importunity soever they have,) that they have offended without punishment,
except a farther liberty of ill doing be taken from them: and with you an
everlasting vexation shall remain, when you consider that you must either
serve, or maintain your liberty by Arms.

For of faith and concord, what hopes are there? They would Lord it, you would
be free: they would do wrong, you would restrain it: last of all your Alies
they use like enemies, and your enemies like Alies. Can peace and friendship
dwell together in such different affections?

For which cause I do admonish and persuade you, that ye do not without
impunity slight so great an offense. This is no robbery of the Common
treasure: neither perforce are moneys extorted from our Confederates: which
crimes, although they are grievous, yet through custom, now they are esteemed
nothing. To a most merciless enemy, the authority of the Senate is betrayed,
your Soueraignety is betrayed. In peace and war the Commonwealth has been
set to sale. Which abuses except they be questioned, except punishment be
inflicted upon the offenders; what will remain further, but that we must live
slaves to them who have done these things. For with impunitie to do what you
list, that is to be a King.

Neither do I (ye Romans) persuade you, that at this time ye should rather
wish your Cittize^s to do amiss, then well; but that by pardoning the wicked,
you do not seek to ruin the good. Besides, in a Commonwealth, it is better
policy by far, to be unmindful of a benefit, then of an offense. A good man
only grows more slow, when you neglect him: a wicked man far worse:
More-ouer if injuries cease, you shall have no need of help.

By the frequent delivery of these, and such like speeches, C. Memmius
persuaded the people of Rome, that L. Cassius who was then Praetour, should be
sent to Iugurth: and upon the assurance of the public faith, should conduct
him to Rome, that more plainly by the Kings confession, the delinquencies of
Scaurus, and of the rest, whom bribes had suborned, might appear to all men.

CHAP. 10.
Cassius the Praetour is sent into Afric. He brings Iugurth to Rome. Bomilcar
by the Kings command murders his nephew Massiua. Upon this Iugurth returns
into Afric; and renewes the war.
Whilst these affairs pass thus at Rome, those who being deputed by Bestia,
commanded the Army in Numidia, following their Generals custom, committed
many, and most insolent outrages. There were some, who being corrupted with
gold, redeliuered the Elephants to Iugurth: others sold fugitives: others made
predatory excursions upon those, who had formerly made their peace.

But Cassius the Praetour, ( C. Memmius his demand being reported, and all the
Nobility being much terrified) passes over to Iugurth: and persuades him being
fearful, and distrusting his own estate out of the guilt of conscience, that
whereas he had yielded himself to the people of Rome, he would not make
trial of their force, rather then of their clemency.

Privately besides, he interposeth his own faith, which the other esteemed no
less then the public: such at that time was Cassius reputation.

Thereupon Iugurth, contrary to his royal dignity, comes to Rome in a most
wretched habit. And although in him there was great confidence of spirit,
(being encouraged by all those, by whose power or villainy, he had managed all
his former enterprises) he subornes with a mighty reward C. Baebius Tribune of
the people, by whose impudence he might fortify himself against all right,
and wrongful proceedings.

But C. Memmius, an assembly being called; (although the Commons were much
offended with the King, and some of them commanded him to be cast into bonds,
others, that except he appeached his Confederates, punishment should be taken
of him as of an enemy, according to the custom of their Ancestors:) regarding
dignity more then anger, pacified the tumult, and appeased their minds:
finally he gave his assurance, that the public faith should in it self
remain inviolable. Afterward, when they began to be silent, Iugurth being
produced, Memmius speaks. He relates his attempts at Rome and Numidia: he
declares his villainies against his father and brethren: by whose coassistance
and ministry he did these things, although the Roman people knew full well,
yet from him they would have them manifested more plainly. If he revealed the
truth, great hope was reposed for him, in the faith and clemency of the people
of Rome: but if he should conceal it, he should not for all that save his
accomplices, but would ruin himself and his own hopes.

Upon this, when Memmius had made an end of speaking, and Iugurth was commanded
to make his answer: C. Bebius Tribune of the people, (whom we have formerly
said to have been corrupted with money) bids the King to be silent: and
although the multitude which was present in the assembly, being much incensed,
terrified him with their clamor, countenance, frequent vehemence, and all
other expressions, in the doing whereof anger delights: yet impudence overcame.
Thus the people being made a mockingstocke, departed out of the assembly. To
Iugurth, Bestiae, and the rest, whom that examination trouble, their minds
became more insolent.

There was at that time a certain Numidian at Rome, Massiua by name, the son
of Gulussa, the nephew of Massinissa: who because in the dissension of the
Kings, he had been opposite to Iugurth; Cirtha being surrendered, and Adherbal
slain, escaping by flight, he forsook Afric. This man Spurius Albinus
persuades, (who the next year after Bestia, was Consul together with Q.
Minutius Rufus) because he was a descendent from Massinissa, that he should
prosecute Iugurth with hatred and terror: that the Kingdom of Numidia he
should crave of the Senate. The Consul was desirous to manage the war, he had
rather all things should be disturbed, then confirmed. To him Numidia, to
Minutius Macedonia befell for Provinces.

In which business when Massiua began to stir, and Iugurth was not
sufficiently protected by his friends: because some of them a guilty
conscience, others infamy, and fear of mind did hinder: he commands Bomilcar,
one who was nearest, and faithfullest unto him, that for reward, (the means by
which he had accomplished many things) he should procure some insidiously to
murder Massiua; and to do it with great secrecy; but if this plot did not
succeed, he should howsouer kill this Numidian.

Bomilcar speedily executes his masters commands: and by men, exercised in such
feats, he discouers his iourneies, and outgoings; finally all the
circumstance of times, and places. Then as soon as occasion required, he lays
his snares for him. Upon this, one of them who were prepared for the murder,
something unadvisedly assaults Massiua, and kills him: but being taken in the
very act, many men exhorting him, but chiefly the Consul Albinus, he makes a
free confession* Bomilcar is found guilty rather by the prescription of honesty
and equity, then by the Law of Nations: as being one of his retinue, who came
to Rome under the assurance of the public faith.

But Iugurth being detected of so heinous a crime, did not first omit to strive
against the truth, before he perceived, that the hatred of the fact did exceed
both his favor and money. Therefore although in the former treaty he had given
fifty of his friends for hostages: yet regarding more his Kingdom, then them,
he dismisseth privily Bomilcar into Numidia, doubting, that the rest of his
Co^federates would be fearful to obey him, if upon this man punishment should
have been inflicted. He himself also within some few days takes his journey
thither, being commanded by the Senate to depart from Italy. But after he was
gone forth of Rome, often silently looking back unto it, at length he said:
That the City was to be sold, and would quickly be lost, if it could but find
a Chapman.

In the mean time Albinus, the war being renewed hastes to transport into
Afric victuals, pay, and all other provisions, which might be useful for the
Soldiers: and forthwith he himself follows; of purpose, that before the
Assembly, for the election of new Magistrates, (which time was not far off)
he might by Arms, surrender, or some other means finish the war. But
Iugurth contrariwise draws out all his proceedings in length, he pretends now
these, then those causes of delay: he promises to yield, and then faineth
fearfulness: to him pursuing he gives way, and forthwith, lest his own men
should grow diffident, he pursues: thus sometimes by protracting the time of
war, sometimes that of peace, he deludeth the Consul: so that there were
some, who thought as then, that Albinus was not altogether ignorant of the
Kings Counsel: neither could they well conceive, how from so much haste at
first, the war should now be prolonged, more through negligence, then cunning.

CHAP. 11.
Albinus goes to Rome, leaving his brother Aulus to command the Army. He is
beaten by Iugurth, and makes a dishonorable peace with him.
But when as time passing away, the days appointed for the election of
Magistrates did approach, Albinus leaving his brother Aulus Propraetour in the
Camp, departed to Rome. At that time the Commonwealth was grievously troubled
with the Tribunitiall tumults of the City; P. Lucullus, and L. Annius Tribunes
of the people, their Colleagues opposing them, labored to continue in their
Office: which dissension hindered the Comitiall meetings for all that year.

Through this delay Aulus growing full of hope, (who^ we have said to have bin
left Propraetour in the Camp) either to finish the war, or to procure money
by the terror of his Army, calls forth his Soldiers in the month of January
out of their Winter Garrisons: and with great marches, the season being cold,
he arriues at the Town of Suthul, where the Kings treasures were. Which Piece,
although through the unseasonableness of the time, and the advantage of
situation, it could neither be surprised nor besieged (for round about the wall
seated in the steep extremity of a mountain, a slimy plain with winter
waters had caused a marish) yet either that by his fained pretense, he might
terrify the King, or being blinded with the desire of gaining the town for
the treasures sake, he raises Vine-workes, casts up a Trench, and hasteneth
al provisions, which might be useful for this enterprise.

But Iugurth having perceived the vanity and unskillfulness of the Propraetour,
out of cunning he confirms his folly: he sends Ambassadors in suppliant
mannner: he himself, as though he shunned him, through forests and by-ways
leads his Army: Finally, he engaged Aulus, through the hope of agreement, that
Suthul being disassieged, he pursued him, as one that fled into unknown
Regions: thus his errors were the more co^cealed. In the mean time by crafty
emissaries, day and nigbt he assayes the Army, some of the Centurions and
Captains of Horse-troups he subornes, to fly over unto him; others, that upon
a signal given, they should quitte their stations.

Which things being ordered according to his mind, late in the night at
unawares, he enuironeth Aulus Camp, with a multitude of Numidians. The Roman
Soldiers being terrified with the unusual tumult, some of them took Arms:
some of them hid themselves: others confirmed the fearfull^ others feared: the
Air was obscured with night and clouds: the danger was doubtful: finally,
whether to fly, or stay, it were more safe, it was uncertain.

But of that number, (which we have mentioned a little before, to have been
corrupted) one Cohort of Ligurians, with two Troops of Thracian Horsemen, and
some few common Soldiers revolted unto the King: and the eldest Centurion of
the Piles of the third Legion, through that work, which he had undertook to
defend, gave means of entrance unto the enemy: through which all the Numidians
made an irruption. Our men with a dishonorable flight, most of them having
cast away their Arms, seized on the next hillocke. Night, and the spoil of
the Camp, arrested the Enemies from making, further use of the victory.

Then Iugurth the next day upon an emparlance delivered these words to Aulus:
That although he held him together with his Army, enclosed with sword and
famine, yet that being mindful of humane chances; if he would make a League
with him, he would dismiss them all in safety, passing under the yoke:
withal that within ten days he should depart out of Numidia.

Which conditions although they were grie^ous, and full of dishonor; yet for
that they wauered through the fear of death, peace was concluded according to
the Kings pleasure. But as soon as these ^idings were known at Rome, fear
and grief invaded the City: some grieved for the glory of the Empire: others
unacquainted with warlicke events, feared their liberty: with Aulus all men
were offended: especially those, who had been often honored in war; because
that being armed, he procured his safety, rather by disgrace, then by fighting
manfully.

For these considerations, the Confull Albinus, mistrusting hatred and danger,
in regard of his brothers fault, demands, counsel of the Senate concerning the
League: and yet in the mean while he inrolles Supplies for the Army: he sends
for A^des from the Confederates and Latin Nation: briefly he forwards his
affairs by all means possible.

The Senate decreed thus, as it was fit they should, that without their and the
peoples order, no League could be established. The Con^ull being hindered by the
Tribunes of the people, from transporting the forces, which he had raised;
within some few days passes into Afric. For all the Army, as it was agreed
upon, being drawn out of Numidia, wintred in the Province.

CHAP. 12.
The Consul is disinabled to prosecute the war. Mamilius, one of the
Tribunes, preferres a Request against them, whom Iugurth had corrupted. The
factions of the C^ttie described.
AFter he arrived there; although he was resoluted in mind to persecute
Iugurth, and to salve the hatred conceived against his brother: yet taking a
survey of his Soldiers, whom besides their flight, for want of discipline,
liberty and looseness had corrupted; he conceived from the necessity of his
affairs, that he could enterprise nothing.

In the mean while at Rome C. Mamilius Limetanus Tribune of the people, makes
this Request to the Commons: that a complaint should be preferred against
those, by whose counsel Iugurth had slighted the Decrees of the Senate: as
also against them, who in their Ambassages, or military charges, had received
money from him; who had redeliuered the Elephants, and fugitives; withal, that
in war or peace, had made any Contracts with the enemies. To cross this
Request, some conscious to themselves others out of the enmity of the factions,
fearing danger (because openly they could not deny, but must confess that
these and such like proceedings did please them) prepared impedime^ts, covertly
by their friends, but specially by their ministers of the Latin Nation, and
Italian Allies.

Yet how earnest the Co^mous were, incredible it is to be related, as also
with what violence they commanded, decreed and desired the preferring of this
Request, more for the hatred of the Nobility, against whom these mischiefs
were contrived, then for the care of the Republicke such eagerness was amongst
the factions. Whereupon others being stricken with fear, M. Scaurus (whom we
have formerly reported to have been: Bestiaes. Deputy) amidst this insultation
of the Commons; and the flight of his own party; (the City even as then
trembling) had brought to pass, that whereas by the Mamdian* Request, three
Commissioners for inquiry were demanded, he himself might be chosen for one of
that number! But the examination being prosecuted with rigor and violence, by
means of the clamor and earnestness of the people; as formely the Nobility
had done: so now the Co^monalty grew insolent from their prosperous affairs.

Moreover the custom of popular fidings, and factions of the Senate, as well
as of all evil Arts besides, sprung up at Rome some few years since, out of
idleness; and the ab^undance of those things, which mortal men esteem
chiefest. For before Carthage was razed, the people and Senate of Rome,
peaceably and modesty swayed the Commonwealth. Neither was there any
controversy of glory and Soueraignety amongst the Citizens: hostile fear
retained the City in good courses.

But as soon as that terror was removed from their minds; those pleasures
which prosperity ^ayes together with wantonness and pride, forthwith entered.
Thus after they had attained that ease, which they wished for in adversity, it
became more grievous and hurtful. For the Noblemen began to convert their
dignity, the Common people their liberty unto licenciousnesse. They sway: they
force: they take by violence. Thus all were divided into two parties: the
Commonwealth, which was the mean, was rent in sunder. But the Nobility was
most strong in faction: the power of the Commons being loose and dispersed
amongst the multitude, was of unequal force.

By the arbitration of some few, all affairs were managed, both Civil, and
Military: in their power were the Treasury, Provinces, Magistracies, honors,
and Triumphs, the people were oppressed with warfare and poverty: the
Generals with a few others, shared the spoils violently. In the mean time
the parents or little children of the Soldiers, as any of them were neighbors
to one more mighty, were thrust out of their habitations. Thus avarice joined
with power, invaded, polluted, and wasted all things, without mean or modesty;
holding nothing in regard, nor reurence, until it had thrown it self
headlong into ruin. For as soon as there were some found out amongst the
Nobility, who preferred true glory before ^ust authority: the City was in
tumult, and Civil dissension, as if the world had been in vproare, began to
arise.

For after that Tiberius, and C. Graccus, (whose Ancestors in the Punick and
other wars, had added much to the Republicke,) vindicated the Plebeian
liberty, and the abuses of some few, began to be manifest: the Nobility being
guilty, and therefore fearful, sometimes by the Confederates, and Latin
Nation, sometimes by the Roman Gentry, whom the hope of the faction had removed
from the Commons, sought to cross the actions of the Grac^hi: and first of all
they put to the sword Tiberius, then after some few years Ca^^s, taking the
same courses, (the one a Tribune of the people; the other a Triumuir, for
drawing out of Colonies) together with (...) Flaccus* And verily the minds of
the Gracchi, through the desire of victory, were not moderate enough: But for a
good men better it is to be overcome; then by indirect means to overcome an
injury.

Thereupon the Nobility, making use of the victory according to their pleasure,
ruined many men by the sword, or banishment: and from thence forward they
enlarged more their own fear, then their authority: which cause has
subverted mighty Commonwealths: whilst some covet by what means soever to
vanquish others, and over rigorously to exercise revenge upon the vanquished.
B^t I should undertake to discourse particularly, and according to their
greatness* of the endeavors of the factions, and of all the customs of the
City, time would fail me sooner then matter wherefore I return to my first
purpose

CHAP. 13.
Metellus the new Consul is sent into Afric. He reformes the discipline of
the Army.
AFter the League made by Aulus, and the shameful flight of our Army, Metellus
and Silanus Consuls elect, parted Provinces amongst themselves: to Metellus
Numidia befell, who being an austere man, and withal opposite to the faction
of the people, yet was he of a level and unblemished credit. He, as soon as
he had took the inuestiture of his Office, establishing all other affairs
jointly with his Colleague, bended his mind wholly upon the war, which he was
to manage. Therewithal being diffident of the old Army, he inrolleth
Soldiers, and sends for Aids from all places: he prepares arms, weapons,
horses, and other military instruments: withal, abundance of victuals, and all
provisions besides, which in a doubtful and penurious war are wont to be
useful. Finally, for the accomplishment of this, the Senate with authority,
the Confederates, the Latin Nation, and Kings, with sending succors
vndemanded, the City with its uttermost furtherance endeavored.

Therefore all provisions being made and settled according to his desire, he
goes into Numidia, with much hope conceived of him by the Roman Citizens; as
well for his own brave abilities, as also for that he carried a mind
invincible against riches: and through the avarice of Magistrates, our Forces
had been formerly defeated in Numidia, and those of the enemies had been
augmented.

But as soon, as he came into Africa, the Army was delivered over unto him by
S. Albinus the Proco^sull, being slothful, vnwarlick, impatient of danger, and
labor, more ready of tongue then hand, driving preyes from their Alyes, and it
self being the enemies prey, wanting discipline, and modest behavior. Thus to
this new General, more trouble did arise from their evil conditions, then
aid or comfort from such a number of Soldiers. For all this Metellus
resolved, (although the prorogation of the Comitiall meetings had wasted the
Summer season, and that he coniectured the Citizens minds to be wholly bent
upon the expectation of the event) not first to make an assay of war, before
he had enforced according to the ancient discipline, his men of war to
exercise themselves.

For Albinus being terrified with the defeat of his brother Aulus, and the
Army, after he had taken a resolution not to go forth of the Province; for so
much of the Summer, as belonged to his command, he quartered his Soldiers for
the most part in standing Camps; except when nastinesse or want of forage
compelled him to change places.

But watches were not set according to the military custom: every man as
listed, absented himself from his Colors, the drudges of the Army
intermingled with the Soldiers daily, and nightly made excursions: and
wandering disorderly, wasted the fields, forced the villages, and contending one
with another, made boot of slaves and Cattle, which they bartered with the
merchants for wine by them brought, and other such like commodities: besides,
they sold their ammunition corn, and bought bread daily: finally, whatsoever
blemishes proceeding from sloth and luxury can be spoken of, or imagined, were
all in that Army, and more besides then these.

But in this difficulty I find Metellus to have showed himself an able and
wise man, no less then he did in actions of hostility; with such temperance he
carried himself betwixt ambition and cruelty. For by his first Edict, he
banished all the helps of sloth, so that no man was to sell in the Camp bread,
or any other meat ready dressed: the drudges were not to follow the Army: the
common Soldier being encamped or marching, was to have no slave nor beast of
carriage: to other abuses by Art he prescribed a remedy.

Besides, with cross marches he removed his Ca^p every day: no other-wise,
then if the enemies had been present, he fortified it with Ditch and Rampire:
he disposed the watches often, and he himself rounded them with the
Lieutenants. Moreover, upon a march, he was sometimes in person present with
the Vanguard, sometimes with them of the Rear, and often with those of the
middle ward; of purpose, that no Soldier should stir out of his Order: but
that they should advance in one body together with their ensigns, and carry
their own victuals and Arms. Thus more by taking away the liberty of
offending, then by punishing offenses, he in a short space confirmed the Army.

In the mean time, Iugurth, as soon as he understood by his Intelligencers of
Metellus proceedings; and withal being certified from Rome of his integrity,
grew distrustful of his own estate, and then at length labored to make a
real surrender. Thereupon he sends Ambassadors to the Consul by way of
petition, who should request only life for himself and his children, all
other things they should submit up to the Roman people.

But by former experiments, it was well known to Metellus, that the Numidian
Nation was faithless, inconstant, and desirous of innovation. Therefore he
visits the Ambassadors severally, one by one: and sounding them by degrees,
after he knew they were fit for his turn, he persuades them by many promises
to deliver above all things Iugurth alive, or at leastwise slain, into his
hands: but in public, those things which he thought fitting he commands
them to report to the King.

CHAP. 14.
Metellus marches into Numidia. He surpriseth Vacca. He sends Ambassadors
to treat of peace.
Upon this, he himself within some few days after, marched into Numidia with
a well appointed and spleenefull Army: where contrary to the appearance of
war, the Cottages were full of Inhabitants: Cattle and Husbandmen were
frequent in the fields: out of the towns, and Country houses, the Kings
Officers came forth to meet him: being ready to puruey Corn, to bring
victuals, and finally, to do whatsoever they were commanded. Nevertheless,
Metellus, no otherwise then if the enemy had bin present, aduanceth with his
Army strongly guarded, he discovers all places far and nigh, he believes
those shows of surrender to be ostentatiue, and devised to betray him.

Therefore he himself with the light-armed Cohorts, and a selected company of
Slingers, and Archers, marched in the head of the Vanguard: in the Rear C.
Martus his Lieutena^t had the charge with the Cauallery: upon both flanks he
distributed the auxiliary Horsemen, to the Tribunes of Legions, and the
Captains of Cohorts: purposely, that the skirmishers being mixed with these,
wheresoever they advanced, they might repulse the Enemies Horsemen: for in
Iugurth there was so much cunning, and such exact knowledge of places and
soldiery, that whether he were more dangerous absent, or present, whether
mannaging war or peace, it was held a thing doubtful.

Seated there was not far from the way, where Metellus iourneyed, a town of the
Numidians, named Vacca: the most famous Mart of all the Kingdom for
commodities, which were to be sold, whereas many of the Italian Nation were
wont both to inhabit and trade. Here the Consul as well for trials sake, as
also for that the accommodations of the place would well bear it, imposed a
Garrison: besides, he gave orders for the importing of grain, and other
provisions useful in war: supposing that which the occasion did premonish,
that the confluence of merchants and victuals would be a means to relieve his
Army, and that now being provided of things necessary, it would serve for a
place of defense.

During these occurrences, Iugurth in a more serious manner sends his
suppliant Ambassadors, to entreat for peace: besides his own and his
childrens life, he submits all things else to Metellus: whom tempted alike,
as the former, to disloyalty, the Consul dismissed: the peace, which the King
requested, he neither denied nor granted; and between these delays he
expected the issue of the Ambassadors promises.

Iugurth, as soon as he balanced Metellus words and deeds together, and saw
himself assailed with his own sleights; as unto whom a peace was verbal, and
promised, but indeed a most cruel war was meant: a great City being
alienated; the Country discovered by the enemies, and the affections of his
Confederates sounded: he resolved to try his fortune by Arms, being enforced
thereunto, through the necessity of his affairs.

Thereupon the enemies passage being discovered, he growing hopeful from the
opportunity of the place, raises as great Forces, as he could, of all sorts,
and through unknown bywayes ouermarched Metellus Army.

CHAP. 15.
Iugurth incampeth in a place of advantage. His Army is discovered by Metellus.
A battle is fought betwixt them, wherein Iugurth is defeated.
THere was in that part of Numidia, which Iugurth possessed upon the division,
a river arising from the South, named Muthul: from which there was distant a
mountain almost twenty thousand paces, of equal tract, lying wast by nature,
and for want of human tillage. But as it were from the midst of this a
hillocke did arise, of a spacious extent, being covered with Olive, Mirtles,
and other kinds of Trees, which grow in dry and sandy ground. But the plain
seated in the midst was barren, except the places bordering on the River.
These being beset with Groves of Trees, were frequented with Husbandmen and
Cattle.

Therefore on that hillocke, which we have said to be thwart-wise extended,
Iugurth sat down, the Forefront of his Army being extinuated; the command
over the Elephants and some part of the footmen, he gave to Bomilear, and
instructs him, what he should do: he himself nearer to the mountain,
marshalleth his own Troops, with all the Cauallery and selected Footmen.
Then rounding severally all the squadrons and Maniples, he does admonish and
conjure them, that being mindful of their former valor and victory, they
would defend himself, and his Kingdom from the avarice of the Romans: that
they should fight with those, whom they had formerly dismissed under the yoke:
that their Chieftaine, not their courage was changed: all things, which might
be required of a General, were ^ore^^lled to their advantage: they had the
higher ground, that being expert, they might fight with the unskillful; not the
fewer with the more, nor untrained with the better Soldiers. Wherefore they
should be prepared and resolute, upon a signal given, to invade the Romans.
That either that day should confi^me all their labors, and victories, or be
the beginning of their greatest calamities.

Besides, man by man, as he had advanced any for some military exploit in
means or honor, he puts them in mind of his bounty, and in a bravery shows
them to others: finally, according to every man's disposition, by promising,
menacing, and protesting, he does encourage them severally after a several
manner: when in the mean time Metellus, ignorant of the enemies, as he
descended from the mountain, viewed them with his Army. At first he was
doubtful, what this uncouth show did mean: (for amongst the underwoods, the
Numidians and their horses had seated themselves; neither fully hid through the
lowness of the trees, and yet uncertain what they might be: since out of
cunning, and the situation of the place, themselves and their military Ensigns
were shadowed:) then the Stratagem being forthwith discovered, the Army in
marching made a stand for a while.

There the orders being altered, in the right flank which was nearest the
enemy, he arangeth the Army with three Aids of reserve* between the Maniples
he distributeth the Slingers, and Archers: all the Horsemen he places in the
wings: and having encouraged his Soldiers briefly for the season, he draws
down his Army, as he had imbattailed it, into the plain, the frount of the
middle-ward being crossewise changed.

But when he perceived the Numidians not to stir, nor to descend from the
mountain; fearing from the season of the year, and scarcity of water, that
his Army would be consumed with thirst, he sent before unto the river
Rutilius one of his Lieutenants, with the light-armed Cohorts, and a part of
the Cauallery, to anticipat^ a place for incamping: thinking that the enemies,
with frequent charging, and crossefights would retard his passage: and because
they reposed no trust in their Arms, would take advantage of the Soldiers
thirst and weariness. Then he himself, as the occasion and place required, in
that order as he descended from the mountain, marches forwards by little and
little: Marius was behind the middle-ward: the Consul himself was with the
Horsemen of the left wing, who upon the march made the maine battle.

But Iugurth, as soon as he saw, that those who had the Van of his Vanguard,
had ouer-reached the bringers up of Metellus Rear, with a Guarde of about
2000. Footmen, he possesses the mountain where Metellus made his descent:
lest perchance the enemies falling back, it might serve them for a retreat,
and after for a defense. Then sudde^ly, upon a signal given, he charge the
enemies. Some of the Numidians kill the hinder-most: others assa^le the right
and left flank: in furious manner they present themselves, and press forward
in all places: they disordered the Ranks of the Romans. Of whom those who
with most resolution had incountred the enemies, being deluded by this
doubtful kind of fight, were themselves sometimes wounded from a far: neither
had they means to strike again, nor to join in hand-fight.

Before this the Horsemen being instructed by Iugurth, wheresoever a Troop of
Romans began to chase, retired not closely nor in one gross, but in as much
distance as they could one from another. Thus being superior in number, if
they could not deter the enemies from pursuing, they inco^passed them, being
dispersed either from behind, or from the flanks. But if the hillocke were
more opportune for flight then the fields, thither the horses of the Numidians
used unto it, easily passed through the underwoods. Our men the roughness and
the ignorance of the place detained.

But the face of all this conflict was various, uncertain, foul and
lamentable: some being scattered from their fellows retire: others pursue:
neither ranks, nor ensigns they observe: wheresoever the danger attached any
man, there he resists and puts it off: arms, weapons, horses, men,
enemies, and Citizens, were blended together; nothing was done by counsel,
nor command: fortune swayed all. Therefore most of the day was spent, when
then, yea even then the event was doubtful.

At length all men fainting with toil and heat, Metellus, when he saw the
Numidians come on more coldly, he rallieth by degrees his Soldiers into one
body: he restores the Ranks, and opposes four legionary Cohorts unto the
enemies Footebands. O them, a great part being weary, rested themselves on the
higher grounds. He entreats, and exhorts his Soldiers together, that they
would not faint, nor suffer these flying enemies to overcome: that they had
neither Camp, nor any fortification, whither retiring they might betake
themselves: all the hopes they had lay in their Arms.

But neither was Iugurth in the mean time out of action: he circu^teth,
confirms, renews the battle, and himself with some chosen men tries all
things to the uttermost: he succoureth his own side, charge the wavering
enemies, by fighting a far off he ingageth their stay, whom he knew to stand
firm. After this manner two Generals, men most excellent, contended one with
another: themselves being equal, but their helps unequal. For Metellus was
aduantaged by his Soldiers valor, the place was disaduantageous: to Iugurth
all other things, but Soldiers, served opportunely. Finally, the Romans, when
they understood, that they had no place of refuge, and that the enemy
disingaged himself from fight; and that now the evening was come, fell off, as
they were commanded, from the opposite hillocke. The place of battle being
lost, the Numidians were rowted and chased: some few were slain: the most part
swiftness, and a Country undiscovered of their enemies, preserved from danger.

In the intercourse of this, Bomilcar, (whom we have heretofore said to have
been by Iugurth appointed Commander over the Elephants, and part of the
Foot-bands,) as soon as Metellus had ouer-reached him, he draws out his men
by little and little into a piece of even ground; and whilst the Lieutenant
hastening, marches to the river, whither he was fore-sent, without tumult, as
the occasion required, he imbattaileth his Army: neither is he slack to
discover, what the enemies should attempt any where.

After he was advertised, that Rutilius was sat down, and that now he was
secure in mind; withal, that the noise increased from Iugurths fight; fearing
lest the Lieutenant, the cause being known, should aid his distressed
friends, he extends his Army with a larger Frount, which, distrusting the
valor of his Soldiers, he had skilfully disposed, for the impeaching of the
enemies passage; and in this order he aduanceth toward Rutilius Camp. The
Romans on the sudden observe a great rising of dust: For the field being beset
with Coppises, did forbid all prospect, and at first they coniectured that the
sand was stirred with the wind: after, when they saw that it continued alike
and as the Army moved, approached nearer: the occasion being discovered, in
haste they take Arms, and as they were commanded, stand fast before the Camp.
Then as soon as they came within convenient distance, with hideous noise they
incountred one another.

The Numidians stayed so long whilst they expected aid from their Elephants:
after they saw them entangled with the boughs of the trees, and being thus
disordered to fetch a compass about, they betake themselves to flight: and
casting away their Arms, for the most part got-off in safety, through the
favor of the hillocke, and the night, which was now at hand. Four Elephants
were taken, all the rest, in number forty, were slain.

But the Romans, although they were faint and weary, through their journey,
the pitching of their Tents, and the battle, yet for that Metellus stayed
longer then opinion, being well ordered, and resolved, they march forwards to
meet him. For the wiliness of the Numidians suffered no delay, nor
slackenesse. And first the night being dark, after they were come within near
distance, with the noise, as if it had been of enemies coming on, they raised
both fear and tumult amongst themselves: and through ignorance a lamentable
fact was like to have bin committed, except the Vantcurrours sent out from both
sides, had discovered the matter. Thereupon in stead of fear, gladness arose:
the Soldiers rejoicing call one another to witness: they relate, and hear
their exploits: every man extolleth his own valiant acts, even to the skies.
Truly this is the condition of humane affairs: it is lawful for cowards to
boast in a victory: moreover losses detract from the valiant.

Metellus staying four days in the same Camp, he causes the wounded to be
carefully dressed; he rewards them, who had well deserved in the battle,
according to the military custom: he praises, and thanketh them all in a
public assembly: he exhorts them, that as for the rest, which would be
feasible with ease, they should carry the same resolution, for the victory they
had already fought enough, their other labors should be for pillage.

CHAP. 16.
Metellus sends out espials to discover Iugurths doings. The Numidians fall
upon some Roman straglers, and beat them. The alarm being taken, they retire
to the higher grounds.
FOr all this, the Consul in the mean while sent fugitives, and others fit
for the purpose, to epsy, where Iugurth was, and what he did, whether he had
few about him, or a full Army, and how he behaved himself being vanquished.
But he was retired into places full of woods, and fortified by nature; where he
raised an Army, e^ceeding the first in number of men, but inactive and weak,
better acquainted with the affairs of husbandry, then war. That happened
through this privilege: for that no Numidian at all follows the King in his
flight, except the Horsemen Royal. Whither every man's mind leads, thither
he departs: neither is that accounted a Soldiers fault: such there customs
are.

Wherefore Metellus, when he saw the King as yet to have an undaunted mind:
that the war was renewed, which could not be prosecuted, but at the others
pleasure; besides, that he was disaduantaged in fight by the enemies: they
being vanquished with less damage, then his men did vanquish; he determines
with himself, that the war was not to be managed by set battles, nor an
aranged Army, but by a different course. Thereupon he goes unto the most
opulent Countries of Numidia: he wastes the fields: he takes, and burns
many Towns and Castles, being meanly fortified, or without Garrisons: he
commands those of military age to be slain; al other things were to be the
Soldiers pray.

Through the terror of this, many hostages were given to the Romans; Corn
and other useful provisions were supplied in abundance: wheresoever occasion
required, a Garrison was imposed: which occurrences much more terrified the
King, then the battle unluckily fought by his Soldiers. For because he, all
whose hope consisted in flight, was compelled to pursue: and he, that was
unable to defend his own, was feign to make war in another territories. yet
from his present distress he takes that counsel, which seemed best: he
commands the greatest part of his Army, to expect him in the same Quarters:
he himself with some choice Horsemen follows Metellus: thus being
undiscovered in his nocturnall and by-way iourneis, he assaileth on the sudden
the Roman straglers. Most of them are slain unarmed: many are taken
prisoners: not one of them all escapes without hurt: and the Numidians, before
they could be relieved from the Camp, departed to the next hillockes,
according as they had orders.

In the mean time much joy was conceived at Rome upon the knowledge of
Metellus proceedings: as for that he governed himself and his Army according
to the discipline of their Ancestors: that in a place of disadvantage he had
vanquished by mere valor; that he possessed the enemies Country: that Iugurth
bearing himself proudly upon Aulus negligence, he had constrained him to
repose the hope of his safety in flight, or in the deserts. Thereupon the
Senate, for these things happily done, decreed supplications to the immortal
gods. The City trembling before, as being doubtful of the event of the war,
now solaced her self with joy. Of Metellus an honorable report was spread.

Thereupon by so much the more eagerly he strives for victory, making all
possible speed in the pursuit thereof: yet being cautelous from giving any
opportunity to the enemy; he well knew that envy attended on glory: thus by how
much the more he was renowned, by so much was he the more careful: neither
after this stratagem of Iugurths, did he pillage any more with his Army
disbanded. When it was needful to provide corn or forage, the Cohorts with
the Cauallery made a standing-guard. He himself commanded one part of the
Army, Marius the other. But more with fire, then driving of preyes was the
Country wasted. In two several places not far remote, they did incamp
themselves: when it was requisite to use force, they joined all their forces:
but for the further dispersing of fear and flight, they took up their
Quarters apart from one another.

As then Iugurth followed aloof over the hillockes, seeking a convenient time,
or place for fight: where he heard, that the enemy approached, he spoileth
the forage and Fountains, of both which there was much scarcity: sometimes he
shows himself to Metellus, sometimes to Marius: he assaileth those who had
the Rear in marching, and forthwith retireth to the mountains: again he
menaceth them one after another; he neither ingageth fight, nor suffers them
to rest: he only attacheth the Enemy in his course of proceeding.

The Roman General, when he saw himself wearied with these wiles, and that
the enemies debarred him from the opportunity of fighting, he resolves to
beleaguer Zama* a great City, and in that part, where it was seated, one of the
bulwarks of the Kingdom: thinking that Iugurth, as the occasion required,
would come to relieve his people, being in distress, and so a battle would be
fought. But he being informed of this by Fugitives, with great iournies over
marches Metellus, he exhorts the Citizens to defend the walls, the
fugitives being added for aids; which kind of men amongst all the Kings Forces
stood most firm unto him; because they had not credit enough to deceive.
Moreover he promises, that he himself would come to their succors in time
convenient.

Things being thus ordered, he departs into places most covert, and within a
while after gets intelligence, that Marius was sent out of the usual road
unto Sicca, to puruey corn with some few Cohorrs. Which town first of all,
after the battle lost, revolted from the King. Thither with some selected
Horsemen he marches by night; and the Romans being upon the point of issuing,
he charge them in the very gate: withal he exhorts those of Sicca alowd,
to incompasse the Cohorts behind: that fortune gave them the opportunity of a
brave exploite: if they should perform it, that hereafter he should during
life be secured in his Kingdom, they in their liberty. And except Marius had
with haste made the Ensigns to march, and to pass out of the Town, surely
all, or the greatest part of the Inhabitants had turned reuolters. With such
inconstancy the Numidians demean themselves.

But the Iugurthine Soldiers being somewhat comforted by the King; after when
their enemies pressed them more forcibly. Some few being lost, the rest saved
themselves by flight.

CHAP. 16.
Marius coming to Zama, Metellus inuesteth it round about with both their
Forces, but is in fine repulsed after two assaults.
Marius arriueth at Zama. That Town is seated in a Champion field, it was more
fortified by art then nature, wanting no provisions requisite, being well
furnished with Arms and Soldiers. Upon this, Metellus, all preparations being
made, befitting the time and place, invested the walls round with his Army; he
commands the Lieutenants where each man should take charge. Then upon a
signal given, at once from all parts arises a hideous noise. Neither does
this terrify the Numidians: without tumult they remain angry and ready: the
fight is begun. The Romans (every one according to his inclination) fight some
with Leaden plummets and stones missiuely cast: some give back, others fall
on; and now they sap the wall, then again they make an attempt by Scalado,
being desirous to come to hand-fight. To encounter this, the Townsmen tumble
down great stones upon the nearest, they throw Spears, Darts, and withal
burning Torches, with Pitch, and Brimstone.

But not those whose stations were furthest off, the cowardice of mind
defended sufficiently: for most of them were wounded with Iauelins discharged
from Engines or the hand. And in like danger, but unlike renown, both the
valiant and cowards were.

Whilst they fight thus at Zama, Iugurth suddenly assaileth with great numbers
the Camp of his enemies; they being slack in their duties, who had the guard,
and expecting nothing less then fight, he violently forces one of the Ports.
But our men being terrified with the sudden fright, all of them provide for
themselves, according to their several dispositions: some fly, others arm: a
great number are wounded or slain: So that of all that multitude, not above
forty mindful of the Roman name, trouping together surprised a piece of
ground, somewhat higher then the other: neither could they be removed thence
with their greatest forces, but the weapons missiuely sent, they send back
again; few against many, less missing their aims. But if the Numidians
approached nearer, there truly they showed their valor, and with mighty
strength they beat, route, and chase.

In the mean time Metellus, whilst eagerly he prosecuteth the assault, heard
from behind a cry, and tumult of enemies: then turning about his horse, he
observed that the flight made toward him; which showed, that it was of his
own people. Thereupon he sends speedily all the Cauallery unto the Camp,
and forthwith after C. Marius with the Cohorts of the Confederates: and
weeping, he coniureth him by his friendship, and by the Common wealth, that he
would suffer no disgrace to be fastened upon his victorious Army, nor the
enemies to depart unrevenged. He brie^ly executefh his orders. But Iugurth was
hindered with the fortifications of the Camp, when as some threw themselves
headlong over the Rampire, others making have arrested one another in the
narrow passage. Metellus, the business being vneffected, when night was come,
returned into the Camp with his Army.

Therefore the next day, before he issued out to the assault; he commands all
the Cauallery, to attend before the Camp, on that part, where the Kings aduenue
was: the Ports and the places next adjoining, he distributeth to the Tribunes:
then he himself marches to the town, and as on the former day, assaulteth
the wall. In the mean while Iugurth out of covert suddenly inuadeth our men.
Those who were aranged in the fore-frount, being somewhat terrified are
disordered: the residue quickly come to their succors. Neither could the
Numidians have longer resisted, but that their footmen intermingled with their
horsemen had made a great slaughter upon the first encounter: on whom they
relying, did not, as it is usual in a battle of horsemen, fall on, and then
wheel about, but they charged with their horses, meeting breast to breast, they
entered, and broke the frount of our Army: so making use of their ready footmen,
they held the enemies for almost vanquished.

In the intercourse of this, they fought at Zama with great violence; where any
Lieutenant of a Legion, or Tribune had charge, there they strove with most
courage: neither had any man more hope in another help, then in him self.
The like the Townes-men did: they fought or were ready for it in all places:
more eagerly they wounded one another, then guarded themselves. The noise was
confounded with encouraging, gladness and groaning: besides the clashing of
Arms pierces the heavens: Missiue weapons fly from both sides. But those who
defended the walls, when the enemies slackned the fight, intentiuely beheld the
horse-battell. Then, as any of Iugurths actions proceed, you might observe them
to be sometimes merry, sometimes fearful: and as they could be heard, or seen
of their fellows, some of them admonish: others encourage, or signify with
their hands, or bend with their bodies. Hither and thither they move, as they
were flying, or discharging weapons.

Which as soon as Marius knew (for he commanded in that part) he proceeds
more slackely, then it was decreed; and counterfeiteth a distrust of the
business: he suffers the Numidians without tumult to view the Kings battle:
thus they being fixed upon the care of their own side, on the sudden he
assaulteth the wall most forcibly: and now the Soldiers quitting their scaling
ladders, had almost surprised the battlements, when as the Townsmen troop
together: they power down stones, fire, and other missiue weapons besides. Our
men at first make resistance: after when one, and then others of their ladders
were broken: and those who stood upon them were thrown down: the rest in the
best manner they could, few being unhurt, the greatest part wounded, make
their escape. At length night parted the fight on both sides.

Metellus, when he saw that the enterprise wts frustrated: that neither the
Town was taken, nor that Iugurth engaged fight, except it were out of ambush,
or places by him chosen; and that now the Summer was spent, he departs from
Zama, and in those Cities, which had revolted from him, and were sufficiently
fortified with walls or situation, he places Garrisons. The remainder of his
Army, he disposes in the Province next to Numidia, in regard of wintring
there. Neither does he afford that time, as others were wont, to rest and
riot, but because the war had but mean proceeding by Arms, he lays snares
for the King by his friends, and resolves to use their perfidiousnesse for
Arms.

Therefore with many promises he assaieth Bomilcar who had been at Rome, and
secretly bail being given, had escaped Judgment for killing Massiua; because
that he by means of his nearest friendship had the best means of
deceiving: and first he wrought, that he should come to him in secret under
the color of conference: then by giving his faith, that if he delivered
Iugurth alive or slain, he should be assured, the Senate would grant him
impunity, and whatsoever was his own, he easily persuades the Numidian, being
as well of a faithless disposition, as also fearful, that if peace were made
with the Romans, he upon the conditions should be delivered over to
punishment. He, as soon as the first opportunity served, visits Iugurth,
being perplexed, and bewailing his fortunes: he does admonish, and with tears
conjure him, that at length he would provide for himself, his children, and
the Numidian people, which had best deserved: in all conflicts they had been
foiled, the Country was wasted, many men were taken and slain, the strength of
the Kingdom was exhausted: enough oftentimes had they tried already fortune,
and the Soldiers valor: he should beware, lest himself protracting time, the
Numidians secured themselves. With these, and other such like speeches, he
moved the King to resolve upon yielding.

CHAP. 17.
Iugurth sends Ambassadors to Metellus. He yields himself and his
Kingdom to the Roman people Afterward he reretracteth. A description of
Marius.
Ambassadors are sent to the General, who should declare that Iugurth would
perform his commands, and without any composition would surrender himself and
his Kingdom unto his trust. Metellus speedily commands all those of the
Senatorian degree* to be sent for, out of their wintring places: of them, and
others, whom he thought fit, he assembleth a Council. Thus according to the
custom of their Ancestors, by the Decree of the Council, he demands from
Iugurth by his Ambassadors, two hundred thousand pounds of silver, all his
Elephants, and a proportion of Horses and Arms. Which being accomplished
without delay, he appointed them to bring all their fugitives bound; a great
part of them were brought according to appointment: some few, as soon as the
surrender was made, escaped unto King Bocchus into Mauritania. Thereupon
Iugurth being dispoiled of Arms, men, and money, when as he himself was
summoned to lay his command upon Tisidium, he again began to change his
resolution, and from a guilty conscience to fear deserved punishment: finally
many days being spent in doubts, when as now thorugh the irkesomnesse of his
adversity all things seemed better then war: then again when he pondered
with himself, how grievous a downfall it would be from a Kingdom into
servitude; many and great aides being lost, to no purpose, he renews the
war again: and at Rome the Senate, sitting in council about the Provinces,
decreed Numidia to Metellus.

At the same time C. Marius casually at Vtica sacrificing to the gods with
slain beasts, the Diuiner told him, that great and wonderful things were
portended: wherefore trusting on the gods, he should execute his designs:
that he should have a frequent trial of fortune: that all things would fall
out prosperously.

But him formerly a mighty desire of getting the Co^s^l^hip had possessed: for
the procuring whereof, setting aside the antiquity of his house, all other
helps served abundantly, as industry, honesty, much knowledge in Souldery, a
mind greedy of war, frugall at home, victorious over lust and wealth, only
covetous of glory. But he being borne and fostred during his childhood at
Arpinum, as soon as he was of military age, he exercised himself in
employment for a Soldiers pay, not in Grecian eloquence, nor neatness of the
City. Thus amidst these good Arts his mind being uncorrupted, grew to
maturity, in a short time.

Therefore when first he requested a Tribuneship of the people, he being to
most men unknown by face, otherwise well known, was proclaimed throughout all
the Tribes. Then from that Magistracy, he acquired others by degrees; and
always in authority he carried himself after that manner that he showed
himself worthy of a more ample one, then that which he exercised. Yet he
being such a man in that eminency of place (for afterward he was precipitated
by ambition) durst not sue for the Consulship. Even then the Commonalty gave
other Magistracies; the Nobility disposed the Consulship successively amongst
themselves. No new man was so illustrious nor commendable for his deeds, but he
was held unworthy of that honor, and was as it were dishonested.

Thereupon, when Marius perceived, that the Diuiners speeches tended thither,
where his ambitious mind did inuit him, he demands a license to depart from
Metellus in regard of his suite: who although he had an abundant stock of
virtue, glory, and other things to be wished for of good men, yet there
harbored within him, a contemptuous mind, and haughtiness of spirit, a fault
common amongst the Nobility. Wherefore he at first being moved with the
strangeness of the matter, wo^dred at his purpose, and as by way of friendship,
does admonish, that he would not undertake such vncouncellable courses, nor
carry a mind higher then his fortune: that all things were not to be desired of
all men: his present estate ought to content him sufficiently: finally he
should beware to request that of the people of Rome, which might in right be
denied him.

After he had delivered these and such like words, and Marius resolution was
not altered, he gives this answer, that as soon as the public imployme^ts
would give him leave, he would do that which he requested. And unto him being
oftentimes importunate in the same suite, it is reported he should say, that
soon enough he with his son might sue for the Consulship. He as then was a
Soldier there in his fathers retinue, being about twenty years of age. Which
occasion inflamed Marius; both for the honor which he affected, as also
against Metellus himself. Thus he raged through greediness and anger, two of
the worst counselors, neither abstained he from any speech or action, which
might savor of ambition: the Soldiers, whom he commanded in the wintring
Garrisons, he used with a more gentle command, then before he had done: to the
Merchants, of whom there was a great multitude at Vtica, he spoke
reprochfully, and boastingly of the war: that should the moity of the Army
be granted to him, in a few days he would have Iugurth bound in chains: that
the General protracted of purpose, for that being a vain man, and of a kingly
pride, he delighted too much in command: all which imputations seemed to them
the more firm, because through the continuance of the war they had wasted
their private fortunes; and to a mind full of desire nothing proceeds with
speed enough.

Moreover there was in our Army a certain Numidian, Gauda by name, the son
of Mastanabal, the nephew of Masinissa, whom Micipsa by testament had made his
second heir, a man spent with diseases, and by that means somewhat crazed in
mind. To whom petitioning, that after the manner of Kings, he might place his
chair equally with him, and then, that for his Guard he might have a Troop of
Roman Gentlemen, Metellus had denied both: the honor, because it was proper to
them, whom the people of Rome entitled Kings: the Guarde, for that it would
be dishonorable to them, if Roman Gentlemen should be attendants on a
Numidian. Him being disquieted Marius visits, and persuades, that he would
seek to revenge these disgraces upon the General by his assistance. The man
being scarce sound in mind by reason of his diseases, he extolleth him with
this favorable speech: that he was a King, a great man, that he was to enjoy
forthwith the Kingdom of Numidia: this would so much the sooner come to pass,
if he himself might be sent Consul to this war.

Therefore both him, and the Roman Gentlemen, both Soldiers and Merchants,
some he himself, others the hope of peace procured, that they wrote to their
friends at Rome unworthily of Metellus concerning the war, that Marius they
required for General. Thus for him the Consulship was sued for by many men,
with a most honest suffragation. Besides the Commonalty at that time, the
Nobility being overthrown by the Mamilian Law, advanced new men. Thus with
Marius all things prospered.

CHAP. 18.
Iugurth soliciteth those of Vacca to rebellion Upon his persuasion they
trecherously kill the Roman Garrison. The Town is recovered by Metellus, and
the rebels are justly punished.
IN the mean time Iugurth, when omitting the surrender, he renewed the war
with great care, he makes preparations, he hasteneth, and raises an Army: the
Cities, which revolted from him, he soliciteth by fear, or ostentation of
rewards: he fortifieth his own Dominions: arms, weapons, and other
necessaries, which he had neglected in hope of peace, he repaireth, or buyeth
all of them outright: he allure in the Roman slaves; and tempts even those
with money, who were billeted in the Garrisons: nothing at all he suffers
unassayed, nor undisturbed: he attempteth all things.

Therefore in Vacca, (where Metellus at first, Iugurth making his peace, had
imposed a Garrison) some principal Citizens being solicited by the Kings
request, neither before alienated in affection, conspired amongst themselves:
(for the common people, as it is mostwhere frequent, especially the Numidians
being of a light disposition, seditious, and disagreeing, desire innovation,
and are displeased with rest and quietness:) then amongst themselves their
affairs being settled, upon the third day following they appoint the
execution, because it being holy, and celebrated throughout all Africa, it
promised sport and iollity, rather then fear.

But as soon, as the time came, the Centurions, military Tribunes, and the
Governor himself of the Town, T. Turpilius Silanus, were severally by
several men invited to their houses: al of them but Turpilius, they kill
amidst their bankets: afterward they assail the straggling Soldiers, being
unarmed, because it was on such a day, and wanting orders to the contrary. The
Commonalty does the like execution, a part of them being instructed by the
Nobility, others being incited with the desire of such things; to whom being
ignorant of the public Acts, and Counsel, the tumult it self and innovation
pleased sufficiently.

The Roman Soldiers, upon the sudden fright, uncertain and unknowing what
was best to be done, run trembling unto the Castle of the Town, where their
shields and Ensigns were: a Guard of the enemies prohibiteth their flight unto
the gate before shut up: besides the women, and boys from the tops of the
houses threw down violently stones, and other materials, which the place
afforded. Thus the doubtful danger could not be prevented, neither by the most
valiant could resistance be made against the most feeble: the good and bad, the
valiant, and cowardly are slain together.

In this great difficulty, the Numidians showing no mercy, and the Town being
every where beset, Turpilius the Governor only amongst all the Italians
escaped unhurt: whether this happened by the compassion of his host, whether
by agreement, or casualty, we know no certainty: but because to him in this
great disaster a dishonorable life was preferred before an unblemished
reputation, he is reputed vile and detestable.

Metellus, when he understood what had happened at Vacca, being grieved, for a
while he retired out of sight. Upon this, when anger and grief had wrought
together, with great care he hasteneth to revenge the injury, he draws forth
expeditely with the setting of the Sun, the Legion, with which he wintred, and
as many Numidian Horsemen as he could: and the next day about the third hour
he arriueth at a eertaine plain, environed with grounds something higher.
There he informs his Soldiers har^^ged with the tediousness of the journey,
and now refusing al commands; that the Town of Vacca was not distant above one
thousand paces thence: that it behooved them to endure with patience the
remaining labor, until they took revenge for their fellow Citizens, men
valiant, though most unfortunate. Moreover he gives free leave of pillage.
Thus their minds being encouraged, he comma^deth the Horsemen to march on the
right flancke, the Footmen in their closest order; and withal to conceal
their ensigns.

As soon as the Vaccensians observed that an Army marched toward them, at
first (as it was indeed) they coniecturing that it was Metellus, did shut their
gates: then when they saw that the fields were not wasted, and that those who
had the point of the Van-guarde were Numidian Horsemen, they thinking again
that it was Iuurth, with great joy issued forth to meet him. The Horse and
Foot having a signal suddenly given, some of them kill the people dispersed
through the Town, some hasten to the gates: others surprise the Towers: anger,
and the hope of spoil prevailed over weariness. Thus the Vaccensians rejoiced
only two days in their perfidiousnesse: all that great and opulent City
became the subject of pillage or revenge.

Turpilius the Governor of the Town, whom we have formerly said to have been
the only man amongst all that escaped in safety, being commanded by Metellus
to speak for himself: after he had made a weak purgation, is condemned, and
being scourged, suffered capital punishment, for he was a Citizen out of
Latium.

CHAP. 19.
Bomilcar seeks to betray Iugurth. He deals for this purpose with Nabdalsa.
He is discovered and put to death.
AT that time Bomilcar, through whose persuasion Iugurth made the surrender,
which for fear he forsook, being suspected of the King, and suspecting him,
desires innovation, he labors to ruin him by treachery: day and night he
vexes himself: finally, having tried all courses, he adioyneth unto himself
Nabdalsa for an associate, a Nobleman famous for his great wealth, and much
beloud of his vassals. Who for the most part commanded an Army apart from the
King, and was wont to execute all affairs, which were left undone by Iugurth,
being tired out, or employed in greater. By which means he purchased renown
and riches.

Thereupon by both their aduices a day is appointed for it: other preparations,
as the occasion required, were made by them in the mean time. Nabdalsa goes
unto the Army, which he had quartered upon command amongst the wintring
Garrisons of the Romans, tha^ the Country by that means might be secured from
the enemies excursions. He being distracted with the greatness of the attempt,
when as he came not at the time appointed, and that fear hindered him from
progression; Bomilcar pensive through the desire of executing his design, and
withal, because his Confederate was fearful, lest the first resolution being
neglected, he should entertain another, he sends letters unto him by trusty
messengers, in which he blames the softness and cowardice of the man; he
calls the Gods to witness, by whom he had sworn; he admonishes, that he
would not convert Metellus rewards into his destruction: that Iugurths ruin
was at hand: but whether he should perish by his, or Metellus virtue, that was
now to be discussed: therefore he should weigh with himself, whether he had
rather accept of reward or punishment.

But when these letters were delivered, Nabdalsa by chance, wearied with the
exercising of his body, reposed himself on his bed. When he had conceived
Bomilcars speeches, first care, then as it is usual with a troubled mind,
sleep attached him: there did belon^ to him a certain Numidian, a faithful
Agent of his affairs, and much esteemed of him, who was partaker of all his
counsels, except of this last, who when he heard, that letters were brought,
thinking that according to custom, there might be some need of his advice or
industry, he enters into the Pauilion: the other being asleep, he takes up
the Epistle, being laid unadvisedly on his pillow, and reads the contents of
it: then the treason being discovered, he poasteth forthwith to the King.

Nabdalsa awaking not long after, when as he missed the Epistle and understood
by some fugitives all the circumstance of the matter; at first he indeuoureth
to apprehend his accuser: but that being lost labor, he goes to Iugurth, to
mediate his reconcilement, telling him, that, that which he resolved, was
prevented by the treachery of his servant, weeping he does conjure him by his
friendship, and by his former faithful services, that he would not hold him
suspected of so heinous a crime: to this the King, otherwise then he thought,
made this gracious answer: that Bomilcar and sundry others, whom he knew to
be accomplices of the conspiracy being slain, he had oppressed his anger, lest
otherwise some seditiou might grow from that occasion. Neither after this had
Iugurth any rest day or night: he was confident of no place, time, nor person,
he feared alike his subjects and enemies: he was circumspect of all dangers,
and affrighted with every noise: nightly he took up several lodgings, unfit
many times for his dignity Royal: now and then awaking out of sleep, he caused
tumult, by betaking himself to his arms: thus with fear as with a frenzy,
he was still vexed.

CHAP. 20.
Metellus makes new preparations for the war. He dismisseth Marius. He
fights with Iugurth, and defeateth his Army. He takes Thala.
THereupon Metellus, as soon as he was advertised by fugitives of Bomilcars
misfortune, and the detecting of the conspiracy; again, as if it had been for
an entire war, he makes and forwardeth all needful preparations. Marius
soliciting for his departure, and withal being grown hateful and offensive
unto him, he dismisseth home, thinking him to be unfit for his employment. And
at Rome, the Commons, the letters being made known, which were sent concerning
Metellus and Marius, heard what they desired of both. To the General, his
Nobility, which before was an ornament, became the occasion of envy; to the
other, the lowness of his descent added favor: but in both these, the bending
of the factions carried more sway then their own virtues or vices.

Besides, the seditious Magistrates stirred the Common people, in all the
assemblies they accuse Metellus of treason: They commend Marius beyond descent.
Finally, the Plebeians were so far moved, that all the Artificers and Country
Peazants, whose fortunes and credit lay in their hands, leaving their labor,
resorted to Marius, and esteemed their own necessary trades less then his
honor. Thus the Nobility being overthrown, after the revolution of much time
the Consulship was given to a new man: and afterward the people being demanded
by Manlius Mantinus one of their Tribunes, whom they would have to manage the
war against Iugurth, frequently they enjoined Marius to undertake that
charge. Yet the Senate not long before had decreed Numidia to Metellus. That
Decree became void.

In this mean time Iugurth having lost his friends, most of whom he himself
had killed, the residue taking their flight, some to the Romans, others to
King Bocchus: when as he considered that war could not be waged without
coassistants, and that it would be dangerous to try the fidelity of new
friends amidst so much perfidiousnesse of the old, he was tossed with a
doubtful and uncertain opinion: no design, counsel, nor person could please
him sufficiently: his iourneyes and commanders he changed daily: sometimes he
marched toward the enemies, now again toward the deserts: oftentimes he
reposed his hope in flight, and forthwi^h in his Arms: he doubted, which he
should least rely on, his subjects valor or loyalty. Thus whatsoever he
intended, fell out unluckily.

But in the midst of these delays, Metellus suddenly shows himself with his
army. The Numidians, as the time would give leave, were ordered and aranged by
Iugurth. Then forthwith the battle is begun. In that part where the King was
present in person, they fought for a while: all the rest of his Soldiers were
broken and chased upon the first encounter: the Romans took some Ensigns,
Arms, and prisoners. For in all battles, for the most part the Numidians are
more beholding to their heels then hands. In this flight Iugurth now more
seriously distrusting his estate, with the fugitives and some part of his
Cauallery, he arriueth first in the deserts, and then at Thala, a great and
wealthy Town, where lay the most part of his treasures, and where his sons
had much of their education during their childhood.

Which things when Metellus knew, although betwixt Thala and the next river in
the space of fifty miles, all places were dry and waste yet hoping to finish
the war, if he could gain that Town, he undertakes to surmount all
difficulties, and to overcome nature it self. Therefore he commands the
beasts of burden to be vnladed of all the baggage, except of Corn for ten
days only: in stead whereof, bottles and other vessels fit for the co^taining
of water, were appointed for their carriage. Besides he gets out of the
fields as much tame Catrell, as he could of the greater size, and ^ladeth on
them vessels of all sorts, but most part wood denones, taken out of the
Numidian cottages. Again, he commands the borderers, who after the Kings
flight had submitted themselves to Metellus, that every one of them should
carry what water he could: he prefixeth a day and place, where they should be
ready to attend: he himself from the river (which we have heretofore said to
be the next water to the town) ladeth his beasts of burden. Thus furnished he
goes to Thala. Then being come to the Rendez-vous which he had enjoined to the
Numidians, and after the Camp was pi^^hed and fortified, suddenly so much
rain powered down from the sky, that it was over and above enough for the
Army. Besides they had victuals more then they expected: for that the
Numidians, as most men do upon a new surrender, stretched their diligence unto
the utmost. But the Soldiers out of a kind of religion made most use of the
rain: and that added much to their courages: for they thinking themselves to
be the care of the immortal gods: the next day following, contrary to Iugurths
opinion, they arrive at Thala.

The Townsmen, who thought themselves fortified with the impregnablenesse of
the place, being amazed with this great and strange accident, nevertheless
provide for the war: our men do the like. But the King now deeming nothing
to be impossible unto Metellus, as one who had subdued by his industry all
arms, weapons, places, times, nay nature it self, commanding other things: by
night he flies out of the Town with his children, and a great part of his
treasure: and staying not longer in any one place then a day or night, he gave
out colourably, that his business caused him to make this have: but indeed he
feared, Treason* which he thought to shun by celerity: for such designs are
fathered by idleness and opportunity.

But Metellus, when he saw the townsmen resolved to fight, and that it was a
strong Peer, in regard of the Works, and situation, he surroundeth the walls
with a Circumuallation. Then he commands them from that place, which was
most fitting for the purpose, to bring their vine Engines forwards, and above
them to raise a Rampire; and Towers being raised upon the Rampire, thus to
secure the work and the laborers. To prevent this, the Townsmen use all
possible diligence and preparations: nothing was left undone by either side.
Finally, the Romans tired out with much labor and fight, after 40. days that
they came thither, only got the Town: all the prey was spoiled by the
fugitives. They, when they saw the walls battered with the Rams, and their
estate grown desperate, carried the gold, silver, and other things of most
account into the Kings Palace: there, being laden with wine, and viands, they
burn both that, the house and themselves withal: thus that punishment, which
they feared from their enemies, they willingly inflicted on selves.

CHAP. 21.
Ambassadors are sent from Lep^is to Metellus. A discourse of the Philenian
brethren.
But together with the taking of Thala, Ambassadors from the Town of Leptis
came to Metellus; requesting that he would send thither a Garrison and
Governor: that one Himilear a Noble man of a factious spirit did affect
innovation: against whom neither the commands of the Magistrates, nor the Laws
were auailable: if he did not speedily do it, their own safety, the Alies of
them would be much endangered. For the Leptitanes long since, from the
beginning of the Iugurthine war, had sent to Bestia the Consul, and
afterward to Rome, to require friendship and Aliance. Then having gotten a
grant of this, they always remained true and faithful, and did perform with
diligence all the commands of Bestia, Albinus, and Metellus: therefore easily
they obtained of the General, whatsoever they requested.

There were sent thither four Cohorts of Ligurians, and C. Annius for
Governor. That town was builded by the Sidonians, whom we have heard to come
hither in ships, flying from home because of Civil discords. Moreover it is
seated betwixt the two Syrtes, who have their name imposed from their nature.
For there are two Gulfes almost in the farthest part of Afric of unlike
bigness, of like condition: the parts of which, that are nearest to the
shore, are of an exceeding depth: the others are casually deep, and at
another season shoaly: for as soon as the sea grows high, and rages with
the winds, the waves draw in slime, sand, and mighty stones: by this means
the condition of these places is altered with the winds; they are called Sir^es
from their extent.

The language of this City is somewhat corrupted by marrying with the
Numidians; but their Laws and habit are for the most part Sidonian which they
retained with the more facility, because they lived far from the Kings
Dominion. For between them, and the populous places of Numidia, there lay
vncultiued and waste grounds. But because we are arrived in these Regions by
mean of the Leptitan affairs, i^ seems worth the relation, to remember the
brave and memorable exploite of two Carthaginians. The place intimated this
unto us.

At what time the Carthaginians ruled over most of Afric, the Cyrenians also
were rich and powerful: the Frontier betwixt them was sandy and uniform;
there was neither mountain, nor river to distinguish their borders: which
cause kept them in a great* and vndiscontinued war. After their Armies and
Fleetes had been often beaten and chased on both sides, and that they had much
impaired one another strength; they fearing that a third party would invade
both the Conquerers and conquered; taking truce, they make an agreement, that
upon a day appointed, their Ambassadors should depart from their several
homes; at what place they met one another, that should be the common border of
both Nations. Upon this, two brethren being sent from Carthage, whose names
were the Phileni, made have in their journey: the Cyrenians went more slowly.
Whether this happened by negligence or casualty, I know nothing at all.

Besides, in those places a tempest no otherwise then in the sea restrains
passage. For when as the wind arising on plain grounds, and bare of trees,
has raised up the sand from the earth, that being carried with great violence
fills both the mouth and eyes: thus prospect being hindered, the journey is
staid.

After the Cyrenians saw that they were somewhat the hindermost, and because of
their neglect, feared punishment at home; they taxed the Carthaginians, that
departing before their time from their place of habitation, they had disturbed
the Treaty; finally they would rather do any thing then depart vanquished. But
when the Carthaginians required any other condition, so it were equal, the
Grecians put the Carthaginians to their choice, that either they should be
buried there quick, whereas they desired borders for their people, or that
themselves upon the same conditions might proceed whither they would. The
Philenians allowing the condition, gave up themselves and their lives to the
Commonwealth thus were they interred alive. In that place the Carthaginians
consecrated Altars to the Philenian brethren, and other honors were instituted
for them in their Country. Now I return to my purpose.

CHAP. 22.
Iugurth draws the Getulians to his party. He solliciteth King Bocchus. He is
advertised of Marius coming.
IVgurth, when after Thala lost, he thought nothing strong enough to resist
Metellus, travailing with some few through vast deserts, he comes to the
Getulians, a fierce and savage kind of people, and as then ignorant of the
Roman name: he raises a multitude of them into one body, and by degrees does
accustom them to keep their ranks, to follow their Ensigns, to obey
command, and to perform other military duties. Besides, he allureth those who
were nearest unto King Bocchus, by great gifts and greater promises, to favor
his cause: with which Assistants, going to the King, he does persuade him,
that he should undertake war against the Romans. This by that advantage
became more facill and feasible, for that Bocchus in the beginning of this
war, had sent Ambassadors to Rome to desire a League and friendship: which
thing being most opportune for the enterprise of the war, some few hindered,
blinded with covetousness, by whom all suites, whether honest or dishonest,
were usually set to sale.

Besides, the daughter of Bocchus was formerly married to Iugurth: but that
bond is meanly regarded by the Moors and Numidians: because that each of them
according to their wealth, have every man sundry wives, some 10. others more:
but Kings more then so. Thus the mind is distracted with the multitude: none of
them is ranked in the place of an equal: they are altogether held despicable.

Thereupon, in a place chosen by both parties, the Army meets: then faith being
given and received interchangeably, Iugurth inflameth Bocchus with this speech:
That the Romans were unjust, of insatiable avarice, the common enemies of all
mankind: that they had the same cause of war with Bocchus, as with himself
and all other Nations, even the desire of rule; unto whom all Kings were
opposites: then he himself, a little before the Carthaginians, with King
Perses, after as every man seemed most powerful, so he became enemy to the
Romans. These, and such like speeches passing, they direct their journey to
the town of Cirtha: for that Q. Metellus had lodged there the prey, prisoners,
and baggage. Thus Iugurth thought that either the City being taken, it would be
a work worth his labor: or if the Roman General came to their succors, they
should come to the trial of a maine battle: for in cunming, he made haste
only to disinable Iugurths peace, lest by exercising delays, he should
desire some other course, rather then war.

The General, when he had heard of the Confederacy of the Kings, he does not
rashly, neither as he was often accustomed to do, ( Iugurth being vanquished)
present in all places free means to fight: but not far from Cirtha his Camp
being fortified, he expects the Kings: thinking it best, after he had made
some trial of the Moors, (because they came as fresh enemies,) to fight at
his best advantage. In the mean time he is certified from Rome by letters,
that the Province of Numidia was given to Marius: for he had heard before, that
he was made Consul: with which tidings being troubled beyond al decency, he
neither could refrain tears, nor moderate his tongue; the man otherwise being
of a most excellent temper, too tenderly took this grieuance: which some
construed to be pride in him: others, a good disposition provoked with
disgrace: many men thought it was, because the victory already gotten, was
wrested out of his hands: to us it is well enough known, that he was more
vexed with Marius honor, then with his proper injury: neither would he have
suffered it with so much anxiety, if the Province taken away, had been assigned
to any but Marius.

Therefore being diuerted with this grief, and because it seemed a foolish
part to take care of another charge with his own danger, he sends
Ambassadors to King Bocchus, to require him, that without cause he would not
become an enemy to the people of Rome: that he had a fair opportunity of
contracting a League and friendship, which would be better then war. Although
he was confident in his own strength, yet he ought not to change
uncertainties for certainties: al war was undertaken with ease, but concluded
with difficulty: not in the same man's power lay the beginning and ending of it:
it was lawful for every man, yea for a coward to begin: it was to be laid
aside, when the Conquerours would: therefore he should provide for himself,
and his Kingdom; neither should he co^mixe his flourishing and Iugurths
desperate fortunes together.

To this the King answered calmely enough: that himself desired peace: but
that he took compassion of Iugurths estate: if the same liberty were granted
to him* all things would be soon agreed on. Again the General, to encounter
Bocchus demands, sends other Messengers: he allows his propositions in
part, others he rejects. In this manner by sending and resending Messengers
from both sides, time passed away, and according to Metellus will, the war
was protracted without action.

But Marius (as is aforesaid) being made Consul through the earnestness of
the Commons, after the people had decreed Numidia for his Province, he being
heretofore incensed against the Nobility, did as then frequently and fiercely
press them: sometimes he offended particulars, sometimes the generality: he
spoke publicly, that he got the Consulship as spoils from them, being
vanquished; with other words besides glorious for himself, grievous for them.
In the mean time, his first care is to provide things useful for the war:
he requires a supply for the Legions: he sends for aids from the Nations,
Kings, and Confederates: moreover, he inuiteth all the flower of Latium, most
of them known to him in the wars, few by report; and by his solicitation he
draws those, who had out-serued their military years, to go this journey
with him: neither did the Senate, although it were adverse, dare to deny him
concerning any business: but even with gladness granted him a supply, because
it was thought the war was not pleasing to the Commonalty, and Marius should
either lose his employment in it, or ^he love of the vulgar. But that hope
proved vain: so much desire had possessed most men to go with Marius. Every man
was persuaded, that he should be enriched with the prey; that he should
return home victorious, and harbored ather thoughts of the same nature: and
Marius ha^h not a little encouraged them with his speech. For after all things
being decreed, which he required, he had an intent to inroll Soldiers, as well
for exhortations sake, as also for exasperating the Nobility: according to his
custom, he summoneth an Assembly of the people: then spoke he after this
manner.

CHAP. 23.
The Oration of Marius the Consul, to the people of Rome.
I Know, O ye Romans, that most men do not by the same Arts sue for Command
from you, and after they have procured it, minister the same: at first they are
industrious, suppliant and moderate: afterward in sloth and pride they
consume their time. But otherwise it seems good to me: for by how much the
more the Commonwealth is to be regarded before a Praetour-ship, or Consulship,
by so much the sooner ought that to be governed, then these sued for. Neither
am I deceived, what a weighty business through your especial favor I
sustain. To provide for war, and withal to spare the Treasury: to draw
them to be Soldiers, whom you are loath to offend: to care for all things both
at home and abroad: and to accomplish these things amongst envious, thwarting
and factious opposites, is a work (O ye Romans) more difficult then opinion.

Besides, if other men prove delinquents, their ancient Nobility, the valiant
exploits of their Ancestors, the greatness of their kinsmen and alies, their
multitude of Clients serve for a means to protect them. All my hopes rely on
my self, which it is necessary to defend with virtue and innocence: for all
other supports are weak.

And this I understand (O ye Romans) that all men's eyes are cast upon me: the
just and good men favor: because that my well doings advance the
Commonwealth: the Nobility seek an occasion to invade me. By so much the more
earnestly I must endeavor, that they may be frustrated, and you not deceived.

Thus to this age have I conuersed from my childhood, that to all labors and
dangers I have been accustomed. What I did freely before your benefits
bestowed, it is not my counsel (O ye Romans) to neglect, having received a
reward for it.

It is a hard matter for such to be temperate in authority, who for ambitious
ends have fained themselves honest: to me, who have passed over all my life in
the best professions, to do well from custom it is grown natural. You have
commanded me to wage war with Iugurth; a thing which the nobility has
brooked impatiently. I beseech you weigh with your selves, whether it might
prove better to change this your purpose, if you should find out of that circle
of the Nobility, some man or other of ancient descent, of many statues and no
service: that forsooth in so great an action, he might tremble, ouerhasten,
and take some Plebeian person for an Aduiser of his Office. Thus many times
has it come to pass, that he whom you have ordained to command in chief, was
feign to seek another General for himself.

But I know (O ye Romans) those, who after they were made Consuls, did begin
to read the acts of their Ancestors, and the military precepts of the
Graecians; praeposterous men as they are. For to gourne, then to be made a
governor, is a thing later in time; first in nature and use.

Compare now (O ye Romans) with their pride me, that am a new man, what
things they are accustomed to hear; and read, I my self have partly seen,
partly acted, what they have learned in books, I have in military service. Now
do you make a conjecture whether deeds or words are of most account. They
despise my nouelty, I their pride. Fortune to me, reproaches to them are
objected. Although I think that there is one nature and common to all, but
every man that is most valiant to be most noble. And if now it could be
demanded of the fathers of Albinus and Bestia, whether they had rather, that I
or those were begotten of them, what think you, they would answer, but that
they would desire the best of men for their children?

But if justly they despise me, let them do the like to their Ancestors: to
whom, even as to me, from virtue Nobility began. They envy my honor: therefore
let them envy my labor, innocence, and dangers: because by those I got that.
But these men corrupted with pride, live so, as if they contemned your honors:
they sue for them in that manner, as if they had lived honestly. No truly, they
are deceived* who together expect things most repugnant, the pleasure of
sloth, and the rewards of virtue.

Besides, when they speak amongst you, or in the Senate, they magnify their
Ancestors in most of their speeches: by relating their valiant acts, they
think themselves the more renowned: which is quite contrary: for by how much
their life is the more glorious, by so much the more is these men's sloth the
more infamous. And truly thus stands the case: The glory of Ancestors is a
light to posterity, which suffers neither their good, nor evil deeds to lie
concealed. Of this I am wanting (O ye Romans.) But that which is by far more
illustrious, I can lawfully speak of my own exploits.

Now behold how unjust they are: what they arrogate to themselves from others
virtue, that they grant not to me for my own: forsooth, because I have not
statues, and because my Nobility is new; which questionles it is better to have
gotten then to deface being once received. Verily I am not ignorant, that if
they would forthwith answer me, their speech would be very eloquent, and
composed. But in this your greatest benefit, when as in all places they rent
with their calumnies, both me and you* it is not my pleasure to be silent: lest
any man should intreprete my modesty to be guilt of conscience* For me, in my
opinion, no speech can offend* because if true, it must needs speak well, if
false, my life and manners confute it. But because your Counsels are accused,
who have imposed on me the highest honor and chiefest employment, again,
consider with your selves, whether you may repent your choice.

I cannot for procuring credit show statues nor triumphs, nor the Consulships
of my Progenitors: but if that occasion required, I could show a Standard,
Spears, ornaments of desert, and other military rewards, besides s^^rres in
the forepart of my body. These are my statues, this is my Nobility; not left by
inheritance, as theirs to them, but which I have acquired with my manifold
labors, and dangers.

My words are not composed: I do meanly regard that* Virtue sufficiently
declares it self. Art is requisite for them, that so with speech they may
palliate their dishonest actions. Neither have I learned the Grecian language:
I had small pleasure to learn that, because it has nothing auailed the
teachers thereof in the pursuit of virtue: But those other things I have been
taught, most beneficial for the Commonwealth; as to charge the enemy, to
stand upon my guard, to fear nothing but infamy: to endure alike* Winter and
Summer, to take my repose on the ground, at the same time to suffer want and
labor. With these precepts I will encourage my Soldiers: neither will I
entertain them with Art, my self with plenty, nor make their labor my glory.
This is a profitable, this is a civil way of commanding. For when thou thy
self shall live daintily, to enforce thy Army with punishment, that is to be a
Lord, not a General.

By doing these and such like things, your Ancestors honored themselves and
the Republic* On whose worth, the Nobility relying, being of different
conditions in themselves, vilify us emulous of them; and challenge all honors
from you, not by merit, but as if they were due. Nevertheless these most
insolent men are much deceived. Their Predecessors left all that they could
unto them, riches, statues* and a glorious memory of themselves: they left not
virtue: That alone, is neither given, nor taken by way of donation.

They say that I am sordid, and rude of conditions, because I do not curiously
enough set forth a banquet, nor have ever a Stage Player of my own, nor a Cook
higher prized, then my Bailiffe. Which is a pleasure for me to confess (O ye
Romans.) For I have learned from my father; and other devout persons, that
neatness for women, labor for men is most convenient: and that it behooves
all good men to possess more glory then wealth; that arms, not vtensils are
an ornament.

But therefore what delights them, what they esteem dearly, let them for ever
do: let them whore, and drink: where they have wasted their youth, there let
them spend their old age, in bankets; given over to the belly, and the
obscenest part of the body: sweat, dust, and such like things, let them leave
to us, unto whom these are more delightful then bankets.

But the case is otherwise: For where as these vile men have dishonored
themselves with scandalous crimes, they seek to take by violence the rewards
of the virtuous. Thus most unjustly riot, and sloth, the worst of all vices,
hinder not those, who have embraced them; to the guiltless Commo^wealth they
prove mischievous.

Now, because I have answered them, as much, as my custom, not their faults
required, I will speak a few words concerning the Commonwealth. First of all
(O ye Romans) hope well of Numidia: what helps have hitherto supported
Iugurth, you have removed them all, avarice, unskillfulness and pride. Besides,
the Army there, is knowing of the Country, but truly more valiant, then
fortunate: for a great part of it has been consumed by the covetousness or
roshn^sse of the commanders.

Wherefore you, who are of military age, endeavor together with me, and
undertake for the Commonwealth. Neither let any man be terrified with the
calamity of others, or with the pride of Generals: I may self in marching and
battle, will be a Counselor and sharer of the danger with you: I will govern
both my self and you in all things alike: and certainly* the gods assisting
the victory, pillage, and praise are all provided for us: which if they were
doubtful, and far removed, yet it becomes all good men to assist the
Commonwealth. For no man by sloth was made immortal: neither did any father
ever wish for his children, that they might be eternal, rather then good, and
honest in their lives. More could I speak (O ye Romans) if words added
courage to cowards; unto the valiant I think enough has been spoken.

Some such speeches being delivered, when as Marius saw the minds of the Common
people erected, he speedily fraugh^eth the ships with victuals, pay, Arms,
and other necessaries. With these he commands A. Manlius his Lieutenant to
pass over. He himself in the mean time inrolleth Soldiers, not after the
ancient custom, nor out of the classical numbers, but for the most part
Volunteers mustred by the poale. Some reported, that this was done for want of
able men; others through the Consuls ambition: because he had been honored
and adua^ced by such people: And to a man that pursues greatness, he that is
most wanting, is most opportune, unto whom his own is no care, because it is
nothing worth, and with a price all things are accounted honest.

Thereupon Marius with his numbers something fuller then was decreed, going
into Afric, in a few days was transported to Vtica. The Army is delivered to
him by P. Rutilius the Lieutenant: for Metellus shunned Marius sight, lest he
should behold that, which being hard, his mind abhorred.

But the Consul, the Legions and Auxiliary Cohorts being reinforced, marched
into a fertile Country and full of pillage: all booties taken there, he gives
to the Soldiers: then he assaileth the Towns and Castles, which were of small
strength in regard of their situation or Garrison, he makes sundry light
skirmishes in sundry places. In the mean time the new leuyed Soldiers,
without fear pre^ented themselves to fight: they saw those that fled, to be
taken o^ slain: every man that was most valiant, to be most safe: that by
their Arms, their liberty, Country, Parents, and all things else were
defended: glory and riches were purchased. Thus in a short space the new and
old Soldiers complied together; and the valor of all became equal.

CHAP. 23.
The Kings retire into the deserts. Metellus goes to Rome. Marius besieged
Capsa, and after some difficulties takes it by force.
But the Kings* as soon as they understood of Marius coming, depart diversely
into places of difficnlt access. Thus it seemed good to Iugurth, hoping ere
long he should surprise his enemies straggling, and that the Romans, as most
men do, fear being removed, would carry themselves more loosly and
licentiously.

Metellus in the mean time going to Rome, i^ contrary to his expecta^tion
received with much joy, being esteemed alike of the Fathers and people* after
their hatred was once allayed.

But Marius readily and wisely attended his own, and the enemies affairs; he
knew what was expe^dient or not for both: he discovered the iourneyes of the
Kings: he prevented their counsels and Stratagems: he suffered no slackenesse
with himself, nor safety with them. Therefore both the Getulians, and Iugurth
driving preyes from our Confederates, he often assailing defeated them in their
iourneyes, and disarmed the King himself, not far from the Town of Cirtha:
which exploits when he perceived to be only glorious, not conducing to the
finishing of the war, he resolves to besiege the Cities one after another,
which in respect of the place or people, were most adua^tageous for the enemy
against himself. Thus either Iugurth would be despoiled of his aids, if he
suffered this, or else must come to the trial of a battle.

For Bocchus had many times sent Messe^gers to the Co^sul, showing that he
desired the frie^dship of the Roman people, that he^ should fear no act of
ho^stility from him. Whether he conterfeited this to the intent, that being
unlooked for, he might invade with more annoyance, or that through the leuity
of his disposition, he was wont to change the resolutions of peace and war,
it remains undiscovered. But the Consul, as he had resolved, marches to the
Towns, and fortified Castles: some by force, others by terror, or by
promising rewards, he withdraws from the enemies. And first his undertakings
were mean, thinking that Iugurth for defending his own, would come within
danger. But when he heard that he was absent a far off, and employed upon
other affairs, it seemed high time for him to undertake things more great and
difficult.

There lay amongst the vast deserts, a fair Town and strong, (called Capsa)
whose founder Hercules the Lybian was said to be. The Citizens were
privileged by Iugurth, living under a gentle command, and for these respects,
were held most faithful: They were fortified against enemies not only with
walls, arms and Soldiers, but that which is much more, with the roughness of
the Region: for besides the places next to the Town, all the rest were wast
for want of manuring, skant of water, and infested with Serpents* whose
violence, as of all other wild beasts, grows more outrageous, by the scarcity
of meat. Besides, the nature of Serpents pernicious in it self, is more
inflamed with thirst, then any thing else.

Of gaining this piece an earnest desire possessed Marius, as well for the use
of the war, as also for that it seemed a difficult matter; and Metellus had
with great glory taken the Town of Thala, seated and fortified not much
unlike: but that at Thala there were some fountains not far from the walls.
The Capsians had only one spring of water, and that within the Town, as for
the rest, they used rain. That inconvenience both there, and in all Afric,
which being far from the sea, lay vncultiued, is suffered with less greeuance,
because the Numidians for the most part fed on milk, and the flesh of wild
beasts, and neither sought for salt nor other prouocations of gluttony: food
served them against hunger and thirst, not for lust nor luxury.

Therefore the Consul, all things being discovered, relying as I think on the
gods (for against so great difficulties he could not sufficiently provide by
counsel: because also he was assailed with want of Corn: for that the
Numidians are more addicted to grazing of Cattle then tillage, and whatsoever
croppe was grown, they had bestowed by the Kings command in places of
strength: but the fields at that time were dry, and bare of grain, for it was
the last of Summer) does notwithstanding as he could, make preparation with
providence enough: he gives out all the Cattle, which he had formerly gotten
by predation, to be driven by the Auxiliary horsemen: he commands A.
Manlius his Lieutenant, with the light-armed Cohorts to go to the Town of
Li^is, where he had placed the pay and victuals: himself going to take preyes,
meant to be there within a few days. Thus his enterprise being concealed, he
marches to the river Tana.

But as he travailed, he distributed the Cattle daily by equal proportions
unto his Army, throughout the Centuries, and Horse-troupes; and took order
that bottles might be made of the hides: thus together he eased the want of
Corn, and all men being ignorant of his purpose, he prepared those things,
which would be forthwith useful. Finally on the sixth day, when they came to
the river, a great number of bottles was made.

There the Camp being pitched with a slight fortification, he commands the
Soldiers to eat, and to march out with the setting of the Sun; that all the
baggage being quitted, they should with water only lade themselves, and the
beasts of carriage. Then when the time came, he issues forth of the Camp; and
having travailed all the night, he rests: he does the same on the next: and
the third long before day light, he arriueth in a place full of little hills,
not distant above two miles from Capsa: and there as covertly as he could, he
makes a stand with all his Army. But as soon as it was open day, and the
Numidians fearing no hostility, came forth of the Town in great numbers: he
suddenly commands all the Horsemen, and with these the nimblest Footmen to
march to Capsa with full speed, and to block up the gates: thereupon he
himself being intentive, follows hastily, neither does he suffer the
Soldiers to pillage.

Which things when the Townes-men knew; their desperate estate, their mighty
fear, the unexpected mischief, together with a great part of their Citizens
in the hands of enemies, enforced them to make a surrender. But the Town was
burnt, the Numidian youth were slain, all the rest were sold: the prey was
divided to Soldiers. This outrage contrary to the Law of Arms, was not done
through the avarice or mischievous disposition of the Consul: but because the
place was for Iugurth opportune, for us difficult in regard of access: the
people were inconstant, and faithless, before never subjected by fear nor
benefit.

After Marius had finished so high a work without any loss of his own men,
being heretofore great and excellent, he now began to be accounted greater and
excellenter: all his vncouncellable actions were interpreted to be virtuous:
the Soldiers being ruled with a modest command, and rich besides, praised him
above measure: the Numidians feared him more then a mortal man* Lastly, all
the Confederates and enemies believed, that either he had a divine spirit, or
that all events were portended to him by the appointment of the gods.

CHAP. 24.
Marius takes other strong places, and amongst the rest, a Castle, where the
Kings Treasure lay, which was held impregnable.
But the Consul, as soon as this enterprise was happily finished, marches to
other Towns: some few he takes, the Numidians making resistance; more he
burns, lving desert in regard of the Capsians miseries; with mourning and
slaughter all things are filled. Finally having gotten many places, and most of
them with an vnbloodyed Army, he undertakes another business, not of that
danger as that of the Capsians, yet no less difficult.

For not far from the river of Mulucha, which divided Iugurths and Bocchus
Kingdom, there was amongst the other grounds being champion, a rocky mountain
with a Castle of indifferent bigness, lying very open, exceeding high, with
one straight entrance left unto it: for all the rest was steep by nature, as
if it had been purposely wrought so. This Piece, Marius, because the Kings
treasures lay there; resolves to take with his utmost force: but this
enterprise was better managed by chance, then Counsel; for in the Castle
there was a sufficient proportion of Soldiers, Arms, and Corn, besides a
Fountain of water: by means of the Bulwarks, Towers, and other works, it
was scarce assaultable: the way to the Castle was exceeding narrow, hewed out
on both sides: the Vine-engines were raised to no purpose, with exceeding
danger: for as soon as they advanced never so little, they were spoild with
fire or stones: the Soldiers could neither stand fast before the works,
through the unevenness of the place: nor do their duty amongst the
Vine-engines, without indangering themselves: all the best men were wounded or
slain: amongst the rest, fear increased.

But Marius much time and labor being spent, anxiously pondered in his mind,
whether he should desist from this enterprise, because it had succeeded ill, or
should expect fortune, which he had often prosperously used. Upon this, when he
had meditated doubtfully many days and nights, by chance a certain Ligurian,
a common Soldier of the auxiliary Cohorts, going out of the Camp to water,
not far from the side of the Castle, which was opposite to them that fought,
observed Snailes creeping amongst the Rocks: of them when he had sought to get
one or two, and afterward more; through the desire of gathering, he ascended
by degrees almost to the top of the mountain: where when he understood the
place to be solitary, after the manner of man's desire, in the di^couery of
things unknown, he does apply his mind unto it. And by chance a great Holme
tree grew in that place amongst the rocks, now declining a little, then
bending, and raised in height, as the nature of all trees is: by whose boughs
sometimes, sometimes by the eminent rocks the Ligurian climbing, suruayeth the
plain of the Castle, for that all the Numidians were intentive amongst those
that fought.

All things being discovered, which he thought might be forthwith useful, he
goes back the same way, not unadvisedly as he came up, but trying and viewing
all places round about. For this cause he goes speedily to Marius: he
informs him what he had done: he does persuade him, that on that side, from
whence he descended, he would assail the Castle: he does promise, that he
would be chief in the enterprise and danger. Marius sent some of those, who
were present with the Ligurian, to inform himself better of his promises: of
whom, as every man's disposition served, so they brought back word, that it was
facill or difficult. Yet the Consuls mind was somewhat encouraged.

Therefore out of the number of his Trumpeters, and Cornetters, he selecteth
five of the nimblest, and with these, four Centurions for their guard,
commanding them all to obey the Ligurian, and appoints the next day for that
service. But as soon as the time came ordained by command, all things being
prepared and disposed, he goes to the place. But they who commanded the
Centuries, being formerly instructed by their Leader, had changed Arms and
attire, being bare on the head and feet, that so their prospect and travail
amongst the rocks, might be the more easy. Upon their backs were their
swords and shields, but they were of the Numidian fashion made of leather for
lightness sake: and withal, that striking one against another, they might
clash with less noise.

Upon this, the Ligurian going before, tied ropes unto the rocks and roots,
that were eminent through antiquity: with which the Soldiers being elevated,
might get up with less labor: sometimes he raised with his hand, those that
were fearful through the vncouthnesse of the passage: whereas the ascent was
something more rough, he sent them one by one unarmed before him: then he
himself followed with their arms: what places seemed dangerous to climb, he
assayed first: and often ascending and descending the same way, then forthwith
traversing, he does imbolden the rest to follow. Thereupon they being long, and
much toyled, came into the Castle being forsaken on that side: because that all
the defendants as they had done on the former days, were present, where they
^ought against the enemies.

Marius, as soon as he understood by Messengers, what the Ligurian had done;
although all the day he had held the Numidians hard in fight, then especially
encouraging his Soldiers, and he himself sallying forth without the
Vine-workes, secondeth with a Tortoise Engine raised, and withal terrifieth
the enemy from aloof with Engines of battery, with his archers and slingers.
But the Numidians, the Roman Vine-workes having been often before overthrown
and burned, sheltred not themselves within the Castle walls, but night and day
walked before the wall: they railed against the Romans, and to Marius objected
madness; to our Soldiers the threatened Iugurths servitude: in prosperity they
grew proud.

In the mean time all the Romans and enemies being earnest in fight, with
great violence on both sides; these striving for Glory and Empire, those for
safety, suddenly from behind the military instruments sounded: and first of
all the women and boys, who came to see, fled: then every man, as he was next
to the wall, finally, all both armed and unarmed. As soon as this happened,
the Romans fall on by so much the more fiercely, they beat down, and only
wound most of the enemies: then they pass over the bodies of the slain, being
greedy of glory, they assault the wall with an emulating strife: neither does
pillage arrest any one of them all. Thus casually Marius rashness
being-corrected, found glory out of an error.

CHAP. 25.
Sylla comes to the Army with great supplies of Horsemen. His character. The
two Kings are discomfited with both their Armies.
Moreover, whilst this enterprise was acting, L. Sylla the Treasurer arriueth
in the Camp with great numbers of Horsemen, for the raising of which, out of
Latium, and amongst the Confederates, he had been left at Rome. But because
the occasion does admonish us of so brave a man, it seems expedient to speak
briefly of his nature and manners: and L. Sisenna, who has prosecuted it most
exactly and diligently, amongst all those who have treated of that subject,
seems to me not to have spoken with freedom enough.

Therefore Sylla was a Nobleman of a Patrician race, his Family being almost
extinguished through the sloth of his Ancestors, he was learned alike, and
that most learnedly in the Greek and Latin tongue, he was of a haughty mind,
greedy of pleasures, but more greedy of honor: in vacant times he was
luxurious, yet pleasure never hindered him from his business, excepting that
concerning his wife, which might be more honestly interpreted: he was
eloquent, crafty and facill in friendship: to shadow his affairs, the height
of his wit was incredible: he was a giver of many things, but most specially
of money: and to him being the happiest of all men, before the civil victory,
Fortune was never above his industry: and many men doubted whether he were more
valiant or fortunate: for those things, which he did afterward, I am
uncertain, whether I should be more ashamed or grieved to relate.

Therefore Sylla, as has been formerly said, after he came into Afric, and
Marius Camp with the Cauallery, being before raw and unexperienced in war,
became the most ablest of all men in a short time. Besides, he saluted the
Soldiers courteously: he gave to many upon request, to others out o^ his own
freedom* he received henefits unwillingly, but the repayed them sooner then
money lent, he required that of no man: he rather endeavored this, that most
men might be his debtours. He communicated his pastimes, and serious affairs
even with the meanest: in the works, in marching, and at the watches, he was
most often present: neither in the mean time, which wicked ambition is wont to
do, did he wound the reputation of the Consul, or of any good man: only he
suffered none to go before him in Counsel* nor execution: about most he got
the precedence. By these courses and Arts, he became in a short space most
dear to Marius and the Soldiers.

But Iugurth, after he ha^ lost the Town of Capsa, with other places of
strength commodious for himself, and withal a great mass of money, he sends
Messengers unto King Bocchus, that he should come with all speed into Numidia,
that the season served to give battle: whom when he heard to make delays,
and doubtfully to protract the means both of war and peace: again, as
before, he corrupts those that were next unto him, with gifts: and he
promises unto the Moore himself a third part of Numidia, if either the
Romans were driven out of Afric, or the war were co^pounded, his own
Dominions remaining entire.

Bocchus allured with this reward, goes over to Iugurth with a great
multitude. Thus both their Armies being joined, they set upon Marius now
marching into his winter Garrisons, scarce a tenth part of the day being left:
thinking that the night, which was now at hand, would be a safeguard to the^
being vanquished, and if they should vanquish would be no impediment, because
they knew the ground: and to the Romans both fortunes would prove more
disadua^tagous in the dark*

Therefore as soon as the Consul was informed by many of the enemies coming,
the enemies themselves were also come: and before the army could be
imbattayled, or the baggage, gathered together; finally, before it could
receive any signal or command, the Moorish and Getulia^ horsemen, not in
front, nor in any form of battle, but in a disorderly troop, as chance gave
the^ means to join, fell on upon our men. All of whom trembling with sudden
fear, but yet mindful of their valor, did either take Arms, or defended
others from the enemies, as they took them. One part mounted their horses, to
issue forth to encounter the foe: the fight was more like to a skirmish of
Thieves, then to a battle* without Ensigns, without ranks, the Horse and
Foot were blended together: some fell: others killed: many circumuented those
from behind, who sought eagerly against those who opposed them in frount:
neither valor nor Arms defended sufficiently; for that the enemies were more
in number, and every where dispersed round about: finally the old and new
Romans, (and in that showing themselves expert Soldiers,) if place, or chance
co^^ioyned any, they did cast themselves into round battalions; and so being
equally defended, and ordered on all parts, they sustained the enemies
impression.

Neither in this so difficult a business was Marius terrified, or dejected in
mind any more then before: but with his own Troop of Horse, (which he had
raised rather out of the most valiant, then out of those, which were most his
familiears) he courseth up and down every where: and some times he succoureth
his own men being distressed: sometimes he assaileth the enemies with his own
hand, whereas being thickest, they made most resistance. He advises his
Soldiers, because all of them being disordered, he could not command.

And now the day was spent, when as yet the Barbarians grew nothing slack:
and thinking the night to advantage them, as the Kings had given order, they
fell on more fiercely. Then Marius takes counsel from the necessity of his
affairs: and that he might have a place of retreat for his own men, he
surprizeth two hillockes being near together: in one of which, not large
enough for incamping, there was a goodly fountain of water: the other was
opportune for use, because being for the most part high and steep, it needed
little fortifying. Besides, he commands Sylla to stay all night at the water
with the Horsemen. He himself reallieth by degrees the disbanded Soldiers
into one Gross, the enemies being no less disordered. Then he withdraws
them all with a full march unto the hillocke.

Thus the Kings enforced with the difficulty of the place, are deterred from
the fight. But both hillockes being environed with the multitude, and not
snffering their own men to depart further, they quartered severally. Upon
this, many fires being made, the Barbarians for most part of the night rejoice,
boast, and make great outcries according to their custom: and the Captains
themselselues were proud, because they fled not; and carried themselves as if
they had been victorious.

But all these passages were easily discerned by the Romans, out of the
darkness, and the higher places; and served them for a great encouragement.
But most of all, Marius being confirmed by the unskillfulness of the enemy,
commands the greatest silence to be observed. Not so much as the warlike
instruments did sound at the setting of the watches. Then as soon as the light
approached, the enemies being now wearied, end not long before attached with
sleep, he commands the Trumpets of the tributary Troops, with all those of
the Cohorts, Horse-Troupes, and Legions, to sound their instruments all
together; the Soldiers had orders to raise a great clamor, and to sally out
of the gates.

The Moors and Getulians being suddenly awaked with the strange and hideous
noise, could neither fly, nor take arms, nor make, nor provide any means of
resistance. Thus all of them with the clashing and clamor, (no man coming to
their succors, our men falling on with tumult, terror and fear) were like
me suprized with an astonishment. Finally, all of them were rowted, and
chased: most of their arms, and military Ensigns were taken: and more slain
in that battle, then in all the former, for by sleep and the uncouth terror,
flight was hindered.

Thereupon Marius, as he began, marches toward his Winter Garrisons, which
because of victuals, he resolved to have in the maritime Towns. Neither yet
was he grown slothful, or insolent with his victory, but even as if he had
been in the eye of his enemies, he aduanceth with his Army marching in square
battalions. Sylla on the right side took charge with the Horsemen, on the
left A. Manlius with the dar^^^s and slingers, besides the Ligurian Cohorts:
for Frontiers and bringers up, he placed the Tribunes with the light-armed
Maniples. The fugitives, who knew the Country best, discovered the enemies
journey withal the Consul, as if no man had been imposed, was provident for
all things: he was present with all, he^praysed, he rebuked those that
deserved: he himself being armed and intentive besides, enforced the Soldiers
to their duties: nor otherwise, then if he had been in the sight of the enemy,
does he dispose his marches, does he fortify the Camp, does he send the
Legionary Cohorts to watch at the Gate, the auxiliary Horsemen before the
Camp: moreover he places others on the Rampire of the works, he himself
rouneth the watches, not so much from the distrust of the performance of (...),
which he commanded, as for that the Generals labor being made equal with the
Soldiers, they might become the more willing.

And verily Marius in that and other times of the Iugurthine war, enforced
the Army more with shame then punishment, which many reported to be done out of
ambition; because from his childhood, he had accounted a customary hardness,
and other things, which other men call miseries, exercises of pleasure. But yet
the Commonwealth, as well as under the seuerest command, was well and orderly
governed.

Moreover on the fourth day following, not far from the Town of Cirtha, the
skoutes hastily show themselves: by which sign the enemy is known to be
near. But because they retaining diversely, several men from several parts,
and all of them signified the same; the Consul doubtful how to marshall his
Army, the order of it being nothing altered, he makes a stand in the same
place, being provided against all events.

By this means Iugurths hope was frustrated, who had distributed his Army into
four divisions, thinking that some amongst them all would equally fall on the
enemies backs. In the mean time Sylla, whom the enemies first attached,
encouraging his Soldiers, in Troop, and with their horses in the closest
order, both he and others invade the Moors. The rest keeping their ground,
defend their bodies from the darts, that were cast against them from the hand;
and if any fell in their power, they killed them.

Whilst the Horsemen fight after this manner, Bocchus with the Footmen, which
his son Volux brought (and were not in the former fight, because they staid
in their journey) sets upon the Rereward of the Romans. Then Marius was
amongst the frontiers, because Iugurth was there with his greatest Forces. Then
the Numidian, Bocchus his coming being known, secretly with some few wheeleth
about to the Footmen: there in Latin (for he had learned to speak it at
Numantia) he cries our aloud, that ou^ men fought in vain: that Marius not
long before was slain by his own hand: showing therewith all his sword
imbrued with blood, which in the fight he had bloodied, in killing a footman of
our^ with great dexterity.

Which report as soon as the Soldiers heard* they were more terrified with
the foulness of the fact, then with the credit of the messengers tidings: and
therewithal the Barbarians raised their spirits, and fell on more fiercely
upon the amazed Romans. And now they were upon the point of flying, when as
Sylla having discomfited those against whom he went, returning by the flanck,
charged the Moors: Bocchus is forthwith put to flight.

But Iugurth, whilst he endeauours to relieve his own men, and to retain the
victory, which was almost gotten, being circumuented by the Horsemen on every
side, all the rest of his retinue being slain, he alone escapes by flight
amongst his enemies weapons. And Marius in the interspace, having followed the
chase of the Horsemen, comes to the succor of his Soldiers, whom he had heard
to have been already put to the worst. Finally, the enemies were now rowted in
every place. Then a horrible spectacle was seen in the open fields: they
follow: they fly: they are slain: they are taken: men and horses are
overthrown together: many having received wounds, could neither fly, nor take
rest: sometimes they strove to rise, and forhwith fell down: last of all, as
far as the eye could discern, all places were covered with weapons, arms,
and carkeises, and amongst them the earth was polluted with blood.

CHAP. 26.
Marius comes to Cirtha. Bocchus mediates for a Treaty of Peace. L. Sylla
and A. Manlius are sent Ambassadors unto him.
FRom that place, the Consul being victorious, without all peradventure came
to the Town of Cirtha, whither at first he intended his journey. Thither
after the fifth day, on which the Barbarians had fought the second time with
ill ^uccesse, Ambassadors from Bocchus arrived, who requested of Marius in the
words of the King, that he would send two of his faithfullest friends unto him:
that he would treat with them about things commodious for himself, and the
people of Rome. He forthwith commands L. Sylla, and A. Manlius to go: who
although they went as men sent for, yet it was their pleasure to deliver some
words to the King: that so they might, either alter his adverse disposition, or
being desirous of peace, they might inflame him more vehemently. Sylla, to
whose eloquence, not age, Manlius gave place, expressed: himself in few words
after this manner:

King Bocchus, we must rejoice, since the gods admonished thee being so great a
person, that at length, thou should desire peace rather then war: nor
should dishonor thy self, being a most excellent man, by confederating
with Iugurth the worst of all men; withal, that thou should take from us a
severe necessity of persecuting they errors and his wickedness. Besides, it
seemed good to the Roman people, being poor even from the very beginning, to
procure friends rather then servants: and they thought it safer to command over
those who were willing, then those who were enforced.

But for thee, no friendship is more useful then ours: first, because we are
far removed, in which there is least cause of offense, and as equal
correspondency, as if we were neighbors: then, because we have parents
abundantly, of friends neither we nor any man else had ever enough. And would
to God this had pleased thee from the beginning: then for certain thou had
received more benefits from the people of Rome, then thou have suffered
mischiefs.

But because Fortune gouernes most of humane affairs, whose pleasure forsooth
it was, that thou should try both our force, and favor: now since thou
may do it by her leave, make haste, go on, as thou have begun. Many and
opportune means thou have to redeem thy errors the more easily with good
offices. Lastly, let this sink into thy breast, that the people of Rome were
never overcome with benefits: for in war, what they are able to do, thou thy
self know.

To this Bocchus answered in few words, excusing withal his own of fence:
That he had not taken arms with any hostill intention, but for the safety of
his Kingdom: that that part of Numidia, from whence he expelled Iugurth, was
made his own by the right of war he could not suffer that to be wasted by
Marius: moreover having sent Ambassadors to Rome, he had received a repulse
of their friendship. But he would omit old grieuances and now, if he might
have Marius license, he would sen^ Ambassadors to the Senate.

Then leave being granted, the Barbarians mind was altered by his friends; whom
Iugurth, fearful of what was intended, after the knowledge of Sylla^ and
Manlius Embassage, had corrupted with gifts.

CHAP. 27.
Marius draws out some Troupesito besiege the Kings Tower. Bocchus some other
Ambassadors, of whom three are sent to Rome.
Marius, in the mean time, his Army being quartered in their Winter Garrisons,
marches into the Deserts, with the light-armed Cohorts, and a part of the
Cauallery, to besiege the Tower royal, where Iugurth had placed all the
fugitives in Garrison. Then again, either from the Contemplation of those
things, which had happened to him in two several battles, or being admonished
by other friends, whom Iugurth had left uncorrupted; Bocchus selecteth five
amongst all the number of those that were nearest unto him, whose fidelity was
well known, and whose judgment were mostable. He commands them to go to
Marius, and from thence, i^ it were his pleasure, to Rome: he grants them
license to manage his affairs, and to compound the war upon what terms
soever.

They travail speedily toward the wintring places of the Romans: then being
surprised and robbed in their journey by Getulian thieves, they repair to
Sylla being fearful, and unseemly clad, whom the Consul, going upon the
expedition, had left for Praetour. He entertained them not as vain enemies,
according to their deserts, but daintily and liberally: upon which occasion the
Barbarians both thought the report of the Romans avarice to be false, and
Sylla for his munificence toward the^ to be their friend. For even then giving
was unknown to many: no man was thought munificent, except willing therewith
all: all good things were procured by bounty.

Upon this they deliner Bocchus chardge to the Treasurer withal they request
of him, that he would be their favorer and Counselor: they magnify in their
speech the Kings Forces, faith greatness, and what ^^se besides they thought
would be useful, or beneuolent Then Sylla having promised them his best
furtherance, they being instructed, what they should speak to Marius, what to
the Senate, stayed thereabout forty days.

After Marius, without effecting the business, was returned to Cirtha, as he
intended; being certified of the arrival of the Ambassadors, he commands both
them and Sylla to come to him from Vtica; and with them L. Bellienus Praetour
of Vtica, besides all men from all places of the Senatorian Order: with them
he informs himself of ^ugurths Mandates; in which license was given to the
Ambassadors to go to Rome: in the interspace a Truce was required of the
Consul. These things pleased Marius, and most men besides: some few censured
more rigorously, as ignorant of humane affairs, which being frail and
inconstant, do always change oppositly.

But the Moors having all their requests granted, three of them went to Rome
with Cn. Octauius Rufo, who being Treasurer transported the pay into Afric:
two of them return to the King. From these Bocchus heard amongst other things,
the report of Syllaes bounty and affection. And at Rome to his Ambassadors
requsting friendship and alliance, (after they had confessed the Kiug to have
erred, and to have fallen into this mischief by Iugurths villainy) an answer
was made after this manner:

That the Senate and people of Rome were mindful of a benefit and injury; but
yet to Bocchus, because he repented, they gave a pardon of his offense: aliance
and friendship shall be granted, when he shall deserve it.

Which passages being known, Bocchus entreats Marius by his letters, that he
would send Sylla unto him: by whose arbitration they might provide for the
common affairs. He was sent with a Conuoy of Horsemen, and Footmen being
Barbarian slingers: besides there went Archers, and the Pelignian Cohort with
their light arms, because of making the more expedition in their journey:
neither were they less defended with these, then with other arms, against the
enemies Darts, because they are light also.

But on the fifth day, as they iourneyed, Volux the son of Bocchus, shows
himself suddenly in the openly fields, with no more than a thousand Horse, who
marching loosely and disorderly, represented to Sylla, and all the rest, both a
number greater then truth, and a hostill terror besides. Therefore every man
makes ready: they try: they fix their arms and weapons: their fear was
something, but their hope more, as unto vanquishers, and against those, whom
they had often vanquished.

In the mean time the Horsemen sent before to discover, brought tidings, that
all was quiet. Volux coming near, tells the Treasurer; that he was sent by
his father Bocchus, to meet and to guard them: then joining their Forces, they
march that and the next day together, without fear. Afterward when they had
pitched their Tents, and the evening was come, suddenly the Moore trembling
with a suptitious countenance poasteth to Sylla: informing him, that it was
discovered by the skoutes, that Iugurth was not far off, withal he does
request and persuade him, that he would secretly fly away with him by night.

He being of a haughty mind, denies that he fears the Numidian so often
vanquished: he was sufficiently confident of his own men's valor: yea if
certain destruction were at hand, he would rather stay, then betraying those
whom he led, save by a shameful flight an uncertain life, and subject to
extinguishment by sickness, perhaps in a short time after. But being warned
by him to dismarch by night, he approues the counsel: and forthwith he
commands the Soldiers to suppe in their Tents, and frequent fires to be made;
then in the first watch to issue out with silence.

CHAP. 28.
Sylla being sent Ambassador to Bocchus, is likely to be surprised by Iugurth.
He escapes. Iugurth is betrayed by Bocchus to the Romans.
ANd now all of them being wearyed with that nights journey, Sylla even with
the rising of the Sun, measured out the ground for incamping: when as the
Moorish Horsemen bring tidings, that Iugurth about the distance of two miles
off, had taken up his Quarters just before them. After which report was heard,
then especially terror inuadeth our Soldiers: they believe that they are
betrayed by Volux, and circumuented by his treachery. And there were some, who
said, that revenge was to be taken by the hand, and so great a villainy in him
was not to pass without punishment.

But Sylla, although he were of the same opinion, yet he defends the Moore from
injury: he persuades his own men, that they would carry a courageous mind: a
few valiant men had often fought fortunatly against a multitude: by how much
the less they spared themselves in fight, by so much the more they would be
safer: neither did it beseem any man, who had taken arms in his hands, to
seek succor from his unarmed feet, and in the greatest fear of all, to
expose the body naked and blind, unto the enemies mercy. Then requiring Jupiter
the greatest of the gods, that he would be present as a witness of Bocchus
villainy, and treachery; he commands Volux, because he committed actions of
hostility, to depart the Camp.

He weeping entreats him, not to believe these things: nothing was done
fraudulently, but rather out of Iugurths cunning; who skowting abroad had
discovered his journey: but because he had not any great Forces; and all his
hopes and helps depended from his father; he was confident, that he durst
enterprise nothing openly, when as he his son was present for a witness:
wherefore it seemed the best course to him, to pass in full view through the
midst of the enemies Camp: himself, the Moors being sent before, or left
there, would stay alone with Sylla.

This counsel, as it was requisite in such an exigent, was allowed: and
forthwith dismarching, because they came unexpected, they passed in safety,
Iugurth being doubtful, and sticking upon delays. Then within a few days,
they arrived where they intended to go.

There conuersed with Bocchus a Numidian called Aspar, much, and familiarly: he
being premitted by Iugurth, (after he heard that Sylla was sent) as an Agent,
and a discouerer in policy of Bocchus counsels: besides there was Dabar, the
son of Massagrada, of the race of Massinissa, but unequal by the mothers side,
for his father was borne of a Concubine; being dear and gracious, with the
Moore for many good Arts, with which his mind was endued, whom Bocchus having
formerly tried by many occurrences, to be faithful to the Romans, he sends
him presently with this message to Sylla, that he was ready to do whatsouer
the Roman people would desire: that himself should choose a day, time, and
place for imparlance: that he would communicate all his counsels with him:
neither should he be afraid of lugurths Ambassador; for dealing a freely in
their common affairs: otherwise he could not prevent his trecheries.

But I find, that Bocchus more out of a Punicke faith, then for the regard of
what he said, detained with the hope of peace, both the Romans, and the
Numidian: and was wont to ponder much with himself, whether he should deliver
Iugurth to the Romans, or Sylla to him. Desire against us, fear for us did
persuade.

Therefore Sylla answers, that he would speak some few words before Aspar;
the rest in secret, none of a very few being present, withal he instructs
him, what answers should be made unto himself.

After, when they were met according to appointment; he says that he was sent
by the Consul, to demand whether he would have peace or war. Then the King,
according to his instructions, commands him to return after the tenth day; and
tells him that as yet he was resolved on nothing, but on that day would give
him an answer. Then both of them depart to their Te^rs. But when most of the
night was spent, Sylla is secretly sent for by Bocchus: only faithful
interpreters are admitted by them. Besides Dabar an intermessenger, a devout
man, swears sincerely to them both. Then the King thus begins:

I never thought, it would come to pass, that I being the greatest King in all
this Land, and of all that I know the most opulent, should owe a courtesy to a
private man. And verily Sylla, before I knew thee, to many men upon request, to
others freely I have given relief; I my self wanted nothing: I rejoice, that
I am difinabled in this, which others are wont to grieve at. It shall be
precious to me, that I sometimes have wanted thy friendship, then which I
esteem nothing dearer in my mind: of this so far thou may make a trial:
arms, men, and money, finally whatsoever pleases thee, take and use: and
while thou live, thou shall never think the courtesy requited, with me it
shall remain entire: moreover, if I may know it, thou shall desire nothing in
vain. For as I think, it is less dishonor for a King to be overcome by
arms, then by munificence.

But concerning your Commonwealth, whose Agent thou art hither sent, hear this
in a few words. I never made war with the people of Rome, nor ever was willing
that war should be made: with arms against armed men I defended my borders:
I pass over this. Since it is your pleasure, wage war with Iugurth, as you
will: I will not go beyond the river Mulucha, which was the Frontier betwixt
me and Micipsa, neither will I suffer Iugurth to attempt it. Besides,
whatsoever you shall request, that is worthy of me and your selves, you shall
not depart with repulse.

To this Sylla replied briefly for himself, for that which concerns peace,
and the common affairs more at large; finally, he reuealeth this secret to
the King, That he must assure him, that the people of Rome, in regard they had
been victorious in the war, would not receive him into favor: he must do
something, which might seem to concern their profit, more then his own: he
had a fair opportunity of this, as having Iugurth in his power: whom if he
delivered to the Romans, they should be much indebted to him: then
friendship, aliance, and that part of Numidia, which he requested, would
freely fall unto him.

The King at first refused; alleging, that kindred, aliance, and a League
besides had passed betwixt them: moreover he feared, lest by the breach of his
faith he should alienate the affections of his subjects; unto whom both Iugurth
was dear, and the Romans hateful. At length being often solicited, he ^s
reconciled, and promises to do all things, that Sylla would require. But for
the counterfeiting ^f peace, of which the Numidian weary of the war, was
most desirous, they framed pretenses, which seemed expedient. Thus the deceit
being composed, they depart severally.

But the King on the next day calls for Aspar^ and tells him, that he
understood from Sylla by Dahar, that the war might be compounded upon
conditions: wherefore he should demand his Kings intention. He being joyful,
goes to Iugurths Camp. Then in structed in all things by him, he returns,
having hastened his journey, after eight days, unto Bocchus; and bring
tidings, that Iugurth wa^ willing to do, whatsoever was commanded: but he was
diffident of Marius: that heretofore ^eace being contracted with the Romans,
had ^eene frustrated: but if ^^^chus would have a ^^^hing done conncellable ^or
both, and a peace ^stablished, he should ^^deauour, that all par^^es might
meet toge^^er, as if they were to ^^eate about it: and ^^ere he should deliver
^^lla into his hands: ^hen he had such a (...) in his power, then (...) League
would be (...) by order from the ^^^nate, and people of Rome: neither would
they forsake a Nobleman being in the enemies power, not by the default of his
own cowardice, but for the Commonwealths cause.

The Moore pondering this long with himself, at length he ingageth his
promise. But whether he delayed the excution out of cunning, (...) sincerity,
we find little certainety. But the wills of Kings are for the most part, as
vehement, as inconstant, often contrary to themselves.

Afterward a time and place being appointed, as if it had bee^ to meet upon a
Treaty of peace, Bocchus sometimes calls for Sylla, sometimes for Iugurths
Ambassador: he intertaineth them courteously: he promises the same to both.
They were joyful alike, and full of good hope. But on that night, which was
the next before the ^ay appointed for em^^rlance, the Moore, some friends being
admitted, and forthwith removed his resolution ^hanging, he is said to ^aue
deliberated much with himself: expressing ^ariety in his counte^^ance, color
and mo^on of body, even as he ^^id in his mind: which signs, he himself
being silent, revealed has inward secrets: yet at length he commands Sylla
to be sent for: and by his advice he prepares snares for the Numidian. Then
when the day came, and a message was delivered unto him of Iugurths approach:
with some few friends, and our Treasurer, as if he went to meet him for
honors sake, he adua^ceth unto a little h^ll that was easily to be seen by
the Ambusheers. Thither the Numidia^ comes unarmed with some few attendants* as
it was ordered; and suddenly a signal being given, he is invaded on all sides
out of the ambushments. The rest are slain: Iugurth is delivered bound to
Sylla, and by him conveyed to Marius.

In the interspace of this, our men fought unfortunately against the Gauls,
under the conduct of their Generals L. Scipio and M. Manlius: with the terror
whereof all Italy trembled, and both they and the Romans even to our memory,
were of this opinion, that all things were prone to their proper virtue: with
the Gauls they co^tended for safety, not for glory. But after the war was
finished in Numidia, and tidings came, that Iugurth was brought bound to Rome,
Marius being absent, was chosen Consul; and Gaul was decreed for his
Province: and he in the Kalends of January triumphed with great glory being
Consul. From that time the hopes and helps of the City relied on him.

FINIS.
HISTORICAL FRAGMENTS AND ORATIONS OF CAIUS CRISPVS SALVSTIVS.

Englished by WI. CROSS.



LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Sign of the Eagle and Child in Britains Bursse. 1629.

To the honorable Gentleman, Master Walter Montague, second Son to the Earl
of Manchester, William Cross wishes first the increase, and afterward the
fullness of all happiness.
Honorable Sir, the knowledge of your Judgment in the point of Historical
Judicature, joined with the remembrance of your gracious favors, have
encouraged me to consecrate those entire Fragments, which are extant in the
five Books of Salusts Histories, together with two Orations to Caesar, and one
against Cicero, to your learned and Iuditious censure; rendered, as I hope they
are, without loss of the Latin salt. If your Nobleness shall accept this
first mite of his thankful offerings, you shall encourage him to higher
attempts, and oblige him to remain for ever,

Your devoted Servant, William Cross.

A DESCRIPTION of the Roman Commonwealth in her integrity and declining.
THe Roman State most flourished in power, Ser. Sulpitius, and M. Marcellus
being Consuls. All Gaul on this side the Rheine, and that which lies betwixt
the Ocean and Mediterrane an Seas being subdued, except that which was
inaccessible, by reason of the Marshes. But with best manners, and greatest
concord the Roman people lived between the second and last Carthaginian war.

But discord, avarice, and ambition, with other mischiefs which are wont to
proceed from prosperity, after the destruction of Carthage, were most
increased. For the injuries of the stronger, and for that a disunion of the
Commonalty from the Fathers, and other civil dissensions had been even from
the beginning. Neither longer, then whilst the Kings being expelled, there was
a fear of Tarquine, and a dangerous war engaged with Hetruria, were things
governed after an upright and modest course.

Upon this, the Fathers held the Commonalty under a servile subjection: they
determined of life and limb after a Regal manner, they expelled men out of
their possessions, and others being voided, they alone lived in command. With
which cruelties, but most specially with the burden of usury the Commonalty
being oppressed, when as in the continual wars they suffered both taxes and
military duties, taking Arms, they surprised the holy mountain, and the
Auentine: and then they procured for themselves Tribunes of the people and
other privileges. Of the discords and controversy on both sides, the second
Punicke war made an end.

Afterward the Punicke fear being removed, they had leisure to exercise
factions. From which time the manners of our Ancestors were precipitated, not
by degrees, as formerly, but like the course of a torrent: so much was the
youth corrupted with riot and covetousness, that not without cause it might be
said, that such men were borne, who could not keep their own estates, nor
suffer others to have any.

Then many troubles, seditions, and last of all civil wars did arise: whilst
some few mighty men, on whose favor many relied, under the honest name of the
Fathers and Commonalty affected a tyrannical command. And they were called
good and evil Citizens, not for their merits toward the Commonwealth, all
men being corrupted alike, but as any man was most rich, and stronger in doing
wrong, because he maintained his present undertakings, he was accounted good.

The Oration of M. Aemilius Lepidus the Consul, against Lu. Sylla.
YOur clemency, and integrity, (O ye Romans,) by which you are most great,
and famous amongst other Nations, minister much cause of fear to me, in the
contemplation of L. Syllaes tyranny, lest that either you be circumuented by
others, being incredulous of these things, which you esteem most wicked:
especially when all his hope rely on villainy and persidiousnesse: neither can
he think himself otherwise safe, except he grows worse and more detestable
from your fear, by means whereof misery may take away the care of your
captiued liberty: or if you shall provide against them, you may be more engaged
in defending your selves from dangers, then in revenging them. Truly his
ministers being men of much renown, and no less honored for the excellent
examples of their Ancestors (I cannot sufficiently wonder at it) bestow their
service for the reward of his tyranny over you: and rather desire them both
with injury, then to live freely after the vprightest manner: The illustrious
progeny of the Bruti, Aemilij, and Lutatij, borne to ruin that, which their
Ancestors got.

For what else was defended from Pyrrhus, Hannibal, Philip, and Antiochus, but
liberty, and every man's proper habitation; that we might be obedient to none,
but the Laws? all which this cruel Romulus detaines, as spoils from taken
strangers; not being glutted with the slaughter of so many Armies, nor with
that of the Consuls, and other Princes, whom the fortune of the war has
consumed: but even then he grows more merciless, when as prosperity turns
most men from anger unto compassion. But he alone amongst all after the memory
of man, has ordained punishments for those that are to be borne; unto whom
injury shall be assured before life: and being as yet protected by his
monstrous villainy, he does rage in most wicked manner; whilst you out of the
fear of a more grievous feruitude, are terrified from the recovering of
liberty.

Something is to be done, and he reincountred (O ye Romans) that your spoils
become not his prey: delays are not to be made, neither by vows are helps to
be procured: except perchance you hope, that out of the tediousness and shame
of his tyranny, he will quit those perquisites with more danger, which he has
usurped to himself by villainy.

But he has proceeded so far, that he esteems nothing glorious, but what is
safe, and all things to be honest, that tend to the preservation of his
tyrannical government. Therefore that peace, and quietness with liberty,
which many good men have embraced before laborious honors, have no respect
with him. At this time we must either serve or command: fear is either to be
had, or caused (O ye Romans.)

For what remains further? or what divine or humane rights are left
unpolluted? the Roman people not long since the rulers of Nations, being
despoiled of glory, Empire, and privileges, withal grown poor and
despicable, have not seruill maintenance left. A great number of Alies and
Latins made free of the City, for their many and meritorious acts, are
restrained by one man alone; and a few of his ministers have possessed the
ancient seats of the Commonalty, for a reward of their villainies. Laws,
Iudicatures, Treasures, Provinces, and Kings, are in one man's power: finally
the liberty of the death and life of Citizens. Withal you have seen humane
sacrifices, and Sepulchers polluted with civil blood.

Is there any thing left remaining for men, but to quit thi^ injury, and die
valiantly? For as much as nature has certainly appointed the same end for all
men, even for those who are hedged about with Iron: neither does any man, that
wants daring, expect the last necessity, but with a feminine resoluton.

But I am seditious, as Sylla says, who complain upon the rewards of these
tumults; and seek after war, because I require the privileges of peace.
Forsooth, as though you could not be otherwise safe, and secured enough under
his government, except Vettius* Picens, and Cornelius the Scribe shall lavish
out other men's lawful acquisitions: except you shall approve all the
proscriptions of the innocent for their riches: the tortures of illustrious
persons; the City wasted with fire and slaughters: the goods of miserable
Citizens sold, or given away; as if they were Cimbrian pillage.

But he obiecteth to me my possessions gotten out of the goods of the
proscribed. Which verily is the greatest argument of his wickedness: that
neither I, nor any man else should be sufficiently safe, if we should do
uprightly. And those things which then I bought out of fear; the price being
paid, I restore forthwith to the rightful owners: neither is it my counsel to
suffer any prey to be made of Citizens. Those calamities shall be sufficient,
which in the heat of madness we have endured. Roman Amies fighting one
against another, and Arms converted from strangers upon our selves.

Of all mischiefs and reproaches let there be an end, Of which Sylla is not so
penitent, but that he glories in his wicked deeds, and if it were lawful,
would follow that course more egerly. Neither, now do I fear, what you
esteem of him, but how much you dare to do your selves: lest one expecting
another for chief, you may be surprised, not by his power, which is weak and
broken, but by your own cowardice, before you could otherwise be surprised,
and before he durst appear so happy.

For besides his debaucht ministers, who desires the same with him? and who
would not have all things changed but the victory? his Soldiers forsooth:
whose blood has been the price of riches, for Tarrula, and Scirrus the worst
of slaves. Or will those, by whom Fusidius is advanced in gaining of
Magistracies a base varlet, the shame of all good men?

Therefore the victorious Army makes me very confident: by whom besides
wounds, and labors, nothing has been procured but a Tyrant. Except perchance
they went about to subvert the Tribunitiall power, founded by our Ancestors,
that so they might usurp Laws and Iudicatures unto themselves: for a fair
hire indeed, when as being banished into marshes and woods, they shall
understand that their disgrace and hatred remain for rewards with some few.

Why therefore does he march with such a Troop, and such anelated mind?
because prosperity supports vice wonderfully: which being decayed, he will be
as much despised, as he was feared before; except perchance he does this under
the color of peace and concord, which names he has given to his villainy and
parricide. Nor otherwise, says he, can the Roman people have an end of war,
except the Commonalty be expelled out of their possessions, the worst of all
civil predation and the right and judgment of all things remain with him,
which belonged to the people of Rome.

Which if you should interpret to be peace and concord, approve then the
greatest disturbances and plagues of the Commonwealth. Submit to imposed laws:
embrace idleness with servitude: and deliver over an example to posterity, of
circumuenting the Roman people, with the effusion of their own blood.

For my self, although by this highest command, enough has been procured for
the name of my Ancestors, for my own dignity and safety also: yet it was not
my resolution to ouervalue my private fortunes: and a dangerous liberty seemed
better to me then servitude? which if you allow, join with me, (O ye
Romans:) and the gods assisting happily, follow Marcus Aemilius the Consul,
as General and Author for the recovering of your liberty.

The Oration of Lu. Philippus, against M. Aemilius Lepidus.
MOst of all, I would desire (O ye Romans) that the Commonwealth were
undisturbed, or being endangered, it were defended by the fittest Agents:
finally, that naughty designs might prove hurtful to the Counselors. But
contrariwise, all things are disturbed with seditions, and by them whom it
behooved rather to restrain them. Last of all, what the worst and foolishest
have decreed, that must be executed by wise and good men. For war and Arms,
although they are hateful to you, yet because they please Lepidus, are to be
undertaken: except perchance it may be any man's counsel to make peace, and
suffer war.

Out alas, ye good gods, which govern as yet this City, the care of it being
neglected, M. Aemilius the worst of all wicked men, of whom it may be
deliberated, whether he be more ^ewde or cowardly, has an Army on foot for
oppressing our Liberty, and has made himself from contemptible, to become
terrible: you wavering and retracting through the words and verses of the
Prophets, rather wish for peace, then defend it: neither are you sensible, that
out of the lenity of your decrees, dignity from your selves, fear from him is
detracted. And this happens justly: because out of his rapines he has gotten
a Consulship; for his sedition, a Province together with an Army. What should
he have received for his well doings, unto whose villainies you have given such
great^rewardes?

But forsooth they, who even to the last, decreed Ambassadors, peace, concord,
and other conditions of the same nature, procured favor from him. Yes truly,
they being held despicable, and unworthy of the Commonwealth, are esteemed no
better th^n a prey; as requiring peace out of fear, by which they lost it,
being once had.

Verily from the beginning, when I saw Etruria to conspire, the proscribed sent
for, the Commonwealth rent in sunder with bribes, I thought it high time to
prevent, and followed Catulus counsel with some few. But they who extolled the
deserts of the Aemilian Family, and by pardoning his offense, would increase
the Majesty of the Roman people, did not then see Lepidus drifts: when he had
taken private Arms for the opressing of liberty, by seeking riches or
protections severally for themselves, every man corrupted the public counsel.

But then Lepidus was a thief with some few Campe-drudges, and Ruffians,
amongst whom there was none, that would not have sold his life for daily hire:
now he is a Proconsull with authority, not bought, but freely given by you,
with Lieutenants as yet obeying lawfully: and to him there resort the lewdest
men of all degrees, inflamed with poverty and lust, perplexed with the
conscience of their crimes: whose rest is in seditions, whose troubles are in
peace. These raise tumult out of tumult, war out of war: being once of
Saturninus, afterward of Sulpitius, then of Marius and Damasippus, now of
Lepidus retinue.

Moreo^er Etruria, and all the relics of the war are in commotion: both
Spaines are solicited to Arms: Mithridates frontiering upon our tributaries,
by whom we are as yet sustained, expects opportunity for the war: so that
besides a ^itting Leader, nothing wants for the subuerting of the Empire.

Which I desire and entreat you (O ye Conscript Fathers) to take into your
consideration: and that you would not suffer the license of ill doing to infect
the sound, like a pestilent contagion. For whereas rewards attend the wicked,
hardly is any man found good for bare thanks only.

What do you expect, whilst his Army falling on again, he shall invade the
City with fire and sword? which issue is by far less removed from the present
state, then civil arms are from peace and concord. Which he has taken
against all divine and humane rights, not for his own, nor the pretended
wrongs of others, but for the overthrowing of Laws and liberty. For he is
vexed and tormented with the desire of mind, and fear of punishment, being
restless and deuoyd of counsel, making trial of this, and that, he fears
peace, he hates war; he sees, that he must fall into wants with his luxury
and licentiousness, and in the mean time abuses your slacknesse. Neither am
I well resolved, whether I shall call this fear, cowardice, or folly; who
seem to wish that the intended evils fall not like lightening on you, but to
prevent them, no man does as much, as endeavor.

And consider (I beseech you) how much the condition of things is altered:
before, the public mischief was contrived secretly, the remedies openly; and
in that good men were aduantaged beyond the wicked. Now peace and concord are
disturbed openly; they are defended secretly. The men, to whom these things are
pleasing, are in Arms, you in fear.

What do you expect further; except perchance you are ashamed or grieved to
do as you should? Can Lepidus orders move your minds, who says it is his
will, that every man's proprieties should be restored to him, when as he
detaineth other men's; that the Laws of war should be annihilated, when as he
inforceth them by Arms; that the freedom of the City should be confirmed,
when as he denies it to them, from whom it has been taken; that the
Tribunitiall authority should be restored to the Commons, from which occasion
all discords have been kindled?

Thou that art the worst, and most impudent of all men, are the poverty and
griefs of the City thy care, who have nothing of thy own, but what has been
gotten by Arms and injury? Thou suest for another Consulship, as if thou
had resigned the first: by war thou seek concord, by which it was
disturbed when it was gotten: thou art a Traitor to us, hateful to them, an
Enemy to all good men; so that thou art not ashamed of God, nor man, whom thou
have wronged with treachery and perjury.

Whom, since thou art such a one, I do exhort, that thou would continue in
thy resolution, and prosecute the wars: and that thy self being disturbed
with delaying of tumults, would not detain us in anguish. Neither the
Provinces, Laws, nor household gods accept thee for a Citizen. Go on, as thou
have begun: that suddenly thou may find a deserved punishment.

But you (ye Conscript Fathers) how long by your delays will ye suffer the
Commonwealth to be undefended, and will encounter Arms with words? Musters are
made against you; ^oneyes are publicly and privately extorted; Garrisons are
drawn forth, and imposed; lust commands over the Laws: when you, in the
interspace provide Ambassadors and decrees. And believe me, by how much the
more earnestly you shall sue for peace, by so much the war will be more
violent: when he shall understand, that he is more supported by fear, then by
goodness and equity. For that man who says, that he hates tumults, and
civil slaughter, and for that cause detaines you from arming against armed
Lepidus; what vanquished men must endure, he thinks it fitter you should
suffer, when as it lies in your power to inflict it upon others. Thus peace is
persuaded for him, from you; for you war, from him.

If these things please; if your minds are so besotted, that being forgetful
of Cinnaes mischiefs, (by whose return into the City, all orders and decency
were overthrown) you will nevertheless submit your selves, your wives and
children to Lepidus; what need is there of decrees? what need of Catulus
assistance, but that he and other good men must undertake in vain the charge
of the Republicke? Do, as you will; provide for your selves the patronages of
Cethegus, and other Traitors, who desire to renew rapines and fierings, and to
arm their hands, against their household gods.

But if liberty and wars delight you more; institute decrees worthy of your
name, and give encouragement to valiant men. A new Army is at hand; and besides
the Colonies of the old Soldiers, all the Nobility with the ablest Commanders.
Fortune follows the best men. Now those succors which are raised, will be
dissolved through your negligence.

Wherefore my censure is this, that since Lepidus, out of his own private
counsel, contrary to the authority of this order, leads an Army unto the
City, composed of most wicked men, and Enemies to the Commonwealth: that
Appius Claudius, the Interregent with Q. Catulus the Proconsull, and others who
have orders for it, shall be careful to guard the City, and endeavor that the
Commonwealth suffer no detriment.

Collections out of the second book of SALVSTS Fragments.
The magnificent entertainment of Metellus in Spain.
But Metellus returning after one year into the further Spain, is received
with great honor, both of men and women, who ran forth to see him from the
high ways and house tops: when as C. Vrbinus the Treasuror and others
knowing his mind, invited him to supper: they regarded equally the custom of
Romans, and men; the houses being adorned with Tapistry, and Ensigns, and
with Scaffolds raised for the show of the Stage-plaiers* withal, the ground
was strowed with Saffron, and other Pageants were shown in the form of a most
magnificent Temple. Moreover, the Image of victory being let down with a fixed
loupe-window, after the counterfeited noise of thunder, imposed a Crown upon
his head: then with Frankincense supplications were made to him, as to some
new-come god. An imbroidred gown was his usual garment, when he sat down to
eat: his bankets were most exquisite; neither were they furnished only out of
the whole Province, but diverse strange kinds of birds and beasts were fetched
out of Mauritania. By means whereof he somewhat obscured his glory, especially
amongst the ancient and religious men, who thought these courses to be proud,
insufferable, and unworthy of the Roman Empire.

Collections out of the third book of SALVSTS Historical Fragments.
The Epistle of Cu. Pompeius to the Senate, being necessitated in the Sertorian
war.
IF against you, my Country and household gods, I had as often undertook
labors and dangers, as from my first youth your mortallest enemies have been
beaten under my conduct, and safety has been procured for your selves; you
could determine nothing worse against me being absent, then now ye do (O ye
Conscript Fathers) whom being thrust out, contrary to my age, into a most
cruel war, with a most well deserving Army; you have, as much, as lies in
you, consumed with hunger, the wretchedst death of all others.

With this hope did the Roman people send forth their children unto the war?
Are these rewards for wounds, and blood so often shed for the Commonwealth?
Being tired with writing and sending of Agents, I have spent all my private
hopes and fortunes; when in the mean time, for these three years, scarce one
years means has been supplied from you. By the immortal gods, what think
you, can I make good the Office of the Treasury, or maintain an Army without
corn and pay?

Verily I confess, that I went to this war, with more desire, then counsel:
because having only received the name of command from you, in forty days I
raised an Army, and removed the enemy lying upon the ne^ke of Italy, from the
Alps into Spain. Through them I discovered another passage from that of
Han^ibals, being more opportune for us. I recovered Gaul, the Py^enaean,
Lacetanian, and Ilerge^an Regions; and sustained the first assault of
conquering S^rto^ius with new Soldiers, and ^ewer by far: and spent all the
winter in Camp amongst most fierce enemies, not in towns, nor out of my own
ambitious choice.

Besides, what should I recount batells fought, or winter expeditions, towns
rased, o^ recovered? when as deeds are more to be regarded the^ words. The
Enemies Camp surprised at Sucro, a battle fought at the River Durius, and
Caius Herennius, one of their chief Captains, being subdued, together with
the City of Valentia, and his Army, are things sufficiently known unto you.

For which services (O ye thankful Fathers) ye requite me with want, and
famine. So that the same condition attends mine, and the Enemies Army: for pay
is given to neither. Both of them may come victorious into Italy.

Which I do admonish, and entreat you to consider, and that you would not
enforce me with necessities to provide privately for my self. The hither
Spain, which is not possessed by the enemies, we or Sertorius have quite
wasted; except the greatest Cities, which of themselves are both a charge and
burden to us. Gaul all this last year relieved Metellus Army with pay and
Corn; and now having had an ill harvest, she her self does hardly subsist. I
have not only spent my own estate, but credit also. You remain as yet: who
except you afford succors, in despite of me, and all my premonitions, the Army
will march from hence, and with it all the war of Spain will pass into
Italy.

The Oration of M. Lepidus, Tribune of the people, unto the people.
IF you should not well consider, O ye Romans, what difference might be,
betwixt the government left unto us by our Ancestors, and this servitude
prepared by Sylla; it were requisite for me to discourse at large, and show for
what injuries, and how often the armed Commonalty disunited themselves from the
Fathers; and how they procured Tribunes of the people, to vindicate their
right. That which remains now, is only to exhort, and to go the direct way,
by which I think liberty may be regained. Neither does it ouerpasse me, how
great supports of the Nobility, I being alone, and impotent, with the vain
shadow of Magistracy only, must undertake to remove from the government; and
how much more securely the wicked live; then the forelorne innocent.

But besides the good hope conceived of you, which has subdued fear, it has
been my resolution, that the difficulties of contending in the case of
liberty, beseem more a valiant man, then not to have contended at all:
Although all other Magistrates created for your right, have converted all their
power and commands against you, induced with favor, hope, or rewards; and
hold it better to offend for hire, then to do well for bare thanks.

Therefore all are inthralled under the tyranny of some few, who under a
military pretense have usurped the Treasury, Kingdoms, Armies, and Provinces,
and possess the capitol out of your spoils: when in the mean time you the
multitude yield up your selves, to be had, and possessed by several men,
dispoiled of all things, which our Ancestors left: except that now you choose
Lords by suffrages, as you did Governors in former times.

Therefore all have put their necks under the same yoke, and forthwith, if
you shall recover your own, most of them will return to your party. For rare
is the resolution, which will defend those things, that please. The rest belong
to the stronger.

What, do you doubt, that any thing can hinder you, proceeding with unanimity,
whom they have feared being lazy and languishing? except perchance Ca. Cotta a
Consul of the middle faction, otherwise then out of fear, restored certain
privileges to the Tribunes of the people; and although L. Sicinius was the
first, that durst speak of the Tribunitiall power, yet was he circumue^ted
through your irresolution. Notwithstanding, they first feared the envy of the
fact, before you were grieved with the wrong. Which I cannot suffici^ntly
admire (O ye Romans) or ye knew all hope to be vain. Sylla being dead, who
imposed ^greeuous servitude, you belee^ed your miseries to be at an end.
Catulus comes up far more ^ruell. A tumult interceded Bru^us, and Acmilius
Mamercus ^eing Consuls. Then C. Curio ^yrannized, even to the destructi^n of a
guiltless Tribune, with that eagerness of mind Lucullus ^his last year
prosecuted L. Quinctius, you your selves saw: ^esides what troubles are now
^^ised against me. Which verily would prove frustrate, if they would make an
end of their ty^anny, before you do of your ^^uitude: especially when in these
^uill broiles other things are pre^^nded in words, but both facti^ns contend
for rule over you.

Therefore other combustions proceeding from licentiousness, ^atred, or
avarice, have been transitory. One thing only is permanent, which both
factions seek for: and for ever hereafter is the Tribunitiall authority taken
from you: a weapon left by your Ancestors for the defense of liberty. Which I
admonish, and entreat you to consider: and that by changing the names of
things to shadow your cowardice, you would not call it ease, in stead of
servitude. To enjoy which even now, if wrong shall onercome truth and honesty,
it is no condition: it would have been, if you had been altogether quiet. Now
observe thus far; that except you vanquish, they will restrain you more;
Since every injury grows safer by his greatness.

What therefore is your censure? Some man will reply, first of all, the
custom, which you now embrace, is to be omitted, of a nimble tongue, and
slothful spirit, not being mindful of your liberty without the place of
assembly. Then that I may not summon you to those virill duties, by virtue
whereof your Ancestors committing a Patritian Magistracy to the Tribunes of
the people, procured free suffrages from Patritian Authors. Although (O ye
Romans) it lies in your power, that those things, which enjoined you suffer
for others, you may do, and not do indifferently for your selves.

What do you expect Jupiter, or some other god for counselor? the great
commands of the Consuls, and decrees of the Fathers, you ratify by your
execution (O ye Romans) and of your own accord you make haste to enlarge and
support their authority over you. Neither do I persuade you to revenge
injuries; rather I would have you embrace peace: neither desiring discords, as
they misinforme, but the end of them, I require our own by the Law of Nations:
and if they shall detain that forcibly, I do not give my censure for arms,
or disunion, but only that you would not give your blood any more.

Let them after their own ways manage and hold places of command: let them
seek after triumphs: let them with their statutes persecute Mithridates,
Sertorius, and the relics of the banished. Let danger and labor be removed,
in which there is no share of the gain: except perhaps by that sudden Law for
corn, your offices are amply requited. By which not withstanding they valued
at 5. measures the liberty of all those, who could no longer want this releese.
For as by the exiguity death is prevented, their stre^gths decay: so that
neither such a small proportion frees them from domesticke care; and the
slouthfullest persons are frustrated from the meanest hope. Which although it
were ample, yet because it represents the price of slavery, whose folly was
it to be deceived, and to owe, together with injury, the favor of those
things, which belong to you? For by any other course neither can they work
upon the generality, nor will endeavor. Yet ought we to be cautelous of their
deceit.

For this cause, all of them together prepare Lenitiues to delay you till the
coming of Cn. Pompeius: whom when they have reverenced with an awful regard,
having made their necks his footstool, forthwith fear being removed, they
will rent his honor peecemeale. Neitherdoth it ashame these auengers, as they
call themselves, of liberty, being so many as they are, that they durst not
without one man pardon an injury, or are not able to defend their right. For
certain it is sufficiently known to me. that Pompey; being a youngman, of
such eminent glory, had rather be chief over you with consent, then an
associat with them in tyranny, and will labor especially to be Author of the
Tribunitiall power.

But formerly (O ye Romans) all ye that were Citizens relied on the patronage
of many, all did not depend from one. Neither could any one man give, or take
away things of that nature. Therefore enough has been spoken. Neither is the
matter shut up in ignorance.

But I know not, what dullness has possessed you, in that you are neither
moved with glory, not wrong; and have exchanged all things for present sloth:
thinking it liberty enough, because your backs are kept from scourging, and you
may lawfully go whither you will, by the leave of your rich Masters; and that
the Peazants enjoy not the same privileges. But yet these men are beaten by
the enmities of the mighty, and are given for a gift to the Magistrates with
their Provinces. Thus some few fight, and vanquish: the Commonalty, whatsoever
happens, is held for vanquished; and will be more every day than other; if
they with greater care shall maintain their tyranny, then you shall require
your liberty.

A Copy of the Letters sent from Mithridates, King of Pontus, to Arsaces King
of Parthia.
King Mithridates to King Arsaces sends greeting.
ALI men, who in their prosperous affairs are solicited unto the society of a
war, ought to consider, whether it may be lawful for the present to contract
peace: then, whether that which is demanded, be sufficiently pious, safe,
glorious, or else v^seemely. Thou might enjoy a perpetual peace except the
enemies were opportune, and withalmost wicked. Thy renown will become
illustrious, if thou shall suppress the Romans. Not otherwise should I dare
to desire thy Aliance; and should vainly hope to blend my evil, and thy good
fortunes together.

The storm of a new war falling upon Tigranes, and my unprosperous estate,
if thou shall balance them truly, will serve for a most special
encouragement. For he being offended, will entertain Aliance, as thou will:
fortune to me, after the loss of many things, has given the benefit of
aduising well; and that which is to be wished for of men that flourish, I being
the weakest, represent an example, by which thou may compose thy affairs
more orderly.

For this has been the only, and ancient cause with the Romans, of warring
with Nations, Kings, and People, the profound desire of rule, and riches: out
of which they first engaged war with Philip King of the Macedonians. Whilst
they were pressed by the Carthaginians, counterfeiting friendship, with a guile
they diuerted Antiochus coming to his succors, by the entire grant of Asia.
And forthwith after Philip, Antiochus was despoiled of all the territory on
this side Taurus, and of ten thousand talents. Then Perses the Son of Philip,
being received into protection by the Samothracian gods, after many and various
conflicts; they being cunning and inuenters of the treachery, killed him
sleeping, because they had granted him life by compromise.

E^^menes, of whose friendship they gloriously vaunt, at first they betrayed to
Antiochus, as the price of peace. Afterward they made Attalus, (being Guardian
only of a captiued Country,) from a King, to become the miserablest of slaves,
by the taxes and contumelies laid upon him: and an impious testament being
forged, they led his Son Aristonicus in triumph, after a hostill manner,
because he sought his Fathers Kingdom. They have besieged Asia: finally,
Nicomedes being dead, they have surprised all Bithynia; when as the son of
Nusa, whom they called Queen, was borne without all doubt.

For what should I name my self? whom being disioyned every where by Kingdoms
and Tetrarchies from their Empire, because the report was, that I was rich, and
would not serve, they provoked with war by Nicomedes, not altogether ignorant
of their villainy; as having given test of those things, which happened
afterward; that only amongst all men, the Cretensians and King Ptolomie were
free at that season.

But* I revenging my wrongs, expelled Nicomedes out of Bithynia, and recovered
Asia the spoil of King Antiochus, and freed Greece from a grievous servitude.
My proceedings Archelaus the basest of my servants hindered, by betraying my
Army; and they, whom cowardice, or mischievous cunning restrained from Arms,
thinking that they should be safe-garded by my labors, suffer now most cruel
punishments. Ptolomie for a price delays the day of war. The Cretensians
assaulted once already, are to expect no end but ruin.

Truly, when I was informed, that by reason of their own intestine miseries,
war was rather deferred, then peace granted; Tigranes condescending who
approues my words too late, thou being far removed, and all others obnoxious,
for all this I undertook the war again, and defeated Marcus Cotta General
of the Romans at Chalcedon in a Land-battell; at Sea I despoiled him of a most
goodly Fleet. Staying at the siege of Cicicus with a great Army, corn failed,
no man all about bringing relief: withal the winter debarred the benefit of
the Sea. Thus being constrained without the enemies force to return into my
native Kingdom, I lost with wrackes at Para and Heraclea the best of my
Soldiers, together with my Fleetes.

Afterward my Army being reinforced at Cabira, and sundry battles passing
betwixt me, and Lucullus, want invaded both of us again. He had for relief
the Kingdom of Ariobarzuris, not touched as yet by the war: I, all the
Regions adjacent being wasted, came into Armenia, and the Romans following not
me, but their custom of subuerting all Kingdoms, because in those fastnesses
they restrained the multitude from fight, they account Tigranes imprudence for
a victory.

Now I pray consider, whether after our conquest, thou can think thy self
more firm for resistance, or that the war will be at an end? I know for
certain, that thou art abundantly stored with men, Arms, and money: and for
this cause thou art desired by us for the society of the war, by them for a
prey. Besides, it is the counsel of Tigranes, his Kingdom being entire, to
finish the war with little labor far from home, by the bodies of our well
experienced Soldiers: since we can neither vanquish, nor be vanquished without
thy danger.

Are you ignorant that the Romans, after the Ocean had limited their Conquests
to the westward, converted their Arms hither? and that they had nothing from
the beginning, which was their own, not so much as their houses, wives, fields,
nor Empire? they were in times past a medley of strangers, without Country,
without Parents, created for the plague of the world, whom not humane, nor
divine Laws can restrain, but that they will force and ruin their friends
and Alies, whether living near or remote, poor or powerful; and all that are
not their vassalls, but specially Kingdoms they esteem for enemies. For few
desire liberty, the greatest part just Masters: we are suspected for
emulatours, and auengers in future time.

But thou, who have Seleucia the greatest of Cities, and the Kingdom of Persia
renowned for riches, what do thou expect from them but deceit for the
present, and war afterward? The Romans are armed against all men, but most
fiercely against those, who being conquered, can yield the greatest spoils: by
daring and deceiving, and by raising wars out of wars, they are grown
mighty. By this course they will ruin all, or perish: the last of which is not
difficult, if thou from Mesopotamia, we from Armenia surround their Army,
wanting corn, wanting aids. Fortune is as yet entire through our defaults.
And this fame will follow thee undertaking the succor of mighty Kings, that
thou have suppressed the robbers of the Nations. Which thing, we warn, and
persuade thee to do; and that thou would not with our destruction enlarge
their only Empire, rather then by our Aliance to be the Conqerour.

Collections out of the fifth book of SALVSTS Historical Fragments.
The Oration of Ca. Cotta the Consul, to the people.
MAny dangers (O ye Romans) have happened to me, both at home, and abroad,
many calamities: some of which I have suffered, others I have repelled by the
aid of the gods, and my own virtue: in all which neither my mind was wanting
to my business, nor labor to my resolutions. Adverse and prosperous affairs
changed wealth, not my wit.

But contrariwise in these miseries, all things have forsaken me: besides, old
age grievous in it self, does redouble my care: to whom being wretched, it is
not lawful in these my last years to hope for an honest death. For if I am a
Paricide of you, and being borne for you, have vilified my household gods, my
Country, and this most glorious Empire, what torment is sufficient for me in my
life, or what punishment after death? when with my wickedness I have exceeded
all the punishments mentioned in hell.

From my first youth I lived in your eye both a private person and Magistrate;
those that would, used my tongue, counsel, and money: neither did I exercise
my eloquence craftily, nor my wit mischieuously: being most covetous of private
favor, I undertook great quarrels for the Commonwealth: who being vanquished
together with her, when destitute of other help, I expected farther miseries;
you (O ye Romans) restored again to me my Country, and household gods, with an
exceeding great dignity.

For which benefits I should not seem sufficiently thankful, if for them
severally, which I cannot do, I should expend my very soul. For life and
death are the rights of nature; that thou may live without disgrace with thy
fellow Citizens, thy fame and fortunes being entire, that is neither given, nor
taken as a donatiue.

You have made us Consuls (O ye Romans) the Commonwealth being much entangled
both at home and abroad: for the Generals of Spain require pay, Soldiers,
Arms, and corn, and the occasion inforceth it: for after the revolt of our
Confederates, and the flight of Sertorius over the mountains, they can neither
come to fight, nor provide necessaries. Our Armies, in regard of Mithridates
great forces, are maintained in Asia and Cilicia: full of enemies is Macedonia:
no less the maritime regions of Italy, and the Provinces: when in the mean
time our tributes being small and uncertainly balanced for the wars, scarce
sustain a part of the charges: thus we sail with a less Fleet, then formerly
we did, for the Conuoy of victuals.

If these things are contracted by our negligence and fraudulent dealing,
proceed, and take punishment as you will: but if the common fortune be in
fault, wherefore do you undertake things unworthy of your selves, of us and
the Commonwealth? And I, over whose age death is impendent, do pray for it, if
by that you can quit any inconvenience: neither can any thing more honest this
ingenious body, then if it cease to live for your safety.

Behold I C. Cotta the Consul am here, I do that which our ancestors have
often done in dangerous wars: I vow and abandon my self for the
Commonwealth: the which to whom you may commit, be circumspectiue from hence
forwards; for no good man will desire that honor, when as of the fortune of
peace and war transacted an account is to be given, or an ignominious death
to be suffered. Only reserve this in your minds, that I was not slain for
lewdness, or avarice, but for the requital of your greatest benefits, I gave
up my soul as a free will offering,

Coniured therefore by your selves, and the glory of your ancestors (O ye
Romans) be patient in adversities, and provide for the Commonwealth: much
care attends the ch^efest command, and many vast labors: which you refuse in
vain, and seek the plenty of peace: when all Provinces, Kingdoms, Seas, and
Lands, are endangered and harraged with the wars.

SALVSTS ORATIONS.
The first Oration of the institution of a Commonwealth, directed to C. Caesar.
THe Roman people got formerly Kingdoms, and Empires: it gave fortune for a
donatiue, and other things, which are greedily desired by mortals: because, as
if it had been out of mere lust, they were often conferred upon unworthy
persons, neither remained they uncorrupted with any. But experience has taught
that to be true, which Appius in his verses says; That every man is a forger
of his own fortune: and this is verified especially in thee, who have so far
outgone others, that men are first wearied with praising thy deeds. then thou
art of doing things praiseworthy.

But virtuous acquisitions, like edifices, ought to be preserved with very much
industry; lest they be deformed with negligence, or ruined through weakness.
For no man willingly resignes rule to another, and although he be good, and
mild, who can do most; yet because it is lawful for him to be wicked, he is
feared.

This happens, for that many men, who are powerful in authority, counsel
peruersly; and think themselves by so much the more fortified, by how much
those, over whom they command, have been the more wicked. But this ought to be
endeavored against; that thou being virtuous and valiant, may command over
the best. For every man that is most lewd, with most difficulty suffers a
governor.

But this is more laborious for thee, then for all men before thee, to settle
an estate gotten by Arms. Thou have managed a war more gentle then the peace
of others: besides the conquered are Citizens. Amongst these difficulties thou
must make an evasion, and for ever hereafter the Commonwealth is to be
confirmed, not by arms only, nor against enemies, but which is greater, and
harder by far, with the profitable Arts of peace.

Therefore the occasion summons hither all, who are much and meanly wise: that
every man should advise the best he can. And this seems so to me, that in that
manner, as thou shall settle the victory, all things will succeed. But now,
that thou may dispose this more readily, and easily, receive in few words,
what my mind tells me.

Thou have had a war, O Emperor, with a famous man, of great wealth, greedy
of rule, of greater fortune then wisdom: whom some few have followed, being
made thy enemies by their own injury: withal whom affinity, or any other
aliance has incited. For neither was any man partaker of his domination, nor
if he could have suffered it, had the whole world been shaken with war. The
rest of the multitude, rather out of the vulgar custom, then Judgment,
followed him, one after another, as if he had been the prudenter person.

About that time some men being possessed with hope, by the suggestions of the
wicked, of usurping upon the Commonwealth, made thy Camp their place of
Concourse, having first polluted all things with lewdness and luxury; and
openly menaced unto the peaceable, death, rapines, and finally all outrages,
which their depraved nature urged. A great part of whom, after they saw neither
debt to be remitted, nor thy self to use Citizens as thou would enemies,
shrunk away from thee: a few stayed, who were likely to have more security in
the Camp, then at Rome. So egerly did the Creditours pursue them.

But for the same causes, it is incredible to be spoken what great persons, and
how many departed afterward unto Pompey, and used him all the time of the
war, as a sacred and unviolated Sanctuary.

Therefore, because peace and war must be agitated by thee the Conqueror;
this, that thou may leave it ciuilly; that, that it may be most just and
di^^urnall: first of all, think with thy self, because thou art to compose
them, what is best to be done. Verily my opinion is, that all tyrannical
governments are more grievous then lasting; neither can any man be feared by
many, but fear from many must reflect on him: that kind of life wageth a
continual and doubtful war: because thou can neither be assured from
before, behind, or either side: thou must live always in danger and fear.

Contrariwise they, who with bounty, and clemency have tempred command, all
joyful and prosperous events have attended them; yea their enemies were more
just, then to others their own Citizens.

But will some say, that I am a corrupter of thy victory, and too much a
wel-wisher of the vanquished? forsooth, because those things, which we, and our
ancestors have given to foreign Nations, enemies by nature, I think fit to
be granted to Citizens; neither after a barbarous manner would have murder
with murder, and blood expiated with blood. What has oblivion defaced those
outrages, which not long before this war were objected against Pompey, and
Syllaes victory? he slew Domitius, Carbo, Brutus, with others besides, being
not armed, neither according to the law of Arms, but butchered afterward,
being suppliants, with the greatest villainy that could be: the Common People of
Rome in a public Village were slaughtered after the manner of Cattle.

Out alas, how clandestine were Citizens funerals, and how sudden were
their murders in the bosoms of parents and children, with the flight of
women, and yonglings, and the spoil of houses? before the victory gotten by
thee, all was full of rigor and cruelty. Unto which courses the very same men
persuade thee: and that forsooth was the end of both your quarrels, that with
mutual consent, injuries should be done: and that the Commonwealth was not
recovered, but taken by thee. And for that cause, the ablest and oldest
Soldiers of the Army being cashiered, contended in Arms, some against their
brethren, and parents, others against their children: that from the miseries of
others, they might, being the wickedst of all men, procure expenses for their
gluttony and insatiable lust, and might be the reproaches of the victory: by
whose debauchments the praise of good men might be blemished.

Neither yet do I think, that thou do ouerpasse, with what manners and
modesty each man demeaned himself, the victory as yet being doubtful; and how
in the administration of the war, some of them frequented whores and bankets,
whose age, if it had been in peaceful times, could not without obloquy, have
tasted such pleasures. Of the war enough has been spoken.

Of establishing a peace, because both thou, and all thine deliberate: First,
consider this, I beseech thee, what that is, about which thou consultest: thus
good and evil men being disseuered, thou shall proceed in the open way to
truth. I conjecture thus: because all things which are borne, dye; that at what
time the fate of dectruction shall approach toward the City of Rome; that
Citizens against Citizens shall join in battle: thus they being wearied and
bloodlesse, will become the prey of some King, or Nation. Otherwise, not the
whole world, nor all people united together, can move or demolish this Empire.

Therefore the benefits of concord are to be confirmed, and the mischiefs of
discord are to be removed. This will fall out so, if thou shall take away the
license of expenses, and rapines, not by recalling to the ancient ordinances,
which long since in this deprauation of manners are made a laughing stock, but
if thou shall perscribe to every man a limited estate and measure of expenses.
Because this custom is much practiced; that young men think it a most
glorious action to consume their own, and other men's goods, to deny nothing to
their lust, or to others craving. They esteem this to be virtue, and
greatness of mind; shamefastness and modesty being reputed cowardice.

By this means their proud minds being entered into an evil course, when as
wonted means are wanting, are spleenefully carried sometimes against Alies,
then against Citizens: they disturb affairs that are settled, and seek out
new fashions for old.

Wherefore for ever hereafter the Usurer is to be removed, that every man may
care for his own. This is the true and plain way, to sway the Magistracy for
the profit of the people, not of the creditour; and to show the greatness of
spirit in adding, not in taking from the Republicke.

And I know how difficult this will be at first, especially with such, who
thought in the victory to live more licentiously, and freely, not more
strictly. For whose safety if thou shall provide rather then for their lust,
thou shall settle both them, us, and our Alies in a firm peace. If the youth
shall follow the same studies, and Arts, certainly thy renowned fame, together
with the City of Rome, will be ruined in a short time.

Finally, wisemen for the respect of peace, wage war, they sustain labor
for the hope of quietness: except you confirm this, what difference is there
to have vanquished, or to be vanquished? wherefore coniured by the gods,
undertake the Commonwealth, and pass through all difficulties, as thou art
accustomed. For either thou alone can heal; or farther care is to be omitted
by all men.

Neither does any man inuoke thee to cruel punishments, and severe Judgments,
by which a City wasted rather, then reformed, but that thou would restrain
the youth from evil Arts, and wicked desires. This indeed will be cleme^cy: to
have provided, that Citizens may not be expelled out of their Country
undeservedly; to have retained them from folly, and deceiteful pleasures; to
have established peace and concord; not, if thou being obsequious to vices, and
suffering offenses, shall give way to a present joy, accompanied with a
mischief, which will forthwith ensue.

And my courage is most of all erected, with that, which others fear, the
difficulty of the business. And for that all Lands and Seas are at once to be
composed by thee (because such a Spirit as thine cannot touch upon mean
things) for thy great care there remains a great reward.

Therefore thou must provide, that the Common people corrupted with Largesses,
and corn publicly given, may be employed in affairs, proper for themselves,
and by which they may be withheld from public mischief: that the youth
apply themselves to honesty, and industry, not to expenses, nor riches. This
will come to pass thus, if thou shall cut off the use and reputation of money,
which is the greatest plague of all others.

For I my self, pondering oftentimes in my mind, by what means men of most
renown had found out greatness: what things had enlarged people and Nations
by Authors of great undertaking; and last of all, for what causes most mighty
Kingdoms and Empires had been ruined: I found always the same things to be
good and evil, and that ail the Conquerors contemned riches, and that all the
conquered desired them. Nor otherwise can any man raise up himself, and being
mortal attain things divine, except the delights of money and the body being
neglected, he be indulgent to the mind, not gratifying a perverse favor by
flattering, or yielding to concupiscence; but exercising himself in labor,
patience, wholesome precepts, and valiant exploits.

For to build up a house, or village, and to adorn it with Skutcheons,
Tapistry, and other works, and to make all of them a spectacle, rather then
thy self, that is not to have riches for an ornament, but for a man's self to
be a reproach to them. Moreover, they who twice in a day are accustomed to
load their bellies, and not to sleep one night without a whore; when as they
have oppressed the soul with servitude, which ought to command; That being
afterward grown dull and lame, vainly they seek to exercise it. For with
imprudence they precipitate both themselves, and many things besides. But
these, and many other mischiefs will together end with the reputation of
money, if nei-Magistracies, nor other things to be coueted by the vulgar, shall
be set to sale.

Besides, provision must be made by thee, how Italy and the Provinces may be
better secured: the means whereof is not obscoure. For the same men make a
general waste by forsaking their own houses, and by seizing wrongfully on
others. Withal, that warrefare, as it has been hitherto, be not unjust, nor
unequal: when some serve out thirty pays, others not so much as one: and that
corn, which was formerly a reward of sloth, it will be convenient to
distribute unto them throughout the infranchised towns, and Colonies, when as
they shall return home after the expiration of their stipendary years.

What things are necessary for the Commonwealth, and glorious for thee, I have
delivered in a few words. It seems good to me now to speak something of this,
that I have done. Most men have, or feign themselves to have wit enough to
censure: but to reprehend other men's doings and sayings, the disposition of all
men is earnestly bent: the mouth seems not sufficiently open, nor the tongue
prompt, which can only utter things meditated in the mind: To whose
interpretation that I am subject, it does not repent me; it would have grieved
me more to have kept silence. For whether thou shall proceed in this, or any
other course, surely I shall speak and assist thee to the best of my power.
That which remains, is to wish, that what things shall please thee, the
immortal gods may approve, and suffer them to succeed happily.

The second Oration of the, institution of a Commonwealth, to C. Caesar.
I Know how difficult, and dangerous a thing it is to give counsel to a King
or Emperor; finally to any man, whose power is seated on high: because they
have both abundance of counselors, neither can any man be circumspectiue, and
prudent enough of future events. Besides, oftentimes evil counsels succeed
more prosperously then good; because fortune swayeth most things according to
her pleasure.

But it was my desire from my first youth, to undertake the Commonwealth: and
in knowing it, I took much, and most special care: not to that end alone,
that I might be capable of a magistracy, which many have gotten by evil Arts;
but that I might take a suruay of the State, both at home, and abroad, and how
powerful she might be in Arms, men and money.

Therefore by me, as I meditated many things with my self, this counsel was
approved, to esteem my own reputation and modesty after thy dignity, and to
hazard any thing, so that any glory might accrue to thee from that. And this I
have not resolved rashly, nor because of thy fortune; but for that amongst
others, I have found in thee this one Art, admirable above the rest; that thy
mind was always greater in adverse, then prosperous fortunes. But this
amongst other mortals is most remarkable, that men are also first wearied with
praising and admiring thy munificence, then thou art in doing things meriting
glory.

Verily this is my resolution, that nothing can be found out so difficult,
which thou do not readily apprehend. Neither have I written these things to
thee of the Commonwealth, which seemed to concern it, because I approved my
own wit and counsel more then was fitting: but amongst the labors of
warfare, amongst battles, victories, and government, I resolved to admonish
thee of civil affairs.

For if this counsel be lodged in thy breast; that to vindicate thy self from
the violence of thy enemies, thou would by any means, opposed against the
Consul, retain the favors of the people, thou must harbor thoughts unworthy
of thy virtue. But if that spirit be within thee, which from the beginning has
disturbed the faction of the Nobility, has restored the Roman Commonalty from
a grievous servitude unto liberty; in thy Praetourship, unarmed has broke the
Arms of thy enemies; at home and abroad has achieved so great, and such
glorious exploites, that thy very adversaries dare nor complain of any thing
but thy greatness: then hear that, which I shall speak of the sum of the
Commonwealth, which verily thou shall find to be true, or not far removed
from truth.

But because ^n. Pompeius either out of his corrupt disposition, or that he
desired nothing more, then that he might hinder thee, fell into such an error,
that he put weapons into his enemies hands: by what means he troubled the
Commonwealth, by the same thou ought to restore it. First of all, he gave to
a few Senators the chief power of moderating, about tributes, expenses, and
judgments; the Roman Commonalty, whose power was formerly chiefest, he left
together with us under the same conditions of servitude.

Although the judgments, as before were restored to the three orders, yet the
selfsame factious men sway, give, and take away, what pleases them: they
circumuent the innocent: they aduanceir their own Favorites to honor. Not
villainy, not scandal, or lewdness does hinder them, from being capable of
Magistracies: what is commodious, they force, they take by violence: finally,
as in a captiued City, they use lust and license for Laws.

And verily I should be somewhat grieved, if they should exercise a victory
gotten by virtue, after this their servile custom. But these inactive persons,
all whose force and valor lies in the tongue, manage insolently a domination
thrust into their hands, by fortune, and another cowardice. For what other
sedition, or civil dissension has plucked up from the root so many, and such
illustrious Families? or in whose victory ever was the mind so precipitated,
and immoderate? Lu. Sylla, unto whom all things were lawful in the victory by
the Law of war, although he conceived that the enemies party was fortified by
Sulpitius, yet some few being slain, he was desirous to retain the rest with
bounty, rather then fear.

But now together with Cato, L. Domitius, and the rest of that faction, forty
Senators, and many young men of good hope have been slaughtered like
sacrifices: when in the mean time this most mischievous kind of people could
not be glutted with the blood of so many miserable Citizens: not Orphants, not
Parents in the cloze of their age, not the mourning of men, the lamentation of
women could mollify their barbarous minds. But doing and speaking worse every
day more then other, they went about to remove some men out of their dignity,
others out of the City.

For what should I speak of thee, whose contumely these most slothful men
would exchange for their own life? In regard that domination is not such a
pleasure to them, (although it happened beyond hope) as thy dignity is a
grief: who hold it more acceptable to hazard their own liberty out of thy
calamity, then that by thee the Empire of the Roman people, of great should
be made greatest.

For which cause thou ought to be more and more provident, how thou may
establish, and strengthen the State. As for me, what my mind suggesteth, I
shall not be doubtful to speak. In two parts I take this City to be divided,
as I have heard from my Ancestors; into the Fathers, and Commonalty. In former
times the chiefest authority was in the Fathers; the greatest power by far was
in the Commonalty. Thereupon disunion happened frequently in the City: and
always the Nobilities strength was lessened, and the right of the people
amplified. But by this means the Commonalty lived freely, because no man's
power was above the Laws: neither in riches, nor pride, but in a good fame,
and valiant exploites, the Noble excelled the ignoble. Every man of the
inferior rank, in Arms, or military employment, wanting no honest
accommodation, was enough for himself, enough for his Country.

But when as being expelled by degrees out of their possessions, sloth and
poverty enforced them to have uncertain habitations: they began to covet other
men's wealth, and to account their liberty with the Republicke salable. Thus the
people by little, and little, which was the Lord, and ruler of all Nations,
fell from his first greatness: and for a common command, every man procured
for himself a private servitude.

Therefore this multitude being first infected with evil manners, then
dispersed into sundry Arts, and courses of life, no ways agreeing amongst
themselves, seem not fit men unto me, to undertake the Commonwealth. But new
Citizens being added, a great hope does possess me, that all of them will be
rozud up for the cause of liberty: for that both a care will grow in them for
retaining their freedom, as well as in those for quitting their servitude. My
censure is, that these being commixed, the new with the old, thou should
place them in the Colonies: thus both the military estate will be strengthened,
and the Commonalty being detained with good employments, will cease from
committing public evil.

But I am not ignorant, nor imprudent, when this thing shall be, what
insolency, what outrages of the Nobility will follow, when as they shall be
incensed, that all things are confounded together, that this servitude is
imposed on ancient Citizens; finally, that of a free State, it will become a
Kingdom, when by one man's gift, a mighty multitude shall have the freedom of
the City. As for my self, this verily is my opinion, That he commits an
evil offense against himself, that would procure favor for himself, with
the disprofit of the Commonwealth: whereas the public good serves also for
private use, there to be doubtful to undertake, I hold it a point of slacknesse
and cowardice.

This was always the counsel of M. Liuius Drusus, in his Tribuneship to
strive for the Nobility to the utmost of his power: neither did he intend to
do any thing else from the beginning, if some factious persons had not
suggested it unto him, unto whom deceit and malice were dearer then faith. When
as they understood that by one man, the greatest benefit would be communicated
to many men: and withal every one of them being conscious to himself, that he
was of an evil and faithless disposition, they conceived of Drusus alike as
of themselves. Therefore out of a fear, lest he through so great a favor
should enjoy the sole command, contending against that, they disturbed their
own counsels.

For which cause (O Emperor) friends money, and Aids are to be procured by thee
with greater care and constancy. To suppress an opposed enemy, it is no
difficulty for a valiant man; neither to plot, nor avoid covert dangers, is a
thing proper to good men.

Therefore when thou shall have brought them into the City, and that by this
means the Commonalty shall be renewed in this thou ought to exercise thy
mind especially, that good manners may be had in estimation, that concord may
be confirmed betwixt the old and new Citizens. But by far shall thou procure
the greatest of all other benefits for thy Country, Citizens, thy self, thy
children; lastly, for all mankind, if thou shall either take away the love of
money* or lessen it, as far as occasion will serve. Otherwise neither
private, nor public estate, neither at home, nor abroad, will be well
governed. For whereas the desire of money is once entered, neither discipline,
nor good Arts, nor any ingenuitie is polished enough: but the mind more or
less maturely, yet finally, is overcome.

Often have I heard, what Kings, what Cities, and Nations have lost great
Empires by opulencie, which being poor, they got by virtue. This is not much
to be marvelled at. For whereas a good man sees one that is worse to become
more renowned and acceptable by his riches; he storms at first, and agitateth
many things in his mind: but whenas every day more then other, glory
ouerballanceth honor, opulency virtue; the mind from truth reuolts to
pleasure. For with glory industry is cherished: when as you shall take away
that, virtue in it self is rough and unpleasant. Last of all, where riches are
valued, all good things are vilified, faith, honesty, shamefastness, and
modesty. For to virtue there is one, and that a difficult way: to get money,
every man endeavors, as he pleases; it is created both out of evil, and
good means.

For this cause, first of all take away the Authority of money: neither in
point of life nor honor, will any man judge more or less from a man's estate,
if neither Praetour nor Consul be made out of the regard of wealth, but
dignity. Yet in the choice of Magistrates, let the peoples judgment be free.
To have Judges allowed by some few, is an argument of Royalty; to have them
chosen for money, is dishonest. Wherefore it is my will, that all those of the
first Classical order do judge, but more in number, then now judge. Neither
did the Rhodians, nor any other Cities ever repent of their judgments,
whereas promiscuously the rich, and the poor, as every man's turn comes,
consult alike about the greatest and least affairs.

But in the creation of Magistrates, that Law pleases me, and that not
absurdly, which C. Gracchus diuulged in his Tribuneship, that out of the five
Classical Orders blended together, at all peraduentures Centuries should be
called forth. Thus they being coequalled in dignity, and money, one will strive
to excel another in virtue. Neither do I prescribe difficult remedies against
riches. For accordingly all things are praised and desired, as the use of those
things is. Wickedness is exercised for rewards: when you shall bar that, no
man amongst all will be wicked for thanks only.

Besides avarice is a cruel, fieree, and unprofitable beast: where it intends,
it wastes Towns, Fields, Temples, and Houses: it confounds divine and humane
Laws: neither Arms, nor walls can hinder her from penetrating with her
Force: Of fame, modesty, children, Country, and parents, she dispoyleth all
mortals. But if thou shall take away the reputation of money that mighty force
of avarice will easily be vanquished by good manners.

And although all men both just and unjust remember these things to be thus:
yet thou shall have no mean controversy with the faction of the Nobility; of
whose deceit if thou shall be cautelous, all things else will succeed with
facility. For these men, if they excelled with virtue enough, would rather be
emulous, then envious of good men. Because sloth, and vnactiuenesse,
stupidity, and dullness have invaded them; they clamor, they detract, they
esteem another man's good name to be their disgrace.

But what should I make any farther relation, as if it were of an unknown
subject? The fortitude of M. Bibulus, and the virtue of his mind has made the
way open to a Consulship: he being a man dull of language, rather evil, then
cunning of wit. What may this man dare, unto whom the Consulship, the greatest
of all other commands, became the greatest dishonor? what is L. Domitius, a
person of much ability, no member of whom is free from lewdness, or villainy?
his tongue is vain, his hands bloody, his feet fugitive: things most
dishonest, which cannot be named honestly.

Yet I do not contemn the only various, talkatiue, and subtle wit of M.
Cato. These are procured by the Grecian discipline. But virtue, vigilance, and
labor are not found amongst the Greeks. For since they have lost their
liberty at home by sloth, think you that by their precepts, command may be
gotten? The rest of the faction are most inactive Noblemen, in whom, as in a
statue, there is no addition of worth, besides the name. L. Posthumus, and M.
Fauonius resemble in my opinion the superfluous ballast of a Ship, when they
seem to arrive safe at their ends: when any adverse thing does happen, the
first loss is of them, for that they are of the lowest estimation.

Because now, as it seems to me, I have spoken at large of renewing, and
reforming the Commonalty: I will speak of the Senate, what may seem fit to be
done by thee.

After my age, and wit grew ripe, I did not altogether exercise my body with
Arms, and Horses, but employed my mind in litterature, because by nature it
was firm in the sufferance of labors; and in that course of life, I found out
this by frequent reading, and hearing; that all Kingdoms, Cities, and Nations
so long inioyed a prosperous Empire, as solid counsels prevailed amongst them:
wheresoever favor, fear, and pleasure corrupted them, not long after, their
power was lessened, then, command taken away, last of all, servitude was
imposed.

Verily, this is my resolution, that whosoever has a more ample, and
illustrious place in a City then others, has an especial care of the
Commonwealth: for to the rest, the City being safe, only liberty is assured;
those who by virtue have gotten riches, renown, and honor for themselves, as
soon as the State inclining a little, begins to be turmoiled, their mind is
variously troubled with cares and toiles: it either meditates the defense of
glory, or liberty, or of private means: in all places it is present, it
hastneth: by how much more it flourished in prosperity, by so much the more in
adversity is it full of anxiety and grief. Therefore when the Commonalty obeys
the Senate, as the body does the soul, and does execute its counsels: it
behooves the Fathers to be able in counsel. In the people cunning is
superfluous. For this cause our Ancestors, when they were pressed with most
dangerous wars, horses, men, and money being lost, they were never weary to
contend armed for the Empire not the wants of the Treasury not the force of the
Enemies, no adverse fortune could deiect their mighty Spirits, but that those
things, which they had gotten by virtue, they would maintain together with
life. And this was done more by sound counsel, then fortunate fights. In
regard that with them there was one Commonwealth; for that they provided:
saction was prepared against foreign Foes: every man exercised body, and
soul, for his country, not for his own greatness.

But contrariwise, at this time Noblemen, whose minds sloth and cowardice
has invaded, being ignorant of labor, of enemies, of warfare, instructed with
homebred faction, rule with pride over all Nations. By this means the Fathers,
by whose counsel the doubtful Commonwealth was formerly established, being
oppressed, rauing up and down, at another pleasure are agitated hither and
thither. Sometimes they make these, then those decrees: as the faction and
arrogance of them inclines, who bear rule, so they esteem good, good and
public evil.

But if either the liberty of all were equal, or the opinion of it more
obscure, the Commonwealth would be far stronger, and the Nobility less
potent. But because it is difficult to make the respect of all coequall: for
that to them the virtue of their ancestors left an acquired glory, dignity,
and clientels: the rest of the multitude for the most part being ignorant
people, let them in their opinion be frec from fear. Thus it being concealed
from themselves, another power will be dearer to every man.

Liberty is desiderable alike of the good, and bad, of the valiant, and the
cowardly. But most men abandon that out of fear. Most foolish mortals, that
which is doubtful in the conflict, how it will happen, out of cowardice, like
men vanqushed, they take upon themselves. Therefore I think by two means the
Senate may be confirmed: if augmented in number they delivered their Votes in a
written table. The table will serve for an encouragement, to make them dare
with greater freedom: in the multitude there is more assurance, and ampler use.

For in these times for the most part, some being intagled in public
Judgments, others in their own, or their friends affairs, have not been
present at the Counsels of State: neither did employment detain them more,
then the proud commands of others. The Noblemen, with some few of the
Senatorian order, whom they have for additions of faction, what things soever
please them, they reprehend, allow, and decree; them they execute, as their
lust inciteth. But as some as the number of Sen^tours being increased, the
Votes shall be delivered in a written table, they will dismiss their former
pride, when they must obey those, over whom before they commanded most
tyrannously.

Perchance (O Emperor) these letters being read, thou will decree, what number
of Senators it may p^ease thee to have; and after what form they shall be
distributed into many and sundry Offices; and since it is my opinion, that the
first Classical order should deliver their judgments, what description, and
what number is to be of every kind: To describe all things generally, had not
been a matter difficult in doing: but first it seemed good to labor about the
sum of the Counsel, and to prove that to be true to thee. If thou resoluest
to make use of this way, all other things will succeed promptly. I would that
this my counsel were prudent, and of most special use. For wheresoever
prosperity happeus to thee, there a good fame will betide me.

But this desire does exercise me more, after what manner and how soon the
Commonwealth may be relieved* I hold liberty worthier then glory. And I do
request and exhort thee, that thou would not (most famous Emperor) after the
conquest of the Gauls, suffer the highest and invincible Empire of the Roman
people to be ruined with age, and dissolved by the greatest discord. Verily, if
this shall happen, neither day, nor night shall ease thy anguish of mind, but
being awaked out of sleep, raging, and rauing thou shall be vexed with a
distracted spirit. For it is manifest to me for a truth, that the life of all
mortals is visited by a divine power: neither is the good, nor evil deed of
any man valued at nothing. But with a different condition rewards attend the
good and bad: in the mean time perchanee they proceed more slowly; every man's
mind gives him hope from his conscience.

But if thy Country, and parents could speak with thee, surely they would say
these words unto thee: O Caesar, we being most valiant men, begot thee in a
most goodly City, to be an honor, and succor to us, a terror to our enemies.
What we had gotten with many labors and dangers, we delivered over to thee,
being borne together with thy life, a Country greatest of al on the earth, a
house and family most illustrious in that Country, besides good Arts, well
gotten riches: finally, all the honestations of peace, and the rewards of war.

For these most ample benefits, we desire of thee not lewdness, nor villainy,
but that thou would restore our overthrown liberty; which thing being
accomplished, the fame of thy virtue will fly throughout all Nations. For at
this time although thou have performed glorious exploits, both at home and
abroad, yet is thy renown but equal with many valiant men: but if thou shall
restore almost from destruction this City amplest in name, and largest in
dominion: who will be more famous, who greater then thee on earth? for that if
by sickness, or fate, it should happen otherwise then well to this Empire: who
doubts, but that through the whole world, vastation, wars, and slaughters
would arise?

But if thou have an honest desire of gratifying thy Country and Parents;
hereafter the Commonwealth being restored, thy glory shall be acknowledged
above all mortals, and the death of thee alone shall be more famous then thy
life. For the living sometimes fortune, oftentimes envy does molest: as soon
as the soul has given way to nature, virtue extolleth her self more and more
above all detraction.

What seemed to me expedient to be done, and what I thought would be useful
for thee, I have briefly written Now I request the immortal gods* that what
course soever thou take this affair may succed prosperously to thee, and the
Commonwealth.

The Oration of SALVST, against CICERO.
Grievously, and with an offended mind should I suffer thy reproachful
speeches, O M. Tullius, if I knew that thou did use this thy petulancy more
out of judgment, then a brainesicke humor. But because in thee I find
neither mean nor modesty; I will answer thee, that if thou have taken any
pleasure in speaking ill, thou may loose that by hearing as bad.

Where shall I complain? whom shall I implore, (O ye Conscript Fathers) that
the Commonwealth is wasted, and become the subject of treachery for every man,
that is most audacious? whether amongst the Roman people, who are so corrupted
with Largesses, that they hold themselves, and their fortunes venals: whether
amongst you (O ye Conscript Fathers) whose authority is grown a laughing
stock for all the worst and wickedst of men; where M. Tullius defends the
Laws and judgments of the people of Rome, and does so moderate it this order,
as if he were the only remainder of the family of that most renowned man
Scipio the African, and were not an vpstart, au Inmate, not long since
naturalized into this City?

Whether or no, M. T. are thy deeds, and words obscure? have thou not lived so
from thy childhood, that thou thoughtest no thing filthy for thy body, which
might please another lust? Forsooth did thou not learn that immoderate
eloquence of M. Piso, with the loss of thy modesty? Therefore it is not much
to be wondered at, that thou sellest that wickedly, which thou procuredst most
lewdly.

But as I think, domesticke splendor exalts thy mind: thy wife is
sacrilegious, and stained with periuries. Thy daughter is a Concubine to her
mothers prejudice, more pleasing and obsequious to thee, then is fit she should
be to a father. Thou have gotten a house with violence, and rapine, fatal for
thee, and thine: that indeed thou might admonish us how much the Commonwealth
is changed, since thou (O thou most wicked man) dwell in that house, which
belonged to M. Crassus a Consular person.

And when these things are so, Cicero says, he has been in the Counsel of
the immortal gods, and was sent from thence to this City, for a protector of
the Citizens; without giving him the name of hangman, who accounts the
Republics damage his own glory: as though thy Consulship was not the cause
of that conspiracy, and by that means the Commonwealth was disioynted, at what
time it had thee for a protector.

But I conjecture, those things extol thee more, which after thy Consulship,
thou did advise with Terentia thy wise about the Commonwealth, when at home
ye contrived the judgments of the Plaution Law: when thou condemnedst some of
the Conspiratours to die, others to pay money: when this man built the Tusculan
for thee, that other the Pompeian village another bought a house. But he that
could do nothing, was next to calumniation; he either came to assault thy
house, or laid in wait for the Senate; finally, some thing was found out
against him by thee.

Which if I object falsely against thee, give an account, how much Patrimony
thou did receive? what has accrued to thee from pleading? out of what money
thou did purchase thy house: thou buildedst thy Tusculan and Pompeian, with
infinite expense. Otherwise, if thou art silent, to whom can it be doubtful,
that thou gottest that wealth out of the blood, and bowels of the Citizens?

But as I conceive, this new man of Arpinum, extracted from the family of Caius
Marius, imitates his virtue, he continues the faction of the Nobility, he has
a care of the Romaue people, he is not moved with fear, nor favor. But is
this an argument only of his amity, and mental virtue? Yes verily this most
inconstant man is suppliant to his Enemies, contumelious to his friends,
sometimes of this, sometimes of that faction; he is faithful to no man; a most
light Senator, a mercinary Patron, no part of whose body is free from
filthiness; his tongue is vain, his hands are ravenous, his throat is
insatiable, his feet are fugitive. And he, when as he is such a man, yet he
dares to say:

O happy Rome, me being Consul borne!

Happy thee being Consul Cicero? Yea rather unhappy and wretched, which
suffredst as then, the most cruel poscription of her Citizens, when as thou,
the Commonwealth being disturbed, did enforce all good men amazed with
terror, to obey thy Tyranny: when all judgments, all Laws were swayed by thy
lust: when as the Portian Law being removed, and liberty taken away, thou did
appropriate to thy self alone the power of all our lives and deaths.

Thou shall do (I prithee Cicero) thou shall accomplish what thou will: it is
enough for us, that we have suffered: but as yet will thou load our ears with
thy hatred? as yet will thou prosecute us with these insufferable words?

Arms yield to Gowns, Bays to the tongue give place.

As though forsooth, gowned, and not armed, thou had performed those things,
of which thou do glory; and that there were any difference betwixt thee, and
Sylla the dictatour, besides the name of command?

But what should I relate more of thy iusolency? whom Minerua has taught al
her Arts, whom the best and greatest Iuputer has admitted into the Counsel of
the gods, whom Italy, being banished, brought back on her shoulders. I beseech
thee* O thou Romulus of Arpinu^, what place at length obainest thou in the
City? what counterfeit and dissemble deeply: greedy he was of other men's
goods, prodigal of his own, in lust insatiable. He had eloquence enough, but
little wisdom. His vast mind did evermore desire things immoderate,
incredible, and over difficult.

After the tyrannical government of Silla, he had a great desire to usurp
upon the Commonwealth, neither did he care whether it were by right or wrong,
so that he might attain the sovereign rule. His restless spirit was daily
more and more disquieted through his private wants, and guilty conscience, both
which increased in him by the means before recited: besides, the corrupted
ma^ners of the City, served for incentiues to his ambition, and these were
turmoiled by the worst of opposite evils, Luxury and Covetousness. And now,
because we have related some thing of the States deprauation, the opportunity
it self seems to inuit us unto the repetition of things forepast, and in
them to deliver the institutions of our Ancestors, both Civil and Military,
the form of government, which they used in the Commonwealth, and the
greatness with which they left it to posterity, and how this glorious
Republique, languishing by degrees, did degenerate into a vile and ignominious
tyranny.

CHAP. 3.
The beginning and declining of the Roman Empire: the precedent times
commended, and the present taxed.
THe Trojans (as I have heard) first built and inhabited the City of Rome,
who under the conduct of Aeneas, living like fugitives, wandered up and down
without any certain place of habitation: with these the Aborigines, or natives
joined themselves, who being a savage kind of people, lived free without laws,
and dissolute without government.

After both these were environed with one wall (incredible it is to be thought
on) with what readiness they complied together, being different in lineage,
language and customs. But after their estate grew respective, and powerful
enough, being enlarged with inhabitants, civility and territory (an event most
frequent in humane affairs) envy did attend on prosperity, so that for this
cause alone, the Kings and bordering. Nations assailed them with war; in this
some few friends came to their aid, others being terrified, removed themselves
from the danger: But the Romans being regardfull of themselves, both in civil
and military exigents, neglected no opportunity; they made great preparations,
encouraged one another, issued forth to encounter the enemy, reposing their
liberties, their Countries, and parents safety, in the protection of their
Arms After, when their virtue had given the repulse to danger they sent aids
to their friends and allies, procuring new confederacies, rather by giving then
receiving benefits. Their government was regular, and the name of it was termed
Royal. Certain selected persons whose bodies were infeebled with age, as
their minds were fort^fied with wisdom, did provide for the Commonwealth:
these in regard of their years, or Office, were called Fathers.

Afterward when the Domination Royal, which was first instituted for the
maintenance of liberty, and enlargement of territory, did degenerate into pride
and absolute soueraigenty, the form of policy being changed, they erected an
annual Empire under the rule of two Consuls. By this course, they thought men's
minds could best be strained from insolency. But even then more then before,
every man began to ouerualue himself, and to dispose his endeavors toward
indirect ends: as well knowing, that Princes jealousies attend more upon good
men then bad, and that the virtue of others administers to them always an
occasion of terror.

Now it is a matter strange to be rehearsed, how much the City having
regained her liberty, enlarged her self in a short time. So forcibly moved the
desire of glory, for now the youth, as soon as they were capable of warlike
sufferances, with much exercise learned their military duties, residing for the
most part in Tents, and these reposed more delight in the equipage of their
Arms and horses of service, then in bankets, and whores. Hence was it, that to
such men no labor was uncouth, no place was too difficult for access or
assault, yea, the armed enemy was not dreadful: their valor subdued all
incountring opposites, the controversy of glory remaining especially amongst
themselves. Thus every man strove with emulation to invade the enemy, to scale
the walls, and to exploit such things in public view. This they accounted
riches, Honor, and true Nobility. They were greedy of praise, liberal of
their coin. They coueted glory without measure, wealth with a competency.

Here I could relate, in what places the Roman people have defeated with small
numbers, puissant Armies of their adversaries, what Cities they have taken by
situation impregnable: but I fear, this digression would withdraw me too
far: only let me assure thus much, that Fortune is predominant in all
events: It is she, that illustrates and obscures our actions being led more by
will then reason.

The exploits of the Athenians in my opinion were ample and magnificent, yet
somewhat inferior to their report, for by reason of those admirable wits which
lived in that State, their acts were celebrated through the world, with excess
of praise: so that their virtue was prized in as high an estimate, as the
sufficiency of wit could deliver in language. But the ancient Romans were
necessitated in this, the capablest spirits being the most active doers: no man
exercised his mind without reference to the body. The best men preferred doing
before speaking, and desired rather to have their own deserts praised, then to
reate other men's exploits, by which means discipline an irruption unto him
with their weapons. The Consul having intelligence of these preparations, and
Guardes being disposed, according as the occasion and time required, he
proposes, (a Senate being called) what their pleasure was to do with them,
who were delivered over unto custody; a frequent Senate having declared them
not long before, to have undertaken treasonably against the Commonwealth.

Thereupon D. Iunius Sillanus, being first demanded his opinion, because at
that time he was Consul Elect, gave (...) that condign punishment was to be
taken upon those who were kept in prison, as also upon L. Cassius, P. Furius,
P. Vmbrenus, and Q. Annius, if they should be apprehended. And being afterward
moved with Caesar's Oration, he protested that he would punctually concur in
opinion with Tiberius Nero, in that he had tbought it fit to make a reference
concerning that particular, and the reinforcement of the Guards: but Caesar,
when it came to his turn, being required his opinion by the Consul, delivered
these or the like words:

All men that consult (O ye conscript Fathers) about doubtful affairs, ought
to be free from hatred, friendship, anger, and pity: for whereas these
impediments are, the mind can hardly discern the truth: neither is there any
man, who can serve at once, both his pleasure and profit: whereas you bend your
disposition, there it preuailes: If lust has gotten the possession, it
predominates, and Reason sways nothing at all. I have an ample subject (ye
conscript Fathers) to discourse, what Kings and Nations have done
vncouncellably, being forced by anger or compassion. But I had rather relate
those things, which our Ancestors, contrary to their natural desires, have
accomplished rightly and orderly. In the Macedonian war, which we waged with
King Perses, the great and goodly City of Rhodes, that grew powerful by the
support of the Roman people, became unfaithful, and ill-affected to us. But
afterward the wars being ended, when it was consulted upon, concerning the
Rhodians: our Predecessors, lest any man should report, they undertook the
war more for wealth then wrong, dismissed


