DORCAS:

A TRVE PATTERN of a goodly life, and good end.

WITH. A PITHY EXHORTATION to the practice of faith and good works.

In a Sermon preached at Totnes in Deuon, January 14. 1630 At the Funeral of
Mrs. Mary Bab, Widow.

By THOMAS SALTERN, sometimes Lecturer there; And Preacher of the Word at
Bradford.

And now published, at the request of sundry godly persons.

Prou. 31.30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that
fears the Lord she shall be praised.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop
near the Conduit in Fleetstreet. 1631.

DORCAS, A PATTERN OF a godly life, and good end.
Act. 9. verse. 36, 37. Now there was at Ioppa a certain Disciple, named
Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas: This woman was full of good
works, and almsdeeds which she did.

And it came to pass in those days that she was sick, and dyed.


THis whole Chapter may well be divided into two parts: the one concerning
Saint Paul, the other touching Saint Peter: the one the Apostle of the
Gentiles, the other of the Jews. The ones wonderful conversion, the others
miraculous operation: the conversion of the one from a Wolf into a Lamb, from
a Bear into a Sheep, from plaiing the Lion of the Tribe of Benjamin, into
following the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: from Saul into Paul: from a
persecutor, into a Preacher of Christianity. The others miraculous operation in
healing a sick man at Lydda, in raising a dead Woman at Ioppa: both works
(...), but the latter more, by how much more harder it is to give life to one
that is dead, then to restore health ^n one that is sick. In this later story,
besides many other circumstances that may be noted, I observe unto you these
three: First, the person raised to life, Tabitha, which by interpretation is
called Dorcas. Secondly, the instrument which God used in the raising of her,
viz. Saint Peter. Thirdly, the effect of the miracle, which v. 42, is intimated
to be twofold, fame brought to the ears, and faith bred in the hearts of many
people; for it was known throughout all Ioppa, and many believed in the Lord.
I will speak only of the person raised, for my text stretches it self no
further, concerning whom the story records three things, her life, her death,
her being raised again. Of the third point nothing at all at this time, for it
comes not within the bounds and limits of my text: only of the two former,
her life, and death; whereof you have a Sermon in print so entitled, The Life
and Death of DORCAS; to which I will refer you for many good notes; which,
because there so fully handled, by me shall be omitted.

Tabitha, by interpretation Dorcas: and secondly, of her profession; her
profession in the form of it, she was a Disciple, and her profession in the
fruit of it, she was full of good works and alms which she did. In entreating
of her death, I will speak of two things, the forerunner of her death, which
was her sickness, and the event of her sickness, which was her death.

The first thing then to be spoken of is her name, Tabitha, and that is Dorcas,
which names do signify a Roe or a Bucke, and are both of them derived from
such roots in their several languages, as do betoken to see. I will say
nothing of that observation that might here be made, how that God knows his
children by name, as he said to Moses, Exodus 33.17. Thou have found grace in my
sight, and I know thee by name: to show that particular and peculiar knowledge
of approbation, whereby God knows the elect above others; nor any thing of
the discreet choice that should be used in the naming of children; in which
point, as I commend not the nicety of some, who like no other names, but such
as have their good signification in holy Scripture, so I much rather condemn
their absurd folly, who out of wit as they think, I am sure without any dram
of discretion, give ridiculous and unseemly names to the children they come to
be sureties for. The note I do gather out of her name, and I will but touch
upon it, is in a word this, as her name was, so was she: Tabitha, or Dorcas was
her name, and she was, and we ought to be cleare-sighted, and with our eyes
open, to the things that concern our souls health. In things of the world we
are Eagles, but beetles and moles in divine matters: curious inquisitors into
the lives of other, careless neglecters of our own estates, and of what
belongs to our Christian duties; whereas if we would search the Scriptures as
we are commanded, we should in them be taught what the objects are, which God
would have us chiefly to fix the eyes of our cares and endeavors on. See that
you keep my Sabbaths, Exodus 31. See (said old Tobit to his Son) that thou
never do that to any man, which thou would not that another should do to
thee. Why see thou the more in thy brothers eye, and do not see the beam
in thine own eye, Mat. 7. See that no man deceive you; See and take heed how
you hear; See that you walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Ephesians.
5.15. See that none recompense evil for evil unto any man, etc. 1 These. 5.15.
And in many other places of holy Scripture we are taught, that if we will be
true Dorcasses indeed, we must cast our eyes, the eyes of our affections, not
on things below, but on the things that are above, Collos. 3.2. Therefore did
David pray unto God, saying, Turn away mine eyes that they behold not vanity.
But I have seen (says Solomon) and considered all the works that are done
under the Sun, and behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 1.14.

The next thing to be spoken of in the life of this Dorcas, is She was a
Disciple, and full of good works and alms which she did. A disciple in
profession, and in practice too, a disciple in confession and conversation too;
the one by her faith, and the other by her works, the one is as the root, the
other as the fruit of Christian profession. They met together in her, and must
in all that will be true disciples: Without faith it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11.6. and without holiness, impossible to see God, Heb. 12.14. Faith
without works is dead, and works without faith, are sins, not in the
substance, and because they are done; but in a maine circumstance, because done
without faith.

Moral honesty, without profession of the true faith, is blind, and wants an
eye to direct it; and profession, without practice, on the other side, is lame,
and wants a foot to carry it in the way to heaven. Therefore says Saint Paul, I
beseech you that you walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called,
Ephesians. 4.1. And, let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
Phi. 1.27. that the Gospel of Christ, the profession of Christianity, the name
of disciples, the truth of God be not ill spoken of, as the Apostle tells
the Jews, saying, The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through
you, Romans 2.24. and wills Titus to teach all degrees so to behave themselves,
that the word of God be not blasphemed, Tit. 2.5. for if we play the foolish
painters part, and humane capiti ceruicem adiungere equinam, put a man's head on
an horses neck, look like disciples, and live like Devils, confess God in
our mouths, and deny him in our works, shall it not be said of us in scorn
and derision, as it was of the Jews by the Heathen, Ezekiel. 36.20. These are the
people of the Lord, these are the Protestants of our times, these are the
Professors of our days, these are they that call themselves disciples, and are
not; But as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16.

O beloved, when the doctrines and deeds, the words and works, the profession
and practice of Christians, of Disciples, of Professors, shall not agree
together, but be at odds and at jar with one another, consider and think on
it in the fear of God, what advantage you give to any the enemies of God and
his Truth, of Christ and his Religion, of goodness and good men, to speak
evil of your God, to lay a blemish on your Religion, to condemn your
profession, because they will not easily be made to think that there can be
any good root or foundation there, where they see no better fruit, so bad a
building. This holiness of life, (I mean not that alone which the Philosophers
speak of, and we call it moral honesty, which yet commends us unto the world,
is good in it self, is necessary to salvation, but is not sufficient) when it
is the fruit and effect of a lively faith in Christ Jesus, and a right
affection to Godward, is a token and testimony of our union with Christ, of our
state in grace, of our being as we would be taken for, true disciples indeed:
a testimony I say, and a token, not to our own consciences only, but to other
men's hearts also; whereas to profess well, and live ill, or to make a shift to
live morally civil, and not care of what profession we be, is to bear false
witness against God, whose servants we boast our selves, and would be taken
for, and yet have not on his livery: Gods livery is a good life, and the badge
or cognizance thereof, is a right profession; this jointly is it which should,
this is it which does, this is it which will declare, when words shall prove
but wind, and shows shall be but shadows, whose servants we are in deed.
We all desire, and are glad to be accounted good Christians, honest men, true
professors, the children of God, faithful brethren, and the like; but let us
strive to be what we desire to be accounted; godly names will never justify
godless men, nay, pium nomen est reatus impij, says Saluianus, we are but
openly mocked and vpbraided, secretly accused and convicted, when we are
honored with names and titles, whereto our lives and manners are not suitable.
Therefore try your selves, beloved, what measure of righteousness is in you,
let not the names of honest men, and good Christians, and such other, puff any
of you up; try and examine your own hearts, with what love you hear the word,
with what care you are fitted to do thereafter, what conscience you make of
sin, what joy you conceive in the works of righteousness, what grief you
feel when your frailty does make you to fall; thus try, and so like or dislike
of your selves. Certainly a Christian, though he cannot be sine peccato and
culpa, without sin; yet he should labor to be sine crimine and quaerela,
without being scandalous and offensive. No man shall ever be able to say
absolutely as Christ did, John 8.46. Which of you can convince me of sin? for
in many things we offend all, Iam. 3.2. And, if we say that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. And
therefore we pray with David, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy
servants: Yet in respect of men, and of the world, we ought all of us to labor
and endeavor, to strive with might and maine, to be able to say as Moses did
to God, Numb. 16.15. I have not taken so much as an Ass from them, neither
have I hurt any of them; as Samuel did to the people, 1 Samuel 12.3. Beheld, here
I am, bear record of me before the Lord, and before his Anointed, Whose Ox
have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I done wrong to? or whom
have I hurt? etc. As Saint Paul did to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know
nothing by my self. So to live in sincerity of heart, that we may be able to
say with Job, We have our witness in heaven, and a witness in our own
consciences; and outwardly to follow such integrity and righteousness, as that
we dare challenge either common fame to accuse us, or our very enemies to
condemn us if they can. And in thus doing, we shall bring glory to God,
comfort to our own consciences, and benefit unto others. God shall be
glorified; and therefore says S. Peter, Have your conversation honest among
the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of you as of evil doers, may by
your good works which they shall see, glorify God in the day of the
visitation. 1 Pet. 2.12. Others shall be ashamed having nothing concerning you
to speak evil of, Tit. 2.8. and by this good shame won unto the word through
the conversation of the rest; and above all, our own consciences shall receive
that peace and quiet which the world cannot give, nor the understanding of man
comprehend. And so I come to speak more particularly of the fruit of this
woman's profession, out of those words, she was full of good works, and alms
which she did.

good works, in special almesdeedes; the measure and quantity, in the word
full, full of good works, and full of alms. First, full of good works. Now
when I speak of good works, I will not bound and impale them within the too
narrow compass of the works of mercy only, and charity toward men; nor do
I think my text inforceth me so to do: neither will I speak in the language
of Gentilisme, that knows no other good works then those which we call moral
virtues; no, the several fruits of faith, the many branches growing out of the
tree of holiness and righteousness, the several Commandments of the two
Tables, are not more wide the^ the name of good works is. Whatsoever is
commanded in any of those precepts (faith it self alone excepted, which is
included in the first Commandment, is comprehended under the name and title of
good works: even as the proper branches of our faith do spread themselves as
far as the Articles of our Creed do; the sum of that which a Christian ought
to believe to his souls health.

Let no man therefore think it enough for him to be careful and zealous in
performing the Commandments of the first Table, while those of the second
Table are neglected by him, if not by his open or actual transgression of the
letter, yet by too ordinary violating the sense of them, in his truly
disobeying under an untrue pretense of greater obedience, by his pride, and
malice, and covetousness, breach of charity, of Christian, yea of natural
affection, hypocrisy, double-dealing, and deceitfulness: (into which crimes
many I fear, that think well of themselves, and would be so thought of
others, do yet run headlong and do not heed it) nor on the other side will it
serve our turns to abstain in some good measure from violating the precepts
of the second Table, (which fear or worldly shame, or other temporal respects
may make us careful in) while we make no conscience of the Commandments of
the first: perning our Religion with the Weathercockes of the time, dividing
our affections between God and Baal, allowing Dagon a room as well as the
Arc, gracing (as we think) our speeches with oaths and blasphemies, making
our selves Gentiles on Gods Sabbaths for fear of being Jews. God has joined
these two tables together, the first he calls the great Commandment (and we
make least account of it) and of the second he says, that it is like unto it,
and no man must, (if he will be a true Disciple) sever the things which God has
joined; they may be distinguished in our books and learning, they must not be
divided in our practice and living.

Now, works are then good, when, first, the ground of them is good, and that
is the word of God, the touchstone by which we must try, the compass by which
we must direct, the square by which we must frame, and the rule whereby we must
order all our actions, if we will bring them within the compass of religious
good works. Secondly, when the root of them is good, and that is faith,
without which, whatsoever has the name of a good work, has yet as our Church
speaks (art. 13.) seeing not done as God has willed, the nature of sin in it;
and all such things though they appear specious and beautiful in the eyes of
men, yet are (as S. Austin speaks) but splendida peccata, they are not gold
though they do glister. And thirdly, when the end of them is good, and that is
Gods glory: therefore says our Savior Christ, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so
shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in heaven. And the Apostle, Whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of
God. 1 Cor. 10.31. And from good works thus understood and thus qualified, none
are exempted, all have their pieces of money, all have their talents given
them, Luke 19. to some in one measure, and to other some in another, but to all
to employ according to the Law of their Master, and all to give an account for
their use of them; every man has his burden, and he must bear it himself,
Gal. 6.5. Works of supererogation are works of superarrogation, and he that
wanting righteousness himself hops to be saved by another man's, does but
mock himself as Pope Symmachus did when he said, and as the Canonists do the
Pope in saying so too (as it is did. 40. c. non nos.) that, In Papa si desint
bona acquisita per meritum, etc. If the Pope have none or little goodness of
his own (as it seems by this it may be in that most holy Father himself)
he shall have enough derived unto him from his Predecessor; if none in
possession, enough by succession; if little by purchase, enough by inheritance:
no, no, the Saints in heaven though they have Crowns to wear, yet they have
none to spare: And, God shall reward every man according to his (not according
to another) works. Every man is a tree, and should be a good tree, whose root
is faith, whose sap is hope, whose branches, the several branches of Gods
Commandments, and of every tree (without exception) that brings not forth
good fruit, it is said, Mat. 3.10. it is cut down and cast into the fire. And,
upon every soul of man that does evil, shall be tribulation and anguish,
Romans 2.9. O now, if I would look about the world for a Dorcas, and in the
troop of Disciples too, should I not need with the Cynicke Philosopher to
light a candle, and yet should not find? not many. The fruits of the spirit are
love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, etc. Gal. 5.22. These
are fruits of faith, these are works of righteousness. But where are these? And
in stead of these, what are the too common fruits of faith? is your swearing
and blasphemy a fruit of faith? is your lying and perjury a fruit of faith? and
what say you to your riot and drunkenness, to your chambering and wantonness,
to covetousness and oppression, to usury and extortion, to strife and
contention, to envy and malice in one toward another, and the like to these?
If these were the signs of Christian profession, if these were the badges of
Christ's Disciples, if these were the works that God did look for, God might
come when he would, he should find these things amongst us, and find us full
of them. O judge with your selves (B.) is this the way to make your calling and
election sure? as S. Peter wills you: or is it not the way rather to seal
unto your souls the assurance of your condemnation in the day of judgment? No,
no, if you will, as all good Christians ought to do, strive to attain to a
certainty of your future blessedness, these things ought not to be so among
you; the works of darkness are not the way to heaven, the works of
righteousness are, though no meritorious cause of our coming thither. You
must give diligence, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.5, etc. and all diligence,
(for all will be little enough) to add to your faith virtue, (for faith
without works is dead) to virtue knowledge, (or else you may do that which is
good, but you shall not do it well) to knowledge temperance, (otherwise your
knowledge will puff you up rather then edify you) to temperance patience,
(for as you must do, so you shall suffer for your well-doing) to patience
godliness, (for you may else give your bodies to be burnt in the fire, and it
shall profit you nothing) to godliness brotherly kindness, (for how can he
that loves not his brother say truly that he loves God?) and to brotherly
kindness charity, or love: (not only brotherly kindness to them that are of
the household of faith, but charity also toward all men, friends and enemies,
as Christ stretched out his arms on the Cross to both the malefactors;) the
first named of these things is faith, the last is love, in the middle are other
good works, the sum of all is that, Gal. 5.6. Faith working by love, if this
be in you, if these things be in you, says the Apostle, and abound, they will
make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ: neither inwardly barren, nor outwardly unfruitful. And
thus much concerning good works in general, for which this Matron in my Text
is here commended; she is commended in the next place in particular for her
almsdeeds, an excellent species and member of those good works, to which we
are enjoined. We have precept for it, and example for it, and reasons for it,
in the holy Scriptures: Cast thy bread upon the waters, says the Preacher,
Eccles 11.1. First he says, cast, do not crumme it, do not do it lazily as
if lothly, but give it with a cheerful mind: Secondly, Cast bread, what is
necessary for the sustenance of them that need; and bread, not a a bone, that
is for dogs; not a bastinado, that's for rogues; nor panem lapidosum, as
Seneca speaks, bread full of gravel, such as the hungry soul must needs
eat, but it goes down heavily, because it is given grudgingly: Thirdly,
panem tuum, thy bread, that which thou have gotten with a good and an honest
conscience; for to rob a Church, and then build a Spittle, or to defraud or
oppress by the pound, and then deal a dole by the penny, is but (according to
the well known proverb) to steal away the goose, and stick down a feather;
And he, says the son of Sirach, that brings an offering of the goods of
the poor, does as one that kills the son before his fathers eyes, Ecclus
34.20. And lastly, it is said, upon the waters. First, there distributed where
there is no more hope of recompense, then of regaining that which is thrown
into the Sea. Again, says God in the mouth of the Prophet Esaias c. 58.7. Is
not this the fast, first, this is the fast that I have chosen, to deal thy
bread to the hungry, when thou see the naked to cover him, and that thou hide
not thy self from thine own flesh: In which last words a reason is given why
the rich should not turn away their eyes from the poor in contempt and
disdain, as too commonly they do, even because, they all are of the same mold
and flesh, and among themselves one another members. And lastly the Apostle, 2
Cor. 8.7. Therefore says he, as ye abound in every thing, in faith and
utterance, etc. see that ye abound in this grace also, viz. a liberal
contribution to the necessities of the poor, by the example of Abraham, Genesis
18. of Lot, Genesis 19. of Job, who protested for himself, that he did not eat
his morsels alone, but the fatherless together with him, Job 31.17. and by the
example of Zacheus, Luke 19.8. Nor are examples so many, but the benefit is as
great. After many days thou shall find it. Eccles 11.1. And, The merciful
man does good to his own soul, Pro. 11.17. And, He that gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord, and what he has given he will pay him again, Pro. 19.17.
And, Blessed is he, (says David) that considers the poor and needy, the
Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble, Psalm. 41.1 And lastly, Charge
them that are rich (says S. Paul to Timothy,) that they do good, that they be
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, etc. 1 Timothy
6.18. I speak not this by way of tax, or as condemning you, I know how the
poor in this place are in very good measure provided for: but I speak you see
to a great many of the Country, as well as to you of the town, and all are not
alike minded neither among them or you. I pray God there be not among both
sorts of you (though I know none here) some such as in the world there are too
many, who are humani in belluas, and in homines belluini, prodigal in their
expenses on hawks or horses, or hou^ds, or worse, and yet close fisted the
whil, and squinteyed when they should look on and succor their poor needy
brethren: for them that are as in this case they should be, what I have spoken
tends to their commendation and encouragement, and to the exhortation and
stirring up of others who are not alike well minded, not alike as others, not
alike as Dorcas in my text, of whom out of the words themselves it may be
truly affirmed, that even while she lived, she was full of alms which she
did. She knew that in heaven she should meet with none that did none her
help, and therefore she would help them that needed before she was going
thither. I have no reason to condemn men's leaving to the poor by way of
legacy in their last wills, yet ye know there is an old saying, that bis dat
qui cito, that man does give double, that gives seasonably; and on the
contrary, the Heathen man could say, tantum gratiae demitur, quantum mora
adijcitur: a good turn that is deferred and put off, does lose a great deal
of that grace and thanks which otherwise it would have, and a suspicion is
left in the minds of men, that we give therefore then, because we cannot keep
it: non bona ta^ pausat, quam benefacta Deus, God more respects the well-doing
of a thing, then the deed done: and indeed (Beloved) if no thing else did, the
hardness of these times, hard times for the poor certainly, do even force us
to open our hands as God has enabled us, for their relief and succor; O let
us not persecute them whom God has smitten, nor vex them whom he has
wounded; let not their affliction be forgotten in the midst of our feasting.
Plead not that the times are hard for others also, as well as for the poor:
who will believe it that shall but think on this, that scarce was there ever
more spent in pride and gallantry, in riot and gluttony, in quassing and
carousing, in sports and gaming? and what a great deal of good might be done
to the poor, if they had what may well be spared out of the costlinesse of
our apparel, out of the superfluity of our diet, nay out of that that is
bestowed upon the Devil; for who else but he gains by what is cast away in
riot and drunkenness, in lusts and filthiness, in games and sportfulness, in
needless quarrels and contentions? do not mis-apply my words, I speak in
general terms, and to forreiners from abroad, as well as to the inhabitants
of this place; all whom I would have to examine their own souls; who take
exception at what I speak, do but bewray their own guiltiness, and think a
great deal worse of themselves then of me they can. O consider (and so I will
conclude this point) that it is panis esurientium quem tu diuoras, etc. the
bread of the hungry which is devoured in gluttony, the drink of the thirsty
that is swilled in intemperately; the garments of the naked that men strut in
so flauntingly (who some of them as St. Ambrose speaks, parietes vestiunt
auro, and pauperes nudant vestimento, do array their walls with cloth of
Arras, of silk, of silver, of gold, and leave bare, if not make bare also the
backs and arms of the needy) and the money of the poor peaceable ones which
is cast away in malicious sures and controversies. Let every thing be placed in
his due place, cause not the lean checkes to become lanker yet, make not the
needy eyes to wait long, and be even ready to fall out of their sockets with
waiting; defraud not the poor of their due alms? though it be given unto
them, it is but lent unto God, and he will repay it, and in due proportion too,
as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully: as of this
godly matron in my Text it is said, that she sowed bountifully, for she was
full of good works and alms which she did. Concerning which words, it is
noted, that fullness here does commend her good works and alms, for three
good qualities; sincerity, generality, constancy; sincerity in respect of the
root and fountain, generality in respect of the streams and branches, and
constancy in respect of the growth and current, her goodness proceeded from
her heart, did spread it self far and wide, and did continue and last unto
her end.

And now (Beloved) that in the midst of our fullness in other kinds, fulness of
pride, fulness of idleness, fullness of knowledge, and fullness of good words,
we would be full of good works also as she was: If we do good, is it not
grudgingly, or for worldly and temporal respects? where is our fullness of
sincerity then? Is it not mincingly, and with that great personages limitation,
in the book of the Kings, God be merciful unto us in these and these cases?
where is our fullness of generality then? Or is it not wearisomely and with
great fainting? where is our fullness of constancy and perseverance? It is this
being full of goodness that brings glory unto God, for herein is my Father
glorified, says our Savior Christ, that you bear much fruit, Ioh. 15.8. It
brings assurance to our consciences of our happy estate here, for he that
abides in me and I in him, says Christ, the same brings forth much fruit,
Ioh. 15.5. and of the reward of blessedness laid up for us in heaven,
therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary in well doing, for
in due time we shall reap if we faint not: if not now while we live, (and
indeed their case is the worst of all of whom it may be said, they have their
reward) yet assuredly when death comes, as it did to this good woman in my
text, and is the second general thing I must speak of concerning her, the
death of Dorcas, with the immediate forerunner thereof her sickness.

And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and dyed. it came to
pass, is sometimes read, it fortuned or happened, both well in diverse
respects, the one in respect of God, unto whose providence all things being
subject, and governed by it, it is said in regard thereof, that things come to
p^sse; and yet to chance or happen in respect of us unto whom God thinks not
fit to reveal and open those future events, which he minds to keep in his
own hands. Whence the point collected is that which you all know, that there
is nothing can befall man in this world, be it cloudy weather or clear,
sunshine, or full of storms, but it is all subject and subordinate to the
wisdom and providence of Almighty God. There be other names used among men, as
fate and destiny, and the like; but hear what St. Austin says, ( de ciuit.
Dei, l. 5. c. 1) Qua si propterea quisque fato tribuit, etc. If any man
attribute the things that come to pass unto fate or destiny, and say that by
it he means the will and providence of God, Sententiam teneat, linguam
corrigat, let him keep his opinion, but let him alter his phrase of speech,
because many when they hear these words, fate, destiny, and the like, are
moved to believe the some thing inferior unto Gods providence is meant, as the
cause or procurer of the things that happen: and the lesson hence arising is in
a word this, that in all the changes and chances of this present life, we lay
up our rest upon Gods providence, and next after our honest and lawful
endeavors refer the success of all to him: in time of health and prosperity,
not lifted up with pride and presumption; nor murmuring and repining when we
see the hand of God upon us, (though we see the hand of men, or the Devil
there also) in case of cross and adversity; but always resolving as old Ely
did, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. It came to
pass that she was sick, yea sickness is the suburbs through which
ordinarily we do enter into the gates of death: and for this purpose has God
placed in man's body deaths armory, his fort of munition, wherein hang a thousand
shields, wherewith the Lieutenant and his Captain, the messenger and his
master, morbus and mors, sickness and death, do but come and then overcome
man. Man's head and heart, and stomach, and liver, and lights, and lungs, and
other parts of his body, what are they, but so many several cells wherein
sickness and death have several swords to wound and kill man with when God
will have it so. Nay, man says Bernard is always sick of one disease or
other, generally of three above other, the one in his beginning and entrance
into the world, and that is full of infirmity and uncleanness: the second in
his progress through the world, and that is full of iniquity and
perverseness: the third in his going out of the world, not without pain and
peril: and nasci in corpore mortali aegrotare est, to be born into the world,
is to be thrust out into a Spittlehouse. And if we consider almost the whole
course of a man's life, how it is spent, we shall find it composed of nothing
else, but infirmities and remedies, maladies and medicines, sicknesses and
their physic, and the physic and remedies many times more troublesome then
the diseases themselves; when a man is hungry he is not well till he eat, and
labor kills without rest after it; the comfort of the one to cure the pain
of the other, and yet ofttimes eating makes as sick as hunger did, the rest of
the body yields no rest to the mind, and the time of quiet proves the most
unquiet time of all. It came to pass that she was sick; What, this godly and
charitable matron? yea, and no marvel at it, the Lord chasteneth whom he
loves, and afflicts with some kind of cross or other every son whom he
does receive, and qui excipitur e numero flagellatorum, excipitur e numero
filiorum, They that are altogether without correction, are bastards and not
sons, Heb. 12.8. But it proves in Gods children, though harsh to flesh and
blood, as the clay by our Savior Christ's power, did to the blind man, Ioh. 9.
an excellent means to open those eyes which were shut by sin, and make a man
see both Gods power, and his own weakness, which in time of ease and freedom
he did not so well discern: for the fruit of wisdom grows on the tree of
trouble, and the schoolehouse of affliction is the schoolehouse of instruction.
But if judgment be executed on the house of God, where shall the wicked and
sinners appear? the one are corrected in the world, that they may not be
condemned with the world; and the other let alone oft-times to spend their
days as oxen in fat pastures, of purpose to be reserved for a more grievous
slaughter. O then, if you will that death shall not be terrible when it comes
(though the Philosopher calls it of all terrible things the worst) learn first
to bid the forerunners of death welcome; learn to entertain, as ye ought
sicknesses patiently, the sicknesses of the body; and crosses patiently, the
crosses of the mind; and losses patiently, loss of goods, loss of friends,
loss of liberty; if God do so order it, these are anteambulones, the
prodromi, the footposts, the messengers, the harbingers of death; bid (I say)
these welcome and death shall come well unto you when it comes, as come it
will, perhaps as near to the heels of sickness, as the words in my text do
come close together, she was sick, and dyed. Or if not, as not always, yet are
there two worms, the two daughters of Time, Day and Night, which continually
bite and gnaw at the root of the tree; our very life and hart-blood, while we,
prodigal of that whereof to be covetous is the only covetousness that is
honest, viz. our time, do so long feed on the honey-combes that hang over out
heads, desiring to satiate our selves with the pleasures of this life, till
this tree of our life be bitten through by those two worms, and we fall into
that pit whence there is no redemption. She was sick and dyed. Yea, this is
the she was sick and dyed: and man is sick, and dies, says Job, c. 14.10.
but what means Job so immediately to the former words man is sick, to adioyne
those other, and man dies, why does he so? Is it to aggrauate the miseries to
which poor man in this world is subject? by the whole scope of the text it
should seem it is, and yet how can it be so? for man is sick and dies, is no
more then man has gone a long and a wearisome pilgrimage, and has finished
his course, or man has labored and wearied himself all the day long, and is
set him down to rest; or man has ouer-watcht himself and is fallen asleep:
this is man is sick, and dies: death indeed, the remembrance of death is
bitter to the man that is at rest in his possessions, that has nothing to vex
him, but has prosperity in all things, whose breasts are yet full of milk, and
his bones of marrow, who may wash his plants with butter, and whose rocks power
him out rivers of oil; O how would the news of death make him startle, and
his knees smite each other with trembling, as it fared with Foelix when Paul
reasoned of the judgment to come. Act. 24.25. But when a man shall long for
death, as a servant does for the shadow, an hireling for the end of his work,
and a woman in travel for her delivery: when he would seek for death if he
knew where, as a man would seek for treasures, and rejoice if he could find
the grave: whose cheeks are gummy with weeping, and the picture of death sits
in his eyes, who never eats morsel with pleasure, but is still dying in the
bitterness of his soul: to such a man how acceptable would the judgment of
death be, and to dye after sickness no degree of misery? Indeed if we
consider death as adjoined to that world of miseries which in this world of
misery we are subject to, then is death a more excellent medicine then all the
Art of man can prescribe, to cure all diseases: but if in the cause of it which
was sin, and in the nature of it, even the dissolution of nature; then does
flesh bid away to death, though it be the ordinance of the Lord over all flesh;
yea all. The words of Job do show the Pedigree of all mankind, I have said to
corruption, thou art my father, and to the worms, thou art my mother, and my
sister, Job 17.14. And if King David said personally of himself, prophetically
of his Lord and ours, I am a worm and no man, what man is there that is not a
worm also? This we know well enough all of us, even so well that the Devil
himself cannot make us believe the contrary, he dares not say to us as he did
to our first parents, ye shall not dye, they had seen none dye before them,
we have had millions, yet see how easily he makes fools of us, he chokes us
with the same bait as he did them, but with this difference, he gave them the
bait whole and they swallowed it, he gives it us by pieces, as that we shall
not dye yet, not this day, or this week, or this month, or perhaps not this
year; and so quickly persuades us so to live, as if we were immortal, never
dreaming either of deaths certainty, or hells misery, or heavens felicity.

The due consideration of which things, even of death alone, would serve to
humble us, as it did those Ancients, who made their often casting ashes on
their heads, a monument and memorial of their mortality: it would serve to
work repentance in us as it did in the Ninevites; and that excellent
resolution which it did in Job, when he said, Naked came I out of my mothers
womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gives and the Lord takes
away; (living as well as life, and life as well as living) blessed be the name
of the Lord for all, Job 1.21. It would be auailable against the lust of the
eyes, covetousness, for he might easily be persuaded not to love the world,
that would duly consider how soon he might leave the world, and the things
of it: against pride of life it would be auailable, for what should make him
lift up his heart above his brethren, whose head he may hap to trample under
his feet that now kneeles before him? O if a man would but think on it, how
vile Christ became for him, and what himself is in himself, weakness in his
birth, wickedness in his life, the subject of rottenness in his end: in his
coming into the world miserable, in his living in the world sinful, in his
going out of the world the heir of corruption, if not the child of perdition
too, this would make to stoop the neck of pride as white as Iuory which must
shortly be as the clay in the streets. And lastly, against the lusts of the
flesh which though never so much doted on, and even made an Idol of, must
first breed a multitude of worms, then be devoured of them; nay, there are
three things that wait to share us and what we have between them, the worms
to have our flesh, the world to have our wealth, and the Devil to have our
souls; and every of these so well contented with his own part, that he will
not leave it for both the other: the world will not care for our souls, or for
our bodies, so it may have our goods; the worms will not care for our goods or
for our souls, so they may have our bodies; and the Devil will not care for
our bodies or for our goods, so he may have our souls: but let us therefore
care more then we do, if not for our bodies, (let death make his best of them
that he can) yet for our substance and for our souls, to put both our houses
in order before we dye; our outward and our inward house, the one for settling
of peace both our own and theirs whom we leave behind us, and the other for
our souls eternal happiness; and both these, because it may be said to any
of us thou shall dye and not live, before it can be said put thine house in
order, that so the houses especially of our hearts may be in order always.

Conclusion.
And thus we have followed Dorcas as far as my text did lead us; Is there now
ever another Dorcas for me to speak of? sure this town had, and habuisse
decus, The memorial of the graces and godly end of Mistress Mary Bab.
it is a credit to them that they had, for she was a credit to them while they
had her, in a good degree such another Dorcas: Concerning whom though I should
be silent, and shall be sparing, yet this Church which she duly frequented,
those poor whom she continually relieved, this town which she always loved,
nay not Ioppa only, and this her dwelling place, but all that knew her by
acquaintance, and many other that did not know her but by the ear, will yet
say, (and it will be said hereafter perhaps with more feeling then now) that
this place has lost a Dorcas, who was, as the name I told you signified in the
root of it, cleare-sighted, to bethink herself how she should, and to provide
in some measure that she might so lead her life here, that she might
afterward live eternally with God, as her good life, and right Christian end
do assure us that she now does. Why, is she dead then? what else means our
meeting here at this time? what this great concourse of people? in all whose
faces a man may easily read the love and grief, that brought you hither: and
shall I not think you thought her worthy of love? I am sure you had reason so
to do; you the poor of this place, to whom I cannot say, as David to the
Daughters of Israel, weep for Saul that clothed you in Scarlet, but weep for
Dorcas who was always ready, and to her end, and at her end, to succor and
relieve in great measure your wants and necessities; wherein if other women did
well, yet she surmounted them. Yet do not weep for her, weep for your
selves, and for your sins; serve God in holiness and godliness of living;
express so your thanks to God for blessing her a^^ ^^ntinuing her so long
among you, (till she was aged fourscore years and five) for your good, and
then doubt not but if ye serve God as ye ought, he will provide for you as you
need: or else fear that God will take away more Dorcasses from you (if at
least there be more) and it fare worse with you yet then now it does. But our
Dorcas did not dye till she was sick first, and in her sickness, O how did
God show that whom he loves, he loves to the end, and toward the end
expresses it more abundantly, as he did to her, who, as if she knew that this
sickness should be her last, and because she knew that the least thought of
worldly things is of force to withdraw the mind from necessary meditations,
left presently the care of these things to others, whom by her Will many years
before made, she had trusted with these things; and spent even all the rest of
her time (as I am and you may be informed by those to whose report you can make
no scruple to give credit) in a right Christian preparation for her last end,
by an often confession of her trust in God, sorrowful acknowledgement of her
own wretchedness, admirable patience in the midst of her pains, earnest
desires to be with her Savior, yet with Christian submission of her will to
Gods, to the great comfort of them that came to comfort her, till even at her
last moment, as if she saw heaven open, and her Savior ready to receive her
into his arms, she desired to be heaued up into the arms of her Savior, who
did not stay long from her, nor would let her stay long from him, but received
her soul into his heavenly Kingdom, leaving her body to be by us brought unto
it long home, there to sleep in its bed of rest, till at the last day it rise
again, and be made partaker of that endless happiness which her soul in the
mean while does alone enjoy; and whereto God in his due time bring us all, for
his great mercies sake, and the merits of his Son and our Savior Jesus
Christ. To whom, etc.

Her Epitaph.
Dear is the death, says David, in God^ (...)
OF all his Saints: of her among the re^^,
RIch in good works, and alms, and day and night,
Careful to serve God, loved of the best:
AGed in years, in goodness, mercy, love:
She sickned, died: and now does live above.
FINIS.

