THE COMPLAINT OF TIME Against the tumultuous and Rebellious Scots.

Sharply inveighing against them (as most justly they deserve) this year,
1639.

By W. S.



LONDON Printed by B. A. and T. F. for Richard Harper in Smithfield, at the
Bible and Harp. 1639.

The Grounds and Reasons of Times Complaint against the Rebellious Scots.
THis Land (God be thanked) is blessed in the happy Government of a most gracious
King, against whom in despite of Mercy diverse aff^onts have lately been
offered by the Rebellions Scots, who under pretense of Religion would overthrow
the Hierarchy of the Church, pulling down the house of God, and building
Babels of their own invention, and manned with this furious zeal, they have
raised great forces, and stand ready armed in the Field to resist the head of
the Church in his Dominions our most gracious King CHARLES; Time therefore
hearing how these bold Attempts under the Title of Covenanters bad acted many
outrages, entrencht upon the Kings Sovereign power, and have hitherto
neglected and slighted his Royal authority; therefore in this complaint of
Time some reasons are laid down. For the Chronicles of this Land due witness
that Rebels have been always overthrown in their designs, and at last met
with a deserved Death. Thus Mortimer who rebelled against King Edward the
second, and violently took away his Queen, was afterward himself taken and
beheaded. Also those rude mechannicke Rebels that were led under the conduct of
Watt Tiler, Tom Miller, and Jack Strae made a great tumultuous vproare in Kent
and Essex, until Sir William Walworth than Lord Mayor of London did with his
Dagger stabbe Jack Straw in Smith-field, whereupon the Dagger was set in the
Arms of London. The rebellion for Perkin Warbek was soon disanimated, and the
Imposture discovered, and so likewise Jack Cade and his associates were soon
confounded and overthrown, and punished according to their Deserts. And thus
Rebellion is like that Ignis fatuus or that fantastic apparition of fire,
which running under hedges does affright Countrypeople, but having blazed a
while, it is soon dissipated and extinguished. The Scots therefore cannot
promise to themselves any better fortune than their rebellious Predecessors,
who were soon scattered and confounded, and their leaders received condign
punishment. If therefore any precise Humorist that accounts himself a
transcendant Protestant, and a Goliath in Religion* when indeed he is an
Hypocritical Puritan, if any such do think the complaint of Time against
the Scots is too Satyricall* I would have him know, that the Rebellion of the
Scots as it is heinous in its own nature, and deserves a sharp vindication
and revenge, so it also has cast an aspersion upon Time, for both the City and
Country do find fault, that it is a very hard, dangerous and doubtful Time.
And some in regard of this unnatural Rebellion say, Time declines and grows
worse, and that many discentions, Divisions and Rebellions shall happen in the
old Age of Time, unto all which accusations Time does make answer with one old
ancient Verse*

Conscia men's recti famae mendacia ridat.
The Conscience that is clear from spot or stayne,
Laughs at the false reports of flying Fame.
Time did not cause the Scots rebellious factions,
Which breaking forth in Time, Time blames their Actions.
THE COMPLAINT OF Time against the tumultuous and rebellious SCOTS. Anno Dom.
1639.
AGe now has silvered ore the hairs of Time,
And as I am grown old, so I decline
In native goodness, else what frantic mood
Could make the Scots so prodigal of their blood
To stain their honor by the Imputation
Of tempting their King to high Indignation
By being Sons of tumult and of thunder?
Time grieves for them, and shook with holy wonder
Admires what Genius leads them on to be
Revolters against sacred Majesty,
Why they had best attempt if they think good
To prove themselves of the Gygantick brood
Pelion on Ossa hurling up again,
So to invade the high Olimpian name
Of love; for whether wont their boldness press?
Unless the just Revenger send redress.
Time needs not here from his own height descend
As to make answer to what they pretend
In frivolous objections, for what pretense
Can heaven allow them for their bold offense?
What have they made such a strange Scrutiny
That none but they have found Divinity?
Or have they fancied to themselves abstractions
Of Angels zeal set forth in divelish actions?
Will they allow unto the King of Heaven
No Ceremonies which are duly given
Unto his Majesty, but will bluntly fall
Without Ceremony to rebellion all,
Must they needs tear the Miter from the head
Of Bishops; what Antipathy is bred
Within that Land which does on England border
That they should seek equality of disorder?
Which always tends to ruin, Nature makes
In all her works a resemblance of Estates,
The peaceful Bees have Kings, the Waspes have none,
They only buzze, and sting, and so are gone;
Most perfect Creatures have the truest sense
Of Sovereignty and true obedience;
The Hierarchy of Angels still do cry
All praise and honor be to God on high
Whom they obey, and government on Earth
From Heaven had original and birth.
And would the Scots think by their furious rage.
To turn the world into a golden Age
As in the Infancy of Time? Yet then
Saturn did reign, and was obeyed by men,
Then Jupiter the ancient world swayed
Whose Sovereignty was generally obeyed;
And Time that measures out the works of nature
From the first being of a formed Creature
To thee not being, was at first created
By the King of Heaven, and my power is dated
And whatsoever is his great Decree
I must therein obey his Majesty.
But since the Giants wars I was not took
With greater fear, nor with more horror struck
Then when loud Fame did bring unto my Ears
The Scots attempt; I drowned my cheeks with tears
And wished that I my Patent might resign
Before the world should say that aged Time
Had thus produced by the seeds of dissension
An armed brood of men sprung from contention
That in despite of mercy will proceed
To court their ruin, and desire to bleed.
Is there a Plurisie, and an excess
In Spiritual matters that must find redress
By such a cruel salve? or does the Sword
More mercy then is usual now afford?
And not cut off ill members, will it spare
Those who in deep affronts engaged are
Against their Sovereign? who did woo them long
By mercy which was powerful and strong
To conquer good minds, but when his Grace found
That Balm of mercy could not cure the wound,
Then our dread Sovereign mindful of his cause,
Went down against those that did flight his laws
Armed with his Justice full of powerful dread
For Kings have Iron hands, though feet of Lead.
Now heaven protect him, Time on aged knees
Prays that these waspes which scorn the obedient Bees
Though they are gathered into mighty swarms
Yet may be all compelled by force of Arm^s
To yield their stubborn necks, let Angels drive
These waspes away out of the Churches Hive.
Who bring no honey, but have often stung
Their Mother with contentions from them sprung.
Time has spoke liberally, but now he will stay
No correct himself, for some perhaps will say
That the Scots bear an earnest great affection
Unto my Daughter Truth, by whose direction
In her defense this furious course they take
For Love of Truth through danger way does make,
But they do err herein, for my dear child
And Daughter Truth's by nature soft and mild.
CHRIST was all Truth, yet when he came to woo
The world to Goodness, and the way to show
Unto all Truth the holy Angels then
Sang Peace on Earth, and Goodwill unto men.
Can therefore tumult, and the thundering Drum
Speak in a language that may well become
The wooers of fair Truth? Or else transported
Do they imagine Truth can thus be courted?
Me thinks I see the Angels hide their faces
And blush in angry zeal, for their disgraces
No think the Scots should think fair Truth to win
From her most just Defendor, and her King.
Me thinks I see sad Truth kneel down and speak
Her wrongs against them who her Laws do break,
She pleads for Mercy and does plead again
And with her Oratory does inflame
The Kings most Royal breast, then having got
His Gracious favor, she tells him the Scot
With many shows of holiness does woo her,
Pretends much inward zealous love unto her
But yet does mock her with a smooth pretense
Of Love to color over his offense;
And then she wishes she may never know
Heaven if Truth did bid them thus to go
In huddle into Arms, for Truth says she
Loves and obeyes your Sacred Majesty;
And all my Precepts say that Kings appear
Like Gods on Earth and his vice-Regents here;
Then why should they the Truth and you abuse
And fasten upon Truth a false excuse?
No it is their Policy that does extend
To use my Name to a prodigious end,
And with the veyle of Truth to hide and shroud
Their proud Ambition which walks in a cloud
And like a Pillar of fire guides them on
Into a Wilderness of Rebellion.
Thus would my Daughter Truth make her complaint
Against the tumultuous Scots that do so vant
In crying up her name, when heaven knows
That Truth was never took with feyned shows.
Be dumb night-Ravens then, and do not croake
To piece up the allegiance you have broke
With fair pretenses, for old Time does know
You have entrencht on Sovereignty, and do grow
Giants in your opinion, being so given
To furious zeal that you would invade Heaven,
Pluck Jupiter out of his Seat, and all
Of you would then be Gods in general.
And yet they are but shadows you pretend
While in substantial matters you offend
By fallacy joining God and King together,
And yet will show obedience unto neither;
There you devide the cause by your affection
And distinguish of a limited subjection.
Even Nature does instruct that you should be
Subject unto the power of Majesty,
And all the works of nature seem to speak
He is a Rebel does alleagiance break.
Then trust not to your selves, though you are strong,
For Heaven will vindicate all Rebellion,
And Truth does say of old, No wars can be
Happy attempted against Soveraigntie.
How dare you still persist; Time bids pull down
Your baffling Flags, and on your knees fall down,
And for your Colors let your blushing cheek
Display them, while you do for mercy seek;
If not, then Time does bid you know bold Scots,
Your Vrne is turned, and Fate has shook your lots,
You have betrayed your selves, up English then
And show your courage against those contemn
Heaven in their King, O let not his great cause
Suffer while they (...) his power and Laws.
FINIS.

