An extracte of the determinacion, and censure of the Doctors of the
universities of Salamanca and Valledolid touching the vvarres of Ireland, and
declaracion of the Poape his Breve concerning the same vvarres.
THE most noble Prince Hugh O Neill bears arms against the Queen of
England, and Englishmen in defense of the Catholic Religion, to wit, that
he, and all Irishme^ with him may freely, and without disturbance confess,
and profess the Catholic faith: which liberty the Queen of England
endeuoreth to debar them of by foarce of arms. About which war there are
two doubts propounded. The one is, whether it belavvfull for Irish
Catholics to favor by arms, or anny other way the forsaid Prince in this
war? The other is, whether it be lavvfull for the forsaid Catholics,
without incurring mortal sin, to feight against the said Prince, and help
the Englishmen, either in arms, or in anny other way, especially seeing by
vvithdravving, or denying the said help they expose them selves to the danger
of death, and leesing all their goods? And again, seeing the Irish Catholics
are permitted by the Poape to obey the Queen of England, and pay her tribute,
as to their lavvfull Prince, and therefore it seems that they may do all that
belongs to subjects, that is, to feight against her rebels, and such as
seem to invade, and usurp the Country subject to her obeisance.

To the good assoiling of both which questions we must presuppose as
certain, that the Poape may compel by force of arms (when there are no
other means to remedy so great a mischief) such as forsake the Catholic
faith, and oppose themselves as enemies to Catholic Religion. It is likewise
to be set down as certain, that the Queen of England does oppugn Catholic
Religion, and suffers not Irishmen to maKe public profession of Catholic
Religion, and that for that cause the foresaid Prince, and before him others,
whom the Apostolical letters of the Poape Clement the VIII. mention, have
Undertaken war against her.

Which grounds admitted, the first question is easily ansvveared, for there
is no doubt, but that all Catholics may favor the said Prince in his
foresaid war, and that with great merit, and hoape of eternal reward.
The reason is, because the said Prince sustayneth the said war by authority
of the Poape to defend the Catholic Religion, for that his Holiness does
exhort him, and all Christian people thereunto, as may be seen by his Holiness
his letters sent forth to this purpose, vvherin he grants as great
favors, and Indulgences to such as favor this Prince in the said war, as
if they should feight against the Turques. Who therefore can doubt, that the
war is just, and of great merit before Almighty God, which is Undertaken
by such authority, and for such a cause?

As concerning the second question it is also certain, that all Catholics
sin mortally which follow the English ca^pe against the said Prince, nor
can not save their souls, nor obtain absolucion of anny Priest, unless they
repent, and forsaKe the english part, and the liKe is also to be said of them
which favor the english in that war with municion, or victuails, or
contribute anny other way, except it be by paiyng the ordinary taxes, which
his Holiness has given them leave to pay to the Queen and her officers. And
this assertion is proved by this manifest reason ensuing, for it is evident by
the Poape his letters, that the Queen of england, and her adherents do maKe
unjust war upon the Prince, and his favorers: for seeing his Holiness
declares that the english oppugn the Catholic faith, and that they ought to
be fought against with no less zeal then Turques, and grants the liKe
Indulgences to those that feight against them as those gain which feight
against Turques, who can doub^e, but that the war on the enlish part is
altogether unjust? But no man ought to favor, or be present at unjust war,
under pain of da^nacion. And therefore, those Catholics sin most
greeuouslie that follow the heretics part against the said Prince, and all
that favor the war with victuails, municions, or anny other means that
anny way pass the limits of indifferent allegiance.

Neither may it avail anny man to note the Poape his Breue or letters of
surrepcion, for surrepcion can have no place vvner there is no me^cio^ of anny
peticio^ at whose instance it was granted, but the Poape does oppenlie shevve
in those his letters that he and his Predecessors have of their avvne acorde
exhorted the Princes of Ireland, and all faithful people unto that war, and
to animate the^ the more theru^to he has granted great Indulgences to this
purpose. How therefore can the Poape his letters be noted of surrepcion, or
called conterfeyte which conteyne nothing but an exhortacion with great
favors to such as shall assent to them? Neither can the Catholics favoring
the English part defend them selves by the reasons brought in the second
question, for a mortal sin must not be committed, though our life, and ^l
our goods lay on it: but it is plain, that to further or healpe an unjust
war is a mortal sin, etc. And it is only granted to Catholics to give
to the heretical Queen such allegea^ce as oppugneth not oppenlie Catholic
Religion. Neither was it nor could it be his Holiness his intent to permit
them to do the Queen such services as are quite contrary to his purpose of
furthering the Catholic faith in Ireland: which to be his purpose his
letters do evidently declare.

By all which it is most evidently proved, that the Prince Oneill, and all
the Catholics of Ireland, that bear arms against the heretical Queen,
that oppugneth the Catholic faith, are not rebels, nor withdraw not their
trve and deve obedience, neither do unjustly usurp the Queens countries, or
dominion, but do rather by just war defend them selves, and their country
from Wicked Tirannie, and defend with all their might the Catholic faith,
as it becomes good Christian Catholics to do. All which assercions
jointly, and in particular as they be here set down, all we whose names
are subscribed do judge, and approve as certain, and most trve. Given at
Salamanca the second of February. 1603.

Fr. Franciscus Zumel, Deane of the faculty of divinity. Mag. Ioannes
Alphonsus de Curiel, professor of Divinity. Fr. Petrus de Herrera, professor
of divinity. Doct. Francis. Sancius. Fr. Dionis. Iuberus. Mag. Andreas de
Leon. Fr. Petrus de Ledesma. Fr. Martinus Peraca. All which are Doctors and
Masters of Divinity in the university of Salamanca. D. Franciscus Sobrino,
Deane of the faculty of divinity in the university of Valledolid. D.
Alphonsus Vaca de Sanctiago. D. Ioannes Garcia Coronel. Magis. Fr. Ioannes
Negron. D. Torre. Fr. Josephus de Luxan. All which be Doctors and Masters of
Divinity in the university of Valledolid. Father Ioannes de Ziguenca. Fath.
Emanuel de Rojas. Fath. Gaspar de Menae, professors of Divinity in the
College of the society of JESUS in the forsaid university of Salamanca.
Father Petrus Osorius, ordinary preacher for the time of the said College.



