THE HISTORY OF JOSEPH: A POEM.

Written by Sir Thomas Salusbury, Barronet, late of the Inner Temple.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Roger Ball, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Golden Anchor in the Strand, near Temple-Barre, 1636.

PErlegi hunc librum, cui titulus ( the life of Joseph, etc.) in quo nihil
reperio sanae fidei, aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Tho. Weeks, Epis. Land. Cap. domest.

TO MY HONORED Grandmother, the LADY Middleton, Late Wife to the right
Worshipful Sir Thomas Middleton Knight and Alderman, sometimes Major of the
City of LONDON.
Honored Madam,
I Have now unto your Ladyships acceptance, and the worlds censure, adventured
these unripe fruits of a forced Muse; which if you shall accept (as they are
truly meant) in witness how ready an observer I am of your commands, I shall
(arming my self with patience and humility the handmaids of obedience) humbly
submit and patiently resolve to bear all just blame the world may lay upon my
rudenes (however your Ladyship will be able to excuse) the betraying so worthy
a subject to so weak a verse. It shall suffice me that the world take notice,
that my endeavors are only ambitious, to satisfy the engagements, whereby your
Ladyships love has obliged me unto you: by none so paraleld as by that of
Jacob to his Grandchildren: who made Ephraim and Manasses, (as Judah, and
Simeon) his own. The like from my youth has been your care and tenderness
over me, which I have no way to requite but by my thankfulness, respect and
obedience to your commands. In observance whereof I commend this Poem to your
patronage, and my self to do you service.

Your dutiful Grandchild, Thomas Salusbury.

To the Noble Barronnet, Sir THOMAS SALUSBURY, upon his Joseph.
I Must commend thy judgment, that could choose
A subject, so well fitted to thy Muse;
That they adorn each other; that they share
In equal glory: that thy Joseph dare
(And without danger) thus himself expose
To the envy of his friends, as well as foes,
And (Confident of thy just merit) slight
His Brethrens malice, and the Ismaelite.
Nay, think his time in Servitude well spent,
Since now he is become thy Argument.
Whereby he is advanced far above
What Egypt could afford, or Pharoh's love.
So happily thou have expressed his worth,
And in such lively colors set him forth,
That Putiphars wife is blameless: all confess
There was no guilt in her lasciviousness.
And had that love sick Lady used the Art
Which thy well languag'd Courtship does impart
Unto her in this story: the assault
Had conquered Joseph, and excused the fault;
The charm had been so forcible, that he
Must with his Cloak, quit his humanity:
Or condescend, or had his Mistress read
This Poem; and observed how thou do plead
For thy chaste Joseph, in as chaste a rhyme,
In Detestation of so foul a Crime.
She had abhorred her self, and loved him more
For's virtue now, then for his face before.
So potent is thy verse: it does suppress
And quench all looser flames of wantonness;
And kindle in our breasts and cold desires,
New heat revived by thy Promethean fires.
Be that thy sole reward, and do not weigh
The Censure of the world. Some will inveigh,
Some will commend: but most proclaim by me,
They envy Joseph, that detract from thee.
D. LL. Dr. I. C.

To my honored friend, Sir Thomas Salusbury, my opinion of his JOSEPH.
AS Joseph's Brethrens sheaves did all obey
Young Joseph's strait and lofty sheafe, so may
All other Poets not alone rehearse
Thy praises, but do homage to thy verse.
Not blasted with those Critics breaths, who spit
Malice: and throw thy Joseph in the pit
Of Envy; making their dull brains the Well
To drown thy fame, whose shallow pates excel
Poor Joseph's Well for emptiness: the pit
Wanted not waters, as their heads do wit.
Some will be apt to say (when first it is known,
Thy Muse does bud) the Rose is over-blowne,
The subject's stale: it is not good to see
Men play and dally with Divinity.
Thus will those Critickes talk, were but thy vain
Such as descended from a love-sicke brain.
O that were rare, and excellent! how fine
Were those thy verses, were they not divine?
When e're thy Ioseph's sold unto such wights,
There Is Joseph sold unto the Ismaelites.
But since thy Muse of Chastity does sing,
Thy Joseph may find favor with the King.
T. Bailey, artium Magister.

IF news of Ioseph's death over Jacob have
Such forch, to bring his gray hairs to the grave
With sorrow, sure with joy my tidings must
As powerful be, to raise him from the dust:
Then Jacob rise and know thy darling Son
Is yet alive; his glory but begun,
Then when thou left'st him was: he now is more
A Favorite, then e're he was before.
Not Pharoh's self, nor all the Sons of Nile
Have so much graced him as thy lofty style,
My friend has done: he in thy verse shall be
Even as in heaven, above Mortality.
O how divin's thy Muse then that can bless,
And add to Saints departed happivesse.
Io. Salusbury, Sen.

In Authorem, and Librum.
I Know it is worth yet will I not commend
Thy Book, I do not love to praise my friend
Unless some foul Detraction I should hear,
Of him, or his; else to commend him were
In friendship as absurd; as should I write
Strong Arguments to prove that snow is white.
Nor will I yet admire thy work, to me
It is a thing not strange at all to see,
That what thou do is excellent I know,
Thy self art absolute, and thy works are so:
Yet may thou meet some Censurers too unkind,
But pity them, who punishment shall find
Enough in their own error: they condemn
Thy work, whilst better judgments laugh at them.
Io. Salusbury Iun.

To my ever honored Sir T. S. Barronet, upon his Joseph.
SO the sweet singer did of Israel use,
In holy Lays to exercise his Muse:
Praising his God, for wonders in the Land
Of Egypt by his servant Moses hand.
Then with Gods mercies sweetly closing there,
The soul at once he ravished, and the ear.
But so long since is that, that there be those,
Make scruple yet whether in Verse or Prose,
The Prophet wrote, as if a measured line
Were more unfit to treat of things divine.
Such heretics of Poetry by chance,
Will in their censure show their ignorance
Of this thy labors worth, when they shall hold
It as a fruitless work, if not a bold:
Deeming the sacred flames that thus inspire
Thy breasts with holy raptures, a strange fire.
And count thee as profane, that dare rehearse,
The majesty of Scripture in a Verse.
Whilst men of abler judgments, that descry
This last worst ages curious nicety
Such, that Gods sacred word, the heavenly bread
Of life, by most is dully relished,
Unless in oil or honey dipped, they know,
He whom the holy Ghosts first penman so
Extolled, as the type of Christ, and square
Of virtues, for all graces singular;
Had slept the subject of our coy neglect,
As buried in the Scribes grave dialect:
And Joseph's goodness, such, some few alone
Professors, and Precisians had known;
Had not thy bounteous Muse thus set him forth
In fashionable garb, to speak his worth
In modern tone; now by thy help he may
Converse with Courtiers, in a Coat as gay
As er'st his Father made him; he may kiss
Each coyer Ladies hand, nor can he miss
Admission, or audience to tell
His story to the best, or worst; so well
He charms attention: by his sweet and smooth
Expressions, so pathetically soothes
His hearers to receive his sugared pills,
Whilst at their ravished ears and eyes he instills
His modesty into their souls; and so
Does Ioseph's story told amongst high and low,
With greater efficacy, virtue teach,
By's pattern, then best precepts we can preach.
In brief, I judge thy Poem to be such,
So good, so pleasant, that I dare avouch,
The reader that no profit reapes by it,
Or pleasure, has nor piety, nor wit.
Hold on this godly course, thy talent spend
By tickling thus our ears, our heart; to mend.
And when thy budding Springs, spare hours bring forth
Such fruit, how great shall be thy harvests worth,
When thy green youth could so exactly trace
Good Iosephs' perfect ways; well may thy grace
In riper years, as his recorded be,
A Map of virtues to posterity.
T. LL. artium Magister.

Upon the Author unknown, and his JOSEPH.
IF fitness be a Poems excellence,
When to the Subject, Style combines with sense,
Where lofty matter, lofty lines do swell,
Where lowly Theames, low words do parallel;
When under shadowed phrase, does couched lie
Sometimes a smile, sometimes a mystery:
Still keeping chaste to chaste, and high to high,
Glossing close secrets still with secrecy.
Then top of wit and masterpiece of skill,
I here discover from a knightly quill.
For in these sheets here swadled up, I spied
The newborn Joseph from his dust revived:
And from the Presses reaking leaden womb,
I saw so fair an Hebrew Offspring come,
So modest, chaste, so Ioseph-like it seemed,
As if again fair Rachels womb had teemed.
And h'an't you read, how Joseph's growing mite
(By fair degrees) raise him a favorite.
So does he here in such brave order rise,
As may indeare him to his Pharoh's eyes.
Next, as the rest their flagging tops did bend
To Joseph's Sheafe, still mounting up an end;
So you fond Bards (like their ungrounded sheaves)
To this green Laurel, veil your saplesse Reaves.
Blast not his worthy fame, here newly blown,
But learn to mend the ruins of your own.
Lo here your President, where you may see
How far divine wit, passes Surquedree.
E. M.

THE DREAMER, OR The first Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS the 37.
JOSEPH, a Sheep-heard, does consort
With His brethren; tel's their ill report:
His Father loves him in extremes,
For which he is hated, and his dreams:
He Is thrown into the pit, and sold
Unto the Ishmaelites for gold,
Who to Egypt having brought him,
The second time a Courtier bought him.
GOD, always just, begins in Abraham's Seed,
To ratify his Promise with his Deed;
Jacob holds fast, and has by this time well
Deserved the happy name of Izrael: Genesis 31.24.

The Angel now would part, he (though disable,
His thigh disjoynted, undefatigable)
Tugs for his blessing; as when heretofore,
For his lo'vd Rachel, he served sev'n years more:
Young Joseph's joyful Mother now (with whom,
A good portent!) God opened her barren womb,
Took from her, her reproach; Israel and she,
Equally blessed by importunity:
He, for a blessing; She, for one to bless;
Both earnest suitors, both with like success.
Hence for all crosses armed, and black despayr,
Learn; GOD himself is overcom by prayr:
If thou as earnest be in seeking, as
Un-tyred Izrael and his Rachel was:
Who now, above the rest, do love this boy,
As one not gotten in the common way,
But as a sign of God's continued love,
A prayr-gain'd child immediate from above:
As, when the mind of Man some good conceives
His hopes dare scarce attempt, and yet receives;
In like degree he loves it (now it is)
As if, he durst, he could have wished it his:
Or, as things held in long suspense before
They Are granted us, we ever prize them more
Then easier purchases; As we prefer
Miraculous, before things commoner:
So they their Joseph, with whom God did bless
Old Israel's age, and Rachel's barrenness;
It was enough (he was her son) to move,
His father, to a more then usual love.
A coat, of many curious colors wrought,
He made for him; Joseph was all his thought;
Joseph was his delight; but yet so far
As hopeful children to wise parents are,
He made no fondling of him; he could brook
The loved child's absence; nor was grieved to look
Upon his labors; nor was Joseph fed
With finer meats, nor warmed a softer bed
With longer privilege, nor was he spared
From any pains wherein his brethren shared,
Nor groaned he for his burden, nor did grumble,
But with prompt will, and an obedience humble,
Strove to perform his task; He went to keep
(With Bilhah's and with Zilpah's sons) the sheep,
And whilst his brethren he did thus consort,
He brought his father home their ill-report,
Who joy'd, they grieved, so young a one to see
Detest, and to detect their infamy:
But Jacob who too wise, above the rest
Fondly to love one, and for nothing best
At least to show it; yet he must approve
And cherish virtue, with increase of love;
Which now he cannot hide, being swelled as high
As Joseph's merits; Virtue first may lie
Or Truth concealed, or the fel-brethrens hate,
Ere his affection, now grown passionate.
And they (who for a teltale heretofore,
Now as their fathers-fondling) hate him more:
Besides, naught renders one to envious hearts
More despicable then excelling parts;
So, naught more then his virtue did incense
His brethren's rage; his fault was Innocence.
Such Jacob's quarrel was, such Joseph's fate,
As 'twere to inherit thus his brethrens hate:
The Fathers life, one Esau's hate pursu'de;
The Son was troubled with a multitude:
He got the blessing from them, and they spite
Him, now, their God's, and father's favorite.
And where this hellish fury once is bred
Of brethrens discord, there it is easily fed
By every new occasion; Joseph's mind
Was then enlightened, when his body blind
With drowzie rest, in heavy sleep he wink't;
Yet saw and learned, by a divine instinct,
Most strange events (such always are the ways
Whereby God was revealed in following days
Unto their offspring) when, against all extremes,
Their age saw visions, and their youth dreamed dreams
Joseph's first dream.
So Joseph now; When as me thought all we
Were binding sheaves of Corn, in the field, quoth he
Unto his brethren, that my sheafe arose
And stood upright in the midst, When lo all those
Of yours stood round, and with reclined head,
As in obeisance, my sheafe worshipped.
Scarce had he ended, when they murmuring all,
Some with a Soul like-troubled as when Saul
From the raised Prophet heard his sudden doom,
And the sad ruin of his house to come:
Some with a scorn; as when Goliath spide
So weak a Champion come, t'afront his pride
With staff and sling; with like belief of fate
Ensuing, they began to vent their hate.
And are we born, fond-dreamer, to obey?
Must we indeed thy vassalls be, cried they?
Must we adore thine eyes, and seek grace thence?
Whom Time and Nature gave pre-eminence?
What frantic pride transports thy fancy thus?
Shall such a boy as thou reign over Us?
And thus they swelled to a more high contempt
Of him, because he told them what he dreampt:
Yet this informing Genius left him not,
But newer fancies in his brain begot;
Such, and of like presage, which mindles he
Of all their bitter flouts and mockery
Freely vents out, even to his fathers ear,
Not caring though his envious brethren hear. Joseph's second dream.

Me thought the Sun and Moon (did me adore)
And th'elev'n Stars, as did the sheaves before,
Quoth he, with like obeisance: Now his Sire,
In whose aged bosom raged th'un-usual fire
Of indignation, this relation moved
Him in this sort to check the child he loved.
What have thou dreampt fond boy? What shall we all,
Thy Father, Mother, and thy Brethren, fall
In reverence to thee? Trust not these vain
And fond illusions of an idle brain:
Shall then that blessing leave me that has gone
Still an inseparable companion
Of comfort with me? That which Isaac gave,
And that which purchased I with lamenesse have
Of my touched thigh, when all the night I strove
With heavenly powers, descended from above,
Till I obtained? And shall my name, which men
Used sacred, in their deepest Oaths, and when
They speak to any unbeleeving ear,
By Abraham, Isaac, Jacob's God they swear?
Shall this name stoop to thine? Must thou indeed
Be only blessed of all the promised seed?
Thus chek't he him; Yet, never the less, each part
Of Joseph's tale he treasured in his heart;
So did his brethren too, though their intent
From their good fathers was far different:
They store his sayings up, as fuel fit
To feed their-hel-bred fire and nourish it,
Blown to too great a height already, by
Him that first changed the warmth and purity
Of fire, to scorching heat, that it might be
A meet reward to perpetuity
For his demerits; who, thus damned to flames,
To make all partners of his torture aims
Here and for ever, and to that end he
Tormenteth some with burning jealousy;
Others, with flames of hate and rancorous ire
Prepares as charcoales for eternal fire,
Amongst all in general (as they are inclined)
He casts these sparks, which kindled once, a wind
From any thing he will raise, to fan withal
The heat more furious, not a word can fall
From harmless Joseph, which not something has
That ads to his incensed brethrens wrath
By this time grown to such a hellish flame,
That nothing but his blood can quench the same:
Exodus 20
But God, that is True and Gracious, pity takes
Even unto thousands, for their fathers sakes;
Their Sins cannot old Jacob's service blot,
Nor may his oath to Abraham be forgot,
But unto all their goods his love converts
The ill meant spleen of their malicious hearts:
Lo how to future times does this foretell
The childrens stubbornness of Jsrael
From their beginning; aged but one descent,
Their plot is murder of the innocent;
So mischievous their minds, so bent on blood,
They spared not those that did or meant them good.
'Twas early in the morn when they were gone
Forth with their Fathers flocks, to feed upon
The plains of Sechem, where they not above
A few short hours had spent, when Jacob's love
Moved his desire to know what had befell
Them since their parting, whether all were well
Amongst their flocks and them, if they had found
Good shades to rest in, or good feeding ground
There for their sheep and herds, and thus inclinde
He calls young Joseph to him, bids him find
His brethren out, where they in Sechem are,
See them and bring me knowledge how they fare
The youth is soon commanded, which he shows
In quick obedience, forth he gladly goes
On this kind errand, to perform the will
Of him that sent him, never fearing ill
Because he meant no harm; So innocent
Was his great Master from his Father sent
To their cursed Offspring; who, not only bred
From cruel loins, but more experienced
In blood and murder; having slain even all
That came and would them to repentance call,
So wicked as they are, they send to his grave
Him that brought peace to all, and came to save.
Who with an unmoved soul as cheerful went
To give his Fathers will accomplishment
Even to the death, though hence the difference grew,
He that his Fathers wisdom was, fore-knew
His danger, Joseph went in little doubt
Oth' sad event to find his brethren out
And comes by this to Sechem, calls and cries
Aloud upon them, but there is none replies
Until as in their quest he roving ran
Thus through the spacious fields, he met a man,
Who finding him, demanded what might be
The cause of his so busy search; quoth he
I seek my brethren Sir, can you I pray
Direct my wandering steps, or tell where they
Have led their flocks; I have to find them out,
Traverst the vale of Hebron and about
The plains of Sechem run with fruitless speed,
Meeting with none could tell me where they feed.
No (quoth the man) then in good time I may
Give thee some ease at last: I heard them say
Let us to Dothan hence; Scarce had he said
Dothan, when Joseph but to thank him staid,
Then with much haste, making this news his guide,
Posts after them, whom when from far they spide,
Their colors changed, and their distracted blood
Eb'd to their hearts, and straight gush't like a flood
Into their face and eyes, and glowing there,
Made their long carried coals in flames appear:
And then a murmur does amongst them run,
Like the winds struggling ere the storm's begun.
When the four Elements assembled are
From all the corners of the Earth to war
In some great Tempest, when the Air and Fire
Against the Earth and swelling-Seas conspire,
Thunder's their trumpet, at whose noise they fall
In a rude conflict mixed, and threaten all
Their poor inhabitants; Lightnings would dry
The Seas, and they to quench heavens fires do try,
And hel's flames too, where having fallen, they rise
With a new crotchet now to strike the Skies.
The earth and air mean while as 'twere dissolved
Into one ill mixed body, look, involved.
Thus altogether rude, and shapelesse as
Old Chaos, ere the worlds creation was.
Nothing but darkness now, no light is found
More then in wretched man, in passions drowned:
Reason extinguish't, man's a world composed
Of all the elements which lie enclosed
In several humors, from them bred whence flow
Our passions which being bound and ordered so
By reason, as the world by light (the best
And first of creatures, made to rule the rest)
Angels are in their kind less blessed then we
That images of our Creator be.
But that curb break, and passions ruling, then
No storm, no Chaos, so deformed as men.
And thus with Joseph's brethren 'twas that stood
Now like so many Cains, in wait for's blood.
See where yond dreamer comes (say they) let us kill,
Let Us make an end of hm, and see what will
Become of all his projects, and his visions,
His idle fancies, and fond aparitions,
And for a good excuse we can not miss
We Will say, Some beast devoured him, true it is.
Most savage beasts they were that thus did plot
To ruin him, their rage considered not
His fathers care who sent, whose love him brought
To hearken of their healths, this they nere thought.
All seek his death but Ruben, who more mild
Then were the rest, labors to save the child,
The boy is young, and childish, he in vain
Urged, and for dreams deserv's not to be slain.
Then with his fathers weakness intercedes,
His years, and his great love to Joseph pleads,
Joseph's the staff, and prop of Isreal's age,
Thus he persists, but they still deaf with rage,
Give him no ear, his words can do no good:
Which when he sees, oh yet let us shed no blood
He cries, my brethren, I Will direct a way
To your revenge, and yet we will not slay,
Nor lay our hands on him, not far from hence
Ith'desert is a hollow hole, and thence
Down to the bottom the descent so steep,
That it is impossible he ere should creep
Again above ground, there is no water there,
And it is so steep withal that none can hear
His cries, and if by chance he there be found,
It may be said, he fell into the ground.
Then can it nere be told, we took his breath,
Although indeed we left him to his death:
None of his blood can on our heads be laid:
For none of it we shed, all this he said
To rid him from their hands, and if he might,
To bring him to their father home at night.
At last more pacified, they take for sense
His words; and give him freer audience.
Reuben, say they, speaks truth, then let us not strive,
We will not kill, but bury him alive.
Their plot concluded on, and Joseph come,
They fall upon him altogether: some
Rip off his many colored coat (the sign
Of Jacobs love) others make fast a line
About his tender waste, and ripping thence
All but his shirt, white like his innocence,
They hale him forwards, whilst his grief, and fears,
Can vent it self in nothing, but in tears:
They will not hear him speak, nor are they moved,
Nor once considered how their father loved
Those blubbered eyes; nor what hold grief would take
On his gray hairs, for his lost Joseph's sake:
Mindlesse of this, with other thoughts then whet
Their fury on, and more on edge did set
Their vengeance, being by this come to the pit,
They rudely take and cast him into it:
And in the ground they bury (O vild deed)
Gods promise, and the hopes of Isacque's seed.
But see his power, that from the loose stones can,
Or looser dust, raise Abraham sons, made man
Of naught, can cause new quickened bodies come
From the graves barren, and unfruitful womb.
He that shall make all deeps, and seas at last,
Their dead from forth their silent mansions cast,
That power can Isreal's seed so deeply sown,
Cause sprouting thence, to flourish in a throne.
Even he that pulls the mighty from their seat,
Shall make the lowest highest, Joseph great,
Who left thus deep, now to his deeper thoughts,
More then his own fate, wails his brethrens faults,
Thinks on their impious rage, and what a curse
Must follow their offense, this grieved him worse
Then his own sufferings, they mean while the feat
Long plotted on performed, sat down to eat
On the earths green carpet, but what ere their food,
I dare presume, their cheer was not so good,
It cannot be the guilt of their offense
Could sit so light upon their conscience.
Some anxious thoughts of their great God displeased
Poor Joseph left to cold, and hunger, seized
Sometimes upon them all, as there they led
It seems they mu^'d, for lo they lift their head,
And looking round, behold upon the sight
Of certain Merchants, that were Ishmaelites,
Whose camels laden (toward Egypt bent)
With balm, and mirrh, and spice, from Gilead went*
Judah cries out, what will it do us good
To kill our brother, and conceal his blood?
He is our brother, and our flesh, 'twere well
We laid no hands upon him, let us sell
Him rather to you Merchants, and being sold,
We are revenged, and our reward is gold.
The saying pleased them all, and up they rose
(Whilst absent Reuben nothing of it knows;)
And coming to the pit, cast in a rope
To hale up weeping Joseph, now in hope
Some pity came upon them, when he found
Worse mischiefs gaping for him then the ground,
He in the narrow confines of the cave
Was King, there being none else, but now is a slave,
For the Ishmaelites being come, to them they brought him,
Who having looked upon, and liked him, bought him,
For twenty silver pieces, a good rate
Judas but thirty for his Master ga^:
Joseph thou highly valued art to rise
Within ten pieces of thy Saviors price,
Thy brethren I Am assured, thought 'twas good gain
To have revenge and silver for their pain.
Two pieces every man, but now thou art gone
A cloak to hide their fault, they think upon,
And here the worst of all their malice noat,
Their infamy, they cover, with thy coat.
Gods finger's in it, a ramme's for Isaac slain,
A kid for Joseph, with whose blood they stain
His colored raiment, mean while to the pit
Reuben makes haste, and being come to it
Bows him there down, and whispers, brother rise,
I come to free thee from the cruelties
Of them that hate thee, as from being slain
I saved, so now I Will bring thee home again
Unto thy father: but when none replies
He doubts, and louder, and yet louder cries:
At last, with out-stretcht throat, he lifts his voice,
So have I often heard the climbing noise
Of some exact Musician that begins
So low, 'yould scarce believe he touched the strings:
Then by degrees mounts to a tone so high
That each ear tingles as in sympathy,
Or like the tune oth'winde, that calmly blows
At first, then swells, and by degrees it grows
Higher, and higher yet, and is at last
Able to deaf the hearers, every blast:
Such and so fruitless, is th'exalted voice
Of Reuben now he hears no answring noise
But his own echo, willingly beguiled,
He takes that as an answer from the child,
And calls again, till reason makes him know
It is not, though (God wot) he wish it so.
He finds his error, and with tears laments
His brothers loss, then passionatly rents
His clothes, and with redoubled haste he makes
After his brethren, whom he over-takes,
First with lamenting voice, which to them cries,
And coming near with teare-bedewed eyes,
Joseph is gone, what shall become of me,
He was not in the pit, then farewell he,
They all replide, we need not fear his spite:
Now, to bring home to our father tales at night,
You have not slain him then, good God defend;
He from his brethren, this untimely end
Should have, (quoth Reuben) no, be thou content,
No violent hands we laid on him, yet sent
Him far enough from troubling us again,
Nor is our quietness the only gain
We Have made, nor yet our just revenge: but see,
All this w'had for him, here is a share for thee.
Who when he saw no remedy, at last
He purged himself oth'guilt, and forward past:
Whilst they applaud their doings and device,
They Have found to blind their fathers aged eyes,
Who wished them blind indeed, when they the coat
Present unto him, and ask him if he know it,
He takes and views, and seeing it all ore
Dipped in his best loved sons supposed gore,
He feign would not believe his eyes, on them
He looks that brought it, then on it again;
He knows the work, and as he well may do,
The making, and the curious colors too.
So God the rainbow clothed, which of his love
And future pity was the pledge, so 'bove
His other brethren, this as a delight
Did witness Joseph was in's fathers sight.
But here the unhappy difference did prove,
That shows Gods pity, this man's pity move.
Who having seen? a crimson that out-shines
The well pressed fruit of cluster bearing vines,
Or any thing of Nature well set by;
To shadow forth the purple Syrian dye,
Close unto which another colour's laid,
Pure as the modest blushes of a maid,
And sundry other reds by a well taught,
And curious needle-woman finely wrought
Into one pillar; in another's seen
As many sorts of well disposed green,
The next of yellow, and between them lay
The fether of the prating Popingay,
Flame color then, and saffron you behold,
Compared with the pleasing hue of gold,
And in like well mixed method you might find
Blacks, blues, and whites, diverse of every kind
In several pillars waved, and neatly wrought
Into one piece of stuff, one curious coat:
If I that artificial work should see
Spoiled, and bestain'd with blood, 'twould pity me,
How much is he moved then? that is persuaded
'Twas with his blood, and death for whom he made it*
He that his passions will express aright,
Must be as he was in the self same plight.
His brows are cloudy, from his eyes it rains
Salt showers of tears, as it were to wash the stains
From off the slubber'd coat, then with a groan,
Because that is spoiled, he will likewise spoil his own.
He rends his garments, and in sackcloth clothes
His aged loins, then weeps afresh and loathes
All words of comfort, Joseph thou art gone,
Torn as my garment, bloody as thine own,
Some evil beast, some bear, or lion wild
Have filled their greedy panches with my child:
And now though all his sons and daughters rise
To comfort him he will none: his big swollen eyes
Will take no truce from tears, they banish sleep,
And as 'twere made for nothing, but to weep.
The day he in no other task out-wears,
And all the night waters his couch with tears.
Now thou art gone, what comfort can I have?
I Will follow thee, my son, into the grave,
With sorrow I Will descend, thus grief prevail d
Ore the old man, and thus he long bewailed
The prosperous youth, who is by this time brought
To Egypt with those Merchants, and there bought
By Putiphar, an officer by place
Chief Marshal, and a man in Pharohs grace.
THE PRISONER: OR, The second Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS the 39.
JOSEPH his Master puts in trust,
His Mistress tempts him to her lust,
Fair words, and threats, in vain she usde,
Then in disdain to be refusde:
Complains of an intended rape,
Alleged her outcry, his escape;
So Joseph is in prison cast,
An uncouth fault, for being chaste.
But still God blessed him: to his care,
The prisoners all committed are.
THe great Creator whose all piercing eye
The secretst corners of our hearts can try.
He that their future inclination knows
Being grown to men, that now art embrioes.
Elected Isaac, ere good Abraham thought
Old barren Sarah should a son have brought.
And Joseph sure, whom God a blessing gave
To weeping Rachel, part of it must have
Himself; the Lord nere blessed a barren womb,
And not the issue that should from it come.
Joseph's beloved, and blessed, even from his birth,
Blessed in the hollow cavernes of the earth,
Where being cast, and then again haled thence,
And by his brethren sold for twenty pence
Of silver, to those Merchants, who him bare
To Egypt, to the house of Putiphar.
There sold the second time; God in the place
Of bondage, with his Master gives him grace.
Who, Joseph Steward of his house, does make,
And all he has, and all for Joseph's sake
Is blessed, and prospers, Joseph is found just,
As seems by Putiphar, his Masters trust:
All Is under Joseph's hand, nor does he know
Ought that he has, but what he eats, or so.
Nor does he loose by it, Joseph keeps true counts,
And Putiphar to wealth, and honor, mounts
By his just care; but see, the devil would show
A little kindness unto Joseph too.
A description of Joseph.
Joseph's a proper man, fair to behold,
Of goodly stature, and a handsome mould,
His sparkling eye quick with attentive care
Shoots pleasing beams, yet those, not wanton are;
His smooth white forehead, and unclouded brow
The open plainness of his heart did show
Sweet and good natures read, not crafty wiles
Are hidden, in his undissembled smiles.
His long disheveled locks, of curled hair
From obscene speeches guard his deafned ear,
His lips fair Rachels were, his looks so meek,
His modesty gave color to his cheek.
His head, and heart, were Jacobs, just, and wise,
All this the fiend pleads, and in's Mistress eyes,
Gives him not grace, but liking, not with loves*
But with her hot lusts strong temptation proves
His youth, so forcibly as might enrage
The cold, decayed blood, of wrincled age.
Yet Joseph is unmoved, a wonder past
Modern belief, he is tempted, fair, and chaste.
Had many women been so, it would from spite
Redeemed the sex, and common epithites:
His no forced virtue was, like theirs that be
Best guarded by their own deformity
From sin, whose face is able to deter
Lust from themselves and the adulterer.
Whose looks no more temptation in them have
Then that they are like the devils, nor to save
Charge or expenses was it, nor was he
To buy his sin, or loose his chastity
At so dear rate; his manhood to control,
As (sinners now) with money, and their soul.
Nor lacks he boldness, for his Mistress she
Becomes the tempter, and where modesty
Most hinders lust, me thinks that grace I find
Like Gods restringent power, which to mankind
The devil does as 'twere in chains withhold
From doing of the mischief, that he would;
Nor wants he youthful heat, being in the prime
And flower of his age, the aptest time
For such employments, nor wants ought to move
That might seduce him to unlawful love.
But he that chaste, and cannot be otherwise,
Offers himself a wretched sacrifice
To God, when all his bones of sap are dry,
As Cains lean ears of corn, which in Gods eye
Was not of all accepted: the most high
Delights not in such barren piety.
Eccl. 12.1.
But Joseph full of virtue, full of truth,
Remembers his Creator in his youth,
E're the days come which bring him of his grave
In mind, those days, wherein men say they have
No pleasure: would that grace that saved him then
From her inticements, were not lost amongst men
Of these last days, she was not foul, nor mean,
Nor was she old, nor yet a common queen,
When had she been all these 'ere given a nay,
How many a youth had cast his soul away
To such a proffer, they had been less nice
Then to deny, more ready to entice.
She was his Masters wife, and this offense
They would have colored with obedience
Still due to her commands: who would have thought,
I mean what worldly man, but this had brought
Him to preferment in a way more nigh
Then his denial, and fidelity?
She sole commandresse was in every thing,
She could her husband sway, and he the King,
But wretched men! and yet I Will nothing say,
I Will not profane my story, to inveigh
Or scarce to mention them that do not know
What sweet content does with good conscience flow.
But from them to the Devil I Will proceed
Observe his plots, see with what cunning heed,
And how industrious he his work does ply,
And gives what she could wish, convenience.
When all abroad, none's left but she at home,
Joseph bout's business in the house does come.
The fiend does find his plot may well be crossed,
That Joseph's bashfulnesse would nere accost
His amourous Mistress, she will not be withstood,
The devil will find more ways unto the wood.
Her plyant bosom with more heat he moves
At Joseph's sight boldly to break her loves
In these broad terms, whom when she first does see,
She runs to embrace, and cries, Come lie with me.
Even as a man that in the dead of night
Some apparision meets, or ghastly sight,
He cannot fly, but trembles, and stands mute,
So blushing Joseph, at this shameless suite:
Whilst she more bold, commends his matchless shape,
Then on his corrall lips commits a rape.
And if before her words your wonder breeds,
She is as plain, or plainer in her deeds:
Wealth is her promise, and her pledge a kiss,
Alas poor Joseph! what a conflict's this?
The world, the flesh, the devil, all at once,
Thou art beset, by hels fierce champions.
They strike his ears with flatt'ries, and they thrust
Even at his soul with fiery darts of lust:
Who armed with virtue, in his heart that dwells,
Makes vain their malice, and their force repels,
With flat refusal, given with due respects,
He reverences his Mistress, but rejects
Her impudent entreaties, and with eyes
Cast where she may not see them, thus replies:
(Lady) you know that in my hands there are
More then my Master wots, unto my care
All is entrusted that he has to lie;
There is none greater in the house then I:
Of all his goods he has detained none
From me, except your self, his wife alone.
Such was old Adams case, one fruit forbad,
Ev n all the world besides he might have had,
And that he longed for, oh unhappy nice
To save his longing, lost his paradise!
And shall not his example give to me
Warning enough from the forbidden tree?
When to my Master I was sold a slave,
His goodness trusted, and securely gave
His whole state to my keeping: oh 'twere shame
My cos'nage should begin upon his fame!
Besides I pray that God my works may bless,
How can I then do this great wickedness,
And sin against him? 'twas I hope to try
Your servants truth, and his fidelity,
My honored Mistrisse, whence these words proceed
Not any meaning to so foul a deed:
Which said, quick reverence made with busy haste,
Not staying for her answer forth he past:
And left her more amazed, then he at first
When she into her lustful passions burst:
A modest blush did Joseph's cheek bestaine,
But in her angry looks all colors reign;
All passions in her breast, first raging ire
Inflames her eyes, they set the rest on fire
Of her swollen face, but: oh her lost delight!
She fears, and changes, now again she is white.
She grievs, laments, despairs; he will nere come back
She cries, and now she is melancholy black;
She frets, and frowns, and then as in disdain
To be refused, she scorns, and smiles again:
Now in distraction all her passions met,
Proteus himself could never counterfeit
So many several colors, till at last
This mad fit of her contemplation past,
She coms t'her self, and thinks what is done, and sed,
And what is the cause that she no better sped:
Then she considers that he was but young,
And must be suppled with a smoother tongue:
She was too rough, thence came her ill success;
Flattry must win the heart of bashfulnesse.
She studies now encomiums for the rare
Perfections he is indu'd with, such as were
Excuse, she thought, for lust of worse degree
Then hers, for incest, or damned Sodomie.
Nature (says she) did nere a body frame
So excellent; only to bear a name,
And to be looked on, nor will I persuade
Thee unto ought, but that for which thou art made,
Which was not for thy self; thou art not young,
Nor decked with comeliness, nor wise, nor strong,
For thine own only good, but unto thee
Nature imparted these, that thou might be
Her steward of them; youth and strength are thine,
(But for her use) oh do not thou decline
From her commands that gave them, she did frame
All for each others good, and what I claim
Is by her laws, who never sure combined
So smooth a body, with so harsh a mind,
As pretend'st to have, all thou can say
Is of thy Masters goodness, can thou pay
His courtesy with greater, all thy life.
Then this thy kindness to his dearest wife?
And is it not mere dissembling if thou tell
Thou love him, and not her he loves so well?
I Will four legged dwellers in the woods, and hills,
Both male, and female, whilst naught curbs their wills
enjoy their sweet variety with peace:
Nature commands them nothing but increase.
Yet still do urge a matrimonial tie
Why can thou think wise she would ere deny
To man whom she of all things has possessed
Those privileges she has given a beast?
But more and stronger charms she does invent,
And so the fiend had made her eloquent.
Her words an aged Hermit from his cell
Might have enticed, and made him sue for hell.
But Joseph's still unmoved, he gives no ear
He Is full of business, and wants time to hear
Her flattries (in his carriage thus to her
Were little hopes of being a Courtier).
Still she assayes him whilst the dev'll her friend
Makes daily opportunities attend
Her newer plots, how can they choose but hit
Between the devils and the woman's wit
So closely followed? for she day by day
As Samsons wife, or his false Dalila,
Importunate, persues him with her lust,
And day by day has the same answer just.
At last impatient of her often denial,
She now resolves upon a final trial:
And either in her vile attempts she will speed
Or on revenge, if not on lust she would feed.
What foul effects do such suits propagate,
If granted, shame; and if not granted, hate.
Thus armed in both hands, brings she sword, and fire.
Swords of revenge, and flames of foul desire.
Here let him choose to which he is inclined,
The fiend and she are of the self-same mind.
If with the sin he cannot be content,
Let him resolve to bear the punishment.
The folks in the field, and Putiphar at Court,
Joseph comes home: oh how do all consort
To her vile purpose? whilst his serious thought
Mused on his business, she his garment caught:
Speaks her old language, now she tells him plain
He Is fast, and shall not part with her again
Till she has had her will: if he refuse her,
She Will swear that he attempted to abuse her.
He thus put out on's dumps, this troubled more
His thoughts, then all he mused upon before,
And as for such encounters ill prepared,
He Is mute, and struggles as a bird ensnared:
Such were his looks, as when Susanna saw
The wicked Elders from their covert draw.
Their case not much unlike, the same they cry,
His Mistrisse and the Elders, do or dye.
As a ruft fowl, that gladly leaves her plumes
In the hawks eager talents, and assumes
New wings of fear, from her late danger past
Until her safety she has won at last.
The like our troubled Joseph forced to do,
Forsakes his garment, and his Mistrisse too.
Who thus forlorn, of all her hopes bereft
Nothing of Joseph, but his raiment left,
And that she kept, a pledge of her disdain,
Not as a pawn, he would return again.
His father Jacob was not troubled more
When he his colored coat had lost before.
Then she is now vexed, and fretted, she could tear
The cloak for anger, yet she will forbear,
And keep it for revenge, her hopes beguiled
Makes her to weep, and anger makes her wild,
With looks distracted now she does arise,
And with a loud and troubled voice she cries
Unto her people, and whilst they amazed
Upon her ill presaging countenance gazed,
She cries out help, as if some foe were by
The Hebrew slave has offered villainy
To me his Masters wife; he that is so just,
In whom his Master does repose such trust,
'Twas he came in to mock me, till affright
By my raised voice, he took himself to flight,
And left for fear, or shame, or both you see
This coat, the witness of his lust with me.
Fine Devil still, what plot has ever been yet
Crossed with the old instrument the woman wit,
Whom he thought fittest amongst the creatures all
To compass a damnation general,
In Adam's ruin; she so served him then
That he has used the self same hand again,
In most of's plots e're since, upon just Lot
By wine, and women, he a conquest got
No power but woman's ever could subvert
David, a man chose after Gods own heart;
Then which success he chose to set upon
The strong, and wise, Samson, and Solomon:
So holy Job was tempted: women are
Like Angels, and the good may half compare
With them for glory, did heavens brightness shine
As often upon them, they were as divine.
The bad ones are the flesh that tempt to evil,
And almost do more mischief then the devil.
Fit instruments for him, to death they lead,
The Wiseman says, her paths unto the dead. Prou. ^.18.

They Are like man's evil genius, and attend
As his bad angel for some wicked end.
The best things when they from their goodness fall,
And be corrupted, prove the worst of all.
'Angels that fell are devils since their curse,
But beauteous woman fallen from virtue, worse.
Such was this dame, who seeking to betray
Poor Joseph for his innocence does lay
His cloak safe, till his Lords return, to whom
She thus presents it at his coming home.
Such are the servants you for me provide,
Your Hebrew slave o'refraught with lust and pride,
Came in to mock me, till my shreiks for fear
Made him forgo his cloak, and leave it here.
Me thinks with such a brow vexed Samson eyed
His father that restrained him from his bride.
So Joseph's angry brethren, did behold him,
When they against him rose, before they sold him:
As now his Master does, who will not stay
To hear him what he for himself can say.
Anger contracts his brow, his eyes shoot fire,
His wroth is kindled, will the slave aspire
To all I have? Is there not in his hands
Enough already? and with that commands
Him to perpetual prison, too unjust
A guerdon for inviolated trust.
Yet in his anger did some love appear,
'Twas to a place where the Kings prisoners were.
But God that's every where is there likewise,
And gives him favor in his keepers eyes;
Who a new charge commits unto his care,
Even all the prisoners that in prison are.
Joseph does all, the keeper takes his rest,
And looks to nothing, but still Joseph's blessed.
For see the Lord his own that nere forsakes,
Makes all to thrive that Joseph undertakes.
Who cheerful still, and no way discontent
For his lost liberty, or punishment:
His clear soul knowing, that for no offense
He suffered, only for his innocence.
And cheerful well he may be, each place proves
A heaven unto him, wheresoever he moves.
By God's dread presence, as by Kings resort,
Each petty cottage does become a Court.
As was the house of Obed-Edom blessed,
Whilst in his walls the sacred Ark did rest:
So Joseph now in jayl (no doubt) it were
A happiness to be a prisoner there.
The keeper finds his blessings whilst he sees
With admiration his increase of fees.
Great prisoners daily flock, like Labans sheep,
Whilst Jacob did his pastures keep.
THE SOOTH-SAYER: OR, The third Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS the 40.
The Butler and the Baker, both
To prison sent in Pharoh's wroth.
They several dreams to Joseph told,
Who their meanings did unfold.
The Butler whom his news restored
He in his own behalf implored:
But with him thanklesse, and unkind,
Being out of sight, is out of mind.
ANd after these things, lo, it came to pass,
Pharoh offended with his Butler was:
And his chief Baker, whom (being wroth) he sent
Together both, to close imprisonment:
Even to the place where Joseph was in ward,
Unto whose charge the Captain of the guard
Committed them, where for a season he
Did serve them both, and bare them company.
There they continued, till some days were past,
Impatient with their durance both: at last
With froward vexing they out wear the light,
And in unquiet slumbers spend the night,
Until as wearied both, a nap they take
Each with a several dream i'th'morne does wake.
When Joseph early coming to salute
His charge, he finds them sullen both and mute.
Sure man's eternal soul, has here some sense
(As other spirits) oth'pleniscience
Which unto them hereafter shall be given
(Their fleshly dross being purged away) in heaven.
And did not our gross bodies it deny
Undoubtedly each man might prophecy.
Whilst our dull carcasses, are charmed with sleep,
Still as in death: our soul his watch does keep:
No outward objects interpose, to hale
Included fancy forth; the natural
Thoughts of our souls presented, then we find,
And dream the fears, or wishes of our mind.
The knowing soul, then, privy to th'entent
Of following fate, discover would the event
To th'corps, and wanting power to do it at full
Speaks in the language of an oracle.
With which the body waking from his trance
Is more afflicted then with ignorance.
So 'twas with these, who understood the news,
Mat. 13.14.
Their dreaming fancies brought them; as the Jews
Christ's parables: and no more, then th'Eunuch did
Esay's misterious prophecy, as he rid
Before he met with Philip, Act. 8.30.
this did vex
Their troubled senses, and so much perplexe
Their mind with doubts; as should a pardon come
To one condemned, he might misdoubt his doom,
And sentence in it, till it were unsealed,
And the glad news, with the contents revealed:
Such were their fears, they always used to be
A little cheered with Joseph's company.
But now when he his morning wishes had
Given, still he finds them discontent and sad.
Their pale aspects, which with an over clowded brow,
And wrinckled forhead, made them seem as though
Th'unpleasing fancies not with sleep forsaking
Their troubled thoughts, still wrought upon the^ waking.
Such was wretch't Hamans face, Hest 6.
when he descride
The strange catastrophe of all his pride
So looked Caldeas King, Dan. 5.
when midst of all
His jollity, he spide upon the wall
The characters unknown, the dreadful hand
Which all the sages could not understand.
So pensive were these prisoners till some pause
Past, Joseph silence breaks and asks the cause.
What mean these heavy looks? they both reply
Young man, it is more then our lost liberty
That now afflicts us, we have each this night,
Dreampt several dreams, and here is none that might
Discose the hidden meaning, or make known
To us the right interpretation.
Perchance they may devine some good event,
Some ease, or end, of our imprisonment.
Be not dismayed, replide the holy youth,
Come not such secrets from the God of truth?
Cheer up your down-cast hearts, and you shall see
God makes his servants wise: pray tell them me
To whom the Butler as a good portent
Of's lucky fancy and the good it meant,
First clears his clouded face, and taking heart,
He thus to Joseph does his dream impart.
The Butlers dream,
Me thought my fancy gave unto my sight
A fruitful vine which spread it self forth right
Into three branches, on whose boughs appear
The three most pleasant seasons of the year:
It springs, and buds, and then it blossoms bore,
At last with ripn'd grapes all clustred ore,
I gathered some, which as I then did think
I crush't in Pharaohs cup, and gave him drink.
To whom good Joseph being loath to hide
Such welcome news from him, thus replide.
interpreted.
The fruitful branches that were spread three ways,
By their interpretation are three days:
Let not those hours seem tedious, which being spent
Are the last days of thy imprisonment.
The King shall lift thine head, and shall restore
Thee then to fill his cup as heretofore.
But when as I foretell you find it so,
Remember Joseph, and some kindness show.
Mention my name to Pharoh, free me hence,
And my good tidings have full recompense.
I from the Hebrew land was stolen a child,
Nor has my youth committed ought so vilde
As to deserve the rigor that thus stays
Me here to languish out my best of days,
In obscure laziness; with so small scope,
Able to break the very heart of hope.
All that my worst accuser e're could lay
Unto my charge, I once did disobey
My Masters wife, in a command that went
Against my conscience; and was therefore sent
Here where you see me; 'twas no other fault
That damned me to this melancholy vault,
Where were that axiom true, that some do hold,
Grief makes men gray, I had ere this grown old.
Now as you find my truth, remember me
By the prediction of your liberty.
Your dream expounded, I have cleared your doubt*
But dream not when I shall my self come out:
Unless your kind remembrance quit me well,
By giving me what I to you foretell.
The Butler like a Courtier promised where
Sad Joseph makes his period with a tear.
By this the Baker having understood,
To'thers interpretation was good,
Roused up himself, and herewith comforted. The Bakers dream interpreted.

Thus told his dream, behold upon my head
Were three white baskets, th'uppermost me thought
With all choice kinds of Pharoh's bake-meats fraught,
Where lo the birds, that round about me fled,
Did cat them out o'th basket on my head.
To whom, thus Joseph, (loathing with delays,
Worse to torment him) tells that three days
His three white baskets are, whose short time spent,
Thou shall be free from thy imprisonment;
And then an end of all thy cares shall make,
Then shall the King thine head from off thee take;
And cause thee to be hanged upon a tree,
And birds shall eat thy flesh from off of thee.
Thus Joseph ends, whilst they with hope and fear,
True picture of those different passions were.
Nor will I otherwise describe their station,
But each was like his dreams interpretation:
The One full of hope, the other of despair;
But all proves true, as Joseph did declare.
For the third following morn it came to pass,
That Pharoh's birth day then solemnized was:
Mirth and the voice of joy the heavens invade,
Whilst he feast for all his servants made.
To which the prisoners called, he lifts their head,
The one's restored, the the other punished
With shame, and verifying Joseph's words,
Hanged, and his flesh devoured by the birds.
Mean while, the advanced Butler, too ingrate,
Forgets poor Joseph, and his wretched state.
Courtiers have busy heads, the breath of Kings
Takes from them clean the sense of meaner things
They Have other thoughts to think on, then to know
Friends low in state, when their high fortunes flow.
They Have all fair language, and that is freely spent;
Their promise too is but a complement.
No strangers business in their heads can stand,
Without some memorandums in their hand.
But pardon me, you noble souls, that be
Attendants fit for sacred Majesty.
Men far above my Muse, weak to set forth
Your praise: less able to impayr your worth.
I know the Court's the only Shoole to teach
Humanity, and to attain the reach
Of wit: it is, what need more words be spent?
Under the Kings immediate government:
Where brave minds, that from glories of the place,
Virtue and worth derive, their Princes grace
Abusing not, but studying to confer't
To his increase of love, upon desert:
Have all those Angels placed by heaven to attend
The King, (his state and person to defend)
So many better geniusses to tell,
And prompt them, both to live, and counsel well.
But to conceive there be 'bout honors seat,
Courtiers like this in the story, it would whet
The dullest Muse, and make mild patience strain
For Satyrs, being inspired by disdain
Of such a thanklesse wretch, that has forgot
His comforter in prison, minding not
Who raised his drooping head, and hopes descry'de
To him, that else might there for grief have did.
THE COVRTIER: OR, The fourth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS the 41.
Pharoh dreamt, the Sages sent
For, cannot tell him what it meant.
Joseph called for, declares
The approaching Famine, and prepares
Against it. Pharoh does him grace,
And yields in Court a second place
To him; his blessing's well begun,
The King a wife, God gives him Sons.
Poor Joseph still a prisoner, looks to hear
From his enlarged friend, with patient ear
For two years space: and freedom he expects
From him, whose life and practice are neglects.
But now he finds his error, knows it can
Nothing avail him to confide in man.
Man nere so mindful, 's but a means to do
What God thinks fit, and gives his blessing to.
This the Bethulians knew, whose state more bad
Then Ioseph's and an Advocate they had
Careful as being a party in the case,
Hopeful as beauty, or her pleading face. Iudeth.

Yet they no confidence, repose she,
They hope a happy means from God may be
For their deliverance: from hence they take
Some courage and their joint petitions make
That God would bless her with success as fair,
As was the undertaker. Samsons hair
Gave but small hope to Israel of defense, Judge. 16

When as the Spirit was departed thence. Isay 38.21. King. 20 7.

What power is in dride figs to heal the fore
Of Judah's King: are Isreal's waters more
Healthful then those of Syria, that they can,
By washing clean the Leper Naaman?
What virtue has unless God blessing meet
The Prophes salt, to make the waters sweet?
The greatest means in misery to redress it
As fruitless is, except our God do bless it.
Men have not power to think of what they see
Unless the Lord instruct their memory.
As now in his good time he brought to pass,
The Butler mindful of poor Joseph was.
Though late, when Pharoh, (for crowns cannot keep
Care from Kings heads) was troubled in his sleep.
Fancies disturbed work on his restless brain
He dreamp't, and wak't, and slept, and dreampt again,
Again affrighted wakes: and sends to call
His Sages, and Magicians, and for all
That used to descant on such mistique theams
But none can tell the meaning of his dreams.
Long had they mused, and here one walked alone
Biting his nails in contemplation.
There the other scratch't his head as if he were
Assured without all doubt to find it there.
One waves his hand, another strokes his beard,
A third sit still, and with his face uprear'd,
Looks whence it came; and sure he will fetch it far
That to a strict account calls star by star,
The host of Heaven, inquiring the effects
Of the close vision from their aspects
But hearsalike, that questions powr's so high
The music of the spears, and their reply.
Here one more serious plodding then the rest
Falls fast asleep, whether his mind oppressed,
With too much study were, or his intent
By his own dream to what Pharoh's meant,
He like the rest succeeds: their heads they joined,
But still so many a head, so many a mind.
Now like the Philistims that undertook
Samsons dark riddle, so the Sages look.
They greatly troubled are, but Pharoh more,
His looks are like his Butlers heretofore,
Who happily was thus by Pharoh's face
Made mindful of his own and Joseph's case:
And whether's pity, or promise were the thing
That moved him if to please, or ease the King,
It were I know not: but he thus began
With reverence made, This day, o King, I can
Remember well my faults, Pharoh was wroth
With his two servants, and most justly both
My self, and his chief Baker put inward
Into the Captain's prison of the Guard.
Where being at once overcome with grief extreme,
And troubled thoughts, each of us dreampt a dream,
In The self-same night our sleeps imaginations
According just to their interpretations.
We waked and sadly mused, till a young man
Putiphars servant, prisoner with us than
An Hebrew captive, unto whom we told
Our dreams, their hidden meanings did unfold.
And as unto us both he did foretell
According to our dreams it so befell
Me he restored unto my former place,
But him he hanged, and so it came to pass.
He had not fully ended, when as one
Quick in obedience covets to be gone
Ere he knows half his errand, Pharoh so
Would ere whether or for whom he know,
But now the tale is ended, when in have,
He calls a messenger that comes as fast.
He sends him to the prison out of hand
And thinks the time long whilst he gave command.
The post upon the wings of speed does fly,
And come, calls out for Joseph hastily.
Now the delay is his, here lies the sport,
He Will shave and shift himself ere come to Court
And all into a comely order bring,
May make him fit to stand before the King:
'Twas a good omen sure, a lucky sign
Which did his future Courtiership divine:
That he so much of sprucenesse then bethought him
When news of freedom from the King was brought him.
Who the mean while impatient of delay,
Begins to wonder at the prisoners stay;
But now is appeased Joseph by this is there
And Pharoh bent to speak as he to hear.
I dreampt a dream, and here is none that can
Interpret it, but I have heard, young man,
Of thee as one that is well seen and wise,
In knowledge of such hidden mysteries.
To whom with a submissive bending knee,
Joseph replies, it is not o King in me:
But God shall give to thy joys increase,
By his poor servant a reply of peace.
Pleased with his graceful modesty the King
Reviews his ingenious face as promising,
As to our Harvest hopes when one espies
The setting Sun with redness leave the Skies.
And with this answer cheered he now thinks long
To hear more comfort from so sweet a tongue,
Pharohs dream.
And therefore thus: When as me thought I stood,
Upon the rivers bank behold sev'n good,
Fat, and wel-favor'd kine, from thence did rise,
And grazed in the meadow, but whilst my pleased eyes
Viewd their broad back that did with smoothness shine,
The troubled waters sent seven other kine
So poor, lean fleshed, as I never eyed
Mere bare anatomies covered with a hide,
There Is none in Egypt such, I took them sent
As foyles the others goodness to present
By their deformities, for near till now
Did I observe such beauty in a Cow
As in the other seven, on whom they set
And cleand devoured, but nere the fatter yet.
Me-thought in killing them the ugly beasts
Looked like so many death in their arrests,
But in devouring they resemblance have
To the insatiate and unfruitful grave.
Which having seen, my laboring fancy broak,
Sleep left my wearied eyes, and I awoak,
But whilst my thoughts were fixed upon this theme,
I slept again, and dreampt another dream.
And then behold there came into my view
A sprouting stalk, wherein sev'n ears there grew
Good, rank, and full of corn, Pharohs second dream.
but whilst I hung
My eyes on that fair object, lo there sprung
Close to those ears sev'n others, thin, and pined,
Withered, and blasted by the Eastern wind.
And these devoured, the swollen fruit burdned ears
Whilst yet no change at all in them appears:
All this have I to the Magicians told,
But none the hidden meaning can unfold.
God has to Pharoh his entents made known
Then answered Joseph, Pharoh's dream is one. Interpreted.

For by the seven good kine, sev'n years are shown,
So by the sev'n good ears, the dream is one.
And the sev'n leaner kine, and empty ears
That came up after, are sev'n other years.
The first being good, and full, betoken plenty,
But famine's threatened in the lean, and empty.
The thing that I have spoken to the King
Not I, but God has spoken, and shall bring
Shortly to pass, sev'n years of plenty shall
Crown all your harvest hopes even throughout all
The fruitful Land of Egypt, after then
In vain the labor of the husbandmen
Shall till the earth, whereon no corn shall stand,
Plenty shall be forgotten in the land.
From which, as from plowed sands, expect no crop,
For seven years famine shall consume it up,
And for it doubled twice to Pharoh was,
It Is stablisht, and shall shortly come to pass,
God has established it, let Pharoh than
Throughout his territories find a man,
Wise, and discreet, and let it be his care
To see that officers appointed are
To take the fifth part up, throughout the land,
And lay the corn all under Pharohs hand.
And let the Cities be well stored with food,
By the neighboring country whilst the years are good,
Since God the bad ensuing has declared
Let not the famine find us unprepared.
But so let Pharoh against those barren years
Provide, that not a soul may perish here,
For want: let foreign Lands the better fare
By us, and owe their safeties to our care.
Here Joseph ends, and lo the thing seemed good
In Pharoh's eyes, and in their eyes that stood
About him, to whom thus the King began.
Is there in all the Land a fitter man?
To whom Gods Spirit shows such hidden things,
He keeps Gods secrets, and is fit for Kings.
Then turning him about to Joseph said,
Since of thee God has 'bove all others made
His choice, these holy counsels to disclose
That proves thee fittest, I have therefore chose
Thee as the only man, discreet, and wise,
To do according to thine own advice.
Thou shall be over my house, what thou think fit,
Shall be my peoples law, who unto it
Shall yield obedience, great as is mine own
Shall thy command in Egypt be, in the throne
I Will only be above, the voice is thine
Of power, the eyes of Majesty be mine.
Now have I set thee over all my Land,
Witness this Ring, which taking from his hand
He put on Ioseph's finger, and arrayed
Him in rich vestures of fine linen made,
Such as the Egyptian Princes wore of old,
And on his neck he put a chain of gold.
Then in his second chariot made him ride
Whilst bow the knee before him, people cry'de:
For Ruler he, ore all the Land does make him,
Which to confirm he turned, and thus bespak him.
It Is I am Pharoh; nor without thee shall
A man lift up his hand or foot through all
My Realm of Egypt, then to crown his life
With true content, he fits him with a wife,
Fair Asenath, a goodly prize alone,
She was Potipherahs daughter, Priest of Un.
Thus Ioseph's raised unto the height of power,
In shorter space, then the quick springing flower:
That asks but one nights growth, he that of late
Wayl'd in a dungeon, fills a chair of State,
Oh what a bounteous King found he to do it!
Nay, what a bounteous God that moved him to it!
Then think on Ioseph's case what ere thou be,
Despair not, art in prison? so was he,
Perhaps, thou wilt say, thou have no skill in dreams,
No revelations, God has other means.
Doubt not his power, nor providence, he can
That has created all, sure help a man
More ways than one: do thou complain thou art poor,
And suffer'st want? Job surely suffered more.
Do crosses vex thee? or afflictions rod
Torment thy soul? have patience still in God:
Wayt on, pray to, trust in him, only he
Can cure, and cleanse, and ease thy malady.
Do strive with strong temptations, to him then
God cast seven devils out of Magdalen?
Art sick, or sinful? prayer a cure did win
For Hezekiah's sore, and David's sin.
Perchance thou have trusted, praid, and waited long;
Look back to Joseph, he was sure but young
When first he tasted sorrow, vexed between
Bondage, Lust, Prisons, and his Brethrens spleen:
Even from his very cradle, yet he stayed,
He waited long with patience, long he prayed
Ere comfort came; for lo when he appears
Before the King, his age was thirty years;
Out of whose presence, to his charge he went,
And overseers throughout Egypt sent
In the seven plenteous, whilst all their grounds
Brought forth by handfuls, every place abounds
With goodly crops, the sight whereof began
To cheer the Clown, and glad the Husbandman.
They ply their trust, their labors never cease
To treasure up the fruitful earths increase.
Me thinks I see them, like the busy swarm,
When their commander hums, and gives th'alarme:
They issue forth, and their dispersed power
Coasts every field, and light on every flower,
To make their sweet extractions, and they strive
Who shall unlade him oftnest at the hive:
They fill their bags, and gladly homewards fly
With pleasant burdens in their painful thigh:
Only this diffrence makes 'twixt them and these,
The gatherers went not murmuring as the Bees.
But with their silent paces all along
They trudge like Ants, a people wise, not strong, Pro. 30.25.

Preventing want in plenty, with their pain,
So each of these came laden home with grain.
They gleaned apace, whilst corn like sa^ds they found,
And stored the Cities from the neighboring ground:
Th'y have gathred much, the Granaries are filled
With all the abundance which the land does yield.
Egypt is now provided against her fears,
Should all the world besiege her for seven years;
Were they wal'd strong enough, it were no doubt
But they would by that, starve the besiegers out.
His work now ending, Joseph takes his rest,
And with two sons, is ere the famine blessed,
Two goodly sons, which Asenath the fair,
Vn's Priest and Princes daughter to him bare:
The first he called Manasseh, for he said,
God of my toil has me forgetful made,
Past in my Fathers house: the second he
Named Ephraim, for God has caused me
Here to be fruitful, whither I was sent,
As the place for my affliction meant.
But now the time is come that must atone
The dreams with their interpretation:
Now Pharoh finds that Joseph's words are true,
The good years gone and past, and bad ensue:
Egypt expects, and now the time appears
The full are swallowed by the blasted ears.
Pined, famine from all lands comes flocking thither,
And from all countries men come flocking with her.
Egypt alone has bread, yet some of those
That were ill husbands, or that did repose
No trust in Ioseph's words, by this half dead
For their late unbelief, cry out for bread.
But still to Pharoh when the people cry'de,
They were to Joseph sent to be supply'de.
What he shall bid you do, to him they went,
Who sold them corn, when all their store was spent.
The granaries he set open, for there was dearth
And famine ore the face of all the earth,
Nay, now in Egypts self it waxed sore,
Till he supplied their daily wants with more,
It raged in all lands and all Countries came
Thither for corn, and ask for Ioseph's name.
THE STEWARD: OR, The fifth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS 42.
To Joseph from all Countries come
The Inhabitants for food among whom
His brethren came plagued with the dearth,
To him as Steward of the earth,
For by him are all Nations fed
Egypt alone abounds in bread.
Blessed with his care, which none denies,
Save them, he challenged for spies.
To prove their trust, they must again
Returning bring young Benjamin.
Simeon meanwhile in hold remains,
And they released go home with grain.
LIke that mysterious Book the Angel gave
To John, are worldlings fond delights, they have
A smack of pleasure which affects the sense
At first, but ends in bitter penitence.
Prove. 5.3, 4, 5.
The whore has honied lips, her perfumed breath
Utters words smooth as oil, but unto death
Her feet make haste, her steps to hell do tend,
Sharpness and bitterness are in her end.
Such in all earthly pleasures, they whose minds
Swell with vainglory, or whom Mammon blinds,
The god of this world, that they think to be,
In riches only true felicity;
Dan. 2.
Like the forgotten dream of Babels King,
(Which did confusion to the Sages bring)
A head of gold, a breast of silver, they,
With thighs of brass may have, but feet of clay.
Their glory, riches, joys, wherein they trust,
Being past away, their end shall be in dust.
The world like a fond Mother is, and smiles
Upon her own, whom she a time beguiles
With pleasures, fading like her self, (for she
That has not, cannot give eternity
To them) whose first, and better days being past,
Must grieve the rest, and think upon their last.
GOD like a gracious Father, but austere;
First, by corrections teaches his to fear,
And to be humble, which being taught them, he
In The end rewards their humility
Job 1.
With choycer blessings, Job he first did try,
By taking of his wealth, his misery
Increased by sore diseases, soul, and sense,
Vexed to the utmost of his patience.
Abram from God receives a strict command
Genesis 22.2.
To sacrifice his Son; with his own hand
To kill his Child, having as yet but one.
Jacob an heyr to his affliction,
Has lost his best loved boy: Gods blessings here
TO his children, diffrent from the worlds appear*
Whilst heers a little time, the world does bless,
Their end is crowned with endless happiness.
Nor does the God of earth and heaven give
Us only future hopes, but whilst we live, Job 42.

Feeds us with daily blessings: Job increas't
In wealth; again, is richest of the East.
Nor does good Abram like contentment lack,
Isack is with a blessing given him back:
And Jacob shall, the days are now begun, Genesis 22.20.

Find to the safeguard of his life, his Son.
The general dearth that through all nations ran,
Has shown his lean aspect in Canaan;
And pinched the holy Patriarks: ten are sent
Of Joseph's brethren, all their store being spent,
For new supplies of corn; for it was sed,
That only Egypt did abound in bread.
Forwards they set, now the first motion stirs,
And they prove Joseph's best Interpreters.
The time is come, the sheaves begin to bend,
Ten of the stars already do descend,
The rest must follow: Jacob now shall see
His raised Son, and his sleeping prophecy:
And he to whom so many dreams were known,
God now declares, and brings to pass his own.
For lo his brethren that were come before him,
Bowing their faces to the earth, adore him.
He Is put in mind of's vision, at first view,
Though none of them knew him, yet them he knew:
And this gives me more wonder then their change,
His strange remembrance, their oblivion strange.
It is not commonly the poor forgot,
To claim alliance from their friends grown great.
Nor is it the usual way o'th world, that men
Of rising fortune should remember then
Their mean, though nearest kin, and much the less
To be expected, coming in distress.
Look on their natures, and there sure should be
Between them some prompting antipathy
Should make them know, however high estated,
So great an eyesore Joseph whom they hated.
Who on the other side, as soon as spide them,
(Nor was his memory malice) he descride them.
He found them as he left them, but their eyes
Were doubtless dazzled with his dignities:
Whilst no revenge, (therefore let none mistake him)
Did so quick sighted, but his meekness make him:
He meant no harm unto them, though he spoke
In a sharp key, and with a rougher look,
Asks whence they came, when humbly one replies,
From Canaan, to buy corn; he calls them spies.
Canaan upon a fruitful soil does stand,
Flowing with milk and honey: Ye our land
Are come to pry into, to what distress
Famine has brought it, and what nakedness.
When trembling, with one sudden voice they cry,
Thy servants true men are, and come to buy
Food for our aged Father, we were borne
All one man's sons, and hither come for corn;
Our altered soil does not afford us grain;
Twice has the reaper looked for work in vain.
Twich have the Plowmans toil and seed inhum'd
Untimely frosts, unkindely heats consumed.
Our store is spent, nor have we hope to live,
Unless your goodness do our wants relieve.
Still Joseph, who but what he knew did hear,
Changed not his noat, but bids observe their fear,
Their tre^bling joints, faint voice, and down-cast eyes,
True signs of guilt, discovered them for spies.
They know not how to look, nor what to say?
Their postures, every thing seemed to betray
Them to his jealous fury: if they muse
Or whisper, then they are forging an excuse;
If they be silent, that their guilt implies;
Their boldness impudence, their language lies.
Yet still considering that no such they were
As he suspected them, they persevere
More confident as in their tale begun.
They were twelve brethren, and the youngest son
Their aged Fathers fondness did detain
At home with him: the twelfth alas was slain,
By what mischance unknown: they stoutly stand
Upon It, they came not to descry the land.
Their honest errand served not to disguise
So bad intents: but still I called you spies,
Answered the subtle Joseph; thus you shall
Prove my surmises vain: choose one of all
That may go up with a supply of grain,
The rest with me in prison shall remain.
Ye shall not hence by Pharohs life I swear,
Until I see your youngest brother here.
This is the way to prove my doubts untrue,
And whether there be any trust in you.
Let one then fetch him, here your safety lies,
For by the life of Pharoh, else you are spies.
At this with fear and trouble sore dismayed,
Not knowing what to say, they nothing said.
But as they musing on each other star'd,
Joseph for three days put them all in ward:
Then calling them before him, they appear,
He bids do this and live, for lo I fear
God; and if as ye say, ye true men be,
Let of your brethren, one stay here with me;
The rest go home in peace, with good supply,
To stave off famine from your family:
But see your youngest brothers presence prove
Your truth returning, so no hand shall move
Against your lives, or safeties, or withstand
Your peaceful traffic with us in the land
This said, when seeing no way to prevent,
Of sad necessity they were content.
Yet with their captive brother, ere they go,
They take a little time to vent their woe.
Guilt surely hangs upon us, and our God
That saw our sin, now threatens with the rod
Of vengeance, timely had our grief bin spent,
Ere we our harmless brother, hither sent.
We turned him pitiless, and deafned ears,
When he in anguish of his soul, and tears,
Gently besought us, but alas, too late,
We nere repent us of our cursed hate,
Whence all these mischiefs their beginnings take:
We justly punished are for Joseph's sake.
For Egypt, even the place where we him sent,
God has ordained for our punishment.
Alas cries Ruben, had you bin so wise,
As to have given any ear to my advice,
This had not bin, when I with language mild,
Dissuaded you from sinning against the child;
But following then your rash and furious mood,
Behold the event, God has required his blood.
Little thought they that Joseph was so near,
The other party to these presents there.
For he dealt subtly with them* and as one
That makes himself the slye companion
Of thieves, or traitors, or perchance would be
More satisfide in some home jealousy.
He fains long deafness, or it may be, can
Translate his tone, like some outlandish man.
Mean while securely they their mischiefs vent,
And he is made privy to their close intent.
As far deceived here, Joseph's brethren were,
He spoke no word but by Interpreter,
At all unto them, and much did seem
A stranger to their language, as to them.
Now he has half his plot, and well content,
Freely forgives them, whom he sees repent.
And in true token, he begins
With tears to help them to bewail their sins.
He weeps, returns, and then as if he thought
'Twas not enough they see and wayle their fault,
As does the grave Confessor use to do;
He means to put them to some penance too.
For having kept them three days in distress,
Their comp'ny he dismissed, by one made less.
For Symeon before their eyes he sent
Bound back again to close imprisonment.
Yet sure, this punishing of them did prove
The truth of his forgiveness, and his love,
As did his acts of love in kindness meant,
Appear to them a kind of punishment.
For having given command that each man's sack
Be filled, and each man's coin restored back
In their sacks mouths: and likewise that they may
Be furnished with provision for their way.
Forwards they set though with an heavy pace
Clogged with their grief, and lamentable case.
Sure tedious are their steps, who cannot stir
But sorrow is their fellow travellour.
Sore grieved in heart their journey they begun
At their first lighting is confusion.
For Ruben, that for provender unbinds
His sack the money in the mouth often finds.
And as the clown that does through medows pass
Espying some glorious colors in the grass,
Stoops down to reach them, being in hope to take:
A goodly prize, when lo, he clasps a Snake.
As pale as he was Reuben, when he saw
His coin in the sacks mouth he does withdraw
His trembling hand, and in as great a fear
As had he met the God of money there.
See here my coins restored! cries he, some train
It Is for our lives, and we shall all be slain.
As in a field of standing corn we find
One end being shaken by the whisking wind,
Those which receive the gust, declining fall
Upon their neighbors, till clean thorough all
Quivering runs; like to those troubled ears,
They shaken are with one another fears.
Oh most unusual fright, For were not it
Uoucht by Antiquity, and holy Writ,
Who would in these our times of God adored
Believe their fear: to see their gold restored.
Had Achan's heart upon the accursed touch
Of the forbidden gold, faild half so much,
Had his Fore-father's fears upon him fell
T'had saved a family in Israel?
He feared not punishment, but it appears
That they, alas! were punished with their fears,
'Twas all God used as the correction mild,
Of a good father to a loved child.
And it was enough for he but shakes the rod,
And strait they fear, but 'twas the fear of God.
Alas! what is it that God has done they cry
Unto his servants: in this ecstasy,
They hom return to Canaan, and their tell
Unto their father all that them befell,
Saying, the man that is their Lord bespake us
In a rough language, and for spies did take us.
When sorely troubled we, in humble wise
Answered, thy servants true men are, not spies,
We of one aged father were begot,
And were twelve brethren, whereof one is not.
The youngest as the comfort of his days
At home in Canaan with our father stays:
Whereat the Lord unsatisfide replies
Thus shall your truth be proved to me, arise,
Prevent your household famine and be gone
With food sufficient for you, leave but one
Behind, but see that your return bring here
Your younger brother so shall it appear,
You true men are, not spies, then I Will restore
Your now detained brother, not before.
And if to trial of your truth you will stand,
Do this and traffic with us in the Land,
Jacob as yet stands mute, while they go on
Emptying their sacks of their provision.
But when their money with their corn appears
They start, not having yet overcome their fears:
And lo this object, nothing less dismayed,
The sons, then now the sire, they are all afraid.
Then Jacob first the silence break, as one
That in the grief challenged chief portion.
He for his childrens loss, felt greatest smart
Which thus breaks forth, in agony of heart.
How has your malice of my sons bereft me
Joseph is not, nor Simeon is not left me.
Poor Benjamin you practice to betray,
And with him take my souls delight away.
All these things are against me, here he staid
And gave his grief some vent: when Ruben said
It Is a hard strait, we must for famine die,
Or bring our brethren in this jeopardie.
Yet let not Israel fear: let him but give
The Child into my hands, and we shall live
Let me ensure his life, and if he runs
In any hazard, let it to my sons
Be even alike; his safe return again
Redeems their lives, or else let both be slain.
More spoke he, but in vain, Jacob is loath
For his loved Benjamin, to accept them both
A pledge, but with a discontented frown,
He tells them flat, my son shall not go down
Along with you, of Joseph I Am bereft
This, only this, is all my comfort left
And sure 'twill bring (if any harm he have)
My gray hairs down with sorrow to the grave.
THE FREEMAN: OR, The sixth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS the 43.
Famine, that Mothers has to kill
Their sons enforced, with a will
As bad, does Israel constrain
To send his children down again
With Benjamin: whose sight has won
Liberty for Symeon.
Who now a free man with the rest,
At Joseph's house partakes the feast.
It Was a hard choice, 2 Samuel 24.
David for his offense
Had; between famine, War and Pestilence.
Not better much, was this of Jacobs here,
To famish, or to part with what most dear
Was to his soul: than which, no plague could be
Of greater torment, not the misery
War brings along, not death, which as the chief
Of humane terrors; so to dye for grief,
The worst of deaths (as doubtless he had done)
His life ran equal hazard with his son.
Mean while, the brethren urging his consent
That Benjamin might go, are discontent,
Doubly to be refused, it did appear
First, in his Fathers eye, that he more dear
Was held than they; the ancient cause that bred
Their hate to Joseph, he inherited
As next of kin: yet hence their ire did grow
On better grounds, their brother might not go,
Though to save all their lives: in their distress
Their offspring murmured in the wilderness,
Not more against Moses, then (their corn near spent)
They against their Sire, who when he would have sent
Them down again: thus Judah makes reply:
The man protested to us solemnly,
To bring our brother, as we hoped for grace
Or favor, else we must not see his face.
So if you will send him with us, well and good,
We also will go down, and buy you food;
Or else we will not: for he told us plain,
Without your brother, see me not again.
Judges 77. King. 6.
A shrewd Dilemma! Jacob full as loath
As the rash Iephtah was to keep his oath:
Or as Samarias starved Wyves, grieved in heart
To kill their sons for food; was he to part
With his loved Benjamin: often they withdrew
Their trembling hands, relenting ere they slew
Their harmless babes, and often they filled the skies
With bitter exclamations, and loud cries.
So Jacobs love ere he could send his son,
Often changed his wavering resolution.
His tenderness and reason are at strife,
He shall not go in peril of his life,
The one alleges, the other makes reply,
If he go not, he must for famine dye.
He Is now resolved, yet ere he let him go,
He first takes liberty to vent his woe,
And as an angry gamester hastily,
Imputes ill fortune to the standers by:
So Jacobs wroth is for his losses bent
On them for ought he knew were innocent.
Why have you dealt so ill with me, in giving
Him knowledge you had yet a brother living?
Perhaps as desperate men at point to dye,
Think less their danger, when with company,
So you unto your fears could find no other
Ease or excuse, but that you had a brother
Yet to partake your sufferings, if not so,
What reason had you else to let him know?
The man did strictly of us they replide
Ask of our state, and how we were allyde,
If w'had more brethren or a Sire alive?
His jealousy made him inquisitive,
Whilst in the humblest way, our fear affords
Him answer to the tenor of his words:
For how alas! could we for truth have known
He would have bid us bring our brother down?
Then Judah further to his father spoke,
And does in feeling manner undertake
His brothers safety, and more boldly pleads
Their general want of bread, which intercedes
A bad, but powerful Advocate: O shall
Your fonder love of one, destroy us all!
Let the Lad go, that we some food may bring,
To save our little ones from famishing:
And if into your hands I don't resign
Him safe, his danger, and the blame be mine.
Had we not through your scruple lingered here,
We had returned ere this, and quit your fear.
'T has been a common and approved saw
Throughout the world; Necessity has no law,
Yet I Am assured no Rhetorician can
Plead half so well, for could there be in man,
Till this his so necessitated trial,
An obstinater spirit of denial
Than was in Jacob: who now yielding, spoke
To Judah thus; if it must be so, then take
A Present of the best fruits of the land,
And each man's money double in his hand,
For that which was returned, which happily might
Have only bin in you some oversight.
And take your brother also: rise, and go ye,
And God Almighty give his mercy to ye
Before the man, that ye may bring again
Your other Brother, and my Benjamin:
For of my children, if I be bereaved,
I am beeeav'd. Here stopped he, they received
Their charge with gladness: cheerful now they went
Without reply, their Father being content
To send their brother with them, whom they hold
A safeguard better, then the coin twice told
They brought along their honey, nor their spice,
Their mirrhe, nor was their precious Balm the price
Of Simeons ransom: nothing else could be
A witness against the Rulers jealousy,
Save Benjamin alone, against Jacobs love
Judah prevayles, when Ruben cannot move,
Though better minded: as it does appear
By his first proffer of a pledge so dear
As were his two sons lives, which Jacob takes
Of Judah, but at Rubens hands forsakes.
It sure must grieve, him thus to be denide,
That labored most against the fratricide,
And sale, th'imputed cause of all their woe:
But it is no matter; so their brother go,
Whose happier tongue persuades; for him alone
They for their peace and freedom build upon.
Now they are confident, and travel fast
As hungry men for meat, then, midst their have
They make a sudden stop: they see the Inn,
Where when they last returned, they would frighted bin,
In opening of their sacks: they doubtful are
Lest to their golden bait, some dangerous snare
Be fixed; and their coin hidden in the sack
To pick a quarrel with them coming back.
When having proved themselves no spies to be,
They might be charged now with thee very.
Nor seems their Benjamin: but as one more
(To be a bondsman) then they brought before.
For him does Judah's heart misgive, his mind
Is troubled for his pledges left behind,
And for his fathers loss; and still their fear
Grows greater as to Egypt they draw near.
At last considering that no ill they meant,
Nor theft, nor falsehood was in their intent,
As by their brothers coming is made plain
And bringing double money down again.
Clearness of conscience does a while beg in
To comfort them: when lo their ancient sin
Is interposed: me thinks, I cannot see
Cries one, yon Ruler, but my memory
Afflicted is with Joseph: all his words
Are full of terror, and his eyes as swords
Even pierce my soul with fear: at every sight
Of him I tremble: so his looks affright,
As had our brothers wronged ghost possessed
His brow, infusing vengeance in his breast.
The same conceit troubles them all, they could
Almost turn back: but hunger makes them bold,
So that a little ha'ing overcome their fear,
Once more before the Ruler they appear.
1. Sa. 25
As the hot wroth of David at the sight
And soft persuasion of the fair Carmelite,
Melted away, when churlish Nabal's life
Was spared for the sweet carriage of his wife.
So Ioseph's garb is alt'red when he sees
Loved Benjamin, no shape of cruelties
Can then usurp his brows: he bids prepare
For now his brethren all invited are
To feast with him at noon, yet still their fear
Misconsters kindness, sure some plot is there
They yet suspect, and as they thought before
Danger in the coin restored, now dread they more
In this invitement, therefore to prevent
(What they much doubted by this love was meant)
Bondage: they to the Steward drawing near
Relate their story, so in hope to clear,
And purge themselves from guilt of all offense
That might the anger of his Lord incense,
And tendering double money, they deny
All knowledge by what means it came to lie
In their sacks mouths: when he that well did know
His masters mind, put on a fained show
Of wonder and saluting them with peace,
Tells them their Fathers God gave that increase
And treasure in their sacks; then going on
To Ioseph's house, he brings forth Simeon
They all are kindly used, as does appear,
Their feet are washed, their beasts have provender,
Two signs of welcome, yet amidst their Feasts
They wanted some contentment of their beasts.
The silly jades seeing their racks stuffed with meat
Better then Canaan used them to, they eat
Dreadlesse of worse event, when lo a fear
Attends their masters trenchers, drawing near
To Joseph's table, they observe the noats
Of the wise King, their knives are at their throats. Prou. 23 2.

But now they find their entertainment free,
Their brother Simeon too, at liberty,
Their present well accepted, Joseph kind,
Questions their welfare, satisfies his mind
With news of Jacobs health: but when he sees
Young Benjamin strange loving ecstasies
Possess him: now with hands imposed on
Him cries he, God be gracious to my son:
His bowels yearn, natures strong sympathy
Works out his melting heart into his eye.
This was excess of joy, that when he came
From his loathed prison was not sure the same.
We read that then his face but once he clears,
Which now twice washed in water is and tears.
He spoke them fair, whilst they as he foresaid
With lowly reverence, their obeisance made.
Much kindness past, Joseph 'twould seem intends
For his late churlishness to make amends.
His servants he commands to set on bread,
Now are three tables with all plenty spread,
One for the Hebrews, one a board of state,
Where Joseph all alone in's glory sat,
One for the Egyptians, who to eat refuse
As an abomination with the Jews.
The brethren sat in order, to their birth,
And to their youth, the place was filled with mirth,
But Benjamin the best beloved guest,
Had his mess seven times bigger then the rest.
THE PLEDGE: OR, The seventh Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS 44.
Fraid as their offspring when pursude,
By Pharoh and his multitude
When they no means of escape could find
The Sea before, the foe behind
The Israelites are overtane,
Iourneying homewards; theft was lain
Unto their charge: whilst they deny
In thought the guilt of felony,
But when their sacks they have unbound,
With Benjamin the cup was found.
They all return, and Judah moves
In his behalf, his fathers loves
And life built on him, does allege,
Offering himself to be his pledge.
THe Feast is ended: they with joy repleat
(Their hearts well cheered with welcome and good meat
Think themselves fit for travel, all their fears
Forgot, none whispers in his brothers ears.
Dreadlesse of danger now they take their leaves
Lowly submissive, like the bowing sheaves.
And part to lade their beasts: while Iosephs's brain,
Is plotting how to bring them back again.
In every sack the steward must restore
Again their moneys as he did before.
But Benjamin, as was his share in the feast
His sack sev'n times more silver then the rest
Is chardg'd with all: for there they had conveyed
The Rulers silver Goblet, which betrayed
Them to their fears a new, the difference strange
Twixt his exceedings is: and sad the change.
He at the table sitting down a guest
Received a sevenfold portion of the feast,
As of his brethrens terror now, he bare
The love away then, now the sorrows are
In as full measure given to him: but why,
You Will wonder, the pretended felony
To him alone was laid, or why should he
The greatest sharer in their torment be
That was not guilty of their crime? to try
Here Joseph wisely meant their amity,
Theod. q. 105. in Genesis
Or if their love was greater that they bore
To's brother now, then to himself before;
How they that had him thither sold could be
Content with Benjamins captivity.
Whether twere so, or whether for the grief
They put him to, or for their unbelief
He meant this purgatory, the same pains
Of soul that there are faign'd to purge the stains
Of bad men's lives afflicts them, their offense
Gnaws them with the same worm of conscience.
For still as often as they have cause to fear
Poor Joseph is remembered with a tear
And still he gives them cause, a punishment
As great, as just revenge could ere invent,
Is such a fear, the quintescence and chief
Of woe, the very soul and sense of grief.
The plagues of Hell are horror, Greg. ho. 22. in Ezekiel.
and man's fear
Is a perspective through which leen appear,
All dangers greater, death it self it is clear
Brings no more tetrour with it then our fear.
Torment of mercy! thus our maker proves
His childrens patience, vexing whom he loves,
As Joseph did his brethren; who the day
Of their departure broak, now take their way
Toward Canan with their loads: scarce had they past
The City walls: when lo in all post have
Their friend the steward or' takes them with a face
Bewraying choler, bids them slack their pace.
They in obedience answered him, and stood
Whilst he, why have you thus paid ill for good
Eagerly charged them? is it not that (quoth he)
The cup he drinks in, it is a robbery
Most sacrilegious (not to be excused)
It was the same he in divining used.
Ill have ye done: alas! what could they say
What could they think, when he that yesterday
Used them so well? should to their charge impute
Theft now; and make a slander his salute.
Lo here an Emblem of man's life! their fears
Give way to comfort, and anon appears
Mat. 5.4
New cause of trembling: joy succeeds sadness,
And unto them that grieve, is promised gladness.
Possessed with wonder, now their looks descry
1. Kings. 21.
Them like good Naboath, charged with blasphemy.
Why, says my Lord, these words? our God forbid,
We ere should do this thing: the money hid
In our sacks mouth from Canaan we brought back
How should we then, or gold, or silver take
By stealth from thy Lords house? so let it be
With whom soever of us it is found, that he
May die the death, and we do all accord
To yield our selves as prisoners to thy Lord.
The motion's good, right did his purpose speed
That well knew where 'twas laid, and soon agreed,
Only the man with whom it is found shall be
My servant: all the rest of you go free.
All parties are well pleased, when not afraid
But full as confident of what they said,
2. Sa. 12.
As David answering Nathan: or that wretch
That made of council against himself did teach
Hester 6.
His foes preferment: speedily they take
Their sacks down to the ground, and make
A busy search, with the eldest they begin
And end where it was found with Benjamin.
Who blushed, though not for guilt, his face the same
Was as his brothers courted by his dame.
So looked they all as the stones rol'd away
The five Kings hid in the cave of Mackedah,
Beheld the victor: shame of their disgrace
Sits heavy on their brow, and burns their face
They plead not guilty: and as if they meant
To show their hearts how true they were, they rent
Their clothes to their bare breasts: but it is no season
To vent their passions, now, they yield to reason,
How to redeem their brother, each man's sack
Burdens his Ass, and all to town go back.
By this is Judah and his brethren come
To Joseph's house, (for he was yet at home)
Before him to the ground they fall, when he
As one unkindely dealt with: why have ye
Thus used me asks? or what is this y' have done
In recompense of my affection?
Had you a hope you might escape me so,
Or could you be so ign'rant not to know
I could divine? what answer have you left?
Or may so vilde and impudent a theft
Find an excuse? or have you yet the face
To use denial in so plain a case?
Judah replies, (my Lord) what can we say?
What shall we speak? how may we wipe away
This guilt? (and then as men in fear confess
More then they know, so they seeing no redress
In justifying of themselves, they yield
To the apparent proofs) God has reveald
Th'iniquity of thy servants; we are bound
Thy servants, we, and he with whom 'twas found.
Nay, God forbid, says Joseph, only he
With whom the Cup was found, is bound to me;
With you I Have naught to do, you fears may cease,
You to your Father may return in peace.
Mercy is that whereby Gods goodness bends
To humane conference; God by that extends
Man's boldness to solicit him, and so
As Abraham, when God gracious made him know
Counsels divine, and the allotted fate
Genesis 8.
Of cursed Sodom, grows importunate.
In like sort Judah at the soft reply
Of milder Joseph, courage takes thereby:
His case adds boldness too, for's brothers sake,
His Fathers, and his sons lives, all at stake:
My Lord (says he) and freely drawing near,
Craves leave to tell his story in his care.
Prove.
The wise Proverbialist compares the ire
Of moved Kings, to a consuming fire.
No less did Judah take it for, oh thou
That even as Pharoh art! ah let not now
Thine anger burn against thy servants! we
When we last came were asked, have not ye
A Father, or a Brother? when in brief,
We told the truth of all (alas the grief!)
We said we had a Father, whose gray head
Was by a tender stripling comforted:
The son of his old age; and this alone
Did make him youthful; having now but one,
(Endeared him the more) of his loved Mother,
This the sole relict, having lost his brother:
Thou badst thy servants bring him down to thee,
That thou might see him, when (my Lord) said we,
He may not leave his Father, should they part,
It were enough to break the old man's heart.
Still layd'st thou thy commands, to see thy face
No more, unless our brother were in place.
So to our Father we delivered plain
Thy words, and when he bad us go again
To buy a little food, we let him know,
Without our brother, that we could not go.
To which thy servant, the old man's oplyde,
Ye know my wife bare me two sons, one died,
He went out from me, but returned no more;
Some beast I therefore said, in pieces tore
That comfort from me, if you therefore take
His brother too, and any harm overtake
The Lad, 'twill bring (but heaven him shield and save,)
My gray hayres down with sorrow to the grave.
Those twain his ages play-fellowes, as dear
And precious to him as his eye-bals were:
Whereof one gone, if the other lose it is light,
Then is it time to bid the world goodnight.
And well might Jacob love him, whom the pain
And hardest labor of his youth did gain:
Twice seven cold winters, twice seven summers heat,
With patience he endured, ere he could get
Their much loved Mother, and as long again
It was, ere could his prayrs and tears obtain
This offspring more then all their brothers prized
For them his faith, and works were exercised,
Their purchase was not by his toil alone,
They were the fruit of his devotion.
If we return without him, 'twill destroy
Our Fathers life, that is bound up in the boy.
So to the grave, down shall thy servants bring
Their Sire thy servants grey-head sorrowing.
Thy servant surety for the Lad became
Unto my Father, mine shall be the blame
For ever if I bring him not again,
Then let thy servant so much grace obtain,
That I may for the Lad thy bondsman be,
And he with his brethren go, instead of me.
For how shall I go up without the Lad?
To be a witness, and spectator sad
There of my Fathers sufferings for my sake,
Who for the childs return did undertake.
THE DISCOVERY: OR, The eighth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS the 45.
Here like a reconciled Lover,
Joseph weeping, does discover
In tears of kindness to his brother
Himself, unable yet to smother
His passions longer; five he brings
Of them to Court, who by the Kings
Directions, and commandment,
With Chariots are for Jacob sent.
THus long good Joseph with an unmoved ear,
The doleful story of himself did hear
His Fathers love and tears: he that denies
The strength of nature in her sympathies:
Had he seen Joseph here sad burden keep,
To his grieved fathers groans, or heard him weep
For love to Benjamin, his error he
Had sure detested as an heresy.
Joseph a natural son appears in this,
Old Jacobs griefs are parents unto his.
So like his passions, to his Syres, I find,
As had he with his body, got his mind.
He cannot of his Fathers sorrows hear,
But as sad issue, it begets a tear.
ow dull were all his brethren? not to know
Him weeping now, as he was wont to do:
He looked as when they sold him; salt drops shroud
The Majesty of's eyes, as when a clowd
So dimmes the radiant brightness of the Sun,
That weakest sights may boldly gaze upon
His beams: what mists do passions cast before
Our eyes? their envy did not blind them more
From knowing of their brother, that in tears
Begged for his life; then now again their fears
Darken both souls and bodies, both their eyes,
Their understandings, and their memories;
They think not what his dreams foretold, his place
Of promised greatness, nor their humble case.
Men's hearts against dangers often misgive, and some
Are light before against a joy to come:
But no such motions in their hearts do stir,
To make them know this their deliverer.
Blind fathers of as blind a race! whom so
Not all the Prophecies could make to know
Their dear redeemer, whom they used with more
Malice than did their Syres his type before.
To show his love, Gods ever blessed Son
Shed tears of grief, and of compassion:
We never read he smild: so Joseph here
Cannot express his joy, but with a tear.
Both passions find one vent, both flowing ran
From's eyes, as if they melted had the man.
So strove they for precedence, and to overcome
Each other, as the twins in's Grandames womb,
Which first should issue forth, he hears with grief
His Fathers fears and sorrows, and belief
Of his decease; but now o're-joy'd again,
He weeps to see his brother Benjamin.
The eye is the souls index; had you seen
The Brethren plotting a revenge, their spleen
Did in their eyes appear, and you might spy
The innocence of Joseph in his eye,
As here his love: could their hard hearts have so
Melted as Joseph's, to conceive the woe
Of their sad Father, or their bowels yearne,
And nature, spite of spleen, made them discern
Their brother, it had saved their present fears,
Old Jacobs sorrows, and good Joseph's tears;
Which now as Lectures are to them; and all
That disobedient, or unnatural
Unto their Parents, or their brethren be,
Instructing them in love and piety.
The goodness of his nature, is a plain
Doctrinall president, he cannot refrain
Before the standers by, some drops must slide
E're he commands convenience; none abide
Now with him, but his brethren, when in tears
He makes them know their Joseph, and appears,
How ever their demerits might him move
In his own likeness, and a brothers love.
He weeps aloud, till all that present were
In Pharohs house, and all the Egyptians hear.
Kings 19.
God comforting Eliah, first with flame,
Strong tearing winds, and hideous storms, there came,
Ere the still voice was heard; so if I dare
The immediate actions of the Lord compare
With those he works by agents; comfort here
Came to the brethren, as to Eliah there.
For after frowns, high words and cries were past
In milder terms he lets them know at last
It Is I am Joseph, does my Father live?
When lo his brethren could no answer give,
And can you blame them for it? should you see
One long deceased, at least so thought to be,
Appear before you, full as much remain
They troubled at his presence; who again
Calls them, come near I pray you, and being come
Tells them, I am your brother Joseph, whom
You into Egypt sold: yet do not grieve,
Nor be you angry with your selves, believe
By Gods decree you sold me, I was sent
Before you to provide you nourishment,
And to preserve your lives: but two years past
Are of the famine, which as yet must last
Five more, in which by Gods most firm decree,
There neither earing shall, nor harvest be:
Haste therefore to my Father, say thus said
Joseph thy son; God me a Lord has made
Over Egypt, wherefore come thou down to me,
And tarry not, so shall thy dwelling be
In Goshen, where the land is fat and good,
And for convenience in my neighborhood.
There shall thy sons and thy sons sons be placed,
Thy numerous flocks and herds and all thou have.
There will I nourish thee, for yet remayn
Five years of famine; lest for want of grain,
Thou and thy household all the souls that be
Born of thy loins should come to poverty.
My brothers eyes have seen, so likewise see ye
It is my mouth that speaks these words unto ye*
Ye therefore to my Father shall relate
The glory ye have seen, and all my state,
In Egypt; ye shall hasten and be gone
To bring my Father down unto his son.
To exemplify Gods love, the holy writ
The love of woman does compare to it.
Which love is full of fervency, so this
Here Benjamin, and he embrace, and kiss,
And weep, and on each others necks they fall
He weeps again, and now he kissed them all
Between these loves this difference may suffice
That love has melting lips, this melting eyes.
In tears they held their conference, whilst report
Had noys'd the fame thereof through all the Court.
It Is news in Pharoh's house; and lo the thing
Pleased all that heard it, for it pleased the King.
Who thus bespake him: to thy brethren say
Go lade your beasts, get home, and bring away
Your father and your households: I will give
The fat of Egypt to you, cat and live.
I have commanded you, now therefore take*
Wagons throughout the land of Egypt, make
All fit for travel, now forget your home,
Bring father, wives, and little ones, and come.
Hasten away, regard you not your stuff,
The good of Egypt's yours, be that enough.
So Isreal's children went, and Joseph made
Wagons, and all things fit (as Pharoh bad)
For them to travel with, he cloah'd them in
New change of raiment; but to Benjamin
Three hundred pieces he of silver gave
Besides five change of raiment, much more brave
Then were the rest, and to his Father he
In this wise sent: ten Asses laden be
With the good things of Egypt, besides corn,
And bread, and meat, by ten she-asses born
To serve his Father by the way, and so
He set his brethren forth; but ere they go
He gives a peaceful caveat: bids them see
That by the way they do not disagree.
Well might he give the charge, whom once their hate
Left to his death, or to a worser fate:
But that great Providence that rules each star
Who gave to them their influence, whose are
All powers of Heaven and Earth, whose firm decree
Is Natures Law, and humane destiny.
That power him serves, did not power him save,
Poor Joseph might have lived and died a slave.
But now as men that truly did repent,
Of what they would done, they heard his words, and went
Forth out of Egypt, and by this they gather
Near to the land of Canaan, to their Father.
Where as the bringers of good news they strive
Which first shall make it known, Ioseph's alive,
And governs Egypt; then at large they speak
Of all his state; but Jacobs faith is weak.
As men to melancholy given delight
In sadder tales, to feed the appetite,
Of their dull humor; so was his belief
To all things hard, that did gainsay his grief,
Now grown in him a habit: since he deemed
This his dear Joseph lost; for here it seemed
He thought his childrens meaning was to abuse
Him with vain hopes; and faints at the news.
But then declared they to him Joseph's words,
And all he said unto them, this affords
Some better ground for hope; but when he sees
The wagons that were sent, as by degrees
His fainting spirit in him did revive
So his belief encreast, Ioseph's alive!
Ioseph's my son, it is enough; for I
Will yet go down, and see him ere I die.
THE MEETING: OR, The ninth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS 46.
Jacobs sacrifice and prayers,
God by night to him appears
With comfort; fearlesse he along
Iourneys; seven and threescore strong
Of his own loins begot; their meeting,
And passions of their joyful greeting:
Joseph his brethren does advise,
How to the King to make replies.
NOw do the tents of Israel abound
With mirth and gladness, Joseph lost is found.
So the strayed sheep which long the shepherd sought,
Did cheer the finder; so the woman's groat:
So pleased our heavenly Father is to win
A son to mercy, that was lost by sin.
Old Jacob heard not with a greater joy
Rachell had made him father of a boy
Then now this news; when with a gladsome heart,
He with his sons, and substance did depart
Toward the land of Egypt; heretofore,
He longed not to embrace the mother more,
Then now to kiss her son: yet can no have,
No strong desire hurry him on so fast,
But to his fathers God heel make some stay
He offered sacrifice, when in his way
He took Beersheba; where the Lord appeared
In visions of the night, and Jacob heard
His Name twice called upon; he makes reply
Unto the holy voice, lo here am I,
So holy Abraham answered; Gen, 32.11. Ioh. 10.4. Genesis 3.19. Ion. 1.3.
so should all
Gods servants be as ready at his call.
Christ's sheep do his voice, and him pursue
And it is undoubtedly a sign most true
Of guilt, or disobedience, when we
With Adam hide us, or with Jonas flee
When he calls on us, first at the last day
The just shall rise; and answer here are they. These, 4.

They that expect good tidings, give good ear,
And ready are, as Jacob was to hear
What God spoke further to him; I am he
Thy father served, and I will make of thee
A mighty Nation: therefore do not fear,
Go down to Egypt, I will bless thee there:
With thee will I go down, with thee remayn
And I will also bring thee up again.
I Will bless thee whilst thou liv'st, and when thou dies
Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
Here Jacob rose with comfort, when his sons
Had placed him with their wives and little ones
In Pharoh's chariots, then with all their store,
Their goods and cattle they from Canaan bore,
They left Beersheba, Jacob and his seed,
His sons, and his sons sons, and all their breed
A goodly progeny to Egypt came
Where God made good the blessing of his Genesis 17.12.
name,
He brought down with him as the text enrowls
Of his own loins begotten threescore souls
And six, which were in Egypt made up ten,
By Joseph and his wife and children.
Had Sarah lived to see this fair foundation,
Her self the root of this so forward Nation,
Israel.
She that misdoubting smiled, would at this sight
So far above her faith, have laughed outright.
Israel is well increased that went but one,
To Padan Aram, with his staff alone,
Returns inricht with wives, and concubines,
Twelve hopeful sons begotten of his loins
Children, and flocks, and herds, all that his eye
Could wish to see, a goodly progeny,
But they by this are to so many grown
As nature could by propagation
Bring forth, twelve families are made of one.
Lo here, and see with wonder the increase,
Of them, whom God has once begun to bless,
Full well deserves it, Moses for a Scribe,
They go by families, but return by Tribes.
Yet still observe how God his word does keep
And what he promised Joseph in his sleep,
Pays to him waking; all the sheafs must bend
The Sun, the Moon, and the 'lev'n stars descend
To do him honor: they by this draw near
To Egypt, Judah is their harbinger.
He to prepare a place does foremost go,
And comes to Ioseph's house whom he lets know,
Their fathers near approach, who at the news
Sets forth to meet him: mark their interviews,
They study no set speech, their love prevents
Common salutes, and formal complements:
But like two foes, who long at deadly fewd
With zeal of hate each others lives pursude,
Now well appointed meet, their eager spite
Admits no parley to delay their fight.
Their bloody thoughts are painted in their face
And shown with terror in a rough embrace.
The passions differ, would I could as well
Find love enough to make a parallel:
But seldom does that better passion move
Two friends, to such an ecstasy of love
As these: so shall the joyful bodies come
To meet their blessed souls in Elysium,
Save that such perfect happiness could never
Admit the badge of sorrow; we in tears
Express the height of gladness, as if 'twere
To intimate, no Joy is perfect here.
As in the bodies temper it has bin
Truly observed which are then most hot within
When outwardly we freeze; even so we find
As much deceit in symptoms of the mind,
Great sorrows seldom weep, and yet appears
In the excess of humane gladness, tears.
Jacob that ever since his son was lost
Had used his eyes to nothing else, accosts
Him with a wonted shower, which from his eyes
Dropped on his neck; he that did sympathize
In all his father's passions cannot refrain
But pays him with as many tears again
They breath their souls in sigh's, their kisses dry
Their moystned cheeks; then in an ecstasy
Jacob cries out (pressed with his sons embrace)
Now let me die, since I have seen thy face
And thou art yet alive: So holy Paul
In heavenly contemplation, filled with all
Those joys his faith presented him, desires
Philip 1.23.
To be dissolved; his soul to Heaven aspires
Or would before its time; but that kept in
It cannot for the fleshly walls of sin,
From whence he prays for freedom; Jacobs thought
Romans 7.24. Genesis 28.12.
From earth to heaven sure like his ladder wrought.
As twere made mindful by this happiness
Of what unspeakable delights do bless
Good souls departed, he with Paul does cry
Transported with his joy, now let me die.
It Was a good wish, he, when what most on earth
Might glad his soul (and make him wish new birth,
To live another age) befell, does crave.
A peaceable departure to his grave.
Whence learn, no blessing may on earth be given
But a good man has better hopes in heaven.
Joseph whose passions could not else be overcome
Turns from his Father to his brethen, whom
He thus bespake; I will to Pharoh go
To whom my fathers coming I will show,
And yours* I Will tell him that ye shepherds are,
Men that have been trained up to have the care
Of Flocks and Herds, which ye along have brought
To save from famine, if he ask you ought
When ye before him come, be my words made
The same: thus shall ye say, thy servants trade
Has been 'bout cattle, from our youth till now:
Ours, and our Fathers; so shall he endow
You with the Land of Goshen, a good place
Free to your selves, and to your flocks to graze
Without disturbance; yours shall be alone
The land: for an abomination
Your trade is to the Egyptians, so shall ye
Have to your selves the fruitful Goshen free.
THE PVRCHACE: OR, The tenth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS 47.
By his Favorites endearement,
Pharoh welcome, and preferment
Gave to Jacob and his sons:
To them, their wives, and little ones,
He does the land of Goshen give,
There with their Flocks and Herds to live.
They only of the famine stand
Fearlesse, whilst the Egyptians land,
Cattle, and every precious thing,
Joseph purchased for the King:
Except o'th Priests, whom he allowd
A daily competence of food.
IMagine Joseph has by this time told
His Fathers coming, to the King: behold
My Brethren with their flocks, and the old man
Our Father, are come down from Canaan,
Driven thence by famine, late they did arrive
In fruitful Goshen, here of them are five.
Then to the King he brought his brethren on,
Who questions them their occupation:
As Joseph taught them, they their answer made,
We Shepherds are, 'thath bin our Fathers trade
Time out of mind, encouraged by the soil,
Which like to Eden Garden, without toil,
Yielded content and plenty, but distressed
With famine now, seems cursed, as the rest
Of the whole earth, for our first Parents sin.
It Is thou alone art happy, that within
Thy realms, men only of Gods mercies sing
Psalms, and not Lamentations: Let O King!
His goodness teach thee pity us, whilst we
Thy servants and thy subjects crave to be.
We are come down to sojourne in thy land,
Humbly desiring thou will give command,
We may in Goshen live. The King replies,
Joseph, thy Father is come down, thine eyes
Behold the land, see where thou find'st the best,
There let thy Father and thy brethren rest:
Let them in Goshen dwell: and if there be
Amongst them, any whose activity
Surmounts their fellows, skillful in their trade,
Let them be rulers over my cattle made.
At first sight, good encouragement they heard,
Not only being admitted, but preferred
For Joseph's sake, who now his Father brought,
And set him before Pharoh: so we ought
When God does bless us thankful hearts to bring
And bless again, as Jacob blessed the King,
Who took good notice of him, it appears
By his demands, he questions him his years.
To whom thus Jacob, in whose sober eye
Did reverence appear, and gravity.
The days and years of this my pilgrimage,
A hundred are and thirty, a short age
Compared to that my Fathers lived in,
But few and evil, all my days have bin.
He first was sensible how life began
Genesis 6.3
To shorten, since God left to strive with man:
For he the first of all to me appears,
Complaining for the fewness of his years.
How should we scan our lives, if Jacob do
Confess his days but short and evil too?
Whom God chose in the womb, who by his mother
The blessing gate, and birthright from his brother,
Whom God so often conferred with, who did stand
On his lamed leg, and with a clasped hand,
Graspt't God himself, and wrestling overcame,
Winning the prize, a blessing, and a Israel.
name;
If he found ill in his days, how shall we
Lift up eyes, most gracious God to thee?
Yet thou like Pharoh us that strangers are,
Nay worse, thine enemies; do not only spare
Succor, and cherish, but promot'st us high
To crown and Kingdoms of eternity.
Grant then, O God, that for thy mercy, we
May ever more continue praising thee:
As holy Jacob with a loyal heart,
Did blessing Pharoh till he did depart
Out of his presence, and with Joseph went
Who'cording to the Kings commandment
Gave him and his the best part to possess
Of Egypt, even the Land of Ramases.
Where them he plentifully stored and fed
According to their families with bread
Which every where was scarce; in Egypt, and
Canaan that milk and honey flowing land,
The famine rages sore, still Pharoh blessed
In Iosesph is: the treasury increast
And where but titulary Kings the throne
Held heretofore, Egypt is Pharohs own.
For yet the famine lasting and the soil
Ungrateful to the painful husbands toil,
Whilst slymy Nilus could not make it bear
Their purses empty as their bellies were:
Coin was as scarce as corn, when wanting gold
For food, their horses, and their herds they sold,
Which in one consumed to Pharoh's hands
Being masters now of nothing else, their lands
And their poor selves they do as bondmen yield,
And every man for corn does sell his field
Till Egypt all was Pharohs: they forsake
Their Country-houses, and themselves betake
To dwell in Cities, save the Priests alone,
To whom the Kings assigned a portion
They therefore sold no lands: then Joseph gave
Others their ground and seed, but the fifth thrave
To Pharoh's use reserved and this did bring
Thanks from the subject, profit to the King.
Thus the Almighty does his servants bless
Giving to all their works a good success.
Ioseph's the King's right hand, the people they
As much in admiration of him, say,
It Is thou have saved our lives, now let us find
Grace in thy sight my Lord, so shall thou bind,
Us Pharohs servants, then a Law was made
By Joseph to this day, and Pharoh had
The fifth of all their corn except alone
The Priests that sold no lands, did pay him none.
And happy Israel who in Goshen dwelt
Pleased with their new possessions, never felt
The force of famine, nor the plague of want
Was known among them, nothing there was scant,
Bread for the man, and fodder for the beast,
Joseph provided them; and they increast
For they whom God does bless, shall multiply
In spite of famine, or the tyranny
Of The worst oppressors: all the harsh commands
Of the other Pharoh, nor the heavy hands
Of their taskmasters, nor their loads laid on
Could let at all their propagation;
The hard pressed Grape yields most, and so the fire
The greater load of woods it bears the higher
The flames ascend, as they oreburdned grow
Whilst Pharoh's hate does but his weakness show.
Such care had God, then, of his Israel,
Mat. 16 18. Philip. 1 21.
As of his Church, against which the gates of Hell
Shall not prevayle: as death is made a gain
To them that die in Christ, whose thought is pain,
To worldlings minds, so here this plague befell
Loss to the world, but gain to Israel.
Who in their given possessions joy'd, and there
Old Jacob with his sons lived sev'nteen year.
So all the days that he on earth had liven
By computation, sevenscore were and seven.
But when the time drew near that he must die
Joseph he called and underneath his thigh,
( So Abraham gave the oath) his hand did place
And said if in thy sight I have found grace, Ge. 24.2.

Bury me not in Egypt, let me sleep
Amongst my Fathers bones, that who so keep
My name or theirs in memory may be
Pertakers of the self-same obsequy.
To this though Joseph plighted had his troth,
Yet Jacob bound him further by an oath.
Those happy counted are in their decease,
Who to their fathers gathered were in peace.
Israel made this appear, who did interre
None but good Kings in David's sepulcher
So taught by Jacob, who in this being
Worshipped, his God, and turned him on his bed.
THE BLESSING: OR, The eleventh Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS the 48.
The thread of Jacob's life near spun,
He blesses Joseph, and his sons.
Jacob was the second born
Joseph his brethrens hate, and scorn,
Youngest of ten: yet was he blessed,
And more beloved then the rest.
So Ephraim here the youngest lad,
The blessings of the right hand had.
A Greater love those blessings more endears
To us, which we have purchased with tears.
Hence comes it, women love those children most
For whom they felt great'st pain: Jacob it cost
Many a zealous groan, ere he could gain
The fruit of Rachels womb, and long again
He wayl'd that loss with tears, as from the hour
Her son was borne, his love it self did shower
More upon his, than on his brethrens head,
So for his loss he many tears ha'ing shed
For him now found, he in an ecstasy,
As cloyed with earthly joy, desires to dye.
The strength of gladness! were the world mine own,
And I not wish it, sure the bliss were none.
But when the powers of the mind are bent
Upon one hope as 'twere the whole content
Of man's desire; and God shall think it fit
To grant; no joy but heaven is like to it.
His wish on earth was, oh had Joseph liven!
And that wish granted, now he wishes heaven,
For which he does prepare; his mastred flesh
Yields to his conquering soul, which now afresh
Assaults the breach, weakness and age had made
In his frail body, those old walls decaid,
His spirit's half got forth, and does foresee
By faith's clear eye, heavens true felicity;
Where all the fullness does of knowledge dwell,
With which the Patriarch inspired, does tell
His childrens following fates, and ere he dies,
Of all that must betide them, prophecies.
But in the mean time, conceive the news is quick,
And one brought Joseph word, his Fathers sick:
He therefore hastening, brings along with him
His Sons, Manasses, and young Ephraim.
Of whom, when Jacob heard, he raised his head,
Strengthening himself, and sat upon his bed:
Where thus to Joseph, he his speech began;
God did to me appear in Canaan.
At Luz, and blessed me, promising increase
To me, and to my seed, whose fruitfulness
Shall fill the land, which for an habitation,
They shall enjoy, and grow a mighty nation.
As for thy sons which were in Egypt thine,
Before I came, those I do claim for mine.
As Ruben are, and Symeon, they shall be
Mine own; thine after issue, all from thee
Shall take their names; and with their brethren share,
Where they in their possessions settled are.
When I from Padan came, my Rachel did
With me in Canaan by the high way side:
'Twas short of Ephrath, there I in the way
Of Ephrath Bethelem, her bones did lay.
But who are these said Israel? for his eyes
Were weak and dim with age; Joseph replies,
These are my sons, with whom God blessed me here;
Then Jacob bade, and Joseph brought them near
For him to bless them, who first with a kiss,
Then clasping of their bodies close to his,
Began the blessing: In that posture Paul
Acts 20.9.
Raised Eutychus to life, who by his fall,
Was doomed to sleep for ever else: if there
2 King. 13.20.
In the dead Prophets bones such virtue were,
To raise men from their graves, what virtue is
Then in a living Patriarks holy kiss?
Or if the Apostles gave the spirit of grace,
Where they imposed their hands, sure this embrace
Of a good man, some blessing brings along:
It Is a more full expression then the tongue.
Number. 22
Differing as deeds from words. Balaam must bless
Against his will: desiring nothing less.
But Jacobs blessing, for its truth affords
Apparent proofs, his deeds precede his words,
Which with Gods mercies he began. I thought
Nere to have seen thy face, but God has brought
Things to my most content, and has decreed
I should not only see thee, but thy seed.
Then Ephraim he preferred his right hand stayed
Upon his head, the left athwart was laid
On to others, let none take offense to hear
That Jacob blessed his sons, and crossed them there.
Nor was it a thing of chance, but read and see,
He laid his hands acrosse them, Verse. 14
wittingly.
Though Joseph on his knees, presents them quite
Contrary, and Manasses to the right
Hand offered first. So God amongst Iesses sons, 1 Samuel 16.

Chose not for face or fair proportions,
But what he saw within: he understands
All hearts, and sure he guided Jacobs hands.
Who thus proceeds in blessing them, and said,
The God from whom your Fathers never straid,
Abram, nor Isack, God that me has fed
All my life long till now, with daily bread,
And the good Angel which such care has had,
Me to redeem from evils, bless the lads;
Be they by mine and Abrams sacred name,
And Isacks called the blessing of the same. Revel. 7.

As in John's vision, those that stamped were,
And in their fronts the holy seal did bear,
Were saved from ruin, so God those did bless,
That bore the Name of promise with increase.
Jacob pronounced the blessing well: said he,
May they increase on earth, and multiply:
So God first blessed the world, when time began,
Using those words to new created man.
But Joseph not well pleased that Jacob laid
His right hand on the head of Ephraim, said,
Not so my Father, this the eldest is:
O be the choysest of thy blessings his!
Then to remove his resolute hand, he tryes,
But the attempt is vain. Jacob denies:
(His mother could not cozen him, nor get
The blessing, with another counterfeit,)
I know it well my Son, he also shall
A people be, said he, and great withal;
Yet shall his younger brother him exceed
In greatness; many nations from his seed
Shall be derived: so blessed he them that day,
And said, in thee shall Israel bless, and say
In a Proverbiall wish; all good overtake him,
God like to Ephraim and Manasses, make him
Happy and fruitful; but in all that passes,
Still Ephraim he prefers before Manasses.
The blessing given; the time which then drew nigh,
He antedating tells them, lo I dye:
Yet fear not, for with you shall God remain,
And bring you to your Fathers land again.
Yet one thing on thee more I will bestow
Above thy brethren, which with sword and bow
I wan, that I might add it to thy right,
From the possessions of the Amorite.
THE PROPHET: OR, The twelfth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS 49.
Jacob foresees, and antedates
His sons return, and following fates.
Then having charged them to interre
Him in his Fathers Sepulcher:
Shilo's coming prophecies,
Binds Joseph with an oath, and dies.
NOw Jacob hastening to his own, relates,
Calling his children to him, all their fates
Which his prophetique soul had then descryde,
Should unto them in their last days betide.
Israel, and gather
Your selves (said he) together to your Father.
Ruben, my first borne Son unto my sight
Reuben.
Gives the beginning of my strength and might.
The power of dignity and excellence,
In him should dwell, but that his foul offense

Excel, but as th'unconstant wave shall be,
For to his Fathers bed (an act most vilde,)
Did he go up, and he my Couch defild;
Symeon and Levi, brethren in offense,
Symeon and Levi.
Have in their dwellings, swords of violence.
Let not my soul into their secrets see,

To their assemblies, from whose angry breath,
Issues revenge, with ruin armed, and death.

Bloody, revengefull, and accursed both
Therefore in Jacob they divided dwell,
And I will scatter them in Israel.
Judah.
But Judah thee thy brethren shall commend,

Thou shall prevail, and still a victor be,
And all thy Fathers sons shall bow to thee.
Judah's a Lions whelpe, so from the prey,
My Son ascends, so down again does lay
His conquering limbs, so does the old Lion couch him
To take his rest, whiles none dares rouse or touch him.

Between his feet, until that Shiloe come:
To whom a gathering shall of people be,

And his Ass Colt be bound unto the Vine,
Whose clothes in blood of grapes are washed, in wine

Take tincture, and his teeth with milk grow white.
But Zebulun at the Sea heaven shall rest, Zebulun


And finds a haven his ships may safely ride on,
For lo his border shall be unto Zidon.
Like a strong Ass is Issachar, Issachar.
between


His tributary shoulders bowed to bear.
Dan midst his people, he a Judge shall dwell, Dan.

Israel.
Dan shall be like a Serpent in the way,

Wait to do mischief; slily, as they sting
The horses heels, till they their riders fling.

The happy means of thy salvation.
Gad by a troop shall be overcome, but he
Shall over them at last a victor be. Gad.

Ashur his bread shall be o'th fat o'th field,
And Ashurs cup shall royal dainties yield, Ashur.

Nepthali, Nepthali.

He also shall a goodly speaker be.
Ioseph's a fruitful bough, whose branches grow
By a Well side, topping the walls: Joseph.
'twas so
David did the blessed man compare
To trees that by the waters planted are. Psalm. 1 3.

So envy shoots at virtue, some did hate him;
The Archers sorely grieved him, and shot at him.

Of his hands were made strong, against all harms,
By Jacobs mighty God; all power is his,
Israel is
Even by thy Fathers God, whose help's on thee,
And by the Almighties blessing, which shall be
Still on thy head, blessings from heaven on high,
And blessings from the deeps which lower lie.
On thee shall blessings from all places come,

The blessings of the Father has prevaild.
'Bove those of my progenitors, and availed,
More than their blessings, to the utmost bound
O'th everlasting hills, they shall abound
On Joseph's head, and on his crown, that hated
Of's brethren was, and from them separated.
Benjamin.
Like to a ravening Wolf, shall Benjamin
In The morning to devour the prey, begin;

He shall take time then to divide the spoil.
Isreal's tribes, whom thus he blessed,
According to their blessings, from the least

To give him with his Fathers burial.
When I shall gathered to my people be,
Ephrons field the Hittites bury me,
In The Cave that is at Macpelah, that lies
'Against Mamre, t'ath by Abram with a price,
With Ephrons field the Hittites purchased bin,
As a possession for to bury in.
Sarahs were laid there,
There Isack and Rebeckah buried were.
There I my Leah laid, and there would I
In the same cave with those loved ashes lie.
That as one flesh and blood we living were,
In like alliance in the Sepulcher
We might consume united thus in death
The field and cave was bought o'th sons of Heth.
This having said, thus ending his commands
Unto his sons, then he withdrew his hands
And feet, yiedling his ghost up into bed,
And was unto his Fathers gathered.
THE FUNERAL: OR, The thirteenth Chapter of Joseph. GENESIS 50.
Joseph and his brethren all,
Attend their Fathers funeral.
They humble supplyants show their fears,
To him who comforts them and chears
Their heavy spirits: all their rage,
Forgot, in peace, and full of age,
In Egypt he lamented dies
And there embalmed and coffind lies.
Jacob, his Fathers imitates in death
And in a blessing spent his latest breath;
Sure good commission for 't from God was given,
For he no sooner ended but to Heaven
His soul was carried; as if that the last
Were of his business here on earth, which past
He leaves it: having then no more to do,
And on his journey forwards sets, when lo
As the Ephesians loath to part with Paul, Acts 20.28.

To the ship sides with grief they brought him all;
So Jacob's sons their spirits overcome,
With sorrow; left a while their earthly home
And as men struck with the same fate; they lay
As dead as he; they sure brought on his way
Their fathers soul toward heaven, for long 'twas e're
Joseph recovered strength to shed a tear,
Lumpish as lead: in the fire which melted powers
And flows about, he lay, but now he showers
His dead trance broken, on his Fathers face
A flood of tears, then with a sad embrace
He escaps his grief, such streams of sorrows fall
As if his moisture were dissolved all
Into his eyes: then with a pious kiss
Strives to supply the breathless trunk with his
Which he in sighing vents: but seeing his breath
Vain as his wishes to recall from death;
To the Physicians he converts it, whom
(To fit the body for a foreign tomb)
He gives command that they embalm it well
So they performed their charge, on Israel
Then after forty days were fully past,
So long the days of men embalmed last.
The lamentation for him sure was sore
The Egyptians they bewail him seventy more.
But when the times of mourning ended were
And Ceremonial rites, he drawing nere
To Pharohs house, requests if I have found
Grace in your sight's, thus tell him, Ioseph's bound,
To 's father by an oath, he may be laid
In The sepulcher, he for himself had made
In Canaan. Let me therefore go I pray
According to my vow, that I may lay
My father in his grave: I shall remayn,
But few days absent, e're I come again.
Pharoh that never any suit deny'de,
His Favorite Joseph moved for, thus replyde:
Go up in peace thou have free leave, and there
Bury thy father, as he made thee swear.
So Joseph with the servants of the King,
Went with his fathers coarse; with tears they bring
Him to his grave, the Elders of the Land,
And of the Court, his house, his brethren, and
His fathers house; behind they left alone
Their sheep, their cattle, and their little ones.
As from some Town, fire, or the hand of fate,
Has clean demolish't and made desolate,
The grieved Citizens march to forsake,
Her ruined walls, such lamentations make
The sad Egyptians, and their tears let fall
As had old Jacob father been to all.
Fierce is the battle when the dreadful sound
Of groans and shreeks of men departing, drowned
The Drum and Trumpet, such the woeful voice
Of the sad mourners, overcame the noise
Of all the Chariot wheels, the trampling steeds,
Though they were many, such sound proceeds,
From their high spoken griefs, men scarce could hear,
Tears filled their eyes, their cries filled every ear.
Their cries were strong and loud enought to have given
A summons back from any place, but heaven,
Or the deep pit of Hell, where shreeks and howles,
Are louder of the there tormented souls.
In Goren Arad, deafness strikes their ears
Wonder their eyes, to see salt showers of tears
Add streams to Jordan, which seven days oreflow'd
With Ioseph's mourning, whilst he there abode.
The Cananites and dwellers round about
Take pitious notice of it, such a shout
Of sorrow, nere was heard there, therefore they
Thence named it Abel Misraim, to this day.
So the performance answer d his command,
His sons have carried him into the land
Of Canaan, and there laid him in the Vault
Of Machpelah, which with the field was bought
By Abraham, of the Hittite, Ephron all
Intended for a place of burial.
And now a new, having hallowed the Cave
Adding the sacred body to the grave,
Of his forefathers, they toward Egypt hye,
Joseph, his brethren, and his company.
One mischief seldom comes alone; the loss
Of Jacob to his sons, has yet a cross
Adds terour to their grief should Joseph be
Mindful of their old grudge, and misery
He had sustained, and now the mourning days
For their dead Father ended, he might raise
His spirit to revenge, but that fears done
They find him Isreal's not rough Esau's son.
For when they jointly had advised and sent,
To Joseph an attoning complement,
In Jacobs honored name, this do we say
By his command'ment now forgive I pray,
The trespass of thy brethren, and their sin
Whereby thou have so ill rewarded bin.
The servants of thy Fathers God we are
Forgive our trespass then we pray thee, spare
Further entreaties answered he, in tears
Seeking to drown or wash away their fears.
When altogether they thus speaking kneeled
We are thy servants, use us thou will,
To whom thus Joseph, fear not (makes reply)
Not so we are all Gods servants, am not I
Under him too, and when ye sought my blood
Did not he then convert it all to good?
That he as it is this day might it contrive,
And I much people might preserve alive,
Fear nothing then, these words his tears assures
I will a comfort be to you, and yours,
And so prevailed these speeche's that they gate
His love now firmer then their former hate,
How blessed a sight when brethren thus agree?
A happy change ends Joseph's Comedy.
This makes a peaceful exit, true content
Crowns their remaining days, in Egypt spent.
No more tormented now with griefs or fears,
Till Joseph having lived an hundred years
And ten, perceiving that the time drew nigh,
Calling his brethren, told them he must die,
His sons were present, Ephraims seed he sees
Unto the third descent, and on the knees
Manasses grandchild holds, a joy to bless
A Patriarch party to Gods promises.
He kept Gods secrets living, now he dies
Which leave make some known he prophecies.
God will his brethren visit, and recall
Them from this place, to that land wherewithal,
To Abraham and to Isack heretofore,
And Jacob he to bless their offspring swore.
This said, he ministered his Fathers oath
Unto his children, and gave charge to both,
He might be buried by his Fathers side,
An hundred then and ten years old he died.
So much bewailed, that my unskilful pen,
Might by their griefs inspired, force tears from men
Of this last age, whose flinty hearts deny,
Should all the world, themselves excepted dye,
To weep: unless for want of company.
Should they but witness here, what showrs were spent,
Rivers of melted sorrows to lament
This Hearse; as when black clouds threat drops of rain,
Strong sympathy from stony walls does draigne
Distilling moisture, all those weeping eyes
Would force from their hard hearts like pity rise,
Should they but hear their waylings as they went
To Canaan with his bones; but what was meant
Here for a Comicke story, lest that I
By this relation, make a tragedy.
Embalmed in Egypt, I shall let him rest,
Fitted with costly odor, for his Chest.
FINIS.

