LONDON Printed by R: Y for Phillip Neuill. And are to be sold at his Shopp
in Juye Lane at the Sign, of the Gun: 1640:


HOLY DISCOVERY AND FLAMES.





By JOHN SALTMARSHE, Mr. of Arts of Magdalen College in Cambridge, and Rector
of West-Ileslerton in Yorkshire.

Open thou my Eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of the Law,

Psalm. 119. 18. My Heart is enditing a good matter,

Psalm. 55. 1. LONDON, Printed by R. Y. for P. Neuill in Ivie-lane. 1640.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Most excellent Sir,
DRawing my breath every day more happily by the favor I received from Your
Royal Father, if my Pen should forget You, it had more Ink then either
allegiance, or loyalty, or duty: The Eyes that I here present Your. Highness,
I confess durst not look his Majesty in the Face; He has so much of Caesar
about Him as strikes me into a non possum far fulmen: but Your Self, being
yet a divine spark and ray from Him, and not ascended Your Meridian of
Soveraigntie, is not become so awful, nor so inaccessible. We may see that Sun
in his Rising, whose Beams may at his Noone chide our weak eyes for the
attempt: This Sir I speak of You, who is but now in Your East, having Your
Noone-point before You, and may You drive on happily to Your glory both in Your
Heaven and Kingdom below, and the Kingdom of Heaven above.

And be pleased, Gracious Sir, to let these Eyes here light but a beam of
Yours to the holy Scripture, and to air but Your Bosom at these Flames, and
to suffer these Leafes, thus seeded with divine thoughts, to be a robe of holy
Ermins to Your Soul: I lay my self and papers at Your Royal feet, and am

A Beadesman for Your Highness J. Saltmarshe.

The Eye and Heart.


He that is spiritual discerns --.

My Heart was hot within me --. THese are the two only parts we have, both
for Soul and Body; our faculty of discerning and affecting, of knowing and
loving. And if these two be sanctified, we are complete; for it is not enough
to be holy in our Eye only, to be enlightened in that Organ; the single theorie
and speculation of goodness lights us but to a brighter damnation, and serves
only to gild a little our dark condition: Dives in his Hell had a Heaven, and
the joy of it in his Eye; yet he had not a ray more either of holiness or
bliss. He that is only a seeing Christian, has his salvation merely in
perspective; and such is but Ethiopian holiness, that has a bright Eye in a
dark body: the Heart then is the part must be affected as well as that; and
this must not be barely enlightened, but enflamed: many Hearts may have sudden
illuminations and coruscations of grace, and yet be no more truly holy then
they were: the Sun may shoot in at a Casement into a room, when a cloud or
curtain may put out all the light that is there; but if he meet with such a
place that his beams and light may combine and conspire, you shall soon feel
a strong warmth, and an able influence: It is thus with grace in the Hearts of
the Saints, the light of it is not saving till it create a heat and holy
inflammation in the affections, as well as a radiation; till it scorch as well
as enlighten, Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us, and
while he opened to us the Scriptures? Therefore I present you an Eye and a
Heart; the one for knowledge, the other for affection; the one in meditation,
the o there in inflammation; the one seeing and discerning, the other kindling
at the sight: for, though I understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and
have not charity, I am nothing, 1. Cor. 3. 2. that is, though I were all Eye,
and had not an Heart enflamed, I were not any thing; yet my Heart cannot want
this Eye, for then I should have a zeal, that is, a flame, as the Apostle
says, but not according to knowledge: Therefore, O my God, let me never rest
but with Eyes thus open, and never die but by these flames:

Igne perire tuo clademque authore levari.

THE SCOURGE
John 2. 15. And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all
out of the Temple.
Discovery.
I Discover, that in the Church or Temple, a scourge may be made, and made use
on; for, when he had made a scourge, he drove them all out: he made it, and
made use on it; Neither made he it to cast by, but he put it into the hands of
his Disciples; and when he gave them the Keys he gave them the Scourge too,
tied at the same string where the Keys hung; that is, he gave them a punitive
power, a power of scourging in the Church, and scourging out of the Church; for
he drove them, and drove them out: an excommunicative power, Shall I come to
you with a rod? says Saint Paul; the Apostle had a lash, which he took from
Christ's Scourge: Yet I observe, though Christ have a scourge, it is but of
small cords, not too coursely spun, nor too much twisted; but of small cords,
that the offenders in the Temple may not be beat like servants, but whipped
like sons: of small cords; where the punishments are easy and calm, the
scourge is of our Saviors twisting, of small cords; and with this they may be
driven, and driven out, he drove them all out. If one lash or rebuke will not
serve, they may be scourged out of the Temple. There are degrees for this holy
punitive engine; If he will not hear thee, tell it to the Church; and if he
hear not the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen man and a Publican.
This is the power of the scourge to whip, and to whip out of the Temple.

The Winds and the Sea.
Math. 8. 26. Why are ye fearful oh ye of little faith? Then he arose and
rebuked the Winds and the Sea.
Discovery.
I Discover the temper and moderation of Jesus; Then he arose and rebuked the
wind. Even now the Wind blew from himself; Why are ye fearful, oh ye of
little faith? and this storm of his passion dashed worse on his Disciples,
then that of the Sea: but how soon he takes leave of it, and cleares into a
calm! how soon are the waves of his soul, his affections, smoothed! and now
a gentle gale of favor blows upon them: He arose and rebuked the winds and
the Sea; yet he speaks not to the storm and passion of the Sea, till his
own were over: We cannot justly rebuke that passion in another, which we bring
in our selves. Christ, from his own serenity to his Disciples, instructs the
Wind and the Sea to a calmnesse; and the very Elements observe his moderation
and temper; they storm and are quiet at a word: It is the honor of a tempest
to set in a calm, and of a Christian storm and passion to clear into a
calmnesse: He rebuked the wind and the sea, he would not suffer the passengers
to be wreck and naufrage, nor the Sea to use any immersive or destructive
violence: if our passions be raised a little, and blown into a storm, we
should rebuke them ere they advance to the mischief and destruction of any;
be angry, but sin not.

The house upon the Rock.
Math. 7. 25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon this house; but it fell not, because it was founded upon a
Rock.
The Flame.
LOrd, how firm is the building which has thee for a foundation! How sure!
there is no shaking it, no undermining it, no ruining; for they that are rooted
and built up in thee, are established in faith, Coloss. 2. 7. What a fixation
is here! what an establishment! who was ever knit unto this foundation and
fell? Judas fell, Hymenaeus fell, Simon Magus fell, Julian the Apostate, and
many others went back, and walked no more with him, John 6. These were goodly
buildings and famous structures, and had many Tarrases and Balconies of
devotion, which raised them high and eminent in the Eyes of all: they had a
form of godliness, 2. Tim. 3. 5. These Houses were glorious for form, for
appearance, but alas, how are they fallen! how scattered! they had no rock for
foundation; and how soon the Wind, the blasts of tentations, how soon the
floods, those waters of tribulation had washed them, and blown and ruined them!
David and the rest of Gods Saints had their Houses surely built; The waters,
says he, are come into my soul, and yet his House stood; They went out from
us, but they were not of us; 1. John 2. 19. Here is the house fallen; because
they were not sure and fast in their foundation, therefore they failed and
fell; that is, they went out. Lord, they that are not built upon thee, how
unstable is their edifice! There is no safety, no security, no trust to any
room in their spiritual house; their imaginations and high thoughts, which
are the galleries and lofty stories of their building, are ever trembling with
the height, and ready to fall: how soon does the power of thy word prevail,
to the casting down imaginations! 2. Cor. 10. how soon are the rafters, and
rooms, and buttresses, and every contignation cast down! for, except the Lord
build the house, they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127. 1. The building
that is so soon overthrown, was never the Lords handyworke, but the men
themselves were the Masons and Carpenters of their own pieties and devotions.
They built their high rooms of pious imaginations, their middle rooms of
faith and charity, their low rooms of humility, so slender, that they could
resist no rain, no flood, no wind; therefore they fell, and great was the
fall: great was the fall, for they built so high, their roofes and pinnacles so
near to Heaven --. But, Lord, be thou my Carpenter, (thou were called the
Carpenters son) and build me my house, and give me timber and graces to
joist and siele it: give me windows to my house too, for here we see darkly as
through a glass. 1. Cor. 13. be thou my rock too for foundation, that I may
sing with the Psalmist, thou art the rock of my salvation, then I shall stand
sure all winds and weathers; sure against the storms of all principalities,
and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places, then I shall be thy
House, whose house we are, Hebr. 3. 6. then I am built up a spiritual House,
ye are built up a spiritual house, 1. Pet. 2. 5. and my foundation will hold
me up, for, the foundation of God stands sure, 2. Tim. 2. 19. and the Floods
shall not wash me down, though they be such Floods as David's, which came in
unto his soul: no Wind shall blow me, though it be such a blast as blew down
the corners of Jobs house: no Rain shall ruin me, though it rain snares,
fire, and brimstone, Psalm. 11. 6. for my foundation will keep me sure; for,
if foundations should be destroyed, what could the righteous do? Psalm. 11. 3.
yet, Lord, if any tile, or outward grace be blown from my House, or any of my
walls be dashed, my casements or doors be cast off the hinges (for those are my
doors and passages where my soul can come forth, and look abroad; and this is
all the ruin, all the failing which I shall suffer) do thou, O Lord, repair
all my decays and dilapidations; so shall thou make me to hear of joy and
gladness, that the bones, or timber of my house, my stronger graces, which
thou have broken may rejoice, Psalm. 51. 8.

JESUS and JOHN.
Math. 3. 13. Then comes JESUS from Galilee to Jordan to JOHN, to be baptized
of him.
Discovery.
I Discover thy remove and address, Then comes JESUS from, etc. Thou leavest
Galilee for Jordan; thou take air in Galilee, and water in Jordan; thou
changest the Element with thy place and business: no place is thy Sphere
longer then the date of thy Commission for action: where new occasions call,
thou make thy departure, no longer pretense, no longer residence, still
obeying the summons of a fresh employment: now thou art for the Sacrament; thou
might as easily have passed over this Baptism as over Jordan; but thy holy
gests for salvation are in order and method: neither will thou come about into
thy Church, but the next and nearest way, through this little current of
Baptism. Thou stepped'st into the water that we may follow thee: Thou washest
to make clean the water, we, that the water may cleanse us, and here thou
employest John, Then comes he to Jordan to John: this is thy honor to thy
Minister, thou will not wash unless he hold the water, thou will not divide
John and Jordan.

The Pinnacle.
Math. 4. 4. And the Devil takes him up, and set him upon a Pinnacle of the
Temple.
Discovery.
I Discover, we can no sooner lay our Scene low, for humility, but the Devil
has a lift for us presently: he takes him up; Him, even Christ himself: now
when he can take up him, his shall be sure of an advancement too, he will be
ever putting us a Pinnacle higher then our condition should be: no place is
privileged, not the holiest, the Temple; not the highest, the Pinnacle, He set
him upon a Pinnacle: the pavement or Isles are the safest; such as he suffers to
be there, have less of his violence, and enjoy more quietly their low
condition: the battlements and spires in the Church or places of eminency, are
ever dangerous, and when you are carried to such a height in the Church as a
Pinnacle, it is not amiss to look down or about you how you came there.

The Bride-chamber.
Math. 9. 15. Can the Children of the Bridechamber mourn so long as the
Bridegroom is with them?
The Flame.
WHat mirth is here now the Bridegroom is with us! Lord, who can be sad when
thou art present; every part of my soul is musical when thou art with me,
every nerve, sinew, and string about me is a Harpstring, a string of harmony,
and rejoicing; now I see in thy presence is fullness of joy, and thou have made
me glad with the joy of thy countenance, Psalm. 21. and now I am entered into
the joy of my Lord, Math. 25. and shall not I be merry and cheerful, when
they earth, O Lord, and thy hills and lands, (dull, and stupid, and inanimate
clay) break forth in rejoycings? Therefore thy servant warbles to thee, Be
joyful in God all ye lands, Psalm. 66. and talk of joy ye hills. Who can
hold his fingers from his Timbrell or Cymball, when his Savior is beside him?
he that has delivered our souls from death, our eyes from tears, and our
feet from falling, Psalm. 116. 8. who can be sad, that has his salvation, his
reconciliation, his redemption, in the same room with him? who can mourn that
has him in presence, who will supply all his necessities? My God shall supply
all your necessities, Phil. 4. 19. who can mourn that has him who takes care
for him? Cast your care upon him, for he cares for you, 1. Pet. 3. who can
mourn that has one to make peace for all his mutinies, his indispositions,
his rebellions? he has made peace through the blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20.
one to intercede for all his offenses? we have an Advocate Christ Jeses, and
he is the propitiation for our sins, 1. John 1. 1, 2. to give us every good
gift? for, to which of you, if he ask a fish, will he give a Scorpion? or,
if he ask bread, will he give a stone? who can mourn that has him to
provide a place for him in his glory? for, in my Fathers house are many
Mansions, and I go to prepare a place for you: Awake then Psaltery and Harp, I
my self will awake right early; and let us be glad and rejoice, for this is
the day which the Lord has made, even this Lord, this Bridegroom, who has
his Wineseller, and Flaggons, and Grapes, and Gardens, and Perfumes, and
Spices, all things for the advancement of mirth: I came into my Garden, I have
gathered my Myrrh, I have drunk my Wine, drink ye, drink abundantly, Cant.
5.
O beloved: Here is no weeping, no tears, for God is here, and he shall wipe
away all tears; here is nothing but revellings and divine espousals, here is
the Bride-chamber, here is the sweet celebration of the spiritual marriage,
here are the holy embraces of Christ and the soul, the blessed recumbencies
and reposings, the interchange of sacred courtship, Arise my fair one, and let
me kiss thee with the kisses of my mouth; And, my love is white and ruddy,
the fairest among ten thousand: here is no mourning, no lamenting, nothing but
love-songs, and sweet epithalamiums, mutual enjoyments and admirations of each
other, Rejoce therefore in the Lord, oh ye righteous, and again, I say,
Rejoice. Phil. 4.

The Synagogue.
Mat. 4. 23. And JESUS went about all Galilee, teaching and preaching in their
Synagogues.
Discovery.
I Discover, that JESUS begins now to be more free of himself, He went about:
before he was in the Desert, he then went out; now he went about, he went out
and about, and thus inlarges himself to his time and business; he begins in
private at Bethlehem, he goes on in public to Galilee; he went, and went
about, he was active and stirring in what he had to do: employment should ever
quicken us; motion suits business better than a chair and cushion: he went,
and, about all Galilee; Galilee, a place neglected and disdained of the Jews:
how the estimations of God and man differ! how unequally their respects are
directed! about all Galilee, that no part may complain of neglect; and in
Galilee he teaches and preaches, he keeps close to his business, teaching
and preaching: He wastes not his hours in other diversions, in
impertinencies, or vain disports, but teaches and preaches; and in their
Synagogues, places appropriated and dedicated to that service.

Galilee.
Math. 4. 25. And there followed him great multitudes of people from Galilee.
Discovery.
HEre I discover the virtue and power of Christ's preaching and miracles; there
followed him, even there where he had preached, there where he had healed and
cured, and that from Galilee; great multitudes from Galilee. When JESUS or his
Word prevails with us, we shall soon leave our Galilees, our worldly places
and circumstances; we shall leave Galilee, and go after JESUS; that is neither
City, nor Country, nor kindred, nor acquaintance, shall be able to keep us
from following: we shall go as this multitude, for a multitude followed him;
and now we shall not go wrong if we follow the multitude, so long as they
follow thus, and follow him here in the Text, even JESUS; yet it is something
strange to see a multitude following him, for the way after JESUS is strait,
and few there be that find it, and his flock is little, fear not little
flock, and yet a multitude are following; but, as many followed him, so
certainly they followed him many ways, the track where JESUS had gone could
not suffer many upon it, but some took other tracts, though all in pretense of
following; and what though a multitude? many are called and few chosen.

The Physician.
Math. 9. 12. The whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick.
The Flame.
LOrd, I have a sick soul, a distempered soul, a languishing soul; the
spirits and faculties of it faint and droope for want of thy Influence, of thy
grace, of thy sacred visits; thou did hide thy face and I was troubled,
Psalm. 30. troubled till I laid down with trouble, and watered my couch; the
trouble weighed upon my spirit, till I was weary and heavy laden: the spirit
of a man may bear his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? who can
bear it, and not lie down under the burden? Lord, I have a sick soul, sick
unto death, for, while I live after the flesh I die, Romans 8. 13. and now that I
am in so deep and desperate distemper of spirit, restore and renew me again;
thou turnest man to destruction, and thou say, Come again ye children of
men: say thou unto my soul, Return, and that voice will quicken me again,
and raise me to life, that I may say with the Apostle, as dying, and yet behold
I live, 2. Cor. 6. 9. Lord, how many are my spiritual diseases! Lay thy hand
upon the pulse of my soul, the affections and passions which beat so violently
for want of thee: as the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my
heart after thee, O God, Psalm. 42. look, O Lord, upon the water of my Soul;
thou have a Bottle, even a holy Urinall, put my tears into thy Vial, Psalm.
56. look upon the complexion of my Soul, how pale and wan! having a form or
color of godliness, but denying the power, 2. Tim. 3. Lord, I acknowledge I
have a sick soul, and many are the diseases thereof. I have now a spiritual
vertigo or turning in my Soul, a giddiness, which makes me unstable in all
my ways; a double-minded man is unstable in all his ways, Jam. 1. 8. Anon I
shall have a spiritual convulsion or a shrinking back of the sinews of my
Soul, of the virtues and graces of it, and then I am nothing so devout, so
religious as I was; Sometime I shall have a spiritual Fever, then I am all in
a hot fit of piety, and then, Master, I will follow thee wheresoever thou
go; and yet soon after I cool again, and then, Lord, let me first go bid
them farewell that are at my house; Lord, to these diseases I have spiritual
sores and ulcers too, sometime my sin ulcerates at the Intellectual part, and
then all my apprehensions and meditations are vain and impious; sometime at my
Will, and then all my inclinations, and addresses, and motions are sinful;
sometimes at my Memory, and then all my remembrances and recapitulations are of
the vices, and follies, and lusts I have been guilty of and cherished; Lord,
thou see now my sick soul, give it a restlesnesse till it repose in thee,
and rest, with thy blessed Apostle, in thy bosom; Lord, now I am sick, make
all my bed in my sickness, Psalm. 41. 3. thou that dispersest thy saving health
among all Nations, Psalm. 67. thou that healest the brokenhearted, thou that
say, I wound and heal, Deuteronomy. 32, heal my wounds with thine, and bind up
my broken and scattered parts, my thoughts and discomposed affections; and I
will praise thee, and say, Thou art the God of my health and my salvation,
Psalm. 28.

The Mountain.
Math. 5. 1. And seeing the multitude, he went up into a Mountain.
Discovery.
I Discover here Christ's retiring from the multitude; for seeing the multitude,
he went up; it is good not to be always too public and popular, nor too much
for the multitude: Christ seeing them went; his foresight of them was a visuall
admonition for his retirement: it is safe taking warning at our eyes; he that
from his window can see a danger, will not stay there and shut the casements
upon it, but seek either to prevent or avoid the inconvenience; An hasty
proceeding or inadvertencie, may engage you in a society you would not:
seeing, he went; he escapes at the first discovery: it is an happiness when
your perspective can inform your feet, and when they keep pace with the
motions of your eye: he is no wiseman that removes not when occasions are free
and open; tedious considerations may arrest you into such a delay, that you
cannot acquit your self at your own pleasure; seeing, he went, and went up:
it is well when your escape is with advantage, when you can stand above the
prease of a danger, and the reach of it; he went up, and into a Mountain: it is
not fit to be always upon the plains and flats with the multitude, but if we
be risen with Christ, to seek those things that are above.

The Sitting.
Math. 5. 1. And when he was set, his Disciples came unto him.
Discovery.
I Discover, that Christ is not always in motion; he has his comma's and
periods in his journey, his Innes to call and refresh at, When he was set. This
When, is the time he sat down in, he reposed in; and where should he sit but
out of sight of the multitude, when he went up from them? it is not so
convenient to take your repasts too openly: be public in nothing but your
office and employment: in that which (...) your self do not summon too many
eyes, nor in that which concerns many, too few: When he was set, this was the
time and place of his residence; he was set, and where but on a Mountain? he
walks not on the Mountain but sits; the higher your place and preferment is,
the less you should move, the more you should sit; that is, the more firm and
staid you should be: too much change and motion bring you into the guilt of
uncertaintie, and that into the opinion of lightness: When he was set; this
sitting sets a luster of gravitie and stately composure upon him; and now is he
fittest for Disciples, now that he sits: do not move too much when you are
teaching and instructing, for that is to be carried to and fro with every wind
of doctrine, especially when you are teaching upon a Mountain and height, when
the point or position is high and steep.

The Bottles.
Math. 9. 7. Neither do men put new wine into old Bottles.
The Flame.
LOrd, I will be any thing for thy sake, thou did so vary thy self, and
become so many things for mine; for my sake thou were a Vine, a tree for every
one to pull away and ravish thy Grapes, I am the Vine, John 15. thou were a
way, I am the way, John 14. a path for every one, every unclean foot to walk
and trample on; thou were a door for every unquiet hand to knock at, and
disturb, and cast off the hinges, I am the door, John 10. thou were a Lamb,
behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world: thou were a
Shepherd, a man of a low and homely condition, I am the good Shepherd.
Lord, I am not able to trace thee through all thy forms, through every thing
thou have been for me, and should not I be a Bottle for thy sake? Thy servant
Paul was a Vessel, even a chosen Vessel, Act. 9. Thy servant David was meaner
then he, even a broken Vessel, I am become like a broken Vessel, Psalm. 31.
And indeed all of us are Vessels, some Vessels of honor, and some of
dishonor, Romans 9. Lord, then I will be thy Bottle, the Vessel for thy blood,
thy Wine; preserve me, Lord, now, that I am thy Bottle from cracks, and flawes,
and bruises, that the graces and virtues which thou do pour into me, may not
spill not run forth, that I may not complain with thy servant, thou have
made me an empty Vessel, Jerem. 51. Now, that I am thy Bottle, fill me, O
Lord, with solid virtues, that I be not puffed up with flatulent and vain
humors, and windy imaginations; for they that are thus puffed up, will soon
burst, even they that are puffed up with a fleshly mind, Wisd. 4. and they that
are thus tympanied, and vainly full, thou will send them empty away, Luke 1.
Lord, now that I am thy Bottle, keep me ever open and clear for receiving,
that no worldly nor sensual filth dawbe me up and stop my passage, that thy
word and graces may have a free infusion and access into my soul; now, that I
am thy Bottle, keep me clean and handsome, that no dusty vice nor dregge and
lees of sin and corruption stain me, and render me unclean, lest thy graces
receive a taint or sowernesse; Fill me, O Lord, thou that fillest all things
living with plenteousnesse, till my Bottle, like David's cup, overflow and run
over, Psalm. 23. so that I may power back my self to thee again, and make good
the Psalmists advice by pouring out before thee, Psalm. 62. but, Lord, the
liquor that thou powrest forth, is so heavenly and spiritual, and has such a
spirit within it that is always working and aspiring out of my Bottle, my
body, that my body is ready to break, and be dissolved; I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ. Lord, it is not for a weak Bottle, an old and
crazie one, such as mine is (for we have this treasure in vessels of earth, and
this earth, this clay, of which my Bottle is made, will fail, and moulder, and
crumble into dust,) to keepe-in the spirit of thy heavenly liquour, thy graces;
therefore what part of my Bottle is old and frail, make it new; thou that
sitt'st upon the throne, and say, Behold I make all things new, Revel. 21.
give me a new heart, Ezech. 36. that I may be in Christ a new creature, 2. Cor.
5. and that my old things being passed away, all things may become new, 2. Cor.
5. 17.

The sad Countenance.
Matthew. 6. 16. When you fast, be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad countenance.
Discovery.
I Discover, there is a time for fasting, When ye fast: a Christian must have
a Calendar to himself, and his Lent must be oftener then once a year: the
weeks of his life must be interlined with Ember days; When ye fast, the
Shambles and Slaughterhouse must be shut up, and the kitchen doors and
cupboards of provision locked; this is to deny your appetite, not to cater for
your stomach, that your steames of flesh and blood may be less, and more
subtle; that the rays of grace may shoot more clearly into you, that your
soul be not too much befogged and benighted with the vapors and mists of
your food: When ye fast. A fasting you must take for granted, it must not be
always Holiday and Easter with you, you must have your Goodfrydayes and Eves
of mortification, for these are the Doors and Porches to mortification; if you
will be there, you must go in here, when you fast. To fast, is to use such a
diet as will make you a lean man, and a fat Christian; and as you grow so much
less in bulk of humanity, you advance so much more in your stature of
Divinity; yet in your fast take a caution with you, that it may not be a fast
and loose; be not of a sad countenance; that is, let your face fast while your
stomach banquets: fast not more to another then your self: it is a vain
delusion to be a Christian in the forehead only; it is not the sackcloth and
ashes God looks at, unless there be a holy spark in the ashes, and a soul
to the sackcloth as well as a body; a power of godliness as well as a form.

The Stature.
Matthew. 6. 27. Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his
stature?
Discovery.
I Discover here the inabilitie and weakness of man: this question Christ
asks, Which of you? puts all out of question; even none of you: You Princes of
the earth, which of you? you Pharisees and Doctors, which of you? Can add? of
your selves, of your own power, or ability, either by taking more to what you
have, or by taking thought, or taking pains? all your taking thus is but a
mistaking, and all your additions and augmentations are but substractions, and
diminutions, and depredations; Thus, while we take thought for adding and
increasing, our souls and statures of grace go back and decline, decline even
with too much thoughtfulness of adding, for, as we add and accumulate with
our own hands, God fillips our height down: the afflictions, and
tribulations, and misfortunes he sends, pull down our statures, and impair
our cubits; for I find a stature every where, some are lower in degree, some
higher; there are statures Ecclesiastical, and statures Political and Civil;
there were in the Church Evangelists, Doctors, Apostles, Disciples, and among
the Apostles, Peter and John, one cubite higher then the rest: In the State
some are rich, some poor, some Princes, some Magistrates, some vassals, and
all these labor in taking thought, (which is the labor of the Soul) and all
to add to and advance their stature, to attain to a cubite higher, to be
greater, and richer, and wiser, and more honorable. These are the cubits, but
if these cubits be of our own adding, they prove vain, nothing: The two sons
of Zebedee were taking thought how to add a cubit, Suffer us, say they, that
one may sit on thy right hand, and another on thy left, in thy Kingdom; but,
which of them could add? you know not what ye ask, says Christ. The
Disciples were taking thought for a cubit too, they were busy who should be
greatest, but Christ takes them down a cubit lower, Let him that is greatest
among you, be as the least: thus we take thought for adding a cubit, but, in
Christ's question, Which of you can add?

The coming down.
Matthew. 8. 1. When he came down from the Mountain, great multitudes followed
him.
Discovery.
I Discover, Christ came down as well as ascended: he came down; down from
his Godhead into manhood, down from Heaven to Earth, down from a blessed
retinue of Angels to a naked, and bare, and poor attendance; from a Lord to
the form of a servnt, from dominion to obedience, from exaltation to
humiliation. He came down from the Mountain; he keeps not always the same
height, but remits and appears less, and lets himself down a peg lower, and
now in his descent becomes more familiar, more accessible: he came down, and
now he comes near to the multitude, and the multitude came near to him, the
multitude followed him; followed him, You see, though he came down, yet he
came down so as the multitude followed him: his humble and lowly behavior
has such an awful reverence, as puts them behind, they followed him;
followed him in submssion and acknowledgement to his authority; followed him,
they durst not in any arrogance precede or go before him; followed him, in a
loyalty to his progress, in applause of his way, for they followed him, in
approbation of his steps; they followed him, they durst not go hail fellow
well met with him, upon equal terms, either of congruitie or condignitie.

The strait gate.
Matthew. 7. 13. Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad
is the way, that leads to destruction, etc.
The Flame.
LOrd, here are two ways, the one a way of declination, the other of
exaltation; the one a broad, a wide, a loose way, a way wherein a soul may be
too free, too licentious, too too straying and excursive; the other a narrow
way, a strait way, a way to keep in and hedge in a Christian passenger; such a
way as will make him gather up his passions, and gird up his affections, that
they be not excessive nor exorbitant, nor too breaking forth into any bypath
or secret tracts of impiety, nor into the broad and open way of wickedness:
Lord, how easy is it to go in this broad way! what freedom, what liberty,
what room for disport is here! what associating and hearding is here! what
trooping every one will have a foot in this way: If I would set forward to any
lust, or ambition, or covetousness, or any other worldly design, this way
will lead me to it, but; Lord. I will think on my ways and turn, Psalm. 119.
59. and, I will take heed to my ways, for here is not only a wide way to
scatter and unloose my self in, but a steep way, and descending way; and if I
once slide down this precipice, the return is painful, and the recoverie
desperate: but I will go stand in the ways, and see, etc. Ierem. 6. 16. and
though the way be smooth, and plain, and easy, and pleasant; the way of the
world, though it be strowne with flowers and roses, and spread with carpets of
plush, for the pleasure and ease of my feet, yet I will instruct them back unto
thy strait way. O Lord, though thy way be gravelled, and causied, and uneven,
yet I will go in thy paths, for they lead to a new and living* way, Hebr. 10.
20. though they be strait, that is, strict, and severe, and pinching, and
bind my behaviors to thee, yet I will on; though they be toilesome in their
ascent, so that I slip back and fall, and decline in my advancements forward,
yet I will not go from thy ways, for the Lord is my helper, ( Hebr. 13. 7) and
he will give grace to help in time of need, ( Heb. 4. 16.) therefore into this
strait gate will I enter, Be open ye everlasting gates, that an heir of
glory may come in: I will enter, though I reach but into the Portall, for I had
rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, then dwell in the Tents of
ungodliness; Psalm. 84. 10. therefore, O Lord, if any darkness or clouds of
ignorance or impiety would cast their shadow upon me in thy ways, to muffle or
benight me, direct my paths, Prove. 3. 6. for thou art the God of light, and in
thee is no darkness, 1. John. 1. 5.

The great Faith.
Matthew. 8. 10. When JESUS heard it, he marvelled, and said unto them that
followed him, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in
Israel.
Discovery.
I Discover, how punctual and eminent JESUS is in his laudatives and
applauses, he marvelled; he that had all the graces in more excellent measure
and manner, yet marvelled at the grace of the Centurion: neither was this
admiration of his, this marvelling of his to himself, in his own bosom,
under his own roof, but to others; he marvelled and said: the more deserts
and parts are taken notice on, and published, the more they are encouraged and
raised. Commendation blows a spirit into the artery of desert, the marvellings
and sayings are the gracious aires which fan them, and make them shed brighter
and clearer; yet what he said was not to the party he commended, but to those
that followed; he would not speak too much in the face of desert; he knew the
modesty of virtue and grace, how soon it would decline, and disacknowledge,
and summon the blood into the face to bespeak his silence; therefore he said,
not to the Centurion, but to them that followed him, Verily I say unto you.

PETER'S house,
Matthew. 8. 14, 15. Now when JESUS was come into PETER'S house, he saw his wives
mother laid, and sick of a Fever. And he touched her hand, etc.
Discovery.
I Discover, Christ stays not in ceremonies, and complements, but looks how
his business and necessity calls, and there he applies; he came into Peter's
house, and there he takes no time with Peter, but his mother, who lay sick of a
Fever; he diverts not to curiosities or impertinencies, to view his house or
rooms, though perhaps but homely neither; or to examine the building or
furniture, but straight to his wives mother who lay sick; her infirmity made
suit for sanation, and he comes to her without any more interjections and
pauses; we should not be too lingering in exigencies and dispatches. And
because his coming without healing had been but a complement, a promise from
his demeanor and no redress, he therefore touched her hand; her hand, the
only part she lays hold with, her only part she applies with, her part she
labors with, the only Organ of practice and employment about her; and this
having a touch and virtue from JESUS, must needs be holier in the actions
after; he touched her hand. JESUS gives us but a touch on our hands here
below, hereafter he will take us by the hand, and lead us in the way
everlasting, Psalm. 139. 24.

The Mote.
Matthew. 6. 3. How will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye, and behold, a beam is in thine own?
The Flame.
O God, how curious are we in the infirmities of others! how officious! how
industrious with our eyes to discern, with our hands to touch, with our
tongues to publish; O that we should be such intelligencers to others, and such
strangers at home! so busy abroad, and sedentarie at home! that we should
light our Tapers for others faults and infirmities, and put them out for our
own! such curious Foreigners, and such incurious Domestics! with what
partial eyes do we look on our selves, so willing to overlook what is
amiss! what merciful Courts and Consistories do we keep for our own
offenses, and what severe censures and examinations for others! how deceitful
are our glasses! The blemishes and spots which are in our selves shed a shadow
upon our neighbors, and makes us believe they are in them; how many are the
blots and moles in our bodies, and yet how pure and clear are all our own
representations! and thus we seem to be religious, and deceive our own
hearts, and our religion is in vain, Iam. 1. 26. Oh, my God, how ancient is
this error! how common! every religion, and heresy, and schism, and
professor has a finger for the eye of his neighbor; for every way of man is
right in his own eyes, Prove. 21. 2. and there is a generation that are pure in
their own eyes, Prove. 30. 12. this generation is our generation, and of this
generation one passes and another comes. How direct! how forward are our eye
beams! how single! how intent! how percussive which shoot and beat full upon
the eyes of others! never coming back, nor doubling, nor reflecting upon our
own weaknesses and offenses; how diffusive, and shedding, and spreading is
this little light in our bodies! how freely disbursed upon other objects, and
how dark at home! how dull to its own Organ! and, if the light that is in me
be darkness, how great is that darkness! Math. 6. 22. how inquisitive, how
finely sighted are we, even to a mote or atome in another! Lord, clear up my
sight with some eyebright water of contrition, that I may see my own beams,
my own motes, and turn back my eyes upon my own offenses, Turn thou them, O
Lord, and they shall be turned, Ier. 31. 18.

The Scribe.
Matthew. 8. 19, 20. And a certain Scribe came and said, Master, I will follow
thee wheresoever thou go. And JESUS said unto him, The Foxes have holes,
etc.
Discovery.
I Discover, Christ declines these hasty resolutions, Master, I will follow
thee, and abates the pace of them with a denial; JESUS said unto him, The
foxes have holes; they that give themselves over so unadvisedly to an
adherence, are not to be entertained at the same rate they run into your
service: they that will follow as this Scribe, wheresoever you go, are too
Catholic and general reteiners, and follow the person more then the parts:
Wheresoever thou go; a thou shall be followed more then that, thou that
teach more then that which thou teach; wheresoever betrays too unbounded
and regardlesse an humor; and, like rash young maids, they betroth their
opinions at the first courtship: they are better in their resolutions that
follow where, and not wheresoever; that follow where they have warrant and
authority for their motion, and that follow howsoever, not wheresoever;
howsoever the world go with them, though Affliction or Tribulation meet them
in the way, yet they will follow howsoever; but these that will follow
wheresoever, are not to be quire cashiered, but moderately brought on, by
holding their reine so much faster as they would break the more hotly after
you: JESUS said not unto him, Thou shall not follow, but he said unto him, The
Faxes have holes, declining his have and propension after him.

The turn.
Matthew. 19. 22. JESUS turned him about, and when he saw her, he said,
Daughter, be of good comfort.
Discovery
I Discover here how JESUS animares and cherishes a timorous spirit; the woman
turns behind him, and he turns about, and presents her the face and
presence she avoided, and he calls her on with his lips, as he cast her off
with his countenance; thus one part of Christ becomes a spokesman for another,
and are by course Advocates and Mediators to each other; for, he turned about
and saw her, and said, Daughter; had he turned and not said, it had been worse
with her, for, a silent aspect had disabled her more; had he only turned and
seen her, and not said, an expectation of his dislike or approbation, or some
such two-fac'd passion had perplexed her; but he saw, and said, he opened his
mouth and behavior at once, and they both speak, and speak her fairly,
Daughter: JESUS had a caracter of power in his visage, and she turned from it*
therefore he turned to her: see the mercy of GOD that vyes turn* for turn
with us, turns after us when we turn from him; and a turn of him thus is
able to wheel us about, and then a gracious reply too will make us turn
further and stay more firmly in our aspects toward him; be of good comfort;
this he said, and to one that was turned away too; I see then, where he finds
his presence has a due influence, he will rather abate then advance, and raise
then deject, and will not triumph in his Soveraigntie and Empire over the
spirits of a weaker.

On the just, and on the unjust.
Matthew. 5. 45. He makes his Sun to rise upon the just and on the unjust.
The Flame.
LOrd, how gracious art thou to shine upon that soul that shootes thee no
glance, no ray! to make a Sun to enlighten her who sits thus in darkness and
in the shadow of death! how dull and stupid is every part and Organ about me!
how fixed and unmovable, even as the earth it looks upon! no aversation, no
turning back from earth, no erection, no lifting up from this part of the
world, no soaring above, no advancement of eyes, of heart, to the heaven from
whence this light shootes and irradiates, which enriches and adornes all this
Globe. Lord, how worthily might thou withdraw this Sun from us, that
withdraw thus from thee! A cloud, a shadow, a visage of night, a retinue of
blackness and darkness, were fitter and more suitable to us, then thy Sun,
and this light, seeing our souls are so unthankful, so regardlesse, so
supine. How justly, O Lord, may* thou complain, I have called, but ye
refused, I have stretched out my hands, and no man regarded, Prove. 1. 24. thou
call us in every ray which beats upon us, thou stretchest out thy hand in
every beam which sparkles from thy heaven, for the heavens are the work of
thy hands, Hebr. 1. 20. but why art thou so merciful to let thy creature look
upon that creature which will not look upon thee, nor acknowledge thee? but
this is thy mercy, and, the earth is full of this mercy; even this earth of
ours which bears thy own Image and impression: O Lord, in this Sun thou
lightest me up so much knowledge, as to see that thy common blessings are no
cognizance, no distinction, no privilege, but are shared equally with the
evil and the good, the just and unjust: I see by this light thou art liberal
in thy temporal disbursments and worldly expenses there, where thou meanest to
be frugall in thy eternal; and do dispense with brightness thy meaner
favors, when thou intendest a darkness in thy after rewards.

JESUS and the Publicans.
Matthew. 9. 10. And as JESUS sat at meat, behold, many Publicans and sinners
came and sat down with him.
Discovery.
I Discover a double respect, one on the Disciples part, another on JESUS part;
on the Disciple's part to entertain him, and with a meal; that his dish as
well as his roof should receive him, that his very table and meat should taste
the better for him: and on JESUS part, he sat at meat; as JESUS sat at meat:
he came and sat down at the meal provided him; he will accept from a
Disciple very homely fare, any thing from a Disciple will take with him;
neither does he nicely or proudly refuse the board that was spread for him,
nor in a stately affectation disappoint the fare provided him: and now he sat,
as though he would compose himself to a posture should do the table of his
Disciple some honor; some respects are to be done to your adherents and
retinue, especially at a time of public notice; for then to make use of their
roof or table, then a coming in, or sitting at meat is an honor as well in
the eye of others as their own: here was a confluence where he sat; now
behold many Publicans, etc. Publicans and sinners came and sat down, men
debauched and notorious; yet they came and sat down, neither did Christ
forbid them the board, nor their host the Disciple; here is no rising on JESUS
part when the Publicans sit down: And as JESUS sat at meat, behold many
Publicans came and sat down; these common exchanges and enterludes should
pass without distaste and offense: their stomachs are too squeasie in religion
which heave and are provoked upon every civil intercourse with the men of the
world; a Publican makes not the meat worse, so JESUS be at the table: they sat
down all, yet we hear no reproaches nor exprobrations from JESUS cast into
their sauce, we hear no table rebukes, though the name of Publican gave
occasion enough, they sat and ate together; it is unseasonable when your sauce
is too sour for your meat, when your behaviors are too tart for your guests.

The Minstrels.
Matthew. 9. 23, 24. And when JESUS came into the Rulers house, and saw the
Minstrels, and the people making a noise, He said unto them, Give place, etc.
Discovery.
I Discover here, Jesus his even and impartial demeanor; he came into the
Rulers house, neither transported with the Ruler nor his house, nor awed with
the authority or state of either; neither of these can silence him in a just
occasion, nor can the Minstrels or company play or tune Jesus into any consort
or consent to their doings, nor any allowance of their Revels: he said, Give
place; he makes not a noise to out-sound the Minstrels, nor will have his tune
of reformation louder then the offenders; his checks and rebukes makes softer
and stiller music; and if the house be a Rulers, his airs shall not sound of
violence, Go out, but Give place, an increpation as full of mildness as
syllables: Give place; indeed every Minstrell and worldly strain should give
place to JESUS; carnal music must leave the room to spiritual: Give place,
one place cannot be for JESUS and the Minstrell; and most commonly where JESUS
is, the music is put out of doors; Ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will
see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take
from you. Joh. 16. 22.

Laborers few.
Matthew. 9. 37. The Harvest is plenteous, but the Laborers are few.
The Flame.
LOrd, thou have an Harvest I see; indeed, I hear of the seed, the precious
seed thou have sown in the world, and some of it fell by the way side, and
some upon stony places, and some among thorns, Mat. 13. 4, 5. I hear of thy
seed time, a wet and watery seed time; but, they that sow in tears shall reap
in joy, and he that goes on his way weeping, bearing forth precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him: thy seed, O
Lord, must be moistened and steeped in showers of penitence and contrition,
Blessed are they that mourn, Matthew. 5. I hear of thy Plough too, and, he
that puts his hand to this Plough, and looks back, is not fit for this
Kingdom; and, He that plougheth should plough in hope: I hear of thy sowing
too, we have sown unto you spiritual things, 1. Cor. 9. 11. I hear of thy
ground too, thy several tempers of earth, the stony ground that would receive
no seed, the thornie ground that choked the seed it received, the high
ground that lay open to all dangers and pillage, and of thy good ground that
hears thy word and understands it, and bears forth good fruit, some an
hundred fold, some thirty, some sixty, Matthew. 13. I hear of thy dung and
manure too, till I shall dig about it and dung it, Matthew. 10. 3. I hear of
the rares and poples too, the heresies and schisms which grow up with thy holy
stalks and ears of corn; for, the enemy came and sowed tares among the
wheat: I hear of thy reapers too, the reapers are the Angels, Matthew. 13. 39.
and of thy fickles, the reaping engines, thrust in thy sickle and reap, Rev. 14.
and of thy sheaves too, gather the tares, and bind them in bundles, Matthew. 13.
30. and of thy barnes, gather the wheat into my barn, Matthew. 13. of thy
gleanings too, he that gathers not with me, scatters: thus is thy Harvest
ripened and accommodated; but this Harvest of thine is great, and the Autumn
in thy Calendar long, Lord, how long! Those that petition thee to fall on work
with thy Harvest, and to crown thy last day with autumnall joys and triumphs,
say, Thy Harvest is great; for there are none of us but we belong to thy
Harvest, we are either corn or tares, we either cumber or advantage the ground
we are in: thy laborers are few, few that labor; some have too many fields to
look at, too many acres for their Plough, that while they labor in one field,
their other degenerates into weeds and tares; some have but a small pittance,
over which the holy Ghost has made them Overseers, and yet they bestirre
themselves little, and are very late and backward in their husbandry: the
laborers are few; how many, O Lord, may thou find in the market place with
those thou rebuked'st, Why stand ye here idle? the laborers are few still:
where are the watchings, fastings, and travelings, and toylings, and warnings,
and repetitions, and continuations of pains? in labors often, in watchings,
in fastings, never ceasing to warn every one night and day with tears, 2.
Cor. 6. this was the toil and travel of some of thy laborers: And, Lord,
Disciples, and other holy Saints, and Adherents, and Fathers, and Martyrs, and
Professors, were laborers; yet there are but few, considering the extent and
latitude of the fields of thy Church and the world; Lord, thou have given me a
field, even a goodly heritage, give me a spirit toilsome and active, finewes
and members indefatigable, that I may labor with my own hands, and drive the
Plough my self, and sow the seed, and then happy shall I be; for so is he
whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.

Believe ye?
Matthew. 9. 28, 29. And JESUS says unto them, Believe ye that I am able to to
do this? and they say, Yea Lord. Then he touched their eyes.
Discovery.
Believe ye?

I Discover, that JESUS will not meet the heat of their importunity with the
heat of a favor, (this were to inflame them into a fevour of soliciting
citing and obtaining) but he retards and puts their expectations about with
enquiries, and conditions, and delays; and with these he ripens his grant and
favors, and raises their rate and market, when a hasty bestowing spoils the
estimate of the favor, and lessens the authority of him that bestows it.
JESUS says unto them, Believe ye? This interrogatorie takes up a time, first
they must have time to believe, and to know they believe, ere they can inform
another; and then the grant is conditionated with their belief, so that their
hopes are yet but to a half part; Believe ye? if JESUS may be sure of their
belief, they may be sure of a favor; it is safe bestowing thus, a preamble
of information does well, to bestow one grace upon the knowledge of another;
they said, Yea Lord; then he touched their eyes.

JESUS went about.
Matthew. 9. 34, 35. But the Pharisees said, He casts out Devils through the
Prince of Devils. But JESUS went about all their Cities and Villages.
Discovery.
I Discover here, that Christ suffers not himself to be over-borne with a
calumny; he lets it not have all the talk and sits still, no, the Pharisees
said, and JESUS went about; JESUS retires not for their saying, but went about;
their censure shuts not the door on him, but he walks abroad; and the more
public the calumny walks, the less private walks he: The Pharisees said, he
casts out Devils through the Prince of Devils: But JESUS went about: If the
calumny sun it self, so will he; if it take up its Inn at every house,
he forbeares neither City nor Village; for, he went about all their Cities
and Villages; innocence will outface an infamy, and dare it abroad, and
challenge it even on its own borders.

The Grape-gathering.
Matthew. 7. 16. Do men gather Grapes of Thorns? or Figs of Thistles?
The Flame.
LOrd, as my root and sap is, so will my fruit be; if that be noble, my fruit
cannot be degenerous: thou art the Vine, the wounded Vine, the bleeding Vine,
the Vine which wrapped about the tree of thy cross, the Vine of whose sacred
liquor, we all drink, the Vine which drops, Sacramentally, into all our cups;
if I be graffed in thee, in thy stock, I know my Grapes will be good, my
fruit will be excellent; then I shall bud and blossom, and grow ripe in
graces; then I shall flourish in thy vineyard; then I shall not be afraid
when thou and thy spouse air your selves abroad, when you go up early to the
vineyards, and see if the vines flourish, and if the tender grapes appear,
Cant. 7. 12. then I will not fear when thou do cast down the hedges or walls
of thy vineyards, for thou will fence me, and gather the rubbish from me, and
make a winepresse beside me; then I shall not be afraid when thou come
for thy fruit, for I shall be better then the vine in thy Prophet; thou
lookedst that it should bring forth grapes, and behold it brought forth wild
grapes, Isa. 5. 4. How was thy holy expectation (be it spoken in a holy sense)
deluded with this Vine, as once with a Fig Tree here below! thou came for
fruit, but found'st nothing but leaves and green promises: Lord, therefore,
now that I am in thy vineyard, dig about me, and rend up my ground with the
good engines of afflictions, and prune me, and take away such outward
circumstances as hinder my flourishing; do any thing to me, O Lord, that I
may bring forth fruit, that I may not deceive the lookers on, the gatherers of
my fruit; else I shall be fit only for the axe and fire: for, every tree that
brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire, Matthew. 3.
10. else I shall become a thorn or brier; a thorn again to my Saviors
temples, I shall wound him again, and crucify him again; for such crucify to
themselves again the Son of God, and make a mock of him. Heb. 6. 6. I shall
become a thistle, full of prickles, by which I shall create anger and grief to
thy holy Spirit, that comes to rest in my leaves, grieving the holy Spirit of
God, whereby I am sealed unto the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.

He gave power.
Matthew. 10. 1. And when he had called unto him his twelve Disciples, he gave
them power.
Discovery.
I Discover, JESUS conferred not his power till he had called them unto him;
He called them first ere they came; they step not to him rashly for their
office, but stay a call, a summons: it is good to have a ^all first for coming
to JESUS, as well as for going from him: He called his Disciples; yet, it may
be, they might advance so far forward, as to give his eye notice they waited:
Such deportments are but wise alarms to awake the disposition of another
toward us, and in such advancements we but make signs for remembrancers: but
now he called them unto him; he will see them nigh him, that he may see them
better. He called them, and that unto himself: in weighty deputations he
trusts only to his own examinations and judgment: While they were from him, he
gave no such power; he knew not their fitness, their power to receive, and
therefore he gave no power till he called them unto him. It is good to have
those near you, upon whom you derive any place or authority; and to be so
speedy in your election (though not hasty) that you may overtake their
solicit: first call them, and then call them near you; He called them unto
him, and gave them power.

To teach and preach.
Matthew. 11. 1. When JESUS had made an end of commanding his twelve Disciples,
he departed thence to teach and to preach in their Synagogues.
Discovery.
I Discover, JESUS here made an end of commanding, but not of teaching; When
he had made an end of commanding, he departed to teach, etc. and thus he even
now obeyes himself, and puts a hand to the doing of his own commands: he
shows he is less imperious then instructive; He made an end of commanding;
his authority has clauses, and inter-stices, and periods; his teaching and
preaching none: He made an end of commanding; but, He departed to teach and
preach; and he sends his Disciples out, but sits not still himself; he
imployes not these holy Curates, to be idle himself; he lays not the holy
burden so upon them, that he leaves his own shoulders bare; he knows he
cannot officiate so close by a proxy, as to appropriate their pains to
himself: Having done his commanding, he departed; not from his office, but
nearer it, to teach and preach: neither departed he from his commanding, for
his commands were to teach and preach: This is the holy method and order; the
Disciple must teach before his Master; JESUS did not much til his Disciples
were dispatched before him; the Disciple must be there first, to cause all to
be made ready for JESUS, to see the souls or houses be swept and garnished
for him; the Disciples must come first, they must ring the Bell ere JESUS come
to Church, they must read Service ere he begin Sermon: you shall seldom have
JESUS till you have had his Disciple; he will still have some preparations and
preambles to his arrival.

The Light.
Matthew. 5. 14. Ye are the light of the world.
The Flame.
O GOD, the whole world is in darkness, thy Sun which thou createdst to rule
the day, wears even a Cipresse of dullness and mortality about it; all these
lower lights are but faint and weak, and in eclipse to the light of thy Word;
Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. Thy lower light
of Creation shows me only the broad paths of the world, and den ways of
man, neither can I walk directly in their trod to thee; I can only darkly
understand by the things that are made, even thy eternal power and Godhead:
But thou have said, My ways are not your ways: Lord, let thy word light me
into thy ways, those ways which lay unrevealed, undiscovered, untract, even a
new and living way. Lead me, O Lord, into the way which thy Son Christ Jesus
led, who called upon all to follow him; Follow me, I am the way: and whose
Apostle called too, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ: This way I see by
the lights (which thou have given us to carry the holy Torch and Taper of thy
Word) thy Apostles, and Disciples, and Ministers: Now I am in the way, I see;
for I discern here the prints, and seals, and impression of my Saviors feet;
he has gone before, and purpled this way, and sported this way with drops of
his blessed wounds; this way thou have gone, and this way thy Saints and
Martyrs have gone too; I see it all so crimsoned with sufferings, and so
scattered with worldly accommodations, which thy servants have left behind them
in following thee; some have left houses, and kindred, and friends, and all for
following thee: and this, I am sure, is the way; these that are the lights of
the world have showed me all; and now I am right if I hold on, and decline not
these lights: scatter such rays as may keep me from bypathes and errors, and
heresies, and schisms; this way then will I take, and I will take heed to my
ways. And now, O Lord, that I enjoy these lights, they seem to me sparkles and
beams from thee who dwell in a light which none can approach unto; they
seem pawnes of that eternal and glorious light wherewith I shall be tissued
and embossed at my reigning with thee; and now I enjoy these lights, neither is
thy wisdom, nor knowledge unsearchable, nor thy ways past finding out: Keep
me, O Lord, that I lose nor these lights, and be carried aside with foolish
and false lights, and vain meteors: How I do comfort my self by these lights!
how I do sun and warm my self by these lights and radiations! Ye are the
lights, such lights as disperse influence and virtuous brightness upon my
soul; ye are the lights, oh shoot out your beams then, and shine as you
were made to enlighten; ye are the lights, to shine about, not to heat, and
inflame, and set all on fire in the Church, to kindle all into combustion: no,
gentle warmths, and masculine heates, which lighten only to regenerate, and
refine, and purge, and clear up all mists and clouds which would muffle and
benight us.

JOHN in prison.
Matthew. 11. 2, 4. Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ,
he sent two of his Disciples: Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and show
John again these things, etc.
Discovery,
I Discover here, that the very prison shall ring of the fame of Christ; no
place so close and obscure where Christ cannot shoot himself in: When John had
heard in the prison; no confinement, or walls, or bars can keep out Christ,
and his Gospel and comforts: JOHN heard of him in prison; every prison will
open as freely to Christ as John's; though the doors be shut, it matters not,
Christ, we know, came among his own when the doors were shut, and spoke
peace. But now, John sends his Disciples to Christ: we can never be so close,
and imprisoned, but we may dispatch a Disciple to Christ, a good thought or
meditation: but John sent two; it is not good sending single to Christ; as many
thoughts and prayers, as many such Disciples as we can, and as will, go
together: John sent here his Disciples to him; John would have them so much
his, that they may be Christ's too; John would teach them to adhere to Christ,
for Christ is always at liberty to do them good; when John, when a Disciple
or Apostle may be shut up, Christ cannot; he has that about him, and within
him, which sheds it self through every place, and makes all closets and
prisons, highways, and streets open passages. And now that Christ hears John
is imprisoned, and expects his answer, he says, Go and show John again
these things: yet John needed to have sent no Disciples to Christ to inform
him; Christ knew both John, and his imprisonment, and was able to supply him
without notice; however, Christ admits of it, and approves it too. Though we
know Christ's omniscience and omnipresence, that he knows all, and sees all,
yet it is good to overtake and prevent his sending, to be at him first; Christ
may know, and yet take no notice, till we give it him first, till we begin to
him; and now that John has sent, Go and show John, says he, these things:
he quickly dispatches them, Go and show; though Christ be at liberty, and
John in prison, yet he gives John resolution betimes: we should never be
arrogant in the privileges or liberties we enjoy above others. John sends his
*Disciples to him, to know whether he were the Christ; and most think John
knew him before; yet he sends his Disciples, it seems, for their information:
It is a pretty secret of instructing, to steal knowledge and information upon
others in our own names.

Greater and least.
Matthew. 11. 11. There has not risen a greater then John the Baptist:
notwithstanding, he that is least in the Kingdom of heaven, is greater then
he.
Discovery.
I Discover here, JESUS complyes not with the time and circumstance; though
John suffer from Herod, he shall not suffer from Jesus; he will honor his
imprisonment, and wreath a garland of due praise about his fetters: There has
not risen a greater then John; John is greater in Jesus opinion, though lesser
in Herod's: The lessening of desert by common reputation, should never bribe our
voice from a just applause; yet, though Jesus applaud him for greater, he
adds then he; he that is least in the Kingdom of heaven: Christ loves so to
magnify his, that they may not be much worse for it; and to style them great
so, as they shall not be much greater in their own opinion: He that is least
in the Kingdom of heaven is greater; if earth will not lessen John, heaven
shall; Christ will none of his lights here below to shine without a shadow;
Christ's landatives are never so full and affirmative, but they are interlined
with something that is negative: There has not risen a greater, and yet, he
that is least is greater: How Christ at once commends and detracts! in deed,
too much applauding and praising is neither safe for you nor the party; I have
said, Ye are gods, what an advancement is here from Gods own mouth! I have
said, yet the same mouth shuts up with this, Ye shall die like men: it is good
applauding so, that you may still take down a greater with a greater then he;
There has not risen a greater, yet, he that is least is greater then he.

The right eye and right hand.
Matthew. 5. 29, 30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee.
The Flame.
O Lord, it is thy holy advice not to fear them that can kill the body: Why
should I fear the mortification of any part thereof, as mine eye or my hand?
the evulsion or abscission of either? why should I fear to be thus my own
holy executioner? I know, O God, thy principle is true, Never man yet hated his
own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it; yet this flesh that I thus
dismember and disavow, is none of my flesh; these members were made the members
of unrighteousness, these parts were alienated and divorced from me, I had put
them away for their spiritual adultery, and fornication, and rebellion; there
was a law in these members which warred against the law of my mind: and by
this cutting off these parts, I have escaped, and am redeemed from this law,
from the condemnation of this law. This eye, O God, was that casement which was
always open to iniquity, and inviting every tentation in; and thus was I
forced to shut up this window, and cast down this casement, and make a
covenant, that they should not look: this eye would never stay at home, but
wander and be impounded abroad, every vain object took it away: this eye was
never satis fied with seeing; this eye was one of those that were adulterate,
eyes full of adultery, this eye was one of those which had lust in it, the
lust of the eyes: this eye was one of those that had a covenant made with it, I
made a covenant with mine eyes; but alas, no covenant, nor any such sacred
bar could keep it shut, but it would out, like Dinah, and gaze and parley so
long with every toy and vanity, till it returned ravished and deflowred: this
was that eye that had no fear of God before it, there was no fear of God
before his eyes; and therefore I have parted with this eye, because it parted
my God and me; I have turned this eye out of service, and I will have no more
of this eye-service; I have cast this eye upon earth, because it would never
look toward heaven; I have pulled it out, because it pulled my soul from the
fast hold and recumbency I had on my God and Savior; I have slain the beams
of it, for they were ever shooting back, and wounding my soul; I have broke
the glass and crystal of it, for it would show me nothing but vain
shadows and forms: And my hand, O Lord, is as guilty too, therefore I have
cut it off too, for this eye lighted it into wicked actions and attempts; now
may the eye say to the hand, I have no need of thee. O Lord, I will not keep
this hand; Thou will have us have pure hands, lifting up pure hands, 1 Timothy 2.
8. thou will have us to wash our hands, I will therefore wash my hands, says
David, in innocence, Psalm. 26. 6. thou will have us to cleanse our hands,
Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, James 4. This hand, O God, I could never keep
pure; I have washed it, but it defiled it self again; I cleansed it, but it
polluted it self again: therefore, O thou, whose hands have made me, and
fashioned me, left the reward of my hands should be given me, I have given it
away. Thou chargest me in thy word not to shut my hand upon the poor, and
this hand would never open, never be free and loose to any such holy expansion;
thou layd'st a charge on me not to withold good when it lies in the power of
my hand to do it, and this hand would never part from the good, nor dispense
the good which was in the power of it; therefore I have cut off this hand, lest
it should divide betwixt me and my Savior, me and my heaven, me and my glory;
and I have only one hand, and one eye left unextinguish'd, un-cut off; and with
this one eye I look up to thee, look down upon me again, for the eye of
the Lord is upon them that fear him: and with one hand I endeavor to thee,
and reach to thee; let thy hand take hold of it, Father, into thy hands I
commend it; pull me up unto thee by this hand, and let thine eyes, which run
to and fro in the earth, enlighten this eye of mine, and create more beams and
rays in mine: and for this eye and hand that is cut off and cast from me,
Though they be sown in corruption, they shall rise in incorruption; though
sown in dishonor, they shall rise in glory; for, though our outward man
perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4. 16.

DAVID an hungry.
Matthew. 12. 2, 3. But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, Thy
Disciples do that which is not lawful. But he said unto them, Have ye not
read what David did when he was an hungry?
Discovery.
I Discover, Christ is ready to untie his own knots, and to open his own
locks, and to pull up those pales and fences at one time, which he set down at
another; but it is always for such as are necessitated to such a way, and fall
by an unavoydable chance upon such a passage: Thy Disciples do that which is
not lawful. But he said, Have ye not read what David did when he was an
hungry? though it were not lawful for David to eat holy bread, yet David,
when he was an hungry, had leave and assent: The Sabbath was once to be
punctually kept, and the grinding an ear in your hands was as much as the
grinding of your self came to, as much as a stoning came to; yet now his
Disciples pluck the ears of corn and rub them, and no fault, but they were
an hungry; their necessity put their hand to the corn, and they pluck off no
guilt, nor reap any penalty with the ear: if their hands transgressed now,
Christ's hands shall seal them a pardon; he that made the law, and the guilt,
can easily lay his charge upon both, to wink at you, and with his warrant, a
Disciple may strain courtesy with a Sabbath, and David with the shewbread.

JESUS knew, and withdrew.
Matthew. 12. 14, 15. Then the Pharisees went out, and held a council against
him. But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself.
Discovery.
I Discover, how Jesus withdrew himself from the conspiracy of his enemies;
the Pharisees went out, and he retires in; they withdraw to a consultation
against him, and he withdrawes from the danger of it; they hold a Council
against him, and he holds a Council for himself, and advises with his breast
for escape; it is happy when our advices keep time with our enemies: But when
Jesus knew; he does not long deliberate upon the danger, one may even think
themselves into a danger while they are thinking to avoid it; when Jesus knew,
he withdrew: it is well when we can so providently make our head and our feet
meet, that is, put our knowledge into practice.

Treasures.
Matthew. 6. 20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven.
The Flame.
MY God, I see thou will have us rich, spiritually rich; thou have given me a
talent, a treasure, and thou expectest an improvement; thou did chide him
that put it not forward to the bank, I see thou will have us thrifty: Lay up
for your selves, thou will not have our stock, our talent idle, but busy for
increase, for accumulation; thou would have us wealthy, for to such thou
give more, and more freely, To him that has shall be given; thou thy self,
O Lord, art rich, according to the riches of thy grace; thou have a treasure of
grace: and again, according to his riches in glory, thou have a treasure of
glory too: and again, the unsearchable riches of Christ; thy wealth, O Lord,
thy treasure is so vaste, it is even unsearchable, it exceeds thy Apostle, that
holy Artists Arithmetic: therefore, O my God, give me this holy feate and
felicity of thriving in the spiritual commerce and trading; give me a bank
and exchequer full of graces: The diligent hand makes rich; O quicken my hand,
and create a new spirit within every joint; bless unto me the spiritual
means thou have given me, increase every grace unto me, that I may treasure up
grace against the day of glory and grace, and commit, and trust all my wealth
to the house and heavenly mansion provided for me by thy Son; In my Fathers
house are many mansions: and, I go to prepare a place for you: and, We have a
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; this mansion, this house, O
God, shall be my exchequer; thy Son, and thy holy Spirit, and Angels shall
receive such spiritual wealth, such graces as I purse up below, and lay all up
for me there, that I may say, I know whom I have believed: and they are able to
keep what I have committed to them: And now, Lord, into thy hands I commend my
spirit, with all this treasure that belongs unto it, with all those graces and
virtues thou have given it, and which I have acquired and improved: here is
that pearl, for the gaining whereof the Merchant in the Gospel sold all he
had; I have gained so much treasure as I have obtained this Pearl; here are
chains of Rubies too, which thou, O Savior, did scatter from thy wounds,
but I have thredded them upon sighs which I have twisted, and upon my heart
strings; besides many other bright and flaming jewels and graces, many
Diamonds, and Carbuncles, and Jaspers, and Saphirs of sanctification; and with
these are necessities supplied, even through the riches and glory of Jesus
Christ. I give these, O Lord, for, freely I have received, and freely I give;
and, What have I that I have not received? but I give all back unto thee, for I
know, It is more blessed to give then to receive: and thus I lay up my treasure
in heaven; every penny and bag I disburse to thy Saints here below is imp'd
with wings and feathers, and is gone into heaven before me, and is gloriously
trans-figured into spiritual coin; and thus my riches take wing and fly
away, fly away that they may be a stock for me there: and Lord, how rich am I
now! rich even with all thy wealth; not a grace, not a merit of thy blessed
Sons, but it is all mine; not a pearl of water from his side, nor a rubie of
blood, nor a diamond of his eye beams, but is mine; for he is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

A sign.
Matthew. 12. 38, 39. Master, we would see a sign of thee. And he answered, An
evilland adulterous generation seeks after a sign.
Discovery.
I Discover, no fair compellation or language can win Christ to allow their
curiosity, not though they say, Master, we would see; we should not be bribed
with a title to any vanity, nor our selves easily won to betray goodness, and
to make our selves servants to the humors of any that entitle us Master: for,
to call us Master, with an intent only to satisfy their own curiosity, is but
to honor us, that they may the better embase us; to set us at liberty, that
they may sooner confine us. A sign is that they require, and are denied;
Christ had been prodigal of these, however it came he was now frugall; there
was no want on Christ's part, he was both able and willing, and gave signs,
his cures and miracles were all signs; sure then the want was on the Pharisees
part, a want of a sober faith and assent, or else a curiosity or delicacy, or
other vain intent was in the business; Therefore he answered, An evil and
adulterous generation etc. his denial is plausible and affable, though to the
Pharisees; he rebukes their request by the person of another, and informs
their generation by another generation that was evil and adulterous, An evil
and adulterous generation.

The Gift.
Matthew. 5. 23. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there, etc.
The Flame.
LOrd, there is no approaching to thy Altar, but with a pure and clean soul;
I will wash in innocence, and so will I compass thy Altar, says David: David
knew that nothing but innocence was fit for thy Altar; therefore, rather then
come to it unclean, he will wash and rinse off his iniquity. I know, Lord,
while I come to thy Altar either in wrath, or rancour, or emulation, I am short
of the innocence I should bring; I know while I have either any malice or
hateful seed in my bosom, sprouting into contention, or any other
mischievous design against my brother, I am not fit for thy Altar, I am no
right sacrifice, no suitable oblation; I must cast away my gall, with all such
offall, that I may be laid on thy Altar; that is the part which sheds an
impuration and defilement over all my parts, makes me an abomination in thy
sight, embitters me, and renders me distasteful and unsavory; and how clean
soever thy Altar be, how holy, how unspotted, yet to me it is nothing so, to
them that are defiled, nothing is pure; and, We have an Altar of which they
have no right to eat, they that kindle unhallowed combustions and stirs in
stead of the pure flames of piety, and devotion, and charity: O Lord, thy
Altar is the only holy engine of reconciliation, of redemption; the only
sanctuary of peace, the conservatory and table of divine favors: here did thy
Priests effect all the gracious intercessions and sacrifices, here did they
appease thy indignation, and persuade thy judgments; and here did thy blessed
Son, who was a Priest for ever, offer himself, Who by the eternal Spirit
offered himself; here was all the effusions, and sanguinary embrewments, and
slayings, and carvings, all in figure of redemption, all in shadow of good
things to come: therefore, O Lord, how can I stain or purple my soul with
malice, or envy, or wrath! for so often as I offend in these, I act but a more
fine a subtle slaughter; he that has but looked after a woman, has committed
adultery with her in his heart; so he that has but looked with a wrathful
eye or thought after his brother, has slain him in his heart: Lord, therefore
let thy holy Spirit that holy Dove which is so active in holy billings and
affections of charity, nest in my soul, and warm my soul into ardent and
fervent loves and desires; for hereby thou have told us that we are thy
Disciples, if we love one another: Lord, let thy love be shed abroad in my
heart, that my heart may shed and disperse it into my other parts; into my
feet, that I may go to my adversary and forgive him; and into my arms and
hands, that I may give unto him, if he hunger, that I may feed him, if he
hirst, that I may give him drink; into my tongue, that I may appease with soft
answers and apologies, his passion toward me; that I may speak friendly and
fairly to him, for, if we love one another, God dwells in us.

Stand without.
Matthew. 12. 47, 48. Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren
stand without, desiring to speak with thee. But he answered and said, Who is
my mother? and who are my brethren?
Discovery.
I Discover now, that Jesus is upon business, and in the heat of his function,
nothing can turn his face or regard out of the way; a behold cannot so arrest
his eye-beames, not though the relation of a mother or a brother put to their
hands; Who is my mother? he declines his duty and respect, and all relations
must be questioned of their title and interest; Who is my mother? and who are
my brethren? such relations are but now the pauses and interjections to
dispatches and employments, and break off that continuity which is exacted in
business of an high and holy nature; Who is my mother? and who are my
brethren? he demands as though he would decline his knowledge; indeed, in
weighty Commissions we should put mother and brethren to the distance of
strangers, and open our veins for consanguinity and respects to run out a
while, and leave our blood and spirits, Thy mother and thy brethren stand
without, and without must they stand a time; it is not fit to admit respects
into the same room with employments.

A Prophet without honor.
Matthew. 13. 57, 58. And they were offended in him. But JESUS said unto them, A
Prophet is not without honor save in his own Country. And he did not many
mighty works there.
Discovery.
I Discover, Jesus passes not over some kinds of contempt with silence, but
replies in defense of his reputation; sometimes a silence shows but a faint
and short-winded spirit, that dares not breathe in the face of his adversary.
They were offended: But Jesus said; he will have his say with them, and his
saying shall be to repel their offense by defense of himself: A Prophet is
not without honor save in his own country; he will not seem guilty of a
neglect by a desert of his own, but theirs; a christian spirit should never
stoop to the contempt of any so far, as to comply with it in any assent, either
by dejection or cowardice: And now Jesus departs, for he did not many mighty
works there; some works he did, and those mighty, but not many mighty; he
would not take off his pen quite, because that his adversary liked not the
copy, Rumpatur quisquis rumpitur invidia; he did not many there, for his stay
would seem to have courted too much an approbation or respect from his enemies;
and all such pretended delays is to set up a boothe for retailing that ware
you want a shop for.

And buried it.
Matthew. 14. 12, 13. And his Disciples came and took up the body and buried it,
and went and told Jesus. When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence into a
desert place apart.
Discovery.
I Discover the Disciples care to the memory of their friend, They took the
body and buried it; they will not suffer his body unburied: it is not fit to
keep the corrupted part of a friend bare or naked; be it a calumny or crime,
lay it under the sod with him, let your memory be a grave to your friends
corruptions and weaknesses, and embalme no part but his best for posterity. Now
after they had buried him, they told Jesus; they are not too hasty in sad
relations; they buried him, and told it after; funeral stories always arrive
soon enough, it is not seasonable to imp their wings with our feathers of
haste: And now that Jesus hears, he departs, When Jesus heard of it, he
departed; he will not stay by ill news, those are but melancholy itches which
delight in frications and chafings, and stay to be rubbed with more accents of
sorrow: they are too soft affections which love even to sit and thaw at a woe
or misfortune: Jesus departed, and whither? but apart; he departed into a
desert place apart. At the news of death he separates from company, wisely
practicing his part of separation, ere his course be to act it: to go apart at
the news of mortality, is a ceremony suits well; such a departure answers in
proportion to the departure of your friend, and shows how near you adventure
for his sake to comply with mortality.

He sent the multitude away.
Matthew. 14. 22. And Jesus constrained his Disciples to get into a ship, and to
go before him, while he sent the multitude away.
Discovery.
I Discover, how observant and decently ceremonious Jesus is; a multitude are
met for his sake, and he leaves not his own to dismiss them, but leaves his
own and dismisses them, and sends those away while he sent the multitude; he
leaves them not abruptly, but, in good manners, dissolves them; sends them
away, a phrase which sounds of a mild dispatch; they were strangers to him,
and therefore he sends them away, but constrained his Disciples, makes bolder
with his own; And Jesus constrained his Disciples: he sends them away, the
multitude, not with any neglect or disdain; in this phrase of sending, he
pretends rather an interest to their return; for an affable dismission sheds
such an engagement upon the people, as keeps them still there while they seem
to depart.

The Son of God.
Matthew. 14. 33, 34. Then they that were in the ship came and worshipped,
saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God. And when they were gone over,
they came into the land of Genesaret.
Discovery.
I Discover, how silent Jesus is now that they worship and applaud him, here is
not a word of his reply: they call him the Son of God, but I read no answer
he makes; for the verse that follows is impertinent to this, And when they
were gone over, etc. I observe, he refuses not the worship nor sacred applause
done him, nor takes much notice, nor prides himself in it: in just and due
applauses, it is a wrong to your merit to deny them, and such modesty does but
whisper to your goodness to betray it: I know, to assume and raise your self
to the trumpet of another is arrogance, and the spirits are too light that are
so soon rarefied and advanced; he is no wise Musician that will make one in
the consort of his own commendation.

The hem of the garment.
Matthew. 14. 36. And they besought him that they might touch the hem of his
garment; and as many as touched were made perfectly whole.
Discovery.
I Discover, that Jesus denies them not the honor they desire; their petition
reaches no nearer him then his garments, nor higher then his hem: it is an
honorable courtesy to be free in such light respects, which are an honor
for others to obtain, and no dishonor nor prejudice for you to give; to let
down your garment, where the hem will satisfy.

Transgress.
Matthew. 15. 2, 3. Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the
Elders? He answered and said unto them, Why do you also transgress the
commandment of God?
Discovery.
I Discover, how Christ vies question for question, and rebuke for rebuke; Why
do thy Disciples transgress, say the Pharisees? and he said, Why do you
transgress? sometimes the quality of your adversary may be such, that it will
be better to racket him his ball of reproach back, then to let it rest with
you; and oftentimes one question is best silenced by another; Christ silences
the Pharisees Why do thy Disciples transgress, with a Why do you also
transgress? and, their tradition of the Elders, with the Commandments of God.

Not away fasting.
Matthew. 15. 32. Jesus called his Disciples unto him, and said, Because they
continued now with me three days, and have nothing to eat, I will not send
them away fasting.
Discovery.
I Discover, how fairly Jesus entreats these that visit him, and accompany
him; and because he would have his welcome as general as generous, he called
his Disciples unto him, they must take notice he intends his affability
exemplary and imitable; and in this entertainment he spreads a table to
posterity, and commends a model and copy of hospitality to the world, for he
gives his company that continue with him a positive repast in this negative
resolution of I will not send them away fasting.

The Disciples to the multitude.
Matthew. 15. 36. And he took the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks,
and brake them, and gave to his Disciples, and his Disciples to the multitude.
Discovery.
I Discover here Christ's order, and care, and demeanor at his bountiful
distribution; he took the loaves and fishes; but ere he took them to give,
he gave thanks; he gave first to God that had given to him, he carves out a
tribute to him, before he carves to the multitude; and tribute to God enables
him better to distribute: in such a giving there is nothing given away; to give
thanks thus, is to say grace after Christ: now, he brake, and gave to his
Disciples: here is no news of his own eating, what he takes or breaks is to
give away; the care of his guests takes place of himself; he brake, and gave
to his Disciples, not to the multitude; though he be prodigal of his fare, yet
not of himself; he serves not out himself with his loaves and fishes; he
gave to his Disciples, he preserves his own honor at the table, and what he
does to the multitude, is by his servants, the Disciples; he gave to his
Disciples, and the Disciples to the multitude.

Get thee behind me.
Matthew. 16. 22, 23. Then PETER took him, and began to rebuke him, etc. But he
turned, and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offense unto
me.
Discovery.
I Discover, how tender Jesus is of his honor and authority, and how sensible
of checks from his inferiors, or any thing that may impair or detract; Peter
rebuked him, and he rebuked Peter with advantage, Satan; and, thou art an
offense unto me: it is wisdom to let your servant know his distance, for
phrase and behavior, and not to suffer him too near you in either; by how
much he is less a servant, by so much you waste from Lord and Master; Get
thee behind me, is a good phrase to tell him both his place and your own;
and the Livery fits best when the servant is behind, and the Master before;
Get thee behind: it seems Peter was advancing a little too forward, what a
check shall those have, who will even step before and beside him in his office
of mediation! Get thee behind me, will be his language, know your place; your
place is but the place of a servant, and an unprofitable servant; your place is
but the place of a creature, mine of a Lord and Creator, Get thee behind me;
your place is a place of guilt, of unworthiness; mine of merit, of
satisfaction.

Indignation against the two.
Matt. 20. 24, 25. And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation
against the two brethren. But Jesus called them unto him.
Discovery.
I Discover, that Jesus will not tolerate a quarrel unpacified, especially
among Disciples; Jesus called them that had indignation, to him; if Peter's
sword be drawn, he 'll command it back into the sheath ere he go; he called
them, he takes notice of their difference, he will not leave it to its self
and to them; the decision would be speedy, lest there be too great a
prevailing, for the ten were moved against the two; he knew there is danger in
trusting a contention too long with the parties, though they be Disciples of
the Church: the ten were moved against the two; the lesser and fewer ever
suffer from the more and mightier, the two from the ten: and how soon were the
ten moved before the two! an harmony is easier preserved among few then many,
among two then ten; the two are brethren, they keep the unity and fraternity
still whole, when the ten are in indignation; the ten were moved, more will
ever be at a business of indignation rather then peace.

The poor widow.
Matthew. 12. 43. And he saw the rich men casting in their gifts into the
treasury. And he saw also a poor widow.
Discovery.
I Discover, how observant Jesus is, he takes notice from the rich to the
poor; he saw the rich men, and he saw also the poor widow; the poor is
equally in his eye with the rich, and she is rich enough, in that notice he
took of her; the rays of his eye set as high a rate upon her as them; nay,
higher, they seem to beat full upon her, and but to glide upon them in their
passage; he saw the rich men, and he saw also a poor widow; He saw also, as
though he saw over them unto her, and took the rich but by way of perspective
to look on the poor, and by this art of survey to advance his commiseration by
the comparison and inequality: neither did he look so much on them as rich
and poor, but how they disposed and dispensed their wealth and poverty, and
how they cast in their gifts and mites: he saw the rich men casting in, and
he saw also a poor widow casting in; though in possessing, the rich have odds
of the poor, yet in disbursing, the widows mites are as plural as their
gifts.

Weep for your selves.
Luke 23. 28. But JESUS turning unto them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, Weep
not for me, but for your selves, and for your children,
The Flame.
O God! this is thy Son Jesus his respect to those that mourn with him; Jesus
turning unto them, he would not decline any pity that follows him, but turns
to it, meets it, and seems to cherish a lamentation with declining it: Weep
not for me; a sad disswasion has a secret to entreat a tear, and privately to
broach the eye which it is busy to stop; Weep not, but weep; as he closes the
eye with one hand, he opens it with another; and when he would not be too
much obliged for a compassion, engages themselves and theirs, and thus casts in
his own sad score into their reckoning: Weep not for me, but for your
selves, and for your children, and their tears shall discharge both griefs. O
God! this was a modest and thrifty part to get thy sorrow wept for by the
tears of another: thus one sad object that is public, shall have the honor
of the lamentation, when many private have more right in it.

Jesus held his peace.
Matthew. 26. 63, 64. But Jesus held his peace. And the high Priest answered and
said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou
be the Christ, the Son of God, or no. Jesus says unto him, etc.
Discovery.
I Discover Jesus his silence, he held his peace: he would not easily answer
nor vie to every common reproach; too much exceptions tenderness betraies a
cause more; for where are the replies more violent then with the guilty? He
held his peace; a tardy and slow defense has ever more grace with it then a
rash and violent: and now that the high Priest adjured him again, Jesus says
unto him; we count them but slight bells which chime at the first pull, and a
weak lock that opens at the first turn; Jesus held his peace, this was his
grave silence which would not chime nor open till the high Priest put more
strength to; I adjure thee by the living God, and then, Jesus says unto him.

The Flesh weak.
Matthew. 26. 40, 41. He comes unto the Disciples, and finds them asleep,
and says unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is willing, but the
flesh is weak.
The Flame.
LORD, how calm a check thy Son uses to a weak offender! for finding an
offense of infirmity, he chides and excuses it at once; Could ye not watch
with me? the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak: O Savior, who
can watch with thee! for thou art such a keeper of Israel as neither slumbers
nor sleeps; Could ye not watch with me? Indeed, O my God, we could not,
thou have the odds of us at watching, thou have an eye of Divinity always
open, The eyes of the Lord run to and fro; we have such clay about us, as
incrassates and duls our faculties; thy clay, O God, is refined and glorified,
and is far more pure and subtle then ours; yet, O Savior, thou excusest it,
the flesh is weak; and in this he modestly repeates their neglect, not urging
a duty for his own sake, but their own advantage; Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into temptation: Watch, that ye enter nor; too much notice of neglect
or offense done to your self, sounds in another ear too harshly of a self
esteem; therefore to avoid that, he wisely makes their own neglect their
danger; and holds them the Looking-glass so, that their own reflection may be
more then his, That ye enter not into temptation.

Not on this fashion.
Mark. 2. 12. And they were all amazed and glorified God, saying. We never saw
it on this fashion.
Discovery.
I Discover, nothing will sooner* create an amazement and admiration, then an
action out of the rode, or highway of working; They were all amazed; and why?
they never saw it on this fashion; had it been on this fashion, they had not
been so amazed: The way to be eminent and famous, is to do something not on
this fashion, to be something excentrick and incongruous in your attempt: Men
always turn after him, who turns the wheels of their expectation a new way.

In the hinder part of the Ship.
Matthew. 12. 47, 48. And he was in the hinder part of the Ship asleep on a
pillow.
The Flame.
MY God, thy Son is not very forward in any place; here he was in the hinder
part; every posture of Christ is instructive; now, that he is in a storm, he
keeps behind, and will not advance in a time of danger; let the rash and hasty
be in the forepart, he stays in the hinder: neither is this backwardness
more his wisdom then his virtue; for this hinder part is but his Hierogliphick
of Humility, and still you shall have him behind in any place or society,: it
is a duay he gives in charge, Love not the uppermost rooms, and, he that
humbles himself shall be exalted. But now, it is strange, that he should be
asleep in the Ship, yet he sleeps now in allegory; to be in a Ship, is no
more but to go at the morien of another; and to be thus swayed sometimes, is
discreet obedience; in the time of a storm, or dangerous commotion, it is good
being asleep; that is, as little active as you can, as far from being a party;
when the tide of others grows violent, it is dangerous sailing with them, it is
better (like thee, O Savior) to lie still, and be carried with the motion,
then to help with your own; for then you are the more patient, by how much
the less agent: to be asleep in the ship then, is to take no notice at the
storm or combustion, not to comply with it, but wisely to wink at an
unavoidable danger or trouble; yet, if it move or jog you, and will not suffer
you to sleep, get to your pillow however, to a place as soft and secure as you
may, and as far retired from any doing as you can, unless you have the power
and authority to rise up with Christ, and rebuke it into a calm.

Immediately.
Mark. 5. 2. And when he was come out of the Ship, immediately there met him.
Discovery.
I Discover, by that time Christ came here, there came one to meet him,
immediately there met him; immediately, he gave him no time to escape; Christ's
holy offers and opportunities must be taken, and the more immediately the
better; the closer and nearer you stick to the opportunity, the sooner and
surer is Christ yours: Immediately, then, when Christ came out: When he was
come out; Christ has his times of coming out, that is, of revealing and
showing himself to a soul, and then it is good meeting him, and taking him in
his early dawnings, and holy discoveries of himself to the soul: When he was
come out, immediately there met him; there should be a meeting on our parts
then, as well as Christ's, a holy preparation and endeavor is a rising up, a
stepping forward, a making toward Christ, a meeting him, There met him; and
where did he meet him, but when he was come out of the Ship? it is good
taking Christ at his first landing with you, at his first coming upon your
borders or coasts; when you hear him preached, or when your heart and
affections are touched with him, and a little affected with his Gospel, then
he is landed on your shore; your senses and affections are the coasts and
borders of your soul, and there take him, and meet him; Immediately there met
him.

The Daughter dead.
Mark. 5. 35. Thy Daughter is dead, Why troublest thou the Master any further?
Discovery.
I Discover, how soon a carnal hope would give over, how soon it despaires,
Thy Daughter is dead, and why troublest thou any further? as though all were at
an end with the Daughter, all life, and spirit, and expectation, and
importunity: such faint spirits must ever have some principle, some pulse or
motion in a business to encourage them on: if she be dead once, they die
too; such look not at Christ, at his power, at his life and word, but at the
Daughter that is dead; they consider not how Christ is alive, and how soon he
may blow a spirit into her arteries, and a soul into her body, and a spark
into her ashes; but the coldness in the body, and emptiness in the artery,
and incineration in the ashes; every sleep is to them a death, every
obstruction a destruction, every decay a ruin irreparable, every dissolution
an annihilation, prayers and holy importunities are vain troubles, and
hopeless endeavors, and redress of impossibilities, Why troublest thou the
Master any further? how soon a weak suggestion stops all the wheels, and
retards the business, and amazes the proceeding! how soon they are taken off
with any period or clause! Why troublest thou any further? not any further
probability or likelihood, not any further trouble or endeavor with them: how
easily is a carnal reason convinced! how strong an Argument can nature make!
how soon is her word taken, thy Daughter is dead!

Thy sword into his place.
Matthew. 26. 52. Then said Jesus, Put up again thy sword into his place.
The Flame.
O my God, even a Disciple to thy Jesus may draw his weapon in as much have as
another; his passions may be as soon unsheathed in defense of his Master; he
is but cold that has not so much heat as to be angry in Jesus cause, nor so
much courage as to wear a sword in his behalf; that is, has something of
power and authority about him: yet Jesus bids, Put up again thy sword; none of
his shall have a sword drawn against the sword of authority; if that be out,
his Disciple shall have command to put up again; a private weapon must not
clash against a public, neither be drawn, or at least appear: Put up thy
sword, that is, let there be even no show of resistance; and, Put it up into
his place, not into theirs, not into the place of the Magistrate or Authority;
sheath it not there, that is not his place, but theirs, the Kings, the Princes,
and Governors: it is to be feared, if the Disciples have their swords out,
they do not hear when Christ calls to Peter, in the name of the rest, Put up
thy sword again into his place.

Pray yonder.
Matthew. 26. 36, 37. And says unto the Disciples, Sit ye here while I go and
pray yonder. And he takes with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee.
Discovery.
I Discover, that Jesus teaches a decorum to his Disciples at Prayer, Sit ye
here; he places them, and orderly, Sit ye here: do not lean here, or use
any irreverent gesture, but, Sit ye here; and not while I pray here neither,
but, while I pray yonder: thus he wisely distinguishes his duty and theirs; if
they sit here, he will pray yonder; they must keep a decent distance while he
officiates; they must be here, and he yonder, not both here. or both yonder*
but as though here he had appointed seats for them* and yonder a pew for
himself; and, sit ye, while I go, that is, quiet, settle, compose your
thoughts and passions, stay them from wandering and straying; Sit ye, that is,
put your selves in a firm posture, use your preparation while I use mine; Sit
ye while I go, that is, my spirit, my soul has a journey to take, yet,
beyond yours* as far as a prayer: Sit ye while I go and pray; and, sit ye
while I go, as though here should be the Congregation, and yonder the
Minister; Sit ye while I go, while I move in the services, while I, I your
Master, and Minister, and Bishop of your souls* while I go: And he goes not
alone neither, he will have his holy assistants and co-adjutors, as a grace
and honor to the prayer and service, though they do little; and they shall not
go after him to this holy business neither, but with him, as it were beside
him at the holy employment, And he takes with him Peter and the two sons of
Zebedee.

The Place.
Matthew. 28. 6. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.
The Flame.
O My God, the very place where Jesus has been is good and graceful to look
at, Come see the place; the very place has so much worth in it as will deserve
a Come and see; Come, it is a good motion and setting forward to Religion; to
come where Christ has been, to see the place of him, where he was either
preached, or taught, or died, or buried: Christ has more places then one;
every soul that has had Christ a day, or a night, or a month, or a year,
that has had a form of godliness and Christianity, has for that time been
the place or tomb where the Lord lay, where he so journed; and, come and see
how empty the place is without him* how unfurnished now he is gone! and in
Apostacies or fallings away you may see the place where the Lord lay; for such
souls are but his tombs for the time, places where he dies, where his
graces, and virtue, and power perish, and these were places where the Lord lay;
for he never stood here, never sat here in these souls; their godliness was
never in so firm and stout a posture; but, he lay, the posture he was in was a
faint, a feeble, a declining, a disable posture.

Jesus met them.
Matthew. 28. 9. And as they went to tell his Disciples, Jesus met them.
Discovery.
I Discover, they that go upon Jesus business shall be sure of his company
sooner or later; if not at their setting forward, yet ere they come to their
journies end: as they went Jesus met them, them that were seekers and followers
of him, them that had a longing and desire after him, he met them; but it was
in their journey, in their going, in their employment about him, as they went:
If Jesus meet any, it shall be such as are going and stirring toward him, for
then he 'll meet them, save them a labor in their holy pursuit after him; he
'll meet them, and by this motion enable them more to go and follow him; he
seldom meets any that stand or sit, but rather meets with them in a check or
rebuke, as with those in the parable, Why stand ye here idle?

He saw and glorified.
Luke 23. 47. Now when the Centurion saw what was done, he glorified God,
saying, Certainly this was a righteous man.
Discovery.
I Discover, how deliberately the Centurion censures, with what caution; he
first saw what was done, then, Certainly, etc. while all was a doing, he said
nothing, he forbore till he saw how the wonder would prove, and then he said,
Certainly: the best verdict is that which is given after clear testimonies;
half premises allow but half conclusions; there can be no saying Certainly,
till there be a seeing what is done, and now the Centurion saw, he glorified
God, saying; where there is a seeing, there will be a saying too; if we open
our eyes upon the works of God, we should open our mouths too; we should say
as well as see, He glorified God, saying: but first there was a seeing, before
there was a saying; our eyes should be the Tapors to light us in our
admirations and praises below; but in wonders above, I will say as certainly,
though I never saw; We walk by faith and not by sight.

Tell his Disciples.
Mark. 16. 7. But go your way, tell his Disciples and Peter, that he goes
before you into Galilee.
The Flame.
O My God! thy Angel dismisses them, now that Jesus is not there; he will not
suffer them to stay in a place where he is not, go your way; now that Jesus
is gone, go you too: there is no staying too long by Jesus his toombe: we may
be there, that is, we may die with him, or be buried with him, therefore says
Paul, We are buried with him by Baptism unto his death: but then we must not
linger too long at the grave; not laying again (as the Apostle says) the
foundation of repentance from dead works, but we must away after to Galilee,
Let us go on to perfection: And as Christ was raised from the dead, so we also
should walk in newness of life: for, he goes before you into Galilee; he
goes before you, a good encouragement for us to follow after; it is good
having JESUS before us, in our eye; we shall run more cheerfully the race
that is set before us, while we may look at JESUS, the Author and Finisher
of our Faith: neither is it enough for us to follow him alone, but we must
take others along with us, Tell his Disciples; and if there be any way that
Jesus goes, any track or path, whether by Galilee, or any other way or mystery
of godliness, we must call upon others, and take them, tell his Disciples
that he goes before you into Galilee; and if there be any one in particular,
that stands in need of a special intimation, tell even him, tell his Disciples
and Peter.

Stood by the Cross.
John 19. 25. Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus, his mother, and his
mothers Sister.
Discovery.
I Discover, those that have any relation to Jesus will be sure to be near his
Cross, yet Jesus and the Cross must be together, or else you shall have none
of them there: if the Cross be there and not Jesus, you shall neither see
mother, nor mothers sister; those that stand by the Cross when Jesus is not
there, are some whom their superstition have brought thither, not their
religion. Now there stood by the Cross; they pass not by it in a dis-regard,
but take it for a thing they may stand by; that is, they come under the shadow
and patronage of it: I see it was enough for these here, the mother, and the
mothers sister, to stand by the Cross; they were crucified in the standing by
it; but for us, we must go nearer it, be nailed to it, For they that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

Philip, and Andrew, and Jesus.
John 12. 21, 22. The same came therefore to Philip which was of Bethsaida of
Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would see Jesus Philip comes and
tells Andrew: and again, Andrew and Philip told Jesus.
Discovery.
I Discover here, a desire in the lay and ignorant to see Jesus; saying, Sir,
we would see Jesus: their course and address for it was this, The same came
therefore to Philip; the way to know Jesus, or his Gospel, or graces, is by
Philip; if you would see Jesus, come to an Apostle, to a Philip; the same came
therefore to Philip; therefore, even for that cause, for seeing Jesus: it is
not for us to have Jesus in our ears, but our eyes too; to hear of him, but
to see him; to have a spiritual knowledge of him, That I may know him, (says
Saint Paul) and the power of his resurrection: and in their address to Philip
for the knowledge of Jesus I discover their reverend opinion of an Apostle,
saying, Sir; an Apostle or Minister has so much power about him, as to
persuade them into a Sir that seek him; and those that would see Jesus, that
desire and long after the sight and knowledge of him, will always give a fair
respect to Philip, even, Sir, we would see: thus they come to Philip, they step
not sawcily to Jesus himself, but they make use of Philip; Philip must be their
expositor, and commentator, and director to Jesus; not like those who step to
Jesus first, and leave Philip and all he can do; they will not be beholden
to the Church, they will find out Jesus themselves: yet I see Philip shows them
not Jesus at the first, or by himself, but he will take Andrews opinion with
him, Philip comes and tells Andrew; in the business of seeing Jesus, or
any thing of his, it is good having more eyes along with us then our own; an
harmony and consent does well, and Andrew may further us; neither does Philip
or Andrew make any such report of Jesus as may stay them from seeing; no, it
were not enough for them to see Jesus in Philip or Andrew, but in himself;
they must not rest in Authority, neither in Philip nor Andrew, nor make them
their period for seeing, that they may say with the Samaritans, Now we
believe, not because of your saying, but because we have seen him our selves.

Little of stature.
Luke 19. 3. And he sought to see Jesus, who he was, and could not for the
prease, because he was little of stature.
Discovery.
I Discover, how many things put themselves betwixt us and Jesus: though our
desire be to see him, yet there will either be a prease to hinder us, a crowd,
a constipation of vain thoughts, and worldly solicitations, which will
interpose and eclipse the clearenesse of Jesus to us; He sought to see Jesus,
but could not for the prease, or else our own stature will be a disadvantage
in our endeavor and seeking; he sought, but could not see, for he was little
of stature; though our lowness or dis-proportion may hinder us, yet our souls
must have a raising, an elevation to see him; they must be a little divined
and deified, a little glorified in inchoation; they must be taller, and more
divinely lofty for Jesus; He was little of stature, and therefore could not;
our statures of nature are but low, but dwarfish, shadows cast at noone,
neither can we with our Inch take measure of his Infinity; our Reason is too
short to make a perspective for seeing Jesus; it is but little of stature,
grace must advance it higher, and give as much faith as will make a holy
perspective; for, Faith is the evidence of things unseene: And this prease will
still be in our way to Jesus too, he could not for the prease; if we would
see Jesus, it were good acquitting ourselves of the multitude, and getting
clear of the prease of the world; for many are thronging about Christ, Many
are called, but few chosen.

Washed their feet.
John 13. 12. After he had washed their feet, and was set down, he said unto
them, Know ye what I have done unto you?
The Flame.
O My God, how full of meaning and mystery every action of Jesus is! and, how
inquisitive Jesus is to give us notice! Know ye what I have done? and how dull
a carnal eye is in discerning! he had washed, but not their eyes; and
therefore as yet they saw nothing in it; he had washed their feet, but not
their head, and therefore as yet they understood as little: he said unto them,
Know ye? he would as it were catechize their ignorance into some knowledge,
and warily convey them a resolution in a question, Know ye what I have done?
what an excellent Syntaxis is here! Christ's very washing is Grammatical and
instructive; every thing of Christ's may afford us something worth our
studying* his very towell has a lesson in the folds of it, of cleansing and
sanctifying; his water flows with instruction in the falling and trilling, and
drops documents of humility at the feet of his Disciples: O Savior! me thinks
thou art dispatching many things here, thou art handling their feet both into
virtue and knowledge, as though they should observe, that their feet did the
best in thy hands, walked evenest, and plainest, and surest, with least error
when thou have the guiding of them: and now thou art washing their feet, thou
intimatest a filth and corruption in our parts of practice and conversation,
that we cannot stir in the ways of the world, but something will stick to us,
that we shall still need thy water and to well, while we walk here; and that
we shall never be so clean and pure Disciples, but we shall still have a foot
or a toe for washing.

They besought him.
Luke 7. 4, 5. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him, saying, he was
worthy for whom he should do this. For he has loved our Nation, and built us
a Synagogue.
Discovery.
I Discover, what an interest and obligation public favors lay upon those
they concern! how many here come to Jesus in the Centurions behalf! They came
to Jesus; they, even they who had a common interest in the courtesy he did, He
loved our Nation, and built us a Synagogue, and for this love to their Nation,
they return him love again, for, they came to Jesus for him; and for his
building a Synagogue, they build him a good reputation saying, that he was
worthy; and why? because he loved our Nation: if you would gain a people you
must do something that is popular; nothing wins a Nation so as a National
favor, and to do this, you must raise your courtesy a story or two higher
then the ordinary height; he built us a Synagogue, you must build something,
that is, do something of eminency, of notice, of duration, that may tower, and
may continue above a private favor: you must build, that is, lay things
together, reconcile, and cement, and unite; and such structures of friendship
and charity are such Synagogues as would be built both in civil and holy
societies.

The Tabernacle.
Luke 9. 33. Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here, let
us make three Tabernacles, one for (...) Moses and one for Elias, not knowing
what he said.
Discovery.
I Discover, as soon as any thing below pleases us, how soon we would be
building, providing for residence: Peter is but a little advanced and
enlightened, and now no place will serve him but here, It is good for us to be
here, here in this mount, here, where we see such a glory, such brightness or
raiment, but yet in all this, not knowing what he said: Oh the vanity of a
carnal sense! how is Peter's eye ravished with these that appear, with Moses,
and Elias, and their bright apparition! he sees their luster, and must needs
make them Tabernacles; it is dangerous to have the glory of the creature too
much in your eye, lest you admire it, and advance it too much: Let us make
three Tabernacles, one for Thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias; how is Peter
transported, to reckon Moses and Elias with Jesus! one for Thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias; what an error was this in Peter to set up Moses and
Elias Tabernacles with Jesus, on the same Mount and height with him! to honor
a saint or creature with the Creator! yet in all this, not knowing what he
said; for had he understood himself, sure here would have been no such
building, no such making of Tabernacles.

He set his face.
Luke 9. 51. He steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem.
Discovery.
I Discover here a firm resolution in Jesus; if he look toward a place or
purpose in earnest, he goes on for it, and turns not back on his way; He see
his face to go; his very looks and face shall steer him, and his countenance
shall be set, that his feet may go the more firmly, he set his face: those
that are unstable in their ways, have their faces running and stirring, not
well set, not steadfastly; and they that go back and Apostate in their
resolutions and purposes, never had their faces steadfastly set: He steadfastly
set his face, and whither, but for Jerusalem, a place he was to suffer and die
at? In necessities and occasions which we cannot avoid, it is good to set our
face, and steadfastly to conform and confirm our resolutions: never a Martyr
nor holy Saint in their suffering, or way to the heavenly Jerusalem, but they
had this holy feat of setting their face, and steadfastly to go; for no man
looking back is fit for the Kingdom.

The Loaves.
John 6. 26. Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did
eat of the loaves.
The Flame.
O My God! it is not enough to seek Christ, to take pains after him* but to
consider our ends and de^^res; we may seek him, and ye not seek him; even in
our bu^^est inquisition, Ye seek me not, says Christ here to those that even
then iought him; Ye seek me, and seek me not as ye ought, not because, but
because: if it be a temporal want sends us after him; we seek him not
because, but because of that supply, because ye did eat of the loaves; the
loaves is the dole we follow him for, therefore in all adherences and
addressings to him, see that there be no loaves in the way, see that it be not
his provision more then himself; yet, Lord, now let me follow thee for thy
loaves, and not because of thy miracles, for thou art now more prodigal of thy
bread then thy wonders, and more to be sought for in it then them, thy bread is
thy body now: Lord, let us always find these loaves on thy Table, and then
we will seek thee, not because of thy miracles, but because we eat of thy
loaves; not of thy miracles in the loaves, for thou art not in thy bread by any
miracle of Transubstantiation, but signification and Sacramental relation: I
am the bread of life which came down from heaven; and thus we will seek thee
not because, but because; not because of any miracle, but because we eat of thy
loaves; yet if these loaves were not kneaded up with any spiritual leaven, if
there were no Sacrament here, it were good seeking thee, though but because of
these loaves; thou can win us with thy earthly fare to the heavenly, with
thy temporal to thy spiritual; thou can bair thy trap of christianity with
a loaf, and catch us by the souls at such a time of relief.

Whom say the people.
Luke 9. 18. And he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am?
Discovery.
I Discover that Jesus desires to hear from his Disciples the censures and
opinions of others; he asked them, Whom say the people? he asks them of the
people, he speaks to the multitude through a few, as one that looks on a large
object through a small Lattice or Casement: you may often take a measure of the
peoples opinions better by another line then your own; he asked them, them
that were often abroad and conversant, he asked them, Whom say the people that
I am? if you would hear your own report, lay your ear to their mouth,
theirs, who are your Creatures and Disciples, or Intelligencers: reports and
censures are the best heard; as Imagery is seen, at a distance; Whom say the
people; it is not the say or voice of a few that should move us, but what say
the people? or Whom say the people? their censure would be sought and enquired
after; it is good hearing what we are as well to others as our selves; the
multitude are such a Crystal as we may dress our conversation and actions
by, Whom say the people that I am? not what or whom are any of the people, not
what is this man or that; such inquiry is over our own threshold, and out of
our own doors, and is very curious and impertinent, Christ's is more domestic
and homeward, Whom say the people that I am?

Some say ELIAS.
Luke 9. 19. They answering, said, JOHN the Baptist: but some say, ELIAS:
others say, that one of the old Prophets is risen again.
Discovery.
I Discover how diverse are the opinions that wait upon any famous or public
party; some say John, some Elias: like an optic glass held before the Sun,
whose beams by shooting in make many various colors, they that sun and air
their good parts abroad, shall always be thus variegated, and parti-colored
by opinions and censures, which strike upon them* a John, and an Elias, and an
old Prophet. What a retraction in opinions here! how diverse is the medium or
judgment which people look thorough! how broken the form and figure appears
into one and another, into a John, or Elias; in one opinion or a few perhaps he
is only a John, only an Elias, or only a Christ; as in one entire Crystal,
there is but one face or whole proportion: but if this one be shivered, how
many appears! if it be some say, or others say, then the glass is shivered,
the people are broken and in parts, the refractions are as diverse as
themselves, then a John Baptist, or Elias, or an old Prophet; yet is not Christ
put by his doings, by the sayings of any; though some say, and others say, he
keeps himself Christ still; they cannot talk him either from himself or
business; neither by saying he is this or that can they say him into an Elias,
or John Baptist, or an old Prophet: it is no matter how many and diverse the
opinions be about us, so we continue one and the same; if Christ be Christ, it
is no matter who say he is either John or Elias.

Forbid him not.
Mark 9. 38, 39. Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, and we
forbad him, because he follows not with us, And JESUS said, Forbid him not.
The Flame.
O God, this is the error of thy Disciples judgment: they forbid, whom thy
Christ allows: how soon had thy Disciples set up their Consistory, and
dispatched their Inhibitions, we forbad him! one would think he might very
well have gone for a Disciple, so long as he was in Christ's name, and wore his
cognizance, but we forbad him; we to whom thou gave Apostleship and power; we
at whose girdle thou tied the keys, we forbad, and why? because he followed
not with us, with us; they must have him, with themselves as well as Christ,
and then all is well; had he followed Christ and followed with them, they had
not forbad him* but, he followed not with us: out error is, we still put in
for a share with Jesus, we must be followed in something as well as Christ;
every one of us, say as* Saint Paul, Be ye followers of me, etc. we have
either some opinion, or some doctrine, or something we would have followed as
well as Christ: he followed not with us, that is, in our company, in our
faction, that way that we followed Christ, therefore we forbad him: but Christ
says forbid him not, for he that is not against us is with us, not against us
in any fundament all truth, or principle, is with us in the maine: he that is
ours in the root, may be allowed his own in a leaf or circumstance:
therefore, forbid him not, no, Christ had not need go less in any, the harvest
is great, and what then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in
truth, Christ is preached. Phil. 1. 18.

As JOHN also.
Luke 11, 1. One of his Disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as JOHN
also taught his Disciples.
Discovery.
I Discover that even the Disciples stood need of a document for prayer, Lord
teach us; though God gave them free and full graces, which could be fluent and
largely dis-sheve^^^ in devotions, yet, Lord teach us; one would think God had
taught them sufficiently in joining his spirit with theirs, his grace to their
nature, his holy affections to theirs, yet, Lord teach us: we must have
another, a second rule, and model for our devotions; the spirit, though of a
Disciple, may be too devoutly licentious and too holy a libertine and outlaw,
unless there be a law, a rule to straiten it; the girdle of a liturgy does
well, to buckle in our holy passions and affections, which would be a little
too fluent and scattered in themselves: it is good going to God, as Saint Paul
went to Jerusalem, behold I go bound in spirit, therefore Lord teach us, that
is, let us have a form of prayer; this is no new request, no teach us as John
also taught; there have been still some teaching, some forms of prayer both
before Christ, and now should be after him too; John was at this ere Christ
came, John was teaching, and dispersing copies and forms to his Disciples; as
John also taught his Disciples.

Your lights burning.
Luke 12. 35. Let your loins be girded, and your lights burning.
Discovery.
I Discover there must be a holy girding and trussing up for heaven, let your
loins be girded; if any affection or passion hang loose about you, let those
that have most of the loine in them, that is, those that are most carnal and
fleshly, gird them up; let your loins be girded, that is, close and strait
bound and gathered to you, let them be girded; they may be tied or slackly and
loosely pinned up, that is, your affections may pretend well, be good and
moral, or slightly religious for a time; but when they are so slenderly tied,
they may soon fall loose about you again, let them be girded* and no more;
and yet not too strait neither, lest they crist and gird into Christian
stoicisme, or too much austerity: and let your lights be burning too; the light
of reason, and that of grace, and that of nature, or what other tapour your God
has lighted you up; let them be burning, that is, full of heat and light; not
only shining, but burning, that is, not only in show and profession, but
burning, sparkling with true heat; not casting any false flames, but true
spiritual fire; burning, that is, dispensing as well a vigor and influence
upon others as your self, that you may kindle your neighbors fuel and set
his holy affections on fire too, let your lights be burning.

Followed a far off.
Matthew. 26. 58. But PETER followed him a far off.
Discovery.
I Discover that Christ has still some in a society that will follow, but
Peter followed: Peter will not give over, he will go how ever the world go;
yet though Peter be the only Disciple that follows him the danger and
misery of the season takes him much off in his following; for, though he
followed, yet he followed but a far off, and this pace and distance a far
off keeps him from a total declination and forsaking: let us keep us
following then however; though we follow but a far off, yet let us walk in
sight of Jesus, that our eye lose him not quite, neither the world and affairs
of it interpose themselves fully, and eclipse all: but Peter followed, and, at
this time of suffering, Peter before all the rest; this was in presage and
omen, because he was to follow him in the like suffering; and he followed a
far off, which falling so far behind, was a preamble to a further
distance, even that of denial.

Dry places.
Matthew. 11. 24. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none, he says I will return
unto my house whence I came out.
Discovery.
I Discover the Diveil will not always be tempting, and suggesting, and
working, but he will have his times of going out; when the unclean Spirit is
gone out; there is no man but he shall have his Vacation as well as Terme-time,
and that time shall be a season of cleanliness and moral neatness with him;
when the unclean Spirit is gone out: he that kept the rooms of the soul
sluttish and foul is gone out, has quit the place, and now his progress is
restless and unquiet, for being gone out, he walks; ^^i^ he is busy seeking
new houseroome, new lodgings, but the places are not for him, they are too
dry; therefore he walks through, he makes no stay nor residence, and why?
the places or souls are dry; dry, that is enflamed, and heared with grace
and holy affections; as the Heart thirsts after the water brooks, so
thirsts the soul after thee, O God: the places are thirsty and adust, and
scorched with heat and pierie; and these are too dry for him, they must have
more of the f^nne and carnal quag-mire, if he stay or take up his Inn, else
he walks through; through, indeed, for they will not let him rest, nor hover,
nor retard with a temptation, seeking rest but sindes none; the graces in the
place where he walks are busy to dispatch and expel him, so that he walks
through, and then back to those souls again that were his; I will return to
my house, says he; my house, those that give themselves more freely to his
suggestions, and unclean inspirations are his indeed, he has more interest
and engagement there; my house, for he takes up and furnishes their rooms,
their hearts and thoughts, with lusts and iniquiries, which are the only
furniture and stuste he brings.

JESUS before them.
Mark. 10. 32. And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem, and JESUS went
before them, and they were amazed, and as they followed, they were afraid.
Discovery.
I Discover it is good being in the way to Jerusalem, And they were in the way;
so long as we are in the way, we are all upon the ascent and going up, as they
were in the way going up; so long as we are in the way, every step we take is
nearer heaven then other: these in the way here were going up to Jerusalem; the
Jerusalem we go to is above too, situated on high, and every pace thither
should be loftier and more advancing then other; set your affections on things
above, Colos. 3. 2. and these that are in this way to Jerusalem, they shall be
sure of Jesus before them, for, our High Priest is passed into heaven, even
Jesus the Son of God, Hebr. 4. 14. it is safe going there where Jesus is gone
before, and we may trace him indeed by his blood into heaven; besides he
scattered such graces and virtues as he went, that the way is become more
pleasant and easy: this it is then to have Jesus, as they had him here,
before; but it is dangerous putting forward before Jesus; they that would be at
heaven at once, in a rapture, and would take post and spur away in a good
motion, would be at Jerusalem before Jesus; for his pace we know was soft,
and grave, and serious, and continued; he rid thither on an Ass, and then his
haste could not be great: yet though we take Jesus here, as these took him
before, yet we shall be amazed and afraid, as we follow after; and they were
amazed, and as they followed they were afraid; there are many things which come
in our way as we are following Jesus, many things to amaze us, the eternal
generation, the word was with God, etc. the incarnation, the power of the
Highest shall over-shadow thee; these and other divine Mysteries will amaze us,
and then the afflictions, and tribulations, and sufferings in the way after him
will make us afraid, for we must be crucified to the world, and the world to
us; and we must forsake our selves, and take up our Cross and follow him.

A Judge and a Divider
Luke 12. 14. And he said unto him, Man, who made me a Judge, or Divider over
you?
The Flame.
O My God! how thy Son declines secular judicature and employment; Man, who
made me a Judge? and thus with a question he declines from himself a thing in
question, Who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you? none had more reason to
judge, one would think, for men, then he that made man ^ and was both God and
man, and shall keep the last Session, and be the great Commissioner for God
Almighty; he that shall have his tribunal, and so many Apostles or sacred
Justices of Peace beside him; yet, Man, who has made me a Judge? one would
think he that had made him God and Man, would allow him to be Judge over men,
to keep an Assise, where ere he come, for all controversies and divisions;
yet, Who has made me a Divider? Indeed, O Savior, thou art no Divider, but a
Reconciler, and Compounder; thou knit'st together heaven and earth, when they
parted; thou tiedst God and Man on one knot, and a surer then before, in thy
holy hypostasis and reconciliation; they do ill then to make thee a Divider,
though it be only in some temporal difference, for thou disclaims that too;
thou will not set up a Session and civil tribunal so near to thy
Consistory; thou were God for another Court, thou have appointed other gods
for these, Princes, and Judges, and Magistrates, I have said ye are gods; ye,
for such business; I, for more holy employment, for the law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John 1. 17.

The greatest the least.
Mark 9. 34. For, by the way they had disputed among themselves who should be
greatest.
Discovery.
FOr, by the way, etc. and I discover they were quite by the way now; who
should be greatest? this is no way for a Disciple of Christ, to dispute for
Primacie, the Kings of the Nations exercise Dominion; who shall be greatest
then, is a question for them, for their ambitions, for their dominations; but
the Disciples honor is like their profession, is quite cross to theirs, to be
least with them is to be greatest; who shall be least then? humility and low
linesse are the spiritual honors and greatness, and every such declination
is an Apostles advancement and greatness; yet there is an honor too for a
Disciple and a double honor, says the Apostle; there is a Lordship and
Mastership too, the very spirits were subject unto them, and their power in the
keys, is a power over every spirit too, whose sins ye retein they are
retained, etc. And here must needs be a greatness which has influence so
far as to the souls and spirits; and there is another greatness too, of
title and compellation, some Apostles, some Evangelists, and some Doctors, etc.
some Overseers, look to the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you
Overseers; and some Angels of the Church, to the Angel of the Church in
Pergama, and to the Angel of the Church in Sardis: and Paul invests and inables
Timothy thus, These things command and teach; a Disciple may command then as
well as teach, may be as well Imperative as Indicative.

Whose shooe-latchet.
John 1. 27. Whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to un-loose.
Discovery.
I Discover, that Christ's shoe was his Gospel, therefore says he, Over Edom
will I cast out my shoe; and this shoe, the Gospel, is fit for his feet; and
the lowest part of him, his humanity is his feet, for with that his Godhead
stood and walked upon earth, and therefore happy was that sinner that could
kiss his feet, and wipe them with her hairs, and wash them with her tears,
when his shoes, his Gospel, was on. And now how beautiful are the feet of
him that brings glad-tidings! for upon these was his Gospel drawn, that holy
shoe, which was only made for his Last; no other can fit it, but him, but his
graces and mysteries; and yet these shoes have a latchet, the holy language,
and parables, and phrases tie on, and fasten these shoes; and these latchets
are only for Prophets, and Apostles, and Ministers to un-loose; every rude hand
and un-hollowed finger must not touch these latchets, nor these shoes: I am
not worthy, says John; if John was not worthy, nor good enough for this
service of unloosing, and interpreting, and expounding, what are we? to preach
or teach, is no more but to un-loose a latchet of the shoe, the Gospel, to
un-loose; it is an un-loosing then, an untying the knot: there must be no
breaking, nor cutting, no violent pulling off of the shoe, that is, no giddy,
no hasty, no inconsiderate expounding, but an unloosing the latchet, a
careful, and sober, and gentle hand must be used, such a hand as will un-loose.

He says unto him.
John 1. 41. He first finds his own Brother SIMON, and says unto him, We
have found the Messiah.
The Flame.
O My God, how careful are thy Disciples! how busy to communicate and
inform! he finds his Brother, and says unto him: This is Christian
industry to seek our Brothren till we find them, he finds his Brother; if
our Brother be out of the way of Christianity, and in any byway, or any dark
way, or way of ignorance, let us find him out, he finds his Brother; and
finding him, it is not enough to see him, or pass by him, but we must tell him
if we see more, or know more then he, or if we have found more, he says unto
him, We have found the Messiah; as soon here as he found him, he tells him
they had found the Messiah; if we find the Messiah or any thing of the
Messiahs, any grace or mystery revealed, let us say, We have found, for it is
not enough to find, but to say, We have found, to publish and reveal it to
another. The woman that had found her groat, called in all about her, and told
them; and he that had found his sheep, and his son, Rejoice with me, says
he.

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.
Those men.
John 6. 14. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did,
said, This is of a truth that Prophet.
Discovery.
I Discover how soon any thing of wonder strikes the true believers into
devotion, and protestation; when they had seen the miracle, they said, This is
of a truth that Prophet; when they had seen, they said: We must have a sight
before we will say any thing; and of a truth, before we will affirm any
thing, or avouch any thing. Our eyes are the only sense of credit and
employment with us, and they must be spoken to first, when they had seen the
miracle, our Savior bespeaks their sight, and that will soon make report of
it to their judgment and affections, and win him a party soon in a soul;
if he get but the eyes to consent, the other parts will be easily persuaded,
when they had seen the miracle, they said: and then the parties that see are
observable, if they be as they were here, those men, there is more hopes;
those men when they had seen: now those men were people of mean rank and
fashion, and when they had seen, they said, This is that Prophet; but the
richer, and greater; and wiser men, the Pharisees and Scribes, they saw the
signs and miracles, but no better for the fight, they said not This is that
Prophet, but he is a Samaritane, and has a Devil.

Willingly received him.
John 6. 21. Then they willingly received him into the Ship, and immediately the
Ship was at the land whither they went.
Discovery.
I Discover that having Jesus, we have our desires, and with dispatch too;
for, having received him, the Ship was immediately at the land whither they
went; immediately, without any cross wind or wave of impediment; if we be
then embarked upon the Sea, that is, engaged or tossed in any worldly affair
or trouble, let us make all haste we can to receive Jesus, and we shall be at
land immediately; and the Ship was immediately at the land: yet many receive
Jesus into their Ship or frail barque of their souls, and meet with many a
high Sea and rough storm, which keep them from whither they would go, but then
they receive him not as these; here, they willingly received him: there must
be a willing receiving, a free-hearted open receiving; neither must we receive
him so much for our selves, and our present redress and success, as for
himself; many receive him, and willingly too, but their own need, and
extremity, or desire prompts them, and then they receive not him, him as pure
Christ, as only Redeemer, but him as a present Fautour, or Deliverer; and such
willingness may be rather a remora, and retard then facilitate.

To make him a King.
John 6. 15. When JESUS therefore perceived that they would come and take him
by force to make him a King, he departed again etc.
The Flame.
O My God, will thou accept of no Crowns here below? no Scepters? indeed their
Crowns are but of thorns here, and their Scepters of reeds: how many wounds
do these Crowns make! who ever wore an Empire or Kingdom about his temples,
and complained not of the scratching, and tearing, and rending, and bleeding?
and cried not out with the Shunamite, my head my head? Such, O Lord, are the
troubles and distractions of State: who ever held a Scepter and complained not
of the weakness? how like a reed it would shake at every wind and air of
trouble or commotion? and therefore did thou depart when they came and would
make the a King; or else were thou so low and humble, that thou would not
suffer thy head nor thy hand to be guilt with soverainty? was this thy
exinanition? O my God, give the same humility to thine, that as thou were God,
and came downinto man; were Lord of all, and took upon thee the form of a
servant; so we may make it our highest pinnacle to be lowest, our throne to be
on a footstool, our greatest honor to be serviceable to others; for I am
among you as he that serves, and that all may know they are but men within, in
their composition and principles, and only endorsed with the superscription of
gods, I have said ye are gods, but ye shall die like men; and that all may
know their Kingdom is not altogether of this world.

A Kingdom divided.
Matthew. 12. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to
desolation.
Discovery.
I Discover, that division is the way to desolation: Divide and rule then is no
Aphorism here; discord does well in any music, but the music of Sovereignty:
whatsoever the Kingdom then or Empire be that we have, let us keep it from
being divided: nothing spoils our Kingdom of nature so much as factious
humors, and distempers, and bruisings, and breakings; for these set up
unwholesome stares, and infect, and corrupt the good Provinces and Shires of our
flesh and blood; and by this we are soon brought to desolution: or, if our
Kingdom be a Kingdom of grace that we have, let us keep it from being
divided; nothings brings this Kingdom to desolation sooner then a law in the
members warring against the law of the mind; for in every Kingdom there
should be a continuity, and concatenation, and consolidation, and where the
Kingdom is divided, there must needs be a dissolution and parting of the parts
continued, and a breaking and rupture of the links, the laws, and firm
combination; and now all is divided, and there are so many flawes and chinkes,
that any thing may flow in: division is the leekes of the Kingdom, and where
these are open, there may soon spring in a tide which may drown all.

Nation against Nation.
Mark. 13. 8. For Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against
Kingdom, and there shall be Earthquakes in diverse places.
The Flame.
LOrd, what combustion! what commotion is here! Nation against Nation, and
Kingdom against Kingdom; Spokest thou this only to Judea and Jerusalem, or
has not thy speech a latitude and influence into our times? are not our
Nations within the territories of this Nation? are not our Kingdoms within the
liberties of this Kingdom here? Nation against Nation and Kingdom against
Kingdom? even now, thy words were a Kingdom against it self, and now it is
one Kingdmoe a against another: Lord, now I see thy word fulfilled, I am not
come to send peace, but the sword; but how does this suit with thee the God of
peace? Peace was sung at thy Nativity, on earth peace; and peace was thy only
blessing, peace be unto you; from whence then, O my God, is this war? is it not
enough that we have war in our selves, and fight against principalities and
powers, and spiritual wickedness, but we must call new forces, and set up new
standards, and above our Shield of Faith and Helmet of Salvation, and
Breast Plate of Righteousness put on other armor; Must it be Nation against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom? O thou that art the God of peace, from
whence is this Nation against Nation and Kingdom against Kingdom? from whence
come these wars and fightings? come they not hence, even of your lusts? Jam.
4. 1. your lusts and desires are inordinate, irregular, and exorbitant, and
they cause these Earthquakes in diverse places; our fears and tremblings are
these Earthquakes, when not only the earth we tread on shakes, but the earth
we are. Our opinions, and waverings, and giddie motions are the cause of these
quakings, for, we are tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine: We, our
earth, our selves do shake with a wind and vapor of faction, and sedition,
that is got into our veins and arteryes, but the foundation of God stands
sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and, O God, fix us and settle us upon thy foundation, and
give our Nations and Kingdoms peace, thou that made peace through the blood of
thy Cross, and let the peace of God rule in our hearts, that we may pray for
the peace of Jerusalem.

FINIS.

