OF THE ANCIENT LAWS OF great Britain.

Seruato Ius, metue Mortalis Deum.

George Saltern.



LONDON Printed for John Iaggard, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Fleetestreete, at the Sign of the hand and Star. 1605.

De Antiquis Britanniae Legibus.
Cap. 1.
IN all actions, in every election, in every counsel and deliberation, it is
to be held for a certain and undoubted principle, that, Only things Godly,
just, and necessary are to be done, and that with due invocation of Divine
assistance, without the which nothing can be done. So the first consideration
ought to be of the end, the second of the means, the third of the effectual
working power, which cannot be hindered, which is only the spirit of God all
sufficient. Genesis 17.1
By this we may see how that ground is to be understood, which some have
taken, namely that in all innouations there ought to be urgent necessity, or
evident utility. A ground which if it had bin used only as it was first
proposed by a Pagan, Vlpianus.
I would say that it were altogether imperfect and defective, seeing the
consideration of Godliness and justice, is quite omitted; but seeing the same is
now taken and pressed by Christians, I will desire them to admit a Christian
exposition, and to say that Religion, Piety and Justice, do carry the weight
of necessity and vtility, and whatsoever is Godly and just, the same is
necessary and proffitable, according to the saying of the Apostle: 1. Tim. 4.
Godliness is proffitable to all things and has the promises of this life and
of the life to come. And again whatsoever is not Godly and just, the same is
not to be done whatsoever necessity or utility may seem to be in it: as it
is written. Mat. 10.37
He that loves Son or daughter more the^ me, is not worthy of me. And so
that ground is much more perfect and absolute which out of a Pagan, is thus
expressed:

Seruato ius et metue mortalis Deum. How Godly and just a thing it is to
establish a perfect Unity in these Kingdoms, for the confirmation of an
everlasting peace between them, and by consequence thereof, for the increase
and propagation of Gods truth and his Gospel, in a former treatise I have
showed according to the best of my understanding.

Now I take in hand to speak of our ancient Laws, and God is the beginning
and end of my work. The thing it self is no less fit and necessary for this
time to be known, then obscure and difficult to expound. For whether we
consider our Statutes enacted since the Norman, we shall find them grounded
upon most just and prudent jntentions: or the remnants of our Acts made by
the Saxons, we shall see them full of Godly and devout admonitions, or the secret
footesteps of the ancient British constitutions, appering yet in the body of
our common Laws, the principles thereof will appear to be the very Laws of
the eternal God, written in the two immortal tables of nature and Scripture.
The reason hereof surbordinate under the gracious ordinance of the Almightye,
was either the blessed disposition of our Princes, whose matches for Godliness
and virtue no country but the Cradle of our Savior could ever afford (as our
eyes now do witness,) or the native inclination of our people most apt to be
led by piety and devotion, as the greatest number of examples do prove: or
the religious and happy counsel of Elutherius to Lucius King of Britain, who
having publicly received in his kingdom the faith and Gospel of our Lord, and
studying to amend his Laws then imperfect, sent unto the said Elutherius for a
Copy of the Roman Laws. The Christian Bishop made such an answer to the
first Christian King, as between two such persons ought to pass; As the most
high God answers his most faithful servant. Exo. 25.40 Inter Leges Sti.
Edwardi La^b. Archaion. Fox ex Antiquo codice See also Monemuthens. Bed. Li. 1.
Pontic. vir.
Make al things according to the pattern etc. So writes this good Bishop.
Petistis a nobis leges Romanas et Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in regno
Britanniae vti voluistis: Leges Romanas et Caesaris semper reprobare possumus,
Legem Dei nequaquam. Suscepistis enim nuper miseratione diuina, in regno
Britanniae Legem et fidem Christi. Habetis penes vos in Regno vtramque paginam.
Ex illis dei gratia, per consilium regni vestri sum legem, et per illam Dei
patientia, vestrum rege Britanniae regnu^. Vicarius vero Dei estis in Regno
iuxta Prophetam regem.

Psalm. 24.
Domini est terra, et plenitudo eius, orbis terrarum et vniuersi qui inhabitant
in eo. Et rursum iuxta prophetam Regem, Psalm. 45.
Dilexisti iustitiam, et odisti iniquitatem, Propterea vuxit te Deus tuus oleo
Laetitiae, prae confortibus tuis. Et rursus iuxta propheta^ regem. Psalm. 72
Deus iudiciu^ tuu^ regi da, et iustitiam tua^ filio regis. Non enim Iudiciu^
neque iustitiam Caesaris Filij enim Regis gentes Christian et populi regni
sunt qui sub vestra protectione, et pace et regno degunt et consistunt iuxta
Euangelium, quemadmodum gallina congregat pullos sub alis, etc. Gentes vero
regni, pulli vestri sunt, quos diuisos debe^is in vnum ad concordiam, et pacem,
et ad fidem, et ad legem Christi, et ad sanctam ecclesiam congregare. etc. This
counsel I say might be the reason, and by all likelihood was the reason that
our common laws are so much grounded upon the law of God, which I am the
rather moved to believe, for that I see our learned Judge Mr. Bracton so
oftentimes inculcating the sentence of this Epistle, and namely that Rex est
vicarius Dei, Lib. 1. C. 2.
and deriuing such excellent conclusions from it, Lib. 3. C. 9
as of Godliness in the Prince and of duty and obedience in the subject etc.
And the effect hereof has been that which is written in the Scriptures:
Verbum Dei manet in aeternum. These laws says the learned Sir John Fortescue
have been in the times of the Britains, Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normanes,
Fortescue de laudibus Legum.
and if they were not the best Laws, some of those Kings (especially the
Romans) would have changed them. Of these things therefore I have to speak
matters far above the mediocritie of my knowledge: but that I may the better
do it, I humbly beseech thee O true light of eternity! to whom all ages and
times are present, to revive the memory of thy glory established by thee in
our ancient Laws, lighten my understanding, confirm my judgment, and lead
me in the ways of truth and justice, seeing that without thee neither any man
can do, nor I can speak any thing.

Cap. 2.
ORder of learning, and of the said Epistle does require, that before I enter
into the discourse of our ancient Britain laws, I speak somewhat concerning
the Roman Laws, that it may appear that neither the reverend Elutherius was
deceived in judgment, nor the Godly Lucius in his choice, nor the learned
Fortescue in his testimony: but that our said ancient Laws were, indeed, as
well as by the Romans own confession (in that they did not change them)
better then their own. I speak as a Christian, for as much as Britain
received the Laws of Christ before it knew the government of Rome; but because
I would be loath to offend, I will remit the reader that is desirous to know,
what may be said of the Authors and composers of the first Roman Laws: Aug.
de Ciuit. Dei. L. 3 Wesembech prefat in Isag. Rival. in hist. Iur. de
Iustiniano.
to St. Augustine and of these now extant to VVesembechius Rivallius, Procopius,
and others: And for the principles and grounds, I will refer them to
consider the particulars of the twelve tables yet in part remaining, and to
measure and examine the rules of the Institutes by the words of the Authors,
out of which they seem to be taken: Aristotle, Tully, Isidorus. etc. and both
by the Scriptures: a work worthy the vacation of a learned man. But for the
Laws of Britain, my principal intention before I come to speak of them, I
will entreat a little leave to speak somewhat first of law in general, and
secondly of the ancient inhabitants of this I Will. For by knowing what they
were, we shall the better know their Laws and manners.

Cap. 3.
THe Law by Aristotle is called a covenant of the society of men. Polit. 1.
De Leg.
By Tully the reason and mind of God discerning just and unjust: If we join
these two and call it the covenant made by God with the society of men,
according to his own reason, Ex. 34.27 and 20. v. 5.6 Deuteronomy. 5.2
discerning just and unjust: it agrees with the words of Moses, and will be as
I take it a perfect definition.

The end as Tully says is manifest, Ad salutem ciuium, De Leg. 2.
ciuitatumque incolu^nitatem vitamque omnium quietam et beatam. Agreeing also
with Moses, if Salus et Incolumitas et Beatitudo, be taken for all the
blessing of this life, and the life to come. Laws are called Divine or Humane.
The divine Laws are those which God immediately made, first written in nature,
secondlye described in the ten commandments, and the Scriptures. Humane Laws
are Laws derived out of the divine Laws by applycation of the general
commandments, First to the principal parties viz. to God, to the common
estate, and to private men according to the division of the twelve Tables:
Auson.
secondlye to particular circumstances of Persons, things, actions, times,
places, Penalties and such like, as the Institutes are divided.

Heerehence follows a conclusion observed also by Tully; that if a Law be
made containing any thing contrary to the Law of God, it is not to be called a
Law, (though all the world in a joint Parlame^t confirm it. For neither is it
derived out of the general precepts, nor partaketh of the common definition,
seeing it is not a covenant of God, but a confederacy against God.

The property and effect of the Law is first to make a distinction of just
from unjust. Secondlye to command and forbid. Thirdlye to punnish and reward.
These things are performed originallye and gennerally by the Law of God, and
secondarily and particularly by the Law of men. The quallities of a true Law
are reckoned up by Isidorus and others. Esse debet Lex Honesta, Iusta,
possibilis, Decret. Part. 1 Wesemb.
secundum naturam et consuetudinem, Loco et tempori conueniens, necessaria vel
vtilis manifesta. etc. A Law must be honest, just, possible, agreeable to
nature and custom, to time and place, necessary or profitable and manifest:
and of this proceeds another ground also, jus nemini violare vel ignorare
Licet. Item lex obligat ad scientiam, ad obedientiam, ad paenam. The Law
binds to knowledge, obedience, and punishment: no man may break it, no man
may be ignorant of it, and that which Isidore, says, when Laws are made, no
Man may judge of them but according to them. The exact performance of the Law
is called Justice, 5 Ethic.
the moderation of the Law upon consideration of circumstances, is called
equity, the contraries to the law are jniurie, jniustice, jniquity, wrong,
force, fraud and such like. Whatsoever is said of the Law of God absolutely,
may proportionally be applied to the Law of men. The end of the Law of God is
al happiness. That happiness which is the end of Humane Laws, consists
chiefly in the conservation of Religion, Psalm. 72.85.
Peace, and Justice, all which things are comprehended by St. Augustine, under
the name of peace, which also he makes the final end of the City of God. De
Ciuitate Dei. li. 19
The matters which the Laws do handle, are chiefly persons, things, places,
times, contracts, offenses and actions. In this Island, persons appointed
specially for the procuration of Religion, are the Archbishops, Bishops and
Ministers; for the preservation of Peace are the Nobility, Sheriffs, and
Justices of peace. For the administration of Justice, the Judges, professors
and Officers of Law. And the King has from God supreme authority over all,
according to the sentence, Rex est Vicarius Dei.

Other distinctions there be of Persons, but it is not my intention to speak
of every difference, but only so much as may serve to give light to the
Discourse intended.

Things also have many divisions, whereof I mean to touch but one, which is
that some may pass by course of inheritance, as Lands and tenements: some
cannot, as Chattelles.

Of places, some have sacred privilege, as Temples, representing God by his
word. The Kings presence and Judicial Courts, representing God in power and
Justice; others are ordinary and common, and of them some are public: as
Markettes, Ways: Some private, as Houses, Shoppes. etc. Times are likewise
divided into sacred and common, the Day, the night, and such like divisions.
Contracts have manifold Distinctions, which see in Bracton. Bracto. L. 3


Crimes, are either against Religion, Peace, or Justice, and again are
considered as public offenses, and so Rex pro pace sequi debet, Bracton.
in which all the Pleas of the Crown are contained, or as some particular
person is interessed, who is to sue accordingly. Again, they may be pursued
ciuilly or criminally. Lastly, actions are distinguished for the most part
according to the things which they demand, or the persons plaintifes or
defendants, or the Courts wherein, or the times when. etc. In actions, are these
principal parts: Su^mons, or Citations, trial, Judgment, and execution:
These points as fitter to be sought in other places, and as to learned men, and
as my self not half learned, I do briefly pass over, hasting to speak
somewhat of the Inhabitants of this Land, and so to that which I intend.

Cap. 4.
AMongst the several opinions that have bin conceived concerning the first
possessors of this Isle, I cannot see any more consonant to divinity, to
reason, and the testimonies of best approved Antiquaries, then that which
maintains the Nations of Britain to be descended of Gomer the Son of
Iaphet, whose children, after the division of tongues, at Babel, spread
throughout al Europe, and so replenished this Island, De tractu Armoricano (vt
fertur) in Britannia^ aduecti says the venerable Bede. Bed. Hist. Lib. 1.
And to say that any multitude of Chams posterity arrived here to inhabit, is
in my understanding contrary to the grounds aforesaid. For first there is no
probability to maintain that the Children or families, descended of one
son: as of Iaphet, were mixed with the Children of the other. For then how
should the accomplishme^t of the Prophecye be observed, which God pronounced
before by the mouth of Noah? Genesis 9.
that Chanaan should be a servant both to Sem and Iaphet, and that Iaphet
should dwell in the tents of Sem: Secondly, it is evident, that almighty God
gave to every famely of the Sons of Noah his several Language, and his
several Country, by these reasons: viz. by the suruay of all Nations the
Sons of Iaphet, Madai the Medes; Iauan the Ionians; Tubal the Iberians;
Meschech, the Moscouites; Gomer, the Cymbri; Ashkenas, the Tuiscones. The
Sons of Cham, Cush, the Aethiopians, Misraim the Aegiptians, Canaan the
Canaanites: the Sons of Sem, Ashur, Ela^, Apachshad, Lud and Aram, every one
had his language and his Country, and as I take it the contrary cannot be
showed.

And this is confirmed by the express words of Moses, or rather of God
himself, the truest Author: where having named, Genesis 10.
first the Sons of Iaphet by themselves, Gomer and the rest, he adds this
conclusion; Of these, were the Isles of the Gentles divided, in their Lands
every man after his tongue, and after their families, in their nations. So
having reckoned the Children of Cham, every one by name, he adds the like
conclusion: Verse. 20.
These are (says he) the Sons of Cham, according to their families,
according to their tongues in their Countries, and in their nations. The like
conclusion he makes after the ennumeration of the Sons of Sem. And the same
point is proved by the History of Abraham, Gene. 12
where he is commanded to go from his Country, from his Kindred, and from his
Fathers house: Deuteronomy. 32.8.
and again by the Song of Moses, and diverse other places of Scripture. So as
it is apparent by the words of the Scripture, that howsoever the languages
were confounded, Vid. August Lib. 16. de Ciuit. Dei.
yet the several kindreds, and families descended from the Sons of Noah,
were not confounded together; but that every family had his particular tongue
and country, and were severed from other Families. And it is also likely, that
howsoever their speeches were confounded, and their families divided: yet the
Sons of Iaphet had amongst themselves more intelligence one of an others
language, then they had of the languages used by the nations descended of Cham,
or Sem. For we see the Assirians, Persians, Syrians, and Hebrews descended of
Sem, had more similitude of speech, and writing among themselves, then they had
with any the nations of Europe. And so the Aegiptians, Aethiopians, Libians,
and other descended of Cham; which vicinityes (as I may call it) of speech,
being greater in those original times, then now it is, caused those families
that had best intelligence one with another to sort themselves together, in
places of nearer neighborhood, And thereof it came, that the Children of Sem
remained in Asia, The children of Cham went into Africa, and the children of
Iaphet went northward into Europa; as we see the Moscouits, the Thracians,
Ionians and Iberians, the Sons of Iaphet to be round about us. Of all which
premises rests this conclusion, that all the inhabitants of Britain are
descended from some one of Iaphets Children.

Other testimonies of the Scriptures incline the same way, Ezech. 38.
for Gomer and Togarmath his son are called the sides of the North; and
learned men do agree, Camden.
that the ancient Kimbri or Gomeri, the Sons of Gomer did reign far and
wide in one neighbor Countries; Sir John Prise.
and the ancient Britains do yet call their country Gimbri. So that in
Divinity and reason we cannot choose but acknowledge our selves to be branches
of the same stock, namelye the Gimbri of Gomer, and likewise the Saxons and
Danes of Ashkenas, and the Scots, If Iberi of Tuball, and al of Iaphet: But if
the Scotti will confess themselves to be Getae, according to the opinion of the
most learned Mr. Camden, then are they descended from Gether, the Son of Sem,
as Melanchton shows. Beda. Li. 1. Mel. Chapter 1. Camden. Folidor vir. Lib. 1.
Sir John Prise.
And to these opinions the reasons and authorities of best antiquaries do
concur, which he that desires to see, may peruse them in Mr. Camden and
others, neither will I preiudicate any man's opinion, (though to me somewhat
improbable) in deriuing us from the Troianes, so as he derive the Troianes
themselves, from Ashkenas which will come to the same effect. Taking therefore
the former opinion, or howsoever it be, the inhabitants of this Isle being by
all men's confession, a most ancient nation of the posterity of Iaphet, and
who (as Gildas seems to say) had at the first the knowledge of God; Gildas
cited by Polidor.
it stands with reason, and with best warrant of authority, to think they
were governed by such Laws, and institutions derived from the Principles of
the first age, that is from the Law of God written in nature, as most of the
ancient nations did embrace, and very near to those which the Godly S^^, in
whose tents God persuades Iaphet to continue, delivered to his Children; of
which I intend to perticulate some hereafter.

Cap. 5.
I Have spoken of the Law in general, and of the first inhabitants of this
Land; and I have to speak somewhat in general of the Laws instituted by our
Christian King Lucius upon receipt of Elutherius Letters, meaning to descend in
to perticularities, by easy paces and degrees.

But in setting down things of so ancient time, whereof remain but few
Historyes, through the rage of the Romans and other sauadge idolaters, the
scourges of this kingdom, in her godly infancye; Lest I should seem to speak
too much of mine own brain; I would entreat every prudent, sober, and
Christian Politician, first to examine the contents, and sentences of that
godly Epistle, and secondly to consider his own mind, and to unfold his
secret understanding, what he himself would have done, and what he would think
fit to do, it he had been then King Lucius, or of counsel with him, having
received such a Letter as before is set down?

Touching the Epistle it self, it contains an answer to the demand of King
Lucius. The demand was, to have the Laws of Rome and Caesar. The answer
consists of two parts; a Rejection, We may (says he) always reprove the
Laws of Rome and Caesar, but not the Laws of God. And an exhortation, to take
a Law for his Kingdom, out of the Law of God. This he inforceth, with diverse
reasons and sentences of Scripture, which with an admirable consent, do every
one prove each other, and every one the several parts of the answer.

First you are Gods Vicar, therefore you must rule by Gods Law and not by
Caesar's. The earth is the Lords, therefore it must be ruled by the laws of the
Lord, and not by Caesar's. God has anointed you to be King, Caesar has not
anointed you, therefore etc. O God, give thy judgments to the King, therefore
not Caesar's: what then would you do, being a godly Christian, upon the reading
of such a Letter? Let our most Christian King St. Edward give us counsel; who
in his Laws, La^b. Arch.
taking the words of this Letter for his groundwork, says thus:

Rex autem, quia vicarius summi regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, vt regnum
terrenum, and populum Domini, and super omnia sancta^ tucatur Ecclesiam eius,
and regat, and ab iniuriosis defendat, and maleficos ab ea euellat. And a
little after, he shows how this may be done: Debet vero Rex Deum timere super
omnia, and diligere, and mandata eius per totum Regnu^ suum seruare. Debet
etiam, sanctam Ecclesiam regni sui, cum omni integritate, and liberate iuxta
constitutiones patrum, and predecessorum seruare, fouere, manutenere, regere,
and contra inimicos defendere: ita vt Deus prae caeteris honoretur, and prae
oculis semper habeatur. Debet etiam bonas eges, and consuctu dines approbatas
erigere, prauas autem delere omnes, and a regno deponere. Debet iudicium rectum
in regno facere, and iustitia^ per consilium procerum regni sui tenere. Thus
says St Edward, but if the counsel of so excellent a King do not resolve
you, yet in the mouth of two witnesses let every word be confirmed, and peruse
the words of a most excellent Counselor and Lawyer, I say Bracton, lib. 3.
cap. 9. who there speaks to the same effect, Bracton.
grounding likewise upon the same golden foundation. Rex est Dei Minister and
Vicarius; Potestas itaque sua iuris est non iniuriae, Potestas autem iniuriae
Diaboli est, non Dei, and so after to the like effect, as St. Edward had spoken.

I think therefore, there is no man but will say that King Lucius did
accordingly: namely, that according to the contents and directions received, he
did call a Counsel or Parliament, a thing used in those times, as I will show
heer-after: He did suruay the State and Laws of his Kingdom; that which was
agreeable to Gods holy word he did confirm, and that which wanted he did
newly enact. Reasons persuading me to think, that King Lucius did so, are
these: First his Godly zeal, which would never have written to Rome for Laws,
without a great desire, to have the best laws to govern his Kingdom; and to
my understanding it is senceles and absurd, to say that when he had received an
answer so good and agreeable to his desire, that he would leave it vnfollowed
and unperformed. It cannot be said that he wanted will, seeing he sent for
Laws, nor that he wanted time, opportunitye, power, or consent of his Nobles
or people, seeing all, or the most part, yea the Druidae and Flamnies embraced
Christian religion together with him, Beda, ponticus virum. Polidor Monemuth.
as our Histories testify; and he ruled the Britains long time after in
flourishing peace and tranquillity. Again, that he retained some of the former
Laws; the common opinion of those ancient Christians of the Primitive age,
persuades me, whereof I will speak more, when I come to K. Lucius his laws.
Yet by the way one text will I cite, out of Iunius, Iun. in epistola, ad
Politiam Mos.
who says that as long as Heathen Emperors, and Kings held the raines of
government, the Christians gave not their minds to dispute the question of the
use and authority of Moses Laws; but when the State changed, and Christian
Emperors were advanced, then those most sapient and orthodoxall Fathers, seeing
it most expedient to turn about this world, without any greater noise,
forbearing the troubles of secular affairs, left the authority, both of
making laws and giving judgments to the ordinary Magistrates; but if any
were instituted Contra Recta^ Rationem, qua^ in natura et scriptura
explicauitus De; against right and good reason, which God in nature and
Scripture has described, that either with gentle and calm admonitions they
procured to be amended, or patiently suffered, if it were incurable, least the
whole common good (which Augustine before called Peace) should be stirred in
hope of some particular; For, that many times the importunity of men brings
to pass, whiles they seek to cure one evil, they shake and weaken the public
estate. In which words besides the point in hand, is much to be observed, that
nothing ought to be in the Law against reason: which is the universal Maxim,
the maine foundation, and as I may call it, the abridgement of all our common
Law, which here you see to be the rule of those ancient fathers, and
affirmed to have been expressed by the Divine wisdom of God in nature and
Scripture. This is it whereby all our questions, and controversies, all our
arguments and judgments, all our Statutes and customs, are ruled and
ouerruled, enlarged and corrected.

But again to our purpose, St. Augustine speaks much to the same effect. De
Ciuit. Dei. lib. 19 C. 17.
Haec ergo caelestis Ciuitas dum peregrinatur in terra etc. This heavenly City
whiles it is in Pilgrimage upon earth, calls Citizens out of all nations; and
in all tongues, assembleth a Pilgrim society; not regarding the manifold
diversities of manners, Laws and customs, not repealing or destroying any of
those things, whereby the terrene peace (so I read) is either procured, or
preserved, but rather keeping and following that, which although it be diverse
in diverse nations, yet still is intended to one and the same end of Terrene
Peace, so long as it is no hindrance of the Religion, whereby the only supreme
and true God is taught to be worshipped. To the same effect he speaks again
in the nineteen Chapter of the same book.

These authorities therefore lead me to believe, that King Lucius retained such
of the ancient institutions, as were not Contra rectam rationem (as Iunius
says) quam in natura et scriptura explicauit Deus. And that he did take some
part of his Laws, out of the Scriptures, is proved by the testimonies of our
Chronicles, compared with the words of the most Godly and religious King Alfred
in his Laws. Lamb. Arc. Higde^ Pontic. virun: Galf. Mon.
The Chronicles say that Gildas the ancient Godly Britain Priest who lived
not much more, then 500. years after Christ, and not much above 300. after
Lucius, translated the British Laws into Latin, and afterward Alfred the
Godly Saxone Prince, translated the same into Saxon; and so continued them to
posterity. Lamb. Ar.
Alfred in the entrance to his Laws, setting first the ten Commandments, and
many judicial Laws of Moses, and last the Apostolical Epistle directed to
the Gentiles, mentioned in the Acts, Acts. 15
which he concludes with these words used in some translations.

That you will not have done your selves, do not unto others; windeth up all
with this conclusion: By this one commandment (says he) it is evident
enough, that Law and right is to be given to all men equally. Neither shall we
need of any other, whatsoever judicial book, only let this be infixed in
the mind of him that sits as judge upon others, that he give no other
sentence of other men, then he would have to be given in his own cause.

But in the propagatio^ of the gospel (says King Alfred) when many men
believed in the word of God, then many Synodes were gathered; and also in
England, the Bishops and other the wisest men assembled, who being taught by
the mildenes of Christ, did set upon every first offender a pecuniarie pain,
the leuying whereof they committed to the Magistrates. etc. And a little after.
Lamb. Archaion.
These I Alfred the King have gathered together and committed to writing.

Then speaking also of the laws of later time, he adds that there were many
things, also which he thought fit to be observed in the acts of Ina, Offa and
Ethelbert: but the former words are plainly spoken of the Laws here
established upon the first receiving of the Gospel by King Lucius, and do
fully prove that the counsel of El^^herius was followed, but with the
mercifulnes and mildehartenes of our Lord christ after the Saxon phrase, and
the Sinodes which Alfred speaks of in the first arriual of the Gospel, were
the Parlaments of Lucius, whose course that it was such as I have said, I pray
you see also by that which follows, wherein I will first speak of the
remnants of the Laws of nature, secondly of the ancient British Laws made
before and by Lucius, and lastly of those that followed until the Norman.

Cap. 6.
IT is manifest in Histories, both sacred and profane, that the most ancient
Nations had their Kings or Princes, their Priests, their Elders or Senators,
and their Dukes or Captains: Cic. 3. Leg. Genesis 18. Job. 12. Psa. 105.21
and this seems to be according to the Law of God and Nature, and it is
seen in the Histories of Egypt, Iudaea, Madian, Arabia, Greece, Italy. So
Caesar found in Britain, Reges, Druidas, Caesar.
Principes, et Nobiles Duces. For it is to be noted, that where he names the
four Kings of Kent, he shows withal, that they were all subject to
C^s^ibellan, and calls Cing^torix Nobilem ducem, which proves that he meant
by Reges (as commonly the Romans understood) men of nobility, power and
government, though it were but in one City, as he says of Immanuentius in
London, who perhaps might then be a Lieutena^t of the city, Proaem. L. 2
as the Lord Mayor is now, and so does Polidor take it, saying that they were
four Princes, such as we now call Earls or Dukes.

It is proved also amongst Antiquaries, that the famous Belinus and Brennus,
and it is not hard to be proved that Mulmutius and others were Kings of this
Island, Bed. Lib. 1.
and Beda the most faithful Historian says literally, that before the year
six hundred after Christ in Britain, Seruaba^t vt cuuque Reges, Sacerdotes,
priuati, et optimates suum quique ordinem. But of the ancient Kings as
likewise of their Elders or Nobles, I find two sorts, the one fatherly, and
the other tirannical. the first having and maintaining the authority of the
first age, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei Lib 15. et 19. Arist. 1. Polit. Genesis 17.29 Genesis
27.29 et 49.10.
wherein Patres familias regebant, the Fathers of the greatest families which
contained others, were Kings, as Adam and Sem taken to be Melchisedec, and
Assure his Son: the Fathers of inferior families, yet populous and great, were
Elders, or Princes; as Abraham, Isack, Jacob, and Job. Such there were in
Britain, as Caesar and Gildas do show. The second sort obtained their
authority by war, violence or Rebellion, as before the flood, Cain and
afterward Nimrod, Esau and the like.

And of this sort there was also in Britain whose times Gildas calls
vetustos immanium Tyrannos annos. Gildas in Epistola.
But as I take it the most ancient Nobility of Britain had a name signifying
as much as Elders or Senators, as they had in other Countries before mentioned.
Of that signification there is a name in many ancient records to be found, a
name of ancient nobility, which imports in signification an Elder, which I
take it was the name of that first and most ancient British Noble man. The
name it self is Thane, and I find this name used for a Noble man in this
Island in Denmake and in Ireland. It must needs be a name proceeding from some
of the nations that raygned in these Countries, but neither the Romans, nor
Saxons, nor the Danes, nor the Irish, can give a reason whereby to claim it as
a word of theirs: Only the Britains have a word most near, both in letter,
signification and use. For where the Danes call a Lord or a Noble man Thane, as
the Britains did, and where the Irish call him Taken, which by reason of his
Eldership is next to succeed in some Lordshippe: yet neither of them give a
reason for it: only the Britains use the word Heane, or Hane, to signify an
Elder; which answers to the word Thane, as I said both in letter,
signification and use. And to verify the saying that all things make an
Harmonious consent to truth, The History testifies, that the Saxons
immediately after their coming into this Island, called their Nobles by a name
of the same signification viz. Earls or eldermen, a name of Nobility unknown
in their own Country; where (as I take it) they are called Graves or Greues,
signifying a governor which name also they brought hither, and it remains in
some use to this day: But the name of Elder they learned of the Britains.

And heereunto agrees the text extant amongst the Laws of St. Edward. Sicut
modo vocantur Grieve, Lamb. Archaion
qui super alios perfecturas habent, ita apud Anglos antiquitus vocabantur
Ealdermen, quasi seniores, non propter senectutem, cum quidam adolescentes
essent, sed propter sapientia^. Et similiter olim apud Britones temporibus
Romanoru^ in regno isto Britanniae vocabantur Senatores qui postea temporibus
Saxonum vocabantur Aldermani. And to say that the Britains used the name of
Senator, or borrowed this name of the Romans, is very publicly, for they
lived in perpetual hatred and hostility with them, as they showed upon a^l
occasions, and followed not their laws, nor institutions in any thing: but by
constraint, seeing them to be Paganes, Idolaters, oppressors of their liberty,
and persecutors of their Religion.

Neither does Beda nor any other Historian speak of any Laws made in Britain
by the Romans, nor of any judgments by them exercised: but of those (if they
be to be called judgments) whereby Albanus and other holy Martirs were most
cruelly put to death. Therefore I conclude that the Britains took this name
and other institutions, not of them, but either of the ancient statutes of
nature, or of the latter restitution by the Gospel. These Nobles therefore
together with the Priests and other selected commons, made the common Counsel
of this Island whereof Caesar speaks, and which at this day is called the
Parliament, and in the most of our Histories called consilium Sapientum. In the
Laws of Edward before the conquest, and in the Laws of King Ina made about
the year 720. after our Lord Christ, there is mention of these Parliament
consisting of these degrees of men.

An hundred years before that, we read that Bertha the Christian Queen of
Kent procured judgments to be established Cum consilio sapientum, Bed. Lib. 2
that is by the Parliament, where also the venerable Bede speaks warily,
saying that it was after the example of the Romans, but not saying it was after
the Roman manner. An hundred years before that again in the time of Arthur
the warrior, we read of Parlaments, and the most learned King Alfred in his
laws says plainly, that upon the propagation of the Gospel, Lamb. Ar.
Nonnulli tam in Anglia quam in alijs regionibus Episcoporum aliorumque
clarissimorum sapientum conuentus agebantur, which could not be after the
Roman fashion: and whosoever observes the circumstances of the matter, he
shall perceive it evidently to be spoken of the time of King Lucius (as I said
before) for in his time being peaceable, the Gospel was first publicly
received, Beda Galfrid. Monu^. Polidor.
and after his death, this Kingdom continually labored with intestiue wars,
in which it was almost impossible to gather counsels, and to establish Laws
and government as he speaks. And as it was in this south part of Britain, so
was it likewise in the north, as appears by their Chronicles. They had Kings,
Priests, Nobles, and Parlaments, agreeable to the form of government of the
most ancient Kingdoms, and to the Laws of God written in Nature and
Scripture: and in this form consists the estate of both the Kingdoms of
great Britain even to this day. And thus much concerning the principal
persons, whereof the body of our state did and does consist: the next thing to
be considered is, of things according to the proceedings of the institutes,
but because nothing can be without a place, and we shall have better occasion
to speak of the division, property and dominion of things hereafter, I will
therefore under correction, entreat now somewhat of the ancient division of
this Island, the common place and subject of our discourse, and of the
judgments therein aunciently used.

Cap. 7.
IT is thought by some, that this Island before the coming of the Romans,
Camden.
was rude and barbarous: and by other, that King Alfred was the diuider of this
Island into such Shires and porcions (for so the word imports) as at this day
we see. But these two opinions to be true ingeneral, I cannot yield; for if I
understand our stories, it will easily appear that this la^d was auncie^tly
long, before Alfreds time, divided almost into as many parts, and in like
manner by the several families or nations of ancient Britains, which are thus
reckoned by Hooker in his 2. Book of the description of England. Cap. 4. viz.
Nonantae Selgonae Dannonij, Gadeni, Ottadeni, Epdij, Cerones, Carmonacae,
Careni, Cornubij, Decantae, Logi, Mertae, Macomagi, Venicontes, Texati, Polij
or Elgoni, Brigantes Parisi, Ordouici, alias Ordoluci, C^ti^uchlani, Coritani,
Trinobantes, Dem^te, Cangi, Silures, Dobuni, Atrebatij, Cantij, Regni, Belgae,
Durotriges, Giruij, Ioeni, Tegenes, Cenimagni, Segonti^ci, Deiri, Venedoti,
Bibroci, with some other whom he and others name. And of these some (as Mr.
Camden plainly shows) possessed one, Camden Britann.
others two or three of these Shires which now are known, and these nations of
Britains are in part named by Caesar, others by Mr. Camden, Polidore and
others. So that King Alfreds division seems not altogether new, but rather a
reviving and more exact description of the old. And this is confirmed by the
testimony of Polidore, who in the laws of Mul^^tius makes mention by name of
Counties, or Shires. Or those Laws more shall be said hereafter: In the mean
time it appears that this land was divided into porcions, or shares, Higden
Polichron Huntingdo^.
even by the Britains. There were also amongst those Britains, even before Luc
us and Caesar's times, diverse great Cities, whereof 28. are named by our
Chronicles, and some of the^ by Caesar, Iter Britan See the description of
England by Hook^r.
besides Towns and Castles innumerable, as Huntington says and as appears
by the ancient Iter Brittanniarum described by the Romans, which are no signs
of a barbarous people. For if civility take his name of a City, or Citizen;
and Cities, and Citizens cannot be ruled without goodlawes, the Britains were
civil, and ruled with good Laws which were Citizens of many great Cities. And
the inconstancy of Caesar and other Romanists is here to be noted, which call
the Britains barbarous, and yet confess that they had many good Cities,
Kings, Nobles, Governors, discipline of war, and peace, commerce, and
traficke with foreign Nations, and al other parts of civility. And the
question of P^lidore is somewhat ridiculous, when he asks whether any man
ever read of Canterbury, Bath, Carle^, or Lecester, in Caesar, Tacitus,
Straho or Ptolomy. No gentle Mr. Polidore; but in Caesar we read of the City
of Trinobantes, and of other Cities, and of the City of the Brigantes,
Londinium, Louentium and Maridunum, in Tacitus and Ptolomy, and your self
confess in the same book that it was a Law among the Britains, that the inner
parts of the Island should not be discovered to strangers. As for the fastness
of Cassibellan, and the painting of their faces; if the story be well examined
and circumstances compared, it will easily be proved that such things were
not originally in the government, and manners of this our country, but were
the wild fruits of long continued civil wars, that raged amongst them,
proceeding of tirranies in their Princes, superstition and Idolatry in their
Priests rebellion, sedition, murders, thefts, adulteries and disobedience in
the Subjects, some of which things are to be gathered by the words of Caesar,
and al of them are laid to their charge by Gildas, Ephesians. 5.
and other Histories. For such things procure the wrath of God to be powered
out upon them (as says the blessed Apostle,) as Italy, France and other
Countries have, by that means received some barbarous touches, and Ireland yet
wasted and subject to great calamities and desolation, is an eye witness of
the same experience, which heretofore was governed with peace ad civility,
and now has many examples extant of strange immannities. And as these are the
just plagues inflicted by the divine Justice upon our Neighbor Island for the
contempt of the Gospel, and such offenses as aforesaid: so were the same
inflicted in those times upon the Britains for treading under foot the light
of nature, and the knoweledge of God (which Gildas signifies that the first
inahbitants had) and many excellent doctrines of Religion, and of justice,
which were but obscurelye, and in part preserved by the Druidae and some few
of the better sort.

But to return where we left, as in other things the Britains maintained
the manners of the ancients, Diodor Sic.
so in that ancient division of this Land into several Nations and families,
the most antique manner of great nations was observed. For not only amongst
the Hebrews, but amongst the Persians, Athenians, Romans, Xenophon ^^uy. et
ali.
and in this Island the Scots being freer from public invasions, had the like
divisions, being a point of civil government, very necessary for many good
and Politic constitutions, and therefore used and preserved amongst all the
primitive Nations, as agreeable to reason and nature, and is to this day
observed as most consona^t to the word of God.

Cap. 8.
AS in the distribution of persons, and of the land, the Britains were
politic and civil: so in their proceedings of Law, in their judgments, and
in their Sciences, it appears that they were not so barbarous as has been
taken: for their varieties of excellent learning (to note that by the way) Sir
John Prise in his book to King Edward the sixth, Sir John Prise. Historiae
Brit. Defensio.
proves that all learned sciences, were known and handled amongst them. To
his book I send those that are desirous to be satisfied in that point. And
although it may be strongly inferred that a Nation given to the studdies of all
excellent learnings, must needs be polished with good laws: yet for the more
clear euice hereof, I purpose to show that their laws in particular were
most just and good, as being derived out of the law of God, written in nature,
and in Scripture; and for that reason not altered, but transmitted to
posteritye, and that they do yet remain amongst us, as I said before. First
of al under favor I cannot agree, the opinion conceived by Gratian that al
things by the Law of nature, were common, Part. 1. Did
but as I take it the distinction of properties was enacted by Almighty God in
the beginning, and by him imprinted with other Laws, in nature, by virtue of
the words, Genesis 1. verse 28.29.
Bear rule over the earth: which gave to man, both dominion and property of
all things. And to prove that it was so, and that it was so understood, Genesis 4.
it appears by Cain and Abel, who in the very beginning were several
possessors of grounds, Lands, Sheep, fruits of the earth, and Cities
inhabited, and in the Historyes of Abraham, Job, and other the Patriarchs,
there is mention made of buying and selling, and of diverse offenses punished by
Law. But by what Law, if not by the Law of nature? And if the Law of nature
be the same which is contained in the Law and the Gospel, as Gracian in the
first entrance of his distinctions affirms; If the term commandments be an
abridgement or exposition of the Law of nature, as he says in an other place:
And if distinction of propertyes be inacted, and the desire of other men's goods
forbidden every where in the Law; the Gospel, and the ten commandments;
then is Gratian in this point, contrary unto him self. But that it is so
forbidden, appears by the eight and tenth Commandment, and in the first to
the Romans, where Covetousness even in an heathen man is accounted for a sin,
Romans 1.
which could not be but by the law of nature, as it is in that place urged.
For where there is no Law, there is no transgression says St. John, and other
law there is not to condemn a Pagan. Therefore, taking that for a point not
hard to be proved, and which all laws have taken as a principal, confessed by
virtue of that law which is every where the same (how-soeuer some authorities
have swayed to the contrary) we find partly by the words of Caesar and Dio,
Arist. Eihic
that this Island had her own laws concerning the division of grounds,
inheritances, Judges, and the distinction of properties, that there were
certain courses of proceedings, and that there were punishments for contempts
and offenses. Dio Lib. 53
First Dio says that 20. years after the coming hither of Caesar; Britannia
suis Legibus vsa est; Britain used her own Laws, and what these own Laws of
Britain were, Caesar shows: his words be these: Druidae fere de omnibus
controuersiis publicis priuatisque constituunt, et si quod est, admissum
facinus si caedes facta, si de Haereditate, definibus controuersia est, ijdem
discernunt, praemia praenasque constituunt, si quisaut priuatus aut populus,
eorum, decreto non stetit, sacrificijs interdicunt. The Druidae says Caesar
(whose discipline he affirms to be found out and most perfect in Britain)
do judge for the most part of all public and private controversies. If any
offense or Homicide be committed: or if the controversy be for bounds or
inheritance, they do determine it, appointing punnishments and rewards; If
any private man, or corporation stand not to their decree, they forbid them
their sacrifices. etc. under the names of offenses and Homicides, he
comprehends all criminal causes, under controversies of lands or inheritance
are contained all civil actions; by the words of controversy, judgment,
determination and decree, he shows that they had a certain form of
proceeding: by punishments and rewards, he shows that their sentence was
compulsiue.

So this testimony proves that they had a settled form of judgments in those
three maine parts, whereof Justinian has composed his whole work, I say De
personis rebus et actionibus. To touch a few particulars, it must needs be
inferred upon Caesar's words, that they had a certain form of conueyance and
course of inherit^^ce in their lands. For else how could controversies of
inheritance and Lands arise to be decided in judgment? Now if any man consider
well of our ancient form of conueyance by Feoffment and Liuerie, and the
solemnity thereof used, not only after, but before the conquest, Histor. Ely.
he shall find it to be are like of the fatherly age, wherein the Law of
nature was with great wisdom observed. Gene. 23
For if you compare it to the assurance of Abraham, you shall find like
precisenes of words: I give thee (says Ephron which is and ever was, our
ancient word, Do or Dedi. Like description of things: The field of Ephron in
Mach^clah over against Mamre, the field and the Cave and all the trees etc, like
assistance of witnesses; in the presence of my people; and that was also our
manner, even before the Norman conquest, and I can find no beginning unless I
bring it to those ancient times. Our word of inheritance (heirs) and that
thereby th'eldest Son should inherit, is either taken from the same law of
nature, and examples of the Patriarchs, as Sem was heir of Noah and Iaphet was
appointed to dwell in his tents. God says to Abraham, Izhak shall be thine
heir, and Izhak made Jacob his heir; Ierim. 49.1
Claim is made to some part of the La^d of Israel in the name of Isreal's
heirs: Or else it was instituted by K. Lucius after the example of God
himself, who made Christ the Lord and heir of all things, Hebr. 1.2
and adopteth us in part only to be heirs with him. Lastly, also the manner
of our succession by inheritance, and how one heir is to take after an other,
as they are in degrees of proximitie, Report. 3.
is by the most exact reporter of our Laws Sr. Edward Cook (his majesty's
Atturnie general) collected and declared, upon the judgment of God, in the
case of Salphahads daughters, Numb. 27
cyted in Ratcliffes case; where he also observes, that in this point, as
almost in all others, the common law is founded upon the Law of God. And this
our manner of conueyance, and limitation of inheritance, I have not read of in
any other nation, neither can find any other beginning for it. For other
conueyances, I find a patent of King Arthur the worthy, and another of one K.
Kenwalchius, both recited in a Patent of King Henry the second, made to the
Monastery of Glassenbury, as I learn of Sir John Prise, Desensio Histor. Brit
who sets down words of King Henry's Patent, as I would King Henry had done
of the other. Also there are many other ancient Charters yet to be seen of
manors, lands and liberties, granted to Abbeyes, Churches and other Religious
houses long before the Conquest; as of King Kenredus to the Abbey of Euesham,
of others to the Cathedral Churches of Landaffe and St. Dauies etc. But of all
other, most excellent is the Patent procured by Turketulus Lord Chancellor,
and Lord of threescore Manors, who surrendered them all to King Eared, and
obtained six Manors, which are also named by Ingulfus, to be granted to the
Abbye of Croyland, together with many ancient Customs and new liberties; by
which may be understood the use of the Common law then and long before.
Concerning also the Manner of suites in Law, and taking distresses or pledges,
and that the defenda^t should find sureties or mainpernors, a thing very
ancient, whereof we read in the laws of King Ina, Lamb. Arc.
and yet continuing amongst us; I find some such matter noted by Job, where
he speaks of taking pledges, Job. 17.3. et 24.3. et 9.
and desires that God would put in surety to answer him.

Also the particular Laws of distresses do prove that they are taken out of
the word of God. For by the common Law no man may distreine a Millstone; Deuteronomy.
24.
a thing specially provided by God himself. Our ancient kinds of
punnishments, as by imprisonments, Fetters, Stocks. etc are named likewise in
several places by Job. Capital executions are derived from the Law given to
Noah; whosoever sheddeth man's blood, Genesis 9.6
by man shall his blood be shed. Lastly our punishment by vtlary seems to be
most ancient, and of the same beginning; for take Bracttons description of
vtlary, and compare it with the words of Caesar, and both with some passages of
Scripture: and you shall find them agree very near together. Bracton thus
describes the forfeiture of vtlary. Forisfacit patriam et regnum, et exul
efficitur, Bracton.
et talem vocant Augli vt lagh, et alio nomine vocari antiquitus solet,
Friendlesinan, et sic videtur Forisfacere amicos; Si quis cum eo communicauerit
aliquid, eadem paena pumendus est; Caput gerit Lupinum. And so forth at large,
which Mr. Stanford thus briefly comprehends. Stant. L. 3.
The out law forfeiteth his country, his friends, his peace, his law, his
right, and his possession: which is true every way, but to be understood
according to the several natures of vtlaries that are amongst us. Now Caesar
of the Druidae says thus: Caesar.
Si quis eorum decreto non stetit, sacrficijs interdicunt. Haec paena apud eos
est grauissima. Quibus ita est interdictum, ij numero impiorum et sceleratorum
habentur, ab ijs omnes decedunt, aditum eorum sermonemque diffugiunt, ne quid
ex contagione incommodi accipiant. Neque ijs petentibus ius redditur neque
honos vllus communicatur. Confer this with the sentence pronounced against
Cain, Thou art cursed from the earth, Genes. 4.
when thou tillist the ground, it shall not yield her strength to thee; a
vagabond and a runnagate shall thou be in the earth.

Thus he forfeited his Country and his possessions, the profits of his labor,
and of his ground, his friends and his peace. And this is the nature of our
vtlary used to this day in capital offenses, but in lesser contempts more
easy and tolerable. Now of these things before described, have consequently
followed all our proceedings, as well in Real as in personal actions; for the
process of distress in the parsonall, was but the taking of pledges of the
defendant, for appearance, and the process by Cape in the Real, was but the
seizing of the Land, for a surety to the same prepose; from whence also many
other secundarie conclusions of reason have necessarilye ensued, as the return
and loss of Issues, defaults, conte^pts, forfeitures, etc. Further in our
Chronicles we read of Lords and tennants in the days of Gorbonian the good,
Galfrid mo^.
and of fealty sworn to the Prince in the time of Elidurus the godly, Pontic.
viru^.
which of necessity were accompained with tenures, services, distresses, and
such like: And thus much be spoken of the ancient visible footesteppes, of the
law of nature, which were before Lucius; Of which you may read also in the
learned discourse of the above named, Sir Edward Cook before the third Book
of his Reports, where he cites the sentence of Caesar: saying that the
discipline of the Druidae was found out in Britannia, and that we had some
forms of proceeding from the Greek; which may well be; but you see the
grounds and beginnings are much more apparent to be seen in the records of
that first age described in the sacred History, and do yet remain amongst us.

Now follows to speak of the ordinances instituted by our ancient Britain
Kings, agreeable to the word of God; and to this day also remaining: and first
of the Laws of Mulmutius and others which were called the Marchen law.

Cap. 9.
ALthough concerning the History of Brutus, there may be some reasons to
doubt which learned men have gathered, yet, why there should not be one Brit or
Brute King of this Land, whose Pedigree Sir John Prise out of an ancient
Chronicle deriueth from Iaphet: And if there were no such Brit, yet why the
whole History of Britain Princes should for the fabulous interposition of one
or two men be rejected, as some have done? I see no reason seeing the
concurre^t testimonies of diverse British momuments of great credit, which Sr I.
Prise cites, and the concordance of the Scottish History in many things, and
that of some of those Princes remains to this day, apparent momuments of others
credible Histories, of others the most inevitable testimony of ancient Laws.
The learned Mr. Cambden a judicious examiner of these things, Cambden in
Britanniae
offers to prove that the famous Brennus that ouerranne Italy, was King of
Britain, (a thing which the said Sr. Io. Prise has already most learnedly
performed:) to me it is as well proved that Mulmutius his Father was King
likewise of this Land: neither do I think the wars of the one so glorious,
as the Laws of the other. But if any be so wilfully ignorant, as to deny, not
only the History of Brit, but of his successors: Let them name if they can
imagine, who built these ancient Monnuments, Ludgate, Bellingsgate,
Caerebranke or the City of York, Carleil, and Caercoil or Colchester and such
like? and who made these ancient Laws, called the Mulmutian, Ponticus virun
Lib. 2. Higden. Cest lib. 1. Galfrid mo^. Baleus. Hooker. Pol. virgil.
and Mercian Laws, of which we have to speak. Many writers which without
question did see, or might see and read the writings of Gildas the wise
Priest, and Alfred the excellent Prince, do consta^tly avouch that Mulmutius
Dunwallo Father of Belinus and Brennus, established those Laws which were
afterward called Mulmutinae, which Gildas translated into Latin, as he
confesses himself (say they) and afterward King Alfred turned them into
English. Out of which words I gather these observations, first that there was
such a King and he made these Laws without question. Secondly that these
Laws were very just, for else such men as Gildas and Alfred would not have
translated and preserved them. Thirdly that they do yet remain amongst our
common Laws, although hardly to be discerned which they be: for the same
writers testify that they being mingled amongst the laws of Alfred, were by
St. Edward reduced to one common Law, which the Norman yielded unto, and
himself and all his successors are sworn to observe them. Pontic. viru^
Monemuth.
And so say viru^nius and Monemuthensis. Leges Patris quae Molmutinae
dicebantur instituit inter Britones quae vsque ad hoc tempus celebrantur inter
Anglos. So also says Higden: where speaking first of the Marchen Law,
containing both Laws of Mulmutius and Mertia, and of the Dane Law, and west
Saxon Law, Ex his tribus Legibus (says he) Sanctus Edwardus tertius vnam Legem
communem edidit, C^strencis. Pol. virgil.
que Leges Edwardi vsque hodie vocantur: of these three laws St. Edward the
third made one common Law, which to this day are called the Laws of Edward.
Behold therefore the Fathers, yea and the very name of our common Law. Behold
a full proof of Sir John Fortescues testimonye concerning our Laws. Some
particulars whereof as they were in those times, are also mentioned in
Chronicles.

For by Polidore it is thus recorded: Pol Virgil.
Mulmutius ius atque Leges nouas, et illas quidem salutares dedit, quas
deinceps Mulmitianas Leges appellarunt. Templa deorum immortalum Loco asyli
omnibus ad ea confugientibus esse constituit; and a little after, Pondera ac
mensuras rebus vendendis emendisque posuit, fures et noxium omne genus hominum
seuerissime puniuit, fecit quamplures vias, decreuit que in quam Latitudinem
fieri deberent, ac Lege sanxit earum ius ad Principem duntaxat pertinere:
eiusque iuris violatoribus, atque ijs qui in illis maleficium aliquod facerent
constituit paenas: praeterea vt ne terra vacaret, neue populus rei frumentariae
inopia frequenter premeretur, aut minueretur, si pecora sola occuparent agros,
qui ab hominibus coli deberent, co^stituit quot quisque Comitatus aratra
haberet, and so forth: where you see that he made laws for Sanctuaries, for
weights, for measures: against theft, robbery, and other offenses: for high
ways and Nusances, and for tillage and Husbandry: and by the words you may
easily gather, that they were the same, or much to the same effect, as they are
now, either continuing in the common Law, or revived by Statutes: and that in
those days also the land was divided into certain parts, which are now called
Counties. Brecus and Fergusius likewise in Scotland, near about the same time
also made Laws for division of their Land into Tribes, hundreds, and
wapentakes says the Chronicle, and for punishment of murder, theft and other
offenses.

Again by Higden it is thus recorded Anno mundi 3529. ante Christum 445.
Mulmutius King of the Britains the 23, but the first Lawmaker, ordained that
Churches Plowes, Cities and Highways, should enjoy a Privilege or liberty.
This Higden expounds to be a kind of Sanctuary, that if any offender did
fly to any of these, he should no further be pursewed but suffered to escape,
which interpretation cannot be made but only of the Church, and therefore to be
let pass, as made by a Monk ignorant of Law.

But our common Law gives a sound and very consonant exposition. For even
from the most ancient times to this day, there is a kind of privilege in
use, that these four should be free from distress. For no man ought to be
distrayned by the beasts of his Plowe, nor in high ways, nor in Markets or
Churches. This freedom from distress then I take to be the privilege
ordained by Mulmutius, chiefly because it is indifferently common to all the
four things above mentioned: Marlebr. Cap. 2. et 15 w. 1. Cap. 16 51. H. 3.
Art. Cleri. Cap. 9. Fitz. N.B. 90.
and although diverse later statutes do confirm and enlarge this privilege to
some one or other of the four, yet none of the^ name altogether, as they were
in Mulmutius Law, and by the likeness of the Privilege it seems they were
joined at first, Also by the words of Articuli Cleri: it seems to be more
ancient then the statutes. For the Clergy there complained of distresses
taken in their glebe as a wrong. Besides some of the writs made upon this
privilege have these words Contra Legem et consuetudinem Regn^, which for the
most part is intended to be the most ancient common Law: yet if this
interpretation be not accepted: then take another collected upon the ancient
Laws of the Saxons and the Norman. They say that the Church has a privilege
which they call Pacem, and is understood the Sanctuary. The four ways have a
peace, which is, that all Nusances in them shall be amended (note the
antiquity of our Laws, of Nusanz.) But for markets and plowes, no other
privilege can be heard of, but only this whereof I have spoken, to be free
from distress, which is still continued. And this Polidor seems to say,
expounding the law of Mulmutius, to be, that the beasts of the plow ought not
to be led away for debt, so long as the debtor had other goods. Now if the
Privilege from distress was so ancient, it must needs follow that
distresses were much more aunciently in use as I noted also before. And from
the use of distresses by secundary conclusions and deductions of reason,
followed many Laws amongst us, yet in common practice; as of Attornments,
Repleuies, Auouries, Tenures Services: Quid Iuris clamat, quem redditu^ reddit.
Per quae seruicia and such like, which by necessity must be understood, where
distresses are frequent, and so much of the Mulmutian Law. Now follows of
King Lucius.

Cap. 10.
BY many steps and degrees I am come to the Lucid star of Britain, well
deserving that name, for that in his time, religion, Justice, and government,
began to shine more brightly in this kingdom. And in the history of him, and
his succsseors the Readers may observe three things: First that this Nation
above all Nations of the earth (except the Hebrews) has had most virtuous,
religious and Godly Princes. Secondly that as our ancient laws were most
righteous, being derived from the laws of God written in nature: So Lucius and
his successors established only such good and just Laws, as were agreeable to
Christianity, and derived out of the Scriptures. Thirdly that all calamities
of this Land has proceeded of public and notorious crimes against God and his
servants, our good Princes, and against religion and religious laws.
Concerning Lucius himself, I cited before the testimony of King Alfred, a
witness far above all exception: who says directly and expressly in his
Laws, that upon the propagation of the Gospel, when many men received the
faith of Christ as well in England as in other regions, certain Synods, as well
of Bishops, as of other most noble wise men were gathered, which appointed
punishments for offenders. And a little after, these Sanctions or Laws, I
Alfred King have collected and committed to writing, where he speaks of
certain Sinodes, of Bishops and Noble and wise men; it must needs be mea^t of
Parlaments, as we showed before. For we read of no general counsel in
Britain, and of Provincial Sinodes, it cannot be intended; where he says
that they were gathered upon the propagation of the Gospel, he signifies the
time of King Lucius, Beda. L. 1.
when the Gospel was first publicly received in this Land, For it cannot be
understood of the Christian Saxons, for of them he speaks by name afterward,
saying that he used choice and judgment in refusing some of their laws, and
taking others; whereof I infer first that those words before were meant of
the first Christian Britains, (whom he names not because they were enemies to
the Saxons) Secondly that those British laws were more sincere and agreeable
to Godlynes then the Saxon. Thirdly that those sanctions by him collected, are
some of the ancient common Laws, which yet remain, for that we find no
other collection of Laws made by him: But this all Histories testify that he
translated into Saxon the same which Gildas turned into Latin, and that the
same were gathered into our common Law by St. Edward and called Saint Edwards
laws.

Besides it cannot be said that these good laws were made by any other, but
only by Lucius, for neither was any other of the Britain Princes so Godly and
religious, as he, neither had any of his successors such peaceable possession
of the Land or conueniency to make laws as he had. For immediately after his
death, and continually till the Saxons time, the whole state traveled with
foreign and intestine enemies. Lastly the testimony of Polidore confirms this,
Pol. Virg.
who gives this most honorable testimony of King Lucius: that he left his
kingdom as well Optimis institutis prouectum advanced or amended with the best
institutions or Laws, as diuina religione auctum; so that without question it
is that he made some of our Laws.

But particularly which of these laws or institutions now extant were enacted
by Lucius, it is hard to say: yet to speak my opinion, I think first our Laws
of fines and amercements was established in his time. For so says Alfred, that
those first Christian Parlaments consisting of Bishops and most noble wise men,
being taught by the mercifulness of Christ, did appoint for every first
offender a pecuniary pain, where you see not only the thing, but almost the
very name of Misericordia, which is used to this day in amercenents, and is
afterward frequently used in the Saxon and Norman Laws, and this was for
smaller offenses. But for the greatest, the words of Alfred go further; saying
of the same first Christians, Proditori tantummodo ac Dommim defertori hanc
initiorem paenam haud infligendam existimarunt, quippe qui eiusmodi viro minime
parcendum censuerunt tum quod Deus contemptores sui omni miseratione indignos
voluit, tum quod Christus illorum qui ei mortem obtulerunt non est omnino
misertus. Where you see that by the testimony of Alfred they took the
president of their Law against Treason, Lamb. Arc.
from the examples of Christ and of God. What was that Law? It follows
afterward. In leg. Alf. Cap. 4
Qui capiti et saluti Regis perfidiose infidiabitur vita et fortunis eius
omnibus priuator. that the Traitor should forfeit, life, Lands, and goods.
Acts. 1.
So was Judas punished and that punishment Elfredus felt being convicted of
treason in the days of King Athelstane as appears by the said Kings Charter,
Fox in men.
recited by Mr. Fox: here also appears not only the Eschet which you see is
expressly set down in the words, but also trialls, for it would be injurious
and vain to set down a punishment for offenses, and not set down a course
how the offender might be cleared or condemned: and it is most unlikely, that
King Lucius and those first Christians would imitate God and Christ in severity
of punishment, and not much more study to imitate him in the Justice and
sincerity of their Trialles.

Therefore I think that the same Lucius ordained our Trials by twelve, and that
according to the example of Christ. For, that it is agreeable to the
Scriptures, Sir John Fortescue.
the learned Sir John Fortescue has fully proved, and whosoever shall
consider of it indifferently, shall find that it is the most righteous and
Godly course that ever was found out, and therefore most likely to proceed
from the piety of that holy King.

Also in that purest age of Christianity, Gra. Did. 11. et Did. 20.
it was held for a ground, that first the Scriptures ought to be searched,
whether any rule might be found for the action intended, or not; if not, then
Mos populi dei et Sanctorum exempla the manner of Gods people and the examples
of holy men were to be followed.

And if holy men ought to be imitated, then who if not our most holy Savior?
as the Apostle says: Ephesians. 5 1. Cor. 11.
Be followers of God as dear Children: and be followers of me as I am of
Christ.

Quo est detestabilior istorum immanitas: So much the more is their cruelty to
be abhorred, which labor to hide, not only the words, but also the examples
of Christ away from us. Therefore I say Lucius did institute the trial of al
matters in fact, Act. 1, 22. et 10 41. John. 15.27
to be by twelve witnesses, as our Savior Christ ordained, and chose twelve to
bear witness of his resurrection; neither do I find any other law president
or example from whence this manner of Trialls should be taken. But I find that
the reverend Elutherius, from whom Lucius had much of his light, used the same
rule and practice, for that good Bishop Iuxta ordinationem Apostolorum
according to the Apostles ordinance, Fascic. Te^p.
did decree that no meats usual for mankind should be refused of Christians;
And Exemplo Christi by the example of Christ, ordained that none should be
regraded before he were condemned.

Thus they took a rule or president for every thing out of the Scripture. And
the authority of Moses to the contrary is not to be objected; for although he
says that at the mouth of two or three, an offender shall die; yet he adds
not the negative, that more should not be used. Therefore the Apostolical
Canons before cited, and the example of our Savior in the affirmative was a
better warrant. And it is most apparent that iuries were used among the
Chsistian Britains and before the Saxon times; for proof whereof, although in
mine opinion, the testimony of the profoundly learned Sir John Fortescue should
be sufficient saying expressly that these laws were used in the time of the
Britains, Sir. John Fortescue.
yet for the further satisfaction of those that lean to much to the opinion of
Polidor and other Italians, I will add more reasons and authorities to the
same point. First the most learned Antiquary of our Nation Mr. Camden, Camden
Britannae.
shows plainly that it was not invented by the Conqueror, (as Polidor
says,) but it was in use in the days of King Etheldred the Saxon; Secondly
the most excellent professor of our Laws, Praef in L. 3.
Sir Edward Cook before cited, proves by substantial records, that this
trial was before the Conquest. So there are three witnesses every one of
exceeding great learning against one Master Polidor.

Tantae molis erat Romanam excindere gentem. Such a labor it is to overthrow
these Italian opinions, of which our nation is too fondly credulous. But let us
go forward, and although my simple discourse can add no weight unto their
most grave judgments, especially the last cited, which is grounded upon
records: yet under favor, I will adioyne some other testimonies and proofs.
In the time of King Edward the third, when by all men's consent our Judges were
most exactly learned (as in deed it was a time excelling, not only in
Martial glory, but in learning and wisdom) I find Mr. Belknap a reverend
Judge, concurring in opinon, with these before named. 41. E. 3.31.
The Law (says he) was founded in this, that every Inquest should be taken Per
duodecim liberos et legales homines et non per pauciores. If it were a
foundation of the common law, then without question it was one of the first
Laws; and we must needs confess that no Law can be without trials, and it
cannot be proved that ever any other trial was used, besides this in pleas of
land or inherirance in this kingdom.

But to make it yet more plain, the City of London is and was in the times of
the Britains, by the confession of many learned writers, namely Caesar
Tacitus, Ptolomy, Ammianus Marcellinus, Gildas Galfridus etc. a most ancient
City, a place of government, and ruled by a governor, the sea of a Flamine or
Bishop, not a fastenes of the woods as some have imagined upon the general
and uncertain words of authors, which never saw it, but frequented and
cclebrated with concourse of Merchants and plenty of commerce as Tacitus
affirms. Now I pray you behold with the eyes of your mind, the form of
such a City: and tell me how you can imagine it to stand without a Court of
Justice, the bond of commerce, for the deciding of controversies? or how you
can imagine that such a Court should be without a due form of Trialls? But
least I may seem to deal by immagination; for the first point that it had a
Court; Calf. Mon. Pontic. vir.
Galfridus Monemuthensis and Ponticus virunnius out of the ancient British
History, do testify in plain words; that in the days of Julius Caesar,
Irelgas, Nephew of Cassibellan, being slain by Cuelinus, Nephew to Androgeus
Governor or Lieftenant of London, a commandment was given to Androgeus to
bring Cuelinus to the K. Court, there to receive Justice: his answer was Sese
suam habere curiam, et in illa definiri debere quicquid alquis in homines suos
clamaret, si ergo rectitudinem de Cuelino decreuisset appetere ipsam in vrbe
Trinobantum ex veterum traditione fieri praeciperet. He alleges that he has
his Court, wherein ought to be determined whatsoever any man laid to the charge
of his men, and that right ought to be done unto them in the City of London
according to the ancient custom. For the second point, if Mr. Polidor will
not give us leave to think that London had this jurisdiction in Caesar's time;
yet without his leave, I will prove by many infallible records that the same
City of London had this jurisdiction, and namely this trial by twelve in the
time of the Britains, thus:

This City of London has and had always from time out of mind their
Hustings, and the writ of right in London tryable by twelve; the Assise of
Freshforce tryable by twelve; and the trial of pleas of the Crown by twelve;
it must needs be that these Liberties were begun either by Parliament or
prescription, either in the time of the Norma^s, of the Saxons, or of the
Britains. But in 14. E. 2. when they must needs have known if there had bin
any Patent or Act of Parliament, either of the Saxons or Normans for it. A quo
warranto in Itinere in Turri London being brought, for these and other
Liberties: The cominaltie of that City make their claim to the rest by several
Pate^ts, but to these by ancient custom and prescription confirmed by
Charters in these words. Quoad articulum quod etc proferunt cartam Henrici aui
Regis nunc in qua continetur quod idem H. rex, 16. die Marcij Anno regni sui
vndecimo concessit ciuibus predictis, quod Hustingum semel tantum in hebdomada
tenatur secundum consuetudmem ciuitatis. Et proferunt aliam carta^ eiusdem
Domini H. Regis in qua continetur quod idem Dominus Henricus Rex 20. die Martij
Anno regni sui 52. co^cessit ciuibus suis London quod de placitis ad coronam
pertinentibus de his maxim quae infra ciuitatem praedictam et eius suburbia
fieri continget, se possunt disrationare secundum antiquam consuetudinem
ciuitatis praedictae. By these Charters you see, that the pleas aforesaid are
to be proceeded and tried according to the prescription or custom of the
City, and so are the words of the Assise of Freshforce. By the way the reader
is to understand, that prescription or custom here, is not said to be the
continuance of many years, as 50.60. or an hundred: But that in Law is said to
be by prescription, the beginning whereof cannot be proved by any record,
writing, or lawul testimony, and such a prescription is here to be understood.

Now that the custom and such a prescriptio^ of London is and was in the
Conquerors time and before, that their trialls should be by a Jury of twelve,
Fit. N.B. 6.
all their records testify: The reverend Judge Fitsherbert testifies and most
evidently the Record of the Quo warranto above cited testifies, for so it
goes forward, Quoad articulum predictum quod ipsi de placitis ad coronam Regis
pertinentibus se possint disrationare secundum antiquam consuetudinem
ciuitatis; dictum est eis periusticiarios quod declarent Curiae modum et formam
huiusmodi disrationamenti et consuetudinis. Qui dicunt quod Antiqua consuetudo
ciuitatis est quod siquis liber ciuitatis aliquod delictum fecerit per quod
periculum vitae incurrere debeat, et vsque Iter Iusticiariorum manucaptus
fuerit, et inde in Itinere postea, sit ad Ratione^ positus, se disrationare
potest per duodecim Iuratores patrie secundum Legem communem vel per magnam
Legem Ciuitatis, viz. per triginta sex legales homines ciuitatis. etc. Nothing
can be more plainly proved, then the point in questitio^ is by this record:
viz. that the trial by twelve was used both by the common Law, and by the most
ancient custom of London, I say by custom, whereof no beginning could be
proved. Well then it was clear in the times of Edw. 2. Edward. 1. and Henry
the third, and so much is also proved not only by this record, but by their
great Charter, for they give them no new liberties, but Ciuitas London habeat
omnes antiquas consuetudines, Mag. Car.
and this was within two hundred years after the Conqueror: if any Law or
Patent had been made of it in all that time; without question, they would have
pleaded the patent or Law, and not prescription. For a Satute or patent does
determine a prescription.

The Conqueror, does he make them any grant or Patent hereof, or does
Edward the Confessor one of the Saxon Princes, grant any such matter or make
mention that any such thing was granted by patent unto London? Ne my: Not a
minim of any such matter, It is written in their Laws, Lamb. Arc. in Leg.
Edwardi. Liber Recordorum. London Dunthorne
Debet etiam in London quae caput est regni et Legum, semper curia Domini Regis
singulis Septimanis die Lunae Hustingis se dear et teneri, Mark how it agrees
with the patent before pleaded. In ea itaque super sunt ardua compota et
ambigua placita coronae et curiae domini regis totius Regni predicti quae haec
vsque et co^suetudines suas vna se^per in violabilitate co^seruat vbicu^que
ipse rex fuerit sieve in expedicione, sieve alibit, propter fatigationem gentium
et populorum regni iuxta veteres Consuetudines bonorum patrum et predecessoru^
et omniu^ principum et proceru^ et sapientu^ sentorum totius regni predicti.
See the Charter of K. William the conqueror in Hookers Chron.
Behold then here is no new institution mentioned neither by the Conqueror nor
by the Co^fessor, but still the ancient customs.

And if this had been by patent or Parliament of any Saxon Prince; without all
question these two Princes would have known it. For all the Saxon government
in peace from the first King unto the last was not above 300. years, and both
Edward and William were most diligent searchers and Registers of all the
laws, Liberties and Customs of their kingdom, as appears by the Domesday
Book, and by that which is recorded by Houeden and others.

Besides in the Saxon times, not a piece of la^d passed from the Crown, and
much less any liberties or Iurisdictio^s, which are parcel of the royal
prerogative without Patent, as appears by the manifold patents of manors,
Lands, and Liberties made to Churches and Monasteries, whereof those that
belonged to the Abbey of Croyland, Ingulfus Historia Eliensis.
are faithfully recorded by Ingulfus, those of the house of Ely by another; and
others are to be seen in the Churches that remain.

The City of London therefore had this Liberty and Manner of trial in the
Normans time, not by patent or new Law, but by prescription; they had it in the
Saxons time not by patent or new Law: therefore by prescription, and it must
needs be true, that they had it from a time whereof no proof could be made,
that is, long before the Saxons. I say by prescription as it is pleaded even
from the Britains. And this that I have said of London, I may say of all
ancient Cities where they have like customs and Liberties; yea the ancient
hundred, Courts, Shiermotes, Wardmotes, Swainmotes, Leets, and Wapentakes,
which are often mentioned in the Saxons Laws as things in use. Let any man
show me, what other kind of trial or inquisition, they had then this, and Quo
warranto by what law they had this, but by like prescription. If you bring
forth the trial by fire and water called Ordell, it was by all likelihood but
a superstitious invention, in the Saxon times, In Legibus Canuti de Foresta.
and was used only in criminal causes where the truth could not otherwise be
known as appears by the Law of Canutus. And although the Conqueror in his
absolute command did something of his own head, Houeden Lamb.
yet it appears plainly that when by the earnest entreaty of his Nobles, he
was persuaded to establish the former laws; he then by the counsel of his
Nobles, and according to the course and common Laws of the Realm, impanelled
twelve men of every Shire, to inquire and make a true presentment of the said
ancient Laws and customs, for so be the words: Electi de singulis totius
patriae comitatibus duodecim viri, Lamb. Arc. Houeden.
iureiurando Coram Rege primum confirmauerunt, vt quoad possent recto tramite
incedentes, nec ad dextra^ nec ad sinistra^ diuertentes, legum suarum, et
consuetudinum, sancita patefacerent etc. And amongst the rest, they make
mencio^ of the customs of London, which I cited before. I say nothing here,
that the footesteps of this trial, are found in the laws of Etheldred made at
wantage, which is cited by Master Camden; nor of the ordinance, made for the
mountainers of Wales: Malmesbury. Huntingdo^. Ethelwardus. Historia Ely
remaining with St. Robert Cotton. Ingulfus.
nor of the law of Kennethus, the famous Scottish King about the year of our
Savior Christ, 840. mentioning some such matter; nor of the learned and
diligent Historians, that lived near about the conquest: and might easily have
told us if any such thing had been begun by the Saxons; nor of the History of
Ely, written before the conquest: and Ingulfus soon after, plainly speaking of
Manors, Feoffements, Shiriffes, Cou^ty Courts, Terms at London, recoueries
in an assise or writ of right, as of things the^ common and usual.

We read also of Parlaments, wapentakes, homages, fealties, discents from the
Grandfather to the Nephew, Eschets to the King for want of heirs, in the days
of Aurelius Ambrosius, Leland. Hooker. Galf. Mon. Gildas.
and of Arthur the worthy, and straight way after, Gildas makes mention of
Courts, Judges, Freshsuit after thieues, and Judgments which could not be
without trialls. By all which I think it is manifest that these points of
common law, and namely these trialls by twelve, are of most ancient
antiquity, according to the common law, and used amongst other customs of the
city of London before the times of the Saxon and Norman Princes, of whom no
such Liberty or course of proceeding could be gotten without patent, and no
other form of ancient trials does appear: upon which I conclude, as before,
that they had it in the times of the Britains.

The same is proved by all the ancient and new records of Assizes, of
Freshforce, of writs of right, and other tryalles in London, which must be all
falsified and many thousands of records besides, if we overthrow this
prescription. And this being so consonant to the judgments of those excellent
men before cited, Ca^den, Belknap, Sr. Io. Fortescue, and Sr. Ed. Cook, Let us
now leave Master Polidor and his followers which either never saw or did not
understand, our ancient Histories and Records; let us leave them (I say) to
their own imaginations, with this admonition to all discreet Antiquaries, that
they be not ouer-hasty to believe either the Roman or other Authors, speaking
of the Britains thire enemies, but holding them suspect for partiality or
ignorance, which may easily appear to every judicial Reader, let us follow
the true grounds confirmed by these faithful Monuments of our Laws, and the
Histories thereunto agreeing. And this being ascertained, it is easy now to
behold, from whence all our Assizes of nouel diseisin of Mordancester, of
darrain presentment, our great Assizes, Iuries, Challenges and the rest, of
which Mr. Bracton at large discourses, are lineally descended, being as I take
it the greatest part of our common Laws, and it appears by that which is
before spoken, that these also are most agreeable to the Scripture of God;
whereupon I conclude fully, that all our common Laws was in use in the
Britains time long before the Saxons, howsoever suppressed and the books
thereof defaced by foreign invasions, and intestine dissentions. And thus much
of Lucius and the Britains. Now of the Saxon Princes.

Cap. 11.
IT has been a work of the special providence of Almighty God, and of his
infinite mercy to this Island, in the mids of Poetical fables wherewith the
British Histories have been mixed, and of those Barbarous inuasio^s, which have
wasted and spoiled them, to leave us yet certain remnants and monuments,
whereby to judge of those long past Antiquities; in judging whereof, men by
taking contrary courses, have made the controversy more difficult, that the
truth found out might be the better confirmed. For some have given themselves
to favor the Roman History so much, as to abrogate all faith and credit from
the British, as if the ambitious Romans and Caesar would say nothing for their
own advantage, who of all others most covetous of glory is justly noted by
Suetonius, Lucian, and Asinius Pollio to have written his comme^taries, as much
as he might, to save his own Honor, especially of his Actions in these
remote places.

Others have gone so far to the bowehand, as to favor all the vanities of
the Poetical Bardes, as if nothing could be denied, which they had once
turned into Rythme. But that God which came into the world to bear witness of
the truth (so much does he love it) has left us rules and directions to try
out the verity of ancient times. By the mouth of two or three witnesses,
every word shall be confirmed says Moses, and (as it is most certain) truth
cannot be so much oppressed as to be utterly destitute of proofs. Let
therefore the proof rest upon witnesses and comparison of circumstances, and
it will appreare as Sir John Prise truly auerreth and learnedly proves, that
the British Story is in many things more to be credited then Caesar, and
Polidore, and other Italians. Besides the Scottish History agreeing in many
things with us, manifestly conuinceth the Romans of their Arrogancy and
vanity, and with all ministers further grounds, not only to prove the
antiquity and sincerity of our common Laws, but that the same or others much
like obtained in Scotland also, as well as here, which may be seen by the
Laws of Brechus and Fergusius answering in time to Mulmutius and Mercia, and
by the Laws of Kennethus, not much distant from Alfred, and last of all by
their Books of Regiam Maiestatem a principal book of Common Law amongst the^,
agreeing in effect with our Glanuill. And to say truth there was little
difference in Laws and Religion, betwixt these two Nations, until the bloody
wars, that began after the time of our King Henry the third, before whose
days Glanuill did write. Again the most ancient of the Saxon Princes, and
lawmakers, do make mention of many things in our common Law, which we are
forced to believe, that they received from the Britains; for that, they speak
of them, as of things usual and common, Ina, Alfred, Lamb. Arc.
Edgar and other the Saxon law makers, speak of the Parliament, of Judgments,
of Treason, of Sanctuaries, of Purgatio^, of execution by hanging, for theft,
of fresh suit after theiues and homicides, of escapes, of Terms kept at
London, of Recoueries, of Exchanges, Historia Eliensis.
of Feoffements, of jntales, of Commons, enclosures, and the Law of Curia
Claudenda, of the law of disceit, it in selling things corrupt or vicious; of
dowers, Leases, Rents, Farms, services etc. And many other, as things the^ in
use, which were allowed as agreeable to Gods word, by those Saxon Christians
being utter enemies to the Britains, and yet most devout in Religion, and
sincere in Justice, as their Laws do testify. For which cause I will touch
certain of the notable Saxon laws, only to show the Godliness of those
ancient Saxons and Scottish Kings, and how in that time the matters of our
common Laws were usual and common.

Inas about the year of our Lord 720. begins his laws thus: Inas by the
grace of God, west Saxon King, by the persuasion and instruction of Cenred my
Father, and of Hedda and Erkenwald my Bishops, and with all my Aldermen, and the
eldest wisemen of my people, and in a great summons of Gods Servants, for the
health of our soul and conservation of our kingdom, (I have enacted) that
right Laws and Judgments be confirmed throughout our kingdom. Cap. 1. That
the ministers of God observe the appointed rules and manners of living: Then
follows Laws for observation of the Sabbath, against theft, robbery, murder,
and many other offenses; and therein, is mention also made of Landlords, of
Tennants, of Rents, and services. Kennethus the most worthy Scottish King,
soon after the same time, makes very just and good Laws, whereof this was
one. In every Shire (this was before Alfred) Let skillful men in the Laws be
appointed to reside, he that blasphemeth the name of God, of the Saints, of
his Prince, or of the Captain of his tribe, let his tongue be cut out. The
most religious K. Alfred about the year 880. begins his laws thus: The
Lord spoke unto Moses these words, saying: I am the Lord thy God which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage, thou shall have
none other Gods besides me. And so forth as in the decalog and other
Iudicialles of Moses. Then follow certain laws against perjury, concerning
Intayles, against Sacrilege, Treason, Quarrelling, Fighting, Fornication, yea
and against immodest touching of a woman; with other laws of great
sincerity, a manifest and approved Vicar and Lieuftenant of God, a second
David, whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, which to confirm, the same
King translated the new Testament out of Latin into the Vulgar Saxo^, for the
use of his subjects, some Copies whereof (as it is said) are yet remaining
amongst us. So far did the learning of those days differ from the ignorance
of these Roman innouators. Edward Anno Dom. 920. Thus begins: I Edward K.
command all G^eeues that they give right judgments to all according to their
judgment Book. Alfred and Guthrun thus made their league by act of Parliament
Ante omnia Deum vnum etc. before al things that one God is to be loved and
Worshipped. Secondly that humane Laws are to be proclaimed as common to Christ
and the King. Then follow Laws for payment of Tithes, for observation of the
Sabaothes etc. Ioh. Picus cited by Mr Lamb. Arc.
And by this league Guthrunus which some call Gurmundus, and was in Baptism
named Ethelstane, obtained Suffolk, Norfolk, and Northumberland, to be given
to him to hold by Fealty of the King. Edmund sets this preface to his Laws: I
Edmund King to al my Subjects do plainly signify, that in a solemn assembly
both of the Clergy and Laity, I have studiously inquired of the wisest of my
kingdom, by what means the Christian faith might be most advanced. And to us
all it seemed most comodious that love and mutual kindness should be maintained
amongst all men throughout our Kingdom. Etenim tae^et nos harum quotidianarum
pugnarum, For we are tired with these quotidian fightings and contentions. O
godly Prince! O true Vicar of the God of Peace! Edgar enacteth Laws for the
observation of the Sunday, and of public feasts and fasts under the pains
contained in the judicial book. And that every man shall freely enjoy the
benefit of the common Law. Note the common law even then named, before St.
Edward and the Conqueror. Canutus the Dane thus: First let all men most
devoutly and religiously worship one God. Al men observe one rule of Christian
Religion. Al men obey Canutus the King with due fidelity and observance. All
defend and keep the church of Christ with holy and everlasting peace, and
continually frequent the same etc, with many other most Godly and Christian
laws, and after many Footesteps of ancient Laws, which yet remain in use,
he concludes with a most ardent exhortation to all men to turn unto God and
to obey his commandments, another Lieftenant or vicegerent of Christ. Edgar
the peaceable confirms the Liberties and rights of the Church, and amongst
other things, enacteth that every man shall enjoy the benefit of the common
Law. Like matters are found in the Laws of Ethelstane, Etheldred, St. Edward
and William the Conqueror, who confirms the same with some small addition,
and has left them to us consecrated by his own oath, and the oath of all his
successors. You see then the sacred Majesty of our Imperaill Princes, who^ God
has vouchsafed not only by the co^fesson of strangers and enemies, but by
these their Laws to be his Vicars and defenders of his faith. And by these
things that have been said, it may fully appear, first how sincerely and
deuoutlye those excellent Princes followed the counsel of Elutherius given to
Lucius, in taking laws for their kingdom out of the word of God, and how true
it is that we affirm that our ancient common laws were begun in the times of
the first Britains, grounded upon the laws of God, printed in Nature and
Scripture, continued by the Saxons in their judgment books, and transmitted
to us by Saint Edward and the Conqueror. And consequently the ground of Sir
John Fortescues testimony, that this land has been possessed by Britannes,
Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans: And in all the times of these several
Nations, and of their Kings, this Realm was still ruled with the self same
laws and customs, which if they had not been right good, some of those Kings
moved either with Justice or with reason, or affection, would have changed or
abolished them, specially the Romane^, who did judge all the world by their
own Laws. Thirdly what direction and Presidents our Princes and Parlaments
have had to follow in making Laws, and what Laws the whole Kingdom is bound
to observe, by that solemn oath that is taken for the observation of St.
Edwards laws and the Laws of the Realm, as partly also is noted unto us in
the preface of that famous Statute, made against Prouisors in the 25. year of
King Edward the third. And lastly what reason may be given of the manifold
calamities, sent by Almighty God, the most just and severe judge at sundry
times upon this Realm, namely the suppressing, and consequentlye the violation
of this his Covenant, of these our ancient laws, and of the law of God,
whereupon they are founded, by the predominant violence of Idolatry,
superstition, injustice, uncleanness, Breach of faith, and loialtye, both
before the Norman and sithence. If it be not so, peruse the Particulars that
the holy Gildas, and aftter him, the learned Sir John Prise obiecteth against
the first Fritains; that the reverend Bid and Geffery of Monmouth urge against
the second age; that Master Camden and other Chronicles, but specially Master
Fox collecteth against the Saxons; that are at large described in the times of
King John and King Henry the sixth, who suffered themselves and these laws to
be ouerswaied by the supreheminence of Rome, and of the contrary side, if we
consider the best means to establish the perpetual unity and felicity of
these two mighty nations, now again reunited, we shall find it to consist
principally in conforming them, both as much as may be to the laws, of that
God of unity which ordained the ancient Laws of both kingdoms to be very
like, and almost the same, as I have showed. For what Kings have reigned in
more magnificence and glory then the Britain Princes instiled by Elutherius,
the Vicars of God in their kingdom, then the Saxon Princes endowed by Beda,
with the Title of Christianissimi, the^ the Normans which have most mainteyned
these Laws, and most opposed themselves against the usurping power of the
foreign Prelate, namely Edward the 1. the 3. and the 6. Henry the 7. and the
eight, acknowledged by the enemy of our faith to be defender of the faith,
and the late most of all excellent, Elizabeth, which was blessed with a
kingdom, longer then the reigns often that cursed her. And now the no less
excellent Majesty of K. James, the true heir as well of the goodness as of the
greatness of his Predecessors. And who have fallen into greater miseries then
those that being invested with such magnificent Titles by right, have suffered
others to take their Titles and authority by usurpation; of whose Calamities
because my heart does tremble to think, I will forbear my pen to write. Yet
by this we see how God has fed and directed us with the staff of Beauty,
Zach. 11.
and with the staff of Bands, but now he will break his staff of beauty,
to disanull his covenant, made with all people, and he will break his staff
of ba^des, to dissolve the Brotherhood between Judah and Israel except we
repent of our manifold sins. I will therefore conclude with the Godly words
of one of our famous and learned Judges Bracton, Bracto^. L. 1
and one of our virtuous and Heroical Kings Canutus, The first taking his
ground out of the many times remembered, and never to be forgotten, Epistle of
Elutherius, says thus: Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub deo et Lege, ad
similitudinem Jesus Christi, cuius vices gerit. Brvcto^ li. 1.
And again Judges do sit in the seat of the K. himself, as in the throane of
God, instead of the K. as instead of Jesus Christ. For the K. is the Vicar and
Lieftenant of God, and judgments are not the judgments of men, but of God;
and therefore it is said that the heart of the King is in the hand of God. And
a little after, into the seat therefore of judgment, which is as the Throne
of the Divine Majesty, let no man unwise or unlearned, presume to ascend,
least he turn light into darkness, and darkness into light, and least
with an ignorant hand like a mad man, he strike the innocent and spare the
offender, and least he fall from above as from the Tribunal of God, by
attempting to fly without wings to support him. And when any man is to judge,
or to be made a judge, let him take heed, lest by judging peruersly and against
the Laws, for request or reward, or a little temporal comoditie, He purchase
to himself sorrow and grief eternal: and least in the day of Gods wrath, he
feel him to be a just revenger, who has said. To me vengeance and I will
recompense, when the Kings and Princes of the earth shall weep and lament at
the sight of the Son of man, for the terror of his judgments, from which
neither gold nor silver can deliver them. Who will not be afraid of that
fearful trial, where the Lord himself shall be accuser, advocate and judge?
from whose sentence none ca^ appeal. For the Father has given al judgment to
the son, who shuts and no man opens, and opens and no man shuts. O
strict and severe judgment wherein me^ shall give account not only of their
actions; but of every idle word that they have spoken! who shall escape from
that anger to come? When the Son of man shall send his Angels, which shall
gather out of Gods kingdom every scandal, and those that do iniquity, and of
them shall make faggots to burn and cast them into the furnace of fire, where
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Without question God is a Jealous
God, and whosoever takes his Covenant, his oathe, his name in vain, he shall
smart, for it he shall smart. Lamb. Arc.
Now therefore says Canutus in the conclusion of his Laws; I beseech all men
in general, and command every man in particular in the name of the immortal
God that sincerely, and withal their hearts they turn to God, and withal
care and diligence, search what is to be done, and what it is to be avoided
(as it is a thing most convenient for our salvation) that we love God and keep
his commandments, and give diligent heed to the words of his messengers For
they shall produce us before his sight in the day, wherein the Lord shall come
to judge every man according to his works. Then happy shall that keeper be,
that shall bring the flock committed unto him into the joys of heaven, by the
pains that he has taken upon earth, And blessed shall be the flock that
followed such a shephard which has pulled the^ from the paws of the Devil,
and commended them as a purchase unto God. Therefore let us all in concord and
unity studdie to please God, and fly from the fearful torments of his wrath,
and judgment. Let the Preachers and Ministers of Gods word (as it is their
charge and needful to all men's salvation) oftentimes preach the glory and
joys of Gods kingdom, and let all men with diligent, serious, and attentive
ears and minds, hear and observe them: yea let them bear the commandments
of God always imprinted and infixed in their hearts. To conclude every man
for the greater advancement of the divine glory, both in word and deed, Godly
and cheerfully apply himself to do well, by what means soever they may. So
at length in the end we all abundantly shall obtain his gracious mercy.
Blessed be the name of the Lord, and to him be honor, praise, and glory, from
this time forth for evermore.

Deus non deseret.
