

A TRVE REPORT AND DESCRIPTION of the taking of the Island and Town of S.
Mary's, by a Ship of Amsterdam, and four English Pinnasses. 1599.

Translated out of Dutch into English.

embellished fleur de lis VBIQVE FLORET


LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1600.

A true report and Description of the taking of the Island and Town of S.
Mary's, by a ship of Amsterdam and four English Pinnasses.
AFter that the great and mighty fleet, set forth and furnished by the united
Provinces (in the year of our Lord 1599.) against the king of Spain and his
countries, under the conduct and command of the noble Lord Peter van Does,
Admiral and General of the same, had set sail, and put themselves forwards
on their no less valiant then succesfull voyage (which God with his omnipotent
hand always vouchsafes to guide and protect in all their lawful attemptes:)
it so chanced, that upon the 10. of June, there strayed from the fleet, a ship
of Amsterdam, wherein was Captain Garret Johnson Cater, who in crossing to and
fro, to recover a sight of the fleet, for about the space of three weeks,
happened upon the first of July to discrie near unto the Island of Saint Mary
four small sails, which afterward he perceived to be four small English
Pinnasses, whereof the biggest was of the burden of thirty lastes, the lesser
about seven lastes, and the other two accordingly. Being all these four
Pinnasses together furnished with nine cast pieces, and could make out amongst
them one hundred men, (when that they knew them to be all friends, and that the
Captains had been aboard one of the other) after their mutual greetings and
welcomes used at sea, the English Captains gave Ca^taine Cater intelligence,
how that they lay in wait for a bark lying under S. Mary's Island, which they
said was rich^y laden, containing a great treasure, and that with his aid and
help they might easily take her. Whereupon the said Cater promised them his
good help, and furtherance to fetch the bark from the shore, if so it were,
that by his assistance they might take her: but it was told him by the Captain
of the greater Pinnasse that it would be impossible to take the bark, without
that first they took the Island it self. Whereupon after deliberation taken
with them (being able to furnish out in all, nine score men, which the said
Captain said would suffice to take the Island) they resolved to assault the
same with their men. And having made the said Captain Cater their Admiral,
they altogether bended their course toward the Island, and the same day entered
under the town, preparing themselves to give the assault the next day.

The second of July, being the visitation of the blessed virg^n Marie, they
shot very strongly with four great pieces out of Captain Caters ship upon the
town of S. Marie: mean while the men began to be ^owed a shore, being all
well appointed and prepared to skirmish, taking their course Eastwards to the
Island, to fall upon the same in the low ground, but they could not do it, by
reason of the great number of the inhabitants upon the shore, which easily
might have hindered their landing. Wherefore Captain Cater after due
consideration thought it requisite to send two of the English pinnasses, with
eight or ten men toward the west side of the said Island, the which with plying
up and down, should seem to assault the Island on that side, himself going
also in his boat, with some of his men, rowing toward the West side of the
Island: whereupon they were shot at by some Spanish soldiers with Muskets, which
lay there upon the flat land, and afterward the same day they shot mightily
with a great piece upon the pinnasses, all which was done to that end, that
the soldiers which were occupied on the West side of the Island, should not
withdraw themselves to the East side thereof to resist their assault there:
which otherwise without doubt they would have done.

Our men now being landed in the East part of the Island, after a small skirmish
and little trouble, (by Gods help) won the Island: for the Spaniardes on the
East side being assaulted suddenly and unlooked for, fled immediately: so that
our men took not only the above named bark, but also had the whole Island and
the Town to their will and disposition.

Which done, the said Captain Cater by advise of the English Captains, set a
ransom on the Island, commanding the chief inhabitants thereof to bring them a
certain sum of Ducats.

Upon the 4. of July they forsook the Island again, because there was no good
road to ride in, as also because that the Westerly wind began to rise
strongly from the shore, so that they should have been in some peril if they
had stayed.

Thus was the Island and Town of S. Mary's won and taken, after they had
lain there three days.

They might well have kept the same, if they had thought it to have been any
thing aduantagious, or profitable for them.

The chief of the Island being by them demanded what the reason was that so
lightly they yielded the Island: answered, that they knew God was displeased
with them, that he would punish them for their sins, and that therefore they
thought it in vain to resist.

To the Almighty God be infinite praises for this and many other victories
granted unto us, and be it his blessed will to continue the same, and to
bless all our lawful enterprises, to the praise, honor, and glory of his holy
name, and the salvation of our souls.

Perused by me Garret Johnson Cater.

FINIS.

