Picturae Loquentes. OR PICTVRES Drawn forth in CHARACTERS. With a Poem of a
MAID.

By WYE SALTONSTALL.

Ne Suitor ultra crepidam. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, and are to be sold by
Tho. Slater, at his shop in the Black Friars. 1631.

(...) Suo. C. S. S. P. D.
THe eye can judge of no object in the dark: ^^en so these Pictures ^eing
hidden in tene^is, could not be dis^rned, until the Prin^r brought them to
light, and set the forth to the view the world. And the^fore as they lived
darkness, and proc^ded from a mind (...) of dark thoughts, have given them
dark Dedication since for my self I desire to be ignot^ unknown to other and
for you to who I present them, I kno^ no fame can redou^ unto you by the ^^eane
Essays, which ^ere written Ocium ^agis foventes, quam stu^entes gloriae, as
Sheap^eards play upon their ^aten pipes, to recre^te themselves, not to get
credit. However* (...) you find hereafter that these Pictures are ^ot shadowed
forth with those lively and exact Lineaments, which are required in a
Character, yet I hope you will pardon the Painter, since all I promise is only
this: Vt cum agis nihil, haec legas and ne nihil agas, defendas; That when you
have nothing to do, if you read them, they will keep you from doing nothing.
And so I leave them as a testimony of my love, presuming of your kind
acceptance.

F. tuus. W. S.

To the Reader.
SInce the Title is the first leaf that comes under censure, some perhaps
will dislike the name of Pictures, and say, I have no color for it; which I
confess, for these Pictures are not drawn in colors, but in Characters,
representing to the eye of the mind diverse several professions, whith if they
appear more obscure than I could wish; yet I would have you know, that it is
not the nature of a Character to be as smooth as a bull-rush, but to have some
fast and loose knots, which the ingenious Reader may easily untye. The first
Picture, is the description of a Maid, which Youngmen may read, and from
thence learn to know, that virtue is the truest beauty. The next follow in
their order, being set together in ^his little Book, that in Winter you may
read them ad ignem, by the fire side, and in Summer ad umbram, under some
shadie tree, and there with pass away the tedious hours. So hoping of thy
favorable censure, knowing that the least judicious are most ready to judge: I
expose them to thy view, with Appelles Motto, Ne Suitor ultra crepidam. Lastly,
whether you like them, or leave them, yet the Author bids you welcome:

Thine as mine, W. S.

THE TABLE.
THe World. 1. An Old man. 2. A Woman. 3. A Widow. 4. A true Lover. 5. A
Country Bride. 6. A Ploughman. 7. A Melancholy man. 8. A young Heir. 9. A
Scholar in the University. 10. A Lawyers Clarke. 11. A Townesman (...) Oxford.
12. An Usurer. 13. A Wandering Rogue. 14. A Waterman. 15. A Shepherd. 16. A
Jealous man. 17. A Chamber lain. 18. A Maid. 19. A Bayley. 20. A petty
Country Fair. 21. A Country Alehouse. 22. A Horse race. 23. A Farmers
Daughter. 24. A Keeper. 25. A Gentleman's house in the Country. 26.
FINIS.
The Author On his Poem of a MAID.
SOme jealous brain may here demand in haste,
Can this Maid that is so vendible be chaste?
That stands t'allure her Lovers on each Stall,
Her liberal beauty so exposed to all?
I answer, not; Thy self, thy self deceive;
It Is in thy choice to love, to like, or leave:
Yet thus much; Should she prove more light than meet,
She could but thus do penance in a sheet.
A MAID
The Argument.
FIrst, a nominall definition of the title of Maid; with the description of
that habituated Innocence which should be in them that challenge^ at
appellation, advising the preservation thereof: ^ also a moderation in their
carriage: First, nega^^vely, that they be not too coy, nor too kind: Then
^ffirmatively, that they be modest, courteous, con^ant: And lastly, the object,
and final cause of this ^idestie, which though last in action, is first in
(...): Marriage.

A MAID.
WHen God this universal world had framed,
He placed the Epitomy of his work therein,
A virgin Man and Woman, both unstaynd;
^or Adam knew not Eve, till he knew sin.
Whence those that live a single life are said,
Still to be Mayds, because at first so made.
The ^ame of Maid we take not in that sense,
For that which two may lose but neither win,
But for a habit of chaste Innocence;
By time and custom introduced within:
A constant breast which goodness does contain
For love of goodness, not for fear of fame.
And she in whom this habit we do find,
Comes nearest sure unto her first creation,
Whose body pure contains a purer mind;
Whose thoughts never fed on ill by speculation:
Many are guiltless of the active part,
Who yet commit the adulteries of the heart.
It Is not enough for to deserve the name
Of Maid, because in act^ she is one;
Perhaps potentia wanted to (...) blame,
Had that been granted she had then been none:
Or circumstances wanted, not her will,
Of time, and place, concurrent to be ill.
Thus forced chastity no praise yet found,
There Is no resistanc^ where there is no temptation^
Where Is no assault no victory is crowned,
She merrits most, where is most solicitation:
Who being tempted, makes her looks speak no,
Cooling unchaste desires like winters snow.
It Is no first pleasures of a Maidens bed,
Which do at once find out their birth, and death,
Which can deserve the name of Maydenhead,
Whose lives are like our winter mornings breath;
Thus ridled: A black lamb with blue feet,
Here I have't, but yonder now I see it.
The name of Maidenhead to Maids assignd
For modesty which should in them shine clear:
A Maid from modesty may be defind,
Who rather strives to be so than appe^re,
Whose harmless thoughts never knew yet to begin
To frame or shape out any forms of sin.
A Maid thus shown, I next would have her warnd
How she her modesty do lay at stake,
She that's forewarned may likewise be forearm'd,
To keep what none but by exchange can take,
And from her modesty never to make divorce,
Till (...) marriage shall the same enforce.
For this once lost, who can again repair?
Who can call back the quick thoughts of the brain?
Or who can make words trusted to the air,
Revert unto their owner back again?
So ^he that once to do this has begun,
Can never undo what once she has undon.
She then that knows the worth of this chaste habit
Should still beware of any rash privation,
Since being total it can never admit,
Unto a habit any back regression:
Water once spilt, who can again recover?
And this once lost, is lost (they say (for ever.
And if this cannot the looser thoughts restrain,
Of some to keep within their Maiden state:
Let them cast up their losses with their gain,
They Will buy repentance at too dear a rate:
When one fled moment shall at once begin,
And terminate fond pleasure, not their sin.
Let her consider last the shame hence got,
Which does reflect at once on more than one,
And like some murdering piece instead of shot,
Disperses shame on more than her alone:
For ill fame still, than good is longer lived,
And to the Stock and Family is derived.
And yet it is hard for woman to deserve,
By thought and deed this Maiden appellation:
And yet more hard the same still to preserve,
Unless by help of modest Education;
By this perhaps she may be taught to frame
A Maiden carriage, to a Maiden name.
(...) or Mayds are vessels, and but weak ones too,
(...) that if goodness be not straight instild,
They take in pride, and love though steept in Rue:
They know no vacuum but must still be filled.
^ood counsels seasoning makes a Virgin last,
^s vessels ever of first liquors taste.
At fifteen years some notions gin to lulke,
Of general evil in a Maidens breast,
And then the appetite begins to work,
On what the fancy did at first suggest.
For Ovid need not in strickt rules have shown,
The Art of love, which Maids can learn alone.
Those younger years are flexible, their will
^s soon seduced to act some fond transgression,
And soon consent importuned once to ill,
Like virgins wax receiving all impression;
Or like some flower which does in growth proceed,
Themselves got up, straight haste to run to seed.
Or like unto an early Rose new blown,
Which each hand strives to pluck from off the stem;
So being ripe they are as soon too gone,
And shall be sure to be attempted then.
If virtues force secure them not, they stand
Like the poor Rose obnoxious to each hand*
What did avail Acrisius thickest guardes,
When Jove did fall down in a golden shower
In Danaes lap? He past then all those wards,
And to deny him then she had no power.
With Maids when one way fails another takes,
When Lovers like to Proteus change their shapes.
It Is no cold walls, or Nunnery, no false spies
That can secure a Maid that's once inclind
To ill: though wacht by jealous Argus eyes,
To act her thoughts a time yet will she find:
There is no way to keep a Maid at all,
But when herself is like a brazen wall:
That can repel men's flatteryes though afar,
And make her looks her liking soon to show,
Which like a frost such thoughts as lustful are,
Nips in the blossom ere they ranker grow.
Since then the eye, and gesture speak the heart,
A Maiden carriage is a Maids chief Art.
First, she should not be coy, or proud withal,
Though she alone were natures Masterpiece;
Nor yet show undeserued scorn to all,
And think herself a second Iasons fleece:
Whom none but he that ventures life must please,
And like to Jason sail the Grecian Seas.
(...) by scorn their ruin thus procure,
^^ting their thoughts soar higher than their place,
^^e yet at last stoopt to some vulgar lure,
(...) so remaind the objects of disgrace:
(...) scorn does still this punishment obtain,
^^eed of pity to find scorn again.
^^uld all perfections that do women grace,
^^joying one whereof, makes many proud,
^^all contracted in one Maidens face;
(...) should not keep them maskt up in a cloud,
(...) let her beauty which makes Lovers pine,
^^^ike the Sun, on all at once to shine.
(...) since their looks at once can cure and wound,
(...) like Achilles lance, both hurt and heal,
should not have them cruel tyrants found,
^^hen Lovers do for favor once appeal.
(...) just god Cupid will revenge that wrong,
^hen Lovers are befoold and scornd too long.
(...) not too coy, so likewise not so kind
(...) should not be, as straightway to be moved
^ith the false gales of every flattering wind,
(...) give all cause to think themselves beloved:
(...) love should passive be, so love t'entertaine,
(...) be beloved, not loving all again.
For she that scatters out her love amongst many,
Since love and truth admits of no division,
Can never be truly said yet to love any;
For love and truth remain entirely one:
Let Maids then give to one their loves and self,
To be a Monarchy, no Commonwealth.
Though good be bettered by community*
Yet since that love and Sovereignty do know
No partners, but consists in unity:
Maids should not let their loves too common grow
^^or't holds in them, though not in matters civil,
A common good is but a private evil.
For who'd spend time in such a vain assault,
To gain her love, who if she yield the same,
Like some French Castle will as soon revoult,
And let another straight the same obtain?
She should be proof against the falsest flattery,
And never to yield upon the strongest battery.
For as those Virgins from the Sun alone,
Kindle their vestall lamps, and if the same
Be once extinct, they can renew't from none
Unhallowed fire but from the Sun again.
So Maids love should be like that sacred fire,
And both from one take light, in one expire.
Thus by opposing contraries together,
Mayds may from hence avoid each rash extream^,
And since that contraries best do show each other,
They may from hence draw forth the golden mean
By participation: which they shall find
I^ to be courteous, not too coy; too kind.
And by a wise discretion well should know,
Not to be coy to quench all Lovers fires;
Nor yet so kind but that she can too show
Scornful neglect on men's unchaste desires:
To mix these passions well should be her care,
To cherish chaste hopes, make unchaste despair.
She may be courteous when that Lovers woe,
Yet not seem easy straight to condescend
To her inferior and her equal too,
Yet not below her self seem to descend:
She must from time and place take chief direction,
And from the person vary speech and action.
Next courteous, chaste she should be, not for fear,
Truth^telling time her shame at last might show,
But 'cause she loves her chastity so dear,
She would not loos't, though none the loss might know:
^or it is no thanks to her whom none did woe
To be a Maid: since it is an act of two.
And to remain so, let them shun such pleasure
As does pervert the mind by strong temptation;
Then let some business give their thoughts no leisure;
For I allow not Maids much contemplation,
Since they do seldom such a subject find,
As may inform, but often hurt the mind.
Nor should they read books which of some fond Lover,
The various fortunes and adventures show;
Nor such as natures secrets do discover,
Since still desire does but from knowledge grow:
These books if that within the breast remain,
One spark of ill will blow't into a flame.
Nor too indulgent to herself become,
Since by soft ease, and by too lofty fare,
Rebel desires unto their objects run,
And for the raines of reason do not care:
For ease instills a secret close desire,
And Bacchus helps to kindle Venus fire.
And much less should she through a gadding mind,
Converse with women whose suspected fame,
May her disgrace, since that we often find,
Vices elixar turns us to the same.
Ill women often spoil Mayds by conversation,
And in the patient work assimilation.
Thus she should still be chaste, but not enforced
To keep this Maiden chastity for ever,
Since it is but kept for to be lost at last,
And like a flower will, if not gatherd wither*
For it is the final cause of Maidens carriage,
To gain themselves a fit, and timely marriage.
They have no way advancement to derive
Unto themselves, but when they match aright,
For it is their marriage must them honor give,
They shine but with a mutaticious light:
For women's honors, from their husbands come,
As Cynthia borrowes luster from the Sun.
And sure the fittest time love to engage,
Is when to youth, time does discretion bring,
For who can love the winter of her age,
That never enjoyed part of youthful spring*
Let them improve their time then, least at last,
The brazen head in them speak, time is past.
And since that marriage is a strickt relation,
Me thinks good counsel were not here in vain,
That they be sure to make a good foundation,
Since that they cannot play their cast again:
For hence their future good is lost or won,
And once to err, is still to be undone.
Yet to propound such rules I do not know,
By which their choice herein may never fail,
Since he that fears the wind shall never sow,
Nor he yet build, that counsel takes of all.
In somethings we can but advise our best,
But must commit to fortune all the rest.
First, let not then the love of wealth so sway
Their minds to match with age, for then they must
But sacrifice their youth up as a pray,
To feed the Vulture of some beastly just:
And what can be more horrid thought or said,
Than aged impotency is unto a Maid?
For though that beauty can make age turn Lover
And like Medeas charms can youth advance,
And dead desires again to life recover,
Which straight again are killed with dalliance:
Yet all this fire is but like sparks that lie
Conceald in ashes, lives* and so does dye.
Nor yet to match with some rich suite of clothes
Some outside, being but a man in seeming,
That can set forth his love with graceful oaths;
Protesting that which is not worth believing:
His love is lust, fruition to obtain,
Which once enjoyed, his love turns have again.
Nor yet with some young beardlesse Heir to lie,
Who like Adonis would some Venus tire,
To prompt his boyish thoughts which stili did fly
Her meaning, and could raise but quench no fire,
A shadow there of marriage but appears,
When there is so great disparity of years.
But let her choose out one that may but be
Her just immediate Senior, for it is ever
Observed that they do always best agree,
Who have both spent their youth and age together.
But that they prosper'd who can e're remember,
When youthful May was matched with cold December?
And much less should they be enforced to love,
Or swayd to like by some match-making mother;
But where equality of desires do move,
First ^et them like, and after pair together:
When that his years, her years do equalize,
And when their natures both do sympathize.
And if she choose she must too likewise take,
Letting her love in one begin and end;
She must be fixed and but one center make,
To which the lines of her affection tend:
For she must be a subject but to one,
Whose being must consist in her alone.
If of love she make a deed of gift,
And before witness do confirm the same,
For to revoke it back she has no shift,
Or to reverse her deed thus made again:
Her love thus given to one she cannot deny,
Since in loves Court no writs of error lie.
Her word must here irrevocable stand,
More fixed than any Chancery decree,
Which as though written by the Eternal hand,
Can never be alterd by posterity.
For let her think when once she plights her love,
The same is registered straight in heaven above.
But such a lover let her still detest,
Who before the appointed day of resignation,
Would of her modesty be fore-possest,
By an old figure of praeoccupation.
It Is lust that hunts thus hotly to obtain,
When true love seeks but love for love again.
For when the Tirian Queen did make her feast,
She should not then have let Aeneas tasted
Those pleasures which she might have wisely gest,
By their enjoying would be soon too wasted.
For nature cannot her actions so suspend,
But having once begun, she hasts to end.
Let her not then be drawn to make surrender,
Of that which does so sweeten expectation,
That Lovers even joy when they remember,
The day shall give their hopes full consummation:
When she with blushes shall unwilling yield,
And weakly striving lose at last the field.
This day once come, she must then understand,
That marriage is a Tenure not at will,
But with her heart to one must give her hand,
To hold for Term of life, for good or ill;
The Church affoords but witness to this act,
Till both the parties seal to this contract.
And now it is time to bid the Bride goodnight,
Having brought her thither where she now must leave,
The thought of father, mother, and delight
In one alone, and unto one must cleave;
Tying their loves with such a Gordian knot,
None can but death like Alexander cut.
FINIS.
Picturae Loquentes. OR PICTVRES drawn forth in Characters.
1. The World.
IS a Stage, men the Actors, who seldom go off with an applause, often are
hist at. Or it may be likened to a Scale or Praedicament of Relation, wherein
the King is the summum genus, under whom are many subordinate degrees of men,
till at last we descend to the Beggar the Infima species of mankind, whose
misery cannot be subdivided into any lesser fortune. The world contemns a
Scholar, and learning makes a Scholar contemn the world. Arts and Sciences
are accounted here mere speculations, terminated only in the knowledge of
their subjects; and therefore the most study the great volume of the world, and
strive to reduce knavery to practice. Poverty is accounted as spreadingly
contagious as the Plague, he that is infected with it is shunned of all men, and
his former friends look upon him as men look upon Dials with a skew
countenance, and so finding him in the afternoon of ^his fortunes, pass by
him. Acquaintance is here chosen with the bravest, not with the wisest: and a
good shute makes a man good company. The cheifest goddess here adored is
riches, she might have her Temple as well as Juno, Minerva, and the rest, but
in liew thereof she takes up every man's heart, and for her sacrifice exacts
their first morning thoughts, so that the most universal government is now a
Ploutocracy. Friends are only here but concomitants of felicity, being like
the Leaves of Trees which stick to them close in summer, but fall off from
them in winter when they most need them. To make love the foundation of
marriage is contem'd as befitting the Innocence of Arcadian Sheapheards, and
therefore now they marry portions and take wifes as things to boot. This
perhaps glewes the eldest sister into some foolish family, while the younger
perhaps has nothing but naturs talent, which while she puts to use, spoils
all. When men look for happiness here, it is a sign they expect none above,
striving to make heaven descend to earth, as though they were loath to take the
pains to go thither. To conclude and not flatter the world, she is the
fools paradise, the wise man's skorne, the rich man's heaven who is miserably
happy, the poor man's hell who is happily miserable, for these two shall
hereafter exchange their condition.

2. An Old Man.
IS loath to bid the world goodnight, he knows the grave is a long sleep,
and therefore would sit up as long as he could. His soul has long dwelt in a
ruinous tenement, and yet is so unwilling to leave it that it could be content
to sue the body for reparations. He lives now but to be a burden to his
friends, as age is to him, and yet his thoughts are as far from death as he
is nigh it. Howsoever time be a continued motion, yet the Dyall of his age
stands still at 50. that is his age for ten years afterward, and loves such a
friend that like a flattering glass tells him he seems far younger. His
memory is full of the actions of his youth, which he often historifies to
others in tedious tales, and thinks they should please others because himself.
His discourses are full of parenthesis, and his words fall from him as slowly
as water from an Alimbeck; drop by drop. He loves the chimney corner and his
chair which he brags was his grandfathers, from whence he secures the cubboard
from the Catts and Dogs, or the milk from running over, and is only good to
build up the architecture of a seacole fire by applying each circumstant
cynder. When his natural powers are all impotencyes, he marries a young wench
for warmth sake, and when he dies makes her an estate durante viduitate only
for widdowhood. At talk he commonly uses some proverbiall verses gathered
perhaps from cheese-trenchers or Schola Salerna, which he makes as applyable,
as a mountebancks plasters to all purposes, all occasions. He calls often to the
Servingman for a cup of Sack, and to that end styles him friend; and wonders
much that new wine should not be put in old ^ottels. Though the proverb be,
once a man and ^wice a child, yet he hopes from his second childhood ^o run
back into his ^eenes, and so be twice a man too. Lastly, he is a ^andle burnt
to the snuff, she ruins only of a man, whose soul (...) the salt of his
body to keep it from stinking, and can ^carcely perform that ^oo.

3. A Woman.
IS the second part of the little volume of man, and differs from him only in
her errataes, which cannot be mended, because she comes out worst still in the
last impression. Though men's desires range after variety, yet they find no
change, since in one woman all are epitomizd; for nature is a skillful painter
and seldom erres, she that drew one, drew all. The cheefect object of their
creation is procreation, and the continuation of the Species of mankind; for
when God first gave her to man, he gave her with this blessing, Increase and
multiply. She was then called a helper, and so she is still; for to many she
helps to undo them. She Is like unto a running Lottery; a man may draw forty
blanks before he gets one prize. Her apparel is but like a sauce to a good
dish, to stir and provoke the appetite to take a taste of her self: Or like
an envious curtayne, which our fancy persuades us conceales many rarityes from
us, but being once withdrawn fails much in the expectation: She may be ty'rd
before satiated, and therefore is one of Salomons three things that cry, Give,
give, hell, woman, and the grave. For her tears they must be distinguished, for
they are not only the effects of sorrow, sometimes of deceit, sometimes anger,
and can bid them flow in a plentiful manner when she list. She Is full of
mutability and like April weather, can laugh and weep at once. Or she is like
a stratagem of war, which admits of no second errors, for to him that marryes
a woman; once to err is for ever to be undone. If she have beauty she grows
proud often at fifteen, begins to look for suitors, and baits them with laying
forth her hair, smothing the superficies of her face, and frequents public
meetings that she may the better publish her beauty, which she knows is a
flower will not long last, and therefore desires it may be soon gathered.
She is naturally curious and inquisitiue to know all things, but careless to
conceal any. And he that commits a secret to her, may as well put water into
a sive or cullender, and may look to have both kept alike. Lastly, she is but
a costly vanity, the folly of wise men, the shell of our generation, more
deceitefull than horseflesh; an instument that may be easily played upon, for
it has but one stop, and yet that makes music too.

4. A Widow.
IS like a cold Pie thrust down to the lower end of the Table, that has had
too many fingers in it, or the last letter of the Greek Alphabet Omega. To a
younger brother she is a reversion after three lives^ for after the death of
three husbands, she commonly ^elpes to reedifie his rui^ous fortunes again.
If he be rich, her chamber ^ntertaynes more suitors ^^an a Lawyars does clients
(...) Term time, and for that purpose keeps a wai^ing Gentlewoman, upon whom
she pretends to be^tow the dowry of a good ^ducation, but indeed uses ^er as a
portall to a great ^oome to give access to ^rangers. She praises ^uch her
former husband, ^or whom while she ^ournes in her gown she ^aughs in her
sleeve, to ^hinke how she shall gull ^er following suitors with this formality
of sorrow whiles she enforces (...) customary sigh as a tribute to the memory
of her bes^ deceased. He that marryes her condemns him self perpetually to
digg^ in a colepit, and instead o^ Rosemary may carry Ru^ to the Church, for
the Plague follows him. She Is a good Logician, and seldom denies the major
often the minor, because she knows there is small force or validity in it. Her
daughters (if she have any) out of the guilty consciousnesse o^ her own youth,
are foulded up a nights in her own chamber for fear of straying, and in the
day time mewd up in some inner parler to be objects of a strangers salutation,
who is more tyrd to salute them, than a French Cook that has many dishes to
taste which gives the best relish. She must be wooed in a ^onverted order from
a maid, for in the one we must begin from love to end in action, but in the
other from action to gain ^oue. For her apparel it is much like herself, too
much porne, and serves but as a ^ainted cloth to cover a ^otten wall. Her
house is ^ell furnished both for or^ament and use, only herself is the worst
piece in it. She condemns much the hasty marriage of mayds, when herself
thought fifteen too long. Her rings are so many cheates from several suitors,
in one of which she commonly wears a deaths head, but is indeed herself a
better embleame of mortality for memento mori like a Motto to be written in
her forehead. Lastly she is a canceld bond that has been long before sealed
and delivered, and is now grown out of date.

5. A true Lover.
IS one whose Soul has made choice of a mistrisse to serve and obey: and this
service proceeds not from fear but love, and he loves were not for her beauty,
but ^or her inward virtue, which shines through the coverings of her body, as
gold work shadowed un^er Lawne. His desires are so chaste that if he thought
enjoying would abate his love, he had rather still love ^han enjoy. In his
visits he ^ses a plain eloquence, as ^est becoming the truth of his
affections, Telling her that he loves her, and then supplies the rest with
sighs. If she wish for any thing, her wishes are his commands, and he runs to
provide it for her. If his mistrisse be wronged, he makes his own sword, the
sword of justice to right her, and he thinks injur't love the fairest
Quarrel* He loves her not for wealth or portion, but per se that is, for
herself, and could be content to take her as Adam took Eve, though she were
naked When she speaks he thinks he hears the Lute of Orpheus, and so
stands amazed like a wondering statue, till the close of her speech dis-enchants
him. If her answer be full of scorn and disdain, he retires to some solitary
place, breathing forth his complaint to Rocks and Mountains, where Echo from
her hollow dwelling replies again: and when he cries she is cruel, Echo
cries again she is cruel too, and so pleases his sad mind by soothing up
his sorrows. Thus her frowns become his frenzy, he knows not what to do,
feign he would do something, but then he dislikes that something, and so does
just nothing. If he take his Lute, he quarrels with the strings, and cannot
please himself in tuning it; when indeed the discord is in his own thoughts.
If at last she vouchsafe to write to him, he receives her letter with more
adoration than a Sybils leaf, and having bestowed some kisses on the paper,
opens it to know the blessed contents, and in answering it spends much time,
before he can resolve what to answer. Yet at last love quickens his Invention,
and fills his brain with choice fancies, while he invokes no other Muse but his
mistrisse. Thus he lives like a man tossed in Cupids blanket, and yet is so
constant to his sufferings, that he could be content to be Loves martyr, and
dye in the flames of love, only to have this Epitaph: Here lies the true
Lover.

6. A Country Bride.
IS a Sacrifize to Venus; led to Church by two young Batchlers. And all the way
is pavd with strewings on which she treads so lightly, that she hardly bruses
a gentle flower, while the maids attend upon her with Rosemary and Ribbons, the
ensigns of a wedding. Being come to Church, her marriage knot is soon tide,
and the Ring put on her thumb, as an emblem of affection, which like a circle
should be endless. The fiddlers now crou'd on, till being come home the
mysterious Bride-Cake is broke over their heads, in the remembrance of the old
Roman custom of confarreation; and afterward she is placed at the upper end
of the Table to denoate her Supremacy in household matters. Here she minces it,
and is ready to cut her fingers with too much modesty, while the name of Bride
makes her simper like a pot that is ready to run over, for she conceits, some
strange matters, and could wish the day were shorter though it be at Christmas.
Dinner once done they fall to country dances, where the lusty Laddes take the
Bride to task, and all to bepecke the floor with their hobnayles, while they
bestirre themselves out of measure, and are only rewarded with a concluding
smack from the brides lips. Thus the Bride is but the maygame of a country
village, that fil's the town with mirth and music: Till night comes, and
then she is laid in her husbands arms, where the Curtains being drawn, we
must leave them, and leave you to think out the rest your self.

7. A Ploughman.
IS the Earths midwife, and helps to deliver her of her yearly burden. His
labor frees her in part from the curse of the barrenness, which she repayes
again with a fruitful crop. He Is the best usurer, for when he sowes the
grain, he looks to have it repayd with the sevenfold Interest. His antiquity
is from Abel, the first tiller of the ground, and himself goes like an Adamite
always in skin. When he hangs between the Ploughstilts, you have his true
posture, where he is seldom an upright man, for he leanes most to one side. A
whole flight of Crows follow him for their food, and when they fly away they
give him ill language. The smell of the earth makes him hungry, for he brings
home an invincible stomach, and nothing holds him tacke but a barley pudding.
He unyokes with the Sun, and so comes whisling home his teame, which
consists of Horse or Oxen, and his care is to see them meated before himself.
This done he is set to supper, where his meals are not lasting because
violent; for he eats hard for the time, and when he finds himself satisfied,
puts up his knife, with a God be praised. In the winter nights the mending of
his whip or shoes find him business, and for that purpose buys hobnayles at
Faires. His greatest pride is a fair bandpoynt, and to wear a posy in his hat
snatched from the maid Ioane. He prays only for a fair seedetime, and of all
days will be sure to keep Plough-munday. If he fall in love, he will be sure
to single her out at the next Wake to dance with, and lays such blows on her
lips you may hear the smacke afar off. If she reject him, he grows
melancholy, and instead of sighs whistles out his breath; and if he have a
Rival, challenges him at footeball. Rainy days makes him only idle, for when
he cannot plough yet he goes to the Harrow because it is an Alehouse. Here he
dare lose his two pots at Noddy and spends his hostess more chalk to reckon
it than her gains are worth. In a word though he have no sign, he is the
Lands chief victualer, a good harvest is* his happiness, and the last seed
he sowes is his own body which he knows like his grain, though it seem to
perish, yet shall spring again.

8. A melancholy Man.
IS a full vessel which makes not so great a sound, as those that are more
empty and answer to every knock. His wise parsimony of words shows more
wisdom, than their many, which are oftentimes more than wise. He can be
merry without expressing it by an ignorant laughter: And if his company screw
themselves up to an excessive strain of mirth; he proves amongst them but like
a jarring string to a consort of music, and cannot raise himself to so high
a note of jollity. When other men strive to seem what they are not, he alone
is what he seems not, being content in the knowledge of himself, and not
waying his own worth in the balance of other men's opinions. If he walk and
see you not, it is because his mind being busied in some serious contemplation,
the common sense has no time to judge of any sensual object. He Is hardly with
much invitation drawn to a feast, where every man sits an observer of another
man's action, and had rather with Diogenes wash his own Roots at home, than
with Aristippus frequent the Court of Kings. His actions show no temerity,
having been long before Intentions, and are at last produced as the ripe issue
of a serious, and deliberate resolution. His speech shows more matter in it
than words, and like your gold coin contaynes much worth in a little, when
other men's is but like brass-farthings, and expresses little in much. As his
apprehensions so his passions, are violent and strong, not enduring on the
sudden any opposition of good counsel, but like a torrent bears down all
before it. If he fall in love, he wooes more by letter than his own presence,
and is not hasty in the desire of fruition. His apparel is plain like
himself, and shows the riches of his mind, which contemnes a gaudy outside as
the badge of fools. He goes therefore commonly in black, his Hat unbrusht, a
hasty gate with a look fixed on the ground, as though he were looking pins
there, when yet his mind is then soaring in some high contemplation; and is
then always most busy, when he seems most idle.

9. A young Heir.
IS a Gamester at Noddy, one and twenty makes him out, if he have a flush in
his hand, expect him shortly to show it without hiding his cards. For his
fathers Avarice he runs into the other extreme prodigality; his hand is of
the quality of lightening, which melts his money in his purse, but leaves his
purse entirely whole. In all companies though almost his equals, he arrogates
to himself supremacy of payment, and like a good Soldier withstands all the
shot, letting none disperse among the rest. During his minority he is but a
companion to Servingmen, who quickly make him proud by buzzing him in the ear
with his future inheritance. Next to his father he looks for a secondary
respect from the Tenants, and is much affected with the title of young
Landlord. His mothers indulgence keeps him still at home, like a b^rd in a
cage, so that when he gets forth he is soon ensnared by any she fowler and
falls down to her stales straightway. When he has wit enough to divide
Commons, he is sent perhaps to Oxford, and having stayed there the dabling of a
fresh man's grown, comes home again, being content rather to eat Sugerplums
at home, than taste there of the bitter root of Learning. From hence he is
transported to the Inns of Court, and dotes much upon the first chapter of
Littletons Tenures concerning feesimple, because his own estate. His fathers
long life is his lingering sickness, and wishes to be once able to say the
first petition of our Lords prayer, Our father which art in heaven. After his
decease, he takes Arms afresh of the Herald, and pays for crest, and Motto.
He walks now next to the wall with a sweld countenance, and speaks as
hautily to his inferiors, as though he had swallowed a Lordship already, and
the Steeple stuck in his throat.

His known estate in the country proposes him varieties of matches, and his
wealth, not his wit win's him affection. He Is now beholding to Poets for
lovesonnetts, and the posy of his wedding Ring. Being thus fixed in one center,
his next ambition is to be pricked down Justice of peace; now his warrants
have more virtue in them than himself. He Is terrible now to his Tennants, and
by his authority can out of his chair nodde a Beggar to the Stocks. In his
discourse his inferiors must now grant him the better, and at his own table if
he break a saltlesse jest, all must applaud him. Thus he lives till time
making him grow old, what was folly in youth now proves dotage, having his
desires of his fathers death punished now at last in the same desires of his
heir, who would gladly give Cloakes for him without mourning, and afterward
bury him in the Sepulchar of his fathers.

10. A Scholar in the University,
MAy be known by a harmless innocent look; his nose seems to be raw for
want of fyres in winter, and yet has such a quick sent, that he quickly smells
out his chopped mutton commons a far off. In his freshmanship he is full of
humility, but afterward ascends the steps of ambition by degrees. He studies so
long words of Art, that all his learning at last is but an Art of words. His
discourse is always grounded out of Aristotle, in whose (...) he puts as much
confidence as in his Creed. In his letters he is often ready to shake the
whole frame of the sense to let in some great word, affecting a nonsenticall
eloquence before propriety of phrase; If he were compeld to salute a
Gentlewoman, he would tremble more than ever he did in pronouncing his first
declamation. He often frequents Booke-binders shops, for his unconstant humor
of tumbling over many books, is like a sick man's pallat, which desires to
taste of every dish but fixes on none. The University Library is his magazine
of learning, where he will be sure to be seen in his formalityes as soon as
he is graduated; for the liberty thereof expresses him a Batchelour. He
earnestly enquires after the weekly Currantoes, and swallows down any news
with great confidence. His cheifest curtesy to strangers, is to show you his
College Buttery, and to skonce himself a halfepeny farthing for your
ententainement. If you seem to admire the names of their small divisions, as
halfepeny, farthing, and the like, out of a self simplicity he straight
laughes at your ignorance. And if you contend for priority in going forth, puts
you down with a stale complement. (...) est Peregrini. When he makes a journey
it is in the vacation, and then he canvises a fortnight aforehand amongst his
friends for Boots and Spurs. His purse like the Sea is governd by the Moon,
for he has his several ebbes and tides, according as he receives his several
exhibitions from his friends. Lastly, he wears out a great deal of time
there to know what kind of Animal he is, contemns every man that is not a
Graduate if himself be one, and because he professes himself a Scholar, goes
commonly in black, and many times it is all he has to show for it.

11. A Lawyers Clearke.
HIs father thought it too chargable to keep him at School til he could read
Harry Stottle, and therefore preferred him to a man of Law. His master is his
genius, and dictates to him before he sets pen to paper. If he be to make a
Bond or Bill, for fear of writing false Latin, he abbreviates the ending and
termination of his word with a dash, and so leaves it doubtful. He sits night
the door to give access to strangers, and at their going forth gives them a
leg in expectation. His master is a cunning jugler of lands and knows how to
convay them underhand, he only coppyes them over again, and looks for a fee
for expedition. His utmost knowledge is the names of the Courts and their
several offices, and begins after a while like a Pie that his tongue slit, to
chatter out some terms of Law, with more audacity than knowledge: At a new
play he will be sure to be seen in the threepeny Room, and buys his pippins
before he goes in, because he can have more for money. When he hears some
stale jest (which he best apprehends) he fills the house with an ignorant
laughter. He wears cutfingerd dogskin gloves, for his ease, or the desire of
bribes makes his hands grow itchy. In the vacation his master goes into the
country to keep Courts, and then he is tide to a Cloakebagge and rides after
him. He calls himself the hand of the Law, and commends the wisdom thereof,
in having so many words go to a bargain, for that both lengthens them, and
makes his fees the larger. He would feign read Littleton if he might have a
comment on him, otherwise he is too obscure, and dotes much on Wests
Symboliography for teaching him the form of an acquittance. In his
freshmanship he hunts after cheap venerye, and is in debt to the Cook, for
Eele pyes on fasting days, and friday nights. The corruption of him is a weak
Attorney, then he trafiques with countrymens businesses, and brings them down
a bill of charges, worse than a Taylers for a suite in the last fashion, and
here we leave him, for now he is at the highest.

12. A Townesman in Oxford.
IS one that has long lived by the well of knowledge, but never sipt at it,
for he loves no water in his wine, though it come from Hellicon. He gaynes
most by the recentity of freshmen, unto whom he sticks as close as a
Horseleech, till he have sucked out the superfluity of their purses. His wife
commonly makes him free by her own copy, and in spite of Pembroke College
keeps open Broadegates still. He loves not a Scholar in his heart, for he
sides against them in any faction though it be but at a match at footeball. His
phrase savours somewhat of the university, being fragments gleaned from other
men's mouths, and gives his words such a punctual stiff pronunciation, as
though they were starcht into his mouth, and durst not come out faster for
fear of ruffling. A Scholar had better take up any wares of his wife than of
him, for he will be sure to make them pay for the expectation of their carrier.
He takes ill words because he knows he deserves them, and yields the supremacy
of the wall to any gown. If the opinion of his riches choose him Alderman, he
thinks himself as wise as any Roman Senator, after this if he can but call a
poor man Rogue, and read a proclamation, he may be thought eligible for
Mayor. He frequents Sermons at St. Maryes only to spy out his debtors, whom
he afterward haunts at their College, and troubles with knocking at their
Chamber doors, but receives no answer, for he is known as well there as a
Sergeant in the Innes of Court, and alike hated. He Is no Logician, and yet
sometims concludes a Syllogism in Bocardo, and is hardly reduced from thence.
Lastly, he is a burre that sticks close to freshmens gowns, a seducer of
hopeful wits, and one that strives to wrythe the pliantnesse of youth to all
ill actions.

13. An Usurer.
MVst be drawn like to those pictures that have a double aspect, which if you
behold one way seems to be a man, but the otherway a devil. He grounds the
lawfulness of his usury from the Parable, wherein the servant was not approved
of, that had not inprov'd his talent, he will be sure therefore not to hide his,
but make the best use of it. He gets into men's estats as Cutpurses get cloakes
in the night, if he can but wind himself into a piece often, he will be sure
to get it all at last. Or like an Essex ague, will shake whole Lordships into a
consumption. His case for heaven is very dangerous, because he sins still with
security. He Is an excellent Cook to dress a young Heir, for he first
pluckes off his feathers, and afterward serves him up to the world with
woodcocke sauce. His Clearke is the Vulcan, that forges the Bonds and Shackels
which he imposes on other men. If you come to borrow money of him, if he feel
out your necessity, he will be sure to make you pay for it, and his first
question will be, what is your security? He could find in his heart to be
circumcised for a Jew, if he thought he might thrive more by his usury. His
pining covetous thoughts eats off his flesh from his body, and as though he
bad been layne in Lime, makes him look like a living Anatomy. All his life is
a goulden dream, for he dreams of nothing but gould, and this red earth is
all the heaven he expects. To conclude, he is one that makes haste to be rich,
and therefore cannot be innocent. Like thieves he undoes men by binding them.
And lastly, his estate is raised out of the ruins of whole families, which
first sends him in ill getting it, and afterward his son in ill spending it,
both to the Devil; and there I leave them.

14. A wandering Rogue,
IS an Individuum Vagtim, a wandering Plannet. He alone contemns fortune, for
what she never gave, she can never take away from him, The vayles of his
apparel is not much worth, for it is a rapsody of Rags which at michaelmas
begins with the leaves of trees to fall off from him and leave him stark
naked. He keeps no table, and yet has a great retinue of hangers on, which
almost devour him alive. If he had wit he might profess himself a Lawyer,
for he has been often called to the bar, though 'twere but to plead not
guilty. He thinks himself as ancient a gentleman as the best, and can
deduce his pettigree from Adam. He professes often fortunetelling by looking
in your hand, and yet knows not his own for all it is burnt there. He keeps a
catalogue of all Gentlemen's houses, but dares not come near a Justice of
Peaces for fear of his inexorable Mittimus. He styles himself a traveller,
and indeed it is thought if he had learning, he might make a good description
of England, for he knows all the highwayes, though not at his fingers, yet
his toes-end. He Is always accompanied with some durty Doxie, whom he never
marryes, but lies with under a hedge, and thinks it a sure contract, because
it is in the sight of heaven. On the highway if he meet a Travelour
unweapon'd, he begges stoutly of him, and so extorts a benevolence rather for
fear, than charity. And at last if his heart serve him, he falls quite from
begging to robbing, which he finds more gainefull and ready to preferment, for
it advances him to the Gallows, and now he is at the highest, where we leave
him to make the world his priest by a confession.

15. A Waterman.
IS like a piece of Hebrew spel'd backward, or the embleame of deceit, for he
rows one way and looks another. When you come within ken of them, you shall
hear a noise worse than the confusion of Bedlem, and if you go with a
Skuller, the Oars think you no Gentleman. He carries many a banquerout over
the water, and yet when he set's them ashore makes them Landed men. If you
dislike the roughness of the water, he warrants you a safe passage, and on
that condition, gives you his hand to help you into the Boat, and his first
question is, where you will be? Though he be never sober yet he is never
drunk, for he lives by water, and is not covetous to get any great estate, for
he is best contented when he goes most down the wind. A fresh water Soldier
he is, and therefore gets to wear some Noblemans badge to secure him from
pressing. He knows all news, and informs men of the names of noble men's
houses toward the Thames. A man would take him for a very busy fellow, for he
has an Oar in every Boat, which though it leake not, yet it is ever ready to
take water. He Is so seldom drunk that it is chalkt up for a miracle, for he
goes commonly on the score. Thus he lives and when he dies, he is sure his
soul shall pass to the Elisian fields, for if Charon should deny him passage,
he means to steal his Boat, and so ferry himself over.

16. A Sheapheard.
IS a happy man, and yet knows not of it; his chief unhappiness consists in
not knowing his own happiness. In Summer time he enthrones himself on the
top of some high Mountain, from whence his eye is entertained with variety of
Landskips, whilst his sheep promiscuously choose out the threepild grass in
the valley. He Is the Emblem of a King or Priest, and his sheep are his
Subjects. He uses his dog as Kings their Laws, oftener to restra^ne than
punish offerees; for if any of his sheep chance to transgress the bounds of
their sheepewalke, he whistles out his dog to fetch them in again. He makes
not his stomach observe any set times of meals, but makes his meals keep
time with his stomach, and then sits down on his grassye carpet, instead of
tapestry, and what ever his fare be, content furnishes out his Table. His
cheifest ambition is to be elected the Sheapheards King, which he obtaines not
by any corrupt suffrage, but by having the first Lamb yeand that year. His
profession is one of the ancientest, and is only younger brother unto
husbandry, as Abel was to Kaine. Whatsoever is fabled of Jason, he alone gets
the golden fleece without savling for it. To strangers h^e's a living Mercury,
and if he be laid, points them out their way with his foot, instead of his
hand, and his knowledge seldom extends farther than the reach of his eye. His
common standing posture is crossleggd, and when he drives his sheep, his
lamenesse makes him keep equal pace with them. When he marries he is no ward
to have a match enforced upon him, but chooses where he list amongst the
Sheapherdesses, where a mutual and reciprocal love on both sides clappes up
the match without any by-respect of Ioynture. This day the rest of the Swaynes
(having first presented his bride unto him crowned with a chaplet of flowers)
solemnize with dancing and singing Roundelaes, wherein the simplicity of their
performance gives a peculiar grace to every action.

Afterward his care becomes hers, she helps him to pitch the hurdles, and at
night foldes him in her own arms. He Is a good physician to his sheep, and
his Tarrbox affords a general medicine for any outward application. He ^ackes
nothing but some business for his thoughts, for were he a Scholar he has the
best leisure for contemplation that could be. And lastly as Alexander wished if
he were not Alexander to be Diogenes, so if all knew his happiness, they would
wish to be Sheapheards.

17. A Ielous Man.
HIs care and fears are all to know what would vex him more being once known.
His passion proceeds from the superfluity of his love, or from the
consciousnesse of some deficiency or inability in himself. His unwise and
ielous fearefullnesse to be deceived, often teaches her the way to deceive
him, and makes her desirous to prove that difference of other men which he so
much suspects. He dares not invite his friend to his house, for fear he
should salute his wife, which he esteems as a Prologue to an ensuing comedye.
At ^able he observes upon whom his wife scatters most favorable looks (for
he fears there may be a dialogue of eyes as well as ^ongues:) whom she
of^enest drinks to, whom she ^omes to, and then his sus^ition comments upon
every action. He Is witty in ^^venting trialls of his ^ives chastity, and he
^retendeth very often journeyes into the Country, thereby to make her more
secure in his absence, but returns again unexpectedly. Sometimes he attends
her in unknown disguises, urges her with earnest solicitation, and is so
hasty for his horns that he could be content to be his own Cuckoldmaker.
His ielous thoughts are ready to bastardize his Children, and if they be not
in every respect like himself, thinks them not his own. His fear of being
robbed is worse than the robbery it self, a woman being like an untold sum of
money, wherein the honor is ^ot sensible of any small ^hieft. In his thoughts
he ^ommends much the securi^y of the Italian Padlocke, and could willingly put
it ^n practice too. His house ^s divided into factions, ^etts every Servant to
be a ^pye over his fellow, and ^ll of them over his wife. ^f she strive to
please him, he ^hinkes it is but to deceive ^im; if not to please him, ^ee
thinks she is better ^leas'd with others. To conclude, he is a man pos^est
with a mixed passion of ^ove-melancholy, which he more easily entertaines than
^s quit off. His ielousy like ^inegar dryes up his blood; hence his palenesse.
He wishes himself unmaried, and thinks when he changed his batchelour buttons
for Rosemary, he lost the best flower in his garden. Lastly whole numbers may
be made out of fractions, but Ielosy makes an irreparable division of love,
which grows worse by continuance.

18. A Chamberlain.
IS the first Squire that gives entertainment to errant strangers. At your
first alighting he straight offers you to see a Chamber, but has got the
trick of tradesmen to show you the worst first. He Is as nimble as Hamlets
ghost here and every where, and when he has many guests, stands most upon his
pantofl^s, for he is then a man of some calling. His gain consists most in
gratuities and retayling of faggotts, wherein he is allowd fourteen to the
dozen, and what he can over-reckon is his own gain. He Is Secretary to the
Kitching and Tapstry, and pays himself his own fees in adding something to
every particular. He takes wages of no man, and yet serves every man. He may
seem a base fellow over night, but in the morning you shall find him a man of
some reckoning. When you ask what is to pay, he comes down and returns
again with a general total, which if you dislike, he offers to prove it by
an Induction of particular Items. Your Tapster takes great care that your
jugges shall never be full, and the Chamberlayne that they shall never b^e
empty, for he will carry them away half full. You shall sooner get fresh litter
for your hor^e, than clean sh^et^s for your self, for he has a trick by
wetting them to make them feel damp, and so having smoothed up the matter, if
you dislike them, he straight equivocates, and swears they were never layne in
since they were last wet. When he is called up a mornings, he gapes as though he
were Sea-sicke, and afterward like the embleame of deceit, brings fire in one
hand and water in the other. If you save the remainder of your meat for
breakefast, he grumbells, for he holds that Tenent, that we ought not to care
for the morrow. Lastly, his life for ease is ^ust about Serving man-like, and
commonly runs the same fortunes, both in their age overtaking beggary; but I
forbear any farther description since his picture is drawn to the life in
every Inn.

19. A Maid.
IS a fruit that grows ripe at fifteen, and if she be not then gathered,
falls of her self. Till she be married she thinks it long, but afterward
she comes shorter of her expectation. I^ she keep a Chambermaide she ly^s, at
her bedds feet, and they two say no Paternosters, but in the morning tell one
another all their wanton dream^s, talk all night long of young men, and will
be both sure to fast on St Agnes Night to know who shall be their first
husbands. Her desires grow now impatient of delay, nothing being more tedious
than a full ripe maidenhead, which she lets a Servingman often obtain by
opportunity. When she is wooed, like the Lapwing she flies farthest from her
nest; and because she can seem coy in words; would make you believe her
thoughts are so too. She laughs at those that shoot at Rovers, and make their
own way difficult, when they might sooner hit the mark, and prove themselves
better shooters. If she be troubled with night talking, she confesses all, and
her dreams make her blush awake; when she falls sick she is much affeard to
lead Apes in Hell, for she would not willingly dye in Ignorance: she reads
now loves historyes as Amadis de Gaul and the Arcadia, and in them courts the
shadow of love till she know the substance, Each morning she and her glass
help to correct the errataes of nature, and comes not out of her Chamber till
she be fully dressed. She learnes many graceful qualities as dancing and
playing, which all propose to themselves no other end but to hasten her
marriage. Till which she counts all time as last tarrying, and if her wishes
had been true she had not been a Maid since she reached her teenes first. To
conclude, she is a fading flower, her wedding night withers her, when she rises
again with an innocent blush, and never greeves for her losses.

20. A Baylye*
IS the Supervisor of a manor under the Lord of the Soil. The Tennants court
him to connive at his Masters injuries, but yet underhand he persuades him to
enclose his Common, in hope to have the yearly letting of it. Though his
master be a Prodigal, yet he strives to enlarge his waste, for he informs
him of all inchroachments. He trusts his Tablebooke with much of his business,
and wears a Bre^nors Almanacke in his pocket for the blanks-sake. He can cast
his face into a buying or bargaining form, and can soon reduce Pounds, into
Marks and Nobles. He gives not an account but makes it, and his Arithmetic
is only the rule of falsehood; His addition is by Counters with which he casts
up his Bills, and his skill in Geometry serves him to measure a Roode of
hedging, and to know how many pe^ches are contaynd in an Acre. He informs his
master when Faires happen, where though he cheat him in buying and selling,
yet at night he makes him a fair reckning. He has the general Theory of all
husbandry, but his business is the direction of other men's labors. His
diligence in harvest time is expressed, by being seen often afield with a Forke
on his shoulder, and he cuts grass always in the change of the Moon. The
Tennants hold his masters land in occupation, and he their wives, and for
b^friending them in renewing their Lease, he seals them without witness. He
knows how to bounder land, and counts it a heinous offense to remove a
merestone. He is the apparitour of the Parish, and brings in his presentiments
against the next court day, with what Justice the Lord knows for they are
fined to them by Amercements.

21. A Petty Country Fair.
IS the publication of some few Pedlers packs distinguished into Boothes, which
is yet filled with a great confluence of country people, who f^ocke thither to
buy some trivial necessaries* A far off it seems a tumult of white staves,
and red petticoates and mu^lers, but when you come nearer they make a fair
show.

The men buy hobnayles and plough-irons, and the women household trifles, yet
such as are for use more than ornament. Your country Gentlewomen come thither
to buy bonelace, and London gloves, and are only known by a Mask hanging on
their cheek and an Anticke plume of feathers in a Fair, and it would do you
good to hear them bargain in their own dialect. The Inns are this day filled,
every man meets his friend and unless they crush a pot they think it a dry
complement. Here the young Lads give their Lasses Fairrings, which if she
take with a simpring consent, the next Sunday their banes are bidden. A
Balletsinger may be sooner heard here than seen, for instead of the violl he
sings to the crowd. If his Ballet be of love, the country wenches buy it, to
get by heart at home, and after sing it over their milkepayles. Gypsies flock
thither, who tell men of losses, and the next time they look for their purses,
they find their words true. At last after much sweat and trampling too and
froe, each one carries home a piece of the Fair, and so it ends.

22. A Country Alehouse.
IS the center of the Towns good fellowship, or some humble roof't Cottage
licensed to sell Ale. The inward hangings is a painted cloth, with a row of
Balletts pasted on it. It smelles only of smoke and new Wort, and yet the
usual guests think it a rare perfume. They drink noe healths here to
Mistresses, but their only complement is: Here Is to thee neighbor Iobson.
They pay here by the polle, for they think that many purses makes light shots,
as many hands light work. Their only game here is Noddy, and that but for a
pot of Ale for pastime. It Is the married man's sanctuary, whither he flies to
avoyde a scoulding wife at home, and thinks to drench his cares in this Ale
lethe. They often make bargains here, but before they go out, can hardly stand
to them. All the posts are Creditors, and the Chalk like an inseparable
accident can hardly be wipt of. They drink here till their mirth and drink
fly out both together, the one in the Chimney and the other in drunken catches,
till the street ring again, and every pot raises them a note higher. To
strangers it is known by the advancement of a Maypole; and is the only guest
house to Pedlers pilgrimages. L^stly, if there be two in the Town, they live
in hostile emulation; and their faction is about brewing the best Ale.

23. A Horse Race.
IS a way to let money run away full speed. Amongst the Romans 'twas an
Olimpick exercise, and the prize was a Garland, but now they bear the Bell
away. It Is the prodigality of country Gentlemen, and the gullery of Londoners;
the one dyets his horse till his purse grows lanck, and the other pays for
rash betting. The former would give any thing for a horse of Pegasus Race, or
one begot of the wind while the mare turned her backeside in Boreas mouth. They
lay wagers here on their horse heels, and hope to win it by their running
heads. The Riders speak northern howsoever, and though they want many graynes
of honest men, yet when they are put into the Scale, they are made weight. The
horses are brought hither in their night clothes, and from thence walk down
to the starting post, whence grew the Latin proverb, a carceribus ad metam.
The country people have time now to commend white-mayne and Pepper-corne,
while the Gentlemen ride up and down with Bets in their mouths, crying three
to one, till the word Done make it a wager. By this time they are coming up,
and the forerunner is received ovant, with great acclamations of joy, and the
hinder man though he rid booty, yet he shows that he favored nether side by
the spur-galling. It being now done, they drop away into the villages, where
their tongues run over the race again, which for that night fills Alehouses
with noise and discourse.

24. A Farmers daughter.
IS a pretty piece of Innocence, that is slow into conceiting love, and had
never thought of marriage, but for example sake, when she saw her youngers go
before her. She is handmayd to her mothers huswifery, which by seeing done she
makes her own, and it proves her best portion. She Is a Bridemaid to all young
couples, where she wears her Rosemary pinned on her Heartside, to show her
affection to Hymen's rites; and if she see them both abed, she carries away a
strong fancy of the sequel. She can sell corn at the next Market, and while
she rides thither on her sack, her short coats administers a temptation in
discovering her Leg. Her corn stands not long for the sellers sake, and she
crosses the Proverb, for she measures it out by another Bushel. She
receives her money of her Chapman, and has a kiss given her always to boot.
If she have any thing to buy, the Mercers shops furnishes her, where she
remembers her mothers commission to a halfpennerth of soap, and at home makes
her account of all. If her father thrive on his farm, the poor neighbors put
the mastership upon him, and if she learn ^o play on Virginalls, it is thought
a Courtlike breeding. For her beauty it is a durable one, and fears no wind,
nor weather, which shows it is not behoulding to Art. She baytes not her eyes
to attract Suitors, but for a husband trusts all to (...) Providence; and at
last Cupid in compassion strikes some Farmers son in love with her, and then
she brewes and makes her own Ale and Cakes for the wedding.

25. A Keeper.
IS a fellow in green, that is led about by a dog in a line, and the burden of
his shoulder is a long staff. He wanders the wild woods to secure the Game,
and is one that is licensed to be a night walker. If he find any trespassers,
half a piece puts out half his eyes, and a whole one makes him wholly blind.
His lodge is a lone house, often fayn'd in historyes to give entertaynment to
wandering strangers, and in the fictions of Duells and ravishments, who comes
in still to rescue, but a Keeper? His honest rudeness makes him a protector of
men and maydenheades, for he thinks the sufferance of such an act would blast
the trees and make the leaves look wan. The horn that affrightes other men,
is his best music: he knows the changes of the chase, and when a noted Dear
is hunted, he winds his fall, and weeps at it.

All the woodnimphs court him, and when he rushes from them, the briars seem
to pull him back again. He understands no chamber whispring, but drownes the
winds with hallowing, and is answered back in the same Language. He knows
the ages of his Dear by casting their horns, and thinks a Cuckold most
unfortunate that his should stick so close to him. He breaks up a wench as he
does a stagge, and having took an essay of her, if he find her fat in the
flancke mar^yes her. His Children like the Indians are borne B^wmen, his hounds
and they lap and feed both out of a dish: he loves those that write in the
praise of hunting, and himself talks whole volumes of it. He wishes all
Noble men were Nimrods, mighty hunters; for besides their liberality, the
bounty o^ beasts gives him the shoulder and the Humbles for his fee. Lastly,
when he wanders to an Alehouse, he loves no sign but the Robbinhood, because
he was a Forrester: where we leave him, till at night he be forth coming.

26. A Gentleman's House in the Country.
IS the prime house of some village, and carries gentility in the front of it.
The Tennants round about travel thither in Pilgrimage with their pigge and
goose off^^ngs, and their duty increases with the near expiring of their
leases. The Servingm^n are like quarter wayters; for while some give attendanee
at home, the rest are dispersed in the Alehouses. Their master alowes them to
make men drink for his credit, while they sound forth his fame of hospitallity
upon the Trumpe^s of black Iackes. They envye most their own coat, for if a
Gentleman bring half a dozen men with him, they will not suffer a man to come
off alive, and that expr^sses their Masters welcome. At meals you shall have a
scattered troup of dishes, led in by some black puddings, and in the Rear
some demolished pastyes, which are not fallen yet to the Servingmen. Between
meals there is bread and Beer for all comers, and for a stranger a napkin,
and cold, meat in the buttery may be obtained. All the Rooms smell of Dogs
and Hawks, and the Halls bears arms, though it be but a muskit^ and two
Corsletts. The maids have their several swee-thearts, which they get by
befriending men in their several offices: As the dayry maid by a dish of
Cream: The Chambermayd by her landrye; and for this the Serving man do^ them
as good a turn. After which if she knot and prove, she obtaines of her
Mistress a poor Coppihold, and they both turn Tennants to the family; and
are called retayners. The Master of the house is adored as a Relic of
gentilitye, and if his wife come by some home-match, he dares not let her see
London or the Court, for fear she should make his woods pay for it. He
observes all times and seasons of the year, and his Christmas is the butlers
Iubile. To conclude, his house is the seat of hospitality, the poor man's Court
of justice, the Curats Sunday ordinary, and the only exchequer of Charity,
where the poor go away relieved, and cry, God bless the founder.

FINIS.

