
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

DU BARTAS HIS Divine Weeks and Works Translated:

And Dedicated to the Kings most excellent Majesty by Josuah Syluester. Now
thirdly corrected and augm.





ANAGRAMMATA REGIA: Regi.
IACOBVS STVART: Iusta Scrutabo.

JAMES STVART: A just Master.

FOr A just Master have I labored long:
To A just Master have I vowed my best:
By A just Master should I take no wrong:
With A just Master would my life be blessed.
In A just Master are all Virtues met:
From A just Master flows abundant grace:
But, A just Master is so hard to get,
That A just Master seems of Phoenix race:
Yet, A just Master have I found in fine.
Of A just Master if you question This,
Whom A just Master I so just define;
My Liege JAMES STVART A just Master is.
And A just Master could my Work deserve,
Such A just Master would I justly serve.
Voy Sire Saluste

Au Tres-puissant, tres-prudent, and tres-Auguste IAQVES (par la grace de Dieu)
Roy de la Grande Britaigne, de France, and d' Irlande: Defenseur de lay Foy
unique Catholic, Apostolic, and Christiene.
*

VOY (SIRE) ton SALVSTE habille en Anglois
( Anglois encore plus de Coeur que de language)
Qui, cognoistant loyal ton Royal Heritage
En ces beaux Liz dorez au Scepter des Gaulois
(Come au vray Souverain des vrays Subjects Francois)
Cy a tes pieds sacrez te faict son saint Hommage
(De ton Hoeur and Grandeur eternal tesmoignage)
Miroir de touts Heroes, Miracle de touts Roys.
VOY (SIRR) to^ SALVSTE, ou (pour le moins) son ombre;
Ou l'ombre (pour le moins) de se Traicts plus divins,
Qui, ores trop noyrcis par mo^ pinceau trop sombre,
S'esclair ciront aux Raiz de tes Yieux plus benins.
Donques d'vn oeil benin and d'vn accueil Auguste
Recoy ton cher Bartas, and VOY SIRE SALVSTE.
Anagrammatisme de IOSVA SYLVESTRE: de vostre Majesty Tres humble Subject and
Seruiteur.

A l'istessa sua Maesta serenisma.
NEptun', gielozo de La Musa Ingleze,
L'immura si del Braccio crystallino,
Ch'il piu divin del Canto suo divino
Poco s'intende fuor del suo Paeze:
^ero (Signor) Come gia la Franceze
T'a Celebrato di-qua l' Apenino;
Di-la, l' ITALICA al Peregrino
Anche fara l' alte tue Lodi intese.
Siche, la Sena, el Pado prestaranno
Lor Chori sacri, per Cantar l' immenza
Alma Virtu, Valor, Pieta, Prudenza
Di GIACOMO (gran SOLOMON Britanno)
Per di tua Gloria (vdita qual^e quanta)
Rapir il Mondo in maraviglia santa.
L'istesso Osseruantissimo* I. S.

INSCRIPTIO.
To England's, Scotland's, France and Ireland's KING:
Great Emperor of EVROPE'S greatest Isles:
Monarch of Hearts, and Arts, and every thing
Beneath BOOTS, many thousand miles:
Upon whose Head, Honor and Fortune smiles:
About whose brows, clusters of Crowns do spring:
Whose Faith, Him Champion of the FAITH en-stiles:
Whose VVisdome's Fame Over all the World does ring:
MNEMOSYNE and
Her fair Daughters bring
The DAPHNEAN Crown,
To Crown Him (Laureat)
Whole and sole Sovereign
Of the THE SPIAN Spring:
Prince of PARNASSVS, and Pierian State:
And with their Crown, their kingdoms Arms they yield
Thrice three Penns Sun-like in a Cynthian field.
Signed by TIMES-SELVES, and their high Treasorer
BARTAS, the great: Ingrosst by SYLVESTER.
Our SVNNE did Set, and yet no NIGHT ensew'd;
Our WOE-full loss so IOY-full gain did bring,
In tears we smile, amid our sighs we Sing:
So suddenly our dying LIGHT renewed.
As when the ARABIAN (only) Bird does burn
Her aged body in sweet FLAMES to death,
Out of Her CINDERS
A new Bird has breath,


In whom the BEAVTIES
Of the FIRST return;
From Spicie Ashes of the sacred VRNE
Of our dead Phoenix (dear ELIZABETH)
A new true PHOENIX lively flourishes,
Whom greater glories than the First adorn.
So much (O KING) thy sacred Worth presum-I-on,
JAMES, thou just Heir of England's joyful UNION.
JAMES, Thou just Heir of England's joyful UNION,
UNITING now too This long severed I WILL
(Severed for Strangers, from it Self the while)
Under one Scepter in One Faith's Communion:
That in our Loves may never be disunion,
Throughout-all Kingdoms in thy Regal Style,
Make CHRIST thy Guide
( In whom was never guile)
CLIO.
To RVLE thy Subjects
In his GOSPEL'S Union.
So, on thy Seat thy Seed shall ever Flourish,
To SION's Comfort and the eternal Terror
Of GOG and MAGOG, Atheism and Error:
So shall one TRVTH thy people train and nourish
In meek Obedience of The Almightie's Pleasure,
And to give CEASAR what belongs to CAESAR.
And (to give CEASAR what belongs to CAESAR)
To sacred Thee (drad Sovereign) dearest JAMES,
While sad-glad ENGLAND yields Her Diadems,
To be disposed at Thine Imperial Pleasure:
While Peers and States expose their pomp and treasure
To entertain thee from thy Tweed to THAMES
With Royal Presents,
And rare-pretious Gemmes;
THALIA.
As Minds and Means
Concur in happy measure.
Here (gracious Lord) low prostrate I present you
The richest Jewel my poor FATE affoords,
( A Sacrifice, that long long since I meant you)
Your Minion BARTAS, masked in My words:
With Him, my Self, my Service, Wit and Art,
With all the SINNEVVES of a Loyal Heart.
With all the SINNEWES of a Loyal Heart,
Unto Your Royal Hands I humbly Sacre
These weeks ( the works of the worlds glorius Maker)
Divinely warbled by LORD BARTAS Art
(Though through my rudenes here mis-tun'd in part)
For, to whom meeter should This Muse betake her,
Than to Your Highness,
Whom (as chief Partaker)
MELPOMENE.
All MUSES Crown
For Principal Desarte?
To whom should sacred Art and learned Piety
In Highest Notes of Heavenly Music Sing
The Royal Deeds of the redoubted Deity,
But to a learned and religious KING?
To whom but You should Holy FAITH co^mend-her,
Great king of ENGLAND, christian FAITH'S defender?
Great king of ENGLAND, Christian FAITH'S defender.
No Selfe-presuming of my Witt's perfection
( In what is mine of this Divine Confection
Boldens me thus to You the Same to tender:
But with the Rest, the Best I have to render
For loyal Witness of my glad affection,
My MITE I offer
To Your High Protection,
CALLIOPE.
Which MORE it needs,
The more it self is slender.
But, for mine AVTHOR, in his Sacred-fury,
I know your Highness knows him Prince of Singers,
And His rare Works worthy Your Royal fingers
( Though here His luster too-too-much obscure-I)
For His sake therefore, and Your Selfs Benignity,
Accept my ZEAL, and pardon mine indignity.
Accept my ZEAL, and pardon mine Indignity
(Smoothing with smiles stern Majesty's Severity)
Since from this Error of my bold temeritie,
Great good may grow, through heavens and your benignity:
For, far more equal to your BARTAS Dignity,
This may provoke (with more divine dexterity)
Some NOBLER Wit,
To SING to our Posterity
TERPSICHORE.
This NOBLEST Work,
After it Self's Condignitie:
Or else the sweet Rays of your Royal Favor
May shine so warm on these wild Fruits of mine,
As much may mend their virtue, taste, and savor,
And Rypen fair the Rest that are behind:
The rather, if some Cloud of COMFORT drop
Amid the Branches of my blasted Hope.
Amid the Branches of my blasted Hope,
Three Noble pearches had my Muse of late,
Where (Turtle-like) groaning Sad tunes she sat:
But (O!) cursed ENVY did untimely lop
The First: the Next, bruiz'd with his Fall, did drop;
The Third remains, grown a great arm of State:
Most WORTIE So,
But so prae -- occupate
EVTERPE.
With other MUSES,
That OURS has no scope.
Wherefore for succor in her weary flight,
Hardly pursued by that sharp Vulture, WANT,
She Is fain my Liege (with your good leave) to light
Amid the Top-leaues of Your CEDAR-Plant:
Where, if you daign Her Rest from FORTVNE'S wrong,
She shall more sweetly End her solemn Song.
She shall more sweetly End Her solemn Song
(If Heaven grant Life, and You give leave to doo-it)
By adding fitly All those Parts unto it,
Which more precisely to Your Praise belong*
(Wherein expressly, with a Thankful tongue,
To your great Self, APOLLO'S self applies-him,
Yeeldes YOU His Laurells,
And does all agnize-him
ERATO.
Rapt with the VVonder
Of Your Uertues, Young).
All the Posthumiall race of that rare Spirit
(His Swan tunes, sweetest near his latest breath)
Which, of his glory their Childes-part inherit
(Though born, alas!) after their Father's death)
As Epilogue, shall PAY our grateful Vows
Under the shaddowe of Your Sacred Boughs.
Under the shaddowe of Your Sacred Boughs,
Great, Royal CEDAR of Mount LIBANON
(Greater then that great Tree of BABYLON)
No marvel if our TVRTLE seek to House;
Since CAESAR'S Eagles, that so strongly Rouse:
The old H^gard FALCON, hatched by Pampelon:
The IBERIAN GRIPHIN
(And not THESE alone,
POLYMNIA.
But every Bird and Beast)
With HVMBLE vows,
Seeks roost or rest under your mighty Bowers:
So mighty has the Almighty made you now:
O Honor Him who thus has Honored You,
And build His house who thus has blessed Yours.
So, STVARTS ay shall stand (propt with His Power)
To Foes a Terror, and to Friends a Tower:
To Foes a Terror, and to Friends a Tower:
ERROR'S Defyer, and True FAITH'S Defense:
A Sword to Wrong, a Shield to Innocence:
Cheering the mild; checking the wild with power:
The Star of other States, and Stern of Our:
The Rod of Vice, and VERTVE'S Recompense:
Long live King JAMES
in all MAGNIFICENCE:
URANIA.
And (full of DAYS)
When (in his Blis-ful Bowr)
Heavens king shall crown thee with the immortal flowr,
Fall all These Blessings on that forward Prince
HENRY (our Hope) to-Crowne His Excellence
A KING at Home, abroad a CONQVEROR.
So Happily, that we may still Conclude,
Our Sun did Set and yet no Night ensew'd.
SVBSCRIPTIO.
YOUR MAJESTY'S Most loyal Subject and Humble Servant IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

The Order of the Books or Tracts of this Volume.
THE FIRST WEEK contains Seven Days.
THE 1. Day. page 1. THE 2. Day. 24. THE 3. Day. 59. THE 4. Day. 91. THE 5.
Day. 114. THE 6. Day. 144. THE 7. Day. 175.
THE SECOND WEEK likewise Seven DAYS: whereof Three were never finished.
ADAM, 1. Day,
Eden. page 215. The Imposture. 236. The Furies. 254. The Handy-Crafts. 276.
NOAH, 2. Day,
The Arc. page 298. Babylon. 315. The Colonies. 335. The Columns. 358.
ABRAHAM, 3. Day,
The Vocation. page 381. The Fathers. 421. The Law. 436. The Captains. 477.
DAVID. 4. Day.
The Tropheis. page 514. The Magnificence. 551. The Schism. 590. The Decay.
619.
Urania. page 656. The Triumph of Faith. 672. The Quadrains of Pibrac. 697. The
miraculous Peace of France. 738. A Paradox against Liberty. 780.



CEs Tempes laurizez, du Laurier mesme honeur;
Ces Yeux contemple-Cieux, ou la Virtue se lit;
Ces traits au front, marquez de Scavoir and d' Esprit;
Ne sont que du BARTAS un ombre exterieur.
Le Pinceau n'en peut plus: Mais, de sa propre Plume
Il ^est peint le Dedans, dans son divin Volume.
These laureat Temples which the Laurel grace;
These Honest Lines, these Signs of Wit and Art;
This Map of Virtues, in a Muse-full Face;
Are but a blush of BARTAS outward part.
The Pencil could no more: But his own Pen
Limms him with-in, the Miracle of Men.
LECTORIBVS.


ENGLAND'S Apelles (rather OUR APOLLO) WORLD'S -- wonder SYDNEY, that rare more
-- than-man, This LOVELY VENUS first to LIMNE began, With such a PENCILL as
no PEN dares follow: How the^ should I, in Wit and Art so shalow, Attempt the
Task which yet none other can? Far be the thought, that mine unlearned hand His
heavenly Labor should so much unhallow: Yet, least (that Holy-RELIQVE being
shrin'd In some High-Place, close locked from common light) My Countrymen should
be debarred the sight Of these DIVINE pure Beauties of the Mind; Not daring
meddle with APELLES TABLE; This have I muddled, as my MUSE was able.

INDIGNIS.
Hence profane Hands, Factors for Hearts profa^e:
Hence hissing Atheists, Hellish Misse-Creants:
Hence Buzzard Kites, dazzled with Beautie's glances:
Hence itching Ears, with Toys and Tales vp-tane:
Hence Green-sick Wits, that relish naught but bane:
Hence dead lyve Idiots, drowned in Ignorance:
Hence wanton Michols, that de^ide my Dance:
Hence M^mike Ap^s; vain Follies Counter-p^ne:
Hence prying Critik^s, carping past your Skill:
Hence dull Conceits, that have no true Discerning:
Hence envious Momes, converting Good to Ill:
Hence all at-once, that lack (or love not) LEARNING:
Hence All vn-holy, from the WORLDS BIRTH Feast;
VRANIA's Grace brooks no vn-worthy Guest
OPTIMIS.
But (my best Guest) welcome great King of FAERIE:
Welcome fair QVEEN (his virtue's virtuous Love):
Welcome right AEGLETS of the ROYAL Eyrie:
Welcome sound Ears, that sacred Tunes approve:
Welcome pure Hands, whose Hearts are fixed above:
Welcome deer Souls, that of Art's choice are charie:
Welcome chaste Matrons, whom true zeal does move:
Welcome good Wits, that grace-full Mirth can vary:
Welcome mild Censors, that mean slips can cover:
Welcome quick Spirits, that sound the depth of Art:
Welcome MECAENAS* and each LEARNING-lover:
Welcome All good: Welcome, with all my Heart:
Sit-down (I pray) and taste of every Dish:
If Ought mis -- like You, better Cook I wish.
Intimo Iosuae Sylvestri, Hexasticon.
VTprodesse suis possit, Salustius offert
Gallis, quod nobis Joshua noster, opus:
Ille ergo eximijs hoc vno nomine dignus
Laudibus; at duplici nititur hic merito:
Quem simul Authoris famae, charaeque videmus
Communi Patriae consuluisse bono.
Io: Bo. Miles.

Ad Ioshuam Sylvesterum, G. Salustij genuinum Interpretem.
(*)

FAre age, divini cultissima lingua Salusti,
(SYLVESTER) Clarij ceu fuit ille Dei;
Elyzij qua part Iugiconvenerat, and te
Edoc^it sensus and sua verba Senex?
An mage, corpored Herois compage soluta,
In te Anima Elyzium fecerat ipsa sibi?
Credo equide^; and Samij rata Dogmata sunt Senis; vnde,
Non Translata mihi, sed genuina canis.
Quin and Posteritas, si pagina prima taceret,
Interpres dubitet tune vel ille siet.
Car: Fitz-Geofridus Lati-Portensis.

Joshua Siluester Anagr: Uere Os Salustij.
OStu SYLVESTER nostro cur Ore vocaris?
An quod in ORE fer as Mel? quod in Aure Mel-os?
An quod BARTASSI faciem dum pingis et ORA,
ORA tui pariter quaelibet ora colit?
Nempe licet duram praete fers nomine SILVAM,
Silvas et salebr as carmina nulla tenent:
Sed quod Athenarum COR, dux Salaminius olim
Dixit, Inest libris Osque vigorque tuis.
Ergo OS esto alijs, mihi Suadae LINGVA videris;
Musis et Phoebo charus OCELLVS eris.
Ad Gallum de Bartassio iam toto Anglice donato.
Quod Gallus factus modo sit, mirare, Britannus,
Galle? novum vide as, nec tamen invide as:
Silvester vester, noster Bartassius, ambo
Laud quidem gemina digni, vt et ambo pari.
In Detractores ad Authorem.
Tace at malevolum OS male strepent is Zoili;
Monstrum bilingue, septuplex Hydrae caput:
Dum Septimanam septies faustam canis
Te Septimana septies faustum facit
Quaevis, nec vlla deleat Iosuam Dies.
Nempe ORE fari Vera si licet meo,
OS ipse VERE diceris SALVSTII;
Qui si impetar is dentibus mordentibus
Impurioris ORIS, (...) Theon
OS non carere dentibus sciat tuum.
E. L. Oxon.

In duo Poetarum lumina, Bartam and Sylvesterum, carmen Asclepiadeum
Gliconicum, dicol. Distroph.
TE Barta caneret Melpomenes melos,
Vel Germana soror nympha Polymnia,
Musarumu^ potens pater,
Pulsans plectra sonantia.
Syluestere, meam tusuperas lyram,
Et linguam modulum, dum rudis obstrepit:
Vatem commeruit decus
Illustrem ingenij tui.
Nemo front ger^ns Daphnidis arborem,
Vel Martem valuit scribere bellicum
Digne, vel Veneris rosae
Vultum purpureae parem:
Nec vestram valeo tollere versibus
Laudem ter geminam Sicaelidum meis
Sacra progenies satis;
Non vos aequiparem modis.
Gallorum D^uidas hospites arborum
Bartas grandiloqui carminis alite
Praestat: noster amat sui
Ponti vincere Naiadas:
Ambo sic proprias viribus ingeni
Divas ruricolas ponticolas simul
Vicistis, trivij meum
Vicistis miserum melos.
Coelum percutiat Gallia vertice,
Ipsos coelicolas terra Britannica,
Quae vates tulerint duos
Claros prae reliquis novos.
G. B. Cantabrig.

EPIGRAM. To M. Iosuah Syluester.
IF to admire were to commend, my Praise
Might then both thee, thy work and merit raise:
But, as it is (the Child of Ignorance,
And utter stranger to all air of France)
How can I speak of thy great pains, but err?
Since they can only judge, that can confer.
Behold! The reuer end Shade of BARTAS stands
Before my thought, ana (in thy right) commands
That to the world I publish, for him, This;
BARTAS does wish thy English now were His.
Son ell in that are his inventions wrought,
As His will now be the Translation thought,
Thine the Original; and France shall boast,
No more, those maiden glories she has lost.
B. Johnson.

In praise of the Translator.
IF divine BARTAS (from whose blessed Brains
Such Works of grace, or graceful works did stream)
Were so admired for Wit's celestial Strain's
As made their Uertues Seat, the highest Extreme;
Then, IOSVAH, the Sun of thy bright praise
Shall fixed stand in Arts fair Firmament
Till Dissolution date Times Nights, and Days,
Since right thy Lines are made to BARTAS Bent,
Whose Compass circumscribes (in spacious Words)
The Universal in particulars;
And thine the same, in other Terms, affords;
So, both your Terms agree in friendly Wars:
If Thine be only His, and His be Thine,
They are (like God) eternal, since Divine.
John Dauies of Hereford.

To M. Iosuah Syluester, of his Bartas Metaphrased.
I Dare confess; of Muses, more than nine,
Nor list, nor can I envy none, but thine.
She, drencht alone in Sion's sacred Spring,
Her Makers praise has sweetly chose to sing,
And reaches nearest the Angels notes above;
Nor lists to sing or Tales, or Wars, or Love.
One while I find, her, in her nimble flight,
Cutting the brazen spheres of heaven bright:
Thence, straight she glides, before I be aware,
Through the three regions of the liquid air:
Thence, rushing down, through Nature's Closet-dore,
She ransacks all her Grandame's secret store;
And, diuing to the darkness of the Deep,
Sees there what wealth the waves in prison keep:
And, what she sees above, below, between,
She shows and sings to others ears and eyne,
It Is true; thy Muse another's steps does press:
The more's her pain; nor is her praise the less.
Freedom gives scope, unto the rouing thought;
Which, by restraint, is curbed. Who wonders ought,
That feet, vnfettred, walken far, or fast?
Which, pent with chains, mote want their wonted haste.
Thou follow'st Bartasses diuiner streine;
And singst his numbers in his native vein.
BARTAS was some French Angel, girt with Bays:
And thou a BARTAS art, in English Lays.
Whether is more? Me seems (the sooth to say'n)
One BARTAS speaks in Tongues, in Nations, twayn.
Ios. Hall.

To my good friend, M. Sylvester, in honor of this sacred Work.
THus to adventure forth, and re-conuay
The best of treasures from a foreign Coast,
And take that wealth wherein they gloried most,
And make it ours by such a gallant pray,
And that without injustice; does bewray
The glory of the Work, that we may boast
Much to have wonn, and others nothing lost
By taking such a famous prize away,
As thou industrious SYLVESTER have wrought,
And here enricht us with the immortal store
Of other's sacred lines; which from them brought,
Coms by thy taking greater than before:
So have thou lighted from a flame devout,
As great a flame, that never shall go out.
Samuel Daniel.

To M. Iosuah Syluester. A SONNET.
THe glorious Salust, moral, true, divine,
Who (all inspired with a Holy rage)
Makes Heaven his subject, and the Earth his stage,
The Arts his Actors, and the Triple-Trine:
Who his rich language gildes, and graceth fine:
His Countries honor, wonder of our age;
Whose World's blessed Birth, and blessed Pupillage,
Gain him a world of fame for every line;
Has here obtained a true Interpreter,
Whom, fame, nor gain, but love to Heaven and us,
Moved to vn-French his learned labors thus.
Thus loves, thus lives all-loued SYLVESTER.
Forward, sweet friend: Heaven, Nature, Arts, and Men,
All to this task prefer thine only Pen.
G. Gay-Wood.

Dilectissimo Io: Syluestri.
GAllica visa fuit Princeps modo lingua; necvlla
Illi vel similis, vel mihi mayor erat:
Credideram magni nullo sermon referri
BARTASI ingenium posse, vel eloquium:
Cum subito clarum dedit alma Britannia solemn,
Ingenij tenebras abstulit ille mei.
Carmina BARTASI SYLVESTER carmine vertit;
Et sisuccessu non mellore, pari.
O, ter felicem venam, Dulceisque Camoenas!
Queis tanto Vati contigit esse pares.
Incepto felix SYLVESTER tramite perge;
Tam been ne coeptum destituatur opus.
Sic pia Sicaelides aspirent Numina Musae:
Sic faueat coeptis doctus Apollo tuis:
Sic tandem felix te gaudeat Anglia vate:
Sic te Virgilium norit et ipsa suum.
Io: Mauldaeus Germanus.

Amicissimo Iosuae Syluestri, G. Salustij D. BARTASII interpreti, Encomium.
QVod conspecta Pharus vario dat lumine vasta
Aequora sulcanti, cum vaga Luna silet:
Et quod lustratis Phoebi dat flammatenebris
Erranti in syluis dum manifestat iter:
Hoc dat praestanti methodo SALVSTIVS illis
Cognitio Sanctae queis placet Historiae.
Ille dedit Gallis quod nobis IOSVA noster,
Qui solus patrio ductus amore dedit.
Ingenium cupitis, non fictaque flumina Vatum?
Hic magnum doctis Hortus acumen habet:
Musa tua est BARTAS dulcissima: Musa videtur
Ipsa tamen NOSTRI, dulcior esse mihi.
Si. Ca. Genesis

Flexanimo Salustij du Bartas interpreti, I^. Syluestri, carmen Encomiasticon.
Often have I seen sweet fancie-pleasing facts
Consort themselves with swart misshapen features,
To grace the more their soule-subduing graces,
By the defect of such deformed creatures;
As Painters garnish with their shadows sable
The brighter colors in a curious Table:
So, English Bartas, though thy beauties, here
Excel so far the glory of the rest,
That France and England both must hold thee deer,
Since both their glories thou have here expressed
(Showing the French tongues plenty to be such,
And yet that ours can utter full as much)
Let not thy fairest Heav'n-aspiring Muse
Disdain these humble notes of my affection:
My faulty lines let faithful love excuse,
Since my defects shall add to thy perfection:
For, these rude rimes, thus ragged, base, and poor,
Shall (by their want) exalt thy worth the more.
E. G.

In Commendation of du BARTAS, and his Translator, M. IOSVAH SYLVESTER.
A SONNET.

WHile nights black wings the days bright beauties hide,
And while fair Phoebus dives in western deep;
Men (gazing on the heavenly stages steep)
Commend the Moon, and many Stars beside:
But, when Aurora's windows open wide,
That Sol's clear rays those sable clouds may banish,
Then suddenly those petty lights do vanish,
Vailing the glories of their glistring pride:
Sa, while du Bartas and our Syluester
(The glorious light of England and of France)
Have hid their beams, each glowe-worme durst prefer
His feeble glimpse of glimmering radiance:
But, now th^se Suns begin to gild the day,
Those twinkling sparks are soon dispersed away.
R. H.

In Commendation of this worthy Work*
Fool that I was; I thought, in younger times,
That all the Muses had their graces sown
In Chaucers, Spencers, and sweet Daniels Rimes
(So, good seems best, where better is unknown).
While thus I dreamed, my busy phantasic
Bad me awake, open mine eyes, and see
How SALVST's English Sun ( our SYLVESTER)
Makes Moon and Stars to veil: and how the Sheau^s
Of all his Brethren, bowing do prefer
His Fruits before their Winter-shaken Leaves:
So much for Matter, and for Manner too,
Has He out gone those that the rest out go.
Let Gryll be Gryll: let Enuie's vip'rous seed
Gnaw forth the breast which bred and fed the same;
Rest safe (Sound truth from fear is ever freed)
Malice may bark, but shall not bite thy Name:
IOSVA, thy Name with BARTAS name shall live*
For, double life you each to other give.
But, Mother Envy, if this Arras spunne
Of Golden threads be seen of English eyes,
Why then (alas!) our Cob-webs are undone:
But She, more subtle, than religious-wise,
Hateful, and hated, proud, and ignorant,
Pale, swollen as Toade (though customed to vaunt)
Now holds her Peace: but (O!) what Peace has She
With Virtue? none: Therefore defy her frown.
Against greater force grows greater victory.
As Camomile, the more you tread it down,
The more it springs; Virtue, despightfully
Used, does use the more to fructisie:
And so do Thou, until thy Mausole rare
Do fill this World with wonderment; and, that
In Venus Form no clumsie fist may dare
To meddle with thy Pencil and thy Plat;
I fear thy life more, till thy goal be run,
Than Wife his Spouse, or Father fears his Son.
R. R.

Malum patienti lucrum.
An Acrostick Sonnet, to his friend M. IOSVA SYLVESTER.
I IF profit, mixed with pleasure, merit Praise,
O Or Works divine be before profane preferred:
S Shall not this heavenly Work the Workers raise,
V Unto the Clouds on Columns selfly-rear'd?
A And (though his Earth be low in Earth interred)
S Shall not du BARTAS (Poetspride and glory)
I In after Ages be with wonder heard,
L Lively recording the UNIVERSAL Story?
V Undoubtedly He shall: and so shall Thou,
E Eare-charming Echo of his sacred Voice*
S Sweet SYLVESTER, how happy was thy choice,
T To Task thee thus, and thus to quight thee now?
E End as thou have begun; and then by right
R Rare Muses NON-SVCH, shall thy Work be hight.
R. N. Genesis

To the Same.
HAd golden Homer, and great Maro kept
In envious silence their admired measures,
A thousand Worthies worthy deeds had slept:
They, reft of praise; and we of learned pleasures.
But (O!) what rich incomparable treasures
Had the world wanted, had not this modern glory,
Divine du BARTAS, hid his heavenly ceasures,
Singing the mighty World's immortal story?
O then how deeply is our ^le beholding
To Chapman, and to Phaer! but, yet much more
To thee (dear SYLVESTER) for thus unfolding
These holy wonders, hid from us before.
Those works profound, are yet profane; but thine,
Grave, learned, deep, delightful, and divine.
R. N.

Du BARTAS His FIRST WEEK, Or Birth of the WORLD: Wher-in In SEVEN DAYS The
glorious Work Of The CREATION is divinely handled.

In the 1. Day, The CHAOS.

In the 2. Day, The ELEMENTS.

In the 3. Day, The SEA and EARTH.

In the 4. Day, The HE AVENS, SUN, MOON, etc.

In the 5. Day, The FISHES and FOVLES,

In the 6. Day, The BEASTS and MAN.

In the 7. Day, The SABBATH.

Acceptam refero.


The first Day of the First Week.
THE ARGUMENT.
GOD'S Aid implored: the Sum of All proposed:
World not eternal, nor by Chance composed:
But of mere Nothing God it essence gave:
It had Beginning: and an End shall have:
Cursed Atheists quipt: the Heathen Clarks controlled:
Doom's glorious Day: Star-Doctros blamed, for bold:
The Matter formed: Creation of the Light:
Alternate Changes of the Day and Night:
The Birth of Angels; some for Pride dejected:
The rest persist in Grace, and guard the Elected.
THou, glorious Guide of Heavens star-glistring motion, The Poet imploreth the
gracious assistance of the true God of Hea uen, Earth, Ayrc and Sea, that he
may happily finish the work he takes in hand.

Thou, thou (true Neptune) Tamer of the Ocean,
Thou, Earth's drad Shaker (at whose only Word,
The Eolian Scoutes are quickly stilled and stirred)
Lift up my soul, my drossie spirits refine,
With learned Artenrich This Work of mine:
O Father, grant I sweetly warbleforth
Unto our seed the WORLD'S renowned BIRTH:
Grant (gracious God) that I record in Verse
The rarest Beauties of this UNIVERSE;
And grant, therein Thy Power I may discern;
That, teaching others, I my self may learn.
And also grant (great Architect of Wonders, The Tra^slator knowing and
acknowledging his own insufficie^cy for so excellent a labor, craves also the
aid of the All sufficient God.

Whose mighty Voice speaks in the midst of Thunders,
Causing the Rocks to rock, and Hills to tear;
Calling the things that Are not, as they were;
Confounding Mighty things by means of Weak;
Teaching dumb Infants thy dread Praise to speak;
Inspiring Wisdom into those that want,
And giving Knowledge to the Ignorant)
Grant me, good Lord (as thou have given me heart
To undertake so excellent a Part)
Grant me such Judgment, Grace, and Eloquence,
So correspondent to that Excellence,
That in some measure, I may seem to inherit
( Elisha-like) my dear Elias Spirit.
CLEAR FIRE for ever has not Air embraced, The World was not from everlasting.

Nor Air for-ay inuiron'd Waters vast,
Nor Waters always wrapped the Earth therein;
But all this All did once (of naught) begin.
Once All was made; not by the hand of Fortune
(As fond Democritus did yerst importune)
With iarring Concords making Motes to meet,
Invisible, immortal, infinite.
The immutable divine Decree, which shall Neither made by Chance. But created
together with Time by the almighty wisdom of God.

Cause the Worlds End, caused his Original:
Neither in Time, nor yet before the same,
But in the instant when Time first became.
I mean a Time confused; for, the course
Of years, of months, of weeks, of days, of howrs,
Of Ages, Times, and Seasons, is confined
By the ordered Dance unto the Stars assigned.
Before all Time, all Matter, Form, and Place,
God all in all, and all in God it was: God was before the World was.

Immutable, immortal, infinite,
Incomprehensible, all spirit, all light,
All Majesty, all-self Omnipotent,
Invisible, impassiue, excellent,
Pure, wise, just, good, God reigned alone (at rest)
Himself alone selfs Palace, host, and guest.
Thou scoffing Atheist, that inquire, what He consuteth the Atheists,
questioning what God did before he created the World.

The Almighty did before he framed that?
What weighty Work his mind was busied on
Eternally before this World begun
(Since so deep Wisdom and Omnipotence,
Naught worse beseems, then sloth and negligence)?
Know (bold blasphemer) that, before, he built
A Hell to punish the presumptuous Guilt
Of those ungodly, whose proud sense dares cite
And censure too his Wisdom infinite.
Can Carpenters, Weauers, and Potters pass
And live, without their several works a space?
And could not then the Almighty All-Creator,
The all-prudent, BE; without this frail Theater?
Shall valiant Scipio Thus himself esteem,
Never less sole then when he sole does seem:
And could not God (O Heavens! what frantike folly!)
Subsist alone, but sink in melancholy?
Shall the Pryenian Princely Sage auerr,
That all his goods he does about him bear:
And should the Lord, whose Wealth exceeds all measure,
Should he be poor, without this Worldly treasure?
God never seeks, out of himself, for ought;
He begs of none, he buies or borrows naught;
But aye, from the Ocean of his liberal Bounty,
He pours out a thousand Seas of Plenty. What God did before he created the
World.

Yer Eurus blew, yer Moon did Wax or Wain,
Yer Sea had Fish, yer Earth had grass or grain,
God was not void of sacred exercise;
He did admire his Glorie's Mysteries:
His Power, his Justice, and his Providence,
His bountious Grace, and great Beneficence
Were the holy object of his heavenly thought,
Upon the which, eternally it wrought.
It may be also that he meditated
The Worlds Idea, yer it was Created:
Alone he lived not; for, his Son and Spirit Of 3. Persons in one only Essence
of God: of the eternal generation of the Son.

Were with him ay, Equal in might and merit.
For, sans beginning, seed, and Mother tender,
This great Worlds Father he did first engender
(To wit) His Son, Wisdom, and Word eternal,
Equal in Essence to the All-One Paternal. Of the Holy Ghost proceeding from
the Father and the Son: The which three Persons are one only and the same
God.

Out of these Two, their common Power proceeded,
Their Spirit, their Love; in Essence undivided:
Only distinct in Persons, whose Divinity,
All Three in One, makes One eternal Trinity.
Soft, soft, my Muse, launch not into the Deep,
Sound not this Sea: see that aloof thou keep
From this Charybdis and Capharean Rock,
Where many a ship has suffered woeful wrack,
While they have fondly vent red forth too-far,
Following frail Reason for their only Star.
Who on this Gulf would safely venture fain, How to think and speak of God.

Must not too-boldly hale into the Main,
But longst the shore with sails of Faith must coast;
Their Star the Bible; Steers-man the Holy Ghost.
How many fine wits have the World abused,
Because this Ghost they for their Guide refused; The Heathen Philosophers lost
themselves and others in their cur^osities: and weening to be wise, became
fools.

And, scorning of the loyal Virgins Thread,
Have them and others in this Maze misled?
In sacred sheets of either Testament
It Is hard to find a higher Argument,
More deep to sound, more busy to discuss,
More useful, known; unknown, more dangerous,
So bright a Sun dazles my tender sight:
So deep discourse my sense confounds quite:
My Reason's edge is dulled in this Dispute,
And in my mouth my fainting words be mute.
This TRINITY (which rather I adore God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
created of Nothing the Worlds goodly frame.

In humblenes, then busily explore)
In the infinite of Nothing, builded all
This artificial, great, rich, glorious Ball;
Wherein appears in grav'n on every part
The Builders beauty, greatness, wealth, and Art;
Art, beauty, wealth, and greatness, that confounds
The hellish barking of blaspheming Hounds,
Climb they that list the battlements of Heaven, Lea^ing curious speculations,
the Poet teaches how to contemplate God in his Works.

And with the Whirlwind of Ambition driven,
Beyond the World's walls let those Eagles fly,
And gaze upon the Sun of Majesty:
Let other-some (whose fainted spirits do droop)
Down to the ground their meditations stoop,
And so contemplate on these Workmanships,
That the Authors praise they in Themselves eclipse.
My heedfull Muse, trained in true Religion,
Diuinely-humane keeps the middle Region:
Least, if she should too-high a pitch presume,
Heavens glowing flame should melt her waxen plume;
Or, if too-lowe (near Earth or Sea) she flag,
Laden with Mists her moisted wings should lag.
It glads me much, to view this Frame; wherein
(As in a Glass) God's glorious face is seen:
I love to look on God; but in this Robe
Of his great Works, this universal Globe.
For, if the Suns bright beams do blear the sight
Of such as fixtly gaze against his light;
Who can behold above the Empyriall Skies
The lightning splendour of God's gloriouseies?
O, who (alas) can find the Lord, without
His Works, which bear his Image round about?
God, of himself incapable to sense, God makes himself (as it were) visible in
his Works.

In's Works, reueales him to our intelligence:
There-in, our fingers feel, our nostrils smell,
Our palats taste his virtues that excel:
He shows him to our eyes, talks to our ears,
In the ord'red motions of the spangled Spears.
The World's a School, where (in a general Story) Sundry comparisons, showing
what use Christians should make in considering the works of God in this mighty
World.

God always reads dumb Lectures of his Glory:
A pair of Stairs, whereby our mounting Soul
Ascends by steps above the Arched Pole:
A sumptuous Hall, where God (on every side)
His wealthy Shop of wonders opens wide:
A Bridge, whereby we may pass-o're (at ease)
Of sacred Secrets the broad boundless Seas.
The World's a Cloud, through which there shines clear,
Not fair Latona's quiv'red Darling deer;
But the true Phoebus, whose bright countenance
Through thickest vail of darkest night does glance.
The World's a Stage, where Gods Omnipotence,
His Justice, Knowledge, Love, and Providence,
Do act their Parts; contending (in their kinds)
Above the Heavens to ravish dullest minds.
The World's a Book in Folio, printed all
With God's great Works in letters Capital:
Each Creature is a Page; and each Effect,
Afaire Character, void of all defect.
But, as young Trewants, toying in the Schools,
In steed of learning, learn to play the fools:
We gaze but on the Babies and the Cover,
The gaudy Flowrs, and Edges gilded-ouer;
And never farther for our Lesson look
Within the Volume of this various Book;
Where learned Nature rudestones instructs,
That, by His wisdom, God the World conducts.
To read This Book, we need notvnderstand Although the world discover
sufficiently even to the most rude the Eternity and Power of God: Yet only the
true Christians do rightly conceive it.

Each strangers gibbrish; neither take in hand
Turks Characters, nor Hebrew Points to seek,
Nyle's Hieroglyphikes, nor the Notes of Greek.
The wandering Tartars, the Antartiks wild;
The Alar^ies fierce, the Scythians fell, the Child^
Scarce seav'n year old, the ble^red aged eye,
Though void of Art, read here indifferently.
But he that wears the spectacles of Faith,
Sees through the Spears, above their highest height*
He comprehends the Arch-moouer of all Motions,
And reads (though running) all these needful Notions.
Therefore, by Faith's pure rays illumined,
These sacred Pandects I desire to read:
And, God the better to behold, behold
The Orb from his Birth, in's Ages manifold.
The admired Author's Fancy, fixed not
On some fantastik fore-conceited Plot:
Much less did he an elder World elect, God, needing no Idea, nor
premeditatio^, nor Pattern of his work, of nothing made all the World.

By form whereof, he might this Frame erect:
As the Architect that builds for a Prince
Some stately Palace, yer he do commence
His Royal Work, makes choice of such a Court
Where cost and cunning equally consort:
And if he find not in one Edifice
All answerable to his queint device;
From this fair Palace then he takes his Front,
From that his Finials; here he learns to mount
His curious Stairs, there finds he Frise and Cornish,
And other Places other Pieces furnish;
And so, selecting every where the best,
Does thirty Models in one House digest.
Nothing, but Nothing, had the Lord Almighty,
Whereof, wherewith, whereby, to build this City:
Yet, when he, Heavens, Air, Earth, and Sea did frame,
He sought not far, he swet not for the same: A fit Simile to that purpose.

As Sol, without descending from the sky,
Crowns the fair Spring in painted bravery;
Withouten travail causes the Earth to bear,
And (far off) makes the World young every year:
The Power and Will, the affection and effect,
The Work and Project of this Architect
March all at once: all to his pleasure ranges,
Who Alwaies-One, his purpose never changes.
Yet did this Nothing not at once receive Of Nothing, God created the matter,
whereunto afterward he gave the form and figure which now we behold in the
creatures*

Matter and Form: For, as we may perceive
That He who means to build a warlike Fleet,
Makes first provision of all matter meet
(As Timber, Iron, Canuase, Cord, and Pitch)
And when all is ready; then appoints, which
Which piece for Planks, which plank shall line the waste,
The Poup and Prow, which Fir shall make a Mast;
As Art and Use directs, heedfully,
His hand, his tool, his judgment, and his eye:
So God, before This Frame he fashioned,
I wot not what great Word he uttered
From's sacred mouth; which summoned in a Mass
Whatsoever now the Heavens wide arms embrace.
But, where the Shipwright, for his gainful trade,
Finds all his stuff to's hand already made;
The Almighty makes his, all and every part,
Without the help of others Wit or Art.
That first World (yet) was a most formless Form,
A confused Heap, a Chaos most deform, What that new created Chaos was, before
God gave it form, figure, place, and situation.

A Gulf of Gulfs, a Body ill compact,
An ugly medly, where all difference lackt:
Where the Elements lay iumbled all together,
Where hot and cold were iarring each with either;
The blunt with sharp, the dank against the dry,
The hard with soft, the base against the high;
Bitter with sweet: and while this brawl did last,
The Earth in Heaven, the Heaven in Earth was placed:
Earth, Air, and Fire, were with the Water mixed;
Water, Earth, Air within the Fire were fixed;
Fire, Water, Earth, did in the Air abide;
Air, Fire, and Water, in the Earth did hide.
For, yet the immortal, mighty Thunder-darter,
The Lord high-Marshall, unto each his quarter
Had not assigned: the Celestial Arks
Were not yet spangled with their fiery sparks:
As yet no flowrs with odours Earth revived:
No scaly shoals yet in the waters diued:
Nor any Birds, with warbling harmony,
Were born as yet through the transparent Sky.
All, All was void of beauty, rule, and light; Genes. 1. 2.

All without fashion, soul, and motion, quite.
Fire was no fire, the Water was no water,
Air was no air, the Earth no earthly matter.
Or if one could, in such a World, spy forth
The Fire, the Air, the Water, and the Earth;
The Earth was not firm, the Fire was not hot*
The Air was not light, the Water cooled not*
Briefly, suppose an Earth, poor, naked, vain,
All void of verdure, without Hill or Plain,
A Heaven vn-hangd, vn-turning, vn-transparant,
Vn-garnished, vn-gilt with Stars apparent;
So may thou guess what Heaven and Earth was that,
Where, in confusion, reigned such debate:
A Heaven and Earth for my base style most fit,
Not as they were, but as they were not, yet.
This was not then the World: 'twas but the Matter,
The Nurcery whence it should issue after;
Or rather, the Embryon, that within a Week The Chaos how to be considered.

Was to be born: for that huge lump was like
The shape-less burden in the Mothers womb, A simile.

Which yet in Time does into fashion com:
Eyes, ears, and nose, mouth, fingers, hands, and feet,
And every member in proportion meet;
Round, large, and long, there of itself it thriues,
And ( Little-World) into the World arriues.
But that becomes (by Natures set direction)
From foul and dead, to beauty, life, perfection.
But this dull Heap of undigested stuf
Had doubtless never come to shape or proof,
Had not the Almighty with his quickening breath Of the secret power of God in
quickening the matter whereof the World was made.

Blow'n life and spirit into this Lump of death.
The dreadful Darkness of the Memphytists,
The sad black horror of Cimmerian Mists,
The sable fumes of Hell's infernal vault
(Or if ought darker in the World be thought)
Muffled the face of that profound Abyss,
Full of Disorder and fell Mutinies:
So that (in fine) this furious debate
Even in the birth this Ball had ruinate,
Save that the Lord into the Pile did pour
Some secret Mastik of his sacred Power,
To glue together, and to govern fair
The Heaven and Earth, the Ocean, and the Air,
Who jointly iustling, in their rude Disorder,
The newborn Nature went about to murder.
As a good Wit, that on the immortal Shrine The Spirit of God, by an
inconceiueable mean, maintained, and (as it were brooding) warmed the
shape-lesse Mass. Genes. 1.

Of Memory, ingraues a Work Divine,
Abroad, a-bed, at board, for ever uses
To mind his Theme, and on his Book still muses:
So did Gods Spirit delight itself a space
To move itself upon the floating Mass:
No other care the Almightie's mind possessed
(If care can enter in his sacred breast).
Or, as a Hen that fain would hatch a Brood,
(Some of her own, some of adoptiue blood)
Sits close thereon, and with her lively heat,
Of yellow-white balls, does live birds beget:
Even in such sort seemed the Spirit Eternal
To brood upon this Gulf; with care paternall
Quickening the Parts, inspiring power in each,
From so foul Lees, so fair a World to fetch.
For, 't's naught but All, in it self including All:
An vn-beginning, midless, endless Ball;
It Is nothing but a World, whose superfice
Leaves nothing out, but what mere nothingis.
Now, though the great Duke, that (in dreadfullaw)
Upon Mount Horeb learned the eternal Law, That there is but one World:
confuting the Error of Leucyppus and his Disciples, by two reasons.

Had not assured us that Gods sacred Power
In six Days built this Universal Bower;
Reason itself does ouer-throw the grounds
Of those new Worlds that fond Leucyppus founds:
Since, if kind Nature many Worlds could embrace.
clip,
Still the upper Worlds water and earth would slip
Into the lower; and so in conclusion,
All would return into the Old Confusion.
Besides, we must imagine empty distance
Between these Worlds, wherein, without resistance
Their wheels may whirl, not hindered in their courses,
By the inter-iustling of each others forces:
But, all things are so fast together fixed
With so firm bonds, that there is no void betwixt.
Thence coms it, that a Cask, pearc't to be spent,
Though full, yet runs not till we give it vent.
Thence is it that Bellows, while the s^out is stopped,
So hardly heave, and hardly can be op't.
Thence is it that water does not freez in Winter,
Stopped close in vessels where no air may enter.
Thence is it that Garden-pots, the mouth kept close,
Let fall no liquor at their siue-like nose.
And thence it is, that the pure silver source,
In leaden pipes running a captive course,
Contrary to it is Nature, spouteth high:
To all, so odious is Vacuity.
God then, not only framed Nature one,
But also set it limitation
Of Form and Time: exempting ever solely
From quantity his own self's Essence holy. Confutation of another Error of
such as make Nature and the Heavens infinita

How can we call the Heavens unmeasured?
Since measured Time their Course has measured.
How can we count this Universe immortal?
Since many-wayes the parts prove howerly mortal:
Since his Commencement proves his Consummation,
And all things ay decline to Alteration.
Let bold Greek Sages fain the Firmament
To be composed of a fifth Element:
Let them deny, in their profane profoundnes,
End and beginning to the Heavens rolling roundnes:
And let them argue that Deaths laws alone,
Reach but the Bodies under Cynthias Throne:
The sandy grounds of their Sophistick brawling
Are all too-weak to keep the World from falling.
One Day, the Rocks from top to toe shall quiver, A lively description of the
end of the World.

The Mountains melt and all in sunder shiuer:
The Heavens shall rent for fear; the lowely Fields,
Puffed up, shall swell to huge and mighty Hills:
Rivers shall dry: or if in any Flood
Rest any liquor, it shall all be blood:
The Sea shall all be fire, and on the shore
The thirsty Whales with horrid noise shall roar:
The Sun shall seize the black Coach of the Moon,
And make it midnight when it should be noon:
With rusty Mask the Heavens shall hide their face,
The Stars shall fall, and All away shall pass:
Disorder, Dread, Horror, and Death shall com,
Noise, storms, and darkness shall vsurp the room
And then the Chief-Chief-Iustice, venging Wrath
(Which here already often threatened has)
Shall make a Bon-fire of this mighty Ball,
As once he made it a vast Ocean all.
Alas! how faith-les and how modest-les Against judicial Astrologers, that
presume to point the very time thereof.

Are you, that (in your Ephomerides)
Mark the year, the month and day, which evermore
Against years, months, days, shall dam-vp Saturnes door!
(At thought whereof (even now) my heart does ache,
My flesh does faint, my very soul does shake)
You have mis-cast in your Arithmetike,
Mis-laid your Counters, groapingly ye seek
In nights black darkness for the secret things
Sealed in the Casket of the King of Kings.
It Is he, that keeps the eternal Clock of Time,
And holds the waights of that appointed Chime:
He in his hand the sacred book does bear
Of that close-clasped final Calender,
Where, in Red letters (not with us frequented)
The certain Date of that Great Day is printed;
That dreadful Day, which does so swiftly post,
That 'twil be seen, before foreseen of most.
Then, then (good Lord) shall thy dear Son descend
(Though yet he seem in feeble flesh ypend)
In complete Glory, from the glistering Sky:
Millions of Angels shall about him fly:
Mercy and Justice, marching cheek by ioule,
Shall his Divine Triumphant Chariot roll;
Whose wheels shall shine with Lightning round about,
And beams of Glory each-where blazing out.
Those that were laden with proud marble Toombs,
Those that were swallowed in wild Monsters woombs,
Those that the Sea has swill'd, those that the flashes
Of ruddy Flames have burned all to ashes,
Awaked all, shall rise, and all reuest
The flesh and bones that they at first possessed.
All shall appear, and hear, before the Throne
Of God (the Judge without exception)
The final Sentence (sounding joy and terror)
Of euer-lasting Happiness or Horror.
Some shall his Justice, some his Mercy taste;
Some called to joy, some into torment cast,
When from the Goats he shall his Sheep disseuer;
These Blessed in Heaven, those Cursed in Hell for ever.
O thou that once (scornd as the vilest drudge)
Did fear the doom of an Italian Judge,
Daign (dearest Lord) when the last Trump shall summon,
To this Grand Sessions, all the World in common;
Daign in That Day to undertake my matter,
And, as my Judge, so be my Mediator.
The eternal Spring of Power and Providence, Having spoken of the creation of
the Matter, he shows how and what Form God gave unto it, creating in six
Days his admirable works.

In Forming of this All-circumference,
Did not unlike the Bear, which brings forth
In the end of thirty days a shapeless birth;
But after, licking, it in shape she draws,
And by degrees she fashions out the paws,
The head, and neck, and finally does bring
To a perfect beast that first deformed thing.
For when his Word in the vast Void had brought
A confused heap of Wet-dry-cold-and-hot,
In time the high World from the low he parted,
And by itself, hot unto hot he sorted;
Hard unto hard, cold unto cold he sent;
Moist unto moist, as was expedient.
And so in Six Days formed ingeniously,
All things contained in the UNIVERSITY.
Not, but he could have, in a moment, made Wherefore God employed six Days in
creating the World.

This flowery Mansion where mankind does trade;
Spread Heavens blew Curtains, and those Lamps have burnisht;
Earth, air, and sea; with beasts, birds, fish, have furnished:
But, working with such Art so many days,
A sumptuous Palace for Mankind to raise,
Yer Man was made yet; he declares to us,
How kind, how careful, and how gracious,
He would be to us being made, to whom
By thousand promises of things to-come
(Under the Broad-Seal of his deer Sons blood)
He has assured all Riches, Grace, and Good.
By his Example he does also shewe-vs How men should imitate God in his works.

We should not heedles-hastily bestowe-vs
In any Work, but patiently proceed
With often re-vises; Making sober speed
In dearest business, and observe, by proof,
That, What is well don, is don soon enough.
O Father of the Light! of Wisdom Fountain; The 1. ^reature extracted from the
Chaos, was Light.

Out of the Bulk of that confused Mountain
What should (what could) issue, before the Light?
Without which, Beauty were no beauty hight.
In vain Timanthes had his Cyclope drawn,
In vain Parrhasius counterfeited Lawn,
In vain Apelles Uenus had begun,
Zeuxis Penelope; if that the Sun
To make them seen, had never showen his splendour:
In vain, in vain had been (those Works of Wonder)
The Ephesian Temple, the high Pharian-Tower,
And Carian Toomb (Tropheis of Wealth and Power)
In vain they had been builded every one,
By Scopas, Sostrates, and C^esiphon;
Had All been wrapt-vp from all humane sight,
In the obscure Mantle of eternal Night.
What one thing more does the good Architect,
In Princely Works (more specially) respect,
Then lightsomness? to the end the Worlds bright Eye,
Caree^ing daily once about the Sky,
May shine therein; and that in every part
It may seem pompous both for Cost and Art.
Whether Gods Spirit, moving upon the Ball
Of bubbling Waters (which yet covered All) Sundry opinions concerning the
matter, and creation of Light.

Thence forced the Fire (as when amid the Sky
Auster and Boreas iusting furiously
Under hot Cancer, make two Clouds to clash,
Whence the air at midnight flames with lightning flash):
Whether, when God the mingled Lump dispackt,
From Fiery Element did Light extract:
Whether about the vast confused Crowd
For twice-six howrs he spread a shining Cloud,
Which after he re-darkned, that in time
The Night as long might wrap-vp either Clime:
Whether that God made, then, those goodly beams
Which gild the World, but not as now it seems:
Or whether else some other Lamp he kindled
Upon the Heap (yet all with Waters blindled)
Which flying round about, gave light in order
To the vn-plac't Climates of that deep disorder;
As now the Sun, circling about the Ball
(As Light's bright Chariot) does enlighten All.
No sooner said he, Be there Light, but lo Genesis 1. 3.

The form-less Lump to perfect Form began grow;
And all illustred with Lights radiant shine, Of the excellent use and
commodity of Light.

Doft mourning weeds, and decked it passing fine.
All-hail pure Lamp, bright, sacred, and excelling;
Sorrow and Care, Darkness and Dread repelling:
Thou World's great Taper, Wicked men's just Terror,
Mother of Truth, true Beauties only Mirror,
God's eldest Daughter: O! how thou art full
Of grace and goodness! O! how beautiful!
Since thy great Parent's all-discerning Eye
Does judge thee so: and since his Majesty
(Thy glorious Maker) in his sacred lays
Can do no less then sing thy modest praise.
But yet, because all Pleasures wax unpleasant, Why God ordained the Night and
Day alternately to succeed each other.

If without pawse we still possess them, present;
And none can right discern the sweets of Peace,
That have not felt Wars irkesom bitterness;
And Swans seem whiter if swart Crows be by
(For, contraries each other best descry)
The All Is Architect, alternately decreed
That Night the Day, the Day should Night succeed.
The Night, to temper Days exceeding drought, The commodities that the Night
brings us.

Moistens our Air, and makes our Earth to sprout.
The Night is she that all our trauails eases,
Buries our cares, and all our griefs appeases.
The Night is she, that (with her sable wing,
In gloomy Darkness hushing every thing)
Through all the World dumb silence does distill,
And wearied bones with quiet sleep does fill.
Sweet Night, without Thee, without Thee (alas!)
Our life were loathsome; even a Hell to pass.
For, outward pains and inward passions still,
With thousand Deaths, would soul and body thrill.
O Night, thou pullest the proud Mask away
Wherewith vain Actors, in this Worlds great Play,
By day disguise-them. For, no difference
Night makes between the Peasant and the Prince,
The poor and rich, the Prisoner and the Judge,
The foul and fair, the Master and the Drudge,
The fool and wise, Barbarian and the Greek*
For, Night's black Mantle couers all alike.
He that, condemned for some notorious vice,
Seeks in the Mines the baits of Avarice;
Or, swelting at the Furnace, fineth bright
Our souls diresulphur; rests yet at Night.
He that, still stooping, toghes against the tide
His laden Barge along a Rivers side,
And filling shoars with shouts, does melt him quite;
Upon his pallet rests yet at Night.
He that in Summer, in extremest heat
Scorched all day in his own scalding sweat,
Shaues, with keen Sithe, the glory and delight
Of motly Meadows; rests yet at Night,
And in the arms of his deer Pheer for goes
All former troubles and all former woes.
Only the learned Sisters sacred Minions,
While silent Night under her sable pinions
Foldes all the World; with pain-less pain they tread
A sacred path that to the Heavens does lead;
And higher then the Heavens their Readers raise
Upon the wings of their immortal Lays.
EVEN NOW I listened for the Clock to chime Before he conclude the first Day,
he treats of Angels.

Days latest hour; that for a little time,
The Night might ease My Labors: but, I see
As yet Aurora has scarce smiled on me;
My Work still grows: for, now before mine eyes
Heavens glorious Host in nimble squadrons flies.
Whether, This-Day, God made*you, Angels bright, The time of their Creation not
certainly resolved.

Under the name of Heaven, or of the Light:
Whether you were, after, in the instant born
With those bright Spangles that the Heavens adorn:
Or, whether you derive your high Descent
Long time before the World and Firmament
(For, I nill sti^ly argue to and fro
In nice Opinions, whetherso, orso;
Especially, where curious search, perchance,
Is not so safe as humble Ignorance);
I am resolved that onceth' Omnipotent
Created you immortal, innocent,
Good, fair, and free; in brief, of Essence such
As from his Own differd not very much.
But even as those, whom Princes favors often Some of the^ are ^allen, reuolting
from God: and are cast into Hell* therefore called Evil Angels, Wicked
Spirits, and Devils.

Above therest have raised and set-aloft,
Are often the first that (without right or reason)
Attempt Rebellion and do practice Treason;
And so, at length are justly tumbled down
Beneath the foot, that raught above the Crown:
Even so, some Legions of thoselofty Spirits
(Envy'ng the glory of their Makers merits)
Conspired together, strove against the stream,
T'vsurp his S^epter and his Diadem.
But He, whose hands do never Lightnings lack,
Proud sacrilegious Mutiners to wrack,
Hurld them in the Air, or in some lower Cell:
For, where God is not, every where is Hell.
This cursed Crew, with Pride and Fury fraught,
Of us, at least, have this advantage got,
That by experience they can truly tell
How far it is from highest Heaven to Hell:
For, by a proud leap, they have taken the measure,
When head long thence they tumbled in displeasure.
These Fiends a^e so far-off from bett'ring them The insolent and audacious
attempts of Satan and his Fellows against God and his Church.

By this hard Judgment, that still more extreme,
The more their plague, the more their pride increases,
The more their rage: as Lizards, cut in pieces,
Threat with more malice, though with lesser might,
And even in dying show their living spite.
For, ever since, against the King of Heaven
The Apostate Prince of Darkness still has striv'n,
Striv'n to deprave his Deeds, t'interr their Story,
T'vndoo his Church, to vnder-mine his Glory;
To reaue this World's great Body, Ship, and State,
Of Head, of Master, and of Magistrate.
But finding still the Majesty divine
Too strongly ^^n^*t for him to vnder-mine;
His Ladders, Canons, and his Engines, all
Force-less to batter the celestial Wall;
Too weak to hurt the Head, he hacks the Members:
The Tree too hard, the Branches he dismembers.
The Fowlers, Fishers, and the Foresters,
Set not so many toyls, and baits, and snares,
To take the Foul, the Fish, the savage Beasts,
In Woods, and Floods, and fear-full Wilderness:
As this false Spiritsets Engines to beguile
The cunningest, that practice naught but wile.
With want on glaunce of Beauties burning eye The diverse baits of the Devil to
entrap mankind.

He snares hot Youth in sensuality.
With Golds bright luster does he Age entice
To Idolize detested Avarice.
With grace of Princes, with their pomp, and State,
Ambitious Spirits he does intoxicate.
With curious Skill-pride, and vain dreams, he witches
Those that contemn Pleasure, and State, and Riches.
Yea, Faith it self, and Zeal, be sometimes Angles
Wherewith this-Iuggler Heav'n-bent Souls intangles:
Much like the green Worm, that in Spring deuours
The buds and* leaves of choicest Fruits and Flowrs;
Turning their sweetest sap and fragrant verdure
To deadly poison and detested ordure.
Who but (alas!) would have been gulled yer-whiles Their Oracles.

With Night's black Monark's most malicious wiles?
To hear Stones speak, to see strange wooden Miracles,
And golden Gods to utter wondrous Oracles?
To see Him play the Prophet, and inspire
So many Sibyls with a sacred fire?
To raise dead Samuel from his silent Toomb, 1. Samuel. 28. 14, 17.

To tell his King Calamities to-com?
T*inflame the Flamine of Jove Ammon so
With Heathen-holy fury-fits, to know
Future events, and sometimes truly tell
The blinded World what afterward befell?
To counter fait the wondrous Works of God; Their false Miracles. Exodus 7, 11,
22. and 8, 7.

His Rod turn Serpent, and his Serpent Rod?
To change the pure streams of the Egyptian Flood
From clearest water into crimsin blood?
To rain-down Frogs, and Grass-hoppers to bring
In the bed-chambers of the stubborn King?
For, as he is a Spirit, unseen he sees
The plots of Princes, and their Policies;
Unfelt, he feels the depth of their desires;
Who harbors vengeance, and whose heart aspires:
And, as used daily unto such affects,
Such feats and fashions, judges of the effects. Their Wiles.

Besides, to circumvent the quickest sprighted,
To blind the eyes (even of the clearest sighted)
And to enwrap the wisest in his snares,
He often fore-tels what he himself prepares.
For, if a Wiseman (though Man's days be don
As soon almost as they be here begun; Wherefore their effects are so strange
and wonderful.

And his dull Flesh be of too slow a kind
T'ensue the nimble Motions of his mind)
By the only power of Plants and Minerals
Can work a thousand super-naturals:
Who but will think, much more these Spirits can
Work strange effects, exceeding sense of Man?
Since being immortal, long experience brings
Them certain knowledge of the effects of things;
And, free from body's clog, with less impeach,
And lighter speed, their bold Designs they reach.
Not that they have the bridle on their neck, God restraines them at his
pleasure.

To run at random without curb or check,
To Abuse the Earth, and all the World to blind,
And tyrannize our body and our mind.
God holds them chained in Fetters of his Power;
That, without leave, one minute of an hour
They cannot range* It was by his permission,
The Lying Spirit trained Achab to perdition; 1. Kings, ^2. 35

Making him marchagainst that Foe with force,
Which should his body from his soul divorce.
Armed with Gods sacred Passport, he did try
Just humble Job's renowned Constancy: Job. 1, 15, etc.

He reaues him all his Cattle, many ways,
By Fire and Foes: his faithful Servants slayes:
To loss of Goods he adds his Childrens loss,
And heaps upon him bitter cross on cross.
For the Only Lord, sometimes to make a trial Why the Lord sometimes lets
loose those wicked* Spirits.

Of firmest Faith; sometimes with Errors violl
To drench the Souls that Errors sole delight;
Lets loose these Furies: who with fell despite
Drive still the same Nail, and pursue (incensed)
Their damned drifts in Adam first commenced.
But, as these Rebels, maugre all their will,
T'assist the Good, befo^c't t'assault the Ill: Of the good Angels serving to
the glory of God* and good of his Church, both in general and particular.

The unspotted Spirits that never did intend
To mount too high, nor yet too low descend,
With willing speed they every moment go
Whether the breath of divine grace does blow:
Their aims had never other limitation
Then God's own glory, and his Saints salvation.
Law-less Desire n^'r enters in their breast,
The Almightie's Face is their Ambrosiall Feast:
Repentant tears of strayed Lambs returning,
Their Nectar sweet: their Music, Sinners Mourning.
Ambitious Man's greedy Desire does gape
S^ept^r Scepter, Crown on Crown to clap:
These never thirst for greater Dignities.
Trauail's their ^ase, their bliss in service lies.
For, God no sooner has his pleasure spoken,
Or bowed his head, or given some other token,
Or (almost) thought on an Exploit, where in
The Ministry of Angels shall be seen,
But these quick Posts with ready expedition
Fly to accomplish their divine Commission.
One follows Agar in her pilgrimage, Genesis 21, 17, 18.

And with sweet comforts does her cares assuage.
Another guides Is^^^^ mighty Hoasts; Exodus 23, 23, and 33, 2.

Another, Jacob on the Idumean Coasts.
Another (skilled in Physic) to the Light Tobi. 11, 7, 11* and 12, 14, and 15

Restores old faithful Tobies failing sight.
In Nazareth, another rapt with joy,
Tells that a Virgin shall bring forth a Boy;
That Mary shall at-once be Mayd-and-Mother, Luke 1, 26.

And bear at-once her Son, Sire, Spowse, and Brother:
Yea, that Her happy fruitful woomb shall hold
Him, that in Him does all the World infold.
Some in the Desert tenderd consolations, Math. 4, 11.

While JESUS strove with Satan's strong Temptations.
One, in the Garden, in his Agonies, Luke 22, 43.

Cheers-vp his fears in that great enterprise,
To take that bloody Cup, that bitter Chalice,
And drink it off, to purge our sinful Malice.
Another certifies his Resurrection Matthew. 28, 25.

Unto the Women, whose faith's imperfection
Supposed his cold limbs in the Grave were bound
Until the Archangels lofty Trump should sound.
Another, past all hope, does pre-auerr Luke 1, 13. Acts 12. ^.

The birth of John, Christ's holy Harbenger.
One, trusty Seriant for divine Decrees,
The Jews Apostle from close Prison frees:
One, in few hours, a fearful slaughter made
Of all the Firstborn that the Memphians had; Exodus 12, 29.

Exempting Those upon whose door-postes stood
A sacred token of Lambs tender blood. 2. Kings, 10. 35

Another mowes-down in a moments space,
Before Jerusalem (Gods chosen place)
Senacharib's proud ouer-daring Host,
That threatened Heaven, and against the Earth did boast;
In his Blasphemous braues, comparing even
His Idol-Gods, unto the God of Heaven.
His Troops, victorious in the East before,
Besieged the City, which did sole adore
The Only God; so that, without their leave,
A Sparrow scarce the sacred Walls could leave.
Then Ezechias, as a prudent Prince,
Poizing the danger of these sad events
(His Subjects thrall, his Cities woeful Flames,
His Childrens death, the rape of noble Dames,
The Massacre of Infants and of Eld,
And's Royal Self with thousand weapons queld;
The Templeraz'd, the Altar and Censer void
Of sacred use, Gods Servants all destroyed)
Humbled in Sackcloth and in Ashes, cries
For aid to God, the God of Victories;
Who hears his suit, and thunders down his Fury
On those proud Pagan Enemies of Jury*
For, while their Watch within their Corpse de Guard
About the Fire securely snorted hard,
From Heaven the Almighty looking sternly down
(Glancing his Friends a smile, his Foes a frown)
A sacred Fencer against the Assyrians sent,
Whose two-hand Sword, at every veny, slent,
Not through a single Soldiers feeble bones,
But keenly slyces through whole Troops at once:
And heaws broad Lanes before it and behind,
As swistly whirling as the whisking wind.
Now began they fly; but all too slow to shun
A flying Sword that followed every one.
A Sword they saw; but could not see the arm
That in one Night had don so dismal harm:
As we perceive a Winde-mils sayls to go;
But not the Wind, that does transport them so.
Blushing Aurora, had yet scarce dismissed
Mount Libanus from the Nights gloomy Mist,
When the Hebrew Sentinels, discov'ring plain
An hundred four score and five thousand* slain,
Exceeding joyful, began to ponder stricter,
To see such Conquest, and not know the Victor.
O sacred Tutors of the Saints! you Guard
Of Gods Elect, you Pursuiuants prepared
To execute the Counsails of the Highest;
You Heavenly Courtiers, to your King the nighest;
Gods glorious Heralds, Heavens swift Harbengers,
'Twixt Heaven and Earth you true Interpreters;
I could be well content and take delight
To follow farther your celestial Flight:
But that I fear (here having ta'n in hand
So long a journey both by Sea and Land)
I fear to faint, if (at the first) too fast
I cut away, and make too-hasty haste:
For, Trauailers, that burn in brave desire
To see strange Countries manners and attire,
Make haste enough, if only the First Day
From their own Sill they set but on their way.
So Morn and Evening the First Day conclude,
And God perceived that All his Works were good.
THE SECOND DAY OF THE FIRST WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Lewd Poets checked: Our Poets chaste Intents:
Heavens Curtain spread: the all-forming Elements;
Their number, nature, use and Domination,
Concent, excess, continuance, situation:
Aire's triple Regions; and their Temper's change:
Winds, Exhalations, and all Meteors strange;
The effects, the use (applied to Conscience):
Man's Reason non-plust in some Accidents:
Of Prodigies: of the Elementall Flame:
Heavens ten-fold Orbs: Waters above the same.
THose learned Spirits, whose wits applied wrong,
With wanton Charms of their in chanting song, A just reproof of wanton and
lasci^ious Poets of our Time.

Make of an old, foul, frantike Hecuba,
A wondrous fresh, fair, witty Helena:
Of lewd Faustina (that loose Emperess)
A chaste Lucretia, loathing wantonness:
Of a blind Bowe-Boy, of a Dwarf, a Bastard,
No petty Godling, but the Gods great Master;
On thankless furrows of a fruitless sand
Their seed and labor lose, with heedless hand;
And (pitching Netts, to catch I little wott
What fume of Fame that seems them to besott)
Resemble Spiders, that with curious pain
Weaue idle Webs, and labor still in vain.
But (though then Time we have no deerer Treasure)
Less should I wail their miss-expence of leisure,
If their sweet Muse, with too-well spoken Spell,
Drew not their Readers with themselves to Hell.
For, under the honey of their learned Works
A hateful draught of deadly poison lurks:
Whereof (alas) Young spirits quaffe so deep, The danger of their seduced
Readers.

That drunk with Love, their Reason falls asleep;
And such a habit their fond Fancy gets,
That their ill stomach still loves evil meats.
The enchanting force of their sweet eloquence
Hurls head long down their tender Audience,
Ay (childe-like) sliding, in a foolish strife,
On the Icie down-Hills of this slippery Life.
The Songs their Phoebus does so sweet inspire,
Are even the Bellows whence they blow the fire
Of raging Lust (before) whose wanton flashes
A tender breast rak't-vp in shamefac't ashes. Our Poets modest purpose.

Therefore, for my part, I have vowed to Heaven
Such wit and learning as my God has given;
To write, to the honor of my Maker dread,
Verse that a Virgin without blush may read. Again, he calls upon God, for
assistance in the description of the 2. Days work.

Clear Source of Learning, soul of the Universe
(Since thou art pleased to choose mine humble verse
To sing thy Praises) make my Pen distill
Celestial Nectar, and this Volume fill
With the Amalthean Horn; that it may have
Some correspondence to a Theme so grave:
Rid thou my passage, and make clear my way
From all incumbers: shine upon This Day;
That guided safely by thy sacred Light,
My Rendez-vous I may attain yer night. Which is, the Fir mament mentioned by
Mose^ in the 1. Chapter of Genesis V. 6, 7, 8. Comprehending the Heavens, and all the
Elementary Region. Of the four Elements, simple in themselves: whereof all
things subject to our sense, are composed.

THAT HVGE broad-length, that long-broad height-profound,
The infinite finit, that great moundless Mound,
I mean that Chaos, that self-iarring Mass,
Which in a moment made of Nothing was;
Was the rich Matter and the Matrix, whence
The Heavens should issue, and the Elements.
Now the Elements, twin-twins (two Sons, two Daughters)
To wit, the Fire, the Air; the Earth, and Waters
Are not compounded: but, of them is all
Compounded first, that in our sense can fall:
Whether their qualities, in every portion
Of every thing, infuse them with proportion:
Whether in all, their substance they confound,
And so but one thing of their four compound:
As in a Venice Glass, before our eyne, Diverse similes.

We see the water intermix with wine:
Or, in our stomach, as our drink and food
Do mingle, after to convert to blood.
This in a Firebrand may wes^e, whose Fire
Does in his flame toward's native Heaven aspire,
His Air in smoke; in ashes falls his Earth,
And at his knots his Water wheezes forth.
Even such a War our Bodies peace maintains:
For, in our Flesh, our Body's Earth remains:
Our vital spirits, our Fire and Air possess:
And, last, our Water in our humors rests.
Nay, there is no Part in all this Bulk of ours,
Where each of these not intermix their powers;
Though It be apparent (and I needs must grant)
That ayesom one is most Predominant.
The pure red part, amid the Mass of Blood,
The Sanguine Air commands: the clotted mud,
Sunk down in Lees, Earths Melancholy shows:
The pale thin humor, that on the outside flows,
Is watery Phlegm: and the light froathy scum,
Bubbling above, has Fiery Cholers room.
Not, that at all times, one same Element
In one same Body has the Regiment: A vicissitude of the Elements
praedominance.

But, in his turn each reigning, his subjects draws
After his Lore: for still New Lords, new Laws;
As sans respect how rich or Noble-born,
Each Citizen rules and obayes, by turn,
In chart'red Towns; which seem, in little space,
Changing their Ruler, even to change their face
(For, as Chameleons vary with their object,
So Princes manners do transform the Subject):
So the Element in Wine predomining,
It hot, and cold, and moist, and dry does bring;
By's perfect or imperfect force (at length)
Enforcing it to change the taste and strength:
So that it does Grapes sharp-green juice transfer
To Must, Must t'wine, and Wine to Vinegar.
As while a Monarch, to teach others aw, Excellent Similes showing the
commodity or disco^modity of the proportion, or excess of every of the
Elemente.

Subjects his own selfs-Greatnes to his Law,
He rules fearless: and his Kingdoms flourish
In happy Peace (and Peace does Plenty nourish);
But if (fell Tyrant) his keen sword be ever
Unjustly drawn, if he be sated never
With Subjects blood; needs must his Rage (at last)
Destroy his State, and lay his Country waste:
So (or much like) the while one Element
Over the rest has modest Government;
While, in proportion (though unequal yet)
With Soueraign Humors Subject Humors fit,
The Body's ^ound; and in the very face
Retains the Form of beauty and of grace:
But if (like that inhumane Emperor
Who wished, all People underneath his Power
Had but one head, that he might butcher so
All the Empires Subjects at one only blow)
It, Tyrannizing, seek to wrack the rest,
It ruins soon the Province it possessed;
Where soon appears, through his proud usurpation,
Both outward change and inward alteration.
So, too-much Moist, which (vnconcoct within) Excess of moisture.

The Liver spreads betwixt the flesh and skin,
Puffs up the Patient, stops the pipes and pores
Of Excrements; yea, double bars the doors
Of his short breath; and slowely-swiftly cursed,
In amidst of Water makes him ever thirst:
Nor gives man Rest, nor Respite, till his bones
Be raked up in a cold heap of stones. Of Drought.

So, too-much Drought a lingering Ague draws,
Which seeming painless, yet much pain does cause;
Robbing the nerves of might, of Joy the heart,
Of mirth the face, of moisture every part
(Much like a Candle fed with it own humor,
By little and little it own selfs consumer)
Nor gives man's Rest, nor Respite, till his bones
Be raked up in a cold heap of stones.
So, too-much Heat does bring a burning Fever, Of Heat.

Which spurrs our Pulse, and furrs our Palate ever;
And on the tables of our troubled brain,
Fantastikely with various pensill vain
Does counterfeit as many Forms, or mo
Then ever Nature, Art, or Chance could show:
Nor gives man Rest, nor Respite, till his bones
Be raked up in a cold heap of stones.
So, too-much Cold couers with hoary Fleece Of Cold.

The head of Age, his flesh diminishes,
Withers his face, hollowes his rheumy eyes,
And makes himself even his own self despise;
While through his marrow every where it enters,
Quenching his native heat with endless Winters:
Nor gives man Rest, nor Respite, till his bones
Be taked up in a coldheap of stones. Of the continuance of the Elements;
maintaining that whatso ever is now n^w formed, has still his substance from
the Materia prima: and what soever dissolues, resolves into the same; changing
only form: And also consuting the contrary Errors.

Yet think not, that this Too-too-much, remises
Ought into naught: it but the Form disguises
In hundred fashions; and the Substances
Inly, or outly, neither win nor leese.
For, all that is made, is made of the First Matter
Which in the old Nothing made the All-Creator.
All, that dissolues, resolves into the same.
Since first the Lord of Nothing made This Frame,
Nought's made of naught; and nothing turns to nothing:
Things birth, or death, change but their formal clothing*
Their Forms do vanish, but their bodies bide;
Now thick, now thin, now round, now short, now side.
For, if of Nothing anything could spring,
The Earth without seed should wheat and barley bring.
Pure Mayden-wombs desired Babes should bear:
All things, at all times, should grow every where.
The Heart in Water should it self in gender;
The Whale on Land; in Air the Lambling tender:
The Ocean should yield the Pine and Cornell Tree;
On Hazels Acorns, Nuts on Oaks should be:
And breaking Natures set and sacred use,
The Doves would Eagles, Eagels Doves, produce.
If of themselves things took their thriuing, then
Slowe-growing Babes should instantly be men:
Then in the Forests should huge boughs be seen
Born with the bodies of unplanted Treen:
Then should the sucking Elephant support
Upon his shoulders a well-manned Fort:
And the new-foaled Colt, courageous,
Should neigh for Battle, like Bucephalus.
Contrariwise, if ought to naught did fall;
All, that is felt or seen within this All,
Still loosing somewhat of it self, at length
Would com to Nothing: If Death's fatal strength
Could altogether Substances destroy,
Things then should vanish even as soon as die.
In time the mighty Mountains tops be bated;
But, with their fall, the neighbor Vales are fatted;
And what, when Trent or Auon ouer-flowe,
They reaue one field they on the next bestow:
Loue-burning Heaven many sweet Deaws does drop
In his deer Spouses fair and fruitful lap;
Which after she restores, straining those showrs
Through the hidden pores of pleasant plants and flowrs.
Whosoever has seen, how one warm lump of wax
(Without increasing, or decreasing) takes By an apt similitude, he shows the
continual Change of the World, in the matter and form thereof, according to
Gods pleasure; in such sort, yet, that the matter remains, though it receive
infinite Forms.

A hundred figures; well may judge of all
The incessant Changes of this nether Ball.
The Worlds own Matter is the waxen Lump,
Which, vn-self-changing, takes all kind of stamp:
The Form's the Seal; Heavens gracious Emperor
(The Living God)'s the great Lord Chancellor;
Who at his pleasure setting day and night
His great Broad Seals, and Privy Signets right
Upon the Mass so vast and variable,
Makes the same Lump, now base, now honorable.
Here Is nothing constant: nothing still does stay:
For, Birth and Death have still successiues way.
Here one thing springs not, till another die:
Only the Matter lives immortally
(The Almighties Table, body of this All,
Of change-full Chances common Arcenall,
All like itself, all in itself contained,
Which by Times Flight has neither lost nor gained)
Change-less in Essence; changeable in face,
Much more then Proteus, or the subtle race
Of rouing Polypes, who (to rob the more)
Transform them howrly on the wauing shore: Sundry Similes to that purpose.

Much like the French ( or like our selves, their Apes)
Who with strange habit do disguise their shapes;
Who loving nouels, full of affectation,
Receive the Manners of each other Nation;
And scarcely shift they shirts so often, as change
Fantastik Fashions of their garments strange:
Or like a Lais, whose inconstant Love
Does every day a thousand times remove;
Who Is scarce unfolded from one Youths embraces,
Yer in her thought another she embraces;
And the new pleasure of her wanton Fire
Stirs in her, still, another new desire:
Because the Matter, wounded deep in heart
With various Love (yet, on the self same part,
Incapable, in the same time, at once
To take all figures) by successions,
Form after Form receives: so that one face
Another faces features does deface. The chief motive of this change of Formet
in the matter.

Now the chief Motive of these Accidents,
Is the dire discord of our Elements:
Truce-hating Twins, where Brother eats Brother
By turns, and turn them one into another,
Like Ice and Water that beget each other; Enigma.

And still the Daughter bringeth-forth the Mother.
But each of these having two qualities
(One bearing Rule, another that obayes)
Those, whose effects do wholly contradict,
Longer and stronger strive in their Conflict.
The hot-dry Fire to cold-moist Water turns not;
The cold-dry Earth, to hot-moist Air, returns not,
Returns not easily: for (still opposite)
With tooth and nail as deadly foes they fight.
But Air turn Water, Earth may Fierize,
Because in one part they do symbolize;
And so, in combat they have less to do;
For, 't's easier far, to conquer one then two.
Since then the knot of sacred Marriage, Of the Situation of the Elements, and of
the effects thereof, compared to the Notes of Music and to the letters of the
Alphabet.

Which ioynes the Elements, from age to age
Brings forth the Worlds Babes: since their Enmities,
With fell divorce, kill whatsoever dies:
And since, but changing their degree and place,
They frame the various Forms, wherewith the face
Of this fair World is so imbellished
[As six sweet Notes, curiously varied
In skillful Music, make a hundred kinds
Of Heavenly sounds, that ravish hardest minds;
And with Division (of a choice devise)
The Hearers souls out at their ears entice:
Or, as of twice-twelue Letters, thus transposed,
This World of Words, is variously composed;
And of these Words, in diverse order sown,
This sacred Uolume that you read, is grown
(Through gracious succor of the Eternal Deity)
Rich in discourse, with infinite Variety]
It was not cause-less, that so carefully
God did divide their common Signory;
Assigning each a fit-confined Sitting,
Their quantity and quality befitting.
Whosoever (sometime) has seen rich Ingotstri'd, A simile lively representing the
separation of the Elements.

When forced by Fire their treasures they divide
(How fair and softly, Gold to Gold does pass,
Silver seeks Silver, Brass consorts with Brass;
And the whole Lump, of parts unequal, seuers
It self apart, in white, red, yellow Rivers)
May understand how, when the Mouth Divine
Opened (to each his proper Place t'assigne)
Fire flew to Fire, Water to Water slid,
Air clung to Air, and Earth with Earth abid.
Earth, as the Lees, and heavy dross of All
(After his kind) did to the bottom fall: Situation of the earth, and fire.

Contrariwise, the light and nimble Fire
Did through the crannies of the old Heap aspire
Unto the top; and by his nature, light
No less then hot, mounted in sparks upright:
As, when we see Aurora, passing gay,
With Opals paint the Seeling of Cathay,
Sad Floods doefume, and the celestial Tapers
Through Earths thin pores, in the Air exhale the vapors.
But least the Fire (which all the rest embraces)
Being too near should burn the Earth to ashes;
As chosen Vmpires, the great All-Creator Of air and water placed between the
earth and fire.

Between these Foes placed the Air and Water:
For, one suffiz'd not their stern strife to end.
Water, as Cozen, did the Earth befriend:
Air, for his Kinsman Fire, as firmly deals:
But both, uniting their divided zeals,
Took up the matter, and appeased the brall;
Which doubt-less else had discreated All.
The Air lodged aloft, the Water under it,
Not casually, but so disposed fit
By him who (Nature in her kind to keep)
Kept due proportion in his Workmanship; Why the air was lodged next the
Element of Fire.

And, in this Storehouse of his Wonders treasure,
Observed in all things number, weight, and measure.
For, had the Water next the Fire been placed,
Fire, seeming then moro wronged and more disgraced,
Would suddenly have left his Adversary,
And set upon the Vmpire (more contrary).
But all the Links of the holy Chain, which tethers
The many Members of the World togethers,
Are such, as none but only he can break them,
Who at the first did (of mere nothing) make them.
Water, as armed with moisture and with cold,
The cold-dry Earth with her one hand does hold;
With the other the Air: The Air, as moist and warm, The disposing and
combining of the Elements.

Holds Fire with one; Water with the other arm:
As Country Maidens, in the Month of May,
Merrily sporting on a Holy Day,
And lusty dancing of a lively Round, A Similitude.

About the May Pole, by the Bag-pipes sound;
Hold hand in hand, so that the first is fast
(By means of those between) unto the last.
For, since it is so that the dry Element
Not only yields her own Babes nourishment,
But with the milk of her abundant breasts,
Does also feed the Aires nimble winged guests,
And also all the innumerable Legions
Of greedy mouths that haunt the Bryny Regions
(So that, the Earth's Mother, or else Nurse of all
That run, or fly, or swim, or slide, or crawl)
'Twas meet, it should be it self's Counterpoize,
To stand still firm against the roaring noise
Of wrack full Neptune, and the wrathful blasts
Of parching South and pinching Boreas.
'T was meet, her sad-slowe body to digest Why the Earth is the lowest, and
environed with the other three Elements, whereof it is the center.

Farther from Heaven than any of the rest:
Least, of Heavens Courseth' Eternal swift Careers,
Rushing against her with their whirling Spears,
Should her transport, as swift and violent,
As ay they do their neighbor Element.
And since, on the otherside, the harmonious Course)
Of Heavens bright Torches is the immortal source
Of earthly life: and since all alterations
(Almost) are caused by their quick agitations
In all the World, God could not place so fit
Our Mother Earth, as in the midst of it.
For, all the Stars reflect their lively rays
On Fire and Air, and Water, diverse ways;
Dispersing, so, their powerful influence
On, in, and through these various Elements:
But, on the Earth, they all in one concur,
And all unite their severed force in her;
As in a Wheel, which with a long deep rut Simile.

His turning passage in the dirt does cut,
The distant spoaks nearer and nearer gather,
And in the Navevnite their points together.
As the bright Sun shines thorough smoothest Glass, Simile.

The turning Planets influence does pass
Without impeachment through the glist' ring Tent
Of the tralucing Fiery Element,
The Aires triple Regions, the transparent Water;
But not the firm Base of this fair Theater.
And therefore rightly may we call those Trines
(Fire, Air, and Water) but Heavens Concubines:
For, never Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars enjoy
The love of these, but only by the way,
As passing by: whereas incessantly,
The lusty Heaven with Earth does company;
And with a fruitful seed, which lends All life,
With-childs each-moment his own lawful wife;
And with her lovely Babes, in form and nature The Water, between the Earth and
Air.

So diverse, decks this beautiful Theater.
The Water, lighter then the Earthy Mass,
Heavier then Air, betwixt them both has place;
The better so with a moist-cold, to temper
The ones over-driness, the others hot distemper.
But, my sweet Muse, whither so fast away? Leaving the Earth and Sea till the
next Book, he comes to treat of the Air.

Soft, soft, my Darling: draw not dry Today
Castalian Springs; defer the Cirque, and Seat,
The power, and praise, of Sea and Earth as yet:
Do not anticipate the Worlds Beginning;
But, till Tomorrow, leave the enter-blinning
Of Rocky Mounts, and rouling Waves so wide.
For, even Tomorrow will the Lord divide,
With the right hand of his Omnipotence,
These yet confused and mingled Elements;
And liberally the shaggy Earth adorn
With Woods, and Buds of fruits, of flowers and corn.
It Is time, my Love, it is time, mine only Care,
To hie us hence, and Mount us in the Air:
It Is time (or never) now, my dearest Minion,
To imp strong farcels in thy sacred pinion;
That lightly born upon thy Virgin back,
Safe through the Welkin I my course may take:
Com, com, my Joy, lend me thy lilly shoulder;
That, thereon raised, I may reach the bolder
(Before the rest of my deer Countrymen,
Of better wit, but worse-applied pen)
At that green Laurel, which the niggard Skies
So long have hidden from my longingeies.
The Air (host of Mists, the bounding Tennis-ball,
That stormy Tempests toss and play with all; The Air distinguished into 3
Regions.

Of winged Clouds the wide inconstant House,
The unsettled kingdom of swift Aeolus,
Great Warehouse of the Winds, whose traffik gives
Motion of life to every thing that lives)
Is not throughout all one: our Elder Sages
Have fitly parted it into Three Stages.
Whereof, because the Highest still is driven
With violence of the First-mouing Heaven, The High.

From East to West; and from West returning
To the honored Cradle of therosiall Morning,
And also seated next the Fiery vault;
It, by the learned, very hot is thought.
That, which we touch, with times does variate,
Now hot, now cold, and sometimes temperate; The Low.

Warm-temp'red showers it sends in the Spring:
In Autumn likewise, but more varying:
In Winter time, continual cold and chill:
In Summer season, hot and soultry still;
For then, the Fields, scorched with flames, reflect
The sparkling rays of thousand Stars aspect;
And chiefly Phoebus, to whose arrows bright,
Our Globy Grandame serves for But and White. The Middle Region of the Air.

But now, because the Middle Region's set
Far from the Fiery seelings flagrant heat,
And also from the warm reuerberation
Which aye the Earth reflects in diverse fashion;
That Circle shiuers with eternal cold.
For, into Hail how should the Water molde, Of the causes of Hail.

Even when the Summer has gilt Ceres Gown,
Except those Climes with Ycicles, were sown?
So soon as Sol, leaving the gentle Twins,
With Cancer, or thirst-panting Leo Inns,
The mid-most Air redoubleth all his Frosts;
Being besieged by two mighty Hoasts
Of Heat more fierce' against his Cold force then ever,
Calls from all quarters his chil troops together.
T'incounter them with his united Power,
Which then dispersed, has far greater power:
As Christian Armies, from the Frontiers far,
And out of fear of Turks outrageous War,
March in disorder, and become (dispersed)
As many Squadrons as were Soldiers yerst;
So that sometimes the untrained Multitude
With bats and boawes has beat them, and subdued:
But if they once perceive, or understand
The Moony Standards of proud Ottoman
To be approaching, and the Sulph'ry thunder
Wherewith he brought both Rhodes and Belgrade under;
They soon unite, and in a narrow place
Entrench themselves; their courage grows apace,
Their heart's on fire; and Circumcised Powrs,
By their approach, double the strength of ours.
It Is (doubt-less) this Contrary Circumstance. The effects the^ of in the
middle Region of the Air.
Antiperistasis
(Bear with the word) I hold it not a miss
TO adopt sometimes such strangers for our use,
When Reason and Necessity induce:
As namely, where our native Phrase does want
A Word so force-full and significant)
Which makes the Fireseem to our sense and reason
Hotter in Winter then in Summer season:
It Is it which causes the cold frozen Scythia,
Too-often kissed by the husband of Orithya,
To bring forth people, whose still hungry breast
(Winter or Summer) can more meat digest
Then those lean staruelings which the Sun does broil
Upon the hot sands of the Libyan soil:
And that our selves, happily seated fair,
Whose spongy lungs draw sweet and holesom Air,
Hide in our stomachs a more lively heat,
While bi-front Ianus frosty frowns do threat,
Then when bright Phoebus, leaving swarty Chus,
Mounts on our Zenith, to reflect on us.
The Almighties hand did this Partition form; Why the air was thus
distinguished in the 3. Regions.

To the end that Mist, Comets, and Wind, and Storm,
Deaw, drizling Showrs, Hail, slippery Ice, and Snow,
In the Three Regions of the Air might grow:
Whereof some, pointed the Earth to fertilize,
Other to punish our impieties,
Might daily grave in hardest hearts the love
And fear of him, who Raigns in Heaven above.
For, as a little end of burning wax, Of exhalations and whereunto they are
appropriate, by the Sun and the Regions of the Air.

By the emptiness, or if it self attracts
In Cupping-glasses, through the scotched skin
Behind the Poule, superfluous humors thin,
Which fuming from the brain did thence descend
Upon the sight, and much the same offend:
So the swift Coachman, whose bright flaming hair
Does every Day gild either Hemisphear,
Two sorts of Vapors by his heat exhales
From floating Deeps, and from the flowery Dales:
The one somewhat hot, but heavy, moist, and thick;
The other, light, dry, burning, pure, and quick;
Which, through the Welkin roaming all the year,
Make the World diverse to itself appear.
Now, if a vapor be so thin, that it
Cannot to Water be transformed fit, Of Mist.

And that with Cold-lym'd wings, it houer near
The flowery Mantle of our Mother deer;
Our Air grows dusky, and moist drowsy Mist
Upon the Fields does for a time persist.
And if this vapor fair and softly sty,
Not to the cold Stage of the middle Sky, Of Deaw and Ice.

But 'bove the Clouds, it turns (in a trice)
In April, Deaw; in January Ice.
But, if the Vapor bravely can adventure
Up to the eternal seat of shivering Winter,
The small thin humor by the Cold is pressed
Into a Cloud; which wanders East and West Of Rain.

Upon the Winde's wings, till in drops of Rain
It fall into his Grandames lap again:
Whether some boistrous wind, with stormy puff
Ioustling the Clouds with mutual counter-buff,
Do break their brittle sides, and make them shatter
In drizling Showers their swift distilling water:
As when a wanton heedless Page (perhaps) Diverse Similes showing how the Rain
is caused through the encounter of the Clouds, which are the matter of it.

Rashly together two full glasses claps;
Both being broken, so dainly they pour
Both their brewed liquors on the dusty flour.
Whether some milder gale, with sighing breath
Shaking their Tent, their tears disseuereth:
As after rain another rain does drop
In shady Forests from their shaggy top,
When through their green boughs, whiffing Winds do whirl
With want on pufs their wauing locks to curl.
Or whether the upper Clouds moist heauiness
Does with his weight an under Cloud oppress,
And so one humor does another crush,
Till to the ground their liquid pearls do gush:
As, the more clusters of ripe grapes we pack
In Vintage-time upon the hurdles back;
At's pierced bottom the more fuming liquor
Runns in the scummy Fat, and falls the thicker.
Then, many Heav'n-flouds in our Floods do lose-am; Whence it proceeds, that
sometimes it raineth Frogs.

Nought's seen but Showers: the Heavens sad sable bosom
Seems all in tears to melt; and Earths green bed
With stinking Frogs is sometimes covered:
Either, because the floating Cloud does fold
Within it self both moist, dry, hot, and cold,
Whence all things here are made: or else for that
The active winds sweeping this dusty Flat,
Sometimes in the air some fruitful dust do heap:
Whence these new-formed ugly creatures leap:
As on the edges of some standing Lake
Which neighbor Mountains with their gutters make,
The foamy slime, it self transformeth often
To green half-Tadpoles, playing there aloft,
Half-made, half-vnmade; round about the Flood,
Half-dead, half-liuing; half-a frog, half-mud.
Sometimes it happens that the force of Cold
Freezes the whole Cloud: then we may behold Of Snow.

In silver Flakes a heavenly Wool to fall;
Then, Fields seem grass-less, Forests leafe-less all,
The World's all white; and, through the heaps of Snow,
The highest Stag can scarce his armor show.
Sometimes befalls, that, when by secret power, Of Hail.

The Cloud's new-chang'd into a dropping shower,
The excessive cold of the mid-Aire (anon)
Candies-it all in bals of Icy-stone:
Whose violent storms sometimes (alas) do proin, Of fume, Vapors, or
exhalations whirling in the Low and Middle Regions of the air, and whereof
the winds are engendered.

Without a knife, our Orchard and our Vine:
Reap without sickle, beat down Birds and Cattle,
Disgrace our woods, and make our Roofs to rattle.
If Heavens bright Torches, from Earth's kidneys, sup
Some somewhat dry and heatfull Vapors up,
The ambitious lightning of their nimble Fire
Would so dainly near the Azure Cirques aspire:
But scarce so soon their fuming crest has raught,
Or touched the Coldness of the middle Vault,
And felt what force their mortal Enemy
In Garrison keeps there continually;
When down again, toward their Dam they bear,
Holp by the weight which they have drawn from her:
But in the instant, to their aid arriues
Another new heat, which their heart reuiues,
Re-arms their hands, and having stayed their flight,
Better resolved brings them again to fight:
Well fortified then, by these fresh supplies,
More bravely they renew their enterprise:
And one-while the upper hand (with honor) getting,
Another-while disgracefully retreating,
Our lower Air they toss in sundry sort,
As weak or strong their matter does comport.
This lasts not long; because the heat and cold,
Equal in force and Fortune, equal bold
In these assaults; to end this so dain brall,
The one stops their mounting, the other stays their fall.
So that this Vapor, never resting stound,
Stands never still, but makes his motion round,
Posteth from Pole to Pole, and flies amain
From Spain to India, and from Inde to Spain.
But though these blustering spirits seem always blow'n
By the same spirit, and of like Vapor grow'n;
Yet, from their birthplace, take they diversely
A diverse name and diverse quality.
Feeling the four Winds, that with diverse blast, Of the Winds, whereof there
are four principal, compared to the four Seasons, the four Complexions, the
four Elements, and the four Ages of man: and assigned to the four Corners of
the World: And called East, West North and South

From the four corners of the World do haste;
In their effects I find four Temp'raments,
Four Times, four Ages, and four Elements.
The East-winde, in working, follows properly
Fire, Choler, Summer, and soft Infancy:
That, which dries-vp wild Afric with his wing,
Resembles Air, Blood, Youth, and lively Spring:
That, which blows moistly from the Western stage,
Like Water, Phlegm, Winter, and heavy Age:
That, which comes shivering from cold Climates solely,
Earth, withered Eld, Autumn, and Melancholy.
Not, but that Men have long ye^ this found-out
More then these four Winds, East, West, North, and South:
Those that (at Sea) to see both Poles are wont,
Upon their Compass two and thirty count,
Though they be infinite, as are the places
Whence the Heav'n-fanning Exhalation passes:
But wheresoever their quick course they bend,
As on their Chiefs, all on these Four depend.
One while, with whisking broom they brush and sweep Diverse effects of the
Winds.

The cloudy Courtains of Heavens stages steep:
Anon, with hotter sighs they dry the Ground,
Late by Electra and her sisters drowned.
Anon refresh they, with a temperate blowing,
The soultry Aier, under the Dog Star glowing:
On Trees anon they ripe the Plum and Pear,
In cods the Poulse, the Corn within the ear:
Anon, from North to South, from East to West
With ceas-less wings they drive a Ship addressed:
And sometimes whirling, on an open Hill,
The round-flat Runner in a roaring Mill,
In flowery motes they grind the purest grain,
Which late they ripened on the fruitful Plain. Diverse effect of hot
exhalations.

If the Exhalation hot and oily prove,
And yet (as feeble) gives place above
To the Airy Regions euer-lasting Frost,
Incessantly the apt-tinding fume is tossed
Till it inflame: then like a Squib it falls,
Or fire-wingd shaft, or sulp'hry Powder-Balls. Of Come^s.

But if This kind of Exhalation tour
Above the walls of Winters icy bowr
'T-inflameth also; and anon becoms
A new strange Star, presaging woeful dooms:
And, for this Fire has more fuel in it
Then had the first, it is not so quickly spent:
Whether the Heavens incessant agitation,
Into a Star transforming the Exhalation,
Kindle the same: like as a coal, that winkt
On a sticks end (and seemed quite extinct)
Tossed in the dark with an industrious hand,
To light the night, becoms a fier-brand:
Or whether the upper Fire do fire the same;
As lighted Candles do the vnlight inflame.
According as the vapour's thick or rare, Of other fiery impressions in the
regions of the Air.

Even, or vn-even, long or large, round or square,
Such are the Forms it in the Air resembles:
At sight whereof, the amazed Vulgar trembles.
Here, in the night appears a flaming Spire,
There a fierce Dragon folded all in fire;
Here a bright Comet, there a burning Beam,
Here flying Lances, there a Fiery Stream:
Here seems a horned Goat environed round
With fiery flakes about the Air to bound.
There, with long bloody hair, a Blazing Star
Threatens the World with Famine, Plague, and War:
To Princes, death: to Kingdoms, many crosses:
To all Estates, inevitable Losses:
To Heard-men, Rot: to Plough-men, hap-less Seasons:
To Sailors, Storms: to Cities, civil Treasons.
But hark: what hear I in the Heavens? me thinks A lively description of
thunder and lightning.

The Worlds wall shakes, and his Foundation shrinks:
It seems even now that horrible P^rsiphone,
Loosing Meger, Alecto, and Tysiphone,
Weary of reigning in black Erebus,
Transports her Hell between the Heaven and us.
It Is held I know, that when a Vapor moist How they are engendered.

As well from Fresh as from Salt water's hoist
In the same instant with hot-Exhalations,
In the Aerie Regions secondary stations;
The Fiery Fume, besieged with the Crowd
And keen-cold thicknes of that dampish Cloud,
Strengthens his strength; and with redoubled Volleys
Of joined Heat, on the the Cold Leagher sallies.
Like as a Lion, very late exiled, A simile.

From's native Forests; spit-at and reuil'd,
Mocked, moov'd, and troubled with a thousand toys,
By wanton children, idle girls and boys;
With hideous roaring does his Prison fill,
In's narrow Cloistre ramping wildely, still,
Runns to and fro; and furious, less does long
For liberty, than to revenge his wrong:
This Fire, desirous to break forth again
From's cloudy Ward, cannot itself refrain;
But, without resting, loud it groans and grumbles,
It roules and roars, and round-round-round it rumbles,
Till (having rent the lower side in sunder)
With Sulph'ry flash it have shot-down his thunder:
Though, willing to unite, in these alarms,
To's Brothers Forces, his own fainting arms;
And the hottest Circle of the World to gain,
To issue vp-ward, often it strives in vain:
But, it is there fronted with a Trench so large
And such an Host, that though it often charge,
On this and that side, the Cold Camp about,
With his Hot Skirmish; yet still, still the stout
Victorious Foe repelleth every push;
So that (despairing) with a furious rush,
Forgetting honor, it is fain to fly
By the backdoor, with blushing Infamy.
Then the Ocean boyls for fear; the Fish do deem Their effects.

The Sea too shallow to safe-shelter them:
The Earth does shake; the Shepherd in the field
In hollow Rocks himself can hardly shield:
The affrighted Heavens open; and, in the Vale
Of Acheron, grim Plutoes self looks pale:
The Air flames with Fire: for, the loud-roaring Thunder
(Renting the Cloud, that it includes, asunder)
Sends forth those Flashes which so blear our sight:
As wakefull Students, in the Winters night
Against the steel glauncing with stony knocks, Simile.

Strike sudden sparks into their Tinder-box.
Moreover, Lightning of a fume is framed: Admirable effects of lightning.

Through 'tselfs hot-dryness, evermore inflamed:
Whose power (past-credit) without razing skin
Can bruiz to powder all our bones within:
Can melt the Gold that greedy Mizers hoord
In barred Cofers, and not burn the board:
Can break the blade and never sindge the sheath:
Can scorch an infant in the Womb to death;
And never blemish, in one sort or other,
Flesh, bone, or sinew of the amazed Mother:
Consume the shoes and never hurt the feet:
Empty a Cask, and yer not perish it:
My younger eyes have often seen a Dame,
To whom the flash of Heavens fantastike flame
Did else no harm, save (in a moment's space)
With windy Rasor shave a secretplace.
Shall I omit a hundred Prodigies Of Crowns and circles about the Sun,
Moon, and other Planets.

Often seen in forehead of the frowning Skies?
Sometimes a Fiery Circle does appear
Proceeding from the beauteous beams and clear
Of Sun and Moon, and other Stars aspect,
Down-looking on a thick-round Cloud ditect;
When, not of force to thrust their rays through-out-it,
In a round Crown they cast them round about-it:
Like as (almost) a burning candle, put Simile.

Into a Closet with the door close shut;
Not able through the boords to send his light,
Out at the edges round about shines bright.
But, in's declining, when Sols countenance
Direct upon a wat'rish Cloud does glance
(A wat'rish Cloud, which cannot easily
Hold any longer her moist Tympany)
On the moist Cloud he limns his lightsom front; Of the Rainbow and how it is
made.

And with a gaudy Pencill paints upon it
A blew-green-gilt Bow bended over us:
For, the adverse Cloud, which first receives thus
Apollos rays, the same direct repells
On the next Cloud, and with his gold it mells
Her various colors: like as when the Sun Simile.

At a bay-window peepeth in upon
A boule of water, his bright beams aspect
With trembling luster it does far reflect
Against the high seeling of the lightsom Hall
With stately Fret-work ouer-crustod all.
On the other side, if the Cloud side-long sit,
And not beneath, or justly opposite How it comes to pass that sometimes
appear diverse Suns and Moons at once.

To Sun or Moon: then either of them Forms
With strong aspect double or trebble Forms
Upon the same. The Vulgar's then affright
To see at once three Chariots of the Light;
And, in the Welkin on Nights gloomy Throne,
To see at once more shining Moons then one.
But, O fond Mortals* Wherefore do ye strive A check to man's Pride in
striving to yield reason in Nature, of all these accidents.

With reach of Sense, Gods wonders to retriue?
What proud desire (rather what Furie's drift?)
Boldens you God-less, all Gods works to sift?
Ille not deny, but that a learned man
May yield some Reason (if he list to scan)
Of all that moves under Heavens hollow Cope;
But not so sound as can all scruple stop:
And though he could, yet should we evermore,
Praising these tools, extol His fingers more
Who works withal, and many-waies does give
To deadest things (instantly) souls, to live. True Philosophy for Christians,
to apply all to their conscience for amendment of life.

Me thinks I hear, when I do hear it Thunder,
The voice that brings Swayns up, and Caesar's under:
By that Towr-tearing stroke, I understand
The undaunted strength of the Divine right hand:
When I behold the Lightning in the Skies,
Me thinks I seeth' Almighties glorious eyes:
When I perceive it Rain-down timely showrs,
Me thinks the Lord his horn of Plenty pours:
When from the Clouds excessive Water spins,
Me thinks God weeps for our vnwept-for sins:
And when in Heaven I see the Rainbow bent,
I hold it for a Pledge and Argument,
That never more shall Universal Floods
Presume to mount over the tops of Woods
Which hoary Atlas in the Clouds does hide,
Or on the Crowns of Caucasus do ride:
But, above all, my perced soul inclines,
When the angry Heavens threat with Prodigious Signs;
When Natures order does reuerse and change,
Preposterously into disorder strange.
Let all the Wits, that ever sucked the breast All the learned in the World
cannot out of the school of Nature give reason for many things that are created
in the High and Middle Regio^s of the Air.

Of sacred Pallas, in one Wit be pressed,
And let him tell me (if at least he can
By rule of Nature, or mere reach of man)
A sound and certain reason of the Cream,
The Wool, and Flesh, that from the Clouds did stream.
Let him declare what cause could yerst beget,
Amid the Air, those drizzling showers of Wheat,
Which in Carinthia, twice were seen to shed;
Whereof that people made them store of Bread.
God, the great God of Heaven, sometimes delights, The true cause of these
Prodigies.

From top to toe to alter Natures Rites;
That his strange Works, to Nature contrary,
May be forerunners of some misery.
The drops of Fire, which weeping Heaven did shower
Upon Lucania, when Rome sent the Flowr Examples drawn out of the History of
the Romans, Jews, Turks, and French, both Ecclesiastical and profane.

Of Italy into the wealthy Clime,
Which Euphrates fatts with his fruitful slime;
Persag'd, that Parthians should, the next year, tame
The proud Lucanians, and nigh quench their Name.
The clash of Arms, and clang of Trumpets heard
High in the Air, when valiant Romans warred
Victoriously, on the (now-Canton'd) Suisses,
Cymbrians, and Almans, hewing all in pieces;
Against Epicures profane assertions, show
That it is not Fortune guides this World below.
Thou that beheld'st from Heaven, with triple Flashes,
Cursed Olympius smitten all to ashes,
For Blasphemies against The ONE Eternall-THREE?
Dare thou yet belch against the TRINITY?
Dare thou, profane, spit in the face of God,
Who for blasphemers has so sharp a rod?
Jews (no more Jews, no more of Abr'ham Sons;
But Turks, Tartarians, Scythians, Lestrigons)
Say what you thought; what thought you, when so long
A flaming Sword over your Temple hung;
But that the Lord would with a mighty arm
The righteous vengeance of his wrath perform
On you, and yours? that what the Plague did leave,
The insatiate gorge of Famine should bereave?
And what the Plague and Famine both did spare,
Should be clean gleaned by the hand of War?
That sucking Infants crying for the teat,
Self-cruell Mothers should unkindly eat?
And that (yer long) the share and coultar should
Rub off their rust upon your Roofs of gold?
And all, because you (cursed) crucified
The Lord of life, who for our ransom died.
The ruddy Fountain that with blood did flow:
The huge Fiery Rock the thundering Heavens did throw
Into Liguria: and the Bloody Crosses
Seen on men's garments, seemed with open voices
To cry aloud, that the Turks swarming host
Should pitch his proud Moons on the Genoan coast. The Poet severe ly taxes
his Countrymen for not marking, or not making use of strange and
exextrarordinary tokens of Gods imminent displeasure.

O Frantic France! why do not Thou make use
Of strangefull Signs, whereby the Heavens induce
Thee to repentance? Can thou tear-lesse gaze
(Even night by night) on that prodigious Blaze,
That hairy Comet, that long streaming Star,
Which threatens Earth with Famine, Plague, and War
(The Almighty's Trident, and three-forked fire
Wherewith he strikes us in his greatest Ire)?
But, what (alas!) can Heavens bear threatenings urge?
Since all the sharp Rods which so hourly scourge,
Thy sens-lesse back, cannot so much as wrest
One single sigh from thy obdurate breast?
Thou drink'st thine own blood, thine own flesh thou eatest,
In what most harms theethy delight is greatest.
O sens-less Folk, sick of a Lethargy,
Who to the death despise your Remedy!
Like froward Iades that for no striking stur,
But wax more restif still the more we spur:
The more your wounds, more your securenes grows,
Fat with afflictions, as an Ass with blows:
And as the sledge hardens with strokes the steel;
So, the more beaten, still the less ye feel.
And want on ENGLAND, why have thou forgot Upon like consideration the
Tra^slator sharp ly cites Eng. and to rouse her from her present security,
proposes fearful examples of her own troublous changes, and others terrible
Chastisements.

Thy visitation, as thou had it not?
Thou have seen signs, and thou have felt the rod
Of the revenging wrathful hand of God.
The frowning Heavens in fearful Sightes fore-spoke
Thy Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman Yoke:
And since (alas!) vnkinder wounds then those,
The Ciuillrents of thy divided ROSE:
And, last of all the raging Wolves of Rome,
Tearing thy limbs (Christ's Lambs) in Martyrdom.
Besides Great Plagues, and grievous Dearths, which (yerst)
Have often the Sinnews of thy strength reuerst.
But thou, more faulty more forgetful art
Then Boys that fear but while they feel the smart:
All this is past; and thou, past fear of it,
In Peace and Plenty, as a Queen do sit,
Of Rods forgetful, and for Rest ungrateful
(That, sottish dulnes: this, a sin most hateful)
Ungrateful to thy God, who all has sent;
And thy late Queen, his sacred Instrument,
By whose pure hand, he has more blessed Thine, Esaias Chap. 5. ^ 2. 3. etc.*

Then yerst his own Choice-planted Hebrew Vine:
From whence he looked for Grapes (as nov from thee);
That bore him Crabs: Thouworse (if worse may be):
That was destroyed, the wild Boar entered in:
ENGLAND beware: Like punishment, like sin.
But, O! what boots, or what auailes my song
To this deaf Adder that has slept so long,
Snorting so loud on pillows of Security,
Dread-less of danger, drowned in Impurity;
Whose Senses all, all ouer-grow'n with Fat,
Have left no door for Fear to enter at?
Yet once again (deer Country) must I call:
ENGLAND repent; Fall, to prevent thy Fall.
Though Thou be blind, thy wakefull watchmen see
Heavens Irefull vengeance hanging over thee
In fearful Signs, threatening a thousand Woes
To thy Sinn's Deluge, which allouer-flowes.
Thine uncontrolled, bold, open Atheism:
Close Idol-seruice: Cloaked Hypocrism:
Common Blaspheming of Gods Name, in Oaths:
Usual Profaning of his Sabbaoths:
Thy blind, dumb, Idol-shepheards, choakt with steeples,
That fleece thy Flocks, and do not feed thy Peoples:
Strife-full Ambition, Florentizing States:
Bribes and Affection swaying Magistrates:
Wealth's mercie-less Wrong, Usury, Extortion:
Poore's Idleness, Repining at their Portion:
Thy drunken Surfets; and Excess in Diet:
Thy Sensual wallowing in Lascivious Riot:
Thy huft, puffed, painted, curld, purld, Wanton Pride
(The Baud to Lust, and to all Sins beside)
These are thy Sins: These are the Signs of Ruin,
To every State that does the same pursue-in:
Such, cost the Jews and Asians Desolation,
Now turned Turks, that were the Holy Nation.
Happy who take by others dangers warning:
All that is writ, is written for our learning:
So preach thy Prophets: But who heeds their cry?
Or, who believes? Then much less hope have I.
Wherefore (Deer Bartas) having warned them;
From this Digression, turn we to our Theme.
As our All-welcom SOVERAIN (Englands solace, Simile.

Heavens care, Earths comfort) in his stately Palace,
Has next His Person, Princes of His Realms
Next him in blood, extract from Royal Stems;
Next those, the Nobles; next, the Magistrates
That serve him truly in their several States;
As more or less their diverse Dignity
Coms near the Greatness of his Majesty:
So, next the Heavens, God marshalled the Element Having sufficiently
discoursed of the Air, he begins to handle the Element of Fire.

Which seconds them in swift bright Ornament:
And then the rest, according as of kin
To the Azure Spears, or the Erring Fires they bin.
Yet some (more crediting their eyes, then Reason)
From's proper place this Essence do disseisin; Against such as deny the Fire
to be an Element.

And vainly strive (after their Fanciessway)
To cut the World's best Element away,
The nimble, light, bright-flaming, heat-full Fire,
Fountain of life, Smith, Founder, Purifier,
Cook, Surgeon, Soldier, Gunner, Alchymist,
The source of Motion: briefly, what not is it?
Apt for all, acting all; whose arms embrace,
Under Heavens arms, this Universal Mass.
For, if (say they) the Fire were lodged between Their Reasons.

The Heavens and us, it would by night be seen;
Since then, so far-off (as in Meads we pass) 1

We see least Glow-wormsglister in the grass:
Besides, how should we through the Fiery Tent,
Perceive the bright eyes of the Firmament?
Since here the soundest and the sharpest ey 2

Can nothing through our Candle-flames descry.
O! hard-beleeuing Wits! if Zephyrus Aunsweres.

And Austers sighs were never felt of us,
You would suppose the space between Earth's Ball,
And Heavens bright Arches, void and empty all:
And then no more you would the Air allow
For Element, then the hot-bright Flamer now.
Now even as far as Phoebus light excels Difference between the Elementary fire
and ours.

The light of Lamps, and every Taper else
Wherewith wevse to lengthen the Afternoon
Which Capricorn ducks in the Sea too soon;
So far in pureness the Elementall Flame
Excels the Fire that for our use we frame.
For, ours is nothing but a dusky light,
Gross, thick, and smoaky, enemy to sight:
But, that above (for being neither blent
With fumy mixture of gross nourishment,
Nor tossed with Winds, but far from us) coms near
It Is neighbor Heaven, in nature pure and clear.
But, of what substance shall I, after-thee Here for conclusion of this second
book, he comes to discourse of the Heavens, and first entreats of their
matter and Essence. According to the opinions of the Philosophers.

(O match-less Master) make Heavens Canapey?
Uncertain, here my resolutions rock
And waver, like the inconstant Weathercock
Which, on a Towr turning with every blast,
Changes his Master, and his place as fast.
Learned Lycaeum, now awhile, I walk-in:
Then the Academian sacred Shades I stalk-in.
Treading the way that Aristotle went,
I do deprive the Heavens of Element,
And mixture too; and think, the omnipotence
Of God did make them of a Quint-Essence;
Since of the Elements, two still erect Their course.

Their motion up; two ever down direct:
But the Heavens course, not wandering up nor down,
Continually turns only roundly round.
The Elements have no eternal race,
But settle ay in their assigned place:
But the azure Circle without taking breath,
His certain course for ever gallopeth;
It keeps one pase, and moved with waight-les waights,
It never takes fresh horse, nor never baits.
Things that consist of the Elements uniting,
Are ever tossed with an intestin fighting;
Whence, springs (in time) their life and their deceasing, Heaven not subject
to alteration, as are the Elements.

Their diverse change, their waxing and decreasing:
So that, of all that is, or may be seen
With mortal eyes, under Nights horned Queen,
Nothing retains the same form and face,
Hardly the half of half an howrs space.
But, the Heavens feel not Fates impartial rigor:
Years add not to their stature nor their vigor:
Use wears them not; but their green-euer Age
Is all in all still like their Pupillage.
Then suddenly, turned studious Platonist,
I hold, the Heavens of Elements consist: What use of Elements in the Heavens.

It Is Earth, whose firm parts make their Lamps apparent,
Their bodies fast; Air makes them all transparant;
Fire makes their rest-les circles pure, and clear,
Hot, lighsom, light, and quick in their career:
And Water, 'nointing with cold-moist the brims
Of the enter-kissing turning Globes extremes,
Tempers the heat (caused by their rapid turning)
Which else would set all the elements a-burning.
Not, that I do compare or match the Matter Difference between the Elements,
whereof the Heavens are composed, and these inferior Elements.

Whence I compose the All-compassing Theater,
To those gross Elements which here below
Our hand and ey does touch and see and know:
'T's all fair, all pure; a sacred harmony
Those bodies binds in end-less Unity:
That Aier's not flitting, nor that Water floating,
Nor Fire inflaming, nor Earth dully doting:
Nor one to other aught offensive neither,
But (to conclude) Celestial altogether.
See, see the rage of humane Arrogance: Detesting the presumption of those
curious wits searching these secrets, He limits himself within the bounds of
Christian Sobriety.

See how far dares man's erring ignorance,
That with unbridled tongue (as if it often
Had tried the mettle of that upper Loft)
Dares, without proof or without reason yielded,
Tell of what timber God his Palace builded.
But, in these doubts much rather rest had I,
Then with mine error draw my Readerwry;
Till a Saint Paul doore-descend from Heaven,
Or till my self (this sinful roab be reav'n,
This rebel Flesh, whose counterpoize oppresses
My pilgrim Soul, and ever it depresses)
Shall see the beauties of that Blessed Place:
If (then) I ought shall see, save Gods bright Face.
But even as many (or more) quarrels cumber Diverse opinions of the number of
the Heavens.

The old Heathen Schools about the Heavens number:
One holds but one; making the Worlds Eyes shine
Through the thin-thicknes of that Crystal line
(As through the Oceans clear and liquid Flood
The slippery Fishes up and down doos^ud.)
Another, judging certain by his ey,
And seeing Seav'n bright Lamps (moov'd diversely)
'Turn this and that way: and, on the other side,
That all the rest of the Heavens twinkling pride
Keep all one course; ingeniously, he varies
The Heavens rich building into eight round Stories.
Others, amid the Starriest Orb perceiving
A triple cadence, and withal conceiving
That but one natural course one body goes,
Count nine, some ten; not numbering yet (with those)
The empyreall Palace, where the eternal Treasures
Of Nectar flow, where ever-lasting Pleasures
Are heaped-vp, where an immortal May
In bliss-full beauties flourishes for ay,
Where Life still lives, where God his Assizes.
Sises holds,
Environed round with Seraphins, and Souls
Bought with his precious blood, whose glorious Flight
Yerst mounted Earth above the Heavens bright.
Nor shall my faint and humble Muse presume
So high a Song and Subject to assume.
O fair, fiue-double Round, sloath's Foe apparent, He stops at the
contemplation and praise of the Heavens. Which he considers as distinguished
into ten stages or Heavens.

Life of the World, Days, Months, and years own Parent*
Thine own selfs model, never shifting place,
And yet, thy pure wings with so swift a pase
Fly over us, that but our Thought alone
Can (as thy babe) pursue thy motion:
Infinite finite; free from growth and grief,
Discord and death; dance-louer; to be brief,
Still like thy self, all thine own in thee all,
Transparent, clear, light; law of this low Ball:
Which in thy wide bout, bound-les all do bound,
And clasp^st all, under, or in thy Round;
Throne of the Almighty, I would fain rehearse
Thy various Dauies in this very Verse,
If it were time, and but my bounded Song
Doubts to make this Second Day too-long.
For, notwithstanding, yet another day
I fear some Critic will not stick to say,
My babbling Muse did sail with every gale,
And mingled yarn to length her web withal.
But know, what ever thou be, that here I gather The sum of what has been
handled in this book, and what is to be understood by the firmament which
Moses describes in the first of Genesis ^. 6

Justly so many of Gods works together,
Because by the Orb of the ample Firmament
Which round This-Day the Eternal Fingers pent
Between the lower Waters and the higher;
I mean the Heavens, the Air, and the upper Fire,
Which separate the Oceans waters salt.
From those which God poured o'r the Ethereal Vault.
Yet have I not so little seen and sought Against those that think there are no
waters above the firmament: Whom he confuteth by diverse Reasons. Simile.

The Volums, which our Age has chiefest thought,
But that I know how suttly greatest Clarks
Presume to argue in their learned Works,
T'o 'r-whelm these Floods, this Crystal to deface,
And dry this Ocean, which does all embrace.
But, as the beauty of a modest Dame,
Who, well-content with Natures comely Frame,
And native Fair (as it is freely given
In fit proportion by the hand of Heaven)
Does not, with painting* prank, nor set-it-out
With helps of Art, sufficient Fair without;
Is more prayse-worthy, then the wanton glance,
The affected gait, the alluring countenance,
The Mart of Pride, the Periwigs and painting,
Whence Courtisans refresh their beauties fainting: 1. The word of God to be
preser red before the voice of man.

So do I more the sacred Tongue esteem,
Though plain and rural it do rather seem,
Then schooled Athenian; and Divinity,
For only varnish, have but Verity;
Then all the golden Wit-pride of Humanity,
Wherewith men burnish their erroneous vanity.
I Will rather give a thousand times the ly 2. Gods word me^tioneth waters above
the firmament.

To mine own Reason, then but once defy
The sacred voice of the ever-lasting Spirit,
Which does so often and so loud averr-it,
That God, above the shining Firmament, Genesis 1, 7 Psalm. 104, 3 Psalm. 148, 4

I wot not, I, what kind of Waters pent:
Whether, that pure, super-celestiall Water,
With our inferior have no likely nature:
Whether, turned Vapor, it have round embow'd
Heavens highest stage in a transparent Cloud:
Or whether (as they say) a Crystal case
Do (round about) the Heavenly Orb embrace.
But, with conjectures wherefore strive I thus?
Can doubtful proofs the certainty discuss?
I see not, why Man's reason should withstand, 3. The power of God ought to be
of greater authority then Man's Reason.

Or not believe, that He whose powrfull hand
Bay'd-vp the Red Sea with a double Wall,
That Isreal's Host might escape Egyptian thrall,
Could prop as sure so many waves on high
Above the Heaven Star-spangled Canapy.
See we not hanging in the Clouds each howr
So many Seas, still threatening down to pour, 4. The consideration of the
waters which hang in the Air, and of the Sea which compasses the Earth.

Supported only by the Aier's agitation
(Selfly too weak for the least waight's foundation)?
See we not also, that this Sea below,
Which round about our Earthly Globe does flow,
Remains still round; and maugre all the surly
Aeolian Slaves and Water's hurly burly,
Dares not (to level her proud liquid Heap)
Never so little past her limits leap?
Why then believe we not, that upper Sphere
May (without falling) such an Ocean bear?
Uncircumcised! O hard hearts! at least
Lett's think that God those Waters does digest
In that steep place: for, if that, Nature here 5. Diverse effects continual and
admirable in Nature.

Can form firm Pearl and Crystal shining clear
Of liquid substance; let us believe it rather
Much more in God (the Heavens and Natur's Father)
Let us much more, much more lett's peiz and ponder
The Almighties Works, and at his Wisdom wonder:
Let us observe, and double-waigh it well,
That this proud Palace whear we rule and dwell
(Though built with match-less Art) had fallen long since,
Had 't not ben seel'd-round with moist Elements.
For, like as (in Man's Little-World) the Brain
Does highest place of all our Frame retain,
And tempers with it is moistfull coldness so
The excessive heat of the other parts below:
The eternal Builder of this beauteous Frame
To enter-mingle meetly Frost with Flame,
And cool the great heat of the Great-Worlds Torches,
This-Day spread Water over Heavens bright Arches.
These Seas (they say) leagued with the Seas below,
Hiding the highest of the Mountains tho,
Had drowned the whole World had not Noah builded
A holy Vessel, where his house was shielded: Taking occasion by his former
discourse he treats of the incou^ ter of the upper waters with the lower:
whence followed the general stood in the days of Noah: Which h^re he lively
represents.

Where, by direction of the King of Kings,
He saved a seed-payr of all living things;
No sooner ship^, but instantly the Lord
Down to the Aeolian dungeon him bestirred,
There muzled close Cloud-chasing Boreas,
And let loose Auster, and his lowering race,
Who soon set forward with a dropping wing;
Upon their beard for every hair a spring,
A night of Clouds muffled their brows about,
Their wattled locks gusht all in Rivers out;
And both their hands, wringing thick Clouds asunder,
Send forth fierce lightning, tempest, rain and thunder.
Brooks, Lakes, and Floods, Rivers, and foaming Torrents
Suddenly swell; and their confused Currents,
Losing their old bounds, break a nearer way
To run at randon with their spoils to Sea.
The Earth shakes for fear, and (sweating) does consume her,
And in her veins leaves not a drop of humor.
And thou thy self, O Heaven, did set wideope
(Through all the Marshes in thy spacious cope)
All thy large sluices, thy vast Seas to shed
In sudden spouts on thy proud sisters head;
Whose aw-less, law-less, shame-les life abhord,
Only delighted to despite the Lord.
The Earth shrinks and sinks; now the Ocean has no shore:
Now Rivers run to serve the Sea no more;
Themselves are Sea: the many sundry Streams,
Of sundry names (derived from sundry Realms)
Make now but one great Sea: the World it self
Is nothing now but a great standing Gulf,
Whose swelling surges strive to mix their Water
With the other Waves above this round Theater.
The Sturgeon, coasting over Castles, muses
(Under the Sea) to see so many houses.
The Indian Manat and the Mullet float
O'r Mountain tops, where yerst the bearded Goat
Did bound and brouz the crooked Dolphin seuds
O'r the highest branches of the hugest Woods.
Naught boots the Tigre, or the Heart or Horse,
Or Hare, or Greyhound, their swift speedy course;
For, seeking Land, the more they strain and breath them,
The more (alas) it shrinks and sinks beneath them.
The Otter, Tortois, and fell Crocodile
Which did enjoy a double house yer-while,
Must be content with only water now.
The Wolf and Lamb, Lions and Bucks, do row
Upon the Waters, side by side, suspect-less.
The Glead and Swallow, laboring long (effect-less)
Against certain death, with wearied wings fall down
(For want of Perch) and with the rest do drown.
And, for mankind, imagine some get up
To some high Mountains over-hanging top;
Some to a Towr, some to a Cedar tree,
(Whence round about a World of deaths they see)
But wheresoever their pale fears aspire
For hope of safety, the Ocean surgeth higher,
And still-still mounting as they still do mount,
When they cease mounting, does them soon surmount.
One therefore ventures on a Plank to row,
One in a Chest, another in a Trough:
Another, yet half-sleeping, scarce perceives
How Is bed and breath, the Flood at once bereaves;
Another laboring with his feet and hands,
A while the fury of the Flood withstands,
(Which by his side has newly droun'd his Mother,
His Wife, his Son, his Sister, Sire, and Brother):
But tired and spent, weary and wanting strength,
He needs must yield (too) to the Seas at length;
All, all must die then: but Parcae, a non parcendo: Thenone-sparing Fates;
that is to say, Death.
the impartial Maids,
Who wont to use so sundry tools for ayds,
In execution of their fatal slaughters,
Had only now the furious foaming Waters.
Safely the while, the sacred Ship did float
On the proud shoulders of that boundless-Moat,
Though mast-les, oar-les, and from Harbor far;
For God was both her Steers-man, and her Star.
Thrice fifty days that Universal Flood
Wasted the World; which then the Lord thought good
To re-erect, in his Compassion great.
No sooner sounds he to the Seas retreat,
But instantly wave into wave did sink
With sudden speed, all Rivers began to shrink;
The Ocean retires him to his wonted prison;
The Woods are seen; the Mountain tops are risen
Out of their slimy Bed: the Fields increase
And spread apace, so fast the waters cease.
And (briefly) the only thundering hand of God
Now Earth to Heaven, Heaven unto Earth re-show'd;
That he again Panchaian Fumes might see
Sacred on Altars to his Majesty. He concludes with a most godly prayer
accommodated to the state of the Church in our time.

Lord, sith't has pleased thee likewise, in our Age,
To save thy Ship from Tyrants stormy rage,
Increase in Number (Lord) thy little Flock;
But more in Faith, to build on thee, the Rock.
So, Morn and Even the second Day conclude,
And God perceived that All his Works were good.
THE THIRD DAY OF THE FIRST WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Sea, and Earth: their various Equipage:
Seuer'd apart: Bounds of the Oceansrage:
'Timbraceth Earth: it does all Watersowe:
Why it is salt: How it does Ebb, and Flow:
Rare streams, and Fountains of strange operation:
Earth's firmnes, greatness, goodness: sharp taxation
Of Bribes, Ambition, Treason, Avarice.
Trees, Shrubs, and Plants: Mines, Metals, Gemms of price:
Right use of Gold: the Load-stones rare effects:
The Countrey-life preferred in all respects.
MY sacred Muse, that lately soared high
Among the glist'ring Circles of the Sky From the Heaven and Regions of the
Air, the Poet descends to the Earth and Sea.

(Whose various dance, which the first Moover drives
Harmoniously, this Universe revives)
Commanding all the Winds and sulphry Storms,
The lightning Flashes, and the hideous Forms
Seen in the Air; with language meetly brave
Whilom discourst upon a Theme so grave*
But, This-Day, flagging lowely by the Ground,
She seems constrained to keep a lowely ^ound;
Or, if sometimes, she somewhat raise her voice,
The sound is drowned with the rough Oceans noise.
O King of grassie and of glassie Plains, He calls upon the true God be
assisted in the description of th^se two Elements, and the things therein.

Whose powrfull breath (at thy drad will) constrains
The deep Foundations of the Hills to shake,
And Seas salt billows against Heavens vaults to rake:
Grant me, Today, with skillful Instruments
To bound a right these two rich Elements:
In learned numbers teach me sing the natures
Of the firm-Earth, and of the floating Waters:
And with a flowring style the Flowrs to limn
Whose Colors now shall paint the Fields so trim.
All those steep Mountains, whose high horned tops God in this third Day
gathers together the Waters, and separates them from the Earth.

The misty cloak of wandering Clouds enwraps,
Under First Waters their crump shoulders hid,
And all the Earth as a dull Pond abid,
Until the All-Monarch's bountious Majesty
(Willing t'enfeof man this worlds Empery)
Commanded Neptune straight to Marshall forth
His Floods apart; and to unfold the Earth:
And, in his Waters, now contented rest,
Thaue all the World, for one whole day, possessed.
As when the muffled Heavens have wept a main, By an apt comparison, he shows
how the Water withdrewe from off the Earth.

And foaming streams assembling on the Plain,
Turned Fields to Floods; soon as the showrs do cease,
With unseen speed the Deluge does decrease,
Sups up it self, in hollow sponges sinks,
And's ample arms in straighter Channel shrinks:
Even so the Sea, to 'tself it self he took,
Mount after Mount, Field after Field forsook;
And suddenly in smaller cask did tun
Her Waters, that from every side did run:
Whether the imperfect Light did first exhale
Much of that primer Humor, where withal
God, on the Second-Day, might frame and found
The Crystal Spears that he has spread so round:
Whether the Almighty did new place provide
To lodge the Waters: whether opening wide
The Earth's Hollow Pores, it pleased him to conueigh Of the lodging and bed of
the sea.

Deep under ground some Arms of such a Sea:
Or whether, pressing waters gloomy Globe,
That cov'red all (as with a cloudy Robe)
He them impris'ned in those bounds of brass,
Which (to this day) the Ocean dares not pass
Without his license. For, the Eternal, knowing
The Seas commotive and inconstant flowing, The Sea kept within her bounds by
the Almighty power of God.

Thus curbed her; and, against her envious rage,
For-ever fenc't ou^ Flowry-mantled Stage:
So that we often see those rolling Hills,
With roaring noise threatening the neighbor Fields,
Through their own spite to split upon the shore,
Foaming for fury that they dare no more.
For, what could not* that great, high Admiral
Work in the Waves, since at his Servants call,
His dreadful voice (to save his ancient Sheep)
Did cleave the bottom of the Erythrean Deep? Exodus 14, 11 Iosuah, 3, 16 Genesis
7, 21 Exodus 17. 6

And toward the Crystal of his double source
Compelled Jordan to retreat his course?
Drowned with a Deluge the rebellious World?
And from dry Rocks abundant Rivers purl'd?
Lo, thus the weighty Water did yer-while
With winding turns make all this world an I Will.
For, like as molten Lead being poured forth A fit Simile showing the winding
turns of the Sea about the Earth.

Upon a level plot of sand or earth,
In many fashions mazeth to and fro;
Runs here direct, thear crookedly does go,
Here does divide it self, there meets again;
And the hot Riv'let of the liquid vain,
On the smooth table crawling like a worm,
Almost (in the instant) every form does form:
God poured the Waters on the fruitful Ground
In sundry figures; somin fashion round,
Some square, some cross, some long, some lozenge-wise,
Some triangles, some large, some lesser size;
Amid the Floods (by this fair difference)
To give the world more wealth and excellence.
Such is the German Sea, such Persian Sine,
Such the Indian Gulf, and such the Arabian Brine,
And such Our Sea: whose divers-brancht Windings.
retortions,
Divide the World in three unequal Portions.
And, though each of these Arms (how large soever) The arms of the Sea
distinguished into smaller members with commodities and use thereof.

To the great Ocean seems a little River:
Each makes a hundred sundry Seas besides
(Not sundry in waters, but in Names and Tides)
To moisten kindly, by their secret Vains,
The thirsty thickness of the neighbor Plains:
To bulwark Nations, and to serve for fences
Against the invasion of Ambitious Princes:
To bound large Kingdoms with eternal limits:
To further Traffic through all Earthly Climates:
T'abbridge long Iourneys; and with aid of Wind
Within a month to visit either Inde.
But, the Earth not only the Oceans debtor is A Catalogue of most of the most
famous Rivers in the World.

For these large Seas: But sh' owes him Tana^is,
Nile ( Aegypts treasure) and his neighbor stream
That in the Desert (through his haste extreme)
Loses himself so often; swift Euphrates;
And the other proud Son of cold Niphates:
Fair spacious Ganges, and his famous brother,
That lends his name unto their noble Mother:
Gold-sanded Tagus, Rhyne, Rhone, Volga, Tiber,
Danubius, Albis, Po, Sein, Arne, and Iber;
The Darian, Plate, and Amazonian River,
(Where SPAIN'S Gold-thirsty Locusts cool their liver):
Our silver Medway, (which does deep indent
The Flowrie Meadows of My native KENT;
Still sadly weeping ( under Pensherst walls)
The Arcadian Cygnet's bleeding Funerals)
Our Thames and Tweed, our Severn, Trent, and Humber,
And many more, too infinite to number.
Of him, she also holds her Silver Springs,
And all her hidden Crystal Riverlings:
And after (greatly) in two sorts repaies
The Humor she borrows by two sundry ways: Fountains Springs and Rivers
welling out of the Earth.

For, like as in a Limbeck, the heat of Fire
Raises a Vapor, which still mounting higher
To the Still's top; when the odoriferous sweat
Above that Miter can no further get,
It softly thickning, falls drop by drop, A Similie showing how the waters of
the Earth are exhaled by the Sun and then powered into the Sea.

And Clear as Crystal, in the glass does drop;
The purest humor in the Sea, the Sun
Exhales in the Air: which thear resolved, anon,
Returns to water; and descends again
By sundry ways unto his Mother Main.
For, the dry Earth, having these waters (first)
Through the wide sive of her void entrails searst;
Giving more room, at length from Rockie Mountains: How the Fountains come to
break forth of the Earth.

She (night and day) pours forth a thousand Fountains:
These Fountains make fresh Brooks (with murmuring currents
These murmuring Brooks, the swift and violent Torrents;
These violent Torrents, mighty Rivers; These,
These Rivers make the vast, deep, dreadful Seas. The increasing of Brooks and
Rivers, and of their falling into the sea.

And all the highest Heav'n-approaching Rocks
Contribute hither with their snowie locks:
For, soon as Titan, having run his Ring,
To the ycie climates brings back the Spring;
On their rough backs he melts the hoary heaps,
Their tops grow green; and down the water leaps
On every side, it foames, it roares, it rushes,
And through the steep and stony hills it gushes,
Making a thousand Brooks; whereof, when one
Perceives his fellow striving to be gone;
Hasting his course, he him accompanies;
After, another and another hies,
All in one race; ioynt-losing all of them
Their Names and Waters in a greater stream:
And He that robs them, shortly does deliver
Himself and his into a larger River:
And That, at length, how ever great and large
(Lord of the Plain) does in some Gulf discharge
His parent-Tribute to Oceanus,
According to the Eternal Rendez-vous.
Yet, notwithstanding, all these Streams that enter Why the sea receives no
increase of all the Waters that fall therein.

In the Main Sea, do naught at all augment her:
For that, besides that all these Floods in one,
Matched with great Neptune, seem as much as none;
The Sun (as yerst I said) and Winds withal,
Sweeping the sur-face of the Brinie-Ball,
Extract as much still of her humors thin,
As weeping Air and welling Earth pours in.
But as the swelting heat, and shivering cold,
Gnashing and sweat, that the Ague-sick do hold,
Come not at hazard, but in time and order
Afflict the body with their fell disorder: Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the
sea: and sundry causes thereof

The Sea has fits, alternate course she keeps,
From Deep to Shore, and from the Shore to Deeps.
Whether it were, that at the first, the Ocean
From Gods own hand received this double Motion,
By means whereof, it never rests stound, Simile.

But (as a turning Whirli-gig) goes round,
Whirls of it self, and good-while after takes
Strength of the strength which the first motion makes:
Whether the Sea, which we Atlantic call,
Be but a piece of the Grand Sea of all;
And that his Floods entering the ample Bed
Of the deep Main (with fury hurried
Against the Rocks) repulsed with disdain,
Be thence compelled to turn back again:
Or whether Cynthia, that with Change-full laws
Commands moist bodies, does this motion cause:
As, on our Shore, we see the Sea to rise
Soon as the Moon begins to mount our skies.
And when, through Heavens Vaultvailing toward Spayn, Proof of the third
cause: viz. that the waxing and wauing of the Moon, causes the flowing and
ebbing of the Sea.

The Moon descends, then it Ebbs again.
Again, so soon as her inconstant Crown
Begins to shine on the other Horizon,
It Flows again: and then again it falls
When she does light the other Meridionalls.
We see more-over, that the Atlantik Seas
Do Flow far farther then the Genoese,
Or both the Bosphores; and that Lakes, which grow
Out of the Sea, do neither Ebb nor Flow:
Because (they say) the silver fronted Star,
That swells and shrinks the Seas (as pleases her)
Pours with less power her plentious influence
Upon these straight and narrow streamed Fennes,
And Inland Seas, which many a Mount immounds,
Then on an Ocean vast and void of bounds:
Even as in Summer, her great Brothers Ey,
When winds be silent, does more easily dry Simile.

Wide spreading Plains, open and spacious Fields,
Then narrow Vales vaulted about with Hills.
If we perceive not in the Deep, so well Why the tide is not so well perceived
at sea as by the shore.

As by the shore, when it does shrink and swell;
Our sprightfull Pulse the tide does well resemble,
Whose outside seems more then the midst to tremble.
Nor is the glorious Prince of Stars less mighty
Then his pale Sister, on vast Amphitrite.
For Phoebus, boiling with his lightsom Heat
The Fish-full Waves of Neptunes Royal Seat,
And supping up still (with his thirsty Rays) The cause of the faltnes of the
sea

All the fresh humor in the floting Seas,
In Thetis large Cells leaves naught behind,
Save liqvid Salt, and a thick bitter Brine.
But see (the while) see how the Sea (I pray)
Through thousand Seas has carried me away,
In fear to have drowned my self and Readers so,
The Floods so made my words to over-flowe.
Therefore a-shoar; and on the tender Lee Of waters separated from the Sea.

Of Lakes, and Pools, Rivers, and Springs, let us see
The soverain virtues of their several Waters,
Their strange effects, and admirable natures,
That with incredible rare force of theirs,
Confound our wits, ravish our eyes and ears.
The Hammon^an Fount, while Phoebus Torch is light, Wonderful effects of
diverse Fountains.

Is cold as Ice; and (opposite) all night
(Though the cold Crescent shine thereon) is hot,
And boiles and bubbles like a seething Pot.
They say (forsooth) the River Silarus,
And such another, called Eurimenus,
Convert the boughs, the bark, the leaves, and all,
To very stone, that in their Waters fall.
O! should I blaunch the Jews religious River,
Which every Saboth dries his Channel over;
Keeping his Waves from working on that Day
Which God ordained a sacred Rest for ay?
If near unto the Eleusinian Spring,
Some sport-full Iig, some wanton Shepherd sing,
The Ravished Fountain falls to dance and bound,
Keeping true Cadence to his rustic sound.
Cerona, Xanth* and Ceph^sus, do make
The thirsty-Flocks that of their Waters take,
Black, red, and white. And near the crimsin Deep,
The Arabian Fountain makes crimsin Sheep.
Solonian Fountain, and thou Andrian Spring,
Out of what Cellars do you daily bring
The Oil and Wine that you abound-with, so?
O Earth! do these within thine entrails grow?
What? be there Vines and Orchards under ground?
Is Bacchus Trade and Pallas Art there found?
What should I, of the Illyrian Fountain, tell?
What shall I say of the Dodonean Well?
Whereof, the first sets any clothes on-fire;
The other does quench (who but will this admire?)
A burning Torch; and when the same is quenched,
Lights it again, if it again be drenched.
Sure, in the Legend of absurdest Fables
I should enroule most of these admirables;
Save for the reverence of the unstained credit
Of many a witness where I yerst have read it:
And saving that our gain-spurr'd Pilots find,
In our days, Waters of more wondrous kind.
Of all the Sources infinite to count,
Which to an ample Volume would amount, A continuation of the admirable effects
of certain Waters.

Far hence on Foreign unfrequented Coast,
I Will only choose some five or six at most,
Strange to report, perhaps believed of few;
And yet no more incredible then true.
In the I Will of Iron (one of those same seav'n
Whereto our Elders Insulae fortunatae.
Happy name had given)
The Savage people never drink the streams
Of Wells and Rivers (as in other Realms)
Their drink is in the Air; their gushing spring
A weeping Tree out of it self does wring:
A Tree, whose tender-bearded Root being spread
In dryest sand, his sweating Leaf does shed
A most sweet liquor; and (like as the Vine
Untimely cut, weeps (at her wound) her wine,
In pearled tears) incessantly distills
A Crystal stream, which all their Cisterns fills,
Through all the Island: for all hither hy,
And all their vessels cannot draw it dry.
In frosty Island are two Fountains strange:
The one flows with Wax: the other stream does change
All into Iron; yet with scalding steam
In thousand bubbles belcheth up her stream.
In golden Peru, necre Saint Helens Mount
A stream of Pitch comes from a springing Fount.
What more remains? That Newfound World, besides,
Toward the West many a fair River guides;
Whose floating Waters (knowing the use aright
Of Work-fit Day, and Rest-ordained Night,
Better then men) run swiftly, all the Day;
But rest, all Night, and stir not any way.
Great Enginer, Almighty Architect,
I fear, of Envy I should be suspect, Of Bathes and Medicinable Waters.

Envy of thy Renown and and sacred glory,
If my ungrateful Rimes should blaunch the Story
Of Streams, distilling through the Sulphur-Mines,
Through Bitumen. Allom, and Nitre veins;
Which (perfect Leaches) with their vertaes cure
A thousand Greefs we mortals here endure,
Old in the April of our age therewith,
Whose rigor strives to ante-date our death.
Now, as my happy Gascony excells, Of the excellent Bathes in Gascony.

In Corn, Wine, Warriors, every Country else;
So does she also in free Bathes abound;
Where strangers flock from every part around.
The barren womb, the Palsie-shaken wight,
The vlcerous, gowtie, deaf, and decrepit,
From East and West arriving, fetch from hence
Their ready help with small or no expense.
Witness Ancossa, Caud'rets, Aiguescald,
Barege, Baigners; Baigners, the pride of all,
The pride, the praise, the only Paradise
Of all those Mountains mounting to the skies,
Where yerst the Gaulian Hercules begot
(Wanton Alomena's Bastard, mean I not)
On fair Piren^ (as the fame does go)
The famous Father of the Gascons; who
By noble deeds, do worthily averr
Their true descent from such an Ancester.
On the one side, Hills hoar'd with eternal Snowes,
And craggy Rocks Baigneres do enclose*
The other side is sweetly compast-in
With fragrant skirts of an immortal Green,
Whose smiling beauties far excel, in all,
The famous praise of the Penei^an Vale:
There Is not a House, but seems to be new;
The even-slated Roofs reflect with glistring blew:
To keep the Pavement ever clean and sweet,
A Crystal River runs through every Street;
Whose Silver stream, as cold as Ice, does slide
But little off the Physic Waters side;
Yet keeps his nature, and disdaines, a jot
To intermix his cold with the others hot.
But, all these Wonders that adorn my Verse,
Yet come not near unto the wondrous Lers:
If it be true, that the Stagyrian Sage
(With shame confused, and driven with desperate rage)
Because his Reason could not reach the knowing
Of Euripus his seav'n-fold Ebbing-flowing,
Leapt in the same, and there his life did end,
Comprised in that he could not comprehend. Of the most won derfull Fountain of
Belestat.

What had he done, had he beheld the Fountain,
Which springs at Belstat near the famous Mountain
Of Foix; whose Floods bathing Maserian Plains,
Furnish with wood the wealthy Tholousains?
As oftas Phoebus (in a complete Race)
On both the Horizons shows his radiant Face,
This wondrous Brook) for four whole months) does flow,
Foure-times-six-times, and Ebbs as often as low
For half an hour may dry-shod past that list:
The next half hour, may none his course resist.
Whose foaming stream strives proudly to compare
(Even in the birth) with Fame-fullst Floods that are.
O! learned (Nature-taught) Arithmetician!
Clock-less, so just to measure Time's partition.
And little LAMBS-BOVRN, though thou match not Lers,
Nor had the Honor of DU BARTAS Verse;
If mine have any, Thou must needs partake,
Both for thine Own, and for thine Owners sake;
Whose kind Excesses Thee so nearly touch,
That Yearly for them Thou do weep so much,
All Summer-long (while all thy Sisters shrink*)
That of thy tears a million daily drink;
Besides thy Waast, which then in haste dothrun
To wash the feet of CHAVCER's Donnington:
But (while the rest are full unto the top)
All Winter-long, Thou never show'st a drop,
Nor send'st a doi^ of need-less Subsidy,
To Cramm the Kennet's Want-less Treasury,
Before her Store be spent, and Springs be staid:
Then, then, alone Thou lendst a liberal Aid;
Teaching Thy wealthy Neighbors (Mine, of late)
How, When, and Where to right-participate
Their streams of Comfort, to the poor that pine,
And not to greaz still the too-greazy Swine:
Neither, for fame, nor form (when others do)
To give a Morsel, or a Mite or two;
But severally, and of a selfly motion,
When others miss, to give the most devotion. The intermedling of the Earth and
Sea, and of the commodities thence arising, and contrariwise of the confusion
that would follow if they were separated.

Most wisely did the eternal All-Creator,
Dispose these Elements of Earth and Water:
For, since the one could not without drink subsist,
Nor, the other without stay, bottom and list,
God intermixed them so, that the Earth her breast
Opening to the Ocean, the Ocean winding pressed
About the Earth, a-thwart, and under it,
For the Worlds Center, both together fit.
For, if their mixed Globe held not certainly
Just the just midst of the Worlds Axle-tree,
All Climats then should not be served a-right
With equal Counter poiz of day and night:
The Horizons il-leuell'd circle wide,
Would sag too-much on the one or the other side:
The Antipodes, or we, at once should take
View of more Signs then half the Zodiac:
The Moon's Eclipses would not then be certain,
And settled Seasons would be then uncertain. The Mass of the Earth and Water
together make a perfect Globe.

This also serves for probation sound,
That the Earths and Waters mingled Mass is Round,
Round as a Ball; seeing on every side
The Day and Night successively to slide.
Yea, though Vespucio (famous Florentine)
Mark Pole, and Columb, brave Italian Trine,
Our (Spain's Dread) Drake, Candish, and Cumberland
Most valiant Earl, most worthy High Command,
And thousand gallant modern Typheis else,
Had never brought the North-Poles Parallels*
Under the South; and, sailing still about,
So many Nex-worlds under us found out.
Nay, never could they the Artik Pole have lost,
Nor found the Antartik; if in every Coast
Seas liquid Glass round-bow'd not euery-where,
With sister Earth, to make a perfect Sphere.
But, perfect Artist, with what Arches strong, How it comes to pass that the
Sea is not flat nor leuel; but rising round and bowed about the Earth.

Props, stays, and Pillars, have thou stayed so long
This hanging, thin, sad, slippery Water-Ball*
From falling out, and ouer-whelming all?
May it not be (good Lord) because the Water
To the Worlds Center tends still by nature;
And toward the bottom of this bottom bound,
Willing to fall, does yet remain still round?
Or may't not be, because the surly Banks
Keep Waters captive in their hollow flanks?
Or that our Seas be buttrest (as it were)
With thousand Rocks dispersed here and there?
Or rather, Lord, is it not Thine only Power
That Bows it round about Earths branchy Bowr?
Doubt-less (great God) it is doubt-less thine own hand The second part of this
3. Book entreating of the Element of earth and first of the firmnes thereof.

Whereon this Mansion of Mankind does stand.
For, though it hang in the Air, swim in the water,
Though every way it be a round Theater,
Though All turn round about it, though for ay
Itselfs Fundations with swist Motions play.
It rests vn-mooueable: that the Holy Race
Of Adam there may find fit dwelling place.
The Earth receives man when he first is born, Earth is the Mo there, Nurse, and
Hostess^ of mankind.

The Earth nurses him; and when he is forlorn
Of the other Elements, and Nature loaths-him,
The Earth in her bosom with kind burial cloaths-him.
Often has the Air with Tempests set-vpon-vs,
Often has the Water with her Floods vndon-vs,
Often has the Fire (the upper as well as ours)
With woeful flames consumed our Towns and Towrs:
Only the Earth, of all the Elements,
Unto Mankind is kind without offense:
Only the Earth did never jot displace
From the first seat assigned it by thy grace.
Yet, true it is, (good Lord) that moved sometimes Of Earth quakes and of the
opening of the earth

With wicked Peoples execrablecrimes,
The wrathful power of thy right hand does make,
Not all the Earth, but part of it to quake,
With aid of Winds: which (as imprisoned deep)
In her vast entrails, furious murmurs keep.
Fear chils our hearts (what heart can fear dissemble?)
When Steeples stagger, and huge Mountains tremble
With wind-less wind, and yawning Hell devours
Sometimes whole Cities with their shining Towrs.
Since then, the Earth's, and Waters blended Ball The Globe of the Earth and
Sea, is but as a little point, in comparison of the great circumference of
Heaven:

Is center, heart, and nauel of this All;
And since (in reason) that which is included,
Must needs beless then that which does include it;
It Is question-less, the Orb of Earth and Water
Is the least Orb in all the All-Theater.
Let any judge, whether this lower Ball
(Whose endless greatness we admire so, all)
Seem not a point, compared with the upper Sphere
Whose turning turns the rest in their Career; Since by the Doctrine of
Astronomers, the least Star in the ^^rmnment is ^8 times bigger then all the
earth.

Since the least Star that we perceive to shine
Above, dispersed in the Arches crystalline
(If, at the least, Star-Clarkes be credit worth)
Is eighteen times bigger then all the Earth:
Whence, if we but substract what is possessed
(From North to South, and from the East to West)
Under the Empire of the Ocean
Atlantike, Indian, and American;
And thousand huge Arms issuing out of these,
With infinites of other Lakes and Seas:
And also what the Two intemperate Zones
Do make unfit for habitations;
What will remain? Ah! nothing (in respect):
Lo here, O men! Lo wherefore you neglect By consideration whereof, the Poet
takes occasion to censure sharply the Ambition, Bribery, Usury, Extortion,
Deceit, and general Covetousness of Mankind.

Heavens glorious Kingdom: Lo the largest scope
Glory can give to your ambitious hope.
O Princes (subjects unto pride and pleasure)
Who (to enlarge, but a hair's breadth, the measure
Of your Dominions) breaking Oaths of Peace,
Cover the Fields with bloody Carcases:
O Magistrates, who (to content the Great)
Make sale of Justice, on your sacred Seat;
And, broaking Laws for Bribes, profane your Place,
To leave a Leek to your unthankful Race:
You strict Extorters, that the Poor oppress,
And wrong the Widow and the Father-less,
To leave your Offspring rich (of others good)
In Houses built of Rapine and of Blood:
You City-Vipers, that (incestuous) ioyn
Use upon use, begetting Coin of Coin:
You Merchant Mercers, and Monopolites,
Gain-greedy Chap-men, perjured Hypocrites,
Dissembling Broakers, made of all deceipts,
Who falsify your Measures and your Weights,
TO enrich your selves, and your unthrifty Sons
To Gentillize with proud possessions:
You that for gain betray your gracious Prince,
Your native Country, or your dearest Friends:
You, that to get you but an inch of ground,
With cursed hands remove your Neigbours bound
(The ancient bounds your Ancestors have set)
What gain you all? alas! what do you get?
Yea, though a King by wile or war had won
All the round Earth to his subjection;
Lo here the Guerdon of his glorious pains:
A needles point, a Mote, a Mite, he gains,
A Nit, a Nothing (did he All possess);
Or, if then nothing anything beless.
When God, whose words more in a moment can, God having discovered the earth
commands it to bring forth every green thing, herbs, trees, flowers and fruits.

Then in an Age the proudest strength of Man,
Had severed the Floods, leuell'd the Fields,
Embas't the Valleys, and embost the Hills;
Change, change (quoth he) O fair and firmest Globe,
Thy moutning weed, to a green gallant Robe;
Cheer thy sad brows, and stately garnish them,
With a rich, fragrant, flowery Diadem;
Lay forth thy locks, and paint thee ( Lady-like)
With freshest colors on thy sallow cheek.
And let from henceforth thy abundant breasts
Not only Nursethine own Wombs native guests,
But frankly furnish with fit nourishments
The future folk of the other Elements;
That Air, and Water, and the Angels Court,
May all seem jealous of thy praise and port. Of Trees growing in Mountains and
in Valleys.

No sooner spoken, but the lofty Pine
Distilling-pitch, the Larch yeeld-Turpentine,
The euer-green Box, and gummy Cedar sprout,
And the Airy Mountains mantle round about:
The Mast-full Oak, the useful Ash, the Holm,
Coat changing Cork, white Maple, shady Elm,
Through Hill and Plain ranged their plumed Ranks.
The winding Rivers bordered all their banks
With slice-Sea Alders, and green Osiars small,
With trembling Poplars, and with VVillows pase,
And many Trees beside, fit to be made
Fuel, or Timber, or to serve for Shade.
The dainty Apricock (of Plums the Prince) Of fruit trees.

The velvet Peach, gilt Orange, downy Quince,
All-ready bear grav'n in their tender barks,
Gods powerful providence in open marks.
The sent-sweet Apple, and a stringent Pear,
The Cherry, Filberd, VVal-nut, Meddeler,
The milky Fig, the Damson black and white,
The Date, and Olyue, ayding appetite,
Spread euery-where a most delightful Spring,
And euery-where a very Eden bring.
Here, the fine Pepper, as in clusters hung, Of shrubs.

There Cinnamon and other Spices sprung.
Here, dangled Nutmegs, that for thrifty pains
Yearly repay the Bandans wondrous gains;
There grows (the Hesperian Plant) the precious Reed
Whence Sugar sirrops in abundance bleed;
There weeps the Balm, and famous Trees from whence
The Arabians fetch perfuming Frankincense.
There, the amorous Uine coll's in a thousand sorts
(With winding arms) her Spouse that her supports:
The Vine, as far inferior to the rest, Of the Vine, and the excellent use of
Wine temperately taken.

In beauty, as in bounty past the best:
Whose sacred liquor, temperately taen,
Reviues the spirits and purifies the brain,
Cheers the sad heart, increases kindly heat,
Purges gross blood, and does the pure beget,
Strengthens the stomach, and the color mends,
Sharpens the wit, and does the bladder cleanse,
Opens obstructions, excrements expels,
And eases us of many Languors else. He preuenteth an objection, and shows
that notwithstanding man's fall, the Earth yields us matter enough to praise
and magnify her Maker.

And though through Sin (whereby from Heavenly state
Our Parents barred us) the Earth degenerate
From her first beauty, bearing still upon her
Eternal Scars of her fond Lords dishonor:
Though with the Worlds age, her weak age decay,
Though she become less fruitful every day
(Much like a Woman with often teeming worn;
Who with the Babes of her own body born,
Having almost stored a whole Town with people, Simile.

At length becomes barren, and faint, and feeble)
Yet does she yield matter enough to sing
And praise the Maker of so rich a Thing.
Never mine eyes in pleasant Spring behold Of Flowers.

The azure Flax, the gilden Marigold,
The Violet's purple, the sweet Rose's stammell,
The Lillie's snow, and Pansey's various ammell;
But that (in them) the Painter I admire,
Who in more Colors does the Fields attire,
Then fresh Aurora's rosy cheeks display,
When in the East she Vshers a fair Day:
Or Iris Bow, which bended in the Sky
Boades fruitful deaws when as the Fields be dry.
Here (deer S. BARTAS) give thy Servant leave. An addition by the Translator,
of the rare Sun-louing LOTOS.

In thy rich Garland one rare Flowr to weaue,
Whose wondrons nature had more worthy been
Of thy divine, immortalizing Pen:
But, from thy sight, when SEIN did swell with Blood,
It sunk (perhaps) under the Crimsin Flood
(When Beldam, Medices, Valois, and Guise
Stained Hymen's Roab with Heathen cruelties)
Because the Sun, to shun so vile a view,
His Chamber kept; and wept with Bartholmew.
For so, so soon as in the Western Seas*
Apollo sinks, in silver Euphrates
The Lotos dives, deeper and deeper ay
Till midnight: then, remounteth toward Day:
But not above the Water, till the Sun
Do r^-ascend above the Horizon. Semper ^adem

So euer-true to Titans radiant Flame,
That (Rise he, Fall he) it is Still the same.
A Real Emblem of her Royal Honor
That worthily did take that Word vpon-her;
Sacred ELIZA, that ensued no less
The etenall Sun of Peace and Righteousness;
Whose lively lamp (what ever did betide-her)
In either Fortune was her only Guider.
For, in her Fathers and her Brothers Days,
Fair rose this Rose with Truth's new-springing rays:
And when again the Gospels glorious Light
Set in her Sisters superstitious Night;
She sunk withal under afflictions streams
(As sinks my Lotos with Sols setting beams):
But, after Night, when Light again appeared,
Ther-with, again her Royal Crown she reared;
And in an I Will amid the Ocean set
(Maugre the Deluge that Romes Dragon spet,
With spite full storms striving to ouer-flowe her,
And Spain conspyring jointly to ouer-throwe-her)
Her Maiden Flowr flourisht above the Water; ELIZABETA REGINA. Anagram. Ei ben
to alza e gira.

For, still Heavens Sun cherisht his loving Daughter:
Bell fior d'Honor, ch'in Mare'l Mondo ammira,
Al Sole sacro, ch'E^ BEN TO ALZA E GIRA
(So, my deer Wiat, honoring Still the same,
In-soul'd an Imprese with her Anagramm):
And last, for guerdon of her constant Love,
Rapt her entirely, to himself above.
So set our Sun; and yet no Night ensued:
So happily the Heavens our Light renu'd:
For, in her stead, of the same Stock of Kings
Another Flowr (or rather Phoenix) springs;
Another like (or rather Still the same)
No less in Love with that Supernall Flame.
So, to God's glory, and his Churches good,
The honor of England, and the Royal blood,
Long happy Monark may king JAMES persist;
And after him, His; Still the same in Christ.
God, not content to have given these Plants of ours Of diverse herbs and
Plants, and of their excellent virtues.

Precious Perfumes, Fruits, plenty, pleasant Flowrs,
Infused Physic in their leaves and Mores,
To cure our sickness, and to salve our sores:
Else doubt-less (Death assaults so many ways)
Scarce could we live a quarter of our Days;
But like the Flax, which flowrs at once and falls, Simile.

One Feast would serve our Births and Burials:
Our Birth our Death, our Cradle (then) our Toomb,
Our tender Spring our Winter would become.
Good Lord! how many gasping Souls have escaped
By the aid of Herbs, for whom the Grave has gap't;
Who, even about to touch the Stygian strand!
Have yet beguiled grim Pluto's greedy hand!
Beard-less Apollo's beardy Esculapius.
Son did once
With juice of Herbs r^ioin the scattered bones
Of the chaste Hyppolitus.
Prince, that in the Athenian Court
Preferred Death before incestuous ^port.
So did Medea, for her Iason's sake,
The frozen limbs of Aeson youthful make.
O sacred Simples that our life sustain,
And when it flies us, call it back again!
It Is not alone your liquor, inly taen,
That often defends us from so many a baen:
But even your savor, yea, your neighborhood,
For some Diseases is exceeding good;
Working so rare effects, that only such
As feel, or see them, can beleeueso much.
Blew Succorie, hanged on the naked neck, The virtue of Succorie. Of
Swines-bread.

Dispels the dimness that our sight does check.
Swines-Bread, sovsed, does not only speed
A tardy Labor; but (without great heed)
If over it a Child-great Woman stride,
Instant abortion often does betide.
The burning Sun, the banefull Aconite,
The poysonie Serpents that unpeople quite
Cyrenian Deserts, never Danger them
That wear about them the Mugw^rt. Peoni^.
Artemisian Stem.
About an Infants neck hang Peoni^,
It cures Al^ydes cruel malady.
If fuming boawls of Bacchus, in excess,
Trouble thy brains with storms of gyddiness,
Put but a garland of green Saffron on, Saffron.

And that mad humor will be quickly gone.
The enchanting Charms of Sirens blandishments,
Contagious A're ingendring Pestilence,
Infect not those that in their mouths have taen Angelica.

Angelica that happy counter-baen,
Sent down from Heaven by some Celestial scout,
As well the name and nature both avow't.
So Pimpernel, held in the Patients hand,
The bloody-Flix does presently with-stand: Pimpernell or Burnet. Madder.

And ruddy Madder's root, long handeled,
Dies the handlers urine into perfect red.
O Wondrous Woad! which, touching but the skin,
Imparts his color to the parts within.
Nor (powerful Herbs) do we alonely find
Your virtues working in frail humane kind;
But you can force the fiercest Animals,
The fellest Fiends, the firmest Mineralls,
Yea, fairest Planets (if Antiquity
Have not belied the Haggs of Thessalie).
Only the touch of Choak-Pard Libbards bane
Aconite,
Bereaves the Scorpion both of sense and might:
As (opposite) Helleborus does make Helleborus.

His vital powers from deadly slumber wake.
With Betonie, fell Serpents round beset, Betonie.

Lift up their heads, and fall to hiss and spet,
With spightfull fury in their sparkling eyes,
Breaking all truce, with infinite defies:
Puffed up with rage, to it by the ears they go,
Baen against baen, plague against plague they throw,
Charging each other with so fierce a force
(For friends turned foes have lightly least remorse)
That wounded all (or rather all a wound)
With poisoned gore they cover all the ground;
And naught can stint their strange intestine strife,
But only the end of their detested life.
As Betonie breaks friendships ancient bands,
So Willo-wort makes wonted hate shake hands: Willow-worte.

For, being fastened to proud Coursers collers,
That fight and fling, it will abate their cholers.
The Swine, that feed in Troughes of Tamarice, Tamarice.

Consume their spleen. The like effect there is
In Finger-Fern: which, being given to Swine, Finger-Ferne.

It makes their Milts to Melt away in fine,
With ragged tooth choosing the same so right
Of all their Tripes to serve it is appetite.
And Horse, that, feeding on the grassy Hills,
Tread upon Lunaria.
Moon-woort with their hollow heels;
Though lately shod, at night go barefoot home,
Their Master musing where their shoes become:
O Moon-wort! tell us where thou hidst the Smith,
Hammer, and Pincers, thou vnshoo'st them with?
Alas! what Lock or Iron Engine is it
That can thy subtle secret strength resist,
Since the best Farrier cannot set a shoo
So sure, but thou (so shortly) can undo?
But I suppose not, that the earth does yield
In Hill or Dale, in Forest or in Field,
A rarer Plant then Candian Dictaminum* Candiae.
Dittanie,
Which wounded Dear eating, immediately
Not only cures their wounds exceeding well,
But against the Shooter does the shaft repel.
Moreover (Lord) is it not a Work of thine* Great varie^ie in color and form of
Plants, and strange co^trari^ty of effects, according to the bodies that* they
work upon.

That every where, in every Turf we find
Such multitude of other Plants to spring,
In form, effect, and color differing?
And each of them in their due Seasons taen,
To one is Physic, to another baen:
Now gentle, sharp anon: now good, then ill:
What cures now, the same anon does kill.
The herb Fen^l giant.
S^gapen serves the slow Ass for meat,
But kills the Ox if of the same he eat.
So branched Hemlock.
Hemlock for the Stares is fit;
But, death to man, if he but taste of it.
And Rose-bay.
Oleander unto beasts is poison;
But, unto man a special counter-poyson.
What ranker poison? what more deadly baen
Then Wolfes ban^.
Aconite, can there be touched or taen?
And yet his juice best cures the burning bit
Of stinging Serpents, if applied to it.
O valiant Venom! O courageous Plant!
Disdainful Poison! noble combatant!
That scorneth aid, and loves alone to fight,
That none partake the glory of his might:
For, if he find our bodies fore-possest
With other Poison, then he lets us rest,
And with his Rival enters secret Duel,
One to one, strong to strong, cruel to cruel,
Still fighting fierce, and never over-giue
Till they both dying, give Man leave to live.
And to conclude, whether I walk the Fields,
Rush through the Woods, or clamber up the Hills,
I find God everywhere; Thence all depend,
He gives frankly what we thankly spend.
Here for our food, Millions of flow'rie grains,
With long Mustachoes, wave upon the Plains;
Here thousand fleeces, fit for Princes Robes, Of grain, si^ke, Cotton-Wool (or
Bombace) Plax and Hemp which the Earth produces.

In Serean Forests hang in silken Globes:
Here shrubs of Malta (for my meaner use)
The fine white balls of Bombace do produce.
Here the azure-flowred Flax is finely spun
For finest Linen, by the Belgian Nun:
Here fatal Hemp, which Denmark does afford,
Does furnish us with Canuass, and with Cord,
Cables and Sails; that, Winds assisting either,
We may acquaint the East and West together,
And dry-foot dance on Neptunes Watery Front,
And in adventure lead whole Towns upon it.
Here of one grain of Indian-wheat.
Maiz, a Reed does spring,
That thrice a year, five hundred grains does bring;
Which (after) the Indians parch, and punn, and knead,
And thereof make them a most holesom bread.
The Almighty Voice, which built this mighty Ball,
Still, still rebounds and echoes over all:
That, that alone, yearly the World revives;
Through that alone, all springs, all lives, all thrives:
And that alone makes, that our mealy grain
Our skillful Seed-man scatters not in vain;
But being covered by the tooth-full Harrow,
Or hid a while under the folded furrow,
Rots to revive; and, warmly-wet, puts-forth
His root beneath, his bud above the Earth;
Enriching shortly with his springing Crop,
The Ground with green, the Husbandman with hope:
The bud becoms a blade, the blade a reed, An exact description of the growing
of wheat and other like kinds of grain.

The reed an ear, the ear another seed:
The seed, to shut the wastefull Sparrows out
(In Harvest) has a stand of Pikes about,
And Chaffie Husks in hollow Cods inclose-it;
Least heat, wet, wind, should roste, or rot, or lose-it:
And, least the Straw should not sustein the ear,
With knotty ioints it is sheathed here and there.
Pardon me (Reader) if thy ravished Eyes
Have seen Today too great varieties
Of Trees, of Flowrs, of Fruits, of Herbs, of Grains,
In these my Groves, Meads, Orchards, Gardens, Plains;
Since the I Will of Zebut's admirable Tree Of the Indian Cocos a most admirable
fruit.

Bears a fruit (called Cocos commonly)
The which, alone, far richer Wonders yields
Then all our Groves, Meads, Orchards, Gardens, Fields.
What? would thou drink? the wounded leaves drop wine.
Lackst thou fine linen? dress the tender rine,
Dress it like Flax, spin it* and weave it well,
It shall thy Cambrik and thy Lawn excel.
Longst thou for Butter? bite the poulpy part,
And never better came to any Mart.
Need thou Oil? then boult it to and fro,
And passing oil it soon becomes so.
Or Vinegar, to whet thine appetite?
Then sun it well, and it will sharply bite.
Or wantst thou Sugar? steep the same a stound,
And sweeter Sugar is not to be found.
It Is what you will: or will be what you would:
Should Mydas touched (I think) it would be Gold.
And God (I think) to crown our life with joys,
The Earth with plenty, and his Name with praise,
Had don enough; if he had made no more
But this one Plant, so full of wondrous store:
Save that, the World (where one thing breeds satiety)
Could not be fair, without so great variety.
But the Earth not only on her back does bear
Abundant treasures glistering everywhere
( As glorious unthrifts, crossed with Parents Curse,
Wear golden Garments; but an empty Purse:
Or Venus Darlings, fair without; within
Full of Disease, full of Deceit and Sin:
Or stately Toombes, externly gilt and garnisht;
With dust and bones inwardly filled and furnished)
But inwardly she is no less fraught with riches, Of the riches under or within
the Earth.

Nay rather more (which more our souls bewitches).
Within the deep folds of her fruitful lap,
So bound-less Mines of treasure does she wrap,
That the hungry hands of humane avarice
Cannot exhaust with labor or device.
For, they be more then there be Stars in Heaven,
Or stormy billows in the Ocean driven,
Or ears of Corn in Autumn on the Fields,
Or Savage Beasts upon a thousand Hills,
Or Fishes diving in the silver Floods,
Or scattred Leaves in Winter in the Woods.
Slat, Iet, and Marble shall escape my pen, Of Minerals.

I over-pass the Salt-mount Oromene,
I blanch the Brine-Quar Hill in Aragon,
Whence (there) they powder their provision.
I Will only now emboss my Book with Brass,
Dye't with Vermilion, decked with Coperass,
With Gold and Silver, Lead and Mercury,
Tin, Iron, Orpine, Stibium, Lethargy:
And on my Gold-work I will only place
The Crystal pure, which does reflect each face;
The precious Ruby, of a Sanguin hew, Of precious stones.

The Seal-fit Onyx, and the Sapphire blew,
The Cassidonie, full of circles round,
The tender Topaz, and rich Diamond,
The various Opal, and green Emerald,
The Agate by a thousand titles called,
The skie-like Turquez, purple Amethists,
And fiery Carbuncle, which flames resists.
I know, to Man the Earth seems (altogether)
No more a Mother, but a Step-dame rather:
Because (alas) unto our loss she bears
Bloodshedding Steel, and Gold the ground of cares:
As if these Metals, and not Man's amiss,
Had made Sin mount unto the height it is.
But, as the sweet bait of abundant Riches,
Bodies and Souls of greedy men bewitches: The use, or abuse of things, makes
the^ good or evil: helpful, or hurtful to Mankind

Gold gilds the Virtuous, and it lends them wings
To raise their thoughts unto the rarest things.
The wise, not only Iron well apply
For household turns, and Tools of Husbandry;
But to defend their Country (when it calls)
From foreign dangers, and intestine bralls:
But, with the same the wicked never mell,
But to do service to the Haggs of Hell;
To pick a Lock, to take his neighbors Purse,
To break a House, or to do something worse;
To cut his Parents throat, to kill his Prince,
To spoil his Country, murder Innocents.
Even so, profaning of a gift divine,
The Drunkard drowns his Reason in the Wine:
So sale-tongu'd Lawyers, wresting Eloquence,
Excuse rich wrong, and cast poor Innocence:
So Antichrists, their poison to infuse,
Miss-cite the Scriptures, and Gods name abuse.
For, as a Cask, through want of use grow'n fusty,
Makes with his stink the best Greek Malmsey musty:
So God's best gifts, usurped by wicked Ones,
To poison turn through their contagious.
But, shall I baulk the admired Adamant, Of the rare virtue of the Loadstone.

Whose dead-live power, my Reasons power does dant.
Renowned Lodestone, which on Iron acts,
And by the touch the same aloof attracts;
Attracts it strangely with vnclapsing crooks,
With vnknow'n cords, with vnconceived hooks,
With unseen hands, with undiscerned arms,
With hidden Force, with sacred secret charms,
Wherewith he wooes his Iron Misteriss,
And never leaves her till he get a kiss;
Nay, till he fold her in his faithful bosom,
Never to part (except we, love-less, loose-em)
With so firm zeal and fast affection
The Stone does love the Steel, the Steel the Stone.
And though sometime some Make bate com betwixt,
Still burns their first flame; it is so surely fixed:
And, while they cannot meet to break their minds,
With mutual skips they show their love by signs
( As bashful Suitors* seeing Strangers by,
Parley in silence with their hand or eye).
Who can conceive, or censure in what sort
One Loadstone-touched Annlet does transport
Another Iron-Ring, and that another,
Till four or five hang dangling one in other?
Greatest Apollo might he be (me thinks)
Could tell the Reason of these hanging links:
Since Reason-scanners have resolved all,
That heavy things, hanged in the Air, must fall*
I am not ignorant, that He, who seeks
In Roman Robes to suit the Sagest Greeks,
Whose jealous wife, weening to home-revoke-him
With a Love-potion, did with poison choak-him;
Has sought to show, with arguing subtilty,
The secret cause of this rare Sympathy.
But say ( Lucretius) what is the hidden cause
That toward the North-Star still the needle draw's,
Whose point is touched with Lodestone? loose this knot,
And still-green Laurel shall be still thy Lot:
Yea, Thee more learned will I then confess,
Then Epicurus, or Empedocles.
We Are not to Ceres so much bound for Bread, Of the excellent use of the
Mariners Compass.

Neither to Bacchus, for his Clusters red,
As ( Signor Flauio) to thy witty trial,
For first inuenting of the Sea-mans Dial
(The Use of the Needle, turning in the same)
Divine deu^^?e! O admirable Frame!
Whereby, through the Ocean, in the darkest night,
Our hugest Caraques are conducted right:
Whereby we are stored with Truch-man, Guide, and Lamp
To search all corners of the watery Camp:
Whereby a Ship, that stormy Heavens have whurld
Near in one Night into another World,
Knows where she is; and in the Card descries
What degrees thence the Equinoctial lies.
Cleer-sighted Spirits, that cheer with sweet aspect
My sober Rymes, though subject to defect;
If in this Volume, as you ouer-read it
You meet some things seeming exceeding credit,
Because (perhaps) here proved yet by no-man;
Their strange effects be not in knowledge common:
Think, yet, to some the Load-stone's use is new;
And seems as strange, as we have tried it true:
Let therefore that which Iron draw's, draw such
To credit more then what they see or touch.
Nor is the Earth only worthy praise eternal, Of medicinable Earthes.

For the rare riches on her back external;
Or in her bosom: but her own selfs worth
Solicits me to sound her glory forth.
I call to witness all those weak diseased,
Whose bodies often have by the effects been eased
Of Lemnos sealed earth, or Eretrian soil,
Or that of Chios, or of Melos I Will.
All-hail fair Earth, bearer of Towns and Towrs,
Of Men, Gold, Grain, Physik, and Fruits, and Flowrs, The Earths Encomion.

Fair, firm, and fruitful, various, patient, sweet,
Sumptuously clothed in a Mantle meet
Of mingled-colour; lac't about with Floods,
And all imbrodered with fresh blooming buds,
With rarest Gemmes richly about embost,
Excelling cunning and exceeding cost.
All-hail great Heart, round Base, and steadfast Root,
Of All the World, the Worlds strong fixed foot,
Heavens chastest Spouse, supporter of this All,
This glorious Buildings goodly Pedestall.
All hail deer Mother, Sister, Hostess, Nurse,
Of the Worlds Soverain: of thy liberal purse,
We Are all maintained: match-less Emperess,
To do thee service with all readiness,
The Spears, before thee bear ten thousand Torches:
The Fire, to warm thee, foldes his heatfull arches
In purest flames above the floating Cloud:
The Air, to refresh thee, willingly is bowed
About the Waves, and well content to suffer
Mild Zephyrs blasts, and Boreas bellowing rougher:
Water, to quench thy thirst, about thy Mountains,
Wraps her moist arms, Seas, rivers, lakes and fountains.
O how I grieve, deer Earth, that (given to gays) Commendations of the
Countrylife.

Most of best wits contemn thee nowadays:
And noblest hearts proudly abandon quight
Study of Herbs, and Country-lifes delight,
To brutest men, to men of no regard,
Whose wits are Lead, whose bodies Iron-hard.
Such were not yerst the reverend Patriarks,
Whose praise is penned by the sacred Clarks.
Noah the just, meek Moses, Abraham
(Who Father of the Faithful Race becam)
Were Shepherds all, or Husbandmen (at least)
And in the Fields passed their Days the best.
Such were not yerst Attalus, Philemetor,
Archelaus, Hiero, and many a Praetor;
Great Kings and Consuls, who have often, for blades
And glistering Scepters, handled hooks and spades.
Such were not yerst, Cincinnatus Fabricius,
Serranus, Curious, who vn-self-delicious,
With Crowned Coultars, with Imperial hands,
With Ploughs triumphant plough'd the Roman lands.
Great Scipio, sated with feigned curtsie-capping,
With Court- Eclipses, and the tedious gaping
Of golden beggars: and that Emperor,
Of Slave, turned King; of King, turned Labourer;
In Country Granges did their age confine:
And ordered there, with as good Discipline,
The Fields of Corn, as Fields of Combat first;
And Ranks of Trees, as Ranks of Soldiers yerst.
O thrice, thrice happy He, who shunns the cares
Of City-troubles, and of State Affairs;
And, serving Ceres, Tills with his own Teem
His own Free-land, left by his Friends to him*
Never pale Enuie's poysonie heads do hiss
To gnaw his heart; nor Vultur Avarice: Free from envy, ambition, and avarice:
and consequently from the devilish practices of Machiauilia^ Politikes.

His Field's bounds, bound his thoughts: he never supps,
For Nectar, poison mixtin silver Cups;
Neither in golden Platters does he lick
For sweet Ambrosia deadly Arsenick:
His hand's his boaul (better then Plate or Glass)
The silver Brook his sweetest Hypocrasse:
Milk, Cheese, and Fruit (fruits of his own endeavor)
Dressed without dressing, has he ready ever.
False Counsailours (Concealers of the Law) Not v^xed with counterfeit
wrestings of wrangling Laywers.

Turn-coat Attourneys, that with both hands draw;
Sly Peti-Foggers, Wranglers at the Bar,
Proud Purse-Leaches, Harpies of Westminster,
With fained chiding, and foul iarring noise,
Break not his brain, nor interrupt his joys*
But cheerful Birds, chirping him sweet Good-morrows,
With Natures Music do beguile his sorrows;
Teaching the fragrant Forests, day by day,
The Diapason of their Heavenly Lay.
His wandering Vessel, reeling to and fro, Not dreading shipwreck, nor in
danger of Pirates.

On the irefull Ocean (as the Winds do blow)
With sudden Tempest is not ouer-whurld,
To seek his sad death in another World:
But, leading all his life at home in Peace,
Always in sight of his own smoke; no Seas,
No other Seas he knows, nor other Torrent,
Then that which waters, with his silver Corrent
His Native Meadows: and that very Earth
Shall give him Burial, which first gave him Birth.
To summon timely sleep, he does not need Not diseased in body through
delicious Idleness.

Aethyop's cold Rush, nor drowsy Poppy-seed;
Nor keep in consort (as Mecaenas did)
Luxurious Villains (Viols I should have said);
But on green Carpets thrumd with mossy Beuer,
Frendging the round skirts of his winding River,
The streams mild murmur, as it gently gushes,
His healthy limbs in quiet slumber hushes.
Drum, Fife, and Trumpet, with their loud A-larms, Not drawn by factions to an
untimely Death

Make him not start out of his sleep, to Arms:
Nor deer respect of some great General,
Him from his bed unto the block does call.
The crested Cock sings Hunt is up to him,
Limits his rest, and makes him stir betime,
To walk the Mountains, or the flowery Meads,
Impearld with tears, that sweet Aurora sheads.
Never gross Air, poysond in stinking Streets, Not choked with contagion of a
corrupted Air.

To choke his spirit, his tender nostrill meets;
But the open Sky, where at full breath he lives,
Still keeps him sound, and still new stomach gives:
And Death, drad Seriant of the eternal Judge,
Coms very late to his sole seated Lodge.
His wretched years in Princes Courts he spends not: Nor (Chamel^^like)
changing, with every object, the color of his conscience.

His thralled will on Great men's wills depends not:
He, changing Master, does not change at once
His Faith; Religion, and his God renounce:
With mercenary lies he does not chaunt,
Praising an Emmet for an Elephant: Nor soothing Sin; nor licking the Tail of
Greatness.

Sardanapalus (drowned in soft excess)
For a triumphant virtuous Hercules;
Thersites foul, for Venus lovely Love;
And every Changeling for a Turtle-Doue;
Nor lavishes in his lascivious lays,
On wanton Flora, chaste Alcestes praise.
But all self-priuate, serving God, he writes
Fear-less, and sings but what his heart in dites.
No sallow Fear does day or night afflict-him:
Unto no fraud does night or day addict-him; Neither pressed with Fear, nor
plotting Fraud.

Or if he muse on guile, it is but to get
Beast, Bird, or Fish, in toil, or snare, or net.
What though his Wardrobe be not stately stuffed
With sumptuous silks (pinked, and powne't, and puffed)
With gold-ground Velvets, and with silver Tissue,
And all the glory of old Eues proud Issue?
What though his feeble Cofers be not cramd
With Misers Idols, golden Ingotsramd?
He is warm-wrapped in his own-growen Wool;
Of vn-bought Wines his Cellar's everfull;
His Garner's stored with grain, his Ground with flocks,
His Barns with Fodder, with sweet streams his Rocks.
For, here I sing the happy Rustiks weal,
Whose handsome house seems as a Commonweal:
And not the needy, hard rack-rented Hind,
Or Copyholder, whom hard Lords do grind;
The pined Fisher, or poor-Daiery-Renter
That lives of whay, for forfeiting Indenture;
Who scarce have bread within their homely Cotes
(Except by fits) to feed their hungry throats.
Let me good Lord, among the Great vn-kend,
My rest of days in the calm Country end.
Let me deserve of my deer AEGLE-Brood,
For Windsor- Forest, walks in Almes-wood:
Be Hadley Pond my Sea; Lambs-bourn my Thames;
Lambourn my London; Kennet's silver streams,
My fruitful Nile; my Singers and Musicians,
The pleasant Birds with warbling repetitions;
My company, pure thoughts, to work thy will;
My Court, a Cottage on a lowely Hill;
Where, without let, I may so sing thy Name,
That times to-com may wonder at the same.
Or, if the new North-star, my Souerain, JAMES
(The secret virtue of whose sacred beams
Attracts the attentive service of all such
Whose minds did ever Virtue's Lodestone touch)
Shall ever daign t'inuite mine humble Fate
T'approoch the Presence of his Royal State:
Or, if my Duty, or the Grace of Nobles,
Shall drive or draw me near their pleasing-Troubles;
Let not their Favors make me drunk with folly:
In their Commands, still keep my Conscience holy:
Let me, true Honor, not the false delight;
And play the Preacher, not the Parasite.
So, Morn and Evening the Third Day conclude,
And God perceived that All his Works were good.
THE FOVRTH DAY OF THE FIRST WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The twinkling Spangles of the Firmament:
The wandering Seav'n (Each in a several Tent);
Their Course, their Force, their Essence is disputed;
That they (as Beasts) do eat and drink; refuted.
Heavens (not the Earth) with rapid motion roll:
The famous Stars observed in either Pole:
Heavens sloaping Belt: the Twelve celestial Signs,
Whear Sol the Seasons of the Year confines:
Days glorious Prince: Nights gloomy Patroness:
His Light and Might: Her constant Change-fulnes.
PVre Spirit that rapt'st above the Firmest Sphere, In the beginning of the
fourth book, calling upon the God of Heaven, our Poet prays to be lift up in
the Heavens, that he may discours^ (as he ought) of the stars* fixed and
wandering.

In fiery Coach, thy faithful Messenger,
Who smiting Jordan with his pleighted Cloak,
Did yerst divide the Waters with the stroke:
O* take me up; that, far from Earth, I may
From Sphere to Sphere, see the azure Heavens Today,
Be thou my Coachman, and now Check by Ioule
With Phoebus Chariot let my Chariotroule;
Drive on my Coach by Mars his flaming Coach;
Saturn and Luna let my wheels approach:
That having learned of their Fire-breathing Horses,
Their course, their light, their labor, and their forces,
My Muse may sing in sacred Eloquence,
To Virtues Friends, their virtuous Excellence:
And with the Lodestone of my conquering Verse,
Above the Poles attract the most perverse,
And you fair learned souls, you spirits divine,
To whom the Heavens so nimble quils assign,
As well to mount, as skilfully to limn
The various motion of their Taperstrim;
Lend me your hand; lift me above Parnassus;
With your loud Trebbles help my lowly Bassus.
For sure, besides that your wit-gracing Skill
Bears, in itself, itself's rich guerdon still;
Our Nephews, free from sacrilegious brauls,
Where Horror swims in blood about our walls,
Shall one day sing that your deer Song did merit
Better Heaven, better hap and better time to hear-it.
And, though (alas) my now new-rising Name
Can hope heer-after none, or little Fame:
The time that most part of our betterwits
Mis-spend in Flattery, or in Fancy-Fits,
In courting Ladies, or in clawing Lords,
Without affection, in affected words:
I mean to spend, in publishing the Story
Of Gods great works, to his immortal glory.
My rymes, begot in pain, and born in pleasure,
Thirst not for Fame (the Heathen hope's chief treasure):
'T shall me suffice, that our deer France do breed
(In happy season) some more learned sced,
That may record with more divine dexterity
Then I have don these wonders to Posterity.
Much less may these abortiue Brats of Mine
Expect Respect (but in respect of Thine):
Yet since the Heavens have thus entaskt my lays
(As darkly Cynthia darts her borrowed rays)
To shadow Thine; and to my Country render
Some small reflection of thy radiant splendour;
It is enough, if heer-by I incite
Some happier spirit to do thy Muse more right;
And with more life give thee thy proper grace,
And better follow great du BARTAS trace.
GOD'S NONE of these faint idle Artizens Here resuming his course, he
presecutes the work of the Creation.

Who, at the best abandon their designs,
Working by halfs; as rather a great deal,
To do much quickly, then to do it well:
But rather, as a workman never weary,
And all-sufficient, he his works does carry
To happy end; and to perfection,
With sober speed, brings what he has begun.
Having therefore the Worlds wide Curten spread
About the circuit of the fruitful Bed, In the fourth day, God created the
fixed Stars, the two great Lights, (vid.) the Sun and the Moon, together
with the other five Planets.

Where (to fill all with her unnumbered Kin)
Kind Natures self each moment lies in:
To make the same for ever admirable,
More stately-pleasant, and more profitable;
He the Azure Tester trimmed with golden marks,
And richly spangled with bright glistring sparks.
I know, those Tapers, twinkling in the sky,
Do turn so swiftly from our hand and eye,
That man can never (rightly) reach, to seeing
Their Course and Force, and much-much less their Being: Of their Course,
Force, Essence, and Substance.

But, if conjecture may extend above
To that great Orb, whose moving All does move,
The imperfect Light of the first Day was it,
Which for Heaven's Eyes did shining matter fit:
For, God, selecting lightest of that Light,
Garnisht Heavens seeling with those Torches bright:
Or else divided it; and pressing close
The parts, did make the Sun and Stars of those.
But, if thy wits thirst rather seek these things, Opinion of the Greek
touching the matter of the Stars.

In Greekish Cisterns then in Hebrew Springs;
Then I conclude, that as of moistfull matter,
God made the people that frequent the Water,
And of an Earthy stuff the stubborn droues
That haunt the Hills and Dales and Downs and Groves:
So, did he make, by his Almighty might,
The Heavens and Stars, of one same substance bright;
To the end these Lamps, dispersed in the Skies,
Might with their Orb, it with them, sympathize.
And as (with us) under the Oaken bark
The knurry knot with branching vains, we mark Simile.

To be of substance all one with the Tree,
Although far thicker and more rough it be:
So those gilt studs in the upper story driven,
Are nothing but the thickest part of Heaven.
When I observe their Light and Heat yblent Their substance is of Fire.

(Mere accidents of the upper Element)
I think them Fire: but not such Fire as lasts
No longer then the fuel that it wastes:
For then, I think all the Elements too-little
To furnish them only with one days victual.
And therefore smile I at those Fable-Forges, Resutation of such as have
thought that the Stars were living creatures that did eat and drink.

Whose busy-idle style so stiffly vrges,
The Heaven's bright Cressets to be living creatures,
Ranging for food, and hungry fodder-eaters;
Still sucking-vp (in their eternal motion)
The Earth for meat, and for their drink, the Ocean.
Sure, I perceive no motion in a Star,
But natural, certain, and regular;
Wher-as Beasts motions infinitely vary,
Confused, uncertain, diverse, voluntary.
I see not how so many golden Posts
Should scud so swift about Heavens azure coasts,
But that the Heavens must open and shut som-times,
Subject to passions, which our earthly climes
Alter, and toss the Sea, and the Air estrange
From it selfs temper with exceeding change.
I see not how, in those round blazing beams,
One should imagine any food-fit limbs:
Nor can I see how the Earth, and Sea should feed
So many Stars, whose greatness does exceed
So many times (if Star-Diuines say troth)
The greatness of the Earth and Ocean both:
Since here our Cattle, in a month, will eat
Seav'n-times the bulk of their own bulk in meat.
These Torches then range not at random, over
The lightsom thicknes of an vn-firm Floor:
As here below, diversely mooving them,
The painted Birds between two aires do swim.
But rather fixed unto turning Spheres,
Ay, will-they, nill-they, follow their careeres: Simile.

As Cart-nails fastened in a wheel (without
Selfs-motion) turn with others turns about.
As the Ague-sicke, upon his shivering pallet, A comparison.

Delays his health often to delight his palate;
When wilfully his taste-les Taste delights
In things unsavory to sound Appetites:
Even so, some brain-sicks live there now-adaies,
That lose themselves still in contrary ways;
Preposterous Wits that cannot row at ease,
On the smooth Channel of our common Seas.
And such are those (in my conceit at least)
Those Clarks that think (think how absurd a jest)
That neither Heavens nor Stars do turn at all,
Nor dance about this great round Earthly Ball;
But the Earth it self, this Massy Globe of ours,
Turns round-about once every twice-twelue hours:
And we resemble Land-bred nouices
New brought aboard to venture on the Seas;
Who, at first launching from the shore, suppose
The ship stands still, and that the ground it goes.
So, twinkling Tapers, that Heavens Arches fill, Opinion of Copernicus confuted

Equally distant should continue still.
So, never should an Arrow, shot upright,
In the same place upon the shooter light;
But would do (rather) as (at Sea) a stone
Aboard a Ship upward uprightly throw'n;
Which not within-boord falls, but in the Flood
A-stern the Ship, if so the wind be good.
So, should the Fouls that take their nimble flight
From Western Marshes toward Mornings Light,
And Zephyrus, that in the Summer time
Delights to visit Eurus in his clime,
And Bullets thundered from the Canons throat
(Whose roaring drowns the Heavn'ly thunders note)
Should seem recoyl: since the quick career,
That our round Earth should daily gallop here,
Must needs exceed a hundredfold (for swift)
Birds, Bullets, Winds; their wings, their force, their drift.
Armed with these reasons, 'twere superfluous
TO assail the reasons of Copernicus;
Who, to salve better, of the Stars the appearance,
Unto the Earth a threefold motion warrants:
Making the Sun the Center of this All, Leaving to dispute farther upon the
former Paradox, he pro ccedeth in his discourse, and by a lively comparison
represents the beautiful ornament of the Heavens about the Earth.

Moon, Earth, and Water, in one only Ball.
But since here, nor time, nor place does suit,
His Paradox at length to pros^cute;
I will proceed, grounding my next discourse
On the Heavens motions, and their constant course.
I often admire Greatness of mighty Hills,
And pleasant beauty of the flowery Fields,
And count-les number of the Oceans sand,
And secret force of sacred Adamant:
But much-much more (the more I mark their course)
Stars glistering greatness, beauty, number* force.
Even as a Peacock, pricked with loves desire, Simile.

To woo his Mistress, strowting stately by her,
Spreads round the rich pride of his pompous vail,
His azure wings and starry-golden tail,
With rattling pinions wheeling still about,
The more to set his beauteous beauty out:
The Firmament (as feeling like above)
Displays his pomp; pranceth about his Love,
Spreads his blew curtain, mixed with golden marks,
Set with gilt spangles, sow'n with glistring sparks,
Sprinkled with eyes, specked with Tapers bright,
Poudred with Stars streaming with glorious light,
TO inflame the Earth the more, with Lovers grace,
To take the sweet fruit of his kind embrace.
He, that to number all the Stars would seek, The number of Stars under both
the Poles innumerable.

Had need invent some new Arithmetic;
And who, to cast that Reckoning takes in hand,
Had need for Counters take the Ocean's sand:
Yet have our wise and learned Elders found And why the ancient Astronomers
observed 48.

Foure-dozen Figures in the Heavenly Round,
For aid of memory; and to our eyes
In certain Howses to divide the Skies.
Of those, are Twelve in that rich Girdle greft Of the fignes in the Zodiac.

Which God gave Nature for her New-yeres-gift
(When making All, his voice Almighty most,
Gave so fair Laws unto Heavens shining Host)
To wear it biaz, buckled ouer-thwart-her;
Not round about her swelling waste to girt-her.
This glorious Baldrick of a Golden tindge,
Imbost with Rubies, edged with Silver Frindge,
Buckled with Gold, with a Bend glistring bright,
Heavens biaz-wise enuirons day and night.
For, from the period, whear the Ram does bring The Zodiac.

The day and night to equal ballancing,
Ninety degrees toward the North it wends,
Thence just as much toward Mid-Heav'n it bends,
As many thence toward the South; and thence
Toward the Years Portall, the like difference.
Nephelian Crook-horn, with brass Cornets crowned, Aries in Mid-March begins
the Spring.

Thou buttest bravely against the New-yeres bound;
And richly clad in thy fair Golden Fleece,
Doo'st hold the First House of Heavens spacious Meese. Taurus in mid-Aprill.

Thou spy'st anon the Bull behind thy back:
Who, least that fodder by the way he lack,
Seeing the World so naked; to renewg't,
Coats the infant Earth in a green gallant suit;
And, without Plough or Yoke, does freely fling
Through fragrant Pastures of the flowery Spring. Gemini in mid-May.

The Twins, whose heads, arms, shoulders, knees and feet,
God filled with Stars to shine in season sweet,
Contendin Course, who first the Bull shall catch,
That neither will nor may attend their match.
Then, Summers-guide, the Crab coms rowing soft, Cancer in mid-Iune begins the
summer.

With his eight owres through the Heaven's azure lo^t;
To bring us yearly, in his starry shell,
Many long days the shaggy Earth to swele.
Almost with like pase leaps the Lion out, Leo in mid-Iuly.

All clad with flames, bristled with beams about;
Who, with contagion of his burning breath,
Both grass and grain to cinders withers.
The Virgin next, sweeping Heavens azure Globe Virgo in mid-August.

With stately train of her bright Golden robe,
Milde-proudly marching in her left hand brings
A sheaf of Corn, and in her right hand wings. Libra in mid-September begin
neth Autumn.

After the Maiden, shines the Balance bright,
Equal druider of the Day and Night:
In whose gold Beam, with three gold rings, there fastens
With six gold strings, a payr of golden Basens.
The spiteful Scorpion, next the Skale addressed,
With two bright Lamps couers his loathsome breast; Scorpio in mid-October.

And fain, from both ends, with his double sting,
Would spet his venom over every thing; Sagittarius in mid-Nouember

But that the brave Half-horse Phylirean Scout,
Galloping swift the heavenly Belt about,
Ay fiercely threats, with his flame-feathered arrow
To shoot the sparkling starry Viper thorough.
And the hoary Centaure, during all his Race, Capricornus in mid-December,
begins Winter.

Is so attentive to this only chase,
That dread-less of his dart, Heavens shining Kid
Coms iumping light, just at his heels vnspid. Aquarius in mid-Ianuary.

Mean-whilethe Skinker, from his starry spout,
After the Goat, a silver stream pours-out;
Distilling still out of his radiant Fire
Rivers of Water (who but will admire?)
In whose clear channel might at pleasure swim
Those two bright Fishes that do follow him; Pisces in mid-February.

But that the Torrent slides so swift away,
That it out-runs them ever, even as they
Outrun the Ram, who ever them pursues;
And by renewing Yearly, all renues. The names of the Principal stars of the
North Pole.

Besides these Twelve, toward the Artik side,
A flaming Dragon does Two-Bears divide;
After, the Wainman coms, the Crown, the Spear;
The Kneeling Youth, the Harp, the Hamperer
Of the hateful Snake (whether we call the same
By Aesculapius, or Alcides name)
Swift Pegasus, the Dolphin, loving man;
Jove's stately Aegle, and the silver Swan:
Andromeda, with Cassiopeia neer-her,
Her father Cepheus, and her Perseus deerer:
The shining Triangle, Medusa's Tress,
And the bright Coachman of Tindarides.
Toward the other Pole, Orion, Eridanus, The names of the Stars of the
South-Pole.

The Whale, the Whelp, and hot-breath't Sirius,
The Hare, the Hulk* the Hydra, and the Boule,
The Centaure, Wolf, the Censer, and the Foul
(The twice-foul Raven) the Southern Fish and Crown,
Through Heavens bright Arches brandish up and down.
Thus, on This-Day working the eightth azure Tent, The fixed stars are in the
eight Heaven.

With Art-les Art, divinely excellent;
The Almighties fingers fixed many a million
Of golden Scutchions in that rich Pauilion:
But in the rest (under that glorious Heaven)
But one a-peece, unto the several Seav'n; And the seven Planets under them
each in his proper Sphere

Least, of those Lamps the number-passing number
Should mortal eyes with such confusion cumber,
That we should never, in the cleerest night,
Stars diverse Course see or discern aright.
And therefore also, all the fixed Tapers
He made to twinkle with such trembling capers; Why the Planets twinkle not,
and the fixed stars do twinkle.

But, the Scaven Lights that wander under them,
Through various passage, never shake a beam:
Or, he (perhaps) made them not different;
But, the host of Sparks spread in the Firmament
Far from our sense, through distance infinite,
Seems but to twinkle, to our twinkling sight: The firmament much farther from
the Earth then the spears of the Planets.

Whereas the rest, nearer a thousand fold
To the Earth and Sea, we do more brim behold.
For, the Heavens are not mixtly enterlaced,
But the undermost by the upper be embraced,
And more or less their roundels wider are,
As from the Center they be near or far:
As in an Egg, the shell includes the skin, Simile

The skin the white, the white the yolk with-in. Two similes representing the
motion of the eight inferior Heavens, through the swift turning of the ninth
which is the Primum Mobile.

Now as the Wind, buffing upon a Hill
With roaring breath against a ready Mill,
Whirls with a whiff the sails of swelling clout,
The sails do swing the winged shaft about,
The shaft the wheel, the wheel the trendle turns,
And that the stone which grindes the flowery corns:
Or like as also in a Clock well tended,
Just counter-poize, justly thereon suspended,
Makes the great Wheel go round, and that anon
Turns with his turning many a meaner one,
The trembling watch, and the iron Maule that chimes
The entire Day in twice twelve equal times:
So the grand Heaven, in four and twenty hours,
Surueying all this various house of ours,
With his quick motion all the Spears does move;
Whose radiant glances gild the World above,
And drives them every day (which swiftnes strange-is)
From Gange to Tagus; and from Tay to Ganges.
But, the vnder-Orbs, as grudging to be still Each of the 8. Heavens so
tra^sported by the Primum Mobil^ has also his proper oblique, and distinct
course each from other.

So straightly subject to another will,
Still without change, still at another pleasure
After one pipe to dance one only measure;
They from-ward turn* and traversing aside,
Each by himself an oblique course does slide:
So that they all (although it seem not so)
Forward and backward in one instant go,
Both up and down, and with contrary pases,
At once they post to two contrary places:
Like as my self, in my lost Marchant-years
( A loss, alas, that in these lives appears)
Wanting to Brabant, Englands golden Fleece The same explaned by a proper
Simile.

( A ritcher pryze then Jason brought to Greece)
While toward the Sea, our (then, Swan-poorer) Thames
Bare down my Bark upon her ebbing streams:
Upon the hatches, from the Prow to Poup
Walking in compass of that narrow Coop,
Maugre the most that Wind and Tide could do,
Have gone at once toward LEE and LONDON too. Why some of these Heavens have a
slower course and shorter compass then other some.

But now, the nearer any of these Eight,
Approach the Empyreall Palace walls in height,
The more their circuit, and more days they spend,
Ye^ they return unto their Iourneys end.
It Is therefore thought, That sumptuous Canapy, The term of the revolution of
the Firmament.

The which the vn-niggard hand of Majesty
Poudred so thick with Shields so shining clear,
Spends in his voyage nigh seven thousand year.
Ingenious Saturn, spouse of Memory, Of the seventh, which is the Sphere of
Saturn.

Father of the Age of Gold; though coldly dry,
Silent and sad, bald, hoary, wrinkle-faced,
Yet art thou first among the Planets placed:
And thirty years thy Leaden Coach does run
Ye^ it arrive where thy Career begun.
Thou, rich, benign, Ill-chasing Jupiter, Of the 6 which is the Sphere of
Jupiter.

Art (worthy) next thy Father sickle-bear,
And while thou do with thy more mild aspect
His froward beams disast'rous frouns correct,
Thy Tinnen Chariot shod with burning bosses,
Through twice-six Signs in twice six twelve months crosses.
Braue-minded Mars (yet Master of mis-order, Of the 5. which is the sphere of
Mars.

Delighting naught but Battails, blood, and murder)
His surious Coursers lasheth night and day,
That he may swiftly pass his course away:
But in the road of his eternal Race,
So many rubs hinder his hasty pase,
That thrice, the while, the lively Liquor-God
With dabbled heels has swelling clusters trod,
And thrice has Ceres shav'n her amber tress,
Ye^ his steel whels have done their business.
Pure goldie-locks, Sol, States-friend, Honour-giuer, Of the 4. which is the
Sphere of Sol.

Light-bringer, Laureat, Leach-man, all Reviver,
Thou, in three hundred threescore days and five,
Do to the period of thy Race arrive.
For, with thy proper course thou measur'st the Year,
And measur'st Days with thy constrained career.
Fair dainty Venus, whose free virtues mild Of the 3. which is the sphere of
Venus.

With happy fruit get all the world with-childe
(Whom wanton dalliance, dancing, and delight,
Smiles, witt^e wiles, youth, love, and beauty bright,
With soft blind Cupids evermore consort)
Of light some Day opens and shuts the port;
For, hardly dar^ her silver Doves go far
From bright Apollos glory-beaming Car.
Not much unlike so, Mercury the witty, Of the 2. which is the sphere of
Mercury.

For ship, for shop, book, bar, or Court, or City:
Smooth Orator, swift Penman, sweet Musician,
Rare Artizan, deep-reaching Politician,
Fortunat Merchant, fine Prince-humour-pleaser;
To end his course takes near a twelue-months leisure:
For, all the while, his nimble winged heels
Dare little bouge from Phoebus golden wheels.
And lastly Luna, thou cold Queen of night,
Regent of humors, parting Months aright, Of the 1. which is the Sphere of
Lun^. The lowest Planet nearest the Earth.

Chaste Emperess to one Endymion constant;
Constant in Love, though in thy looks in constant
( Unlike our Loves, whose hearts d^ssemble soonest)
Twelve times a year through all the Zodiak runnest.
Now, if these Lamps, so infinite in number,
Should still stand-stil as in a sloathfull slumber,
Then should some Places (always in one plight)
Have always Day, and ^om have always Night: Of the necessity of diverse
motions of the Heavens.

Then should the Summers Fire, and Winters Frost,
Rest opposite still on the self same Coast:
Then naught could spring, and nothing prosper would
In all the World, for Want of Heat or Cold.
Or, without change of distance or of dance,
If all these Lights still in one path should prance,
The inconstant parts of this low Worlds contents
Should never feel so sundry accidents,
As the Con^unction of celestial Features
Incessantly pours upon mortal Creatures.
I Will never believe that the Arch-Architect Of the force and influence of the
C^lestiall body upon the terrestrial.

With all these Fires the Heavenly Arches decked
Only for Show, and with these glistering shields
TO amaze poor Shepherds watching in the fields.
I Will never believe that the least Flowr that pranks
Our Garden borders, or the Common banks,
And the least stone that in her warming Lap
Our kind Nurse Earth does covetously wrap,
Has some peculiar virtue of it own;
And that the glorious Stars of Heaven have none:
But shine in vain, and have no charge precise,
But to be walking in heavens Galleries,
And through that Palace up and down to clamber
As Golden Gulls about a PRINCES CHAMBER.
Sens-less is he (who without blush) denies
What to sound senses most apparent lies:
And against Experience he that spets Fallacians,
Is to be hisst from learned Disputations:
And such is he, that does affirm the Stars
To have no force on these inferiors;
Though heavens effects we most apparent see
In number more then heavenly Torches be.
I nill allege the Seasons alteration, Sundry proofs of the same. 1 The
diverse seasons. 2 The fearful accide^ts that commonly succeed Eclipses.

Caused by the Sun in shifting Habitation:
I will not urge, that never at noon days
His envious Sister intercepts his Rays
But some great State eclipseth, and from Hell
Alecto looses all these Furies Fell,
Grim, lean-fac't Famine, foul infectious Plague;
Blood-thirsty War, and Treason hateful Hag:
Here pouring down Woes universal Flood,
To drown the World in Seas of Tears and Blood.
I Will overpass how Sea does Eb and Flow, 3 The ebbing and flowing of the sea.

As the Horned Queen does either shrink or grow;
And that the more she Fills her forked Round,
The more the Marrow does in bones abound,
The Blood in Veins, the sap in Plants, the Moisture 4 The increase and
decrease of marrow, blood and humors in diverse creatures.

And lushious meat, in Creuish, Crab and Oyster:
That Oak, and Elm, and Firr, and Alder, cut
Before the Crescent have her Cornets shut,
Are never lasting, for the builders turn,
In Ship or House, but rather fit to burn: 5. The apparent alterations in the
bodies of sick persons.

And also, that the Sick, while she is filling,
Feel sharper Fits through all their members thrilling.
So that, this Lamp alone approoves, what powrs,
Heavens Tapers have even on these souls of ours:
Temp'ring; or troubling (as they be inclined)
Our mind and humors, humors and our mind,
Through Sympathy, which while this Flesh we carry,
Our Souls and Bodies does together marry.
I Will only say that since the hot aspect
Of the Heavenly Dog Star, kindles with effect A particular proose by the
effects of certain notable stars, ordinarily noted in some Month of ^he year.

A thousand unseen Fires, and dries the Fields,
Scorches the Valleys, parches-vp the Hills,
And often times into our panting hearts,
The bitter Fits of burning Fevers darts:
And (opposite) the Cup, the dropping Pleiades,
Bright-glistering Orion and the weeping Hyades,
Never (almost) look down on our abode,
But that they stretch the Waters bounds abroad,
With Clowdy horror of their wrathful frown,
Threatening again the guilty World to drown:
And (to be brief) since the gilt azure Front
Of Firmest Sphere has scarce a spark upon it
But pours down-ward some apparent change,
Toward the Storing of the Worlds great Grange;
We may conjecture what hid power is given
TO infuse among us from the other Seven,
From each of those which for their vertuerare
The Almighty placed in a proper Sphere. Rejecting the Stoiks, he shows that
God, as the first Cause, does order all things, and what use we should make of
the force Course, and Light of the coelesti all bodies.

Not that (as Stoiks) I intend to tie
With Iron Chains of strong Necessity
The Eternal's hands, and his free feet enstock
In Destinies hard Diamantin Rock:
I hold, that God (as The first Cause) has given
Light, Course, and Force to all the Lamps of Heaven:
That still he guides them, and his Providence
Disposes free, their Fatal influence:
And that therefore (the rather) we below
Should study all, their Course and Force to know:
To the end that, seeing (through our Parents Fall)
TO how many Tyrants we are waxen thrall,
Ever since first fond Woman's blind Ambition,
Breaking, made Adam break Heavens High Commission:
We might vnpuff our Heart, and bend our Knee,
TO appease with sighs Gods wrathful Majesty;
Beseeching him to turn away the storms
Of Hail, and Heat, Plague, Dearth, and dreadful Arms,
Which often the angry Stars, with bad Aspects,
Threat to be falling on our stubborn necks:
To give us Curbs to bridle the ill proclivitie
We are inclin'd-to, by a hard Nativitie:
To pour some Water of his Grace, to quench
Our boiling Fleshes fell Concupiscence,
To calm our many passions (spiritual tumors)
Sprung from corruption of our vicious humors.
Latonian Twinns, Parents of Years and Months, Here proceeding to the second
part of this book, he treats at large of the Sun and Moon.

Alas! why hide you so your shining Fronts?
What? nill you show the splendour of your ray,
But through a Vail of mourning Clouds, I pray?
I pray pul-off your mufflers and your moorning,
And let me see you in your native burning:
And my deer Muse by her eternal flight,
Shall spread as far the glory of your Light
As you your selves run, in alternat Ring,
Day after Night, Night after Day to bring.
Thou radiant Coachman, running end-les course, Of the Sun: entering into the
description whereof, he confesses that he knows not well where to begin.

Fountain of Heat, of Light the lively sourse,
Life of the World, Lamp of this Universe,
Heavens richest Gemm: O teach me where my Verse
May but begin thy praise. Alas! I fare
Much like to one that in the Clouds does stare
To count the Quails, that with their shadow cover
The Italian Sea, when soaring hither over,
Fain of a milder and more fruitful Clime,
They com, with us to pass the Summer time:
No sooner he begins one shoal to sum,
But more and more, still greater shoals do com,
Swarm upon Swarm, that with their count-les number
Break off his purpose, and his sense incumber.
Days glorious Eye! even as a mighty King, The Sun at Prince of the Ce
lestiall lights marches in the midst of the other six Planets which enuiron

About his Country stately Progressing,
Is compast round with Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Knights,
(Orderly marshalled in their noble Rites)
Esquires and Gentlemen, in courtly kind
And then his Guard before him and behind;
And there is naught in all his Royal Muster,
But to his Greatness adds grace and luster:
So, while about the World thou ridest ay,
Which only lives by virtue of thy Ray,
Six Heavenly Princes, mounted evermore,
Wayt on thy Coach, three behind, three before,
Besides the Host of the upper Twinklers bright,
To whom, for pay thou give only Light.
And, even as Man (the little-World of Cares) The Sun is in Heaven, as the
heart in man's body.

Within the middle of the body, bears
His heart (the Spring of life) which with proportion
Supplieth spirits to all, and every portion:
Even so (O Sun) thy Golden Chariot marches
Amid the six Lamps of the six low Arches
Which seel the World, that equally it might
Richly impart them Beauty, Force, and Light.
Praising thy Heat, which subtly does pearce His notable offects upon the
Earth.

The solid thickness of our Universe,
Which in the Earths kidneys Mercury does burn,
And pallid Sulphur to bright Metal turn;
I do digress, to praise that Light of thine,
Which if it should, but one Day, cease to shine,
The unpurged Air to Water would resolve,
And Water would the mountain tops inuolve.
Scarce I begin to measure thy bright Face,
Whose greatness does so often Earths greatness pass,
And with still running the Celestial Ring,
Is seen and felt of every living thing;
But that fantastikly I change my Theme
To sing the swiftness of thy tyer-les Teem;
To sing, how, Rising from the Indian Wave,
Thou seem (O Titan) like a Bridegroom brave, Excellent comparisons borrow
ed out of the 19 Psalm.

Who, from his Chamber early issuing out
In rich array, with rarest Gems about;
With pleasant Countenance, and lovely Face,
With golden tresses, and attractive grace,
Cheers (at his coming) all the youthful throng
That for his presence earnestly did long,
Blessing the day, and with delightful glee,
Singing aloud his Epithalamie.
Then, as a Prince that feels his Noble heart,
Wounded with Loves pure Honor-winged dart
( As HARDY LAELIVS, that Great GARTER-KNIGHT, The same exemplified in an
honorable personage of our time now very aged; but in his young years, the glory
of Arms and Chivalry.

Tilting in Triumph of ELIZA'S Right
( Yearly that Day that her deerraign began)
Most bravely mounted on proud RABICAN,
All in gilt armor, on his glistering Mazor
A stately Plume, of Orange mixed with Azur,
In gallant Course, before ten thousand eyes,
From all Defendants bore the Princely Prize)
Thou glorious Champion, in thy Heavenly Race,
Runnest so swift we scarce conceivethy pase.
When I record, how fitly thou do guide
Through the fourth heaven thy flaming Coursers pride, Of Gods wonder full
providence in placing the Sun in the midst of the other Planets, and of the
commodities that come thereof

That as they pass, their fiery breaths may temper
Saturn's and Cynthya's cold and moist distemper
(For, if thou gallop'st in the nether Room
Like Phaeton thou would the World consume:
Or, if thy Throne were set in Saturn's Sky,
For want of heat, then every thing would die)
In the same instant I am pressed to sing,
How thy return reviveth every thing;
How, in thy Presence, Fear, Sloth, Sleep, and Night,
Snowes, Fogs, and Fancies, take their sudden Flight.
The art (to be brief) an Ocean wanting bound,
Whear ( as full vessels have the lesser sound)
Plenty of Matter makes the speaker mute;
As wanting words thy worth to prosecute.
Yet glorious Monarch, among so many rare Of the Suns continual and daily
course.

And match-less Flowrs as in thy Garland are,
Some one or two shall my chaste sober Muse
For thine Immortal sacred Sisters choose.
I Will boldly sing (bright Soverain) thou art none
Of those weak Princes Flattery works upon
( No second EDWARD, nor no RICHVRD Second,
Vn-kinged both, as Rule-vnworthy recon'd)
Who, to enrich their Minions past proportion,
Pill all their Subjects with extreme extortion;
And charmed with Pleasures (O exceeding Pity!)
Ly always wallowing in one wanton City;
And, loving only that, to mean Lieutenants
Farm out their Kingdoms care, as unto Tenants.
For, once a day, each Country under Heaven
Thou bidst Good Morrow, and thou bidst Good-Ev'n.
And thy far-seeing Ey, as Censor, views
The rites and fashions Fish, and Foul do use,
And our behaviors, worthy (every one)
The Abderian Laughter, and Ephesian Moan.
But true it is, to the end a fruitful lew
May every Climat in his time renew. Of his oblique or By-course, cause of the
four seasons: and of the commodities of all Climates in the world.

And that all men may nearer in all Realms
Feel the alternat virtue of thy beams;
Thy sumptuous Chariot, with the Light returning,
From the same Portall mounts not every Morning:
But, to make known each-where thy daily drift,
Doo'st every day, thy Coursers Stable shift:
That while the Spring, prankt in her greenest pride,
Raigns here, els-wher Autumn as long may bide;
And while fair Summers heat our fruits does ripe,
Cold Wintets Ice may other Countries gripe.
No sooner does thy shining Chariot Roll A pleasant and lively description of
the four seasons of the year.

From highest Zenith toward Northern Pole,
To sport thee for three Months in pleasant Inns,
Of Aries, Taurus, and the gentle Twinns,
But that the mealie Mountains (late unseen)
Change their white garments into lusty green,
The Gardens prank them with their Flowery buds,
The Meads with grass, with leaves the naked Woods,
Sweet Zephyrus begins to buss his Flora, The Spring.

Swift-winged Singers to salute Aurora;
And wanton Cupid, through this Universe,
With pleasing wounds, all Creatures hearts to perce.
When, backward bent, Phlegon thy fiery Steed,
With Cancer, Leo, and the Maid, does feed;
The Earth cracks with heat, and Summer crowns his Ceres
With gilded Ears, as yellow as her hair-is:
The Reaper, panting both for heat and pain,
With crooked Rasor shaves the tufted Plain; The Summer.

And the good Husband, that due season takes,
Within a Month his year's Provision makes.
When from the mid-Heav'n thy bright flame does fly
Toward the Cross-Stars in the Antartik Sky, Har^^st.

To be three months, vp-rising, and down-lying
With Scorpio, Libra, and the Archer flying,
The Earth by degrees her lovely beauty bates,
Pomona loads her lap with delicates,
Her Apron and her Osiar basket (both)
With dainty fruits for her deer Autumns tooth
(Her health-less spouse) who barefoot hops about
To tread the juice of Bacchus clusters out.
And last of all, when thy proud-trampling Teem
For three Months more, to soiourne still does seem
With Capricorn, Aquarius, and the Fishes
(While we in vain revoke thee with our wishes) Winter.

In stead of Flowrs, chill shivering Winter dresses
With Isicles her (self-bald) borrowed tresses:
About her brows a Periwig of Snow,
Her white Freez mantle freng'd with Ice below,
A payr of Lamb-lyn'd buskins on her feet,
So does she march Orythias love to meet;
Who with his bristled, hoarie, bugle-beard,
Coming to kiss her, makes her lips afeard;
Whear-at, he sighs a breath so cold and keen,
That all the Waters Crystallized been;
While in a fury, with his boystrous wings
Against the Scythian snowie Rocks he flings,
All lusks in sloth, and till these Months do end,
Bacchus and Vulcan must us both befrend.
O second honor of the Lamps supernal, Of the Moon and her alterations

Sure Calendar of Festiuals eternal,
Seas Soueraintess, Sleep-bringer, Pilgrims guide,
Peace-loving Queen: what shall I say beside?
What shall I say of thine inconstant brow,
Which makes my brain waver, I woat not how?
But, if by the Ey, a man's intelligence
May ghess of things distance so far from hence,
I think thy body round as any Ball, Of her roundnes and brightness borrowed
of the Sun.

Whose superfice (nigh equal over all)
As a pure Glass, now up, and down anon,
Reflects the bright beams of thy spouse, the Sun.
For as a Husbands Nobless does illustre Simile.

A mean-born wife: so does the glorious luster
Of radiant Titan, with his beams, embright
Thy gloomy Front, that selfly has no light.
Yet it is not always after one self sort, Of her waxing and waning when she is
in her last quarter, and when she renues and comes to her full.

For, for thy Car does swifter thee transport,
Then does thy Brothers, diversely thou shin'st,
As more or less thou from his sight declin'st.
Therefore each month, when Hymen (blessed) above
In both your bodies kindles ardent love,
And that the Starrs-king all inamoured on thee,
Full of desire, shines down direct upon thee;
Thy nether half-Globe toward the Earthy Ball
(After it is Nature) is observed all.
But, him aside thou have no sooner got,
But on thy side a silver file we noat,
A half-bent Bow; which swells, the less thy Coach
Does the bright Chariot of thy spouse approach,
And fills his Circle. When the Imperial Star
Beholds thee just in one Diameter,
Then by degrees thy Full face falls away,
And (by degrees) Westward thy Horns display:
Till fallen again betwixt thy Lovers arms,
Thou wink'st again, vanquished with pleasures charms.
Thus do thou Wax and VVane, thee often renewing;
Delighting change: and mortal things, ensuing
(As subject to thee) thy selfs transmutation,
Feel the unfelt force of secret alteration.
Not, but that Phoebus always with his shine,
Cleers half (at least) of thine aspect divine; Of the cause of the diverse
aspect of the Moon.

But't sems not so: because we see but here
Of thy round Globe the lower Hemisphear:
Though waxing usward, Heav'n-ward thou do wane;
And waning usward, Heav'n-ward grow'st again.
Yet, it befalls, even when thy face is Full,
When at the highest thy pale Coursers pull,
When no thick mask of Clouds can hide away,
From living eyes, thy broad, round, glistering Ray,
Thy light is darkened, and thine eyes are seel'd,
Covered with shadow of a rusty shield.
For, thy Full face in his oblique design
Confronting Phoebus in the Ecliptic ligne,
And the Earth between; thou losest for a space,
Thy splendour borrowd of thy Brothers grace:
But, to revenge thee on the Earth, for this Of the cause of the Eclips of the
Sun.

Fore-stalling thee of thy kind Lovers kiss,
Sometimes thy thick Orb thou doo'st inter-blend
Twixt Sol and us, toward the later end:
And then (because his splendour cannot pass
Or pearce the thicknes of thy gloomy Mass)
The Sun, as subject to Deaths pangs, us sees-not,
But seems all Light-less, though indeed he is not.
Therefore, far differing your Eclipses are;
For thine is often, and thy Brothers rare:
Thine does indeed deface thy beauty bright; Difference between the Eclipses of
the Sun, and of the Moon.

His does not him, but us bereave of Light:
It is the Earth, that thy defect procures;
It is thy shadow, that the Sun obscures:
Eastward, thy front begins first to lack;
Westward, his brows begin their frowning black:
Thine at thy Full, when thy most glory shines;
His, in thy Wane, when beauty most declines:
Thine's general, toward Heaven and Earth together;
His, but to Earth, nor to all places neither.
For, the hideous Cloud, that cov'red so long since Of the admirable and
extraordinary Eclipse of the Sun, on the Day that our Savior suffered on the
Cross, for our Redemption. Mat. 27, ver. 45 Mar. 15, ver. 33 Luk 23. ver. 44

With nights black vail the eyes of the Starry-Prince
(When as he saw, for our foul Sinful slips,
The Match-less Maker of the Light, eclipse)
Was far, far other: For, the swarty Moors,
That sweating toil on Guinnes wealthy shoars:
Those whom the Niles continual Cataract
With roaring noise for ever deaf does make:
Those, that suruaying mighty Quinzay.
Cassagale,
Within the Circuit of her spacious Wall
Do dry-foot dance on the Oriental Seas;
And pass, in all her goodly crossing ways
And stately streets fronted with sumptuous Bowrs,
Twelve thousand Bridges, and twelve thousand Towers:
Those that, in Norway and in Finland, chase
The soft-skind Martens, for their precious Case;
Those that in Ivory Sleads on Ireland Seas
(Congealed to Crystal) slide about at ease;
Were witness all of his strange grief; and ghest,
That God, or Nature was then deep distressed.
Moreover Cynthia, in that fearful stound,
Full-fild the compass of her Circle round;
And, being so far off, she could not make
(By Natures course) the Sun to be so black:
Nor, issuing from the Eastern part of Heaven,
Darken that beauty, which her own had given.
In brief, mine ey, confounded with such Spectacles
In that one wonder sees a Sea of Miracles.
What could thou do less, then thy Self dishonor
(O chief of Planets!) thy great Lord to honor?
Then for thy Fathers death, awhile to wear
A moorning Roab on the hateful Hemi-spheare?
Then at high-noon shut thy fair eye, to shun
A Sight, whose sight did Hell with horror stun?
And (pearc't with sorrow for such injuries)
To please thy Maker, Nature to displease?
So, from the South to North to make apparent, Of the going back of the Sun in
the time of Ezechias. 1. King. 26. Ver. 11. Es^y. 38. Ver. 8

That God reuoak't his Seri^ant Death's sad Warrant
Against Ezechias: and that he would give
The godly King fifteen years more to live:
Transgressing Heavens eternal Ordinance;
Thrice in one Day, thou through one path did prance:
And, as desirous of another nap,
In thy ver million sweet Aurora's Lap,
Thy Coach turned back, and thy swift sweating Horse
Full ten degrees lengthned their wonted Course:
Dials went false, and Forests (gloomy black)
Wondered to see their mighty shades go back.
So, when the incensed Heavens did fight so fell Of the Suns standing still
in the time of Iosuah. Ios. 12. 13

Under the Standard of deer Israel,
Against the Host of odious Ammorites;
Among a million of swift-Flashing Lights,
Rayning down Bullets from a stormy Cloud,
As thick as Hail, upon their Armies proud:
That such as escaped from Heavens wrathful thunder,
Victorious swords might after heaw in-sunder;
Co^^ur'd by Iosuah, thy brave steeds stood still,
^^ ^ull Career stopping thy whirling wheel*
And, one whole Day, in one degree they stayed
In midst of Heaven, for sacred Armies aid:
Least the Infidels, in their disordred Flight,
Should save themselves under the wings of Night.
Those, that then lived under the other Pole,
Seeing the Lamp which does enlight the Whole,
To hide so long his lovely face away,
Thought never more to have re-seen the Day;
The wealthy Indians and the men of Spain,
Never to see Sun Rise or Set again.
In the same place Shadows stood still, as stone;
And in twelve Hours the Dials showed but one.
THE FIFTH DAY OF THE FIRST WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Fish in the Sea, Fowls in the Air abound:
The Forms of all things in the Waters found:
The various Manners of Sea-Citizens,
Whose constant Friendship far exceeds Men's:
Arions strange escape: The Fowls attend
On the only Phoenix, to her end-less end:
Their kinds, their customs, and their plumes variety;
Some presidents of Prudence, some of Piety:
The grateful Aegle, burning in the Flame
With her dead Mistress, the fair Sestian Dame.
LAtonian Lamps, conducting diverse ways, After a Poetical manner he craves
time and opportunity to discourse in this Day of the creation of Fishes and of
Fowls.

About the World, successiue Nights and Days;
Parents of winged Time, haste, haste your Carrs,
And passing swiftly both the opposed Bars
Of East and West, by your returning Ray,
The imperfect World make elder, by a Day.
Ye Fish, that brightly in Heavens Baldrik shine,
If you would see the Waters waving brine
Abound with Fishes, pray Hyperion
T'abandon soon his liquid Mansion;
If he expect, in his prefixed Career,
To host with you a Month in every Year.
And thou, eternal Father, at whose wink To which purpose ^specially he
calls on the true God.

The wrathful Ocean's swelling pride does sink,
And stubborn storms of bellowing Winds be dumb,
Their wide mouths stopped, and their wild pinions number;
Great Soverain of the Seas, whose books can draw
A man alive from the Whales monstrous maw,
Provide me (Lord) of Steers-man, Star, and Boat,
That through the vast Seas I may safely float:
Or rather teach me dyue, that I may view
Deep under water all the Scaly crew;
And dropping wet, when I return to land
Laden with spoils, extol thy mighty hand.
IN VAIN had God stored Heaven with glistring studs, The first part of this
Book, wherein he handles how by the Commandment of the Lord, the Fishes began
to move in the Waters.

The Plain with grain, the Mountain tops with woods,
Severed the Air from Fire, the Earth from Water,
Had he not soon peopled this large Theater
With living Creatures: Therefore he began
( This-Day) to quicken in the Ocean,
In standing Pools, and in the straggling Rivers
(Whose folding Channel fertile Champain severs)
So many Fishes of so many features,
That in the Waters one may see all Creatures;
And all that in this All is to be found;
As if the World within the Deeps were drowned.
Seas have (as well as Skies) Sun, Moon, and Stars: The Seas no less stored
with priui ledges and presidents of Gods glorious power then Heaven and Earth;
and of the strange Fishes that live therein.

(As well as Air) Swallows, and Rooks, and Stares:
(As well as Earth) Vines, Roses, Nettles, Millions,
Pinks, Gilliflowrs, Mushroms, and many millions
Of other Plants (more rare and strange then these)
As very Fishes living in the Seas:
And also Rams, Calves, Horses, Hares, and Hogs,
Wolves, Lions, Vrchins, Elephants, and Dogs,
Yea Men and Mayds: and (which I more admire)
The Mytred Bishop, and the Cowled Friar:
Whereof, examples (but a few years since)
Were showen the Norways, and Polonian Prince.
You divine wits of elder Days, from whom
The deep Invention of rare Works has com,
Took you not pattern of your chiefest Tools
Out of the Lap of Thetis, Lakes, and Pools?
Which partly in the Waves, part on the edges
Of craggy Rocks, among the ragged sedges,
Bring-forth abundance of Pins, Pincers, Spoaks,
Pikes, Percers, Needles, Mallets, Pipes, and Yoaks,
Owers, sayls, and swords, saws, wedges, Razors, Rammers,
Plumes, Cornets, Knives, Wheels, Vices, Horns, and Hammers.
And, as if Neptune, and fair Pan^pe,
Palae^on, Triton, and Leucothoe,
Kept publik Roules, there is the Calamary;
Who ready Penknife, Pen and Ink does carry.
As a rare Painter draws (for pleasure) here Why God created so many sorts of
strange Fishes

A sweet Adonis, a foul Satyr there:
Here a huge Cyclop, there a Pigme Elf;
Sometimes, no less busying his skillful self,
Upon some ugly Monster (seldom seen)
Then on the Picture of fair Beauties Queen:
Even so the Lord, that, in his Work's variety,
We might the more admire his powerful Deity;
And that we might discern by differing features
The various kinds of the vast Oceans creatures;
Forming this mighty Frame, he every Kind
With diverse and peculiar Signet signed.
Some have their heads grovelling betwixt their feet Examples* The Pour-Cuttle.
Cuttle. Crab. Sea Har^. Oyster.

(As the inky Cuttles, and the Many-feet):
Some in their breast (as Crabs): some head-less are,
Foot-less, and finn-les (as the bane-full Hare,
And heat-full Oyster) in a heap confused,
Their parts vnparted, in themselves diffused.
The Tyrian Merchant, or the Portuguez
Can hardly build one Ship of many Trees: The Tortoise.

But of one Tortoise, when he list to float,
The Arabian Fisherman can make a Boat:
And one such Shell, him in the stead does stand
Of Hulk at Sea, and of a House on land.
Shall I omit the monstrous Whirl-about,
Which in the Sea another Sea does spout,
Wherewith huge Vessels (if they happen nigh)
Are overwhelmed and funken suddenly?
Shall I omit the Tunnies, that durst meet The Tunny^.

The Eoan Monarchs never daunted Fleet,
And beard more bravely his victorious powrs
Then the Defendants of the Tyrian Towrs;
Or Porus, conquered on the Indian Coast;
Or great Darius, that three Battails lost?
When on the Surges I perceive, from far,
The Ork Whirl-pool, Whale, or huffing Physeter, Diverse kinds of Whales.

Me thinks I see the wandering I Will again
( Ortygian Delos) floating on the Main.
And when in Combat these fell Monsters cross,
Meseems some Tempest all the Sea does toss.
Our fear-less Sailors, in far Voyages
(More led by Gain's hope then their Compasses) Of their monstrous shape, and
huge greatness.

On the Indian shore, have sometime noted some
Whose bodies covered two broad Acres room:
And in the South-Seas they have also seen
Some like high-topped and huge-armed Treen;
And other-som whose monstrous backs did bear
Two mighty wheels with whirling spokes, that were
Much like the winged and wide spreading sayls
Of any Winde-mill turned with merry gales.
But God (who Nature in her nature holds)
Not only cast them inso sundry moldes:
But gave them manners much more differing, Of the diverse qualities of Fishes.

As well our wits as our weak eyes to bring
In admiration; that men evermore,
Praising his Works, might praise their Maker more.
Some love fresh Waters, some the salt desire,
Some from the Sea use yearly to retire
To the next Rivers, at their own contenting,
So both the Waters with free Trade frequenting;
Having (like Lords) two Houses of receipt:
For Winter the one, the other for Summers heat.
As Citizens, in some intestine braul, Simile. Describing the custom of certain
Sea-Fishes frequenting the fresh Waters in some seasons of the year.

Long cooped up within their Castle wall;
So soon as Peace is made, and Siedge removed,
Forsake a while their Town so strong approved;
And, tired with toil, by leashes and by payrs,
Crowned with Garlands, go to take the ayrs:
So, dainty Salmons, Ch^uins thunder-scar'd,
Feast-famous Sturgeons, Lampreys speckle-starr'd,
In the Spring Season the rough Seas for sake,
And in the Rivers thousand pleasures take:
And yet the plenty of delitious foods,
Their pleasant Lodging in the crystal floods,
The fragrant sents of flowery banks about,
Cannot their Countries tender love wipe out
Of their remembrance; but they needs will home,
In the irefull Ocean to go seek their Tomb:
Lik^ English Gallants, that in Youth do go
To visit Rhine, Sein, Ister, Arn, and Po; Comparison.

Where though their Sense be dandled, Days and Nights,
In sweetest choice of changeable Delights.
They never can forget their Mother-Soyl,
But hourly Home their hearts and eyes recoyle,
Long languishing with an extreme Desire
To see the smoke of their deer Native Fire.
One (like a Pirat) only lives of prizes,
That in the Deep he desperately surprises: The Fishes feeding.

Another haunts the shore, to feed on foam:
Another round about the Rocks does roam,
Nibbling on Weeds: another, hating thieuing,
Eats naught at all, of liquor only living;
For, the ^alt humor of his Element
Serves him (alone) for perfect nourishment.
Some love the clear streams of swift tumbling Torrents
Which through the rocks straining their struggling currents
Break Banks and Bridges; and do never stop,
Till thirsty Summer com to drink them up:
Some almost always pudder in the mud
Of sleepy Pools, and never brook the flood
Of Crystal streams, that in continual motion
Bend toward the bosom of their Mother Ocean:
As the most part of the Words Peers, prefer
^^oyls before Rest, and place their Peace in War:
And some again (of a far differing humor)
Hold Rest so deer, that but the only ^umour
Of War far off, affrights them at the first;
And wanting Peace, they count their States accursed.
O watery Citizens, what Vmpeer bounded Of the providence of God in their diverse
and notable manner of living: affording many Lessons to Mankind.

Your liquid Livings? O! what Monarch mounded
With walls your City? What severest Law
Keeps your huge Armies in so certain aw,
That you encroach not on the neighboring Borders
Of your swim-brethren? as (against all Orders)
Men daily practice, joining Land to Land,
House unto House, Sea to Sea, Strand to Strand,
Mountain to Mountain, and (most-most insaci'ble)
World unto World, if they could work it possible.
And you (wise Fishes) that for recreation,
Or for your seeds securer propagation,
Do sometimes shift your ordinary Dwelling;
What learned Chalde (skilled in Fortune-telling)
What cunning Prophet your fit Time does show?
What Herralds Trumpet summons you to go?
What Guide conducteth, Day and Night, your Legions
Through path-l^^s paths in unacquainted Regions?
What Captain stout? what Loadston, Steel, and Star,
Measures your course in your Adventures far?
Surely, the same that made you first of Naught,
Who in your Nature some Ideas wrought
Of good and Evil; to the end that we,
Following the Good, might from the Evil flee.
The adulterous Sargus does not only change Strange nature of the fish Sargus.

Wives every day, in the deep streams; but (strange)
As if the honey of Sea-loues delights
Could not suffice his ranging appetites,
Courting the Shee-Goats on the grassie shore,
Would horn their Husbands that had horns before*
Contrary to the constant Cantharus, Of Cantharus.

Who, ever faithful to his dearest Spouse
In Nuptial Duties spending all his life,
Loves never none but his own only wife.
But, for her Love, the Mullet has no Peer; Of the Mullet.

For, if the Fisher have surpised her Pheer,
As mad with woe to shore she follows,
Pressed to consort him both in life and death:
As yerst those famous, loving Thracian Dames Simile.

That leapt alive into the funeral flames
Of their dead Husbands; who deceast and gone,
Those loyal Wives hated to live alone.
O! who can here sufficiently admire
That Gaping Fish whose glistering eyes aspire
Still toward Heaven? as if beneath the skies The Vrano-S^op^^.

He found no Object worthy of his eyes.
As the Wood-pecker, his long tongue does lill
Out of the clov'n-pipe of his horny bill,
To catch the Emmets; when, beguiled with-all,
The busy swarms upon it creep and crawl:
The Vrano-scope, so, hid in mud, does put
Out of his gullet a long limber gut,
Most like unto a little Worm (at sight)
Wher-at est-soons many small Fishes bite;
Which ther-with all this Angler swallows straight,
Always self, armed with hook line, and bait*
The subtle The Ozena.
Smell-strong-Many-foot, that ^ain
A dainty feast of Oister-flesh would gain,
Swims softly down, and to him slily slips,
Wedging with stone his yet wide-yawning lips,
Least else (before that he have had his pray)
The Oyster, closing, clip his limbs away,
And (where he thought to have joyed his victories)
Himself become unto his prize a prize.
The Cramp-fish, knowing that she harbors The Torpedo.

A plague-full humor, a fell banefull breath,
A secret Poppy, and a sense-less Winter,
Benumming all that dare too-neer her venture*
Pours forth her poison, and her chilling Ice
On the next Fishes; charmed so in a t^ic^,
That she not only stays them in the Deep,
But stuns their sense, and ^ul^ them fast a sleep;
And then (at fill) she with their flesh is fed;
Whose frozen limbs (still living) seem but dead.
It Is this Torpedo, that when she has took
Into her throat the sharp deceitful hook,
Does not as other Fish, that wrench and wriggle
When they be pricked, and plunge, and strive, and struggle;
And by their stir, thinking to escape the Angle,
Faster and faster on the hook do tangle:
But, wily, clasping close the Fishing Line,
Suddenly spews into the Silver Brine
Her secret-spreading, sodain-speeding bane;
Which, up the Line, and all along the Cane,
Creeps to the hand of the Angler; who with-all
Benumbed and sens-less, suddenly lets fall
His hurtful pole, and his more hateful prize: Simile.

Becomn like one that (as in bed he lies)
Seems in his sleep to see some ghastly Ghost;
In a cold sweat, shaking, and swelt almost,
He calls his wife for aid, his friends, his folks,
But his stuffed stomach his weak clamor ^hoaks:
Then would he strike at that he does behold;
But sleep and fear his feeble hands do hold:
Then would he run away; but, as he strives,
He feels his feet fetterd with heavy Gyues.
But, if the Scolopendra have suckt-in The Scolopendra*

The sowr-sweet morsel with the barbed Pin,
She has as rare a trick to rid her from-it:
For instantly, she all her guts does vomit;
And, having cleared them from the danger, then
She fair and softly sups them in again,
So that not one of them within her womb
Changes his Office or his wonted room.
The thriuing Amia (near Abydos breeding) The Amia.

And subtle Sea-Fox (in Steeds-loue exceeding) The Sea-Fox.

Without so vent ring their dear life and lyning,
Can from the Worm-clasp compass their vntwining:
For, sucking-in more of the twisted hair,
Above the hook they it in sunder shear;
So that their foe, who for a Fish did look
Lifts up a bareline, robbed of bait and hook.
But timorous Barbels will not taste the bit, The Barbel.

Till with their tails they have vnhooked it:
And all the baits the Fisher can devise
Cannot beguile their wary iealousies.
Even so almost, the many spotted Cuttle The Cuttle.

Wel-neer ensnared, yet escapes subtle;
For, when she sees her self within the Net,
And no way left but one, from thence to get,
She suddenly a certain Ink dothspew,
Which dies the Waters of a sable hew;
That, dazzling so the Fishers greedy sight,
She through the Clouds of the black Waters night,
Might escape with honor the black streams of Styx,
Whereof already, almost lost, she licks.
And, as a Prisoner, (of some great transgression,
Convict by Witness and his own Confession) Simile.

Kept in dark Durance full of noysom breath,
Expecting nothing but the Day of Death;
Spies every corner, and pries round about
To find some weak place where he may get out:
The delicate, cud-chewing Golden-Eye, The Golden-eye or Guilt-head.

Kept in a Weyre, the widest space does spy,
And thrusting-in his tail, makes the Osiars gape
With his often flapping, and does so escape:
But, if his fellow find him thus b^^^ed,
He lends his tail to the Imprisoned;
That thereby holding fast with gentle law,
Him from his Durance, he may friendly draw.
Or, (if before that he were captiuate)
He see him hooked on the biting bait,
Hasting to help, he leapeth at the line,
And with his teeth snaps-off the hairy twine.
You stony hearts, within whose stubborn Center Sundry in structions that
Fishes give to men.

Could never touch of sacred friendship enter,
Look on these Seas my Songs have calmed thus*
Here Is many a Damon, many a Th^se^s.
The gilden Sparlings, when cold Winters blast The Sparlings.

Begins to threat, themselves together cast,
In heaps like balls, and heating mutually,
Live; that alone, of the keen Cold would die.
Those small white Fish to Venus consecrated,
Though without Venus aid they be created
Of the Ocean scum; seeing themselves a pray
Exposed in every Water-Rouers way,
Swarming by thousands, with so many a fold
Combine themselves, that their joint strength does hold
Against the greediest of the Sea-thieues sallies;
Yea, and to stay the course of swiftest Galleys.
As a great Carrak, cumbred and oppressed Simile.

With her selfs-burthen, wends not East and West,
Star-bood and Lar-boord, with so quick Careers,
As a small Fregat, or swift Pinnass steers;
And as a large and mighty limbed Steed, Another.

Either of Friseland, or of German breed,
Can never manage half so readily,
As Spanish Iennet, or light Barbary:
So the huge VVhale has not so nimble motion, Of the the Whale and his friend
Musculus.

As smaller Fishes that frequent the Ocean;
But sometimes rudely' against a Rock he brushes,
Or in some roaring Straight he blindly rushes,
And scarce could live a Twelue-month to an end,
But for the little Musculus (his friend)
A little Fish that swimming still before,
Directs him safe from Rock, from shelf and shore:
Much like a Child that loving leads about Simile.

His aged Father when his eyes be out;
Still wasting him through every way so right,
That rest of eyes he seems not rest of sight.
Waues-Mother Thetis, though thine arms embrace Strange League between the
Pearl-Fish and the Prawne.

The World about, within thine ample space,
A firmer League of friendship is not seen
Then is the Pearl-fish and the Prawn between;
Both have but one repast, both but one Palace,
But one delight, one death, one sorrow, and one solace:
That, lodges this; and this remunerates
His Landlords kindness with all needful Cates.
For, while the Pearl-Fish gaping wide does glister,
Much Fry (allured with the bright siluerlustre
Of her rich Casket) flocks into the Nacre;
Then with a prick the Prawn a sign does mak-her
That instantly her shining shell she close
(Because the Prey worthy the pain he knows):
Which gladly done, she ev'nly shareth-out
The Prey betwixt her, and her faithful scout.
And so the Sponge-Spye, warily awakes Also between the Sponge and his Spy.
The Galley Fish The Sayle-Fish. Boat-Crab. Sea-Vrchin.

The Sponges dull sense, when repast it takes.
But O! what style can worthily declare
(O! Galley-Fish, and thou Fish-Mariner,
Thou Boat-Crab, and Sea-Vrchin) your dexterity
In Sailors Art, for safeness and celeritie?
If Iaffa Merchants, now Comburgers seem
With Portingalls, and Portingalls with them:
If Worlds of Wealth, born under other Sky,
Seem born in Ours: if without wings we fly
From North to South, and from the East to West,
Through hundred sundry way-less ways addressed:
If (to be brief) this World's rich compass round,
Seem as a Common, without hedge or mound,
Where (at his choice) each may him freely store
With rarest fruits; You may we thank therefore.
For, whether Typhis, or that Pride of Greece
That sailed to Colchos for the Golden-Fleece,
Or Belus Son, first builded floating bowr^,
To mate the Winds, Storms, and the Waters Stowrs;
What ever he were, he surely learned of you
The Art of Rowing and of Sailing too.
Here would I cease, save that this humorous song,
The Hermite-Fish compels me to prolong. The sea* Hermit

A man of might that builds him a Defense
Against Weathers rigor and Warr's insolence,
First dearly buies (for, What good is good-cheap?)
Both the rich Matter and rare Workmanship:
But, without buying Timber, Lime, and stone,
Or hiring men to build his Mansion,
Or borrowing House, or paying Rent therefore,
He lodges safe: for, finding on the shore
Some handsome shell, whose Native Lord, of late
Was dispossessed by the Doom of Fate;
Therein he enters, and he takes possession
Of the empty Harbor, by the free concession
Of Natures Law; who Goods that Owner want
Always allots to the first Occupant.
In this new Case, or in this Cradle (rather)
He spends his Youth: then, growing both together
In age and Wit, he gets a wider Cell
Wherein at Sea his later Days to dwell.
But Clio, wherefore art thou teadious
In numbering Neptunes busy Burgers thus?
If in his Works thou will admire the worth
Of the Seas Soverain, bring but only forth
One little Fish, whose admirable Story The strange and secret property of the
Remora, or Stop-ship.

Suffices sole to show his might and glory.
Let all the Winds in one Wind gather them,
And (seconded with Neptunes strongest stream)
Let all at once, blow all their stiffest gales
A-stern a Galley under all her sails;
Let her be helped with a hundred Owers,
Each lively handled by five lusty Rowers:
The Remora, fixing her feeble horn
Into the tempest-beaten Vessels stern,
Stays her stone-still: while all her stout Consorts
Sail thence at pleasure to their wished Ports.
Then loose they all the sheats, but to no boot:
For, the charmed Vessel bougeth not a foot;
No more then if then if three fadom under ground,
A score of Anchors held her fastly bound:
No more then does an Oak, that in the Wood
Has thousand Tempests (thousand times) with stood,
Spreading as many massy roots below,
As mighty arms above the ground do grow.
O Stop-ship say, say how thou can oppose
Thy self alone against so many foes?
O! tell us where thou doo'st thine Anchors hide,
Whence thou resistest Sayls, Owers, Wind, and Tide*
How on the so dain can thou curb so short
A Ship whom all the Elements transport?
Whence is thine Engine and thy secret force
That frustrates Engines, and all force does force?
I had (in Harbor) heaved mine Anchor over,
And even already set one foot a-shoar; Dolphin.

When lo, the Dolphin, beating *against the bank,
'Gan mine oblivion moodily mis-thank:
Peace Princely Swimmer, sacred Fish, content-thee;
For, for thy praise, the end of this Song I meant-thee.
Brave Admiral of the broad briny Regions,
Triumphant Tamer of the scaly Legions,
Who living, ever liv'st (for never sleep,
Deaths lively Image in thy eyes does creep)
Lover of Ships, of Men, of Melody,
Thou up and down through the moist World do ply
Swift as a shaft; whose Salt thou love so,
That lacking that, thy life thou do forgo:
Thou (gentle Fish) were the happy Boat, of yore
Which safely brought the Amiclean Harp a-shoar.
Arion, match-less for his Musiks skill,
Among the Latins having gained his fill The strange adventure of Ario^ saved
by a Dolphin.

Of gold and glory, and exceeding fain
To re-salute his learned Greece again;
Unawares, imbarks him in a Pirates ship:
Who loath to let so good a Booty slip.
Soon waighes his Anchors, packs on all his fail,
And Winds conspiring with a prosperous gale,
His winged Fregat made so speedy-sight;
Tarentum Towers were quickly out of fight;
And all, save Skies, and Seas, on every side;
Where, the only Compass is the Pylots guide.
The Saylours then (whom many times we find
Falser then Seas, and fiercer then the Wind)
Fall straight to strip him, ryfling (at their pleasure)
In every corner to find out his treasure:
And, having found it, all with one accord
Hoist the Owner up, to heave him ouer-boord.
Who weeping said, O Nereus noble issue,
Not, to restore my little gold, I wish you:
For, my chief Treasure in my Music lies
(And all Apollo's sacred Pupils, prize
The holy Virgins of Parnassus so,
That underfoot all worldly wealth they throw.)
No (brave Triumphers over Wind and Wave,
Who in both Worlds your habitation have,
Who both Heavens Hooks in your adventures view)
It Is not for That, with broken sighs I sue:
I but beseech you, offer no impieties
Unto a person deer unto the Deities.
So may Messenian Sirens, for your sake,
Be ever mute when you your voyage make,
And Tritons Trumpet the angry Surges swage,
When (justly) Neptune shall against you rage.
But if (alas!) cannot this obtain
(As my faint eye reads in your frowns too plain)
Suffer, at least, to my sad dying voice,
My doleful fingers to consort their noise:
That so, the Sea-Nimphs (rapt in admiration
Of my divine, sweet, sacred lamentation)
Dragging my corpse to shore, with weeping showrs
May deaw the same, and it entoomb in flowrs.
Then play (said they) and give us both together,
Treasure and pleasure by thy coming hither.
His sweetest strokes then sad Arion lent
The enchanting sinnews of his Instrument:
Wherewith he charmed the raging Ocean so,
That crook toothed Lampreys and the Congers row
Friendly together, and their native hate
The Pike and Mullet (for the time) forgate,
And Lobstars floated fear-less all the while
Among the Polyps, prone to theft and guile.
But among all the Fishes that did throng
To dance the Measures of his Mournful song,
There was a Dolphin did the best accord
His nimble Motions to the trembling Chord:
Who gently sliding near the Pinnass side,
Seemed to inuit him on his back to ride.
By this time, twice the Saylours had essayd
To heave him over; yet twice himself he stayed:
And now the third time strove they him to cast;
Yet by the shrowds the third time held he fast:
But lastly, seeing Pirates past remorse,
And him too-feeble to withstand their force,
The trembling Dolphins shoulders he bestrid;
Who on the Oceans azure surges slid,
So, that far-off (his charge so cheered him)
One would have thought him rather fly, then swim:
Yet fears he every shelf and every Surge
(Not for himself, but for his tender charge)
And, sloaping swiftly overthwart those Seas
(Not for his own but for his Riders ease)
Makes double haste to find some happy strand,
Where his sweet Phoebus he may safely land.
Meanwhile, Arion, with his Music rare,
Paies his deer Pylot his delighfull fare.
And heauing eyes to Hea'vn (the Hav'n of Pity)
To his sweet Harp he tunes this sacred Ditty;
O thou Almighty! who Mankind to wrack,
Of thousand Seas, did whilom one Sea make,
And yet did save, from the universal Doom,
One sacred Household, that in time to com
(From Age to Age) should sing thy glorious praise;
Look down (O Lord) from thy supernall rays;
Look, look, (alas!) upon a wretched man,
Half Toomb'd already in the Ocean:
O! be my Steers-man, and vouch safe to guide
The stern-les Boat, and bit-less Horse I ride;
So that, escaping Winds and Waters wrath,
I once again may tread my native path:
And henceforth, here with solemn vows I sacre
Unto thy glory (O my God and Maker)
For this great fauour's high Memorial,
My heart, and Art, my voice, hand, Harp, and all.
Here-with, the Seas their roaring rage refrain,
The Clowdy Welkin waxed clear again,
And all the Winds did so dainly convert
Their mouths to ears, to hear his wondrous Art.
The Dolphin then, discrying Land (at last)
Storms with himself, for having made such haste,
And wished Laconia thousand Leagues from thence,
TO have joyed the while his Musiks excellence.
But, before his own delight, preferring far
The unhoped safety of the Minstrell rare,
Sets him a shore, and (which most strange may seem)
Where life he took, there life restores him.
But now (deer Muse) with Jonas lets us hie
From the Whales belly; and from ieopardy
Of stormfull Seas, of wreakfull Rocks and Sand,
Com, com (my Darling) let us haste to Land.
While busy, poaring downward in the Deep, The second part of this book,
treating of Fowls.

I sing of Fishes (that there Quarter keep)
See how the Fowls are from my fancy fled,
And their high praises quight out of my head:
Their flight out-flies me; and my Muse almost
The better half of this bright Day has lost.
But, cheer ye, Birds: your shadows (as ye pass)
Seeming to flutter on the Waters face,
Make me remember, by their nimble turns,
Both what my duty, and your due concerns.
But first I pray ( for meed of all my toil
In bringing you into this HAPPY I WILL)
Vouch safe to waken with your various Notes
The sense-less senses of those drowsy Sots,
Whose eyelids laden with a weight of Lead
Shall fall a-sleep the while these Rymes are read.
But, if they could not close their wakefull eyes
Among the Water's silent Colonies;
How can they sleep among the Birds, whose sound
Through Heaven and Earth and Ocean does redound?
The Heavenly Phoenix first began to frame Of the admirable and Only Phoenix.

The Earthly Phoenix, and adorned the same
With such a plume, that Pboebus, circuiting
Prom Fez to Cairo, sees no fairer thing:
Such form, such feathers, and such Fate he gaue-her,
That fruitful Nature breeds nothing braver:
Two sparkling eyes; upon her crown, a crest
Of starry Sprigs (more splendent then the rest)
A golden down about her dainty neck,
Her breast deep purple, and a scarlet back, Her description.

Her wings and train of feathers (mixed fine)
Of orient azure and incarnadine.
He did appoint her Fate to be her Pheer,
And Deaths cold kisses to restore her here
Her life again, which never shall expire Her life.

Until (as she) the World consume in fire.
For, having passed under diverse Climes,
A thousand Winters, and a thousand Primes;
Worn-out with years, wishing her end-less end,
To shining flames she does her life commend:
Dies to reviue, and goes into her Grave
To rise again more beautiful and brave.
Perched therefore, upon a branch of Palm,
With Incense, Cassia, Spiknard, Myrrh, and Balm,
By break of Day she builds (in narrow room)
Her Vrn, her nest her Cradle, and her Toomb:
Where, while she sits all gladly-sad expecting
Some flame (against her fragrant heap reflecting)
To burn her sacred bones to seed-full cinders
(Wherein, her age but not her life, she renders) Her death.

The Phrygian Skinker, with his lavish Ewer,
Drowns not the Fields with shower after shower;
The shivering Coachman with his Icy Snow
Dares not the Forests of Phoenicia strowe:
Auster presumes not Libyan shoars to pass
With his moist wings: and gray-beard Boreas
(As the most boistrous and rebellious slave)
Is prisoned close in the Hyper-Borean Cave:
For, Nature now propitious to her End,
To her living Death a helping hand does lend:
And stopping all those Mouths, does mildely sted
Her funerals, her fruitful birth, and bed:
And Sol himself, glauncing his golden eyes
On the odoriferous Couch wherein she lies,
Kindles the spice, and by degrees consumes
The immortal Phoenix, both her flesh and plumes.
But instantly, out of her ashes springs
A Worm, an Egg then, then a bird with wings, Her re-generation.

Just like the first (rather the same indeed)
Which (re-ingendred of it'sselfly seed)
By noblely dying a new Date begins,
And where she loses, there her life she wins:
End-less by'r End, eternal by her Toomb;
While, by a prosperous Death, she does become
(Among the cinders of her sacred Fire)
Her own selfs Heir, Nurse, Nurseling, Dam, and Sire:
Teaching us all, in Adam here to die, The best application.

That we in Christ may live eternally.
The Phoenix, cutting the unfrequented Air, Birds that follow the Phoenix and
their natures.

Forthwith is followed by a thousand pair
Of wings, in the instant by the Almighty wrought,
With diverse Size, Color, and Motion fraught.
The sent-strong Swallow sweepeth to and fro, The Swallow.

As swift as shafts fly from a Turkish Bow,
When (use and Art and strength confedered)
The skillful Archer draws them to the head:
Flying she sings, and singing seeks where
She more with cunning, then with cost, may rear
Her round-front Palace in a place secure,
Whose Plot may serve in rarest Arch'tecture:
Her little beak she loads with brittle straws,
Her wings with Water, and with Earth her claws,
Whereof she Mortar makes, and there-with-all
Aptly she builds her semicircle Wall.
The pretty Lark, climbing the Welkin clear, The Lark.

Chaunts with a cheer, Here, peer-I near my Deer;
Then stooping thence (seeming her fall to rue)
Adieu (she says) adieu, deer Deer, adieu.
The Spink, the Linot, and the Gold-Finch fill The Linot. The Finch.

All the fresh Air with their sweet warbles shrill.
But all This's nothing to the Nightingale, The Nightingale.

Breathing, so sweetly from a breast so small,
So many Tunes, whose Harmony excells
Our Voice, our Violls, and all Music else.
Good Lord! how often in a green Oken Grove,
In the cool shadow have I stood, and strove
To marry mine immortal Lays to theirs,
Rapt with delight of their delicious A^ers?
And (yet) methinks, in a thick thorn I hear
A Nightingale to warble sweetly-cleer:
One while she bears the Base, anon the Tenor,
Anon the Trebble, then the Counter-Tenor:
Then, all at once; (as it were) chalenging
The rarest voices with her self to sing:
Thence thirty steps, amid the leafie Sprayes,
Another Nightingale repeats her Lays,
Just Note for Note, and adds some Strain atlast,
That she had conned all the Winter past:
The first replies, and descants there-vpon;
With divine warbles of Division,
Redoubling Quavers; And so (turn by turn).
Alternatly they sing away the Morn:
So that the Conquest in this curious strife
^oth often cost the one her voice and life:
Then, the glad Victor all the rest admire,
And after count her Mistress of the Quire,
At break of Day, in a Delicious song
She sets the Gam-vt to a hundred young:
And, when as, fit for higher Tunes she sees-them,
Then learnedly she harder Lessons gives-them;
Which, strain by strain, they studiously recite,
And follow all their Mistress Rules aright.
The Colchian Pheasant, and the Partridge rare, Diverse other delicate, and
gentle Birds.

The lustful Sparrow, and the fruitful Stare,
The chattering Pie, the chastest Turtle-Doue,
The grizel Quoist, the Thrush (that Grapes does love)
The little Gnat-snap (worthy Princes Boords)
And the green Parrat, fainer of our words,
Wait on the Phoenix, and admire her tunes,
And gaze themselves in her blew-golden plumes.
The ravening Kite, whose train does well supply
A Rudders place; the Falcon mounting high, Ravenous Birds.

The Marlin, Lanar, and the gentle- Tercell,
The Ospray, and Saker, with a nimble sarcell
Follow the Phoenix, from the Clouds (almost)
At once discovering many an vnknow'n Coast.
In the swift Rank of these fell Rovers, flies
The Indian Griffin with the glistring eyes,
Beak Eagle-like, back sable, sanguin breast,
White (Swan-like) wings, fiercetalons, always pressed
For bloody battails; for, with these he tears
Boars, Lions, Horses, Tigres, Bulls, and Bears:
With th^se, our Grandams fruitful panch he pulls,
Whence many an Ingot of pure Gold he culls,
To floor his proud nest, builded strong and steep
On a high Rock, better his thefts to keep:
With these, he guards against an Army bold
The hollow Mines where first he finds Gold;
As wroth, that men upon his right should rove,
Or theevish hands vsurp his Tresor-troue.
O! ever may thou fight so (valiant Foul)
For this dire bane of our seduced soul; Detestation of Avarice, for her
execrable and dangerous effects

And (with thee) may the Dardan Ants, so ward
The Gold committed to their careful Guard,
That henceforth hope-less, man's frail mind may rest-her
From seeking that, which does it is Masters master:
O odious poison! for the which we dive
To Pluto's dark Den: for the which we rive
Our Mothe^ Earth; and, not contented with
The abundant gifts she outward offers,
With sacrilegious Tools we rudely rend-her,
And ransak deeply in her bosom tender,
While under ground we live in hourly fear
When the frail Mines shall over-whelm us there:
For which, beyond rich Taproban, we roll
Through thousand Seas to seek another Pole;
And, maugre Winds and Waters enmity,
We every Day new vnknow'n Worlds descry:
For which (alas!) the brother sels his brother,
The Sire his Son, the Son his Sire and Mother,
The Man his Wife, the Wife her wedded Pheer,
The Friend his Friend: O! what not sell we here,
Sithence to satiat our Gold-thirsty gall,
We sell our selves, our very souls and all?
Near these, the Crow his greedy wings displayes, Night-Fowles and solitary
Birds.

The long-lived Raven, the infamous Bird that lays
His bastard Eggs within the nests of other,
To have them hatched by an unkindly Mother:
The Skritch-Owl, used in falling Towrs to lodge,
The unlucky Night-Raven, and thou lasie Madge
That fearing light, still seek where to hide,
The hate and scorn of all the Birds beside.
But (gentle Muse) tell me what Fowls are those
That but even-now from flaggy Fenns arose? Water fowls.

It Is the hungry Hearn, the greedy Cormorant,
The Coot and Curlew, which the Moors do haunt,
The nimble Teal, the Mallard strong in flight,
The Di-dapper, the Plover and the Snight:
The silver Swan, that dying sings best,
And the Kings-Fisher, which so builds her nest
By the Seaside in midst of Winter Season,
That man (in whom shines the bright Lamp of Reason)
Cannot devise, with all the with has,
Her little building how to raise or raze:
So long as there her quiet Couch she keeps,
Sicilian Sea exceeding calmly sleeps;
For, Aeolus, fearing to drown her brood,
Keeps home the while, and troubles not the Flood.
The Pirat (dwelling always in his Bark)
In's Calender her building Days does mark:
And the rich Merchant resolutely venters,
So soon as the Halcyon in her brood-bed enters.
Meanwhile, the Langa, skimming (as it were)
The Oceans surface, seeks every where
The hugy Whale; where slipping-in (by Art)
In his vast mouth, she feeds upon his heart.
NEVV-SPAIN's Cucuio, in his forhead brings Strange admirable Birds.

Two burning Lamps, two underneath his wings:
Whose shining Rays serve often in darkest night,
The Imbroderer's hand in royal Works to light:
The ingenious Turner, with a wakefull eye,
To polish fair his purest Ivory:
The Usurer, to count his glistring treasures:
The learned Scribe to limn his golden measures.
But note we now, toward the rich Moluques,
Those passing strange and wondrous (birds) With us called Birds of Paradise.
Mamuques
(Wondrous indeed, if Sea, or Earth, or* Sky,
Saw ever wonder, swim, or go, or fly)
None knows their nest, none knows the dam that breeds them:
Food-less they live; for, the Airealonely feeds them:
Wing-less they fly; and yet their flight extends,
Till with their flight, their vnknow'n lives-date ends.
The Stork, still eying her deer Thessalie, Charitable Birds

The Pelican consorteth cheerfully:
Prayse-worthy Payer; which pure examples yield
Of faithful Father, and officious Child.
The one quites (in time) her Parents love exceeding,
From whom she had her birth and tender breeding;
Not only brooding under her warm breast
Their age-chill'd bodies bedridden in the nest;
Nor only bearing them upon her back
Through the empty Air, when their own wings they lack;
But also, sparing (This let Children note)
Her daintiest food from her own hungry throat,
To feed at home her feeble Parents, held
From forraging, with heavy Gyves of Eld.
The other, kindly, for her tender Brood
Tears her own bowels, trilleth-out her blood
To heal her young, and in a wondroussort
Unto her Children does her life transport:
For, finding them by some fell Serpent slain,
She rents her breast, and does upon them rain
Her vital humor; whence recovering heat,
They by her death, another life do get:
A Type of Christ, who, sin-thrall'd man to free,
Became a Captive; and on shameful Tree
(Self-guiltless) shed his blood, by's wounds to save-vs,
And salve the wounds the old Serpent firstly gave-vs:
And so became, of mere immortal, mortal;
Thereby to make, frail mortal Man, immortal.
Thus doo'st thou print (O Parent of this All) Lessons for mankind* out of the
Consideration of the natures of diverse creatures.

In every breast of brutest Animal
A kind Instinct, which makes them dread no less
Their Childrens danger, then their own decease;
That so, each Kind may last immortally,
Though the Indiuiduum pass successively.
So fights a Lion, not for glory (then)
But for his Deer Whelps taken from his Den
By Hunters fell: He fiercely roareth out,
He wounds, he kills; amid the thickest rout,
He rushes-in dread-less of Spears, and Darts,
Swords, shafts, and staves though hurt in thousand parts;
And, brave-resolved, till his last breath lack
Never gives-over, nor an inch gives-back:
Wrath salves his wounds: and lastly (to conclude)
When, over-layd with might and Multitude,
He needs must die; dying, he more bemoanes,
Then his own death his Captive little-Ones.
So, for their young our Masty Currs will fight,
Eagerly bark, bristle their backs, and bite.
So, in the Deep, the Dog-Fish for her Fry
Lucma's throes a thousand times does try:
For, seeing when the subtle Fisher follows-them,
Again alive into her womb she swallows-them;
And when the perill's past, she brings them thence,
As from the Cabins of asafe defense;
And (thousandlyues to their deer Parent owing)
As sound as ever in the Seas are rowing.
So does a Hen make of her wings a Targe
To shield her Chickens that she has in charge:
And so, the Sparrow with her angry bill
Defends her brood from such as would them ill.
I hear the Crane (if I mistake not) cry; The Crane, Y

Who in the Clouds forming the forked Y,
By the brave orders practiced under her,
Instructs Soldiers in the art of War.
For, when her Troops of wandering Cranes for sake
Frost-firmed Strymon, and (in Autumn) take
Truce with the Northern Dwarfs, to seek adventure
In Southren Climats for a milder Winter;
Afront each Band a forward Captain flies,
Whose pointed Bill cuts passage through the skies;
Two skillful Sergeants keep the Ranks aright,
And with theirvoice hasten their tardy Flight;
And when the honey of care-charming sleep
Sweetly begins through all their veins to creep,
One keeps the Watch, and ever carefull-most,
Walks many a Round about the sleeping Host,
Still holding in his claw a stony clod,
Whose fall may wake him if he hap to nod:
Another does as much, athird, afourth,
Until, by turns, the Night be turned forth.
There, the fa^r Peacock beautifully brave, The Peacock.

Proud, portly-strouting, stalking, stately-grave,
Wheeling his starry Tr^yn, in pomp displayes
His glorious eyes to P^^bus goldenrayes*
Close by his side stands the courageous Cock* The Cock.

Crest-peoples King, the Peasants trusty Clock,
True Morning Watch, Aurora's Trumpeter,
The Lions terror, true Astronomer,
Who daily rises when the Sun does rise,
And when Sol sets, then to roost he hies.
There, I perceive amid the flowery Plain The Estridge.

The mighty Estridge, striving oftin vain
To mount among the flying multitude
(Although with feathers, not with flight indu'd):
Whose greedy stomach steely gads digests;
Whose crisped train adorns tryumphant crests.
Thou happy Witness of my happy Watches,
Blush not (my Book) nor think it thee dismatches, Of Insects in the Creation
whereof the wisdom of their Makershineth admirably.

To bear about, upon thy paper-Tables,
Flies, Butterflies, Gnats, Bees, and all the rabbles
Of other Insects (end-less to rehearse)
Limn'd with the pencill of my various Verse;
Since These are also His wise Workmanships,
Whose fame did never obscure Work eclipse:
And since in These he shows us every howr
More wondrous proofs of his Almighty power
Then in huge Whales, or hideous Elephants,
Or whatsoever other Monster haunts
In storm-less Seas, raising a storm about,
While in the Sea another Sea they spout.
For, if old Times admire Callicrates
For Ivory Emmets; and Mermecides
For framing of a rigged Ship, so small
That with her wings a Be can hide it all
(Though the Artfull fruits of all their curious pain,
Fit for novse, were but inventions vain)
Admire we then the All-wise Omnipotence,
Which does within so narrow space dispense Of Flies.

So stiff a sting, so stout and valiant heart,
So loud a voice, so prudent wit and Art.
For, where is the State beneath the Firmament,
That does excel the Bees for Government? Of B^^^.

No, no: bright Phoebus, whose eternal Race
Once every Day about the World does pase,
Sees here no City, that in Rites and Laws,
(For Equity) near to their Justice draws:
Not Venice.
That, which flying from the furious Hun,
In the Adri^n* Sea another World begun.
Their well-rul'd State my soul so much admires,
That, durst I loose the Rains of my desires,
I gladly could digress from my design,
To sing a while their sacred Discipline:
But if, of all, whose skillful Pencils dare
To counterfeit the Almightie's Models rare,
None yet durst finish that fair Piece, wherein
Learned Apelles drew L^ues wanton Queen;
Shall I presume Hymetus Mount to climb,
And sing the Bees praise in mine humble rhyme?
Which Latian Bards inimitable Prince
Has warbled twice about the banks of Mince?
Yet may I not that little * Worm pass-by, The Silkworm.

Of Flyturn'd Worm, and of a Worm a Fly:
Two births, two deaths, here Nature has assign'd-her,
Leaving a Post-hume (dead-live) seed behinde-her,
Which soon transforms the fresh and tender leaves
Of Th^sbes pale Tree, to those slender sleaves
(On ovall clews) of soft, smooth, Silken flakes,
Which more for us, then for her self, she makes.
O precious fleece^ which only did adorn
The sacred loins of Princes heertoforn:
But our proud Age, with prodigal abuse,
Has so profaned the old honorable use,
That Shifters now, who scarce have bread to eat,
Disdain plain Silk, unless it be beset
With one of those deer Metals, whose desire
Burns greedy souls with an immortal fire.
Though last, not least; brave Aegle, no contempt
Made me so long thy story hence exempt
( Nor LESS-E Xtold shall thy true virtues be,
For the Eyrie's sake that owes my Muse and me;
Wh^ar Iov's and Juno's stately Birds be billing*
Their azure Field with fairest Eaglets filling
(Azure they hear three Eaglets Argentine,
A Cheuron Ermin grailed Or between)
WI^t, CHief^ie, RICHess, to THem all I Wish
In Earth; in Heaven the immortal Crown of Bliss.)
For, well I know, thou hold (worthily)
That place among the Aerie flocks that fly,
As does the Dragon or the Cocatrice
Among the bancfull Creeping companies:
The noble Lion among savage Beasts:
And gentle Dolphin among the Dyving guests.
I know thy course; I know, thy constant sight
Can fixly gaze against Heavens greatest Light.
But, as the Phoenix on my Front does glister,
Thou shall the Finials of my Frame illustre.
On Thracian shore of the same stormy stream, A strange and notable story of
the love and death of an Eagle.

Which did inherit both the bones and name
Of Phryxus Sister (and not far from thence
Whear love-blind Heroes hap-less diligence,
In steed of Loves lamp, lighted Deaths cold brand,
To waft Leanders naked limbs to land)
There dwelt a Maid, as noble, and as rich,
As fair as Hero, but more chaste by much:
For, her steel breast still blunted all the Darts
Of Paphos Archer, and eschew'd his Arts.
One day, this Damsel through a Forest thick
Hunting among her Friends (that sport did seek)
Upon a steep Rocks thorny-thrummed top
(Whear, one (almost) would fear to clamber up)
Two tender Aeglets in a nest espies,
Which against the Sun s^te trying of their eyes;
Whose callow backs and bodies round about
With soft short quils began to bristle out;
Who yawning wide, with empty gorge did gape
For wonted fees out of their Parents rape.
Of these two Fowls the fairest up she takes
Into her bosom, and great haste she makes
Down from the Rock, and shiuering yet for fear
Tripps home as fast as her light feet can bear:
Even as a Wolf, that hunting for a pray,
And having stolen (at last) some Lamb away;
Flies with down-hanging head, and leereth back
Whether the Mas^y do pursue his track.
In time, this Aegle was so thoroughly manned,
That from the Quarry, to her Mistress hand
At the first called would com; and faun vpon-her,
And bill and bow, in sign of love and honor:
On the other side, the Maiden makes as much
Of her deer Bird; stroking with gentletouch
Her wings and train, and with a want on voice
It want only does cherish and rejoice:
And (prety-fondling) she does prize it higher
Then her own beauties; which all else admire.
But (as fell Fates mingle our single joys,
With bitter gall of infinite annoyes)
An extreme Fever vexed the Virgins bones
(By one disease to cause two deaths at once)
Consumed her flesh, and wanly did displace
The Rose-mixt-Lillies in her lovely face.
Then fared the Foul and Fairest both a-like;
Both like tormented, both like shivering sick:
So that, to note their passions, one would gather
That Lachesis spun both their lives together.
But often the Aeagle, striving with her Fit,
Would fly abroad to seek some dainty bitt,
For her deer Mistress* and with nimble wing,
Some Rail, or Quail, or Partridge would she bring;
Paying with food, the food received so often,
From those fair, Ivory, Virgin-fingers soft,
During her nonage, yer she durst essay
To cleave the sky, and for herself to prey.
The Fever now with spiteful fitts had spent
The blood and marrow of this Innocent,
And Life resigned to cruel Death her Right;
Who three days after does the Eagle cite.
The fearful Hare durst now frequent the Down;
And round about the Walls of Hero's Town,
The Tercel-gentle, and swift Falcon flew,
Dread-less of the Aegle that so well they knew:
For she (alas) lies on her Ladies bed,
Still-sadly mourning; though a-live, yet dead:
For, O! how should she live, since Fatal knife
Has cut the thread of her lives dearest life?
Over the deer Corpse sometimes her wings she hovers,
Sometimes the dead breast with her breast she covers,
Sometimes her neck does the pale neck embrace,
Sometimes she kisses the cold lips and face;
And with sad murmurs she lamenteth so,
That her strange moan augments the Parents woe.
Thrice had bright Phoebus daily Chariot run
Past the proud Pillars of Aicmaenas son,
Since the fair Virgin past the fatal Ferry
Whear (lastly) Mortals leave their burdens weary;
And yet this doleful Bird, drowned in her tears,
All comfort-les, Rest and Repast forbears:
So much (alas!) she seems to contend,
Her life and sorrows both at once to end.
But lastly, finding all these means too-weak,
The quick dispatch, that she did wish, to wreak;
With ire and anguish both at once enraged,
Unnaturally her proper breast she gaged,
And tears her bowels, storming bitterly
That all these deaths could yet not make her die.
But, lo the while, about the lightsom door
Of the hap-les house, a mournful troop, that bore
Black on their back, and Tapers in their fists,
Tears on their cheeks, and sorrow in their breasts;
Who, taking up the sacred Load (at last)
Whose happy soul already Heaven embra'ct;
With shrill, sad cries, march toward the fatal Pile
With solemn pase: The silly Bird, the while,
Following far-off, her bloody entrails trails,
Honoring with conuoy, two sad Funerals.
No sooner had the Ceremonious Flame
Embraced the Body of her tender Dame,
But suddenly, distilling all with blood,
Down soust the Eagle on the blazing wood:
Nor boots the Flamine, with his sacred wand
A hundred times to beat her from her stand;
For, to the midst still of the Pyle she plies;
And, singing sweet her Ladies Obsequies,
There burns herself: and blendeth happily
Her bones with hers she loved so tenderly.
O happy Payr! upon your sable Toomb,
May Mel and Manna ever showring come;
May sweetest Myrtles ever shade your Hearse,
And evermore live you within my Verse.
So Morn and Evening the Fifth! Day conclude,
And God perceived that All his Works were good.
THE SIXTH DAY OF THE FIRST WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Inuiting all, which through this world, aspire
Unto the next, Gods glorious Works t'admire;
Here, on the Stage, our noble Poet brings
Beasts of the Earth, Cattle, and Creeping things:
Their hurt and help to us: The strange events
Between Androdus, and the Forest Prince.
The little-World (Commander of the greater)
Why formed last: his admirable Feature:
His Heaven-born Soul; her wondrous operation:
His dearest Rib. All Creatures generation.
YOu Pilgrims, which (through this worlds City) wend
Toward the happy City, whear withouten end An exhortatio^to al which through
the Pilgrimage of this life, tend toward the everlasting City, to consider well
the excellent works of God, here represented by our Poet.

True joys abound; to anchor in the Port
Whear Deaths pale horrors never do resort:
If you would see the fair Amphitheatres,
The Arks, Arcenalls, Towrs, Temples, and Theaters,
Colosses, Cirques, Pyles, Ports, and Palaces
Proudly dispersed in your Passages;
Com, com with me: For, there is not any part
In this great Frame, where shines any Art,
But I will show't you. Are you weary since?
What! tired so soon? Why, will you not (my friends)
Having already ventured forth so far
On Neptnn's back (through Winds and Waters war)
Row yet a stroke, the Harbor to recover,
Whose shoars already my glad eyes discover?
Almighty Father, guide their Guide along, Invocation.

And pour upon my faint vnfluent tongue
The sweetest honey of the Hyantian Fount,
Which freshly purleth from the Muses Mount.
With the sweet charm of my Victorious Verse,
Tame furious Lions, Bears, and Tigers fierce;
Make all the wild Beasts, laying fury by,
To com with Homage to my Harmony.
OF ALL THE Beasts which thou This-Day did build, The Elephant.

To haunt the Hills, the Forest, and the Field,
I see (as Viceroy of their brutish Band)
The Elephant, the Vant-gard does command:
Worthy that Office; whether we regard
His Towred back, whear many Soldiers ward;
Or else his Prudence, whearwithall he seems
T'obscure the wits of human-kind sometimes:
As studious Scholar, heeself-rumineth
His lessons given, his King he honoreth,
Adores the Moon: moved with strange desire,
He feels the sweet flames of the Idalian fire,
And (pierctwith glance of a kinde-cruell ey)
For humane beauty, seems to sigh and die.
Yea (if the Graecians do not miss-recite) His combat with the Rhinocerot.

With His crooked trumpet he does sometimes write.
But, his huge strength, nor subtle wit, can not
Defend him from the sly Rhinocerot:
Who never, with blind fury led, does venture
Upon his Fo, but (yer the Lists he enter)
Against a Rock he whetteth round about
The dangerous pike upon his armed snout:
Then buckling close, does not (at randon) hack
On the hard Cuirass on his Enemies back;
But vnder's belly (cunning) finds a skin,
Whear (and but thear) his sharpened blade will in.
The scaly Dragon, being else too low
For the Elephant, up a thick Tree does go;
So, closely ambusht almost every Day,
To watch the Carry-Castle, in his way:
Who, once approaching, straight his stand he leaves,
And round about him he so closely cleaues
With His wrything body; that his Enemy His combat with the Dragon.

(His stinging knots unable to vn-ty)
Hastes to some Tree, or to some Rock, whearon
To rush and rub-off his detested zone,
The fell embraces of whose dismal clasp
Have almost brought him to his latest gasp.
Then, suddenly, the Dragon slips his hold
From the Elephant, and sliding down, does fold
About his forelegs, fettered in such order, The true Image of Civil war.

That stocked thear, he now can stir no further:
While the Elephant (but to no purpose) strives
With His winding Trunk t'vndoo his wounding gyves,
His furious fo thrusts, in his nose, his nose;
Then head and all; and thear-withall does close
His breathing passage: but, his victory
He joys not long; for his huge Enemy,
Falling down dead, does with his weighty Fall
Crush him to death, that caused his death, withal:
Like factious Frenchmen, whose fell hands pursue Simile.

In their own breasts their furious blades t'imbrew,
While pitty-les, hurried with blinded zeal,
In her own blood they bathe their Commonweal;
When as at Dreux, St. Denis, and Mountcounter,
Their parricidiall bloody swords encounter;
Making their Country (as a Tragik Tomb)
T'interr the Earths terror in her hap-les womb.
Or, like our own (late) YORK and LANCASTER, Simile.

Ambitious broachers of that Uiper-War,
Which did the womb of their own Dam devour,
And spoiled the freshest of fair ENGLAND'S Flowr;
When (WHITE and RED) ROSE against ROSE, they stood,
Brother'gainst Brother, to the knees in blood:
While WAKE-FIELD, BARNET and St. ALBON'S streets
Were drunk with deer blood of PLANTAGENETS:
Whear, either Conquered, and yet neither Won;
Since, by them both, was but their Own undone.
Near the Elephant, coms the horned Alias Gyraffa alias Anabula: an Indian
Sheep or a wild Sheep. The Hirable. Camel. Bull. Ass. Horse.

Hirable,
Stream-troubling Camel, and strong-necked Bull,
The lazy-pased (yet laborious) Ass,
The quick, proud Courser, which the rest does pass
For apt address; Mars and his Master loving,
After his hand with ready lightness moving:
This, out of hand, will self advance, and bound,
Corvet, pase, manage, turn, and trot the Round:
That, follows loose behind the Groom that keeps-him;
This, kneeleth down the while-his Master leaps-him:
This, runns on Corn-Ears and never bends their quills;
That, on the Water, and never wets his heels.
In a fresh Troup, the fearful Hare I note, The Hare. The Connie. Goat. Sheep.
Swine. Dear.


The oblivious Conney, and the brouzing Goat,
The sloathfull Swine, the golden-fleeced Sheep,
The light-foot Heart, which every year does weep
(As a sad Recluse) for his branched head,
That in the Springtime he before has shed.
O! what a sport, to see a Heard of them
Take soil in Summer in some spacious stream!
One swims before, another on his chine,
Nigh half-vpright, does with his breast incline;
On that, another; and so all do ride
Each after other: and still, when their guide
Grows to be weary, and can lead no more,
He that was hindmost coms and swims before:
Like as in Cities, still one Magistrate
Bears not the Burden of the common State;
But having past his Year, he does discharge
On others shoulders his sweet-bitter Charge.
But, of all Beasts, none steadeth man so much
As does the Dog; his diligence is such:
A faithful Guard, a watchful Sentinel,
A painful Purvayor, that with perfect smell
Provides great Princes many a dainty mess,
A friend till death, a helper in distress,
Dread of the Wolf, Fear of the fearful Thief,
Fierce Combatant, and of all Hunters chief.
There skips the Squirrell, seeming Weather-wise, Squirrel.

Without beholding of Heavens twinkling eyes:
For, knowing well which way the wind will change,
He shifts the portall of his little Grange.
There Is the wanton Weazell, and the wily Fox, Weazell. Fox. Monkey. Ciuit Cat.

The witty Monkey, that man's action mocks:
The sweat-sweet Ciuet, deerly fetched from far
For Courtiers nice, past Indian Tarnassar.
There, the wise Beuer, who, pursued by foes, Beuer, or Bezar.

Tears-off his codlings and among them throws;
Knowing that Hunters on the Pontik Heath
Do more desire that ransom, then his death.
There, the rough Hedgehog; who, to shun his thrall, Hedgehog.

Shrinks up himself as round as any Ball;
And fastening his slow feet under his chin,
On's thistly bristles rowles him quickly in.
But the Ey of Heaven beholds naught more strange
Then the Chameleon, who with various change Chameleon.

Receives the color that each object gives,
And (food-les else) of the Air alonely lives.
My blood congeals, my sudden swelling breast
Can hardly breathe, with chill cold cakes oppressed;
My hair does stare, my bones for fear do quake,
My color changes, my sad heart does shake:
And, round about, Deaths Image (ghastly-grim)
Before mine eyes all-ready seems to swim.
O! who is he that would not be astound,
To be (as I am) here environed round
With cruell'st Creatures, which for Mastery, Creatures venomous, and offensive
to man.

Have vowed against us end-less Enmity?
Phoebus would faint, Alcides self would dread,
Although the first drad Python conquered,
And the other vanquished the Erymanthian Boar,
The Nemean Lion and a many more.
What strength of arm, or Art-full stratagem,
From Nile's fell Rover could deliver them, The Crocodile.

Who runs, and rows, warring by Land and Water
Against Men and Fishes, subject to his slaughter?
Or from the furious Dragon, which alone Dragon.

Set on a Roman Army; whearupon
Stout Regulus as many Engines spent,
As to the ground would Carthage walls have rent?
What shot-free Corslet, or what counsel crafty,
Against the angry Aspick could assure them safety, Aspick.

Who (faithful husband) over hill and Plain
Pursues the man that his deer Pheer has slain;
Whom he can find amid the thickest throng,
And in an instant venge him of his wrong?
What shield of Ajax could avoid their death
By the Basilisk, whose pestilentiall breath Basilisk.

Does pearce firm Marble, and whose banefull ey
Wounds with a glance, so that the soundest die?
Lord! if so be, thou for mankind did rear Why God created such noysom and
dangerous creatures: Sin the occasion of the hurt they can do us.

This rich round Mansion (glorious every whear)
Alas! why did thou on This Day create
These harmfull Beasts, which but exasperate
Our thorny life? O! were thou pleased to form
The innammel'd Scorpion, and the Uiper-worm,
The horned Cerastes, the Alexandrian Skink,
The Adder, and Drynas (full of odious stink)
The Eft, Snake, and Dipsas (causing deadly Thirst):
Why have thou armed them with a rage so cursed?
Pardon, good God, pardon me; 't was our pride,
Not thou, that troubled our first happy tide,
And in the Childehood of the World, did bring
The Amphisbena her double banefull sting.
Before that Adam did revolt from Thee,
And (curious) tasted of the sacred Tree,
He lived King of Eden, and his brow
Was never blankt with pallid fear, as now:
The fiercest Beasts, would at his word, or beck,
Bow to his yoke their self-obedient neck;
As now the ready Horse is at command Simile.

To the good Rider's spur, or word, or wand;
And does not wildely his own will perform,
But his that rules him with a steady arm.
Yea, as forgetful of so foul offense, God has given v^ wisdom to avoid and
vanquish them.

Thou left'st him (yet) sufficient wisdom, whence
He might subdue, and to his service stoop
The stubborn'st heads of all the savage troop.
Of all the Creatures through the Welkin gliding,
Walking on Earth, or in the Waters sliding,
The have armed some with Poison, some with Paws,
Some with sharp Antlers, some with griping Claws,
Some with keen Tushes, some with crooked Beaks,
Some with thick Cuirets, some with skaly necks;
But made Man naked, and for Weapons fit
Thou gav'st him nothing but a pregnant Wit;
Which rusts and duls, except it subject find
Worthy it is worth, whereon it self to grind;
And (as it were) with envious armies great,
Be round about besieged and beset.
For, what boot Milo's brawny shoulders broad,
And sinnewie arms, if but a common load
He always bear? what Bays, or Olive boughs,
Parsley, or Pine, shall crown his warlik brows,
Except some other Milo, entering Lists,
Courageously his boasted strength resists?
"In deepest perils shines Wisdoms prime:
"Through thousand deaths true Valor seeks to clime;
"Well knowing, Conquest yields but little Honor,
"If bloody Danger do not wait upon her.
O gracious Father! the have not only lent God has set them at enmity among
themselves.

Prudence to Man the Perils to prevent,
Wherewith these foes threaten his feeble life;
But (for his sake) have set at mutual strife
Serpents with Serpents, and have raised them foes
Which, vnprovoked, felly them oppose. The Viper and Scorpion with their young.

Thou make the ungrateful Viper (at his birth)
His dying Mothers belly to gnaw forth:
Thou make the Scorpion (greedy after food)
Unnaturally devour his proper brood;
Whereof, one scaping from the Parents hunger,
With His death does vengeance on his brethrens wronger:
Thou make the Weazell, by a secret might, The Weazell against the Basiliske.

Murder the Serpent with the murdering sight;
Who so surprised, striving in wrathful manner,
Dying himself, kills with his baen his Baener.
Thou make the Ichneumon (whom the Memphs adore) The Ichneumon against the
Aspick.

To rid of Poisons Nile's manured shore;
Although (indeed) he does not conquer them
So much by strength as subtle stratagem.
As he that (urged with deep indignity)
By a proud Challenge does his foe defy;
Premeditates his posture and his play,
And arms himself so complet every way
(With wary hand guided with watchful eye,
And ready foot to traverse skilfully)
That the Defendant, in the heat of fight,
Finds no part open for his blade to light:
So Pharaohs Rat yer he begin the fray
Against the blind Aspick, with a cleaving Clay
Upon his coat he wraps an Earthen Cake,
Which afterward the Suns hot beams do bake:
Armed with this Plaster, the Aspick he approaches,
And in his throat, his crooked tooth he broacheth,
Whileth' other boot-les strives to pearce and prick
Through the hard temper of his armor thick:
Yet, knowing himself too-weak (for all his wile)
Alone to match the skaly Crocodile;
He, with the Wren, his Ruin does conspire.
The Wren, who seeing (pressed with sleeps desire) The Ichneumon and the Wren
against the Crocodile.

Nile's poysony Pirate press the slimy shore,
Suddenly coms, and hopping him before,
Into his mouth he skips, his teeth he pickles
Cleanses his palate, and his throat so tickles,
That charmed with pleasure, the dull Serpent gapes
Wider and wider with his ugly chaps:
Then, like a shaft, the Ichneumon instantly
Into the Tyrants greedy gorge does sly,
And feeds upon that Glutton, for whose Riot
All Niles fat Margents could scarce furnish diet.
Nay more (good Lorst) the have taught Mankind a Reason God has taught us to
make great use of them.

To draw Life out of Death, and Health from Poison:
So that in equal Balance ballancing
The Good and Evil which these Creatures bring
Unto Man's life, we shall perceive, the first
By many grains to over-waigh the worst.
From Serpents escaped, yet am I scarce in safety: Fierce and untameable beasts.

Alas! I see a Legion fierce and lofty
Of Sauvages, whose fleet and furious pase,
Whose horrid roaring, and whose hideous face
Make my sense sense-less, and my speech restrain,
And cast me in my former fears again.
Already howls the waste-Fold Wolf, the Boar The Wolf. Boar. Bear. Ounce.
Tigre. Leopard. Unicorn. Hyaena. Mantichora, a kind of Hyaenae. Cephus, a kind
of Ape or Munkey Chiurcae.

Whetts foamy Fangs, the hungry Bear does roar,
The Cat-fac't Ounce, that does me much dismay,
With grumbling horror threatens my decay;
The light-foot Tigre, spotted Leopard,
Foaming with fury do besiege me hard;
Then the Unicorn, the Hyena tearing-tombs
Swift Mantichor', and Nubian Cephus coms:
Of which last three, each has (as here they stand)
Man's voice, Man's visage, and Mans's foot and hand.
I fear the Beast, bred in the bloody Coast
Of Cannibals, which thousand times (almost)
Re-whelps her whelps, and in her tender womb,
She does as often her living brood re-tomb.
But, O! what Monster's this that bids me battle,
On whose rough back an Host of Pikes does rattle: The Porcupine.

Who string-less shoots so many arrows out,
Whose thorny sides are hedged round about
With stiff steel-pointed quils, and all his parts
Bristled with bodkins, armed with Auls and Darts,
Which ay fierce darting, seem still fresh to spring,
And to his aid still new supplies to bring?
O fortunate Shaft-neuer-wanting Bowe-man!
Who, as thou fly'st can hit thy following foe-man,
And never missest (or but very narrow)
The intended mark of thyselfs kindred Arrow:
Who, still self-furnisht need borrow never
Diana's shafts, nor yet Apollos quiver,
Nor bowe-strings fetch from Carian Aleband,
Brazell from Peru, but have all at hand
Of thine own growth; for in thy Hide do grow
Thy String, thy Shafts, thy Quiver and thy Bow.
But (Courage now.) heers coms the valiant Beast, The Lion King of Beasts.

The noble Lion, King of all the rest;
Who brauely-minded, is as mild to those
That yield to him, as fierce unto his foes:
To humble suitors, neither stern nor statefull,
To benefactors never found ungrateful. A memorable History of a Lion
acknowledging the kindness he had received of Androdus a Roman Salve.

I call to record that same Roman Thrall,
Who (to escape from his mechanical
And cruel Master, that (for lucre) vs'd-him
Not as a Man, but, as a Beast, abus'd-him)
Fled through the desert, and with trauail'd tired,
At length into a mossie cave retired:
But thear, no sooner began the drowzy wretch
On the soft grass his weary limbs to stretch,
But coming swift into the cave he sees
A ramping Lion gnashing of his teeth.
A thief, to shameful execution sent
By Justice, for his faults just punishment,
Feeling his ey's clout, and his elbows cord,
Waiting for nothing but the fatal Sword;
Dies ye^ his death, he looks so certainly
Without delay in that drad place to Die:
Even so the Slave, seeing no means to shun
(By flight or fight) his feared destruction
(Having no way to fly, nor arms to fight,
But sighs and tears, prayers, and woeful plight)
Embraces Death; abiding, for a stown,
Pale, cold, and sense-les, in a deadly swown.
At last, again his courage' began to gather,
When he perceived no rage (but pity rather)
In his new Host, who with mild looks and meek
Seemed (as it were) succor of him to seek,
Showing him often one of his paws, wherein
A festering thorn for a long time had been:
Then (though still fearful) did the Slave draw nigher,
And from his foot he lightly snatched the Bryer,
And wringing gently with his hand the wound,
Made the hot impostume run upon the ground.
Thenceforth the Lion seeks for Booties best
Through Hill and Dale, to cheer his new-com Guest,
His new Physician; who, for all his cost,
Soon leaves his Lodging, and his dreadful Host;
And once more wanders through the wilderness,
Whether his froward Fortune would address,
Until (re-taen) his fell Lord brought him home,
For Spectacle unto Imperial Rome,
To be (according to their barbarous Laws)
Bloudily torn with greedy Lions paws.
Fell Canniball* Flint-harted Polyphem*
If thou would needs exactly torture him
(Inhumane Monster, hateful Lestrigon)
Why from thine own hand have thou let him gone,
To Bears and Lions to be given for prey,
Thy self more fell a thousand-fold, then they?
African Panthers, Hyrcan Tigres fierce,
Cleonian Lions and Panonian Bears,
Be not so cruel, as who violates
Sacred Humanity, and cruciates
His loy all subjects; making his recreations
Of Massacres, Combats, and sharp Taxations.
Above all the Beasts that filled the Martian Field
With blood and slaughter, one was most beheld;
One valiant Lion, whose victorious fights
Had conquered hundreds of those guilty wights,
Whose feeble skirmish had but striv'n in vain
To escape by combat their deserved pain.
That very Beast, with faint and fearful feet
This Runnagate (at last) is forced to meet;
And being entered in the bloody List,
The Lion rowz'd, and ruffles-vp his Crest,
Shortens his body, sharpens his grim ey,
And (staring wide) he roareth hideously:
Then often swindging with his sinnewy train,
Sometimes his sides, sometimes the dusty Plain,
Hewhets his rage, and strongly rampeth on
Against his foe; who, nigh already gone
To drink of Lethe, lifts to the Pole
Religious vows, not for his life, but soul;
After the Beast had marched some twenty pase,
He sudden stops; and, viewing well the face
Of his pale foe, remembered (rapt with joy)
That this was he that eased his annoy:
Wherefore, converting from his hateful wildenes,
From pride to pity, and from rage to mildenes,
On his bleak face he both his eyes does fix,
Fawning for homage, his lean hands he licks.
The Slave, thus knowing, and thus being known,
Lifts to the Heavens his front now hoary grown,
And (now no more fearing his tearing paws)
He strokes the Lion, and his poule he claws,
And learns by proof, that a good turn at need,
At first or last shall be assured of meed.
There Is under Sun (as Delphos God did show)
No better Knowledge, then Our self to Know: Noscete ipsu^.

There is no Theme more plentiful to sean,
Then is the glorious goodly Frame of MAN: The second part of this sixth book:
Wherein is discoursed at large of the creation of Man;

For in Man's self is Fire, Air, Earth, and Sea;
Man's (in a word) the World's Epitome
Or little Map: which here my Muse does try
By the grand Pattern to exemplify.
A wit^y Mason, does not (with rare Art) And of the wonders of Gods wisdom,
appearing both in his body and Soul.

Into a Palace, Paros Rocks convert,
Seel it with gold, and to the Firmament
Raise the proud Turrets of his Battlement,
And (to be brief) in every part of it,
Beauty to use, use unto beauty fit,
To the end the Skrich-Owl, and the Night-Rav'n should
In those fair walls their habitations hold:
But rather, for some wise and wealthy Prince
Able to judge of his arts excellence:
Even so, the Lord built not this All-Theater,
For the rude guests of Air, and Woods and Water; The world made for Man.

But, all for Him, who (whether he survey
The vast salt kingdoms, or the Earth's fruitful clay,
Or cast his eyes up to those twinkling Eyes
That with disordered order gild the Skies)
Can everywhere admire with due respect
The admired Art of such an Architect.
Now of all Creatures which his Word did make, Man was created last, and why.

MAN was the last that living breath did take:
Not that he was the least; or that God durst
Not undertake so noble a Work at first:
Rather, because he should have made in vain
So great a Prince, without on whom to Reign.
A wise man never brings his bidden guest Fit comparison.

Into his Parlour, till his Room be dressed,
Garnisht with Lights, and Tables neatly spread
Be with full dishes well-nigh furnished:
So our great God, who (bountious) ever keeps
Here open Court, and the ever-bound-les Deeps
Of sweetest Nectar on us still distills
By twenty-times ten thousand sundry quills,
Would not our Grandsier to his Board inuit,
Yer he with Arras his fair house had dight,
And, under starry State-Cloaths, placed his plates
Filled with a thousand sugared delicates.
All the admirable Creatures made beforn,
Which Heaven and Earth, and Ocean do adorn, All other creatures nothing in
respect of Man made to the Image of God, with (as it were) great preparation,
not all at once, but by interims first his Body, and then his reasonable Soul.

Are but Essays, compared in every part,
To this divinest Masterpiece of Art.
Therefore the supreme peer-les Architect,
When (of mere nothing) he did first erect
Heaven, Earth and Air, and Seas; at once his thought,
His word, and deed all in an instant wrought:
But, when he would his own selfs Type create,
The honor of Nature, the Earths sole Potentate;
As if he would a Council hold he cyteth
His sacred Power, his Prudence he inuiteth,
Summons his Love, his Justice he adiourns,
Calls his Goodness, and his Grace returns,
To (as it were) consult about the birth
And building of a second God, of Earth;
And each (apart) with liberal hand to bring
Some excellence unto so rare a thing.
Or rather, he consults with his only Son
(His own true Pourtrait) what proportion, Genesis 1, 16

What gifts, what grace, what soul he should bestow
Upon his Viceroy of this Realm below.
When the other things God fashioned in their kind,
The Sea t'abound in Fishes he assigned,
The Earth in Flocks: but, having Man in hand,
His very self he seemed to command.
He both at-once both life and body lent
To other things; but, when in Man he meant
In mortal limbs immortal life to place,
He seemed to pawse, as in a weighty case:
And so at sundry moments finished
The Soul and Body of Earth's glorious Head.
Admired Artist, Architect divine, Innocation.

Perfect and peer-les in all Works of thine,
So my rude hand on this rough Table guide
To paint the Prince of all thy Works beside,
That grave Spectators, in his face may spy
Apparent marks of thy Divinity.
Almighty Father, as of watery matter
It pleased thee make the people of the Water: Man's body crea ted of the dust
of the Earth.

So, of an earthly substance made thou all
The slimy Burgers of this Earthly Ball;
To the end each Creaturemight (by consequent)
Part-sympathize with his own Element.
Therefore, to form thine Earthly Emperor,
Thou tookest Earth, and by thy sacred power
So tempered'st it, that of the very same
Dead shape-les lump did Adams body frame:
Yet, not his face down to the Earth-ward bending
(Like Beasts that but regard their belly, ending
For ever all) but toward the azure Skies
Bright golden Lamps lifting his lovely Eyes;
That through their nerves, his better part might look
Still to that Place from whence her birth she took.
Also thou plantedst the Intellectual Power
In the highest stage of all this stately Bowr, His head the seat of
understanding.

That thence it might (as from a Cittadell)
Command the members that too-oft rebel
Against his Rule: and that our Reason, there
Keeping continual Garrison (as 't were)
Might Avarice, Envy, and Pride subdue,
Lust, Gluttony, Wrath, Sloth, and all their Crew
Of factious Commons, that still strive to gain
The golden Scepter from their Soverain.
The Eyes (Body's guides) are set for Sentinel The Eyes full of infinite
admiration.

In noblest place of all this Citadel,
To spy far-off, that no miss-hap befall
At unawares the sacred Animal.
In forming these thy hand (so famous held)
Seemed almost to have itself excelled,
Them not transpearcing, least our eyes should be
As theirs, that Heaven through hollow Canes do see,
Yet see small circuit of the welkin bright,
The Canes strict compass does so clasp their Sight:
And least so many open holes disgrace
The goodly form of the Earthly Monarch's face.
These lovely Lamps, whose sweet sparks lively turning,
With sudden glaunce set coldest hearts a-burning,
These windows of the Soul, these starry Twinns,
These Cupids quivers have so tender skinns
Through which (as through a pair of shining glasses)
Their radiant point of pearcing splendour passes,
That they would soon be quenched and put-out,
But that the Lord has Bulwarkt them about;
By seating so their wondrous Orb, betwix
The front, the Nose, and the vermillion Cheeks:
As in two Valleys pleasantly enclosed
With pretty Mountains orderly disposed. The Brows and Eye lids.

And as a Pent-house does preserve a Wall
From Rain and Hail, and other Storms that fall:
The twinkling Lids with their quick-trembling hairs
Defend the Eyes from thousand dangerous fears.
Who fain would see, how much a human face
A comely Nose does beautify and grace;
Behold Zopyrus, who cut off his Nose
For's Princes sake, to circumvent his foes. The Nose.

The Nose, no less for use then beauty makes:
For, as a Conduit, it both gives and takes
Our living breath: it is as a Pipe put-vp,
Whereby the moist Brain's spongy boan does sup
Sweetsmelling fumes: it serves as a gutter
To void the Excrements of grossest matter;
As by the Scull-seams, and the Pory Skin
Euaporate those that are light and thin:
As through black Chimneys flies the bitter smoke,
Which but so vented would the Household choke.
And, since that Time does with his secret file The Mouth.

Fret and diminish each thing every-while;
And whatsoever here begins and ends,
Wears every howr and its self-substance spends;
The Almighty made the Mouth, to recompense
The Stomaks pension, and the Times expense
(Even as the green Trees, by their roots resume
Sap for the sap, that howrly they consume)
And placed it so, that always by the way,
By sent of meats the Nose might take Essay,
The watchful Ey might true distinction make
'Twixt Herbs and Weeds, betwixt an Eel and Snake;
And then the impartial Tongue might (at the last) The Tongue.

Censure their goodness by their savory taste.
Two equal ranks of Orient Pearls impale The Teeth.

The open Throat: which (Queen-like) grinding small
The imperfect food, soon to the Stomach send-it
(Our Maister-Cook) whose due concoctions mend-it.
But least the Teeth, naked and bare to Light,
Should in the Face present a ghastly sight;
With wondrous Art, over that Mill do meet
Two moving Leaves of Coral soft and sweet. The Lips.

O mouth! by thee, our savage Elders, yerst
Through way-les Woods, and hollow Rocks dispersed,
With Acorns fed, with Fells of Feathers clad*
(When neither Traffik, Love, nor Law they had) Of the excellent use and end of
speech.

Themselves uniting, built them Towns, and bent
Their willing necks to civil Government.
O mouth! by thee, the rudest wits have learned
The Noble Arts, which but the wise discerned.
By thee, we kindle in the coldest spirits
Heroik flames affecting glorious merits.
By thee, we wipe the tears of woeful Eyes,
By thee, we stop the stubborn mutinies
Of our rebellious Flesh, whose rest-less Treason
Strives to dis-throne and to dis-sceptre Reason.
By thee, our Souls with Heaven have conversation.
By thee, we calm the Almighties indignation,
When faithful signs from oursoules center fly
About the bright Throne of his Majesty.
By thee, we warble to the King of Kings;
Our Tongu's the Bow, our Teeth the trembling strings,
Our hollow Nostrils (with their double vent)
The hollow belly of the Instrument;
Our Soul's the sweet Musician, that plays
So divine lessons, and so Heavenly lays,
As, in deep passion of pure burning zeal,
Jove's forked Lightnings from his fingers steal.
But O! what member has more marvails in it, The Ears,

Then the Ears round-winding double labyrinth:
The Body's scouts, of sounds the Censurers,
Doors of the Soul, and faithful Messengers
Of divine treasures, when our gracious Lord
Sends us the Embassage of his sacred Word?
And, since al Sound seems always to aseend,
God placed the Ears (where they might best attend)
As in two Turrets, on the buildings top,
Snailing their hollow entries so a-sloap,
That, while the voice about those windings wanders,
The sound might lengthen in those bowed Meanders;
As, from a Trumpet, Wind has longer life,
Or, from a Sagbut, then from Flute or Fife: Sundry Similies expressing the
reason of the round winding Mazes of the Ear^.

Or as a noise extends far and wide
In winding Vales, or by the crooked side
Of crawling Rivers; or with broken trouble
Between the teeth of hollow Rocks does double)
And that no sudden sound, with violence
Pearcing direct the Organs of this Sense,
Should stun the Brain, but through these Mazie holes
Conueigh the voice more softly to our Souls: Another comparison to that pur
pose.

As th'Ouse, that crooking in and out, does run
From Stony-Stratford toward Huntington,
By Royal Amptill; rusheth not so swift,
As our near Kennet, whose Trowt-famous Drift
From Marleborow, by Hungerford does hasten
Through Newbery, and Prince-grac't Aldermarston,
Her Silver Nymphs (almost) directly leading,
To meet her Mistress ( the great Thames) at Reading.
But, will my hands, in handling the human Stature, The hands.

Forget the Hands, the handmaids unto Nature,
The Almighty's Apes, the Instruments of Arts,
The voluntary Champions of our hearts,
Minds Ministers, the Clarks of quick conceits,
And bodies victuallers, to provide it meats?
Will you the Knees and Elbow's springs omit,
Which serve the whole Body by their motions fit? Joints, The Knees and Arms.

For as a Bow, according as the string,
Is stiff or slack, the shafts does farther fling;
Our Nerves and Gristles diversely dispense,
To the human Frame, meet Motion, Might and Sense:
Knitting the Bones, which be the Pillars strong, The Sinews, Gristles and
Bones.

The beams and Rafters, whose firm Joints may long
(Maugre Deaths malice, till our Maker calls)
Support the Fabrik of these Fleshly Walls? The Feet.

Can you conceal the Feets rare-skilfull feature,
The goodly Bases of this glorious Creature?
But, is it not time now, in his Inner Parts,
To seeth' Almightie's admirable Arts?
First, with my Launcet shall I make incision,
To see the Cells of the twin Brains division:
The Treasurer of Arts, the Source of Sense:
The Seat of Reason; and the Fountain, whence
Our sinews flow: whom Natures providence
Armed with a helm, whose double lynings fence
The brains cold moisture from its boany Armor,
Whose hardness else might hap to bruise or harm-her:
A Registre, where (with a secret touch)
The studious daily some rare Knowledge couch?
O, how shall I on learned Leaf forth-set
That curious Maze, that admirable Net,
Through whose fine folds the spirit does rise and fall,
Making its powrs, of Vital, Animal:
Even as the Blood, and Spirits, wandering
Through the preparing vessels crooked Ring,
Are in their winding course concoct and wrought,
And by degrees to fruitful Seed are brought.
Shall I the Hearts vn-equall sides explain, Of the Heart.

Which equal poiz does equally sustain?
Whereof, the one's filled with blood, in the other bides
The vital Spirit which through the body slides:
Whose rest-les panting, by the constant Pulse,
Does witness health; or if that take repulse,
And shift the dance and wonted pase it went,
It shows that Nature's wronged by Accident,
Or, shall I cleave the Lungs, whose motions light Of the Lungues.

Our inward heat do temper day and night:
Like summer gales wauing, with gentle puffs,
The smiling Medows green and gaudy tuffs:
Light, spungy Fans, that ever take and give
The aetheriall Air, whereby we breathe and live:
Bellows, whose blast (breathing by certain pawses)
A pleasant sound through our speech-Organs causes?
Or, shall I rip the Stomachs hollowness, Of the Stomach.

That ready Cook concocting every Mess,
Which in short time it cunningly conuerts
Into pure Liquor fit to feed the parts;
And then the same does faithfully deliver Of the Liver.

Into the Port-vain passing to the Liver,
Who turns it soon to Blood; and thence again
Through branching pipes of the great Hollow vain,
Through all the members does it duly scatter:
Much like a fountain, whose divided Water
It self dispersing into hundred Brooks, An apt Similitude.

Bathes some fair Garden with her winding Crooks.
For, as these Brooks, thus branching round about,
Make here the Pink, there the Aconite to sprout,
Here the sweet Plum-tree, the sharp Mulberie there,
Here the low Vine, and there the lofty Pear,
Here the hard Almond, there the tender Fig,
Here bitter Wormwood, there sweet smelling Spike:
Even so the Blood (bred of good nourishment) Of the Blood and Nourishment.

By diverse Pipes to all the body sent,
Turns here to Bones, there changes into Nerves,
Here is made Marow, there for Muscles serves,
Here Skin becoms, there crooking Veins, there Flesh,
To make our Limbs more forcefull and more fresh.
But, now me list no nearer view to take
Of the Inward Parts, which God did secret make,
Nor pull in pieces all the Human Frame:
That work were fitter for those men of Fame,
Those skillful sons of Aesculapius:
Hippocrates; or deep Herophilus:
Or the eloquent and artificial Writ
Of Galen, that renowned Pergamite.
'T suffices me, in some sort, to express
By this Essay the sacred mightiness,
Not of Iapetus wittie-fained Son,
But of the true Prometheus, that begun Of the Creation of the Soul.

And finished (with inimitable Art)
The famous Image, I have sung in part.
Now, this most peer-les learned Imager,
Life to his lovely Picture to conferr,
Did not extact out of the Elements
A certain secret Chymik Quint-essence:
But, breathing, sent as from the lively Spring*
Of his Diuinenss some small Riuerling,
Itself dispersing into every pipe
Of the frail Engine of this earthen Type.
Not, that his own Selfs-Essence blessed he brake, Of her Essence and substance.

Or did his Triple-Unitie partake
Unto his Work; but, without Selfs-expence
Inspired it richly with rare excellence:
And by his power so spread his Rays thereon,
That even as yet appers a portion
Of that pure luster of Celestial Light
Whearwith at first it was adorned and dight.
This Adam's spirit did from that spirit derive
Which made the World: yet did not thence deprive Whence it is proceeded.

Of Gods self-substance any part at all;
As in the Course of Nature does befall,
That from the Essence of an Earthly Father, Diverse Similes.

An Earthly Son essential parts does gather:
Or as in Springtime from one sappy twig
There sprouts another consubstantiall sprig.
In brief, it is but a breath: now, though the breath
Out of our Stomachs concaue issues;
Yet, of our substance it transporteth naught:
Only it seems to be simply fraught
And to retain the purer qualities
Of the inward place whence it derived is.
Inspired by that Breath, this Breath desire
I to describe. Whosoever does not admire
His spirit, is sprightless; and his sense is past, Of the excelle^ce of Man's
soul.

Who has no sense of that admired Blast.
Yet wot I well, that as the Ey perceiues
All but it self, even so our Soul conceiues
All save her own selfs Essence; but, the end
Of her own greatness cannot comprehend.
Yet as a sound Ey, void of vicious matter, How she may know her self.

Sees (in a sort) it self, in Glass or Water:
So, in her sacred Works (as in a Glass)
Our Soul (almost) may see her glorious face.
The boistrous Wind, that rents with roaring blasts Three fit comparisons to
that purpose.

The lofty Pines, and to the Welkin casts
Millions of Mountains from the watery World,
And proudest Turrets to the ground has whurld:
The pleasing fume that fragrant Roses yield,
When wanton Zephyr, sighing on the field,
Enammels all; and, to delight the Sky,
The Earth puts-on her richest Lyuory:
The accorded Discords, that are sweetly sent
From the Iuorie ribs of some rare Instrument,
Cannot be seen: but he may well be said
Of Flesh, and Ears, and Nose entirely void,
Who does not feel, nor hear, nor smell (the powrs)
The shock, sound, sent; of storms, of strings, of flowrs. The Soul not only
vital, but also divine and immortal.

Although our Soul's pure substance, to our sight
Be not subjected: yet her motion light
And rich discourse, sufficient proofs do give,
We have more soul than to suffice to live;
A Soul divine, pure, sacred, admirable,
Immortal, end-less, simple, vnpalpable.
For, whether that the Soul (the Mint of Art) The Seat of the Soul.

Be all in all, or all in every part:
Whether the Brain or Heart do lodge the Soul,
O Seneca, where, where could thou enroule
Those many hundred words (in Prose or Verse)
Which at first hearing thou could back rehearse? Notable examples of
excellent Memories.

Where could great Cyrus that great Table shut
Wherein the Pictures and the names he put
Of all the Soldiers, that by thousands wandered,
After the fortunes of his famous Standard?
In what deep vessel did the Embassader
Of Pyrrhus (whom the Delphian Oracler
Deluded by his double-meaning Measures)
Into what Cesterns did he pour those Treasures
Of learned store, which after (for his use)
In time and place, he could so fit produce?
The Memory, is the Eyes true Register,
The Peasants Book, Times wealthy Treasorer,
Keeping Records of Acts and accidents
What s' ever, subject unto humane sense,
Since first the Lord the Worlds foundations laid,
Or Phoebus first his golden locks displaid,
And his pale Sister from his beaming light
Borrowed her splendour to adorn the Night.
So that our Reason, searching curiously
Through all the Roules of a good Memory,
And fast'ning closely with a Gordian knot
To past events, what Present Times allot,
Fore-sees the Future, and becomes more sage,
More happily to lead our later age.
And, though our Soul live as imprisoned here,
In our frail flesh, or buried (as it were) Of the quick swiftnes, and sudden
motion of the Soul: comprehending all things in Heaven and Earth.

In a dark Toomb; Yet at one flight she flies
From Caipe to Imaus, from the Earth to Skies;
Much swifter then the Chariot of the Sun,
Which in a Day about the World does run.
For, sometimes, leaving these base slymy heaps,
With cheereful spring above the Clouds she leaps,
Glides through the Air, and there she learns to know
The Originalls of Wind, and Hail, and Snow,
Of Lightning, Thunder, Blazing-Starrs and storms,
Of Rain and Ice, and strange Exhaled Forms.
By the Aires steep-stairs, she boldly climbs aloft
To the Worlds Chambers; Heaven she visits often,
Stage after Stage: she marketh all the Spears,
And all the harmonious, various course of theirs:
With sure account, and certain Compasses,
She counts their Stars, she metes their distances
And differing pases; and, as if she found
No Subject fair enough in all this Round,
She Mounts above the Worlds extremest Wall,
Far, far beyond all things corporeal;
Where she beholdes her Maker, face to face,
(His frowns of Justice, and his smiles of Grace)
The faithful zeal, the chaste and sober Port
And sacred Pomp of the Celestial Court.
What can be hard to a sloath-shunning Spirit,
Spurred with desire of Fames eternal merit? Of learned, curious, pleasant,
marvelous, and more then humane invention of man's wit.

Look (if thou can) from East to Occident,
From Island to the Moors hot Continent;
And thou shall naught perfectly fair behold,
But Pen, or Pencill, Grauing-tool, or Mould,
Has so resembled, that scarce can our ey
The Counterfeit from the true thing descry.
The brazen Mare that famous Myron cast,
Which Stallions leapt, and for a Mare embraced:
The lively picture of that ramping Vine
Which whilom Zeuxis limn'd so rarely fine,
That shoals of Birds, beguiled by the shapes, Of Caruing and Painting.

Peckt at the Table, as at very Grapes:
The Marble Statue, that with strangest fire
Fondly inflamed the Athenian Youths desire:
Apelles Uenus, which allured well-neer
As many Loves, as Venus self had here;
Are proofs enough that learned Painting can
Can (Goddess-like) another Nature frame.
But the Art of Man, not only can compack
Features and forms that life and Motion lack; The subtle conclusions of the
Mathematikes: witness Archytas Dove.

But also fill the Air with painted shoals
Of flying Creatures (Artificial Fowls)
The Tarentines valiant and learned Lord,
Archytas, made a wooden Dove, that soared
About the Welkin, by the accorded sleights The Eagle and the Fly, of John de
Monte-Regio: or Regi-Montanus*

And counterpoiz of sundry little weights.
Why should I not that wooden Eagle mention
(A learned Germans late-admir'd invention)
Which mounting from his fist that framed her,
Flew far to meet an Almain Emperor;
And having met him, with her nimble train,
And weary wings, turning about again,
Followed him close unto the Castle Gate
Of Noremberg; whom all the Shows of State,
Streets hanged with Arras, Arches curious built,
Loud-thundring Canons, Columns richly gilt,
Gray Headed Senate, and Youth's gallantise,
Graced not so much, as only This Devise.
Once, as this Artist (more with mirth then meat)
Feasted some friends that he esteemed great,
From vnder's hand an iron Fly flew out;
Which, having flowen a perfect Round-about,
With weary wings, returned unto her Master,
And (as judicious) on his arm she plac't-her.
O divine wit! that in the narrow womb
Of a small Fly, could find sufficient room
For all those Springs, wheels, counterpoiz, and chains,
Which stood in stead of life, and spur, and rains.
Yea, you your selves, ye bright Celestial Orbs, Astronomy.

Although no stop your rest-less Dance disturbs,
Nor stays your Course; yet can ye not escape
The hands of men (that are but men in shape)
A Persian Monarch, not content, well-nigh The king of Per sia his Heaven of
Glass.

With the Earths bounds to bound his Empery:
To reign in Heaven, raised not with bold defiance
(Like brauing Nimrod, or those boistrous Giants)
Another Babel, or a heap of Hills:
But, without moving from the Earth, he builds
A Heaven of Glass, so huge, that there-upon
Sometimes erecting his ambitious Throne,
Beneath his proud feet (like a God) he saw
The shyning Lamps of the other Heaven, to draw
Down to the Deep, and thence again advance
(Like glorious Brides) their golden Radiance:
Yet had the Heaven no wondrous excellence
(Save Greatness) worthy of so great a Prince.
But, who would think, that mortal hands could mould Admirable Dialls and
Clocks, namely, at this Day, that of Straesbourg.

New Heaven's, new Stars, whose whirling courses should
With constant windings, though contrary ways,
Mark the true mounds of Years, and Months, and Days?
Yet 't is a story that has often been heard,
And by grave Witness hundred times auerr'd,
That, that profound Briareus, who of yore
(As selfly armed with thousands hands and more)
Maintained so long the Syracusian Towrs
Against great Marcellus and his Roman Powrs: The Engines of Archimedes, and
his Sphere.

Who fier'd his foes Fleet with a wondrous Glass:
Who hugest Vessels, that did ever pass
The Ti^rhen Seas, turned with his only hand
From Shore to Sea, and from the Sea to Land;
Framed a Sphere, where every Wandering Light
Of lower Heavens and the upper Tapers, bright,
Whose glistering flames the Firmament adorn,
Did (of themselves) with ruled motion turn.
Nor may we smother, or forget (ingrately) The Heaven of Silver sent by the
Emperor Ferdinand to Solomon the great Turk.

The Heaven of Silver, that was sent (but lately)
From Ferdinando (as a famous Work)
Unto Bizantium to the Greatest Turk:
Wherein, a spirit still moving to and fro,
Made all the Engine orderly to go;
And though the one Sphere did always slowely slide,
And (opposite) the other swiftly glide;
Yet still their Stars kept all their Courses even
With the true Courses of the Stars of Heaven:
The Sun, there shifting in the Zodiac
His shining Houses, never did forsake
His pointed Path: there, in a Month, his Sister
Fulfilled her course, and changing often her luster
And form of Face (now larger, lesser soon)
Followed the Changes of the other Moon.
O complete Creature! who the starry Spears Of man's resemblance to his first
Pattern, which is God.

Can make to move, who above the Heavenly Bears
Extend'st thy power, who guidest with thy hand
The Day's bright Chariot and the nightly Brand:
This curious Lust to imitate the best
And fairest Works of the Almightiest,
By rare effects bears record of thy Lineage
And high descent; and that his sacred Image
Was in thy Soul ingrav'n, when first his Spirit
(The spring of life) did in thy limms inspire-it.
For, as his Beauties are past all compare;
So is thy Soul all beautiful and fair:
As he is immortal; and is never idle:
Thy Soul's immortal; and can brook no bridle
O^ sloth, to curb her busy Intellect:
He ponders all; thou peizest each effect:
And thy mature and settled Sapience
Hathsom alliance with his Providence:
He works by Reason; thou by Rule: He Is glory,
Of the Heavenly Stages; thou of the Earthly Story:
He Is great High Priest; thou his great Vicar here:
He Is Souerain Prince; and thou his Viceroy deer.
For, soon as ever he had framed thee, Other testimonies of the excellency of
Man, constituted Lord of the World.

Into thy hands he put this Monarchy:
Made all the Creatures know thee for their Lord,
And com before thee of their own accord:
And gave thee power (as Master) to impose
Fit sense-full Names unto the Host that rows
In watery Regions; and the wandering Herds
Of Forest people; and the painted Birds:
O too-too happy! had that Fall of thine
Not cancelled so the Character divine.
But since our Souls now-sin-obscured Light Wherein consists Man's selicitie.

Shines through the Lanthorn of our Flesh so bright;
What sacred splendour will this Starr send forth,
When it shall shine without this vail of Earth?
The Soul, here lodged, is like a man that dwells
In an ill Air, annoyed with noysom smells; Excellent comparisons.

In an old House, open to wind and weather;
Never in Health, not half an hour together:
Or (almost) like a Spider, who, confined
In her Webs center, shook with every wind;
Moves in an instant, if the buzzing Fly
Stir but a string of her Lawn Canapie.
You that have seen within this ample Table, Of the Creation of Woman made for
an aid to Man, and without whom Man's life were miserable.

Among so many Modules admirable,
The admired beauties of the King of Creatures,
Com, com and see the Woman's rapting features:
Without whom (here) Man were but half a man,
But a wild Wolf, but a Barbarian,
Brute, ragefull, fierce, moody, melancholic,
Hating the Light; whom naught but naught could like:
Born solely for himself, bereft of sense,
Of heart, of love, of life, of excellence.
God therefore, not to seem less liberal
To Man, then else to every animal;
For perfect pattern of a holy Love,
To Adams half another half he gave,
Taken from his side, to bind (through every Age)
With kinder bonds the sacred Marriage.
Even as a Surgeon, minding off-to-cut Simile*

Some cure-less limb; before in ure he put
His violent Engines on the vicious member,
Brings his Patient in a sense-less slumber,
And grief-less then (guided by use and Art)
To save the whole, sawes off the infected part:
So, God empal'd our Grandsiers lively look,
Through all his bones a deadly chilness struck,
Siel'd-vp his sparkling Eyes with Iron bands,
Led down his feet (almost) to Lethe Sands;
In brief, so numm'd his Soul's and Body's sense,
That (without pain) opening his side; from thence
He took a rib, which rarely he refined,
And thereof made the Mother of Mankind:
Grauing so lively on the living Bone
All Adams beauties; that, but hardly, one
Could have the Lover from his Love descried,
Or known the Bridegroom from his gentle Bride:
Saving that she had a more smiling Ey,
A smoother Chin, a Cheek of purer Die,
A fainter voice, a more enticing Face,
A Deeper Tress, a more delighting Grace,
And in her bosom (more then Lillie-white)
Two swelling Mounts of Ivory, panting light.
Now, after this profound and pleasing Trance, Their Marriage.

No sooner Adams ravished eyes did glaunce
On the rare beauties of his new-com Half,
But in his heart he began to leap and laugh,
Kissing her kindly, calling her his Life,
His Love, his Stay, his Rest, his Weal, his Wife,
His other-Self, his Help (him to refresh)
Bone of his Bone, Flesh of his very Flesh.
Source of all joys? sweet Hee-Shee-Coupled-One, Their Epithalamie, or wedding
Song.

Thy sacred Birth I never think upon,
But (ravished) I admire how God did then
Make Two of One, and One of Two again.
O blessed Bond! O happy Marriage!
Which do the match 'twixt Christ and us presage!
O chastest friendship, whose pure flames impart
Two Souls in one, two Hearts into one Heart!
O holy knot, in Eden instituted
(Not in this Earth with blood and wrongs polluted,
Profaned with mischiefs, the Pre-Scaene of Hell
To cursed Creatures that' against Heaven rebel)
O sacred Covenant, which the sin-less Son
Of a pure Virgin (when he first begun
To publish proofs of his drad Power Divine,
By turning Water into perfect Wine,
At lesser Cana) in a wondrous manner
Did with his presence sanctify and honor!
By thy deer Favor, after our Decease, The commodities of Marriage.

We leave behind our living Images,
Change War to Peace, in kindred multiply,
And in our Children live eternally.
By thee, we quench the wild and wanton Fires,
That in our Soul the Paphian shot inspires:
And taught (by thee) a love more firm and fitter,
We find the Mel more sweet, the Gall less bitter,
Which here (by turns) heap up our human Life
Even now with joys, anon with iars and strife.
This done; the Lord commands the happy Pair Propagation by the blessing of God.

With chaste embraces to replenish Fair
The unpeopled World; that while the World endures,
Here might succeed their living Pourtraitures.
He had imposed the like precept before,
On the irefull Droues that in the Deserts roar,
The fethered Flocks, and fruitfull-spawning Legions
That live within the liquid Crystal Regions.
Thence-forth therefore, Bears, Bears ingendered;
The Dolphins, Dolphins; Vulturs, Vulturs bred;
Men, Men: and Nature, with a change-less Course,
Still brought forth Children like their Ancestors: Unnatural Co^iunctions
produce monstrous Births.

Though since indeed, as (when the fire has mixt-them)
The yellow Gold and Silver pale betwixt them
Another Metal (like to neither) make,
Which yet of eithers riches does partake:
So, often, two Creatures of a diverse kind,
Against the common course through All Assigned,
Confounding their lust-burning seeds together,
Beget an Elf, not like in all to either,
But (bastard Mongrel) bearing marks apparent
Of mingled members, taken from either Parent.
God, not contented, to each Kind to give Of things ingendered without seed or
commixtion of sexes.

And to infuse the Virtue Generatiue,
Made (by his Wisdom) many Creatures breed
Of liue-less bodies, without Venus deed.
So, the cold humor breeds the Salamander,
Who (in effect) like to her births Commander
With-childe with hundred Winters, with her touch
Quenches the Fire though glowing never so much.
So, of the Fire in burning furnace, springs
The Fly Pyrausta with the flaming Wings:
Without the Fire, it dies; within it, joys;
Living in that, which each thing else destroys.
So, slow Boots underneath him sees,
In the ycy Isles, those Goslings hatched of Trees,
Whose fruitful leaves, falling into the Water,
Are turned (they say) to living Fowls soon after.
So, rotten sides of broken Ships do change
To Barnacles; O Transformation strange*
'Twas first a green Tree, then a gallant Hull,
Lately a Mushrum, now a flying Gull.
So Morn and Evening the Sixth Day conclude,
And God perceived that All his Works were good.
THE SEVENTH DAY OF THE FIRST WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
In sacred Rest, upon This sacred Day
The Eternal does his glorious Works suruay:
His only Power and Providence persevere
TO uphold, maintain, and rule the World for ever:
Maugre Men's malice and Hells raging mood,
God turns all things to his Childrens good:
Sabbaoths right use; From all Worlds-Works to cease;
To pray (not play) and hear the Word of Peace:
Instructions drawn from dead and living things,
And from our selves; for all Estates; for Kings.
THe cunning Painter, that with curious care, By an excellent Similitude of a
Painter delighted with the sight of a curious table which he has lately
finished; our Poet shows how God rested the seventh Day, and saw (as says
the Scripture) that all that he had made was Good.

Limning a Land-scape, various, rich, and rare,
Has set a-work, in all and every part,
Invention, Judgment, Nature, Use and Art;
And has at length (t'immortalize his name)
With weary Pencill perfected the same;
Forgets his pains; and, inly filled with glee,
Still on his Picture gazeth greedily.
First in a Mead he marks a frisking Lamb,
Which seems (though dumb) to bleat unto the Dam:
Then he observes a Wood, seeming to wave:
Then the hollow bosom of some hideous Cave:
Here a Highway, and there a narrow Path:
Here Pines, there Oaks torn by tempestuous wrath:
Here from a craggy Rocks steep-hanging boss
(Thrumm'd half with Iuy, half with crisped Moss)
A silver Brook in broken streams does gush,
And headlong down the horned Cliff does rush;
Then winding thence above and under ground,
A goodly Garden it be-moateth round:
There, on his knee (behind a Box-Tree shrinking)
A skillful Gunner with his left ey winking,
Leuels directly at an Oak hard by,
Whereon a hundred groaning Culuers cry;
Down falls the Cock, up from the Touch-pan flies
A ruddy flash that in a moment dies,
Off goes the Gun, and through the Forest rings
The thundering bullet, born on fiery wings.
Here, on a Green, two Striplings, stripped light,
Run for a prize with labor some delight;
A dusty Cloud about their feet does flow
(Their feet, and head, and hands, and all do go)
They swelt in sweat; and yet the following Rout
Hastens their haste with many a cheerful shout.
Here, six pyed Oxen, under painful yoke,
Rip up the folds of Ceres Winter Cloak.
Here, in the shade, a pretty Shepheardess
Drives softly home her bleating happiness:
Still as she goes, she spins; and as she spins,
A man would think some Sonnet she begins.
Here runs a River, there springs forth a Fountain,
Here vails a Valley, there ascends a Mountain,
Here smoks a Castle, there a City fumes,
And here a Ship upon the Ocean looms.
In brief, so lively, Art has Nature shaped,
That in his Work the Work-mans self is rapt,
Unable to look off; for, looking still.
The more he looks, the more he finds his skill:
So the Architect (whose glorious Workmanships God rested the seaue^th Day, and
contemplates, on his Works.

My cloudy Muse does but too-much eclipse)
Having with pain-less pain, and care-less care,
In These Six Days, finished the Table fair
And infinite of the Universal Ball,
Rests This Day, to admire himself in All:
And for a season eying nothing else,
Joys in his Work, since all his Work excels
(If my dull, stutting frozen eloquence
May dare conjecture of his high Intents).
One while, he sees how the ample Sea does take A brief recapitulation and
consideration of the Works of God in the whole World and a learned Exposition
of the words of Moses Genesis 1. 31 God saw that all that he had made, was
perfectly good.

The Liquid homage of each other Lake;
And how again the Heaven sexhale, from it,
Abundant vapors (for our benefit):
And yet it swells not for those tribute streams,
Nor yet it shrinks not for those boiling beams.
There see's he the Ocean-peoples plentious broods;
And shifting Courses of the Ebbs and Floods;
Which with inconstant glaunces night and day
The lower Planets forked front does sway.
Anon, upon the flowery Plains he looks,
Laced about with snaking silver brooks.
Now, he delights to see four Brethrens strife
Cause the Worlds peace, and keep the World in life:
Anon, to see the whirling Spears to roll
In rest-less Danses about either Pole;
Whereby, their Cressets (carried diverse ways)
Now visit us, anon the Antipodes.
It glads him now to note how the Orb of Flame,
Which girts this Globe, does not enfire the Frame:
How the Airs glib-gliding firmless body bears
Such store of Fowls, Hail-storms, and Floods of tears:
How the heavy Water, pronest to descond,
'Twixt Air and Earth is able to depend:
And how the dull Earth's prop-less massy Ball
Stands steady still, just in the midst of All.
Anon his nose is pleased with fragrant sents
Of Balm, and Basil, Myrrh, and Frankincense,
Thyme, Spiknard, Hysop, Sauory, Cinnamon,
Pink, Violet, Rose, and Cloue-Carnation.
Anon, his ear 's charmed with the melody
Of winged Consorts curious Harmony:
For, though each bird, guided with Art-less Art,
After his kind, observe a song apart,
Yet the sole burden of their several Lays
Is nothing but the Heav'n-Kings glorious praise.
In brief, the Almightie's ey, and nose, and ear,
In all his works, does naught see, sent, or hear,
But shows his greatness, savors of his grace,
And sounds his glory over every place.
But above all, Man's many beauteous features
Detain the Lord more then all other Creatures:
Man's his own Minion; Man's his sacred Type,
And for Man's sake, he loves his Workmanship.
Not, that I mean to fain an idle God,
That lusks in Heaven and never looks abroad,
That Crowns not Virtue, and corrects not Vice,
Blind to our service, deaf unto our sighs;
A Pagan Idol, void of power and piety,
A sleeping Dormouse (rather) a dead Deity.
For though (alas!) sometimes I cannot shun,
But some profane thoughts in my mind will run,
I never think on God, but I conceive
(Whence cordial comforts Christians souls receive) Of the Providence of God.

In God, Care, Counsel, Justice, Mercy, Might,
To punish wrongs, and patronize the right:
Since Man (but Image of the Almightiest)
Without these gifts is not a Man, but Beast.
Fond Epicure, thou rather slept'st, thy self, Epicurus and his followers,
denying the same, consuted by sundry Reasons.

When thou did forge thee such a sleep-sick Elf
For life's pure Fount: or vainly fraudulent
(Not shunning the Atheists sin, but punishment)
Imaginedst a God so perfect-less,
In Works defying, whom thy words profess.
God is not sitting (like some Earthly State)
In proud Theater, him to recreate
With curious Objects* of his ears and eyes,
(Without disposing of the Comoedies)
Content to have made (by his great Word) to move
So many radiant Stars as shine above;
And on each thing with his own hand to draw
The sacred Text of an eternal Law:
Then, bosoming his hand, to let them slide,
With reans at will, whether that Law shall guide:
Like one that having lately forced some Lake, Simile.

Through some new Channel a new Course to take,
Takes no more care thence-forth to those effects,
But lets the Stream run where his Ditch directs.
The Lord our God wants neither Diligence, 1 Gods power, goodness, and wisdom,
shine gloriously in governing the world.

Nor Love, nor Care, nor Power, nor Providence.
He proved his Power, by Making All of naught:
His Diligence, by Ruling All he wrought:
His Care, by Ending it in six Days space:
His Love, in Building it for Adams Race:
His Providence (maugre Times wastefull rages)
Preserving it so many Years and Ages.
For, O! how often had this goodly Ball
By his own Greatness caused his proper Fall?
How often had this World deceast, except
Gods mighty arms had it vpheld and kept? 2 In him and through him, all things
live and move, and have their Being.

God is the soul, the life, the strength, and sinnew,
That quickens, moves, and makes this Frame continue.
God's the main spring, that makes every way
All the small wheels of this great Engine play.
God's the strong Atlas, whose vnshrinking shoulders
Have been and are Heavens heavy Globes vpholders.
God makes the Fountains run continually, 3. All things particularly are guided
by his Ordinance and Power, working continually.

The days and Nights succeed incessantly:
The Seasons in their season he does bring,
Summer and Autumn, Winter, and the Spring:
God makes the Earth fruitful, and he makes the Earth's
Large loignes not yet faint for so many births.
God makes the Sun and Stars, though wondrous hot,
That yet their Heat themselves inflameth not;
And that their sparkling beams prevent not so,
With woeful flames, the Last great Day of woe:
And that (as moved with a contrary wrest)
They turn at-once both North, and East, and West:
Heaven's constant course, his heast does never break:
The floating Water waits at his beck:
The Air's at his Call, the Fire at his Command,
The Earth is His: and there is nothing fand
In all these Kingdoms, but is moved each howr
With secret touch of his eternal Power.
God is the Judge, who keeps continual Sessions, 4 God is the Judge of the
World: having all Creatures visible and invisible, ready armed to execute his*
Judgments.

In every place to punish all Transgressions;
Who, void of Ignorance and Avarice,
Not won with Bribes, nor wrested with Device,
Sins Fear, or Favor; hate, or partial zeal;
Pronounces Judgments that are past appeal.
Himself is Judge, Jury, and Witness too,
Well knowing what we all think, speak, or do:
He sounds the deepest of the doublest heart,
Searches the Reins, and fifteth every part:
He sees all secrets, and his Lynx-like ey
(Yet it be thought) does every thought descry:
His Sentence given, never returns in vain;
For, all that Heaven, Earth, Air, and Sea contain,
Serve him as Sergeants: and the winged Legions,
That soar above the bright Star-spangled Regions,
Are ever pressed, his powrfull Ministers;
And (lastly) for his Executioners,
Satan, assisted with the infernal band,
Stands ready still to finish his Command.
God (to be brief) is a good Artizan
That to his purpose aptly manage can
Good or bad Tools; for, for just punishment, Yea, he makeeh even the wicked
this instruments to punish the wicked, and to prove his Chosen

He arms our sins us sinners to torment;
And to prevent the vngodly's plot, sometime
He makes his foes (will-nill-they) fight for him.
Yet true it is, that human things (seem) slide
Vnbridledly with so uncertain tide,
That in the Ocean of Events so many,
Sometimes Gods Judgments are scarce seen of any:
Rather, it seems that giddy Fortune guides Again, against Epicures, who hold
that all things happen in the World by Chance.

All that beneath the silver Moon be^ideth.
Yet, art thou ever just (O God) though I
Cannot (alas!) thy Judgments depth descry:
My wit's too shallow for the least Design
Of thy drad Counsails, sacred, and divine:
And thy least-secret Secrets, I confess
To deep for us, without thy Spirit's address.
Yet oftentimes, what seems (at first sight) 1 Gods Judgments past our
search: yet ever just in themselves

Unjust to us, and past our reason quite,
Thou make us (Lord) acknowledge (in due season)
To have been don with equity and reason.
So, suffering the Hebrew Tribes to sell their brother, Gen 45. ver. 6. 7 and
Genesis 50. v^. 20.

Thy eternal Justice thou did seem to smother.
But Joseph (when, through such rare hap, it chanced
Him of a slave to be so high advanced,
To rule the Land where Nilus fertile flood
Dry Heavens defects endeavors to make good)
Learned, that his envious brethrens treacherous drift,
Him to the Stern of Memphian State had lift,
That he might there provide Relief and Room
For Abraham's Seed, against (then) time to com.
When thy strong arm, which plagues the Reprobate, 2. In executing his
judgments on the rebellious he shows mercy on his Servants.

The World and Sodom did exterminate,
With flood and flame: because there lived then
Some small remains of good and righteous men,
Thou seem'dst unjust: but when thou sauedst Let
From Fire, from Water Noah and his Boat,
'Twas plainly seen, thy Justice stands propstious
To the Innocent and smites but the vicious.
He wilful winks against the shining Sun, 5 He shows his power in the
confusion of the Mightiest: and in the deliverance of his Church.

That see's not Pharao, as a mean begun
Forth' Hebrews good; and that his hardened heart,
Smoothed the passage for their soon-depart:
To the end the Lord, when Tyrants will not yield,
Might for his Glory find the larger field.
Who sees not also, that the unjust Decree
Of a proud Judge, and Judas treachery,
The Peoples fury, and the Prelates gall,
Served all as organs to repair the Fall
Of Edens old Prince, whose luxurious pride
Made on his seed his sin for ever slide? 4 He turns the malice of Satan and
his instruments, to his own glory, and the good of his: of whom he has always
special care.

The Almighties Care does diversely disperse
Ore all the parts of all this Universe:
But more precisely, his wide wings protect
The race of Adam, chiefly his Elect.
For ay he watches for his Children choice
That lift to him their hearts, their hands, and voice:
For them, he built the ay-turning Heavens Theater;
For them, he made the Fire, Air, Earth, and Water:
He counts their hairs, their steps he measures,
Handles their hands, and speaks with their breath;
Dwells in their hearts and plants his Regiments
Of watchful Angels round about their Tents. A remedy for temptation of the
godly, seeing the prosperity of the wicked, and the afflictions of Gods
children.

But here, what hear I? Faith-less, God-less men,
I meruail not, that you impugn my pen:
But (O!) it grieves me, and I am amazed,
That those, whose faith, like glistering Stars, has blazed
Even in our darkest nights, should so object
Against a doctrine of so sweet effect;
Because (alas!) with weeping eyes they see
The vngodly-most in most Prosperity,
Clothed in Purple, crowned with Diadems,
Handling bright Scepters hoording Gold and Gems,
Croucht-to, and courted with all kind affection,
As privileged by the Heavens protection;
So that, their goods, their honors their delights
Excel their hopes, exceed their appetites:
And (opposite) the godly (in the storms
Of this Worlds Sea) tossed in continual harms:
In Earth, less rest then Euripus they find,
Gods heavy Rods still hanging them behind:
Them, shame, and blame, trouble and loss pursues;
As shadows bodies, and as night the deawes.
Peace, peace, deer friends: I hope to cancel quite The same comforted in
diverse sorts: with apt Similitudes, co^firming the reason and declaring the
right end of God; diverse dea ling with men.

This profane thought from your unsettled Sp'rit.
Know then, that God (to the end he be not thought
A powr-less Judge) here plagueth many a fault;
And many a fault leaves here unpunished,
That men may also his last judgment dread.
On the other side, note that the Cross becoms
A Ladder leading to Heavens glorious rooms:
A Royal Path, the Heavenly Milken way,
Which does the Saints to Jove's high Court convay.
O! see you not, how that a Father grave,
Curbing his Son much shorter then his Slave,
Does the one but rare, the other rife reprove,
The one but for lucre, the other all for love?
As skillful Quirry, that commands the Stable
Of some great Prince, or Person honorable,
Gives oftest to that Horse the teaching spur,
Which he finds fittest for the use of War.
A painful Schoolmaster, that has in hand
To institute the flowr of all a Land,
Gives longest Lessons unto those, where Heaven
The ablest wits and aptest wills has given.
And a wise Chieftain, never trusts the weight
Of the execution of a brave Exploit,
But unto those whom most he honors,
For often proof of their firm force and faith:
Such sends he first to assault his eager foes;
Such against the Canon on a Breach bestows;
Such he commands naked to scale a Fort,
And with small number to re-gain a Port.
God beats his Deer, from birth to burial,
To make them know him, and their pride appall, Affliction profitable to the
Faithful.

To draw devout sighs from calamity,
And by the touch to try their Constancy,
TO awake their sloth, their minds to exercise
To trauail cheer'ly for the immortal Prize.
A good Physician, that Arts excellence
Can help with practice and experience, They are necessary to cure the diseases
of the soul.

Applies discreetly all his Recipes,
Unto the nature of each fell-disease;
Curing this Patient with a bitter Potion.
That, with strict Diet, the other with a Lotion,
And sometime cutteth off a leg or arm,
So (sharply sweet) to save the whole from harm:
Even so the Lord according to the ill humors
That vex his most-Saints with soule-tainting tumors)
Sends sometimes Exile, sometimes lingering Languor,
Sometimes Dishonor, sometimes pining Hunger,
Sometime long Lawsuits, sometime Loss of good,
Sometimes a Childs death, or a Widdow-hood:
But ay he holds, for the good of His,
In one hand Rods; in the other Remedies.
The Soldier, slugging long at home in Peace, Without them Gods children
decline.

His wonted courage quickly does decrease:
The rust does fret the blade hanged up at rest:
The Moath does eat the garment in the Chest:
The standing Water stinks with putrefaction:
And Virtue has no Virtue but in action.
All that is fairest in the World, we find
Subject to trauail. So, with storms and wind
The Air still is tossed: the Fire and Water tend,
This, still to mount; that, ever to descend:
The spirit is spright-less if it want discourse,
Heaven's no more Heaven if it once cease his Course.
The valiant Knight is known by many scars: The Cross an honorable mark.

But he that steals-home, wound-less, from the Wars,
Is held a Coward, void of Valors proof,
That for Deaths fear, has fled, or fought a-loof.
The Lord therefore, to give Humanity
Rare presidents of daunt-less Constancy, God will be glorified in the constant
sufferings of his Servants.

And crown his deer Sons with victorious Laurels
Won from a thousand foes in glorious quarrels;
Pours down more evils on their hap-less head,
Then yerst Pandora's odious Box did shead;
Yet strengthening still their hearts with such a Plaster,
That though the Flesh stoop, still the Spirit is Master.
But, wrongly I these evils Evil call: There is nothing evil in Man's life,
but sin: and virtue is best perceived in the proof.

Sole Vice is ill; sole Virtue good: and all,
Besides the same, is selfly, simply, had
And held indifferent, neither good nor bad.
Let envious Fortune all her forces wage
Against a constant Man, her fellest rage
Can never change his godly resolution,
Though Heaven it self should threaten his confusion.
A constant man is like the Sea, whose breast True constantie lively represented
by two comparisons.

Lies ever open unto every guest;
Yet all the Waters that she drinks, can not
Make her to change her qualities a jot:
Or, like a good sound stomach not soon casting
For a light surfeit or a small dis-tasting;
But, that, untroubled, can incontinent
Convert all meats to perfect nourishment.
Though then, the Lords deep Wisdom, to this day, God, Resting on the seventh
Day, and blessing it: teaches us that in resting one day of the Week, we
should principally employ it in his service: That we should cease from our
worldly and wicked works, to give place to his grace, and to suffer his Spirit
to work in us by the Instrument of his holy word.

Work in the Worlds vncertain-certain Sway:
Yet must we credit that his hand composed
All in six Days, and that He then Reposed;
By his example, giving us behest,
On the Seventh Day for evermore to Rest.
For, God remembered that he made not Man
Of Stone, or Steel, or Brass Corinthian:
But lodged our soul in a frail earthen Mass,
Thinner then Water, britteler then Glass:
He knows our life is by naught sooner spent,
Then having still our minds and bodies bent.
A Field, left lay for some few Years, will yield
The richer Crop, when it again is tilled:
A River stopped by a sluice a space,
Runs (after) rougher and a swifter pase:
A Bow, a while unbent, will after cast
His shafts the farther, and them fix more fast:
A Soldier, that a season still has layn,
Coms with more fury to the Field again:
Even so, this Body, when (to gather breath)
One Day in Seav'n at Rest it soiourneth;
It re-collects his Powrs, and with more cheer,
Falls the next morrow to his first Career.
But, the chief End, this Precept aims at, is
To quench in us the coals of Covetize;
That while we rest from all profaner Arts,
Gods Spirit may work in our retired hearts:
That we, down-treading earthly cogitations,
May mount our thoughts to heavenly meditations:
Following good Archers guise, who shut one ey, Simile.

That they the better may their mark espy.
For, by the Almighty, this great Holy Day
Was not ordained to dance, and mask, and play, Against profaners of the
Sabbath.

To slugg in sloth, and languish in delights,
And loose the Reans to raging appetites:
To turn Gods Feasts to filthy Lupercals,
To frantike Orgies, and fond Saturnals:
To dazzle eyes with Prides vainglorious splendour,
To serve strange Gods, or our Ambition tender;
As the irreligion of loose Times has since
Changed the Prime-Churches chaster innocence. We ought on the Lords Day,
atte^d his service and me ditate on the everlasting Rest, and on the works of
God.

God would, that men should in a certain place
This Day assemble as before his face,
Lending an humble and attentive ear
To learn his great Name's deer-drad Loving-Fear:
He would that there the faithful Pastor should
The Scriptures marrow from the bones unfold,
That we might touch with fingers (as it were)
The sacred secrets that are hidden there.
For, though the reading of those holy lines
In private Houses som-what move our minds;
Doubtless, the Doctrine preached does deeper pearce,
Proves more effectual, and more weight it bears. The practice of the
faithful, in all reformed Churches, on the Sabbath Day.

He would, that there in holy Psalms we sing
Shrill praise and thanks to our immortal King,
For all the liberal bounties he bestow'th
On us and ours, in soul and body both:
He would, that there we should confess his Christ
Our only Savior, Prophet, Prince, and Priest;
Solemnizing (with sober preparation)
His blessed Seals of Reconciliation:
And, in his Name, beg boldly what we need
(After his will) and be assured to speed;
Since in the Exchequer of his Clemency,
All goods of Fortune, Soul, and Body lie.
He would, this Sabbath should a figure be The Corporal Rest, a figure of the
spiritual.

Of the blessed Sabbath of Eternity.
But the one (as Legal) heeds but outward things;
The other, to Rest both Soul and body brings:
The one but a Day endures; the others Date
Eternity shall not exterminate:
Shadows the one the other does Truth include:
This stands in freedom, that in servitude:
With cloudy cares the one's muffled up som-whiles;
The others face is full of pleasing smiles:
For, never grief, nor fear of any Fit
Of the least care, shall dare come near to it.
It Is the grand Iubile, the Feast of Feasts,
Sabbath of Sabbaoths, end-less Rest of Rests;
Which, with the Prophets, and Apostles zealous,
The constant Martyrs, and our Christian fellows,
Gods faithful Servants, and his chosen Sheep,
In Heaven we hope (within short time) to keep.
He would this Day, our soul (sequestered Meditation of the works of God,
especially on the day of Rest.

From busy thoughts of worldly cares) should read,
In Heavens bowed Arches, and the Elements,
His bound-less Bounty, Power and Providence;
That every part may (as a Master) teach
The illiterat, Rules past a vulgar reach.
Com (Reader) sit, com sit thee down by me; Exhortation to this Meditati^,
with the use and profit thereof.

Think with my thoughts, and see what I do see:
Hear this dumb Doctor, study in this Book,
Where day and night thou mai'st at pleasure look,
And thereby learn uprightly how to live:
For, every part does special Lessons give,
Even from the gilt studs of the Firmament,
To the base Center of our Element.
See thou those Stars we (wrongly) Wandering call, The Planets teach us to
follow the will of God.

Though diverse ways they dance about this Ball,
Yet ever more their manifold Career
Follows the Course of the First Moving Sphere?
This teaches thee, that though thine own Desires
Be opposite to what Heavens will requires,
Thou must still strive to follow (all thy days)
God (the first Mover) in his holy ways. The Moon teaches that we have not
any thing that we have not received.

Vain puff of wind, whom vaunting pride bewitches,
For Bodies beauties, or Minds (richer) Riches;
The Moon, whose splendour from her Brother springs,
May by Example make thee vail thy wings:
For thou, no less then the pale Queen of Nights,
Borrow'st all goodness from the Prince of Lights.
Will thou, from Orb to Orb, to the Earth descend? The Elementary fire and
ours, where our happiness, and where our misery consists.

Behold the Fire which God did round extend:
As near to Heaven the same is clear and pure;
Ours here below, sad, smoaky, and obscure:
So, while thy Soul does with the Heavens converse,
It Is sure and safe from every thought perverse;
And though thou won here in this world of sin,
Thou art as happy as Heavens Angels been:
But, if thy mind be always fixed all
On the foul dunghill of this darksom vale,
It will partake in the contagious smells
Of the unclean house wherein it droops and dwells.
If envious Fortune be thy bitter foe, The Air, that afflictions are
profitable for us.

And day and night do toss thee to and fro;
Remember, the Air co^^^reth soon, except
With sundry Winds it be o^t swing'd and swept.
The Sea, which sometimes down to Hell is driven, The Sea, that we ought for no
respect to transgress the Law of God.

And sometimes heaues afroathy Mount to Heaven,
Yet never breaks the bounds of her precinct,
Wherein the Lord her boisterous arms has linkt;
Instructs thee, that neither Tyrants rage,
Ambition's winds, nor golden vassallage
Of Avarice, nor any love, nor fear,
From Gods Command should make thee shrink a hair.
The Earth, which never all at once does move, The Earth, that we should be
constant.

Though her rich Orb received, from above,
No firmer base her burden to sustent,
Then slippery props of softest Element;
By her example does propose to thee
A needful Lesson of true Constancy. The Ears of Corn, that we should be
humble.

Nay, there is naught in our deer Mother found,
But Pythily some Virtue does propound.
O! let the Noble, Wise, Rich, Valiant,
Be as the base, poor, faint, and ignorant;
And, looking on the fields, when Autumn shears,
There let them learn among the bearded ears;
Which still the fuller of the flowery grain,
Bow down the more their humble heads again;
And ay the lighter and the less their store,
They lift aloft their Chaffie Crests the more.
Let her, that (bound-less in her wanton wishes) The Palm Tree, that we should
be chaste.

Dares spot the Spouse-bed with unlawful kisses,
Blush (at the least) at Palm Trees loyalty,
Which never bears, unless her Male be by.
Thou, thou that prancest after Honors prize Cinnamon teaches Diligence and
Prudence.

(While by the way thy strength and stomach dies)
Remember, Honor is like Cinnamon
Which Nature mounds with many a million
Of thorny pricks; that none may danger-les
Approach the Plant, much less the Fruit possess.
Can thou the secret Sympathy behold The Sun and the Marigold, direct us
unto Christ, the Sun of Righteousness.

Betwixt the bright Sun and the Marigold,
And not consider, that we must no less
Follow in life the Sun of Righteousness?
O Earth! the Treasures of thy hollow breast
Are no less fruitful Teachers then the rest.
For, as the Lime does break and burn in Water,
And swell, and smoke, crackle, and skip, and scatter, Lyme in water, teaches
vsto show our virtue in extremity.

Waking that Fire, whose dull heat sleeping was
Under the cold Crust of a Chalky Mass:
He that (to march amid the Christian Host)
Yields his hearts kingdom to the Holy Ghost;
And, for brave Service under Christ his Banner,
Looks to be crowned with his Chief Champions honor,
Must in Affliction wake his zeal, which often
In Calmer times sleeps too-securely soft.
And, opposite, as the rich Diamond The Diamond exhorts to Constancy.

The Fire and Steel does stoutly both withstand:
So the true Christian should, till life expire,
Contemn proud Tyrants raging Sword and Fire.
Or, if fell Rigor with some ruth-les smart
A little shake the sinnews of his heart,
He must be like the richest Mineral, Gold in the furnace, to magnanimity, and
purity.

Whose Ingots bow, but never break at all;
Nor in the Furnace suffer any loss
Of weight, but Lees; not of the Gold, but dross.
The precious Stone that bears the Rain-bowes name, The stone Iris, to
edification of our Neighbor.

Receives the bright face of Sols burnisht flame;
And by reflection, after, it displaies
On the next object all those pointed rays:
So whosoever has from the Empyreall Pole,
Within the center of his happy Soul
Received some splendour of the beams divine,
Must to his Neighbor make the same to shine;
Not burying Talents which our God has given
To be employed in a rich trade for Heaven,
That in his Church he may receive his Gold,
With thirty, sixty, and an hundred fold.
As the Iron, touched by the Adamant's effect, The needle in the Mariners
compass shows that we should incessantly look on Christ our only load
star.

To the North Pole does ever point direct:
So the Soul, touched once by the secret power
Of a true lively Faith, looks every howr
To the bright Lamp which serves for Cynosure
To all that sail upon the Sea obscure.
These presidents, from liue-les things collected, Lessons from living
Creatures.

Breed good effects in spirits well affected;
But lessons, taken from the things that live,
A liuelier touch unto all sorts do give.
Up, up ye Princes: Prince and People, rise, Bees, to subjects and to Princes.

And run to School among the Hony-Flies:
There shall you learn, that an eternal law
Subjects the Subject under Princes aw:
There shall you learn, that a courageous King,
To vex his humble Vassals has no sting.
The Persian Prince, that princely did conclude The Marlin, to the unthankful

So severe laws against Ingratitude,
Knew that the Marlin, having kept her warm
With alive Lark, remits it without harm;
And least her frend-bird she should after slay,
She takes her flight a quite contrary way.
Fathers, if you desire, your Children sage The Eagle, so Parents.

Should by their Blessings bless your crooked age;
Train them betimes unto true Virtues Lore,
By Aw, Instruction, and Example (more):
So the old Eagle flutters in and out,
To teach his young to follow him above.
If his example cannot timely bring
His backward birds to use their feeble wing,
He leaves them then some days unfed, whereby
Sharp hunger may at length constiain them fly.
If that prevail not, then he beats them, both
With beak and wings to stir their fearful sloth.
You, that to haste your hated Spouses end, The Turtle, to Wedlock-breakers.

Black deadly poison in his dish do blend;
O! can ye see with vn-relenting eyes
The Turtle-Doue? since, when her husband dies,
Dies all herioy: for, never loves she more;
But on dry bowghs does her dead Spouse deplore.
Thou, whom the freedom of a foolish tongue Wild geese, to B^bblers.

Brings often in danger for thy neighbors wrong;
Discreetly set a hatch before the door:
As the wise Wilde-geese, when they over-soar
Cilician Mounts, within their bills do bear
A pebble-stone both day and night; for fear
Least ravenous Eagles of the North descry
Their Armies passage, by their cackling Cry.
O! Mothers, can you? can you (O unkind!) Diverse Fishes, to unnatural
Mothers, that will ^ not nour se their own Children.

Deny your Babes your breasts? and call to mind
That many Fishes, many times are fain
Receive their seed into their wombs again
( Lucinas sad throes, for the self-same birth,
Enduring often, it often bringing forth)?
O! why embrace not we with Charity Dolphins, to the cruel.

The living, and the dead with Piety?
Giving these succor, sepulture to those:
Even as the Dolphins do themselves expose,
For their live fellows, and beneath the Waves
Cover their dead-ones under sandy Graves.
You Children, whom (past hope) the Heavens benignity The wild Kid, to children.

Has heapt with wealth, and heaved-vp to dignity,
Do not forget your Parents: but behold
The officious Kids, who (when, their Parents old,
With heavy Gyues, Elds trembling fever stops
And fetters-fast upon the Mountain-tops)
As careful purveyours, bring them home to brouz
The tendrest tops of all the slenderest boughs;
And sip (self-thirst-les) of the Rivers brink,
Which in their mouths they bring them home to drink.
For Household Rules, read not the learned Writs
Of the Stagirian (glory of good wits): The Spiders, to Man and Wife.

Nor his, whom, for his honny-steeped style,
They Proverbiz'd the Attik Muse yer-while:
Since the only Spider teaches every one,
The Husbands and the Huswifes function.
For, for their food, the valiant Male does roam;
The cunning Female tends her work at home:
Out of her bowels, wool and yarn she spitteth,
And all that, else her learned labor fitteth:
Her waight's the spindle that does twist the twine,
Which her small fingers draw so even and fine.
Still at the Center she her warp begins,
Then round (at length) her little threads she pins,
And equal distance to their compass leaves:
Then neat and nimbly her new web she weaues,
With her fine shuttle circularly drawn,
Through all the circuit of her open lawn;
Open, least else the ungentle Winds should tear
Her cipres Tent (weaker then any hair)
And that the foolish Fly migh easter get
Within the meshes of her curious Net:
Which he no sooner does begin to shake,
But straight the Male does to the Center make,
That he may conquer more securely there
The humming Creature, hampred in his snare.
You Kings, that bear the sword of just Hostility, The Lion, to Kings.

Pursue the Proud, and pardon true Humility;
Like noble Lions that do never show
Their strength and stomach on a yielding Foe,
But rather through the stoutest throngs do forage,
'Mid thousands Deaths to show their daunt-les courage.
Thou sluggard (if thou list to learn thy part) The Emmet and Hedgehog, to the
sloathfull.

Go learn the Emmets, and the Vrchins Art;
In Summer the one, in Autumn the other takes
The Seasons fruits, and thence provision makes,
Each in his Lodging laying up a hoord
Against cold Winter, which does naught afford.
But (Reader) We resemble one that winds, Man may find in himself excellent
instruction.

From Saba, Bandan, and the wealthy Indes
(Through threatening Seas, and dangers manifold)
To seek far-off for Incense, Spice, and Gold;
Since we, not loosing from our proper Strand,
Find all wherein a happy life does stand;
And our own Bodies self-contained motions,
Give the most gross a hundred goodly Notions.
You Princes, Pastors, and ye Chiefs of War, The head teaches all persons in
authority.

Do not your Laws, Sermons, and Orders mar;
Least your examples banefull leaprosies
Infect your Subjects, Flocks, and Companies;
Beware, your evil make not others like;
For, no part's sound if once the Head be sick.
You Peers, O do not through self-partiall zeal, The Eyes instruct Princes, and
Noblemen.

With light-brain'd Counsails vex your Commonweal:
But, as both Eyes do but One thing behold,
Let each his Countries common good vp-hold.
You, that for Others trauail day and night,
With much-much labor, and small benefit, The teeth, such as travail for
others.

Behold the Teeth, which Toule-free grind the food,
From whence themselves do reap more greef then good.
Even as the Heart has not a Moments rest, The Heart, the Ministers of the Word.

But night and day moves in our panting breast,
That by his beating it may still impart
The lively spirits about to every part:
So those, to whom God does his Flock betake,
Ought always study, always work, and wake,
To breathe (by Doctrine and good Conversation)
The quickening spirit into their Congregation.
And as the Stomach, from the holesom food The stomach, the same.

Diuides the grosser part (which is not good)
They ought from false the truth to separate,
Error from Faith, and Cockle from the Wheat,
To make the best received for nourishment,
The bad cast forth as filthy excrement. The Hands, all Christians, to Charity.

If Bat or Blade do threaten sudden harm
To belly, breast, or leg, or head, or arm,,
With dread-less dread the hand does ward the blow,
Taking her self her brethrens bleeding woe:
Then, mid the shock of sacrilegious Arms
That fill the world with blood and boistrous storms,
Shall we not lendour helping hands to others,
Whom Faith has made more near and deer then Brothers?
Nor can I see, where underneath the Sky The whole body the whole society of
mankind that every one ought to stand in his own vocation.

A man may find a iuster Policy,
Or truer Image of a calm Estate
Exempt from Faction, Discord, and Debate,
Then in the harmonious Order that maintains
Our Bodies life, through Members mutual pains*
Where, one no sooner feels the least offense,
But all the rest have of the same a sense.
The Foot strives not to smell, the Nose to walk,
The Tongue to combat, nor the Hand to talk:
But, without troubling of their Commonweal
With mutinies, they (voluntary) deal
Each in his Office and Heav'n-pointed place,
Be It vile or honest, honored or base,
But, soft my Muse: what? will thou re-repeat
The Little-Worlds admired Modulet?
If twice or thrice one and the same we bring,
It Is teadious; how ever swect we sing.
Ther-fore a-shoar: Mates, let our Anchor fall:
Here blows no Wind: here are we Welcome all.
Besides, consider and conceive (I pray)
W'haue rowed sufficient, for a Sabbath Day.
THE END OF THE FIRST WEEK.
Du BARTAS His SECOND WEEK, Disposed (After the proportion of his First) Into
SEVEN DAYS: (viz.) THE 1. ADAM, THE 2. NOAH, THE 3. ABRAHAM, THE 4. DAVID.
THE 5. ZEDECHIAS, THE 6. MESSIAH, THE 7. The ETERNAL SABBATH.
But, of the three last, Death (preventing Our Noble Poet) has deprived us.

Acceptam refero.


TO THE MOST ROYAL PATTERN AND PATRON OF LEARNING AND RELIGION, THE HIGH AND
MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES
(BY THE GRACE OF GOD)

KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND: TR VE DEFENDER OF THE TR VE,
ANCIENT, CHRISTIAN, CATHOLIC, AND APOSTOLIC FAITH etc.

1. SONNET.
From ZEAL- Land, sailing* with the Wind of Love,
In the Bark LABOUR, stirred by Theorems,
Laden with ^ope and with DESIRE t'approve,
Bound for Cape- Comfort in the I Will of IHMMES;
In such a Mist, we fell upon the Coast,
That suddenly upon the Rock Neglect
(Unhappily) our Ship and Goods we lost,
Even in a Place that we did least suspect.
So, Cast* away (my LIEGE) and quight vn-don,
We Orphan-remnants of a wofefull Wrack,
Here cast ashore to Thee for succor run:
O Pity us, for our deer Parent's sake,
Who Honored Thee, both in his Life and Death,
And to thy guard his POSTHVMES did bequeath.
2. SONNET.
These glorious WORKS, and grateful Monuments
Built by Du BARTAS, on the ^yrenaeis
(Your Royal Virtues to immortalize,
And magnify your rich Munificence)
Have proved so Charge-full to Trans-port from thence
That our small Art's-st^ck hardly could suffize,
To under go so great an Enterprise;
But is even beggerd with the vn-cast Expense.
So that, except our Muses SOVERAIN
With gracious Eye regard her spent Estate;
And, with a hand of Princely Favor, daign
To stay her fall (before it be too-late)
She needs must fail: as (lending Light about)
Self-spending Lamps, for lack of Oil, go-out.
Voy (Sire) Saluste.

To the Right Excellent, and most hopeful young Prince, HENRY, Prince of WALES.
ANAGR.
Henricus Stuartus. Hic strenuus ratus.
THE TROPHEIS, and MAGNIFICENCE.

THe gracious Welcome You vouchsaf't yer-while
To my grave PIBRAC (though but meanly clad)
Makes BARTAS (now, no Stranger in this Isle)
More bold to come (though suited even as clad)
To kiss Your HIGHNESS Hand; and, with Your Smile,
To Crown His Haps, and Our faint Hopes to glad
(Whose weary longings languish in our Style:
For, in our Wants, our very Songs be sad).
He brings, for Present to so great a PRINCE,
A Princely GLASS, made first for SOLOMON:
The fitter therefore for your EXCELLENCE
As often to look-in, as You look upon.
Some Glasses flatter: other-som deform:
This, ay, presents You a true PRINCE'S Form.
Voy Sire Saluste.

To the right Honorable, the Lord High Chancellor of England.
ANAGR.
Thomas Egerton. 1. Gestat Honorem. 2. Age met Honors. 3. Honors met Age.
THE LAW.
MOst humbly
Shows to thy Great Worthiness,
Grave MODERATOR of our Britain LAWS)
The Muses Abject (subject of Distress)
How, long Wrong-vext, in a not - Need - less Cause,
Not at the King's Bench, but the Pennie-less)
By one, I Want (the son of Simpleness);
Unable, more to greaze the scraping paws
Of his Attorney Shift, or oil the iaw
Of his (dear) Counsel, Serieant Pensiueness;
He is compelled, in forma pauperis,
To Plead, himself (and show his (little) LAW)
In the free Court of thy mild Courtesies.
Please it thee therefore an Iniunction grant,
To stay the Suit between himself and Want.
For Thee and Thine, for ay,
So He and His shall pray.

I. S.

To the Right Honorable* the Earl of Salisburie, Lord high Threasurer of
England.
ANAGRAMMATA.
Robertus Cecilius. Robertus Cecillius. Cui ortus celebris: (vel) Cerebro sic
Tullius. Robertus Comes Sari. Carus est Orbisermo.

THE CAPTAINS.
ARms yield to Arts: the Trumpet to the Tongue:
Stout Ajax Prize the wise Ulysses wann*
It will not seem then* that we have mis-sung,
To sing of CAPTAINS to a Counsel -man:
Since, without Counsel, Courage is but rage;
Rude in Resolving, rash in Acting it:
In which respect, those of the Antique Age
Fain PALLAS Goddess both of War and Wit:
Therefore, to Thee, whose Wit so much has sted
(In War and Peace) our Princes and our STATE:
To Thee (whose Virtue has now Triumphed
Of cause-les Envy, and misgrounded Hate:
To Thee ( Witt's- WORTHY) had it not bin wrong,
Not to have sounded my War- WORTHIE's Song?
I. S.

To the right Honorable, the Earl of Dorset (late) Lord High Threasurer of
England.
ANAGR.
Sacvilus Comes Dorsetius. Vas lucis Esto decor Musis. Sacris Musis celo
deuotus.
THE SCHISM.
NOt without Error, and apparent Wrong
To Thee, the Muses, and my Self (the most)
Could I omit, amid this Noble Host
Of learned Friends to Learning, and our Song,
To muster Thee; Thee, that have loved so long
The sacred Sisters, and (sad-sweetly most)
Thy Self have sung (under a feigned Ghost)
The tragik Falls of our Ambitious Throng.
Thearfore, in honor of Thy younger Art,
And of the Muses, honored by the same,
And to express my Thankful thoughts (in part)
This Tract I sacre unto SACKVIL's Name,
No less renowned for Numbers of Thine Own,
Than for thy love to Other's Labors show'n.
I. S.

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Pembroke.
ANAGR.
William Harbert. With liberal arm.
THE DECAY.
FAr be The Title of this tragik page
From Thee (rare Module of Heroik minds)
Whose noble Bounty all the Muses binds
To honor Thee; but mine does most engage:
And yet, to Thee, and to Thy Patronage
(For present lack of other grateful signs)
Needs must I Offer these DECAY ed lines
(Lyned with Horrors of ISAACIAN rage):
Whear-in, to keep decorum with my Theme,
And with my Fortunes ( ruined euery-way)
My Care-clogd Muse (still carried down the stream)
In singing Other's, sighs her Own DECAY
In style, in state, in hap, in hope, in all:
For, Vines, vnpropped, on the ground do craul.
I. S.

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Essex, Earl Marshall of England, etc.
*

EDEN.
GReat Strong-bowe's heir, no self-co^ceipt does cause
Mine humble wings aspire to you, unknown:
But, knowing this, that your renown alone
(As the Adamant, and as the Amber draws:
That, hardest steel; this, easie-yeelding strawes)
Atterrs the stubborn, and attracts the prone:
I have presumed (O Honors Paragon!)
To grave your name (which all Iberia awes)
Here on the forefront of this little Pile;
T'inuite the virtuous to a sacred feast,
And chase-away the vicious and the vile;
Or stop their lothsom envious tongues (at least).
If I have erred, let my submission scuse:
And daign to grace my yet vngraced Muse.
I. S.

To the same Right Honorable Earl of Essex, etc.
*

THE ARK.
FRom the ARK of Hope, still tossed in distress
on the angry Deluge of disastrous plight,
My silly Dove, here takes her Second slight,
To view (great Lord) thy World of worthiness:
Vouchsafe (rare Plant of perfect Noblenes)
Some branch of safety, whereon she may light;
Some Olive leaf, that may presage me right
A safe escape from this wet wilderness.
So, when the Flood of my deep Cares shall fall,
And I be landed on sweet Comfort's Hill;
First, my pure thoughts to Heaven present I shall:
Then, on thy favors meditating still*
My Zealous Muse shall daily strive to frame
Some fairer Tropheis to thy glorious Name.
I. S.

To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Mount-ioy, Earl of Devonshire.
*

THE IMPOSTTVRE.
Though in thy Brook (great Charles) there swim a Sw^
Whose happy, sweet, immortal tunes can raise
The virtuous Greatness of thy Noble praise
To higher notes, than my faint numbers can:
Yet, while thy Lucan does in silence scan
Unto himself new-meditated lays,
To finish up his sad Pharsalian fraies;
Lend ear to BARTAS (now our Countryman).
For, though his English be not yet so good
(As Frenchmen hardly do our tongue attain)
He h^peth yet to be well understood;
The rather, if you (worthy Lord) shall daign
His bashfulnes a little to advance,
With the mild favors of your countenance.
I. S.

To the same Right Honorable Earl of Devonshire, etc.
*

THE HANDY-CRAFTS.
THe Mome- free Passage, that my Muse has found
Under Safe Conduct of thy Patronage,
Through carping Censures of this curious Age
(Where high conceited happy wits abound)
Makes her presume ( O Mountioy, most renownd!)
To bear again, in her re-Pilgrimage,
The noble Pasport of thy Tutelage,
To salve her still from sullen Enuies wound.
Let thy (true-Eagle) Sun-beholding Eyes
Glance on our Glowe-worm's scarce discerned spark:
And while Witt's towering Falcons touch the skies,
Observe a while our tender-imped Lark.
Such sparks may flame, and such light Larks may fly
A higher pitch, than drosse-full Vanity.
I. S.

To the same Right Honorable Earl of Devonshire, etc.
*

THE COLONIES.
REnowned Scipio, though thine Ennius
Still merit best the best of thy regard:
Though (worthily) his Trumpet be pre-ferr'd
To sound the Triumphs thou have wonn for us;
Yet, since one Penn, how-euer plentious
(Were it the Mantuan or Meonian Bard)
Suffizeth not to give Fame's full Reward
To thy great Deeds, admired and glorious:
Though He, thy Homer be; Thou, his Achilles;
Both by each other Happy: Thou (heer-in)
To Have such a Trump as his immortal Quill-is;
He such a Theme as thy High Virtues been:
It shall (Great Worthy) no Dis-Honour be
That (English) Bartas has Sung (thrice) to thee.
I. S.

To the Honorable, learned, and religious Gentleman, Sir Peter Young of S^ton,
Knight, Almoner of Scotland, and one of his Majesty's Privy Council there.
THE COLVMNS.
YOUNG, Ancient Servant of our Soueraign Lord,
Grave Master of thy Maister's minor-years;
Whose Prudence and whose Piety appears
In his Perfection, which does Thine record:
Whose loyal Truth, His royal Trusts approve
By often Embassage to the greatest Peers:
Whose Duty and Devotion He endeers
With present Favors of his Princely Love:
In Honor of these Honors many-fold,
And for memorial of Thy kind regard
Of these poor Orfanes (pyn'd in Hope-les cold)
Accept these Thanks for thy firm Loves reward;
Wher-in (so Heavens prosper what we have sung)
Through every Age thou shall live ever YOUNG.
I. S.

To the right virtuous ( fauorer of Virtue, furtherer of Learning) Sir Thomas
Smith (of Lonaon) Knight, ( late) Lord Ambassador for his Majesty, to the
Emperor of Russia.
JONAS.
TO thee, long tossed in a fell Storm of State;
Cast out, and swallowed in a Gulf of Death,
On false-suspect of thine vn-spotted Faith,
And flying from thy (Heav'n-giuen) Charge of late:
For much resemblance of thy troublous Fate
(Much like in Case to that he suffers,
Though (in effect) thy Cause far differs)
I send my JONAS; to congratulate
Thy (happy) Rescue, and thy holy Trial:
Wher*by (as Fire does purify the Gold)
Thy Loyalty is more notorious Loyal,
And worthy the Honors which thou now doo'st hold.
Thus, Virtue's Palms, oppressed, mount the more:
And Spices, bruz'd, smell sweeter than before.
I. S.

To the most Honorable, learned, and religious Gent. Mr. Anthony Bacone.
*

THE FVRIES.
BOund by thy Bounty, and mine own Desire,
To tender still new Tribute of my zeal
To Thee, whose favor did the first repeal
My proto-BARTAS from Self-doomed Fire:
Having new-tuned to du BARTAS Lyre
These tragik murmurs of His FVRIES fell,
Which (with the Horrors of an Earthly Hell)
The Sin cursed life of wretched Mortals tire:
To whom, but Thee, should I present the same?
Since, by the breath of Thine encouragement,
My sacred fury thou did first inflame
To prosecute This sacred Argument.
Such as it is, accept it, as a sign
Of Thankful Love, from Him, whose all is Thine.
I. S.

To the same most Honourarable Gentleman, Master Anthony Bacone.
*

BABYLON.
THy friendly censure of my first ESSAIE
( Du Bartas FVRIES, and his BABYLON)
My faint Endeavors has so cheared on,
That Both His WEEKS are also Ours, today.
Thy gracious hand, repriuing from decay
My fame-les Name, doomed to Oblivion,
Has so stirr'd-vp my Soul's devotion,
That in my Songs thy Name shall live for ay.
Thy mild acceptance of my simple myte
(Pattern and Patron of all virtuous drifts)
Does here again my grateful Muse inuit
To re-salute thee with mine humble gifts;
Indeed, no Gifts, but Debts to Thy desert:
To whom I owe my hand, my head, my heart.
I. S.

ADAM. The FIRST DAY Of The SECOND WEEK;
Containing

1. EDEN, 2. The IMPOSTVRE, 3. The FVRIES, 4. The HANDY-CRAFTS.
Acceptam refero.





EDEN. THE I. PART OF THE I. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Our Poet, first, does Gods assistance seek:
The Scope and Subject of his Second Week.
Adam in Eden: Edens beauties rare;
A real Place, not now discerned where:
The Tree of Life; and Knowledge-Tree with-all:
Knowledge of Man, before and since his Fall:
His exercise, and excellent Delights,
In's Innocence: of Dreams and Ghostly Sights:
Nice Questions curbed: Death, Sins effect; whereby
Man (else Immortal) mortal now, must Die.
GReat God, which have this World's Birth made me see, Invocation of the true
God for assistance in Description of the Infancy and first estate of the World.

Unfold his Cradle, show his Infancy:
Walk thou, my Spirit, through all the flowring alleis
Of that sweet Garden, where through winding valleys
Four lively floods crauld: tell me what mis-deed
Banished both Edens, Adam and his seed:
Tell who (immortal) mortalizing, brought-vs
The Balm from Heaven which hoped health has wrought-vs:
Grant me the story of thy Church to sing,
And gests of Kings: Let me this Total bring
From thy first Sabbath to his fatal toomb,
My style extending to the Day of Doom.
Lord, I acknowledge and confess, before,
This Ocean has no bottom, nor no shore;
But (sacred Pilot) thou can safely steer
My venurous Pinnasse to her wished Peer;
Where once arrived, all dropping wet I will
Extol thy favors, and my vows fulfill.
And gracious Guide, which do all grace infuse, The Translator, considering
his own weakness and insufficiency for a Work so rare and excellent, as all
the World has worthily admired: craves also the assistance of the Highest,
that (at least) his endeavor may both stirvp some abler Spirit to undertake
this Task; and also provoke all other good Wits to take in hand some holy
Argument: and with-all, that Him-self may be for ever sincerely affected, and
(as it were) thoroughly seasoned with the sweet relish of these sacred and
religious discourses. Simile.

Since it has pleased thee task my tardy Muse
With these high Theams, that through mine Art-les Pen
This holy Lamp may light my Countrymen:
Ah, teach my hand, touch mine unlearned lips;
Least, as the Earths gross body does Eclipse
Bright Cynthia's beams, when it is interposed
Twixt her and Phoebus: so mine ill-dispos'd,
Dark, gloomy Ignorance, obscure the rays
Of this divine Sun of these learned days.
O! furnish me with an vn-vulgar style,
That I by this may we an our wanton I WILL
From Ouids heirs, and their vn-hallowed spell
Here charming senses, chayning souls in Hell.
Let this provoke our modern Wits to sacre
Their wondrous gifts to honor thee, their Maker:
That our mysterious ELFINE Oracle,
Deep, moral, grave, Inventions miracle;
My deer sweet DANIEL, sharp-conceipted, brief,
Civil, sententious, for pure accents chief:
And our new NASO, that so passionates
The heroike sighs of loue-sick Potentates:
May change their subject, and advance their wings
Up to these higher and more holy things.
And if (sufficient rich in self-inuention)
They scorn (as I) to live of Strangers Pension,
Let them devise new Weeks, new works, new ways
To celebrate the supreme Prince of praise.
And let not me (good Lord) be like the Lead
Which to some City from some Conduit-head
Brings holsom water, yet (self-wanting sense)
It self receives no drop of comfort thence:
But rather, as the thorough-seasoned But
Wherein the tears of death-prest Grapes are put, Simile.

Retains (long after all the wine is spent)
Within it self the liquors lively sent:
Let me still savor of these sacred sweets
Till Death fold-vp mine earth in earthen sheets;
Least, my young lays, now prone to preach thy glory
To BRUTUS heirs, blush at mine elder Story.
GOD ( Supreme Lord) committed not alone Narration.

Tour Father Adam, this inferior Throne; God, having Created and established
Man Lord of the Crea tures, lodges him in the fair Garden of Eden.

Ranging beneath his rule the scaly Nation
That in the Ocean have their habitation:
Those that in horror of the Deserts lurk:
And those that capering in the Welk in work;
But also chose him for a happy Seat
A climate temperate both for cold and heat,
Which dainty Flora paveth sumptuously
With flowery VER'S inammeld tapistry;
Pomona pranks with fruits, whose taste excels;
And Zephyr fills with Musk and Amber smells:
Where God himself (as Gardner) treads the allies,
With Trees and Corn couers the hills and valleys,
Summons sweet sleep with noise of hundred Brooks,
And Sun-proof Arbours makes in sundry nooks:
He plants, he proins, he pares, he trimmeth round
The ever green beauties of a fruitful ground;
Heer-there the course of the holy Lakes he leads,
With thousand Dies he motleys all the meads.
Ye Pagan Poets, that audaciously
Have sought to dark the ever-Memory The Elysian Fields of the Heathen Poets,
are but Dreams.

Of Gods great works; from henceforth still be dum
Your fabled praises of Elysium,
Which by this goodly module you have wrought,
Through deaf tradition, that your Fathers taught;
For, the Almighty made his blisfull Bowrs
Better indeed, then you have fained yours. A large Descrip tion of the rich
beauties of the Garden of Eden or earthly Paradise.

For, should I say that still, with smiling face,
The all clasping Heavens beheld this happy place;
That honey sweet, from hollow rocks did drain;
That fostering milk flowed up and down the Plain;
That sweet as Roses smelt the ill-savory Rue:
That in all soyls, all seasons, all things grew:
That still there dangled on the self-same treen
A thousand fruits, nor over-ripe, nor green:
That egrest fruits, and bitterest herbs did mock
Madera Sugars, and the Apricock;
Yielding more holesom food then all the messes,
That now taste-curious, wanton Plenty dresses,
Disguising (in a thousand costly dishes)
The various store of dainty Fowls and Fishes,
Which far and near we seek by Land and Seas,
More to provoke then hunger to appease;
Or should I say, each morning, on the ground Excellent estate of the Earth and
especially of Eden before Adams fall.

Not common deaw, but Manna did abound:
That never guttur gorging durty muds,
Defiled the crystal of smooth-sliding floods,
Whose waters past, in pleasant taste, the drink
That now in Candia decks Cerathus brink:
That shady Groves of noble Palm Tree sprays,
Of amorous Myrtles, and immortal Bays
Never vn-leav'd; but evermore their new
Self-arching arms in thousand Arbours grew:
Where thousand sorts of birds, both night and day,
Did bill and woo, and hop about, and play;
And marrying their sweet tunes to the Angels lays,
Sung Adams bliss and their great Makers praise.
For then, the Crows, night Rav'ns, and Howlets noise
Was like the Nightingals sweet-tuned voice;
And Nightingals sung like divine Arion,
Like Thracian Orpheus, Linus, and Amphion.
The Ayre's daughter Echo, haunting woods among,
A blab that will not (cannot) keep her tongue,
Who never asks, but only answers all,
Who lets not any her in vain to call;
She bore her part, and full of curious skill,
They ceasing sung, they singing ceased still:
There Music reigned and ever on the Plain,
A sweet sound raised the dead-liue voice again.
If there I say the Sun (the Seasons stinter) All discommodities far from Eden
before Sin

Made no hot Summer, nor no hoary Winter,
But lovely VER kept still in lively luster
The fragrant Valleys smiling Meads and Pasture:
That boistrous Adams body did not shrink
For Northren winds, nor for the Southren wink:
But Zephyr did sweet musky sighs afford,
Which breathing through the Garden of the Lord,
Gave bodies vigor, verdure to the field,
That verdure flowrs, those flowrs sweet savor yield:
That Day did gladly lend his sister, Night,
For half her moisture, half his shining Light:
That never hail did Harvest prejudice,
That never frost, nor snow, nor slipperyice
The fields en-ag'd: nor any stormy stowr
Dismounted Mountains, nor no violent shower
Poverisht the Land, which frankly did produce
All fruitful vapors for delight and use:
I think I ly not, rather I confess Edens principal, and most excellent beauty.

My stammering Muses poor vnlearnednes.
If in two words thou will her praise comprise,
Say It was the type of the upper Paradise;
Where Adam had (O wondrous strange!) discourse
With God himself, with Angels intercourse.
Yet (overcurious) question not the site, Of the place where the Garden of
Eden was situate.

Where God did plant this Garden of delight:
Whether beneath the Equinoctial line,
Or on a Mountain near Latona's shine,
Nigh Babylon, or in the radiant East.
Humble content thee that thou know (at least)
That, that rare, plentious, pleasant, happy thing
Whereof the Almighty made our Grand-sire King,
Was a choice soil, through which did rolling slide
Swift Ghion Pishon, and rich Tygris tide,
And that fair stream whose silver waves do kiss
The Monarch Towrs of proud Semiramis.
Now, if that (roaming round about the earth) It was a certain material Place:
howsoe^^^ now a-daies, we can exactly observe neither the Circuit, nor extent
of it.

Thou find no place that answers now in worth
This beauteous place, nor Country that can show
Where now-adayes those noted floods do flow:
Include not all within this Close confined,
That laboring Neptunes liquid Belt does bind.
A certain place it was (now sought in vain)
Where set by grace, for sin removed again,
Our Elders were: whereof the thunder-darter
Made a bright Sword the gate, an Angel Porter.
Nor think that Moses paints fantastik-wise It was no allegorical nor
mystical Garden.

A mystike tale of fained Paradise:
('T was a true Garden, happy Plenties horn,
And seat of graces) least thou make (forlorn)
An Ideall Adams food fantastical,
His sin supposed, his pain Poetical:
Such Allegories serve for shelter fit
To curious Idiots of erroneous wit,
And chiefly then, when reading Histories,
Seeking the spirit, they do the body leese.
But if thou list to guess by likelihood, It was defaced by the general Flood.

Think that the wreakfull nature-drowning flood
Spared not this beauteous place, which foremost saw
The first foul breach of Gods eternal law:
Think that the most part of the plants it pulled,
And of the sweetest flowrs the spirits dulled,
Spoild the fair Gardens, made the fat fields lean,
And changed (perchance) the rivers channel clean: Why the Situation of the
Garden of Eden is now hard to find.

And think, that Time (whose slippery wheel does play
In humane causes with in constant sway,
Who exiles, alters, and disguises words)
Has now transformed the names of all these Fordes.
For, as through sin we lost that place, I fear
(Forgetful) we have lost the knowledge where
'T was situate, and of the sugared dainties
Wherewith God fed us in those sacred plenties.
Now of the Trees wherewith the immortal Power Of the two Trees serving as
Sacraments to Adam.

Adorned the quarters of that blisfull Bowr,
All served the mouth, save two sustaind the mind:
All served for food, save two for seals assigned.
God gave the first, for honorable style, Whereof the Tree of Life was a
Sacrament.

The tree of Life: true name; (alas the while!)
Not for the effect it had, but should have kept,
If Man from duty never had mis-stept.
For, as the air of those fresh dales and hills
Preserved him from Epidemik ills,
This fruit had ever-calm'd all insurrections,
All civil quarrels of the cross complexions;
Had barred the passage of twice childish age,
And ever-more excluded all the rage
Of painful griefs, whose swift-slowe posting-pase
At first or last our dying life does chase.
Strong counter-bane! O sacred Plant divine! The excellency of that Tree.

What metal, stone* stalk, fruit, flowr, root, or ryne,
Shall I presume in these rude rymes to suit I

Unto thy wondrous World-adorning Fruit?
The rarest Simples that our fields present-vs
Heal but one hurt, and healing too torments us:
And with the torment, lingering our relief
Our bags of gold void, yer our bulks of grief.
But thy rare fruits hid power admired most,
Salveth all sores, sans pain, delay, or cost:
Or rather, man from yawning Death to stay,
Thou did not cure, but keep all ills away.
O holy, peer-less, rich preservative! We cannot say what Tree it was.

Whether were thou the strange restoratiue
That suddenly did age with youth repair,
And made old Aeson younger then his heir?
Or holy Nectar, that in heavenly bowrs,
Eternally self-pouring Hebe pours?
Or blessed Ambrosia (Gods immortal fare)?
Or else the rich fruit of the Garden rare,
Where, for three Ladies (as assured guard)
A fire-arm'd Dragon day and night did ward?
Or precious Moly, which Jove's Pursuiuan
Wing-footed Hermes brought to the Ithacan?
Or else Nepenthe, enemy to sadness,
Repelling sorrows, and repealing gladness?
Or Mummie? or Elixir) that excels
Save men and Angels every creature else)?
No, none of these: these are but forgeries,
But toys, but tales, but dreams, deceipts, and lies:
But thou art true, although our shallow sense
May honor more, then sound, thine Excellence.
The Tree of Knowledge, the other Tree behight: Of the Tree of. Knowledge of
Good and Evil.

Not, that itselfly had such special might,
As men's dull wits could whet and sharpen so
That in a moment they might all things know.
'T was a sure pledge, a sacred s^gne, and seal;
Which, being ta'n, should to light man reveal
What ods there is, between still peace, and strife;
Gods wrath, and love; drad death, and dearest life*
Solace, and sorrow; guile, and innocence;
Rebellious pride, and humble obedience.
For, God had not deprived that primer season Of the excellence of man's
knowledge before Sin.

The sacred lamp and light of learned Reason:
Mankind was then a thousand fold more wise
Then now: blind Error ^ad not bleard his eyes,
With mists which make the Athenian Sage suppose
That naught he knows, save this, that naught he knows.
That even light Pir^^o^s wavering fantasies
Reave him the skill his un skill to agnize.
And the Abderite, within a Well obscure,
As deep as dark, the Truth of things immure.
He (happy) knew the Good by the use of it: How he knew good and evil before
Sin.

He knew the Bad, but not by proof as yet:
But as they say of great Hyppocrates,
Who (though his limbs were numm'd with no excess,
Nor stop this throat, nor vexed his fantasy)
Knew the cold Cramp, the Angine, and Lunacy,
And hundred els-pains, whence in lusty flowr
He lived exempt, a hundred years and four.
Or like the pure Heav'n-prompted Prophets rather,
Whose sight so clearly future things did gather,
Because the World's Soul in their soul enseal'd
The holy stamp of secrets most concealed.
But our now- knowledge has, for tedious train, O^ man's knowledge sinc^ his
Fall.

A drooping life, and over-racked brain,
A face forlorn, a sad and sullen fashion*
A rest-less toil, and Cares self-pining passion.
Knowledge was then even the souls soul for light,
The spirits calm Port, and Lanthorn shining bright
To straight steptfeet clear knowledge; not confused:
Not sour, but sweet: not gotten, but infused.
Now Heavens eternal all-fore-seeing King, Why the Lord put man in the Garden
of Eden

Who never rashly orders anything,
Thought good, that man (having yet spirits sound-stated)
Should dwell els-where then where he was created;
That he might know, he did not hold this place
By Natures right, but by mere gift and Grace;
That he should never taste fruits vn-permitted,
But keep the sacred Pledge to him committed,
And dress that Park, which God, without all term,
On these conditions gave him, as in farm.
God would, that (void of painful labor) he Of his exercise there.

Should live in Eden; but not idly:
For, Idleness pure Innocence subuerts,
Defiles our body, and our soul peruerts:
Yea, soberest men it makes delicious,
To virtue dull, to vice in genious.
But that first travel had no sympathy
With our since-travails wretched cruelty,
Distilling sweat, and panting wanting wind,
Which was a scourge for Adams sin assigned.
For, Edens earth was then so fertile fat, 4. Comparisons.

That he made only sweet Essays, in that,
Of skillful industry, and naked wrought
More for delight, then for the gain he sought.
In brief, it was a pleasant exercise,
A labor liked, a pain much like the guise
Of cunning dauncers; who* although they skip, ^.

Run, caper, vault, traverse, and turn, and trip,
From Morn till Even, at night again full merry,
Renew their dance, of dancing never weary.
Or else of Hunters, that with happy luck 2.

Rousing betimes some often breathed Buck,
Or goodly Stagge, their yelping Hounds uncouple,
Wind loud their horns, their whoops, and hallows double
Spur-on and spare not, following their desire,
Themselves vn-weary, though their Hackneis tire.
But, for in the end of all their iolity,
There Is found much stifness, sweat and vanity;
I rather match it to the pleasing pain
Of Angels pure, who ever sloth disdain: 3.

Or to the Suns calm course, who pain-less ay 4.

About the welkin posteth night and day.
Doubtless, when Adam saw our common air, Adam admireth the beauties of the
World in general.

He did admire the mansion rich and fair
Of his Successors* For, frosts keenly cold
The shady locks of Forests had not powl'd:
Heaven had not thundered on our heads as yet,
Nor given the earth her sad Divorces Writ.
But when he once had entered Paradise, But most especially of the Garden of
Eden.

The remnant world he justly did despise:
[Much like a Boor far in the Country born,
Who, never having seen but Kine and Corn,
Oxen, and Sheep, and homely Hamlets thatcht
(Which, fond, he counts as Kingdoms; hardly matched)
When afterward he happens to behold
Our welthy London's wonders manifold, In this comparison my Author sets
down the famous City of Paris: but I have presumed to apply it to our own City
of London* that it might be more familiar to my mere English and vn-trauaild
Readers.

The silly peasant thinks himself to b^
In a new World; and gazing greedily,
One while he Art-less, all the Arts admires,
Then the fair Temples, and their top-less spires,
Their firm foundations, and the massy pride
Of all their sacred ornaments beside:
Anon he wonders at the differing graces,
Tongues, gests, attires, the fashions and the faces,
Of busie-buzzing swarms, which still he meets
Ebbing and flowing over all the streets;
Then at the signs, the shops, the waights, the measures,
The handy-crafts, the rumors, trades, and treasures.
But of all sights, none seems him yet more strange
Then the rare, beauteous, stately, rich Exchange.
Another while he maruails at the Thames,
Which seems to bear huge mountains on her streams:
Then at the fa^-built Bridge; which he does judge
More like a tradefull City then a Bridge;
And glancing thence a-long the Northren shore,
That princely prospect does amaze him more.]
For in that Garden man delighted so,
That rapt he wist not if he wak't or no;
If he beheld a true thing or a fable;
Or Earth, or Heaven: all more then admirable.
For such excess his ecstasy was small;
Not having spirit enough to muse withal,
He wished him bundred-fold redoubled senses,
The more to taste so rare sweet excellences;
Not knowing, whether nose, or ears, or eyes,
Smelt, heard, or saw, more sauors, sounds, or Dies.
But, Adams best and supreme delectation, Happiness of the first Man before his
fall.

Was the often haunt and holy conversation
His soul and body had so many ways
With God, who lightened Eden with his Rays.
For spirits, by faith religiously refined,
'Twixt God and man retain a middle kind:
And (Vmpires) mortal to the immortal ioyn;
And the infinite in narrow clay confine.
Som-times by you, O you all-faining Dreams,
We gain this good; but not when Bacchus steams Of the visions of the spirit.

And glutton vapors ouer-flowe the Brain,
And drown our spirits, presenting fancies vain:
Nor when pale Phlegm, or Saffron-coloured Choler,
In feeble stomachs belch with diverse dolor,
And print upon our Understandings Tables;
That, Water-wracks; this other, flamefull fables:
Nor when the Spirit of lies our spirits deceiues,
And guile-full visions in our fancy leaves:
Nor when the pencil of Cares ouer-deep
Our day-bred thoughts depainteth in our sleep.
But when no more the souls chief faculties,
Are sperst to sereue the body many ways,
When all self-vned, free from days disturber,
Through such sweet Trance, she finds a quiet harbor;
Where some in riddles, some more plain expressed,
She sees things future, in the Almighties breast.
And yet far higher is this holy Fit, Of the certainty of the visions of the
spirit, the body being at rest.

When (not from flesh) but from flesh-cares, acquit)
The wakefull soul it self assembling so,
All selfly dies; while that the body though
Lives motion-les: for, sanctified wholly,
It takes the impression of Gods Signet Soly;
And in his sacred Crystal Map, does see
Heavens Oracles, and Angels glorious glee:
Made more then spirit, Now, Morrow, Yesterday,
To it, all one, are all as present aye.
And though it seem not (when the dream's expired)
Like that it was; yet is it much admired
Of rarest men, and shines among them bright
Like glistring Stars through gloomy shades of night.
But above all, that is the divinest Trance, Of divine and extraordinary visions
and Revelations.

When the souls eye beholds Gods countenance;
When mouth to mouth familiarly he deals,
And in our face his drad-sweet face he seals.
As when S. Paul, on his deer Masters wings,
Was rapt alive up to the eternal things:
And he that whilom for the chosen flock,
Made walls of waters, waters of a rock.
O sacred flight! sweet rape! loves soueraign bliss! Of the excellency of such
visions and Revelations

Which very loves deer lips do make us kiss:
Hymen, of Manna, and of Mel compact,
Which for a time do Heaven with earth contract:
Fire, that in Limbeck of pure thoughts divine
Do purge our thoughts, and our dull earth refine:
And mounting us to Heaven, vn-mouing hence,
Man (in a trice) in God do quintessence:
O! made thou man divine in habitude,
As for a space; O sweetest solitude,
Thy bliss were equal with that happy Rest
Which after death shall make us ever-blest.
Now, I believe that in this later guise What manner of visions the first Man
had in Eden.

Man did converse in Pleasant Paradise
With Heavens great Architect, and (happy) there
His body saw (or body as it were)
Gloriously compast with the blessed Legions
That reign above the azure-spangled Regions.
ADAM, quoth He, the beauties manyfold Man is put in possession of Ede^, under
a condition

That in this Eden thou do here behold,
Are all thine, only: enter (sacred race)
Come, take possession of this wealthy place,
The Earth's sole glory: take (deer Son) to thee,
This farm's demains, leave the Chief right to me;
And the only Rent that of it I reserve, is
One Trees fair fruit, to show thy suit and service:
Be thou the Liege, and I Lord Paramount,
I Will not exact hard fines (as men shall wont).
For sign of Homage, and for seal of Faith,
Of all the profits this Possession has,
I only ask one Tree; whose fruit I will
For Sacrament shall stand of Good and Ill.
Take all the rest, I bid thee: but I vow
By the vn-nam'd name, where-to all knees do bow,
And by the keen Darts of my kindled Ire
(More fiercely burning then consuming fire)
That of the Fruit of Knowledge if thou feed,
Death, dreadful Death shall plague Thee and thy Seed.
If then, the happy state thou hold'st of me,
My holy mildnes, nor high Majesty,
If faith nor Honor curb thy bold ambition,
Yet weigh thy self, and thy own Seeds condition.
Most mighty Lord (quoth Adam) here I tender Before Sin, Man was an humble
and zealous servant of God.

All thanks I can, not all I should thee render,
For all thy liberal favors, far surmounting
My hearts conceit, much more my tongues recounting.
At thy command, I would with boyst'rous shock
Go run my self against the hardest rock:
Or cast me head long from some Mountain steep,
Down to the whirling bottom of the Deep:
Yea, at thy beck, I would not spare the life
Of my deer Phoenix, sister-daughter-wife:
Obaying thee, I find the things impossible,
Cruel, and painful; pleasant, kind, and possible.
But since thy first Law does more grace afford
Unto the Subject, than the souerain Lord:
Since (bountious Prince) on me and my Descent,
Thou do impose no other tax, nor Rent,
But one sole Precept, of most just condition
(No Precept neither, but a Prohibition);
And since (good God) of all the Fruits in EDEN
There Is but one Apple that I am forbidden,
Even only that which bitter Death does threat,
(Better, perhaps, to look on then to eat)
I honor in my soul, and humbly kiss
Thy just Edict (as Author of my bliss):
Which, once transgrest, deserves the rigor rather
Of sharpest Judge, then mildnes of a Father.
The Firmament shall retrograde his course,
Swift Euphrates go hide him in his source,
Firm Mountains skip like Lambs; beneath the Deep
Eagles shall diue; Whales in the air shall keep,
Yer I presume, with fingers ends to touch
(Much less with lips) the Fruit forbod so much.
Thus, yet in league with Heaven and Earth, he lives; Description of the
beauties of the Garden of Eden.

Enjoying all the Goods the Almighty gives:
And, yet not treading Sins false mazy measures,
Sails on smooth surges of a Sea of pleasures;
Here, underneath a fragrant Hedge reposes,
Full of all kinds of sweet all-coloured Roses,
Which (one would think) the Angels daily dress
In true loue-knots, tri-angles, lozenges.
Anon he walks in a level lane The Orchard.

On either side beset with shady Plane,
Whose arched boughs, for Frize and Cornich bear
Thick Groves, to shield from future change of air:
Then in a path impaled, in pleasant wise,
With sharp-sweet Orange, Limon, Citron trees;
Whose leauy twigs, that intricately tangle,
Seem painted walls whereon true fruits do dangle.
Now in a plentious Orchard planted rare
With vn-graft trees, in checker, round and square:
Whose goodly fruits so on his will do wait,
That plucking one, another's ready straight:
And having tasted all (with due satiety)
Finds all one goodness, but in taste variety.
Anon he stalketh with an easy stride, The Brooks.

By some clear Riuer's lilly-paued side,
Whose sand's pure gold, whose pebbles precious Gemms,
And liquid silver all the curling streams:
Whose chiding murmur, mazing in and out,
With Crystal cesterns moats a mead about:
And the art-less Bridges, ouer-thwart this Torrent,
Are rocks self-arched by the eating current: The Bridges.

Or loving Palms, whose lusty Femals (willing
Their marrow-boyling loves to be fulfilling,
And reach their Husband-trees on the other banks)
Bow their stiff backs, and serve for passing-planks.
Then in a goodly Garden's all is smooth, The Alleis, beds and Borders.

Where prodig Nature sets abroad her booth
Of richest beauties, where each bed and border
Is like pide posies diverse dies and order.
Now, far from noise, he creeps covertly
Into a Cave of kindly Porphyry, The Caves.

Which, rock-fall'nspowts, congeald by colder air,
Seem with smooth anticks to have sceled fair:
There laid at ease, a cubit from the ground,
Upon a Iaspir fringed with y^ie round,
Purfled with vains, thick thrumm'd with mossie Beuer,
He falls asleep fast by a silent River;
Whose captive streams, through crooked pipes still rushing, The pleasant
murmur of the Waters.

Make sweeter Music with their gentle gushing,
Then now at Tiuoli, the Hydrantik Braul*
Of rich Ferrara's stately Cardinal:
Or Ctesibegrave;s rare engines, framed there
Where as they made of Ibis, Jupiter.
Musing* anon through crooked Walks he wanders, The Maze.

Round-winding rings, and intricate Meanders,
False-guiding paths, doubtful beguiling strays,
And right-wrong errors of an end-less Maze:
Not simply hedged with a single border
Of Rosenoary, cut-out with curious order,
In Satyrs, Centaurs, Whales, and half-men-Horses,
And thousand other counterfaited corses:
But with true Beasts, fast in the ground still sticking, The wonderful Plants.

Feeding on grass, and the airy moisture licking:
Such as those Bonarets, in Scythia bred The Bonarets.

Of slender seeds, and with green fodder fed;
Although their bodies, noses, mouths, and eyes,
Of new-yeand Lambs have full the form and guise;
And should be very Lambs* save that (for foot)
Within the ground, they fix a living root,
Which at their navel grows, and dies that day
That they have brouz'd the neighbor grass away.
O wondrous virtue of God only good!
The Beast has root, the Plant has flesh and blood:
The nimble Plant can turn it to and fro;
The nummed Beast can neither stir norgoe:
The Plant is leaf-less, branch-less, void of fruit;
The Beast is lust-less, sex-less, fire-less, mute:
The Plant with Plants his hungry paunch does feed;
The admired Beast is sown a slender seed.
Then up and down a Forest thick he paseth; The Trees of the Garden of Eden

Which selfly opening in his presence, baseth
Her trembling tresses neuer-vading spring,
For humble homage to her mighty King:
Where thousand Trees, wauing with gentle puffs
Their plumy tops, sweep the celestial roofs:
Yet envying all the massy Cerbas fame, The Cerbas.

Since fifty pases can but clasp the same.
There springs the Shrub three foot above the grass, The Balm.

Which fears the keen edge of the Curtelace;
Whereof the rich Egyptian so endears
Root, bark, and fruit, and much-much more the tears.
There lives the Sea-oake, in a little shel;
There grows vntill'd the ruddy Cochenel: The Sea-Oak. The Cochenel. The
Chermez.

And there the Chermez, which on each side Arms
With pointed prickles all his precious arms:
Rich Trees, and fruitful in those Worms of Price,
Which pressed, yield a crimsin-coloured juice,
Whence thousand Lambs are died so deep in grain
That their own Mothers know them not again.
There mounts the Melt, which serves in Mexico
For weapon, wood, needle, and thread (to sow) The admirable Melt.

Brick, honey, sugar, sucket, balm, and wine,
Parchment, perfume, apparel, cord, and line:
His wood for fire, his harder leaves are fit
For thousand uses of inuentiue wit.
Som-times ther-on they grave their holy things,
Laws, lauds of Idols, and the gests of Kings:
Som-times conjoined by a cunning hand
Upon their roofs for rows of tyle they stand:
Som-times they twine them into equal threeds;
Small ends make needles; greater, arrow-heads:
His upper sap the sting of Serpentscutes:
His new-sprung bud a rare Conserve indures:
His burned stalks, with strong fumosities
Of pearcing vapors, purge the French disease:
And they extract, from liquor of his feet,
Sharpevinegar, pure honey, sugar sweet.
There quakes the Plant, which in Pudefetan
Is called the Shame-fac't: for, ashamed of man, The shame-faced

If toward it one do approach too much,
It shrinks his boughs, to shun our hateful touch;
As if it had a soul, a sense, and sight,
Subject to shame, fear, sorrow and despite.
And there, that Tree from off whose trembling top
Both swimming shoals, and flying troops do drop: A Tree whose* leaves
transform to fowl and fish.

I mean the tree now in Iuturna growing,
Whose leaves dispersed by Zephyr's wanton blowing,
Are metamorphos'd both in form and matter,
On land to Fowls, to Fishes in the Water.
But see thou not (deer Muse) thou treadst the same A modest correction of
our Poet unwilling to wade farther in curious search of hidden secrets:

Too-curious path, thou do in others blame?
And striv'st in vain to paint This Work so choice,
The which no humane spirit, nor hand, nor voice,
Can once conceive, less pourtray, least express,
All ouer-whelm'd in gulfs so bottomless.
Who (matching Art with Nature) likeneth
Our grounds to EDEN, fondly measures,
By painted Butter-flies the imperial Eagle;
And the Elephant by every little Beagle.
This fear to fail, shall serve me for a bridle, Or to wander unprofitably in
nice Questions, concerning the Garden of Eden and man's abode there:

Least (lacking wings and guide) too busie-idle,
And ouer-bold, Gods Cabinet I clime,
To seek the place and search the very time,
When both our Parents, or but one was taken
Out of our Earth, into that fruitful Plain:
How long they had that Garden in possession,
Before their proud and insolent Transgression:
What Children there they earned, and how many,
Of whether sex: or whether none or any:
Or how (at least) they should have propagated,
If the sly malice of the serpent hated,
Causing their fall, had not defiled their kin,
And unborn seed, with leprosy of Sin.
If void of Venus; since unlike it is,
Such blessed state the noble flowr should miss
Of Virgin-head, or folk so perfect chaste
Should furious feel, when they their loves embraced;
Such tickling flames as our fond soul surprise
(That dead awhile in Epileps^e lies)
And slack our sinews all, by little and little
Drowning our reason in foul pleasure brittle.
Or whether else as men in gender now,
Since spouse-bedspot-less laws of God allow,
If no excess command: since else again
The Lord had made the double sex in vain.
Whether their Infants should have had the Power
We now perceive in fresh youths Iusty flowr,
As nimble feet, lims strong and vigorous;
Industrious hands, and hearts courageous;
Since before sin, Man ought not less appear
In Natures gifts, then his then-seruants were:
And lo the Partridge, which new-hatched bears
On her weak back her parent-house, and wears
In stead of wings, a bever-supple down,
Follows her dam through furrows up and down.
Or else as now; since in the womb of Eve
A man of thirty years could never live:
Nor may we iudge' against Natures course apparent;
Without the sacred Scriptures special warrant:
Which for our good (as Heavens deer babe) has right
To countermaund our reason and our sight.
Whether their seed should with their birth have brought
Deep Knowledge, Reason, Vnderstanding-thought;
Since now we see the new-fall'n feeble Lamb,
Yet stayn'd with blood of his distressed Dam,
Knows well the Wolf, at whose fell sight he shakes,
And right the tear of the vnknow'n Eaw he takes*
And since a dull Dunce, which no knowledge can,
Is a dead image, and no living man.
Or the thick vail of Ignorance's night
Had hooded-vp their issues inward sight;
Since the much moisture of an Infant brain
Receives so many shapes, that ouer-lam
New dash the old; and the trim commixation
Of confused fancies, full of alteration,
Makes the Understanding hull, which settle would,
But finds no firm ground for his Anchors hold.
Whether old ADAM should have left the place
Unto his Sons; they, to their after-race:
Or whether all together at the last
Should gloriously from thence to Heaven have past.
Search whosoever list, who list let va^^t in pride The decision of such Questions.
is a busy idleness.

TO have hit the white, and let him (sage) decide
The many other doubts that vainly rise,
For mine own part I will not seem so wise:
I will not waste my trauail and my seed,
To reap an empty straw, or fruitless reed.
Alas! we know what Orion of grief
Rained on the cursed head of the creatures Chief, Sin makes us perceive more
then sufficiently what happiness our Grand-sire lost, and what misery he got, by
his shameful Fall.

After that God against him war proclaimed,
And Satan princedom of the earth had claimed.
But none can know precisely how at all
Our Elders lived before their odious fall:
An vnknow'n Cifer, and deep Pit it is,
Where Dircean Oedipus his marks would miss:
Since Adam's self, if now he lived anew,
Could scant unwind the knotty snarled clew
Of double doubts, and questions intricate
That Schools dispute about this pristin state.
But this sole point I rest resolved in, But for sin, man had not been
subject unto Death.

That seeing Death's the mere effect of sin,
Man had not dreaded Death's all-slaying might,
Had he still stood in Innocence upright.
For, as two Bellows, blowing turn by turn, Simile.

By little and little make cold coals to burn,
And then their fire inflames with glowing heat
An iron bar; which on the Anuil beat,
Seems no more iron, but flies almost all
In hissing sparks, and quick bright cinders small:
So, the Worlds Soul should in our soul inspire
The eternal force of an eternal fire,
And then our soul (as form) breathe in our corse
Her count-less numbers, and Heav'n-tuned force,
Wherewith our bodies beauty beautified,
Should (like our death-less soul) have never died.
Here (wot I well) some wranglers will presume Objections against the estate of
man, who had not been subject unto death but for Sin.

To say, Small fire will by degrees consume
Our humor radical: and, how-be-it
The differing virtues of those fruits, as yet
Had no agreement with the harmfull spite
Of the fell Persian dangerous Acomte;
And notwithstanding that then ADAMS taste
Could well have used all, without all waste,
Yet could they not restore him every day
Unto his body that which did decay*
Because the food cannot (as being strange)
So perfectly in humane substance change:
For, it resembles wine, wherein too rife Simile.

Water is brewd, whereby the pleasant life
Is ouer-cool'd; and so there rests, in fine,
Naught of the strength, savor, or taste of wine.
Besides, in time the natural faculties
Are tired with toil; and the Humour-enemies,
Our death conspiring, undermine, at last,
Of our Souls prisons the foundations fast.
I, but the Tree of life the strife did stay Answer to those objections.

Which the Humors caused in this house of clay;
And stopping the evil, changed (perfect good)
In body fed, the body of the food:
Only the souls contagious malady
Had force to frustrate this high remedy.
Immortal then, and mortal, man was made; Conclusion.

Mortal he lived, and did immortal vade:
For, before the effects of his rebellious ill,
To die or live, was in his power and will:
But since his Sin, and proud Apostasy,
Ah! die he may, but not (alas!) not-dy;
As after his new birth, he shall attain
Only a power to neuer-dy again.
FINIS.
THE IMPOSTVRE. THE II. PART OF THE I. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Justice and Mercy modul'd in their kind:
Satan's proud Hate, and Envy to Mankind:
His many Engines, and malicious Wiles,
Whereby the best he many-times beguiles*
Why he assumed a Body, and began
With Eve; by Her to undermine her Man:
Their dreadful Fall: Their drousie Conscience:
Gods righteous Sentence, for their foul Offense,
On them (and Theirs): Their Exile: Eden barred
With flaming Sword, and Scraphin for guard.
O Who shall lend me light and nimble wings,
That (passing Swallows, and the swiftest things)
Even in a moment, boldly-daring, I
From Heaven to Hell, from Hell to Heaven may fly?
O! who shall show the countenance and gestures
Of Mercy and Justice? which fair sacred sisters,
With equal poiz, do ever balance even
The unchanging Proiects of the King of Heaven?
The one stern of look, the other milde-aspecting:
The one pleased with tears, the other blood affecting:
The one bears the Sword of vengeance unrelenting,
The other brings Pardon for the true-repenting:
The one, from Earths- Eden, Adam did dismiss,
The other has raised him to a higher Bliss.
Who shall direct my pen to paint the Story
Of wretched man's forbidden-Bit-lost glory?
What Spell shall charm the attentive Readers sense?
What Fount shall fill my voice with eloquence?
So that I, rapt, may rau^sh all this I WILL
With graue-sweet warbles of my sacred style;
Though Adams Doom, in every Sermon common,
And founded on the error of a woman,
Weary the vulgar, and be judged a jest
Of the profane, zeal-scoffing Atheist.
Ah! Thou my God, even Thou (my soul refining He has recourse to God the
only giver of all sufficiency and dex teritie in good and holy things.

In holy Faith's pure furnace, clearly shining)
Shall make my hap far to surmount my hope,
Instruct my spirit, and give my tongue smooth scope:
Thou, bountious in my bold attempts shall grace-me,
And in the rank of holiest Poets place-me;
And frankly grant, that (soaring near the sky)
Among our Authors, Eagle-like I fly:
Or, at the least (if Heaven such hap denay)
I may point others, Honors beauteous Way.
WHILE Adam bathes in these felicities, The enemy of God enuieth Man and
plotteth his destruction.

Hell's Prince, sly parent of revolt and lies,
Feels a pestiferous busie-swarming nest
Of neuer-dying Dragons in his breast,
Sucking his blood, tyring upon his lungs,
Pinching his entrails with ten thousand tongues,
His cursed soul still most extremely racking,
Too frank in giving torments, and in taking:
But above all, Hate, Pride, and Envious spite,
His hellish life do torture day and night:
For the Hate he bears to God, who has him driven*
Justly for ever, from the glittering Heaven,
To dwell in darkness of a sulph'ry clow'd
(Though still his brethrens service be allowed:)
The Proud desire to have in his subjection
Mankind in chained in gyues of Sins infection,
And the Envious heart-break to see yet to shine
In Adams face Gods Image all divine,
Which he had lost; and that Man might atchieue
The glorious bliss, his Pride he did deprive:
Grown barbarous Tyrants of his treacherous will,
Spur-on his course, his rage redoubling still.
Or rather (as the prudent Hebrew notes)
It Is that old Python which through hundred-throats
Does proudly hiss, and (past his wont) does fire
A hell of Furies in his fell desire:
His envious heart, self-swoln with sullen spite,
Brooks neither greater, like, nor lesser wight:
Dreads the one, as Lord; as equal, hates another;
And (jealous) doubts the rising of the other.
To vent his poison, this notorious Tempter His subtlety in executing his
Designs.

(Mere spirit) assails not Eve, but does attempt her
In fained form: for else, the soul divine
Which ruled (as Queen) the Littl^-worlds design,
So purely kept her Vow of Chastity,
That he in vain should tempt her Constancy.
Therefore he fleshly does the Flesh assay
(Suborning that) her Mistress to betray;
A subtle Pandar with more tycing sleights
Then Sea has Fish, or Heaven has twinkling lights.
For, had he been, of an ethereall matter, Why he hid him in a Body.

Of fiery substance, or aiereall nature;
The needful help of language had he wanted,
Whereby Faiths groundwork was to be supplanted:
Since such pure bodies have nor teeth, nor tongues,
Lips, artires, nose, Palate, nor panting lungs,
Which rightly placed are properly created
True instruments of sounds articulated.
And further-more, though from his birth he had had Why he appeared not in his
own likeness: nor transformed him into an Angel of light.

Hart-charming cunning smoothly to persuade,
He feared (malicious) if he care-less, came
Vn-masked, like himself, in his own name,
In deep distrust man entering, suddenly,
Would stop his ears, and his foul presence fly:
As (opposite) taking the shining face
Of sacred Angels full of glorious grace,
He then suspected least the Omnipotent
Should think man's Fall scarce worthy punishment.
Much like (therefore) some thief that does conceive Simil^.

From trauailers both life and goods to reaue,
And in the twilight (while the Moon does play
In Thetis Palace) near the Kings highway
Himself does ambush in a bushy Thorn;
Then in a Cave, then in a field of Corn,
Creeps to and fro, and fisk eth in and out,
And yet the safety of each place does doubt;
Till, resolute at last (upon his knee
Taking his level) from a hollow Tree,
He swiftly sends his fire-wingd messenger,
At his false suit t'arrest the passenger:
Our freedoms felon, fountain of our sorrow,
Thinks, now the beauty of a Horse to borrow;
Anon to creep into a Haifers side; He hides him under diverse figures.

Then in a Cock, or in a Dog to hide;
Then in a nimble Heart himself to shroud;
Then in the starr'd plumes of a Peacock proud;
And least he miss a mischief to effect,
Often changes mind, and varies often aspect.
At last, remembering that of all the broods, Why he chose the Serpent.

In Mountains, Plains, Airs, Waters, Wilds, and Woods,
The knotty Serpent's spotty generation
Are filled with infectious inflammation:
And though they want Dogs teeth, Bores tusks, Bears paws,
The Vultures bill, Bulls horns, and Griphins claws;
Yea, seem so weak, as if they had not might
To hurt us once, much less to kill us quite:
Yet, many times they treacherously betray us,
And with their breath, look, tongue, or train they slay us:
He crafty cloaks him in a Dragons skin
All bright-bespect; that, speaking so within
That hollow Sagbuts supple-wreathing plies*
The mouer might with the Organ sympathize.
For, yet the faith-less Serpent (as they say)
With horror crawled not groueling on the clay,
Nor to Mankind (as yet) was held for hateful,
Since that is the hire of his offense ungrateful.
But now, to censure how this change befell Sundry opinions hereupon.

Our wits com short, our words suffice not well
To utter it: much less our feeble Art
Can imitate this sly malicious part.
Sometimes me seems (troubling Eues spirit) the Fiend 1

Made her this speaking fancy apprehend.
For, as in liquid clouds (exhaled thickly)
Water and Air (as moist) do mingle quickly;
The evil Angels slide too easily,
As subtle Spirits, into our fantasy.
Sometimes me seems She saw (wo-worth the hap) 2

No very Serpent, but a Sepents shape:
Whether that, Satan played the Iuggler there,
Who tender eyes with charmed Tapers blear,
Trans-forming so by subtle vapoury gleams,
Men's heads to Monsters, into Eels the beams:
Or whether, Devils having bodies light,
Quick, nimble, active, apt to change with slight,
In shapes or shows, they guilefull have proposed;
In brief, like the Air whereof they are composed.
For, as the air, with scattered clouds be-spred
Is here and there, black, yellow, white, and red,
Resembling* Armies, Monsters, Mountains, Dragons,
Rocks, fiery Castles, Forests, Ships, and Wagons,
And such to us through glass transparent clear
From form to form varying it does appear:
So, these seducers can grow great, or small,
Or round, or square, or straight, or short, or tall,
As fits the passions they are moved by,
And such our soul receives them from our ey.
Sometimes; that Satan (only for this work) 3

Feigned him a Serpents shape, wherein to lurk.
For, Nature framing our souls enemies,
Of bodies light, and in experience wise,
In malice crafty; curious they assemble
Small Elements, which (as of kin) resemble,
Whereof a Mass is made, and there* unto
They soon give growth and lively motion too.
Not, that they be Creators: for, the Almighty
Who first of nothing made vast Amphitri^^,
The World's dull Center, Heaven's ay-turning frame*
And whirling Air, sole merits that high name:
Who (only Being) Being gives to all,
And of all things the seeds substantial
Within their firstborn bodies has enclosed,
To be in time by Nature's hand disposed:
Not those, who (taught by curious Art or Nature)
Have given to things Heav'n-pointed form and stature,
Hastened their growth, or wakened learnedly
The forms that formless in the Lump didly.
But (to conclude) I think it was no conceit, ^*

No fained Idol, nor no iuggling slight,
Nor body borrowed for this uses sake,
But the self Serpent which the Lord did make
In the beginning: for, his hateful breed
Bears yet the pain of this pernicious deed. ^*

Yet, it is a doubt, whether the Devil did
Govern the Dragon (not there selfly hid)
To raise his courage, and his tongue direct,
Locally absent, present by effect.
As when the sweet strings of a Lute we strike,
Another Lute laid near it, sounds the like,
Nay, the same note, through secret simpathy
(Untouched) receiving life and Harmony:
Or, as a sta^, which (though far distant) pours,
Upon our heads, hap-less or happy showrs.
Or, whether for a time he did abide,
Within the doubling Serpents damask hide, 6.

Holding a place-less place: as our soul deor*
Through the dimlanthorn of our flesh* shines clear;
And bound-less bounds itself in so straight space,
As fo^m in body, not as body in place.
But this stands sure, how ever else it went,
The old Serpent served as Satan's instrument
To charm in Eden with a strong illusion Conclusion of the former opinions. A
comparison.

Our silly Grandam to her selfs confusion.
For, as an old, rude, rotten, tune-les Kit,
If famous Dowland daign to finger it,
Makes sweeter Musik then the choicest Lute
In the gross handling of a clownish Brute:
So, whiles a learned Fiend with skillful hand
Does the dull motions of his mouth command,
This self-dum Creatures glozing Rhetorike
With bashful shame great Orators would strike.
So, Faiery Trunks within Epyrus Grove
Moved by the spirit that was inspired by Jove,
With fluent voice (to every one that seeks)
Foretell the Fates of light-beleeuing Greeks:
So all incenst, the pale Engastromith
(Ruled by the furious spirit he is haunted with)
Speaks in his womb; So well a workmans skill
Supplies the want of any organ ill:
So does the Phantike (lifting up his thought
On Satan's wing) tell with a tongue distraught
Strange Oracles, and his sick spirit does plead
Even of those Arts that he did never read.
O ruth-less murderer of immortal souls!
Alas! to pull us from the happy Poles, The sundry subtle and horrible
end^uours of the devil, putting on diverse forms to overthrow Mankind.

And plunge us headlong in thy yawning hell,
Thy ceas-less frauds, and fetches who can tell?
Thou play'st the Lion, when thou do in gage
Bloodthirsty Nero's barbarous heart with rage,
While flesht in murders (butcher-like) he paints
The Saint-poor world with the deer blood of Saints.
Thou play'st the Dog, when by the mouth profane
Of some false Prophet t^ou do beleh thy bane,
While from the Pulpit harkingly he rings
Bold blasphemies against the king of kings.
Thou play'st the Swine, when plunged in pleasures vile,
Some Epicure does sober minds defile,
Transforming lewdly, by his loose impiety,
Strict Lacedaemon to a soft society.
Thou play'st the Nightingale, or else the Swan,
When any famous Rhetorician,
With captious wit and curious language, draws
Seduced hearers; and subuerts the laws.
Thou plaist the Fox, when thou do fain a-right
The face and phrase of some deep Hypocrite,
True painted Toomb, dead-seeming coals, but quick;
A Scorpion fell, whose hidden tail does prick.
Yet, this were little, if thy spite audacious,
Spared (at the least) the face of Angels gracious,
And if thou did not (Ape-like) imitate
The Almighties works, the wariest Wits to mate. The Poet resumeth his
Discourse, touching the Temptation of Eve.

But (without numbering all thy subtle baits,
And nimble iuggling with a thousand sleights)
Timely returning where I first digrest,
I Will only here thy first DECEIT digest.
The Dragon then, Man's Fortress to surprise,
Follows some Captains martial policies,
Who, yer too near an Adverse place he pitch, Comparison.

The situation marks, and sounds the ditch,
With his eyes level the steep wall he metes,
Surueies the flanks, his Camp in order sets;
And then approaching, batters sore the side
Which Art and Nature have least fortified:
So this old Soldier, having marked rife
The firstborn payrs yet danger-dreadless life;
Mounting his Canons suttly he assaults
The part he finds in evident defaults:
Namely, poor Woman, wavering, weak, unwise,
Light, credulous, news-louer given to lies.
Eve, Second honor of this Universe! Satan's Oration

Is It true (I pray) that jealous God, perverse,
Forbids (quoth he) both you and all your race,
All the fair Fruits these silver Brooks embrace;
So often bequeathed you, and by you possessed,
And day and night by your own labor dressed?
With the air of these sweet words, the wily Snake
A poisoned air inspired (as it spoke)
In Eues frail breast; who thus replies: O! know Eues Answer

What e^r thou be (but thy kind care does show
A gentle friend) that all the fruits and flowrs
In this earths-heav'n are in our hands and powrs,
Except alone that goodly fruit divine,
Which in the midst of this green ground does shine;
But, all-good* God (alas! I wot not why)
For bad us touch that Tree, on pain to die.
She ceast: already brooding in her heart
A curious wish, that will her weal subvert. A^sit comparison.

As a false Lover that thick snares has laid,
T'intrap the honor of a fair young Maid,
When she (though little) listening ear affoords
To his sweet, courting, deep-affected words,
Feels some asswaging of his freezing ^^ame,
And sooths himself with hope to gain his game;
And rapt with joy, upon this point persists,
That parleing City never long resists:
Even so the Serpent, that does counterfeit
A guilefull Call ^^allure us to his net;
Perceiving Eve his flattering gloze digest,
He prosecutes, and locund, does not rest,
Till he have tried, foot, hand, and head, and all,
Upon the Breach of this new-battered wall. The Devils reply

No, fair (quoth he) believe not, that the care
God has, mankind from spoiling death to spare,
Makes him forbid you (on so strict condition)
This purest, fairest, rarest Fruits fruition:
A doubtful fear* an en^le, and a hate,
His jealous heart for ever cruciate;
Since the suspected virtue of This Tree
Shall soon disperse the cloud of Idiocy,
Which dims your eyes; and* further, make you seem
(Excelling us) even equal Gods to him.
O Worlds rare gloryl reach thy happy hand,
Reach, reach (I say) why do thou stop or stand?
Begin thy Bliss, and do not fear the threat His audacio^s impudence.

Of an uncertain Godhead, only great,
Through self-aw'd zeal: put on the glistring Pall
Of immortality: do not fore-stall
(As envious stepdame) thy posterity
The souerain honor of Divinity.
This parley ended, our ambitious Grandam, The Apostas^e of Eve.

Who only yet did heart and ey abandon
Against the Lord; now farther does proceed,
And hand and mouth makes guilty of the deed.
A nouice Thief; that in a Closet spies A Comparison

A heap of Gold, that on the Table lies;
Pale, fearful, shiuering, twice or thrice extends,
And twice or thrice retires his fingers ends,
And yet again returns; the booty takes,
And faintly-bold, up in his cloak it makes,
Scarce finds the door, with faultring foot he flies,
And still looks back for fear of Hu-on cries:
Even so does Eve show by like fear-full fashions
The doubtful combat of contending Passions;
She would, she would not; glad, sad; coms, and goes:
And long she marts about a Match of Woes:
But (out alas^) at last she touches it,
And (having touched) tastes the forbidden bit. Another comparison lively
expressing the Fall of Man, by the provocation of his wife.

Then as a man that from a lofty Clift,
Or steepy Mountain, does descend too swift,
Stumbling at somewhat, quickly clips some lim
Of some deer kinsman walking next to him,
And by his headlong fall, so brings his friend
To an untimely, sad, and sudden end;
Our Mother, falling, hales her Spouse anon
Down to the gulf of pitchie Acheron.
For, to the wished Fruits beautiful aspect,
Sweet Nectar-taste, and wonderful effect,
Cunningly adding her quaint smiling glances,
Her witty speech, and pretty countenances,
She so preuails, that her blind Lord at last,
A morsel of the sharp-sweet fruit does taste.
Now suddenly wide-open feel they might
(Siel'd for their good) both souls and bodies sight;
But the sad Soul has lost the Character, The effects of their disobedience.

And sacred Image that did honor Her:
The wretched Body, full of shame and sorrow
To see it naked, is inforct to borrow
The Trees broad leaves, where of they aprons frame,
From Heavens fair ey to hide their filthy shame.
Alas, fond death-lings! O! behold how clear
The knowledge is that you have bought so deer:
In heavenly things ye are more blind then Moals,
In earthly Owls. O! think ye (silly souls)
The sight that swiftly through the earth's solid centres
(As globes of pure transparent crystal) enters
Cannot transpearce your leaves? or do ye ween,
Covering your shame so to conceal your sin?
Or that, a part thus clouded, all does lie
Safe from the search of Heavens all-seeing ey?
Thus yet, man's troubled dull Intelligence
Had of his fault but a confused sense:
As in a dream, after much drink it chances,
Disturbed spirits are vexed with rauing fancies.
Therefore the Lord, within the Garden fair, The extraordinary presence of God,
awakes their drousie souls swallowed up of Sin: and begins to arraign them.

Moving b^times I wot not I what air,
But super natural; whose breath divine
Brings of his presence a most certain sign:
Awakes their Lethargy, and to the quick,
Their self-doom'd souls does sharply press and prick:
Now more and more making their pride to fear
The frowning visage of their Judge severe:
To seck new-refuge in more secret harbors
Among the dark shade of those tusting arbors.
Adam, quoth God (with thundering majesty)
Where art thou (wretch!) what do thou? answer me
Thy God and Father, from whose hand, thy health
Thou hold'st, thine honor, and all sorts of wealth.
At this sad summon's, woeful man resembles Description of the horrible effects
of a guilty Conscience, summoned to the presence of God.

A bearded rush that in a river trembles:
His rosy checks are changed to earthen hew;
His dying body drops an yeie deaw;
His tear-drown'd eyes, a night of clouds bedims;
About his ears, a buzzing horror swims;
His fainted knees, with feeblenes are humble;
His faultring feet do slide away and stumble:
He has not (now) his free, bold, stately port;
But down-cast looks, in fearful slavish sort;
Now, naught of Adam, does in Adam rest;
He feel's his senses pained, his soul oppressed:
A confused host of violent passions iarr;
His flesh and spirit are in continual war:
And now no more (through conscience of his error)
He hears or feesth' Almighty, but with terror:
And loath he answers (as with tongue distraught)
Confessing (thus) his fear, but not his fault.
O Lord! thy voice, thy dreadful voice has made Adams answer^

Me fearful hide me in this covert shade.
For, naked as I am (O most of might!)
I dare not come before thine awful sight.
Naked (quoth God)? why (faith-less renegate, God urges the cause of his
deiection and fear.

Apostate Pagan!) who has told thee that?
Whence springs thy shame? what makes thee thus to run
From shade to shade, my presence still to shun?
Have thou not tasted of the learned Tree,
Whereof (on pain of death) I warned thee?
O righteous God (quoth Adam) I am free Adams reply, excusing himself and
covertly imputing his Guilt to God. Examination of Eve, who excuses her self
likewise on another.

From this offense: the wife thou gave me,
For my companion and my comforter,
She made me eat that deadly meat with her.
And thou (quoth God) O! thou frail treacherous Bride,
Why, with thy self, have thousedu^'t thy Guide?
Lord (answers Eve) the Serpent did entice
My simple frailty to this sinful vice.
Mark here, how He, who fears not who reform An example for Indges and
Magistrates.

His high Decrees, not subject unto form,
Or style of Court: who, all-wise, has no need
TO examine proof or witness of the deed:
Who, for sustaining of unequal Scale,
Dreads not the Doom of a Mercuriall;
Yer Sentence pass, does publicly convent,
Confront, and hear with ear indifferent
The Offenders sad: then with just indignation,
Pronounces thus their dreadful Condemnation. The Sentence of the supreme
Judge against the guilty Prisoners: and first of all against the Serpent.

Ah cursed Serpent, which my fingers made
To serve mankind: the have made thy self a blade
Wherewith vain Man and his inueigled wife
(Self-parricids) have reft their proper life.
For this thy fault (true Fountain of all ill)
Thou shall be hatefull'mong all creatures still.
Groueling in dust, of dust thou ay shall feed:
I Will kindle war between the Woman's seed,
And thy fell race; hers on the head shall ding
Thine: thine again hers in the heel shall sting.
Rebel to me, unto thy kindred cursed* Against the Woman.

False to thy husband, to thy self the worst:
Hope not, thy fruit so easly to bring-forth
As now thou slay'st it: hence forth, every Birth
Shall torture thee with thousand sorts of pain;
Each artire, sinew, muscle, joint and vain,
Shall feel his part: besides foul vomitings,
Prodigious longings, thought-full languishings,
With change of color, swouns, and many others,
Eternal fellows of all future mothers:
Under his yoke, thy husband thee shall have,
Tyrant, by thee made the Arch-tyrants slave. Against Man.

And thou disloyal, which have harkned more
To a wanton fondling then my sacred lore:
Hence forth the sweat shall bubble on thy brow:
Thy hands shall blister, and thy back shall bow:
Never shall thousend into thy branchievains
A bit, but bought with price of thousand pains.
For, the earth feeling (even in her) the effect
Of the doom thundered against thy foul defect;
In stead of sweet fruits which she selfly yields
Seed-less, and Art-less over all thy fields,
With thorns and burrs shall bristle up her breast:
(In short) thou shall not taste the sweets of rest,
Till ruth-less Death by his extremest pain
Thy dust-born body turn to dust again.
Here I conceive, that flesh and blood will brangle, Objection to excuse the
Sin of Man.

And murmuring Reason with the almighty wrangle,
Who did our parents with Free Will indue, 1.

Though he foresaw, that that would be the clew
Should lead their steps into the woeful way
Where life is death ten thousand times a day:
Now all, that he fore-sees, befalls: and further,
He all events by his free power does order.
Man taxes God of too-vniust severity,
For plaguing Adams sin in his posterity:
So that the old years renewed generations
Cannot assuage his venging indignations,
Which have no other ground to prosecute,
But the mis eating of a certain fruit.
O dusty wormling! dare thou strive and stand Answers to the first objection.

With Heavens high Monarch? will thou (wretch) demand
Count of his deeds? Ah! shall the Potter make 1.

His clay, such fashion, as him list, to take?
And shall not God (Worlds Founder, Natures Father)
Dispose of man (his own mere creature) rather?
The supreme King, who (Judge of greatest Kings)
By number, weight and measure, acts all things,
Vice-loathing Lord, pure Justice, patron strong,
Law's life, Right's rule, will he do any wrong?
Man, hold thou of God thy frank Free Will, 2.

But free t'obay his sacred goodness still?
Freely to follow him, and do his hest,
Net Philtre-charm'd, nor by Busiris pressed?
God arms thee with discourse: but thou (O wretch)
By the keen edge the wound-soule sword do catch;
Killing thy self, and in thy loins thy line.
O banefull Spider (weaving woeful twine)
All Heavens pure flowrs thou turnest into poison:
Thy sense reaues sense: thy reason robs thy reason.
For, thou complainest of Gods grace, whose Still
Extracts from dross of thine audacious ill, 3.

Three unexpected goods: praise for his Name;
Bliss for thy self; for Satan endless-shame:
Since, but for sin, Justice and Mercy were
But idle names: and but that thou did err,
CHRIST had not com to conquer and to quell,
Upon the Cross, Sin, Satan, Death, and Hell:
Making thee blessed more since thine offense,
Then in thy primer happy innocence.
The^, might thou die; now, death thou do not doubt:
Now, in the Heaven; then, did thou ride without:
In earth, thou liv'dst then; now in Heaven thou be:
Then, thou did hear Gods word; it, now thou see:
Then, pleasant fruits; now, Christ is thy repast:
Then might thou fall; but now thou stand fast.
Now, Adams fault was not in deed so light,
As seems to Reason's sin-bleard Owlie sight:
But't was a chain where all the greatest sins
Were one in other linked fast, as Twinns:
Ingratitude, pride, treason, gluttony,
Too-curious skill-thrist, envy, felony,
Too-light, too-late belief; were the sweet baits
That made him wander from Heavens holy straights.
What would thou (Father) say unto a Son
Of perfect age, to whom for portion
(Witting and willing, while thy self yet live)
All thy possessions in the earth thou give:
And yet the ungrateful, grace-lesse, insolent,
In thine own Land, rebellion does invent?
Map now an Adam in thy memory;
By Gods own hand made with great majesty,
Not poor, nor pined; but at whose command
The rich abundance of the world does stand:
Not slave to sense, but having freely might
To bridle it, and range it still aright:
No idiot fool, nor drunk with vain opinion;
But Gods Disciple and his dearest Minion:
Who rashly grows for little, nay for naught,
His deadly foe that all his good had wrought:
So may thou ghess, what whip what rope, what rack,
What fire, were fit to punish Adams lack. Answers to the second objection.

Then, since Man's sin by little and little runs
End-less, through every Age from Sires to Sons; 1.

And still the farther this foul sin-spring flows
It still more muddy and more filthy grows:
Thou ought not marvail, if (even yet) his seed
Feel the just wages of this wicked deed.
For, though the keen sting of concupiscence
Cannot, yer birth, his fell effect commence;
The unborn Babe, hid in the Mothers womb,
Is Sorrow's servant, and Sin's servile groom,
As a frail Mote from the first Mass extract,
Which Adam baen'd by his rebellious fact.
Sound offspring coms not of a Kind infected:
Parts are not fair, if to tall be defected:
And a defiled stinking sink does yield
More dirt then water, to the neighbor field.
While nights black muffler hoodeth up the skies, 2.

The silly blind-man misseth not his eyes: Simile.

But when the day summons to work again,
His night, eternal then he does complain,
That he goes groping, and his hand (alas!)
Is fain to guide his foot, and guard his face:
So man, that lives in the wombs obscurity,
Knows not; nor makes known his lusts impurity:
Which for it is sown in a too-plentious ground,
Takes root already in the Caves profound
Of his infected Heart: with his birth, it peers,
And grows in strength, as he does grow in years;
And waxt a Tree (though proyn'd with thousand cares)
An execrable deadly fruit it bears.
Thou see, no wheat Helleborus can bring: 3.

Nor barley, from the madding Morrell spring: Simile.

Nor, bleating Lambs brave Lions do not breed:
The leprous Parents, raise a leprous seed:
Even so our Grand-sire, living Innocent,
Had stockt the whole World with a Saint-descent:
But suffering sin in EDEN him invade,
His sons, the sons of Sin and Wrath he made.
For, God did seem t'indow, with glory and grace, 4.

Not the first Man so much, as all man's race:
And after reaue again those gifts divine,
Not him so much, as in him all his line.
For, if an odious Traitor that conspires, Simile.

Against a Prince, or to his state aspires,
Feel not alone the laws extremity;
But his sons sons (although sometimes they be
Honest and virtuous) for their Fathers blame,
Are hap-less scarr'd with an eternal shame:
May not the Eternal, with a righteous terror,
In Adams issue punish Adams error?
May he not thrall them under Deaths command:
And sear their brows with everlasting brand
Of infamy, who in his stock (accursed)
Have graft worse slips then Adam set at first?
Man's seed then justly, by succession, Conclusion of the former Disputations,
and execution of Gods Decree against Adam and Eve. They are driven out of Eden.

Bears the hard penance of his high transgression:
And Adam here, from Eden banished,
As first offender is first punished.
Hence (quoth the Lord) hence, hence (accursed race)
Out of my Garden: quick, avoid the place,
This beauteous place, pride of this Universe,
A house unworthy Masters so perverse.
Those that ( in quarrel of the Strong of Strongs, Simile.

And just revenge of Queen, and Countries wrongs)
Were witnesses to all the woeful plaints,
The sighs, and tears, and pitiful complaints,
Of brauing Spaniards (chiefly brave inword)
When by the valiant Heav'n-assisted sword
Of Mars- like ESSEX, Englands Marshall-Earl
( Then Albions Patron, and Eliza's Pearl)
They were expulst from Cad'z, their dearest pleasure,
Losing their Town, their honor, and their treasure:
Woe worth ( said they) woe worth our Kings ambition;
Woe worth our Clergy, and their Inquisition:
He seeks new Kingdoms, and does lose his old;
They burn for conscience, but their thirst is gold:
Woe, and alas, woe to the vain brauados
Of Typhon- like-inuincible ARMADOS,
Which like the vaunting Monster-man of Gath,
Have stirred against us little David's wrath:
Wo-worth our sins: woe worth our selves, and all
Accursed causes of our sudden fall;
Those well may ghess the bitter agonies,
And lukewarm Rivers gushing down the eyes
Of our first Parents, out of Eden driven
(Of Repeal hope-less) by the hand of Heaven;
For, the Almighty set before the door The earthly Eden shut-vp for ever from
Mankind.

Of the holy Park, a Seraphin that bore
A waving sword, whose body shined bright,
Like flaming Comet in the midst of night;
A body merely Metaphysioall,
Which (differing little from the ONE vnicall,
The Act-simply-pure, the onely-beeing BEING)
Approaches matter; ne'rtheless, not being
Of matter mixed: or rather is so made
So merely spirit, that not the murdering blade,
His joined quantity can part in two:
For (pure) it cannot Suffer ought, but Do.
FINIS.
THE FVRIES. THE III. PART OF THE I. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The World's tranform'd from that it was at first:
For Adams Sin, all Creatures else accursed:
Their Harmony dis-tuned by His iar:
Yet all again concent, to make Him war;
As, the Elements, and above all, the Earth:
Three ghastly FVRIES; Sickness, War, and Dearth,
A general Muster of the Bodies Griefs:
The Souls Diseases, under sundry Chiefs:
Both, full of Horror, but the later most;
Where ugly Vice in Virtues Mask does boast.
THis's not the World. O! whither am I brought? Sin has changed and disfigured
the face of the World.

This Earth I tread, this hollow-hanging Vault,
Which Days reducing, and renewing Nights,
Renues the grief of mine afflicted sprights;
This Sea I sail, this troubled Air I sip,
Are not The First-Weeks glorious workmanship:
This wretched Round is not the goodly Globe
The Eternal trimmed in so various Robe:
It Is but a Dungeon and a dreadful Cave,
Of that First World the miserable grave.
All-quickning Spirit, great God, that iustly-strange Invocation.

Iudge-turned-Father, wrought'st his wondrous change,
Change and new-mould me; Lord, my hand assist,
That in my Muse appear no earthly mist:
Make me thine organ, give my voice dexterity
Sadly to sing this sad Change to Posterity.
And, bountious Giver of each perfect gift,
So tune my voice to his sweet-sacred Clift,
That in each strain my rude unready tongue
Be lively Echo of his learned Song.
And, henceforth, let our holy Musik ravish
All well-born Souls, from fancies lewdly-lauish
(Of charming Sin the deep-inchaunting Sirens,
The snares of virtue, valour-softning Hyrens)
That touched with terror of thine indignation,
Presented in this woeful Alteration,
We all may seek, by Prayer and true Repentance,
To shun the rigor of thy wrathful Sentence.
The Tra^slator here humbly vaileth-bonnet to the Kings Majesty; who many
years since (for his princely exercile) translated these FVRIES, the URANIA,
and some other Pecces of Du BARTAS.
But, yer we farther pass, our slender Bark
Must here strike top-s^ils to a Princely Ark
Which keeps these Straights: He hails us threatfully,
Star-boord our helm; Com underneath his Lee.
Ho, Whence your Bark? of Zeal-land: Whether bound?
For Virtues Cape: What lading? Hope. This Sound
You should not pass; sau^ that your voyage tends
To benefit our Neighbors and our Friends.
Thanks, Kingly Captain; daign us then (we pray)
Some skillful Pylot through this FVRIOVS Bay;
Or, in this Channel, since we are to learn,
Vouch safe to togh us at your Royal Stern.
YER THAT our Sire (O too too proudly-base)
Turned tail to God, and to the Fiend his face,
This mighty World did seem an Instrument
True-strung, well-tuned, and handled excellent, Happy estate of the World,
before Sin; set forth by a Similitude.

Whose symphony resounded sweetly-shrill
The Almighties praise, who played upon it still.
While man served God, the World served him, the live
And liue-less creatures seemed all to strive
To nurse this league; and, loving zealously
These two deer Heads, embraced mutually:
In sweet accord, the base with high reioyc't,
The hot with cold, the solid with the moist;
And innocent Astraea did combine
All with the mastick of a Love divine.
For, the hidden love that now a-dayes does hold The Sympathy yet appearing
between certain Creatures, is but as a little shadow of the perfect union which
was among all Creatures, before Man's Fall.

The Steel and Lodestone, Hydrargire and Gold,
The Amber and straw; that lodges in one shell
Pearl-fish and Sharpling: and unites so well
Sargons and Goats, the Sperage and the Rush,
The Elm and the Vine, the Olive and Myrtle-bush,
Is but a spark or shadow of that Love
Which at the first in every thing did move,
When as the Earth's Muses with Harmonious sound
To Heavens sweet Music humbly did resound.
But Adam, being chief of all the strings
Of this large Lute, o're-retched, quickly brings
All out of tune: and now, for melody
Of warbling Charms, it yels so hideously,
That it affrights fell Enyon, who turmoils
To raise again the old Chaos antik broils:
Heaven, that still smiling on his Paramour, Of the Discord that Sin has
brought among all things.

Still in her lap did Mel and Manna pour,
Now with his hail, his rain, his frost and heat,
Does parch, and pinch, and over-whelm, and beat,
And hoars her head with Snowes, and (ielous) dashes
Against her brows his fiery lightning flashes,
On the other side, the sullen, envious Earth Sundry notable Antipathies.

From blackest Cells of her foul breast sends forth
A thousand foggy fumes, which every where
With cloudy mists Heavens crystal front besmear.
Since that, the Woolf the trembling Sheep pursues;
The crowing Cock, the Lion stout eschews;
The Pullein hide them from the Puttock's flight,
The Mastie's mute at the Hyaenas sight:
Yea (who would think it?) these fell enmities
Rage in the sense-less trunks of Plants and Trees:
The Vine, the Cole, the Cole-wort Swines-bread dreads,
The Fearn abhors the hollow waving Reeds,
The Olyue and the Oak participate,
Even to their earth, signs of their ancient hate,
Which suffers not (O date-less discord!) the one
Live in that ground where the other first has grown.
O strange instinct! O deep immortal rage,
Whose fiery fewd no Laethe flood can swage!
So, at the sound of Wolf-Drums rattling thunder
The affrighted Sheep-skin-Drum does rent in sunder:
So, that fell Monsters twisted entrails cuts
(By secret power) the poor Lambs twined guts,
Which (after death) in steed of bleating mute,
Are taught to speak upon an Yvory Lute:
And so the Princely Eagles ravening plumes
The feathers of all other Fowls consumes.
The First-mov'd Heaven (in 'tself it self still stirring) The estate of Man
before Sin

Rapts with his course (quicker then winds swift whirring)
All the other Spears, and to Alcides Spyres
From Alexanders Altars drives their Fires:
But mortal Adam, Monarch here beneath,
Erring draws all into the paths of death;
And on rough Seas, as a blind Pylot rash,
Against the rock of Heavens just wrath does dash
The Worlds great Vessel, sailing yerst at ease,
With gentle gales, good guide, on quiet Seas.
For (yer his fall) which way so ever he rolled His estate after Sin.

His wondering eyes God everywhere behold;
In Heaven, in Earth, in Ocean, and in Air,
He sees, and feels, and finds him everywhere.
The World was like a large and sumptuous Shop
Where God his goodly treasures did unwrap:
Or Crystal glass most lively representing
His sacred Goodness, everywhere frequenting.
But, since his sin, the woeful wretch finds none
Herb, garden, grove, field, fountain, stream or stone,
Beast, mountain, valley, sea-gate, shore, or haven,
But bears his Deaths* doom openly engraven:
In brief, the whole scope this round Center has,
Is a true storehouse of Heavens righteous wrath. Al creatures from the
highest to the lowest, enemies to Man.

Rebellious Adam, from his God revolting,
Finds his yerst-subiects against himself insulting:
The tumbling Sea, the Air with tempests driven,
Thorn-bristled Earth, the sad and lowering Heaven
(As from the oath of their allegiance free)
Revenge on him the Almighties injury.
The Stars coniur'd, through envious Influence, The Heavens, with all there in.

By secret Hang-men punish his offense:
The Sun with heat, the Moon with cold does vex-him,
The Air with unlooked for sudden changes checks-him,
With fogs and frosts, hails, snowes, and sulph'ry thunders;
Blasting, and storms, and more prodigious wonders.
Fire, fallen from Heaven, or else by Art incited, All the Elements. Fire. Air.

Or by mischance in some rich building lighted,
Or from some Mountains burning bowels throw'n,
Repleat with Sulphur, Pitch, and Pumie stone,
With sparkling fury spreads, and in few hours
The labor of a thousand years devours.
The greedy Ocean, breaking wonted bounds, Sea.

Vsurps his herds, his wealthy Isles and Towns.
The grieved Earth, to ease her (as it seems) Earth.

Of such profane accursed weight, sometimes
Swallows whole Countries, and the airie tops.
Of Prince-proud towrs in her black womb she wraps.
And in despite of him, abhord and hateful, Earth brings forth weeds.

She many ways proves barren and ungrateful:
Mocking our hopes, turning our seed-Wheat-kernel
To burn-grain Thistle, and to vapourie Darnel,
Cockle, wild Oats, rough Burs, Corn-cumbring Tares,
Short recompense for all our costly cares.
Yet this were little, if she more malicious, Venomous plants.

Fell stepdame, brought us not Plants more pernicious:
As, sable Henbane; Morell, making mad:
Cold poisoning Poppy, itching, drowsy, sad:
The stifning Carpes^, the eyes-foe Hemlock stinking,
Limb-numming belching: and the sinew-shrinking
Dead-laughing Ap^um, weeping Aconite
(Which in our vulgar deadly Wolfs-bane hight)*
The dropsy* breeding, sorrow-bringing Psylly
(Here called Flea-Wurt) Colchis* banefull Lilly,
(With us Wild-Saffron) blistring biting fell:
Not Napell, making lips and tongue to swell:
Blood-boyling Yew, and costiue M^sseltoe:
With yce-cold Mandrake, and a many mo
Such fatal plants; whose fruit, seed, sap, or root,
T'vntimely Grave do bring our heed-less foot.
Besides, she knows, we brutish value more Poison hidden among the Metals.

Then Lives or Honors, her rich glittering Ore:
That Avarice our bound-less thought still vexes:
Therefore among her wreakfull baits she mixes
Quicksilver, Lithargie and Orpiment,
Wherewith our entrails are often g^awn and rent:
So that sometimes; for Body, and for Mind,
Torture and torment, in one Mine we find.
What rests more? the Masters skillful most, The excellency of Man's Dominion
over the Creatures before his Fall.

With gentle gales driven to their wished Coast,
Not with less labor guide their winged wayn^
On the azure forehead of the liquid plains:
Nor crafty Iugglers, can more easily make
Their self-liv'd Puppets (for their lucres sake)
To skip and scud, and play, and prate, and praunce,
And fight, and fall, and trip, and turn, and dance:
Then happy we did rule the sealy Legions
That dumbly dwell in stormy water-Regions;
Then fethered singers, and the stubborn droues
That haunt the Deserts and the shady Groves:
At every word they trembled then for aw,
And every wink then served them as a law,
And always bent all duty to obserue-vs,
Without command, stood ready still to serue-vs.
But now (alas!) through our fond Parents fall, The Creatures now becomn
Tyrants and ^raytors to Him, whose slaves and servants they were before Sin.

They (of our slaves) are grown our tyrants all.
Wend we by Sea? the dread Leuiathan
Turns vpside-down the boiling Ocean,
And on the sudden sadly does in toomb
Our floting Castle in deep Thetis womb;
Yerst in the well kin like an Eagle towering,
And on the water like a Dolphin scowring.
Walk we by Land? how many loathsome swarms
Of speckled poisons, with pestiferous arms,
In every corner in close Ambush lurk
With secret bands our sudden banes to work?
Besides, the Lion and the Leopard,
Boar, Bear, and Wolf to death pursue us hard;
And, ielous vengers of the wrongs divine,
In pieces pull their Soverains sinful line.
The huge thick Forests have nor bush nor brake
But hides some Hangman our loathed life to take:
In every hedge and ditch both day and night
We fear our death, of every leaf affright.
Rest we at home? the Masty fierce in force,
The untamed Bull, the hot courageous Horse,
With teeth, with horns, and hooues besiege us round,
As grieved to see such tyrants tread the ground:
And there is no Fly so small but now dares bring
Her little wrath against her quondam King.
What hideous sights? what horror-boading shows? An admirable description of
Man's miserable Punishments, tortured by himself.

Alas, what yels? what howls? what thundering throws?
O! am I not near roaring Phlegoton?
Alecto, sad Moger' and Thesiphon?
What spells have charmed ye from your dreadful den
Of darkest Hell? Monsters abhord of men,
O Nights black daughters, grim-fac't Furies sad,
Stern Plutos Posts, what make ye here so mad?
O! feels not man a world of woeful terrors,
Besides your goaring wounds and ghastly horrors?
So soon as God from Eden Adam drove,
To live in this Earth (rather in this Grave,
Where reign a thousand deaths) he summon'd-vp
With thundering call the damned Crew, that sup
Of Sulphury Styx, and fiery Phlegeton,
Bloody Cocytus, muddy Acheron.
Com snake-trest Sisters, com ye dismal Elves,
Cease now to curse and cruciate your selves:
Com, leave the horror of your houses pale,
Com, parbreak here your foul, black, banefull gall:
Let lack of work no more from hence forth fear-you,
Man by his sin a hundred hells does rear-you.
This echo made whole hell to tremble troubled,
The drowsy Night her deep dark horrors doubled,
And suddenly Auernus Gulf did swim
With Rozin, Pitch, and Brimstone to the brim,
And the ugly Gorgons, and the Sphinxes fell,
Hydraes and Harpies began to yawn and yel.
As the heat, hidden in a vapoury Cloud,
Striving for issue with strange murmurs loud,
Like Guns a stuns, with round-round-rumbling thunder
Filling the Air with noise, the Earth with wonder:
So the three Sisters, the three hideous Rages,
Raise thousand storms, leaving the infernal stages. The FVRIES with their
furniture and train, representing the Horror of Sinne^ and the cursed estate
of an evil conscience.

Al-ready all roll on their steely Cars
On the ever-shaking nine-fold steely bars
Of Stygian Bridge, and in that fearful Cave
They iumble, tumble, rumble, rage and rave.
Then dreadful Hydra, and dire Cerberus
Which on one body, bears (monsterous)
The heads of Dragon, Dog Ounse, Bear, and Bull,
Wolf, Lion, Horse (of strength and stomach full)
Listing his lungs, he hisses, barks, and brays,
He howls, heyels, he bellows, roars, and neighs,
Such a black Sant, such a confused sound
From many-headed bodies does rebound.
Having attained to our calm Hav'n of light,
With swifter course then B^reas nimble flight,
All fly at Man, all at intestine strife,
Who most may torture his detested life.
Here first coms DEARTH* the lively form of Death, 1 Description of Famine with
her train.

Still vawning wide, with loathsome stinking breath,
With hollow eyes, with meager cheeks and chin,
With sharp lean bones pearcing her sable skin:
Her empty bowels may be plainly spied
Clean through the wrinkles of her withered hide:
She has no belly, but the bellies seat,
Her knees and knuckles swelling hugely great:
Insatiate Orque, that even at one repast,
Almost all creatures in the World would waste;
Whose greedy gorge dish after dish does draw,
Seeks meat in meat. For, still her monstrous maw
Voyds in devouring, and sometimes she eats
Her own deer Babes for lack of other meats:
Nay more, sometimes (O strangest gluttony!)
She eats her self, her self to satisfy;
Lessening her self, her self so to in large:
And cruel thus she does our Grand-sire charge;
And brings besides from Limbo, to assist-her,
Rage, Feeblenes, and Thirst her ruthe-less sister.
Next marches WAR, the mistress of enormity, 2. Of War and her train.

Mother of mischief, monster of Deformity;
Laws, Manners, Arts, she breaks, she mars, she chaces:
Blood, tears, bowrs, towrs; she spils, swils, burns, and razes:
Her brazen feet shake all the Earth a-sunder,
Her mouth's a firebrand, and her voice a thunder,
Her looks are lightnings, every glaunce a flash:
Her fingers guns that all to powder pash.
Fear and Despair, Flight and Disorder, coast
With hasty march, before her murderous host:
As, Burning, Waste, Rape, Wrong, Impiety,
Rage, Ruin, Discord, Horror, Cruelty,
Sack, Sacrilege, Impunity, and Pride,
Are still stern consorts by her babarous side:
And Poverty, Sorrow, and Desolation,
Follow her Armies bloody transmigration.
Here Is the other FVRIE (or my judgment fails) 3. Sickness exactly described
with all her partakers and dependers.

Which furiously man's woeful life assails
With thousand Cannons, sooner felt then seen,
Where weakest strongest; fraught with deadly teen:
Blind, crooked, cripple, maimed, deaf, and mad,
Cold-burning, blistered, melancholik, sad,
Many-nam'd poison, minister of Death,
Which from us creeps, but to us gallopeth:
Foul, trouble-rest, fantastik, greedy-gut,
Blood-sweating, harts-theef, wretched, filthy Slut,
The Child of surfait, and Ayrs-temper vicious,
Perilous known, but unknown most pernicious. Innumerable kinds of diseases.

The inammeld meads, in Summer cannot show
More Grasshoppers above, nor Frogs below,
Then hellish murmurs here about do ring:
Nor never did the pretty little King
Of Hony-people, in a Sunshine day
Lead to the field in orderly array
More busy buzzers, when he casts (witty)
The first foundations of his waxen City;
Then this fierce Monster musters in her train
Fell Soldiers, charging poor mankind amain.
Lo, first a rough and furious Regiment The first Regiment sent to assail the
Head Man's chiefest F^rtresse. Simile.

T'assault the Fort of Adams head is sent,
Reasons best Bulwark and the holy Cell
Wherein the souls most sacred powers dwell.
A King, that ayms his neighbors Crown to win,
Before the brute of open wars begin,
Corrupts his Counsel with rich recompenses;
For, in good Counsel stands the strength of Princes:
So this fell Fury, for forerunners, sends
Many, and Phrenzie to suborn her friends:
Whereof, the one drying, the other over-warming
The feeble brain (the edge of judgment harming)
Within the Soul fantastikly they fain
A confused host of strange Chimeraes vain,
The Karos, the Apoplexy, and Lethargy
As forlorn hope, assault the enemy
On the same side; but yet with weapons others:
For, they freez-vp the brain and all his brothers;
Making a live man like a liue-less carcass,
Save that again he scapeth from the Parcas.
And now the Palsy, and the Cramp dispose
Their angry darts; this binds, and that does lose
Man's feeble sinews, shutting up the way
Whereby before the vital spirits did play.
Then as a man, that fronts in single Fight A similitude of the effects and
endeavors of sickness.

His sudden foe, his ground does trauerse light,
Thrusts, wards, auoids and best advantage spies,
At last (to daze his R^uals sparkling eyes)
He casts his Cloak, and then with coward knife,
In crimsin streams he makes him strain his life:
So SICKNESS, Adam to sub due the better
(Whom thousand Gyues al-ready fastly fetter)
Brings to the field the faith-less Ophthalmy
With scalding blood to blind her enemy,
Darting a thousand thrusts; then she ^^ backed
By the Amafrose and clowdy Cataract:
That, gathering-vp gross humors inwardly
In the Op^^ke sinnew, clean puts out the ey:
This other, caseth in an envious caul
The Crystal humor shining in the ball.
This past: in-steps that insosent insu^ter;
The cruel Quincy, leaping like a Vulture
At Adams throat, his hollow weasand swelling
Among the muscles, through thick bloods congealing;
Leaving him only this Essay, for sign
Of's might and malice to his future-line:
Like Hercules that in his infant-browes
Bore glorious marks of his undaunted prowes,
When with his hands (like steely tongs) he strangled
His spightfull stepdams Dragons spotty-spangled:
A proof, praesaging the tryumphant spoils
That he atchiv'd by his Twelve famous Toyls.
The second Regiment with deadly darts
Assaulteth fiercely Adams vital parts: The second Regiment assaulting the
vital Parts.

Al-ready the Asthma panting, breathing tough,
With humors gross the lifting Lungs does stuff:
The pining Phthisick fills them all with pushes,
Whence a slow spowt of cor'sie matter gushes:
A wasting flame the Peripneumony
Within those spunges kindles cruelly:
The spawling Emptem, ruth-less as the rest,
With ^oul impostumes fills his hollow chest:
The Pl^urisi^ stabs him with desperate foyl
Beneath the ribs, where scalding blood does boil:
Then the In^ubus (by some supposed a spright)
With a thick phlegm does stop his breath by night.
Deer Muse; my guide; clear truth, that naught disse^bles, The Ague with her
train her k^n^s, and cruel effects.

Name me that Champion that with fury trembles,
Who armed with blazing fire brands, fiercely flings
At the Armies heart not at our feeble wings:
Having for Aids* Cough, Headache, Horror, Heat,
Pulse-beating, Burning, cold-distilling-Sweat,
Thirst, Yawning, Yolking, (...), Shiuering, Shaking,
Fantastik R^uing, and continual Akeing,
With many more: O! is not this the Fury
We call the Fever? whose in constant fury
Transforms her ofter then Vertumnus can,
To Tertian, Quartan, and Quotidian,
And Second too; now posting, sometimes pawsing,
Even as the matter, all these changes causing,
Is rommidged with motions slow or quick
In feeble bodies of the Ague-sick.
Ah treacherous beast! needs must I know thee best: Our Poet, having been
himself for many years grieu^usly a fl^ct^d with the Fever, complains
bitterly of her rude violence.

For four whole years thou were my poor hearts guest,
And to this day in body and in mind
I bear the marks of thy despite unkind:
For yet (besides my veins and bones bereft
Of blood and marrow) through thy secret theft
I feel the virtue of my spirit decayed,
The Enthousiasmos of my Muse allaid;
My memory (which has been meetly good)
Is now (^l^s^) much like the fleeting flood;
Whereon no sooner have we drawn a line
But it is canceld, leaving there no sign:
For, the deer fruit of all my care and cost,
My former study (almost all) is lost,
And often in secret have I blushed at
Mine ignorance: like C^ru^ne, who forgot
His proper name; or like George Trapezunce
(Learned in youth, and in his age a Dunce)
And thence it grows, that maugre my endeavor
My numbers still by habit have the Fever;
One-while with heat of heavenly fire-ensoul'd,
Shivering anon, through faint vn-learned cold.
Now, the third Regiment with stormy stours The third Regiment warring on the
natural Powers.

Sets-on the Squadron of our Natural Powers,
Which happily maintain us (duly) both
With needful food and with sufficient growth.
One-while the Boulime, then the Anorexie,
Then the Dog-hunger, or the Bradypepsie,
And childe-great Pica (of prodigious diet)
In straightest stomachs rage with monstrous riot:
Then on the Lyver does the Iaundize fall,
Stopping the passage of the choleric Gall;
Which then, for good blood, scatters all about
Her fiery poison, yellowing all without:
But the sad Dropsy freezeth it extreme,
Till all the blood be turned into fleam.
But see (alas!) by far more cruel foes
The slippery bowels thrilled with thousand throes:
With prisoned winds the wringing Colic pains-them,
The Iliak passion with more rigor strains-them,
Streightens their Conduits, and (detested) makes
Man's mouth (alas!) even like a loathsome Iakes.
Then the Dysentery with fretting pains
Extorteth pure blood from the flayed veins.
On the other side, the Stone and Strangury,
Torturing the Reins with deadly tyranny,
With heat-concreted sand-heaps strangely stop
The burning urine, strained drop by drop:
As opposite, the Diabete, by melting
Our bodies substance in our Urine swelting,
Distills us still, as long as any matter
Unto the spout can send supply of water.
Unto those parts, whereby we leave behind-vs
Types of ourselves in aftertimes to mind-vs,
There fiercely flies defective Venery,
And the foul, feeble, fruit-less Gonorrhe
(An impotence for Generations-deed,
And lust-less Issue of the vncocted seed)
Remorse-less tyrants, that to spoil aspire
Babes vnconceiv'd, in hatred of their Sire.
The fell fourth Regiment, is outward Tumors The fourth Regiment, forrageth,
and defaceth the Body outwardly

Begot of vicious indigested humors:
As Phlegmons, Oedems, S^yrrhes, Erysipiles,
Kings-euils, Cankers, cruel Gouts, and Byles,
Wens, Ring-worms, Tetters: these from every part
With thousand pangs brave the besieged heart:
And their blind fury, wanting force and courage
To hurt the Fort, the champain Country forage.
O tyrants! sheath your feeble swords again: Comparison.

For, Death al-ready thousand-times has slain
Your Enemy; and yet your envious rigor
Does mar his feature and his limbs disfigure,
And with a dull and ragged instrument
His ioints and skin are sawed, and torn, and ren^*
Me thinks most rightly to a coward Crew
Of Wolves and Foxes I resemble you,
Who in a Forest (finding on the sand
The Lion dead, that did alive command
The Land about, whose aw-full Countenance
Melted (far off) their yce-like arrogance)
Mangle the members of their liue-less Prince,
With feeble signs of dastard insolence.
But, with the Griefs that charge our outward places, The Lowsi^ Disease.

Shall I account the loathsome Phthiriasis?
O shameful Plague! O foul infirmity!
Which makes proud Kings, fouler then Beggars be
(That wrapped in rags, and wrung with verminsore,
Their itching backs sit shrugging evermore)
To swarm with Lice, that rubbing cannot rid,
Nor often shift of shirts, and sheets, and bed:
For, as in springs, stream stream pursues fresh,
Swarm follows swarm, and their too fruitful flesh
Breeds her own eaters, and (till Deaths arrest)
Makes of it self an execrable feast.
Nor may we think, that Chance, confusedly Diseases proper to certain Climats
and Nations.

Conducts the Camp of our Third Enemy:
For, of her Soldiers, some (as led by reason)
Can make their choice of Country, Age, and Season.
So Portugal has Phthisiks most of all,
Eber Kings-euils; Arne the Suddain-Fall;
Sauoy the Mumps; West India, Pox; and Nyle
The Leprosy; Plague, the Sardinian-Ile:
After the influence of the Heavens all-ruling, To some ages of man.

Or Countries manners. So, soft Childhood puling
Is wrung with Worms, begot of crudity,
Are apt to Lasks through much humidity:
Through their salt phlegms, their heads are hid with skalls,
Their Limbs with Red-gums and with bloody balls
Of Menstruall humor which (like Must) within
Their bodies boiling, buttoneth all their skin.
To bloody-Flixes, Youth is apt inclining,
Continuall-Feuers, Phrenzies, Phthisik-pyning.
And feeble Age is seldom-times without
Her tedious guests, the Palsy and the Gout,
Coughes, and Catarrhs. And so the Pestilence,
The quartan-Ague with her accidents,
The Flix, the Hip-gout, and the Watrie-Tumour, To the Seasons of the year.

Are bred with us of an Autumnal humor:
The Itch, the Murrein, and Alcides-grief,
In Verse hot-moysture do molest us chief:
The Diarrhoea and the Burning-Feuer,
In Sommer-season do their fell endeavor:
And Pleurisies, the rotten- Coughes, and Rheums,
Wear curled flakes of white celestial plumes:
Like sluggish Soldiers, keeping Garrison
In the ye^e Bulwarks of the Years gelt Son.
Some, seeming most in multitudes delighting, Some Diseases contagious.

Bane one by other, not the first acquiting:
As Measels, Mange, and filthy Leprosy,
The Plague, the Pox, and Phthisik-maladie.
And some (alas!) we leave as in succession,
Unto our Children, for a sad possession: Some haereditary.

Such are Kings-euils, Dropsy, Gout, and Stone,
Blood-boyling Leprie, and Consumption,
The swelling Throat-ache, the Epilepsie sad,
And cruel Rupture, payning too-too bad:
For their hid poisons after-comming harm
Is fast combined unto the Parents sperm.
But O! what arms, what shield shall we oppose, Some not known by their Cause,
but by their Effects only.

What stratagems against those treacherous foes,
Those teacherous griefs, that our frail Art detects
Not by their cause, but by their sole effects?
Such are the fruitful Matrix-suffocation,
The Falling-sicknes, and pale Swouning-passion;
The which, I wot not what strange winds long pause,
I wot not where, I wot not how does cause.
Or who (alas!) can escape the cruel wile Some by sundry Causes increasing and
waxing worse.

Of those fell Pangs that Physics pains beguile?
Which being banished from a body, yet
(Under new names) return again to it:
Or rather, taught the strange Metempsychosis
Of the wise Samian, one it self transposes
Into some worse Grief: either through the kindred
Of the humor vicious, or the member hindered:
Or through their ignorance or avarice
That do profess Apollos exercise.
So, Melancholy turned into Madness;
Into the Palsy, deep-affrighted Sadness;
The Il-habitude into the Dropsy chill:
And Megrim grows to the Comitial-Ill.
In brief, poor Adam in this pitious case Comparison.

Is like a Stag, that long pursued in chase,
Flying for succor to some neighbor wood,
Sinks on the sudden in the yielding mud;
And sticking fast amid the rotten grounds,
Is over-taken by the eger Hounds:
One bites his back, his neck another nips,
One pulls his breast, at's throat another skips,
One tugs his flank, his haunch another tears,
Another lugs him by the bleeding ears;
And last of all, the Wood-man with his knife
Cuts off his head, and so concludes his life.
Or like a lusty Bull, whose horned Crest Another comparison.

Awakes fell Hornets from their drowsy nest,
Who buzzing forth, assail him on each side,
And pitch their valiant bands about his hide;
With fisking train, with forked head, and foot,
Himself, the air, the earth, he beats (to no boot)
Flying (through woods, hills, dales, and roaring rivers)
His place of grief, but not his painful grievers:
And in the end, stitcht full of stings he dies,
Or on the ground as dead (at least) he lies.
For, man is laden with ten thousand languors: An amplification of Man's
miseries, compared with other Cretures, seldomer sick, and sooner healed: and
that by natural Remedies of their own: having also taught Men many practices
of Physike.

All other Creatures, only feel the angors
Of few Diseases: as, the gleaning Quail
Only the Falling-sicknes does assail:
The Turn-about and Murram trouble Cattle,
Madness and Quincie bid the Masty battle.
Yet each of them can naturally find
What Simples cure the sickness of their kind;
Feeling no sooner their disease begin,
But they as soon have ready medicine,
The Ram for Physik takes strong-senting Rue:
The Tortois slow, cold Hemlok does renew:
The Partridge, Blackbird, and rich painted Iay
Have the oily liquor of the sacred Bay.
The sickly Bear, the Mandrak cures again;
And Mountain-Siler helps Goats to yean:
But, we know nothing, till by poaring still
On Books, we get us a Sophistik skill;
A doubtful Art, a Knowledge still unknown:
Which enters but the hoary heads (alone)
Of those, that (broken with unthankful toil)
Seeks others Health, and lose their own the-while:
Or rather those (such are the greatest part)
That waxing rich at others cost and smart,
Grow famous Doctors, purchasing promotions,
While the Churchyards swel with their hurtful potions;
Who (hangman like) fear-less, and shame-less too,
Are prayed and paid for murders that they do.
I speak not of the good, the wise, and learned,
Within whose hearts Gods fear is well discerned:
Who to our bodies can again unite
Our parting souls, ready to take their flight.
For, these I honor as Heavens gifts excelling,
Pillars of Health, Death, and Disease repelling:
The Almighties Agents, Natures Counselors,
And flowring Youths wise faithful Governors.
Yet if their Art can ease some kind of dolors,
They learned it first of Natures silent Scholars:
For, from the Seahorse came Phlehotomies,
From the wild Goat the healing of the eyes;
From Stork, and Hearn, our Glysters laxatiue,
From Bears and Lions, Diets we derive.
Against the only Body all these Champions stout
Striuesom, within: and other some, without.
Or, if that any the all-fair Soul have stricken,
It Is not directly; but, in that they weaken
Her Officers, and spoil the Instruments
Wherewith she works such wondrous presidents.
But, lo! four Captains far more fierce and eger, Of four Diseases of the
Soul, under them co^prehending all the rest.

That on all sides the Spirit it self beleaguer,
Whose Constancy they shake, and soon by treason
Draw the blind Judgment from the rule of Reason:
Opinions issue; which (though self unseen)
Make through the Body their fell motions seen.
Sorrow's first Leader of this furious Crowd,
Muffled all-over in a sable clowd, 1. Sorrow described with her company.

Old before Age, afflicted night and day,
Her face with wrinkles warped every-way,
Creeping in corners, where she sits and vies
Sighs from her heart, tears from her blubbered eyes;
Accompanied with self-consuming Care,
With weeping Pity, Thought, and mad Despair
That bears, about her, burning Coals and Cords,
Asps, Poisons, Pistols, Halters, Knives, and Swords:
Fouls quinting Envy, that self-eating Elf,
Through others leanness fatting up herself,
Ioying in mischief, feeding but with languor
And bitter tears her Toad-like-swelling anger
And Jealousy that never sleeps, for fear
(Suspicions Flea still nibbling in her ear)
That leaves repast and rest, near pined and blind
With seeking what she would be loath to find.
The second Captain is excessive Joy, 2. Joy with her Train.

Who leaps and tickles, finding the Apian-way
Too-streight for her: whose senses all possess
All wished pleasures in all plentiousnes.
She has in conduct false vainglorious Vaunting,
Bold, soothing, shame-less, loud, injurious, taunting:
The winged Giant lofty-staring Pride,
That in the clouds her braving Crest does hide:
And many other, like the empty bubbles
That rise when rain the liquid Crystal troubles.
The Third, is blood-less, hart-less, wit-less Fear, 3. Fear and her Followers.

That like an Asp-tree trembles every where:
She leads bleak Terror, and base clownish Shame,
And drowsy Sloth, that counter faiteth lame,
With Snail-like motion measuring the ground,
Having her arms in willing fetters bound,
Foul, sluggish Drone, barren (but, sin to breed)
Diseased, beggar, starved with wilful need.
And thou Desire, whom nor the firmament, 4. Desire, a most violent Passion,
accompanied with others like: as Ambition, Avarice, Anger, and Foolish Love.

Nor air, nor earth, nor Ocean can content:
Whose-looks are hooks, whose belly's bottom-less,
Whose hands are Gripes to scrape with greediness,
Thou art the Fourth: and under thy Command,
Thou bringst to field a rough unruly Band:
First, secret-burning, mighty-swoln Ambition
Pent in no limits, pleased with no Condition,
Whom Epicurus many Worlds suffice not,
Whose furious thrist of proud aspiring dies not,
Whose hands (transported with fantastike passion)
Bear painted Scepters in imagination:
Then Avarice all-arm'd in hooking Tenters
And clad in Bird-lime; without bridge she venters
Through fell Charybdis, and false Syrtes Nesse;
The more her wealth, the more her wretchedness:
Cruel, respect-less, friend-less, faith-less Elf,
That hurts her neighbor, but much more her self:
Whose foul base fingers in each dunghill poar
(Like Tantalus) starved in the midst of store:
Not what she has, but what she wants she counts:
A wel-wingd Bird that never lofty mounts.
Then, boiling Wrath, stern, cruel, swift, and rash,
That like a Boar her teeth does grind and gnash:
Whose hair does stare like bristled Porcupine;
Who som-times rowles her ghastly-glowing eyn,
And som-time fixtly on the ground does glaunce,
Now bleak then bloody in her Countenance;
Rauing and railing with a hideous sound,
Clapping her hands, stamping against the ground;
Bearing B^cconi, fire and sword to slay,
And murder all that her for pity pray;
Baning her self, to bane her Enemy;
Disdaining Death, provided others die:
Like falling Towrs o'r-turned by the wind,
That break themselves on that they vnder-grinde.
And then that Tyrant, all-controuling Love:
( Whom here to paint does little me behooue,
After so many rare Apelleses
As in this Age our Albion nourishes)
And to be short, thou do to battle bring
As many Soldiers against the Creatures King,
(Yet not his own) as in this life, Mankind
True very Goods, or seeming- Goods does find.
Now, if (but like the Lightning in the sky)
These sudden Passions past but swiftly by, The horrible effects of the
Passions of the soul, far more dangerous then the diseases of the body.

The fear were less: but, O! too-oft they leave
Keen stings behind in Souls that they deceive.
From this foul Fountain, all these poisons rise,
Rapes, Treasons, Murders, Incests, Sodomies,
Blaspheming, Bibbing, Theeuing, False-contracting
Church-chaffering, Cheating, Bribing, and Exacting.
Alas! how these (far-worse then death) Diseases
Exceed each Sickness that our body seises;
Which makes us open war, and by his spite
Gives to the Patient many a holsom light,
Now by the color, or the Pulles beating,
Or by some Fit, some sharper dolor threatening;
Whereby the Leach neer-ghessing at our grief,
Not seldom finds sure means for our relief.
But, for these Ills reign in our Intellect
(Which only, them both can and ought detect)
They rest unknown, or rather self-conceal'd;
And soule-sick Patients care not to be healed.
Besides, we plainly call the Fever, Fever:
The Dropsy, Dropsy: ouer-gilding never,
With guile-full flourish of a fained phraze,
The cruel Languors that our bodies craze:
Whereas, our fond self-soothing Soul, thus sick,
Rubs her own sore; with glozing Rhetorik
Cloaking her vice: and makes the blinded Blain
Not fear the touch of Reasons Cautere vain.
And sure, if ever filthy Vice did iet The miserable corruption of our Times,
worse then all former Ages.

In sacred Virtues spot-less mantle neat,
It Is in our days, more hateful and vn-hallow'd,
Then when the World the Waters wholly swallowed.
I Will spare to speak of foulest Sins, that spot
The infamous beds of men of mighty lot;
Least I the Saints chaste tender ears offend,
And seem them more to teach, then reprehend.
Who bear upon their French-sick backs about, All riotous Prodigality
disguised with the name of Liberality.

Farms, Castles, Fees, in golden shreads cut-out;
Whose lavish hand, at one Primero-rest,
One Mask, one Turney, or one pampering Feast,
Sends treasures, scrap't by the Usury and Care
Of miser Parents; Liberal counted are.
Who, with a maiden voice, and mincing pase,
Quaint looks, curled locks, perfumes, and painted face, Effeminate curiofitie
and luxuvious Pride, miscalled Cleanlines.

Base coward-hart, and wanton soft array,
Their manhood only by their Beard bewray,
Are Cleanly called. Who like Lust-greedy Goats, Insatiate lust and Beast like
Loosenes, surnamed Love.

Brothel from bed to bed; whose Siren-notes
Inchaunt chaste Susans, and like hungry Kite
Fly at all game, they Lovers are behight.
Who, by false bargains, and unlawful measures Extreme Extortion, counted
Thrist.

Robbing the World, have he aped kingly treasures:
Who cheat the simple; lend for fifty fifty,
Hundred for hundred, are esteemed Thrifty. Blasphemous Quarrels, brauest
Courage.

Who always murder and revenge affect,
Who feed on blood, who never do respect
State, Sex, or Age: but, in all humane lives
In cold blood, bathe their paricidiall knives;
Are styled Valiant. Grant, good Lord, our Land Inhuman Murder highest Manhood.

May want such valor whose self-cruell hand
Fights for our foes, our proper lifeblood spils,
Our Cities sacks, and our own Kindred kills.
Lord, let the Lance, the Gun, the Sword, and Shield,
Beturn'd to tools to furrow-vp the field,
And let us see the Spyders busy task
Wov'n in the belly of the plumed Cask.
But if (brave Lands-men) your war-thirst be such,
If in your breasts sad Enyon boil so much,
What holds you here? alas! what hope of crowns?
Our fields are flocks-less, treasure-less our Towns.
Go then, nay run, renowned Martialists,
Re-found French-Greece, in now- Natolian lists;
Hy, hy to Flanders; free with conquering stroke
Your Belgian brethren from the Iberians yoke:
To Portingal; people Galizian-Spain,
And grave your names on Lysbon's gates again.
FINIS.
THE HANDI-CRAFTS. THE IIII. PART OF THE I. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Praise of Peace, the miserable states
Of Edens Exiles: their vn-curious Cates,
Their simple habit, silly habitation:
They find out Fire. Their foremost Propagation:
Their Childrens trades, their offerings; envious Cain
His (better) Brother does unkindly brain:
With inward horror hurried up and down,
He breaks a Horse, he builds a homely Town:
Iron's invented, and sweet Instruments:
Adam fore-tells of After-Worlds events.
Heaven's sacred Imp, fair Goddess that renew'st The Poet here welcometh peace
which (after long absence) seems about this time to have returned into France.
The Benefits she brings with Her.

The old golden Age, and brightly now re-blew'st
Our cloudy sky, making our fields to smile:
Hope of the virtuous, horror of the vile:
Virgin, unseen in France this many a year,
O blessed Peace! we bid thee welcome here.
Lo, at thy presence, how who late were pressed
To spur their Steeds, and couch their staves in rest
For fierce encounter; cast away their spears,
And rapt with joy, them enter-bathe with tears.
Lo, how our Marchant-vessels to and fro
Freely about our trade-full Waters go:
How the grave Senate with iust-gentle rigor,
Resumes his Robe; the Laws their ancient vigor:
Lo, how Obliuions Seas our strifes do drown:
How walls are built that war had thundered down:
Lo, how the Shops with busy Crafts-men swarm;
How Sheep and Cattle cover every Farm:
Behold the Bon-fires waving to the skies:
Hark, hark the cheerful and re-chaunting cries
Of old and young; singing this joyful Dittie,
Io, rejoice, rejoice through Town and City, Thanksgiving to God for peace

Let all our air, re-eccho with the praises
Of the everlasting glorious God, who raises
Our ruined State: who gives us a good
We sought not for (or rather, we with-stood)
So that, to hear and see these consequences
Of wonders strange, we scarce believe our senses.
O! let the King, let Mounsieur and the Sover'n
That does Nauarras Spayn-wrongd Scepter govern, Grateful remembrance of the
means thereof.

Be all, by all, their Countries Fathers cleapt:
O! let the honor of their names be kept,
And on brass leaves ingrav'n eternally
In the bright Temple of fair Memory,
For having quenched, so soon, so many fires,
Disarmed our arms, appeased the heavenly ires,
Calmed the pale horror of intestin hates,
And damned-vp the bi-front Fathers gates.
Much more, let us (deer, World-diuided Land)
Extol the mercies of Heavens mighty hand, An imitation thereof, by the
Translatour, in honor of our late gracious Soverain Elizabeth: in whose happy
Reign, God has given this Kingdom so long peace and rich prosperity.

That (while the World, Wars bloody rage has rent)
To us so long, so happy Peace has lent.
(Maugre the malice of the Italian Priest,
And Indian Pluto (prop of Antichrist;
Whose Host, like Pharao's threatening Israel,
Our gaping Seas have swallowed quick to hell)
Making our I Will a holy Safe-Retreat
For Saints exiled in persecutions heat.
Much more, let us with true-heart-tuned breath,
Record the Praises of ELIZABETH
(Our martial Pallas and our mild Astraea,
Of grace and wisdom the divine Idea)
Whose prudent Rule, with rich religious Rest,
VVel-neer nine Lustres has this Kingdom blessed.
O! pray we him that from home-plotted dangers
And bloody threats of proud ambitious Strangers,
So many years has so securely kept her,
In just possession of this flowring Scepter;
That (to his glory and his deer Sonns honor)
All happy length of life may wait upon her:
That we her Subjects, whom he blesses by-her,
Psalming his praise, may sound the same the higher.
But, waiting (Lord) in some more learned Lays,
To sing thy glory, and my Soueraigns praise;
I sing the young Worlds Cradle, as a Proem
Unto so rare and so Divine a Poem.
WHO, FVL OF wealth and honors blandishment,
Among great Lords his younger years has spent; An Elegant comparison
representing the lamentable Condition of Adam and Eve driven out of Paradise.

And quaffing deeply of the Court-delights,
Used naught but Tilts, Turneis, and Masks, and Sights:
If in his age, his Princes angry doom
With deep disgrace drive him to live at home
In homely Cottage, where continually
The bitter smoke exhales abundantly
From his before-vn-sorrow-drained brain:
The brackish vapors of a silver rain:
Where Vsher-less, both day and night, the North,
South, East, and West winds, enter and go forth:
Where round-about, the lowe-rooft broken walls
(In stead of Arras) hang with Spiders cauls:
Where all at once he reaches, as he stands,
With brows the roof, both walls with both his hands:
He weeps and sighs, and (shunning comforts ay)
Wishes pale Death a thousand times a day:
And, yet at length falling to work, is glad
To bite a brown crust that the Mouse has had,
And in a Dish (instead of Plate or Glass)
Sups Oaten drink in stead of Hypocras.
So (or much like) our rebel Elders, driven
For ay from Eden (Earthly type of Heaven)
Ly languishing near Tigris grassie side,
With nummed limbs, and spirits stupefied.
But powrfull NEED (Arts ancient Dame and Keeper, The first Manner of life,

The early watch-clock of the sloathfull sleeper)
Among the Mountains makes them seek their living,
And foaming Rivers, through the champain driving:
For yet the Trees with thousand fruits y-fraught
In formal Checkers were not fairly brought:
The Pear and Apple lived Dwarf-like there,
With Oaks and Ashes shadowed euery-where:
And yet (al as!) their meanest simple cheer
Our wretched Parents bought full hard and deer:
To get a Plum, sometimes poor Adam rushes
With thousand wounds among a thousand bushes.
If they desire a Medlar for their food,
They must go seek it through a fearful wood;
Or a brown Mulbery, then the ragged Bramble
With thousand scratches does their skin be-scramble.
Wherefore (as yet) more led by the appetite Great simplicity in their kind of
life.

Of the hungry belly then the tastes delight,
Living from hand to mouth, soon satisfied,
To earn their supper, the after noon they plied,
Vn-stor'd of dinner till the morrow-day;
Pleased with an Apple, or some lesser pray.
Then, taught by Ver (richer in flowrs then fruit)
And hoary Winter, of both destitute,
Nuts, Filberds, Almonds, wisely up they hoord,
The best provisions that the woods afford.
Touching their garments: for the shining wool Their Clothing*

Whence the roab-spinning precious Worms are full,
For gold and silver wov'n in drapery,
For Cloth dipped double in the scarlet Die,
For Gemms brightlustre, with excessive cost
On rich embroideries by rare Art embost:
Sometimes they do the far-spred Gourd vnleave,
Sometime the Fig Tree of his branch bereave:
Sometimes the Plane, sometimes the Vine they shear,
Choosing their fairest tresses here and there:
And with their sundry locks, thorn'd each to other,
Their tender limbs they hide from Cynthias Brother.
Sometimes the Iuie's climing stems they strip,
Which lovingly his lively prop does clip:
And with green lace, in artificial order,
The wrinkled bark of the Acorn-Tree does border,
And with his arms the Oaks slender twigs entwining.
A many branches in one tissue joining,
Frames a loose Iacquet, whose light nimble quaking,
Wagg'd by the winds, is like the wanton shaking
Of golden spangles that in stately pride
Dance on the tresses of a noble Bride.
But, while that Adam (waxen diligent) Their Winter Suits.

Wearies his limbs for mutual nourishment:
While craggy Mountains, Rocks, and thorny Plains,
And bristly Woods be witness of his pains:
Eve, walking forth about the Forests, gathers
Speights, Parrots, Peacocks, Estrich scattered feathers,
And then with wax the smaller plumes she sears,
And sowes the greater with a white horse hairs,
(For they as yet did serve her in the steed
Of Hemp, and Towe, and Flax, and Silk, and Thread)
And thereof makes a medly coatso rare
That it resembles Nature's Mantle fair,
When in the Sun, in pomp all glistering,
She seems with smiles to woo the gawdie Spring.
When (by stolen moments) this she had contrived,
Leaping for joy, her cheerful looks revived,
Sh' admires her cunning; and incontinent
'Sayes on herself her manly ornament;
And then through path-less paths she runs apace,
To meet her husband coming from the Chase.
Sweetheart (quoth she, and then she kisseth him)
My Love, my Life, my Bliss, my Joy, my Gemm,
My souls deer Soul, take in good part (I pree-thee)
This pretty Present that I gladly giue-thee.
Thanks my deer All (quoth Adam then) for this,
And with three kisses he requites her kiss.
Then on he puts his painted garment new,
And Peacock-like himself does often view,
Looks on his shadow, and in proud amaze
Admires the hand that had the Art to cause Eues industry in making a Gar meant
for her Husband.

So many several parts to meet in one,
To fashion thus the quaint Mandilion.
But, when the Winters keener breath began
To crystallize the Baltike Ocean,
To glaze the Lakes, and bridle-vp the Floods,
And perriwig with wool the bald-pate Woods;
Our Grand-sire, shrinking, 'gan to shake and shiver,
His teeth to chatter, and his beard to quiver.
Spying therefore a flock of Muttons coming
(Whose freez-clad bodies feel not Winters numming)
He takes the fairest, and he knocks it down:
Then by good hap, finding upon the Down
A sharp great fish-bone (which long time before
The roaring Flood had cast upon the shore)
He cuts the throat, flayes it, and spreads the fell,
Then dries it, pares it, and he scrapes it well,
Then clothes his wife therewith; and of such Hides
Slops, Hats, and Doublets for himself prouides.
A vaulted Rock, a hollow Tree, a Cave, Their Lodging and first building.

Were the first buildings that them shelter gave:
But, finding the one to be too-moist a hold,
The other too-narrow, the other ouer-cold;
Like Carpenters, within a Wood they choose
Sixteen fair Trees that never leaves do loose,
Whose equal front in quadran form prospected,
As if of purpose Nature them erected:
Their shady boughs first bow they tenderly,
Then enterbraid, and bind them curiously;
That one would think that had this Arbor seen,
'T had been true seeling painted-ouer green.
After this trial, better yet to fense
Their tender flesh from the ayry violence, A building somewhat more exact*

Upon the top of their fit-forked stems,
They lay a-crosse bare Oaken boughs for beams
(Such as dispersed in the Woods they find,
Torn-off in tempests by the stormy wind)
Then these again with leauy boughs they load,
So covering close their sorry cold abode,
And then they ply from the eau^s unto the ground,
With mud-mixt Reed to wall their Mansion round
All save a hole to the Eastward situate,
Where straight they clap a hurdle for a gate
(Instead of hinges hanged on a With)
Which with a slight both shuts and opens.
Yet fire they lackt: but lo, the winds, that whistle The invention of Fire^

Amid the Groves, so often the Laurel iustle
Against the Mulbery, that their angry claps
Do kindle fire, that burns the neighbor Cops.
When Adam saw a ruddy vapor rise
In glowing streams; astund with fear he flies,
It follows him, until a naked Plain
The greedy fury of the flame restrain:
Then back he turns, and coming somewhat nigher
The kindled shrubs, perceiving that the fire
Dries his dank Clothes, his Color does refresh,
And vnbenums his sinews and his flesh;
By the vnburntend a good big brand he takes,
And hying home, a fire he quickly makes,
And still maintains it, till the starry Twins
Celestial breath another fire begins.
But, Winter being comn again it grieved him,
TO have lost so fondly what so much relieved him,
Trying a thousand ways, since now no more
The iustling Trees his damage would restore.
While (elsewhere musing) one day he sat down How the first Man invented Fire
for the use of himself and his Posterity.

Upon a steep Rocks craggy-forked crown,
A foaming beast come toward him he spies,
Within whose head stood burning coals for eyes;
Then suddenly with boisterous arm he throws
A knobbie flint that hummeth as it goes;
Hence flies the beast, the il-aimed flint-shaft grounding
Against the Rock, and on it oftre bounding,
Shivers to cinders, whence there issued
Small sparks of fire no sooner born then dead.
This happy chance made Adam leap for glee,
And quickly calling his cold company,
In his left hand a shining flint he locks,
Which with another in his right he knocks
So up and down, that from the coldest stone
At every stroke small fiery sparkles shone.
Then with the dry leaves of a withered Bay
The which together handsomely they lay,
They take the falling fire, which like a Sun
Shines clear and smoak-less in the leaf begun.
Eve, kneeling down, with hand her head sustaining,
And on the low ground with her elbowe leaning,
Blows with her mouth: and with her gentle blowing
Stirs up the heat, that from the dry leaves glowing,
Kindles the Reed, and then that hollow kix
First fires the small, and they the greater sticks. Beginning of Families.

And now, Mankind with fruitful Race began
A little corner of the World to man:
First Cain is born, to tillage all addicted; The several Occupations of Abel
and Cain.

Then Abel, most to keeping flocks affected.
Abel, desirous still at hand to keep
His Milk and Cheese, vnwildes the gentle Sheep
To make a Flock; that when it tame became
For guard and guide should have a Dog and Ram.
Cain more ambitious, gives but little ease
To's boisterous limbs: and seeing that the Pease,
And other Pulse, Beans, Lentils, Lupins, Rice,
Burnt in the Copses, as not held in price,
Some grains he gathers: and with busy toil,
Apart he sowes them in a better soil,
Which first he rids of stones, and thorns, and weeds,
Then buries there his dying-liuing seeds.
By the next Harvest, finding that his pain
On this small plot was not in grately-vain;
To break more ground, that bigger Crop may bring
Without so often weary laboring,
He tames a Heifer, and on either side,
On either horn a threefold twist he ti'd
Of Osiar twigs, and for a Plough he got
The horn or Tooth of some Rhinocerot.
Now, the one in Cattle, the other rich in grain,
On two steep Mountains build they Altars twain; Their sacrifice.

Where (humbly-sacred) the one with zealous cry
Cleaues bright Olympus starry Canopy:
With fained lips, the other low'd-resounded
Hart-wanting Hymns, on self-deseruing founded:
Each on his Altar offreth to the Lord
The best that eithers flocks, or fields afford.
Rein-searching God, thought-sounding Judge, that tries God regards Abell and
his Sacrifice; and rejects Cain and his: whereas Cain enuieth, and finally
kills his Brother; whose blood God reuengeth.

The will and heart more then the work and guise,
Accepts good Abels gift: but hates the other
Profane oblation of his furious Brother;
Who feeling, deep the effects of Gods displeasure,
Raues, frets, and fumes, and murmurs out of measure.
What boots it ( Cain) O wretch! what boots it thee
TO have opened first the fruitful womb (quoth he)
Of the first mother; and first born, the rather
TO have honored Adam first, with name of Father?
Unfortunate, what boots thee to be wealthy,
Wise, active, valiant, strongly-limb'd, and healthy,
If this weak Girl-boy, in man's shape disguised,
To Heaven and Earth be dear, and thou despised?
What boots it thee, for others night and day,
In painful toil to wear thy self away:
And (more for others then thine own relief)
To have devised of all Arts the chief;
If this dull Infant, of thy labor nursed
Shall reap the glory of thy deeds (accursed)?
Nay, rather quickly rid thee of the fool,
Down with his climbing hill, and timely cool
This kindling flame: and, that none ouer-crowe thee,
Re-seise the right that Birth and Virtue owe-thee.
Ay in his mind this counsel he reuolues,
And hundred times to act it he resolves,
And yet as often relents; stopped worthily
By the pains horror, and sins tyranny.
But, one day drawing with dissembled love
His harm-less brother far into a Grove,
Upon the verdure of whose virgin-boughs
Bird had not pearcht, nor never beast did brouz;
With both his hands he takes a stone so huge,
That in our age three men could hardly bouge,
And just upon his tender brothers crown,
With all his might he cruel casts it down.
The murdered face lies printed in the mud,
And loud for vengeance cries the martyred blood,
The battered brains fly in the murd'rers face.
The Sun, to shun this Tragike sight, a-pace
Turns back his Teem: the amazed Parrs^ide
Does all the Furies scourging whips abide:
External terrors, and the internal Worm
A thousand kinds of living deaths do form:
All day he hides him, wanders all the night,
Flies his own friends, of his own shade affright,
Scarr'd with a leaf, and starting at a Sparrow,
And all the World seems for his fear too-narrow. By reason of the multiplying
of Mankind, the Children of Adam begin to build houses for their commodity and
retreat.

But for his Children, born by three and three,
Produce him Nephews, that still multiply
With new increase; who yer their age be rise
Become great-Grand-sires in their Grand-sires life:
Staying at length, he chose him out a dwelling,
For woods and floods, and air, and soil excelling.
One fels down Firs, another of the same
With crossed poles a little Lodge does frame:
Another mounds it with dry walls about,
And leaves a breach for passage in and out:
With Turf and Furse: some others yet more gross
Their homely Sties in stead of walls enclose:
Some (like the Swallow) mud and hay do mix,
And that about their silly Cotes they fix:
Some make their Roofs with fearn, or reeds, or rushes,
And some with hides, with oase, with boughs, and bushes.
He, that still fearful, seeks still defense, Cain thinking to find sum
quiet for the tempests of his conscience, begins to fortify, and builds a
Town.

Shortly this Hamlet to a Town augments.
For, with keen Coultar having bounded (witty)
The four-fac't Rampire of his simple City;
With stones soon gathered on the neighbor strand,
And clayie mortar ready there at hand.
Well trod and tempered, he immures his Fort,
A stately Towr erecting on the Port:
Which awes his own, and threats his enemies;
Securing som-what his pale tyrannies.
O Tigre! think thou (hellish fratricide)
Because with stone-heaps thou art fortified,
Prince of some Peasants trained in thy tillage,
And silly Kingling of a simple Village;
Think thou to escape the storm of vengeance dread,
That hangs already o'r thy hateful head?
No: were thou (wretch) encamped at thy will
On strongest top of any steepest Hill:
Were thou immured in triple brazen Wall,
Having for aid all Creatures in this All:
If skin and heart, of steel and iron were,
Thy pain thou could not, less avoid thy fear
Which chils thy bones, and runs through all thy vains,
Racking thy soul with twenty thousand pains.
Kain (as they say) by this deep fear disturbed, Supposes to secure himself
by the strength and swiftnes of a Horse, which he begins to tame.

Then first of all the untamed Courser curbed,
That while about on others feet he run
With dusty speed, he might his Deaths-man shun.
Among a hundred brave, light, lusty, Horses
(With curious ey, marking their comely forces)
He chooses one for his industrious proof, Description of a gallant Horse.

With round, high, hollow, smooth, brown, ietty hoof,
With Pasterns short, upright (but yet in mean);
Dry sinnewie shanks; strong, flesh-less knees, and lean;
With Hart-like legs, broad breast, and large behind,
With body large, smooth flanks, and double-chin'd:
A crested neck bowd like a half-bent Bow,
Whereon along, thin, curled mane does flow;
A firm full tail, touching the lowely ground
With dock between two fair fat buttocks drowned;
A pricked ear, that rests as little space,
As his light foot; a lean, bare, bony, face,
Thin joule, and head but of a middling size,
Full, liuely-flaming, quickly rolling eyes,
Great foaming mouth, hot-fuming nosthrill wide,
Of Chest-nut hai^, his forehead starryfi'd,
Three milky feet, a feather on his breast,
Whom seav'n-years-old at the next grass he ghest.
This goodly Iennet gently first he wins, The manner how to back, to break, and
make a good Horse.

And then to back him actiuely begins,
Steady and straight he sits, turning his sight
Still to the forepart of his Palfrey light.
The chafed Horse, such thrall ill-suffering,
Begins to snuff, and snort, and leap, and fling;
And flying swift, his fearful Rider makes,
Like some unskillful Lad, that vnder-takes
To hold some ships helm, while the headlong Tide Simile.

Carries away the Vessel and her Guide;
Who near devoured in the iaws of Death,
Pale, fearful, shivering, faint, and out of breath,
A thousand times (with Heaven erected eyes)
Repents him of so bold an enterprise.
But, sitting fast, less hurt then feared; Cain
Boldness himself and his brave Beast again:
Brings him to pase, from pasing to the trot,
From trot to gallop: after runs him hot
In full career: and at his courage smiles;
And sitting still, to run so many miles. The ready speed of a swift Horse
presented to the Reader, in a pleasant and lively description*

His pase is fair and free; his trot as light
As Tigres course, as Swallows nimble flight:
And his brave gallop seems as swift to go
As Biscan Darts, or shafts from Russian bow:
But, roaring Canon, from his smoking throat,
Never so speedy spews the thundering shot
(That in an Army mowes whole squadrons down,
And batters Bulwarks of a summoned Town)
As this light Horse scuds, if he do but feel
His bridle slack, and in his side the heel:
Shunning himself, his sinewie strength he stretches;
Flying the earth, the flying air he catches,
Born whirl-wind-like: he makes the trampled ground
Shrink under him, and shake with doubling sound:
And when the sight no more pursue him may,
In fieldy clouds he vanishes away.
The wise-waxt Rider, not esteeming best
To take too-much now of his lusty Beast, Good Horsemanship.

Restrains his fury: then with learned wand
The triple Coruet makes him understand:
With skillful voice he gently cheers his pride:
And on his neck his flattering palm does slide:
He stops him steady still, new breath to take,
And in the same path brings him softly back.
But the angry Steed, rising and reaning proudly,
Striking the stones, stamping and neighing loudly, The Countenance Pride, and
Port of a courageous Horse, when he is chased.

Calls for the Combat, plunges, leaps, and praunces,
Befoams the path, with sparkling eyes he glaunces,
Champs on his burnisht bit, and gloriously
His nimble fetlocks lifts belly-high,
All side long iaunts, on either side he iustles,
And's wauing Crest courageously he bristles,
Making the gazers glad on every side
To give more room unto his portly Pride.
Cain gently strokes him, and now sure in seat, The Dexterity of a skillful
Rider.

Ambitiously seeks still some fresher feat
To be more famous; one while trots the Ring,
Another while he does him back-ward bring,
Then of all four he makes him lightly bound;
And to each hand to manage rightly round;
To stoop, to stop, to caper, and to swim,
To dance, to leap, to hold-vp any lim:
And all, so don, with time-grace-ordered skill,
As both had but one body and one will.
The one for his Art no little glory gains,
The other through practice by degrees attains
Grace in his gallop, in his pase agility,
Lightness of head, and in his stop facility,
Strength in his leap, and steadfast managings,
Aptnes in all, and in his course new wings.
The use of Horses thus discovered,
Each to his work more cheerly fetteled,
Each plyes his trade, and trauails for his age,
Following the paths of painful Tuball sage.
While through a Forest Tuball (with his Yew The invention of yro^.

And ready quiver) did a Bore pursue,
A burning Mountain from his fiery vain,
An iron River rowles along the Plain:
The witty Hunts-man, musing, thither hies,
And of the wonder deeply began devise.
And first perceiving that this scalding mettle,
Becoming cold, in any shape would settle,
And grow so hard that with his sharpened side,
The firmest substance it would soon divide;
He casts a hundred plots, and yer he parts
He moulds the groundwork of a hundred Arts:
Like as a Hound, that (following loose, behind Comparison.

His pensive Master) of a Hare does find;
Leaves whom he loves, upon the sent does ply,
Figs to and fro, and falls in cheerful Cry,
And with vp-lifted head, and nosthrill wide
Winding his game, snuffs-yp the wind, his guide:
A hundred ways he measures Vale and Hill:
Ears, eyes, nor nose, nor foot, nor tail are still,
Till in her hot Form he have found the pray
That he so long has sought for every way.
For, now the way to thousand works reveald,
Which long shall live maugre the rage of Eld: Caesting of the first
Instruments of Iron.

In two square creases of unequal sises
To turn two iron streamlings he devises;
Cold, takes them thence: then off the dross he rakes,
And this a Hammer, that an Anuill makes;
And adding tongs to these two instruments,
He stores his house with iron implements:
As forks, rakes, hatchets, plough-shares, coultars, staples,
Boltes, hindges, hooks, nails, whittles, spokes, and grapples;
And grow'n more cunning, hollow things he forms,
He hatcheth Files, and winding Vices wormeth,
He shapeth Sheers, and then a Saw indents,
Then beats a Blade, and then a Lock invents.
Happy device! we might as well want all The excellent uses and commodities of
Iron.

The Elements, as this hard mineral.
This, to the Plough-man, for great uses serves:
This, for the Builder, Wood and Marble carues:
This arms our bodies against adverse force:
This clothes our backs: this rules the unruly Horse:
This makes us dry-shod dance in Neptunes Hall:
This brightens gold: this conquers self and all;
Fifth Element, of Instruments the haft,
The Tool of Tools, and hand of Handy-Craft.
While (compast round with smoking Cyclops rude, Invention of Music.

Half-naked Bronts, and Sterops swarthy-hewd,
All well-neer weary) sweating Tubal stands,
Hastening the hot work in their sounding hands,
No time lost Iubal: the vn-full Harmony
Of vn-even Hammers, beating diversely,
Wakens the tunes that his sweet numbery soul
Yer birth (some think) learned of the warbling Pole.
Thereon he harps, and ponders in his mindo,
And glad and fain some Instrument would find Invention of the Lute and other
Instruments.

That in accord those discords might renew,
And the Iron Anuils rattling sound ensew,
And iterate the beating Hammers noise
In milder notes, and with a sweeter voice.
It chaunc't, that passing by a Pond, he found
An open Tortoise lying on the ground,
Within the which there nothing else remained
Save three dry sinews on the shell stiff-strained:
This empty house Iubal does gladly bear,
Strikes on those strings, and lends attentive ear;
And by this mould frams the melodious Lute,
That makes woods ^arken, and the winds be mute,
The Hills to dance, the Heavens to retro-grade,
Lions be tame, and tempests quickly vade.
His Art, still waxing, sweetly marries
His quavering fingers to his warbling breath:
More little tongues to's charm-care Lute he brings,
More Instruments he makes: no Echo rings
'Mid rocky concaves of the babbling vales,
And bubbling Rivers rolled with gentle gales,
But wyery Cymbals, Rebecks sinews twined,
Sweet Virginals, and Cornets curled wind.
But Adam guides, through paths but seldom gone, While Cain and his Children
are busy for the World, Adam and his other Sons exercise themselves in Piety
and justice, and in searching the goodly secrets of Nature.

His other Sons to Virtues sacred throne:
And chiefly Seth (set in good Abels place)
Staff of his age, and glory of his race:
Him he instructs in the ways of Verity,
To worship God in spirit and sincerity:
To honor Parents with a reverentaw,
To train his children in religious law:
To love his friends, his Country to defend,
And helpful hands to all mankind to lend:
To know Heavens course, and how their constant Swaies
Divide the year in months, the months in days:
What star brings Winter, what is Summers guide;
What sign foul weather, what does fair betide;
What creature's kind, and what is cursed to us:
What plant is holesom, and what venomous.
No sooner he his lessons can commence,
But Seth has hit the White of his intents,
Draws rule from rule, and of his short collations
In a short time a perfect Art he fashions.
The more he knows the more he craves; as fuel
Kills not a fire, but kindles it more cruel.
While on a day by a clear Brook they travel, Seth questions his Father
concerning the state of the World, from the Beginning to the End.

Whose gurgling streams frizadoed on the gravel,
He thus bespake: If that I did not see
The zeal (deer Father) that you bear to me,
How still you watch me with your careful eyn,
How still your voice with prudent discipline
My Prentize ear does often reverberate;
I should misdoubt to seem importunate:
And should content me to have learned, how
The Lord the Heavens about this All did bow;
What things have hot, and what have cold effect;
And how my life and manners to direct.
But your mild Love my studious heart advances
To ask you further of the various chances
Of future times: what offspring spreading wide
Shall fill this World; What shall the World betide,
How long to last: What Magistrates, what Kings
With Justice Mace shall govern mortal things?
Son (quoth the Sire) our thoughts internal ey, Adams answer.

Things past and present may by means descry;
But not the future, if by special grace
It read it not in the One-Trines glorious face.
Thou then, that (only) things to com do know,
Not by Heavens course, nor guess of things below,
Nor coupled points, nor flight of fatal Birds,
Nor trembling tripes of sacrificed Herds,
But by a clear and certain pre-science
As Seer and Agent of all accidents,
With whom at once the threefold times do fly,
And but a moment lasts Eternity;
O God, behold me, that I may behold
Thy crystal face: O Sun, reflect thy gold
On my pale Moon; that now my veiled eyes
Earth-ward eclipst, may shine unto the skies.
Ravish me Lord, O (my souls life) reviue
My spirit a-space, that I may see (a-lyue)
Heaven yer I die: and make me now (good Lord)
The Echo of thy all-cel estiall Word. The power of Gods spirit in his
Prophets: and the difference between such* and the distracted frantike
Ministers of Satan.

With sacred fury suddenly he glowes,
Not like the Bedlam Bacchanalian froes,
Who, dancing, foaming, rolling furious-wise
Under their twinkling lids their torch-like eyes,
With ghastly voice, with visage grizly grim;
Tossed by the Fiend that fire cely tortures them,
Bleaking and blushing, painting, shreeking, swouning,
With wrath-les wounds their sense-les members wounding:
But as the Imperial, Airy peoples Prince
With stately pinions soaring hy from hence,
Cleaues through the clouds, and brauely-bold does think
With his firm eye to make the Suns eye wink:
So Adam, mounted on the burning wings
Of a Seraphick love, leaves earthly things,
Feeds on sweet Ether, cleaues the starry spears,
And on Gods face his eyes he fixtly bears:
His brows seem brandisht with a Sun-like fire,
And his purged body seems a cubit higher.
Then thus began he: The ever-trembling field Adam declares to his Son, in how
many Daiet the World was created.

Of scaly folk, the Arches starry seeld,
Where the All-Creator has disposed well
The Sun and Moon by turns for Sentinel;
The clear cloud-bounding Air (the Camp assigned
Where angry Auster and the rough North-winde
Meeting in battle, throw down to the soil
The Woods that midling stand to part the broyl);
The Diapry Mansions where mankind does trade,
Were built in Six Days: and the Seav'nth was made
The sacred Sabbath. So, Sea, Earth, and Air,
And azure-gilded Heavens Pavilions fair,
Shall stand Six Days, but longer diversely
Then the days bounded by the Worlds bright eye.
The First begins with me: the Seconds morn How many Ages it shall endure.

Is the first Ship-wright, who does first adorn
The hills with Vines: that Shepherd is the Third, 1. Adam.

That after God through strange Lands leads his Heard, 2. Noah.

And (past man's reason) crediting Gods word, 3. Abraham.

His only Son slayes with a willing sword:
The Fourth's another valiant Shepheardling, 4. David.

That for a Cannon takes his silly sling,
And to a Scepter turns his Shepherds staff,
Great Prince, great Prophet, Poet, Psalmograph:
The Fifth begins from that sad Princes night 5. Zedechias.

That sees his children murdered in his sight,
And on the banks of fruitful Euphrates,
Poor Judah led in Captive heauiness: 6. Messiah.

Hoped Messiah shines in the Sixth;
Who, mocked, beat, banished, buried, cruci-fixt,
For our foul sins (stil-selfly-innocent)
Has fully born the hateful punishment:
The Last, shall be the very Resting-Day,
The Air shall be mute, the Waters work shall stay; 7. The Eternal Sabbath.

The Earth her store, the stars shall leave their measures,
The Sun his shine: and in eternal pleasures
We plunged, in Heaven shall ay solemnize, all,
The eternal Sabbaoths end-less Festival. Considerations of Adam upon that
which should be fall his Posterity, unto the end of the first World destroyed by
the Flood: according to the relation of Moses in Genesis, in the 4. 5. 6. and
7. chapters.

Alas! what may I of that race presume
Next the irefull Flame that shall this Frame consume,
Whose gut their God, whose lust their law shall be,
Who shall not hear of God, nor yet of me?
Since those outrageous, that began their birth
On the holy groundsill of sweet Edens earth,
And (yet) the sound of Heavens drad Sentence hear,
And as ey-witness of mine Exile were,
Seem to despite God. Did it not suffize
(O lust full soul!) first to polygamize?
Suffiz'd it not (O Lamech) to distain
Thy Nuptial bed? but that thou must ingrain
In thy great-Grand-sires Grand-sires reeking gore
Thy cruel blade? respecting naught (before)
The prohibition, and the threatening vow
Of him to whom infernal powrs do bow:
Neither his Pasports sealed Character
Set in the forehead of the Murderer.
Courage, good Enos: re-advance the Standard
Of holy Faith, by humane reason slaunder'd,
And troden-down: Inuoke the immortal power;
Upon his Altar, warm bloud-offrings pour:
His sacred nose perfume with pleasing vapor,
And teend again Trueth's neer-extinguisht Taper*
Thy pupil Henoch, selfly-dying wholly,
(Earths ornament) to God he lives solely.
Lo, how he labors to endure the light
Which in the Arch-essence shines glorious-bright:
How rapt from sense, and free from fleshly lets,
Sometimes he climbs the sacred Cabinets
Of the divine Ideas euer-lasting,
Having for wings, Faith, fervent l'rayer and Fasting:
How at sometimes, though clad in earthly clod,
He (sacred) sees, feels, all inioyes in God:
How at sometimes mounting from form to form,
In form of God he happy does transform.
Lo, how the all-fair, as burning all in love
With his rare beauties, not content above
TO have half, but all, and ever; sets the stairs
That lead from hence to Heaven his chosen heirs:
Lo, now he climeth the supernall stories:
Adieu, deer Henoch: in eternal glories
Dwell there with God: thy body, changed in quality
Of Spirit or Angel, puts on immortality:
Thine eyes already (now no longer eyes,
But new bright stars) do brandish in the skies:
Thou drinkest deep of the celestial wine:
Thy Sabbaoth's endless: without vail (in fine)
Thouseest God face to face; and neervnite
To the ONE-TRINE Good, thou liv'st in the Infinite.
But here the while (new Angel) thou do leave
Fell wicked folk, whose hands are apt to reaue,
Whose Scorpion tongues delight in sowing strife,
Whose guts are gulfs, incestuous all their life.
O strange to be believed! the blessed race,
The sacred Flock whom God by special grace
Adopts for his, even they (alas!) most shame-less
Do follow sin, most beastly-brute and tame-less,
With lustful eyes choosing for wanton Spouses
Men's wicked daughters; mingling so the houses
Of Seth and Cain: preferring foolishly
Frail beauties blaze to virtuous modesty.
From these profane, foul, cursed kisses sprung
A cruel brood, feeding on blood and wrong;
Fell Giants strange, of haughty hand and mind,
Plagues of the World, and scourges of Mankind
Then, righteous God (though ever prone to pa
Seeing his milde-ness but their malice harden,
List plead nolonger, but resolves the fall
Of man forthwith, and (for man's sake) of all:
Of all (at least) the living creatures gliding
Along the air, or on the earth abiding.
Heavens crystal windows with one hand he opes,
Whence on the World a thousand Seas he drops:
With the other hand he gripes, and wringeth forth
The spungy Globeof the execrable Earth,
So straightly pressed, that it does straight restore
All liquid floods that it had drunk before:
In every Rock new Rivers do begin;
And to his aid the snowes com tumbling in:
The Pines and Cedars have but boughs to show,
The shoars do shrink, the swelling waters grow.
Alas! so-many Nephews lose I here
Amid these deeps, that but for mountains near,
Upon the rising of whoseridges lofty,
The lusty climb on every side for safety,
I should be seed-less: but (alas!) the Water
Swallows those Hills, and all this wide Theater
Is all one Pond. O children, whither fly-you?
Alas! Heavens wrath pursues you to destroy-you:
The stormy waters strangely rage and roar,
Rivers and Seas have all one common shore,
(To wit) a sable, water-loaden Sky
Ready to rain new Oceans instantly.
O Sonn-less Father! O too fruitful haunches!
O wretched root! O hurtful, hateful branches!
O gulfs unknown! O dungeons deep and black!
O worlds decay! O universal wrack!
O Heavens! O Seas! O Earth (now earth no more)
O flesh! O blood! Here, sorrow stopped the door*
Of his sad voice, and almost dead for woe,
The prophetizing spirit forsook him so.
NOAH. The SECOND DAY Of The SECOND WEEK;
Containing

1. THE ARK, 2. BABYLON, 3. THE COLONIES, 4. THE COLVMNES.
Acceptam refero.


The ARC. THE I. PART OF THE II. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Noah prepares the Ark: and thither brings
(With him) a Seed-payr of all living things:
His exercise, a shipboard: Atheist Cham
His holy Fathers humble Zeal does blame;
And diversely impugns Gods Providence:
Noah refells his Faith-less arguments:
The Flood surceast: The Ark-landed: Blood forbid:
The Rain-bowe bent; what it pre-figured:
Wine drowneth Wit: Cham scoffs the Nakedness
Of's sleeping Sire: the Map of Drunkenness.
IF Now no more my sacred rimes distill A Preamble, wherein, by a modest
Complaint the Poet stirs up the Readers attention, and makes himself way to
the invocation of the name of God.

With Art-less ease from my discustom'd quill:
If now the Laurel, that but lately shaded
My beating temples, be dis-leav'd and vaded:
And if now, banished from the learned Fount,
And cast down headlong from the lofty Mount
Where sweet Urania sits to indite,
Mine humbled Muse flag in a lowely flight;
Blame these sad Times ungrateful cruelty,
My household cares, my healths infirmity,
My drooping sorrows for (late) grievous losses,
My busy suits, and other bitter crosses.
Lo, there the clogs that weigh down heavily
My best endeavors, whilom soaring high:
My harvest's hail: the pricking thorns and weeds
That in my soul choke those diviner seeds.
O gracious God! remove my great incumbers,
Kindle again my faiths neer-dying imbers:
Assuage thine anger (for thine own Sons merit)
And from me (Lord) take not thy holy Spirit:
Comb, gild, and polish, more then ever yet,
This latter issue of my laboring wit:
And let not me be like the wind, that proudly
Begins at first to roar and murmur loudly
Against the next hills, over-turns the Woods,
With furious tempest tumbles-vp the floods,
And (fiercely-fell) with stormy puffs constrains
The sparkling flints to roll about the Plains;
But flying, faints; and every league it goes
One nimble feather of his wing does lose:
But rather like a River poorly-breeding
In barren Rocks, thence drop by drop proceeding:
Which, toward the Sea, the more he flies his source,
With growing streams strengthens his gliding course,
Rowles, roars, and foams, raging with rest-less motion,
And proudly scorns the greatness of the Ocean.
THE DOOMS of Adam lackt not long effect.
For, the angry Heavens (that can, without respect The coming of the Flood,
and Building of the Ark.

Of persons, plague the stubborn Reprobate)
In Waters buried the Vniuersall-state:
And never more the nimble painted Legions
With hardy wings had cleft the ayrie Regions:
We all had perished, and the Earth in vain
Had brought such store of fruits, and grass, and grain,
If Lamechs Son (by newfound Art directed)
That huge vast vessel had not first erected,
Which (sacred refuge) kept the parent-payrs
Of all things moving in the Earth and Ayrs.
Now, while the Worlds-re-colonizing Boat Noah's exercises aboard the Ark.

Does on the waters over Mountains float,
Noe passes not with tales, and idle play,
The tedious length of days and nights away:
But, as the Summers sweet distilling drops,
Upon the meadows thirsty yawning chops,
Re-greens the Greens, and does the flowrs re-flowr,
All scorcht and burnt with Auster's parching power:
So the care-charming honey that distills
From his wise lips, his house with comfort fills,
Flatters despair, dries tears, calms inward smarts,
And re-aduanceth sorrow-daunted hearts,
Cheer ye, my children: God does now retire
These murdering Seas, which the revenging ire
Of his strict Justice holy indignation
Has brought upon this wicked generation;
Arming a season, to destroy mankind,
The angry Heavens, the water, and the wind:
As, soon again his gracious Mercy will
Clear cloudy Heavens, calm winds, and waters still.
His wrath and mercy follow turn by turn;
That (like the Lightning) does not lightly burn
Long in a place: and this from age to age
Hides with her wings the faithful heritage.
Our gracious God makes scant-weight of displeasure,
And spreads his mercy without weight or measure:
Sometimes he strikes us (to especial ends)
Upon our selves, our Children, or our friends,
In soul or body, goods, or else good names,
But soon he casts his rods in burning flames:
Not with the fist, but finger he does beat us;
Nor does hethrill so often as he does threat-vs:
And (prudent Steward) gives his faithful Bees
Wine of his wrath, to rebel Drones the Lees.
And thus the deeds of Heavens Iust-gentle King,
The Second Worlds good Patriarch did sing. Cham, full of impiety, is
brought-in, answering his Father; and diversely impugning the wisdom and
irreprohensible Prowidence of God Almighty and All-mercifull: and the humble
and religious Zeal of Noah.

But, brutish Cham, that in his breast accursed,
The secret roots of sinful Atheism nursed;
Wishing already to dis-throne the Eternal,
And self-vsurp the Majesty supernall:
And to himself, by name of Jupiter,
On Afrik sands a sumptuous Temple rear:
With bended brows, with stout and stern aspect,
In scornful terms his Father thus be-checkt.
Oh! how it grieves me, that these servil terrors
(The scourge of Cowards, and base vulgars errors)
Have ta'n such deep root in your feeble breast!
Why, Father, always selfly thus deprest,
Will you thus always make yourself a drudge,
Fearing the fury of a fained Judge?
And will you always forge your self a Censor
That weighs your words, and does your silence censure?
A sly Controuler, that does count your hairs,
That in his hand your hearts keys ever bears,
Records your sighs, and all your thoughts descries,
And all your sins present and past espies?
A barbarous Butcher that with bloody knife
Threats night and day your grieuous-guilty life?
O! see you not, the superstitious heat
Of this blind zeal, does in your mind beget
A thousand errors? light credulity
Does drive you still to each extremity,
Faining a God (with thousand storms oppressed)
Fainter then Women, fiercer then a Beast.
Who (tenderhearted) weeps at others weeping,
Wails others woes, and at the only peeping
Of others blood, in sudden swoun deceases,
In manly breast a woman's heart possesses:
And who (remorse-less) lets at any season,
The stormy tide of ragetransport his reason,
And thunders threats of horror and mishap,
Hides a Bears heart under a humane shape.
Yet, of your God, you one-while thus pretend;
He melts in tears, if that your fingers end
But akea-while: anon, he frets, he frowns,
He burns, he brains, he kills, he dams, he drowns.
The wildest Boar does but one Wood destroy;
A cruel Tyrant but one Landannoy:
And yet this Gods outrageous tyranny
Spoils all the World, his only Empery.
O goodly Justice! One or two of us
Have sinned perhaps, and moved his anger thus;
All bear the pain, yea even the innocent
Poor Birds and Beasts incurr the punishment.
No, Father, no: ('t is folly to infer it)
God is no varying, light, inconstant spirit,
Full of revenge, and wrath, and moody hate,
Nor savage-fell, nor sudden passionate,
Nor such as will for some small fault undo
This goodly World, and his own nature too.
All wandering clouds, all humid exhalations,
All Seas (which Heaven through many generations
Has hoorded-vp) with selfs-weight enter-crusht,
Now all at once upon the earth have rusht:
And the endless, thin air (which by secret quils
Had lost it self within the windes-but hills
Dark hollow Caves, and in that gloomy hold
To ycy crystal turned by the cold)
Now swiftly surging toward Heaven again,
Has not alone drowned all the lowly Plain,
But in few days with raging Floods o're-flowen
The top-less Cedars of mount Libanon.
Then, with just grief the godly Father galled, Answers of Noah to all the
blasphemies of Cha^, and his fellow-Atheists.

A deep, sad, sigh from his hearts center haled,
And thus replied: O false, rebellious Cham!
Mine ages sorrow, and my houses shame,
Through self-conceipt contemning the Holy Ghost,
Thy sense is baend, thine understanding lost:
And O I fear (Lord falsify my fear)
The heavy hand of the high Thunderer
Shall light on thee; and thou I doubt shaltbe
His Furies object, and shall testify
By thine infamous life's accursed state,
What now thy shame-less lips sophisticate.
I (God be praised) know that the perfect CIRCLE 1. Answer: God is infinite,
immutable, Almighty, and incomprehensible.

Whose Center's everywhere, of all his circle
Exceeds the circuit; I conceive aright
The Al-mighty-most to be most infinite:
That the only ESSENCE feels not in his mind
The furious tempests of fell passions wind:
That mooveless, all he moves: that with one thought
He can build Heaven; and builded, bring to naught:
That his high Throne 's enclosed in glorious Fire
Past our approach: that our faint soul does tier,
Our spirit grows spright-less, when it seeks by sense
To sound his infinite Omni-potence.
I surely know, the Cherubins do hover
With flaming wings his starry face to cover.
Nonesees the Great, the Almighty, Holy-ONE,
But passing by and by the back alone.
To us, his Essence is in-explicable,
Wondrous his ways, his name vn-vtterable;
So that concerning his high Majesty So that men cannot speak of Him but
improperly.

Our feeble tongues speak but improperly.
For, if we call him strong, the praise is small:
If blessed spirit, so are his Angels all:
If Great of greats, he is void of quantity:
If good, fair, holy, he wants quality;
Since in his Essence fully excellent,
All is pure substance, free from accident. Why we cannot speak of God but
after the manner of men.

Therefore our voice, too-faint in such a subject
TO ensue our soul, and our weak soul her object,
Does always stammer; so that ever when
'T would make Gods nameredoubted among men;
(In humane phraze) it calls him pitiful,
Repentant, jealous, fierce, and anger-full.
Yet is not God by this repentance, thus, 2. Answer. The Repentance and the
change which the Scripture attributes to God, is far from Error and defect.

Of ignorance and error taxt, likevs:
His jealous hatred does not make him curious,
His pity wretched; nor his anger furious.
The immortal Spirit is ever calmly-cleer:
And all the best that feeble man does here,
With vehemence of some hot passion driven;
That, withripeiudgement does the King of Heaven. Two comparisons explaning the
same.

Shall a Physician comfortably-bold*
Fear-less, and tear-less, constantly behold
His sickly friend vexed with exceeding pain,
And feel his pulse, and give him health again?
And shall not the euer-self-resembling God
Look down from Heaven upon a wretched clod,
Without he weep, and melt for grief and anguish;
Nor cure his creature, but himself must languish?
And shall a Judge, self-angerless, prefer
To shameful death the strange adulterer;
As only looking fixly all the time
Not on the sinner, but the sinful crime?
And shall not then the Eternal Iusticer 3. Answer, Justice being a ver tue in
Man cannot be a vice in God.

Condemn the Atheist and the Murderer,
Without selfs-fury? O! shall Justice then
Be blamed in God, and magnified in men?
Or shall his sacred Will, and soverain Might
Be chayn'd so fast to man's frail appetite,
That filthy sin he cannot freely hate,
But wrathful Rage him selfly-cruciate?
Gods sacred vengeance, serves not for defense 4. Answer: God does not punish
Offenders for defense of his own Estate: but to maintain virtue and confound
vice.

Of his own Essence from our violence
(For in the Heavens, above all reach of ours,
He dwells immured in diamantine Towers):
But, to direct our lives and laws maintain,
Guard Innocence, and Injury restrain.
The Almighty past not mean, when he subverted
Near all the World from holy paths departed. 5. The iniquity of the world
deserved exereame punishment.

For, Adams Trunk (of both our Worlds the Tree)
In two fair Branches forking fruitfully,
Of Cain and Seth; the first brought forth a suit
Of bitter, wild, and most detested fruit:
The other, first rich in goodness, afterward
With those base Scyons being graft, was marred:
And so produced execrable clusters
Worthy so wicked and incestuous lusters:
And then (alas!) what was there to be found
Pure, just, or good, in all this Earthly Round?
Cain's Line possessed sin, as an heritage; 6. When all are generally depraved,
all merit to be destroyed.

Seth's, as a dowry got by marriage:
So that, (alas!) among all humane-kinde
Those mongrell kisses marred the purest mind.
And we (even we, that have escaped here 7. The least imperfect pass
condemnation, even then when they are most lively chasticed.

This cruel wrack) within our conscience bear
A thousand Records of a thousand things
Convincing us before the King of kings;
Whereof not one (for all our self-affection)
We can defend with any just objection.
God played no Tyrant, choking with the floods 8. God destroying the workma^,
does no wrong to the Tools, if he break, and batter them with their Master.

The earthly Bands and all the ayrie broods:
For, since they lived but for man's service sole,
Man, razed for sin out of the Living Roll,
Those wondrous tools, and organs excellent,
Their Workman reft, remained impertinent.
Man's only head of all that draws breath.
Who lacks a member; yet persevereth
To live (we see): but, members cut away
From their own head, do by and by decay. 9. A Traitor deserves to have his
house razed to the ground.

Nor was God cruel, when he drowned the Earth
For, sit hence man had from his very birth
Rebeld against him, was it not equity,
That for his fault, his house should utterly
Be rent and razed? that salt should there besow'n,
That in the ruins (for instruction)
We for a time might read and understand
The righteous vengeance of Heavens wrathful hand,
That wrought this Deluge: and no hoorded waves
Of ayry clouds, or vnder-earthly caves?
If all blew Curtins mixed of air and water, 10. The Flood was no natural
accident, but a most just judgment of God.

Round-over-spreading this wide All-Theater,
To some one Climate all at once should fly,
One Country they might drown undoubtedly:
But our great Galley having gone so far,
So many months, in sight of either Star,
From Pole to Pole through sundry Climats whorld,
Shows that this Flood has drowned all the world.
Now non-plust, if to reinforce thy Camp, 11. The waters of the Flood sprung
not from a natural motion only, but proceeded from other then natural Causes,
which cannot produce such effects.

Thou fly for succor to thine Ayery Damp:
Show, in the concave of what Mountains steep
We may imagine Dens sufficient deep
For so much air as gushing out in fountains,
Should hide the proud tops of the highest Mountains;
Since a whole tun of air scarce yields (in trial)
Water enough to fill one little Vial.
And what should then betide those empty spaces?
What should succeed in the forsaken places
Of the air's thin parts (in swift springs shrinking thence)
Since there is no void in the All-circumference?
Whence (will thou say) then coms this raging flood, 12. The consideration of
the power of God in subiecting the creatures to Noah: in sustaining and feeding
them so long in the Arc (which was as a Sepulcher) confuteth all the
objections of Atheists.

That over-flowes the windy Ryphean Wood,
Mount Libanus, and enviously aspires
To quench the light of the celestial fires?
Whence (shall I say) then, whence-from coms it (Cham)
That Wolves, and Panthers waxing meek and tame,
Leaving the horror of their shady home,
Adiourn'd by Heaven, did in my presence com,
Who holding subject under my command
So many creatures humbled at my hand,
And now restored to the honor and estate,
Whence Adam fell through sin and Satan's hate?
Whence does it com, or by what reason is it,
That vn-mann'd Haggards to mine empty fist
Com without call? Whence coms it, that so little
Fresh water, fodder, meal, and other victual,
Should serve so long so many a greedy-gut
As in the dark holds of this Ark is shut?
That here the Partridge does not dread the Hauk?
Nor fearful Hare the spotted Tiger baulk?
That all these storms our Vessel have not broak?
That all this while we do not jointly choke
With noysom breath, and excrementall stink
Of such a common and continual sink?
And that ourselves, 'mid all these deaths, are saved
From these All-Seas, where all the rest are Engraved?
In all the compass of our floating Inns, 13. The Arc full of Miracles, which
confound the wits and stop the mouths of profane wranglers.

Are not so many planks, and boords, and pins,
As wonders strange, and miracles that ground
Man's wrangling Reason, and his wits confound:
And God, no less his mighty power displayed
When he restored, then when the World he made.
O sacred Patron! pacify thine ire,
Bring home our Hulk: these angry floods retire;
A-liue and dead, let us perceive and prove
Thy wrath on others, on our selves thy love.
Thus Noah sweetens his Captivity, God causes the Flood to cease.

Beguiles the time, and charms his misery,
Hoping in God alone: who, in the Mountains
Now slopping close the veins of all the Fountains,
Shutting Heavens sluees, causing the air (controlled)
Close-vp his channels, and his Seas with-hould,
Calls forth the winds. O Heavens fresh fans (quoth he)
Earths sweeping Brooms, O Forests enmity,
O you my Heralds and my Harbengers
My nimble Posts and speedy Messengers,
Mine arms, my sinews, and mine Eagles swift
That through the air my rolling Chariot lift;
When from my mouth, in my iust-kindled ire
Fly Sulphry fumes, and hot consuming fire,
When with my Lightning Scepters dreadful wonder
I muster horror, darkness, clouds, and thunder:
Wake, rise, and run, and drink these waters dry,
That hills and dales have hidden from the sky.
The Aeolian Crowd obays his mighty call, The Arc rests on the Mountain
Ararat, in Armenia.

The surly surges of the waters fall,
The Sea retreateth: and the sacred Keel
Lands on a Hill, at whose proud feet do kneel
A thousand Hills, his lofty horn adoring
That cleaues the clouds, the starry welkin goaring.
Then hope-cheer'd Noah, first of all (for scout) What Noah did before he went
forth.

Sends forth the Crow, who flutters neer-about;
And finding yet no landing place at all,
Returns a-boord to his great Admiral.
Some few days after from the window flies
The harm-less Dove for new discoveries:
But seeing yet no shore, she (almost tired)
A-boord the Carrack back again retired.
But yer the Sun had seav'n Heav'n-Circuits rode,
To view the World a-fresh she flies abroad;
And brings a-boord (at evening) in her bill
And Olive branch with water pearled still.
O happy presage! O deer pledge of love!
O wel-com news! behold, the peaceful Dove
Brings in her beak the Peace-branch, boading weal
And truce with God; who by this sacred seal
Kindly confirms his holy Covenant,
That first, in fight the Tiger rage shall want,
Lions be cowards, Hares courageous,
Yer he be false in word or deed to us.
O sacred Olive! firstling of the fruits,
Health-boading branch, be it thy tender roots
Have lived still, while this strange Deluge lasted,
I do rejoice it has not all things wasted:
Or be it, since the Ebb, thou newly spring,
Praised be the bounty of the immortal King
That quickens thus these dead, the World induing
With beauty fresh so suddenly renewing.
Thus Noah spoke: And though the World began lift He exspecteth Gods commandment
to go forth: whereby, at the first he was shut up in the Ark*

Most of his Isles above the waters drift,
Though waxen old in his long weary night,
He see a friendly Sun to brandish bright:
Though choked with ill air in his stinking staul,
He Will not a-shoar till God be pleased with-all;
And till (devout) from Heaven he understand
Some Oracle to license him to land.
But, warned by Heaven, he comes from his Cave,
(Or rather from a foul infectious grave)
With Sem, Cham, Iapheth, and their twice-two Brides,
And thousand pairs of living things besides,
Unclean and clean: for, the holy Patriark
Had of all kinds enclosed in the Ark.
But, here I hear the ungodly (that for fear
Late whispered softly in each others ear,
With silent murmurs muttering secretly)
Now trumpet thus their filthy blasphemy; New objection of Atheists, concerning
the capacity of the Ark.

Who will believe (but shallow-brained Sheep)
That such a ship scarce thirty Cubits deep,
Thrice fifty long, and but on^e fifty large,
So many months could bear so great a charge?
Since the proud Horse, the rough-skinn'd Elephant,
The lusty Bull, the Camel water-want,
And the Rhmocerot, would, with their fodder,
Fill-vp a H^lk fa^r deeper, longer, broader?
O profane mockers! if I but exclude Answer*

Out of this V^ssell a vast multitude
Of since-born mongrels, that derive their birth
From monstrous medly of Venerian mirth;
Fantastik Mules, and spotted Leopards,
Of incest-heat engendered afterward:
So many sorts of Dogs, of Cocks, and Doves,
Since, daily sprung from strange and mingled loves,
Wherein from time to time in various sort,
Dedalian Nature seems her to disport:
If playner, yet I prove you space by space,
And foot by foot, that all this ample place,
By subtle judgment made and Symmetrie,
Mi^ht lodge so many creatures handsomely,
Since every brace was Geometrical:
Naught rests ( Momes) for your reply at all;
If, who dispute with God, may be content
To take, for current, Reasons argument.
But here to admire the Al-mighties powrfull hand An vn-answerable answer to
all profane objections.

I rather love, and silence to command
To man's discourse: what he has said, is don:
For, evermore his word and deed are one.
By his sole arm, the Gallions Masters saw
Themselves safe rescued from Deaths yawning iaw;
And offer-vpto him, in zealous wise,
The Peace full sent of sweet burnt-sacrifice;
And send with-all above the starry Pole
These winged sighs from a religious soul.
World-shaking Father, Windes-King, calming-Seas,
With mild aspect behold us: Lord appease
Thine Angers tempest, and to safety bring
The planks escaped from this sad Perishing.
And bound for ever in their ancient Caves
These stormy Seas deep World-deuouring waves.
Increase (quoth God) and quickly multiply, Comandements, Prohibitions, and
Promises of God to Noah and his Posterity.

And fill the World with fruitful Progeny:
Resume your Scepter, and with new beheasts
Bridle again the late revolted Beasts,
Re-exercise your wonted rule again,
It is your office over them to reign:
Deer Children, use them all: take, kill, and eat:
But yet abstain and do not take for meat
Their ruddy soul: and leave (O sacred seed!)
To rav'ning Fowls, of strangled flesh to feed.
I, I am holy: be you holy then.
I deeply hate all cruel bloody men:
Therefore defile not in your brothers blood
Your guilty hands; refrain from cruel mood;
Fly homicide: do not in any case,
In man, mine Image brutishly deface:
The cruel man a cruel death shall taste;
And blood with blood be venged first or last;
For evermore upon the murderers head
My roaring storms of fury shall be shed.
From henceforth, fear no second Flood that shall* The Rain Bow given for a
Pledge of the Promise, that there shall be no more general Flood.

Cover the whole face of this earthly Ball:
I assure ye no; no, no, I swear to you
(And who has ever found mine Oath untrue?)
Again, I swear by my thrice-sacred Name:
And to confirm it, in the Clouds I frame
This colored Bow. When then some tempest black
Shall threat again the fearful World to wrack,
When water-loaden Heavens your Hills shall touch,
When the air with Midnight shall your Noon be-pitch,
Your cheerful looks up to this Rain-bowe cast.
For, though the same on moystful Clouds be placed,
Though hemmed with showrs, and though it seem to sup
(To drown the World) all the Oceans waters up,
Yet shall it (when you seem in danger sink)
Make you, of me; me of my promise, think.
Noah looks-vp, and in the Air he views Description of the Rayn-Bowe*

A Semicircle of a hundred hews:
Which, bright ascending toward the aethereall thrones,
Has a line drawn between two Orizons
For just Diameter: an even-bent bow
Contrived of three; whereof the one does show
To be all painted of a golden hew,
The second green, the third an orient blew;
Yet so, that in this pure blew-golden-green
Still ( Opal-like) some changeable is seen.
A Bow bright-shining in the Arch-Archers hand,
Whose subtle string seems level with the Land,
Half-parting Heaven; and over us it bends,
Within two Seas wetting his horned ends;
A temporal beauty of the lampfull skies,
Where powrfull Nature shows her freshest dies. What it signifies.

And if you only blew and red perceive;
The same as signs of Sea, and Fire conceive;
Of both the flowing and the flaming Doom,
The Judgment past, and Judgment yet to come.
Then, having called on God, our second Father Noah falls to Husbandry, and
tills the Earth, as he had done before the Flood

Suffers not sloth his arms together gather,
But falls to work, and wisely now renew'th
The Trade he learned to practice in his youth.
For, the proud issue of that Tyrant rude
That first his hand in brothers blood imbrewd,
As scorning Ploughs, and hating harm-less tillage,
And (wantons) prising less the homely village,
With fields and Woods, then the idle Citties-shades;
Embraced Laws, Scepters, and Arts, and Trades.
But Seths Sons, knowing Nature soberly
Content with little, fell to Husbandry,
There to reducing with industrious care,
The Flocks and Droues covered with wool and hair;
As prayse-full gain, and profit void of strife,
Art nurse of Arts, and very life of life.
So, the bright honor of the Heavenly Tapers
Had scarcely boxed ali the Earths dropsy vapors,
When he that saved the store-seed-World from wrack,
Began to delve his fruitful Mothers back,
And there soon-after planteth heedfully
The brittle branches of the Nectar-tree.
For, among the pebbles of a pretty hill
To the warm Suns ey lying open still, He plants a vine

He sets in furrows or in shallow trenches
The crooked Vines choice scyons, shoots, and branches:
In March he delves them, re-re-delves, and dresses,
Cuts, props, and proins; and God his work so blesses,
That in the third September for his meed
The plentious Vintage does his hopes exceed.
Then Noah, willing to beguile the rage He is ouer-taken with Wine.

Of bitter griefs that vexed his feeble age,
To see with mud so many Roofs o're-growen,
And him left almost in the World alone,
One-day a little from his strictness shrunk,
And making merry, drinking, over-drunk:
And, silly, thinking in that hony-gall
To drown his woes, he drowns his wits and all. Description of a drunken-man.

His head grows giddy, and his foot indents,
A mighty fume his troubled brain torments,
His idle prattle from the purpose quite,
Is abrupt, stuttering, all confused, and light:
His wine-stuft stomach wrung with wind he feels:
His trembling Tent all topsi-turuie wheels:
At last, not able on his legs to stand,
More like a foul Swine then a sober man,
Oppressed with sleep, he wallows on the ground,
His shame-lesse snorting trunk, so deeply drowned
In self oblivion, that he did not hide
Those parts that Caesar covered when he died.
Even as the Ravens with windy wings o're-fly Fit Comparisons to set sorth the
nature and property of Slanderers, and Detracters imitating Cham.

The weeping Woods of Happy Araby,
Despise sweet Gardens and delicious Bowrs
Perfuming Heaven with odoriferous flowrs,
And greedy light upon the loath some quarters
Of some late Lopez, o^ such Romish Martyrs:
Or as a young, unskillful, Painter raw,
Does carel^sly the fairest features draw
In any face, and yet too nearly marks
The un pleasing blemish of deformed marks,
As lips too-great, or hollowness of eyes,
Or sinking nose, or such indecencies:
Even so the ungodly Sonns of Leasings Father
With black Obliuions sponge ingrately smother
Fair Virtues draughts, and cast despightfully
On the least sins the venom of the ey,
Fru^p others faults, and trumpet in all ages
The lightest trips of greatest Personages:
Like scoffing C^am that impudently viewd
His Fathers shame, and most profanely-lewd,
With scornful laughter (grace-les) thus began
To infamize the poor old drunken man.
Com (brethren) com, com quickly and behold His speech to his Brethren, seeing
his Fathers nakedness.

This pure controuler that so often contrould
Us without cause: see how his bed he soyls:
See, how the wine (his master) now recoyls
By's mouth, and eyes, and nose: and brutely lo
To all that com his naked shame does show.
Ah shame-less beast (both brethren him reproov'd,
Both chiding thus, both with just anger moov'd) Their discreet behavior.

Unnatural villain, monster pestilent,
Unworthy to behold the firmament.
Where (absent we) thou ought have hid before
With thine own Cloak, but with thy silence more,
Thy Fathers shame, whom age* strong wine, and grief,
Have made to fall, but once in all his life;
Thou barkest first, and sporting at the matter
Proclaim'st his fault on infamies Theater.
And saying this, turning their sight a-side)
Their hoarie Fathers nakedness they hide.
When wine had wrought, this good old man awook, Noah awaked curses Cham and
his posterity: and blesses Sem and Iaphet, and their Issue.

Agniz'd his crime, ashamed, wonder-strook
At strength of wine, and touched with true repentance,
With Prophet-mouth ganthus his Sons fore-sentence:
Cursed be thou Cham, and cursed be (for thy scorn)
Thy darling Canaan: let the pearly Morn,
The radiant N^on, and rheumy Evening see
Thy neck still yoaked with Captivity.
God be with Sem: and let his gracious speed
Spread-wide my Iapheths fruitfull-swarming seed.
Error, no error, but a wilful badnes: An execratio^ of Drunkenness, described
with its shameful dangerous and detestable effects.

O foul defect! O short, O dangerous madness!
That in thy rage, do harm-less Clytus smother,
By his deer friend; Pentheus by his Mother.
Phrenzy, that makes the vaunter insolent;
The talkfull, blab; cruel, the violent:
The fornicator, wax adulterous;
The adulterer, become incestuous:
With thy plagues leaven swelling all our crimes;
Blind, shameless, sense-less, quenching oftentimes
The soul within itself: and often defames
The holiest men with execrable blames.
And as the Must, beginning to re-boyl,
Makes his new vessels wooden bands re-coyl,
Lifts-vp his lees, and spews with fuming vent
From his Tubs ground his scummy excrement:
So ruin'st thou thine host, and foolishly
From his hearts bottom driv'st all secrecy.
But, had thou never don (O filthy poison!)
More mischief here, but thus bereft of reason
This Virtues Module (rather Virtues best)
We ought thee more then Death it self detest.
FINIS.
BABYLON. THE II. PART OF THE II. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Antithesis of Blessed and Cursed States,
Subject to Good and Evil Magistrates:
Nimrod vsurps: His prowes-full Policy,
To gain himself the Goal of Souerainty:
BABEL begun: To stop such outrages,
There, God confounds the builders Languages:
Tongues excellent: the Hebrew, first and Best:
Then Greek and Latin: and (above the rest)
The Arabian, Toscan, Spanish, French, and Dutch,
And Ours, are Honored by our Author much.
O Happy people, where good Princes reign, A preface, repre senting the selici
tie and happy estate of Co^monweales, governed by good and prudent Princes: and
the misery of those that live in subjection unto Tyrants: which the Poet very
fitly proposes as his introduction to the life and Manners of Nimrod.

Who tender public more then private gain!
Who (virtue's patrons, and the plagues of vice)
Hate Parasites, and harken to the wise:
Who (self-commanders) rather sin suppress
By self-examples, then by rigorousnes:
Whose inward-humble, outward Majesty
With Subjects love is guarded loyally:
Who Idol-not their pearly Scepters glory,
But know themselves set on a lofty story
For all the world to see and censure too:
So, not their lust, but what is just they do.
But, 't is a hell, in hateful vassalage,
Under a Tyrant to consume ones age:
A self-shav'n Dennis, or a Nero fell,
Whose cursed Courts with blood and incest swell:
An Owl, that flies the light of Parliaments
And State-assemblies, jealous of the intents
Of private tongues; who (for a pastime) sets
His Peers at ods; and on their fury whe^s:
Who neither faith, honor, nor right respects:
Who every day new Officers erects:
Who brooks no learned, wise, nor valiant subjects,
But daily crops such vice-vp braiding objects:
Who (worse then Beasts, or savage monsters been)
Spares neither mother, brother, kiff, norkin:
Who, though round fenc'^ with guard of armed Knights,
A-many moc he sea^s, then he affrights:
Who taxes strange extorts; and (^aniball)
Gnawes to the bones his wretched Subjects all.
Print (O Heaven's king!) in our Kings hearts a zeal, A Prayer sitted to the
former discourse and giving entry to that which follows.

First, of thy laws; then of their publik weal:
And if our Countries now- Po-poysoned phrase,
Or now-contagion of corrupted days,
Leave any tract of Nimrodizing there;
O! cancel it, that they may every where,
In stead of Babel, build Jerusalem:
That loud my Muse may echo under them.
YER Nimrod had attained to twice six years, Nimrods exercises and essays to to
make himself Master of the rest.

He tyrannized among his strippling-peers,
Out-stript his equals, and in happy howr,
Laid the foundations of his after-powr,
And bearing Reeds for Scepters, first he raigns
In Prentice-Princedom over sheep-heard Swains.
Then knowing well that whosoever ayms (illuster)
At fancied bliss of Empires awful luster;
In valiant acts must pass the vulgar sort,
Or mask (at least) in lovely Virtues Port:
He spends not night on beds of down or feathers,
Nor day in tents, but hardens to all weathers
His youthful limbs: and takes ambitiously
A rock for Pillow, Heaven for Canapey:
In stead of softlings jests, and iollities,
He joys in Iousts, and manly exercises:
His dainty cates, a fat Kids trembling flesh,
Scarcefully slain, lukewarm and bleeding fresh.
Then, with one breath, he strives to attain
A Mountains top, that ouer-peers the Plain: Perseverance in painful and
laborious exercises of Nimrod grown gracious with the people.

Against the stream to cleave the rolling ridges
Of Nimph-strong floods, that have born down their bridges,
Running vnrean'd with swift rebounding sallies
Across the rocks within the narrow valleys:
To overtake the dart himself did throw,
And in plain course to catch the Hind or Roe.
But, when five lustres of his age expired,
Feeling his stomach and his strength aspired
To worthier wars, perceived he any-where,
Boar, Libbard, Lion, Tiger, Ounse, or Bear,
Him dread-less combats; and in combat foyls,
And reares high Tropheis of his bloody spoils.
The people, seeing by his warlike deed
From thieves, and robbers every passage freed:
From hideous yells, the Deserts round about:
From fear, their flocks; this monster-master stout,
This Hercules, this hammer-ill, they tender,
And call him (all) their Father and Defender.
Then Nimrod (snatching Fortune by the tresses) He abandous his first petty
Chase, and hunteth wylier for a more precious Prey.

Strikes the hot steel; sues, sooths, importunes, presses
Now these, then those, and hastening his good Hap
Leaves hunting Beasts, and hunteth Men to trap.
For, like as He, in former quests did use
Calls, pit-falls, toyls, sprenges, and baits, and glews:
And (in the end) against the wilder game,
Clubs, darts, and shafts, and swords, their rage to tame:
So, some he wins with promise-full entreats,
With presents some, and some with rougher threats:
And boldly (breaking bounds of equity)
Vsurps the Child-World's maiden Monarchy;
Whereas, before each kindred had for guide
Their proper Chief, yer that the youthful pride
Of vpstart State, ambitious, boiling, fickle,
Did thrust (as now) in others corn his sickle.
In-throniz'd thus, this Tyrant'gan devise Tyrannical rule of Nimrod* and his
proud enterprise.

To perpetrate a thousand cruelties,
Pel-mel subuerting for his appetite
God's, Man's, and Nature's triple sacred Right.
He braues the Almighty, lifting to his nose
His flowring Scepter: and for fear he lose
The peoples aw; who (idle) in the end
Might slip their yoke; he subtle makes them spend
Draws dry their wealth, and busies them to build
A lofty Towr, or rather Atlas wild.
We Have lived (quoth he) too-long like pilgrim Grooms:
Leave we these rolling tents, and wandering rooms:
Let Us raise a Palace, whose proud front and feet
With Heaven and Hell may in an instant meet;
A sure Asylum, and a safe retreat,
If the irefull storm of yet-more Floods should threat:
Lets found a City, and united there,
Under a King let us lead our lives; for fear
Least seuer'd thus, in Princes and in Tents,
We be dispersed over all the Regiments
That in his course the Days bright Champion eyes,
Might-less our selves to succor, or advise.
But, if the fire of some intestine war,
Or other mischief should divide us far,
Brethren (at least) let us leave memorials
Of our great names on these cloud-neighbouring walls.
Now, as a spark, that Shepherds (unespied)
Have fallen by chance upon a Forest side, A comparison showing, lively, the
efficacy of the attempts of Tyrants, the Rods of Gods righteous vengeance upon
ungodly people.

Among dry leaves; awhile in secret shrouds,
Lifting a-loft small, smoaky-wauing clouds,
Till fanned by the fawning winds, it blushes
With angry rage; and rising through the bushes,
Climbs fragrant Hauthorns, thence the Oak, and than
The Pine, and Fur, that bridge the Ocean:
It still gets ground, and (running) does augment,
And never leaves till all near Woods be brent:
So, this sweet speech (first broacht by certain Minions)
Is soon applauded among the light opinions:
And by degrees from hand to hand renu'd,
To all the base confused multitude;
Who longing now to see this Castle reared,
Them night and day in differing crafts bestirred.
Some fall to felling with a thousand strokes
Aduenturous Alders, Ashes, long-lived Oaks;
Degrading Forests, that the Sun might view
Fields that before his bright rays never knew.
Ha 'ye seen a Town exposed to spoil and slaughter Lively Description of the
people occupied in some great business.

(At victors pleasure) where laments and laughter
Mixtly resound; some carry, some convey,
Some lug, some load; against Soldiers seeking Prey
No place is sure, and yer a day be done,
Out at her gate the ransack't Town does run:
So (in a trice) these Carpenters disrobe
The Assyrian hills of all their leafie robe,
Strip the steep Mountains of their ghastly shades,
And powle the broad Plains, of their branchy glades:
Carts, Sleds, and Mules, thick-iustling meet abroad,
And bending axels groan beneath their load.
Here, for hard Cement, heap they night and day
The gum my slime of chalky waters gray:
There, busy Kil-men ply their occupations
For brick and tyle: there, for their firm foundations,
They dig to hell; and damned Ghosts again
(Past hope) behold the Suns bright glorious wain:
Their hammers noise, through Heavens rebounding brim,
Affrights the fish that in fair Tygris swim.
These ruddy walls in height, and compass grow,
They cast long shadow, and far-off do show:
All swarms with workmen, that (poor sots) surmise
Even the first day to touch the very skies.
Which, God perceiving, bending wrathful frowns, God displensed with the
audacious enterprise of Nimrod and his, resolves so ^^ break their Designs by
consoun ding their Language.

And with a noise that roaring thunder drowns;
'Mid cloudy fields, hills by the roots he rakes,
And the vnmov'd hindges of the Heavens he shakes.
See, see (quoth he) these dust-spawn, feeble, Dwarfs,
See their huge Castles, Walls, and Counter-scarfs:
O strength-full Piece, impregnable! and sure
All my just anger's batteries to endure.
I swore to them, the fruitful earth, no more
Henceforth should fear the raging Oceans roar;
Yet build they Towrs: I willed that scattered wide
They should go man the World; and lo, they bide
Self-prisoned here: I meant to be their Master,
My self alone, their Law, their Prince, and Pastor;
And they, for Lord, a Tyrant fell haueta'en-them,
Who (to their cost) will roughly curb and rean them;
Who scorns mine arm, and with these brauing Towrs
Attempts to seal^ this Crystal Throne of ours.
Com, com, le^s dash their drift; and since, combined
As well in voice, as blood, and law, and mind,
In ill they harden, and with language bold
Incourage-on themselves their work to hold,
Let Us cast a let against their quick diligence:
Let Us strike them straight with spirit of difference;
Let Us all confound their speech: let us make the brother,
The Sire, and Son, not understand each other.
This said, as soon confusedly did bound
Through all the work I wot not what strange sound, Execution of Gods Decree.

Aiangling noise; not much unlike the rumors
Of Bacchus Swains amid their drunken humors:
Some speak between the teeth, some in the nose,
Some in the throat their words do ill dispose,
Some howl, some hallow, some do stut and strain,
Each has his gibberish, and all strive in vain
To find again their known beloved tongue,
That with their milk they sucked in cradle, young.
Arise betimes, while the Opal-coloured Morn, A fit comparison

In golden pomp does May-days door adorn:
And patient hear the all-differing voices sweet
Of painted Singers, that in Groves do greet
Their Love- Bon-iours, each in his phraze and fashion
From trembling Perch uttering his earnest passion;
And so thou may conceit what mingle-mangle
Among this people every where did iangle.
Bring me (quoth one) atrowell, quickly, quick;
One brings him up a hammer: heaw this brick
(Another bids) and then they cleave a Tree:
Make fast this rope, and then they let it flee:
One calls for planks, another mortarlacks:
They bear the first, a stone; the last an ax:
One would have spikes, and him a spade they give:
Another asks a saw, and gets a sieve:
Thus crosly-crost, they prate and point in vain;
What one has made, another mars again:
Nigh breath-less all, with their confused yawling,
In boot-less labor, now begins appawling.
In brief, as those, that in some channel deep An other elega^t comparison
showing that there is no Counsel, no Endeavor, no diligence, no might nor
multitude, that can resist God.

Begin to build a Bridge with Arches steep,
Perceiving once (in thousand streams extending)
The course-chang'd River from the hills descending,
With watery mountains bearing down their Bay,
As if it scorned such bondage to obey;
Abandon quickly all their work begun,
And here and there for swifter safety run:
These Masons so, seeing the storm arrived
Of Gods just Wrath, all weak, and hart-depriu'd,
Forsake their purpose, and like frantic fools
Scatter their stuff, and tumble down their tools.
O proud revolt! O traiterous felony! Discommodities proceeding from the
confusion of Tongues.

See in what sort the Lord has punished thee
By this Confusion: ah! that language sweet,
Sure bond of Cities, friendships mastik meet,
Strong curb of anger, yerst united, now
In thousand dry Brooks strays, I wot not how:
That rare-rich gold, that charm-grief fancy-mouer,
That calm-rage harts-theef, quel-pride coniure-louer:
That purest coin, then current in each coast,
Now mingled, has sound, weight, and color lost,
It Is counterfeit: and over every shore
The confused fall of Babel yet does roar.
Then, Finland-folk might visit Africa,
The Spaniard Inde, and ours America,
Without a truch-man: now, the banks that bound
Our Towns about, our tongues do also mound:
For, who from home but half a furlong goes,
As dumb (alas!) his Reason's tool does lose:
Of if we talk but with our near confines,
We borrow mouths, or else we work by signs.
Vn-toild, vn-Tutord, sucking tender food,
We learned a language all men understood;
And (seav'n-yeers-old) in glass-dust did commence
To draw the round Earths fair circumference:
To cipher well, and climbing Art by Art,
We reached betimes that Castles highest part,
Where the Encyclopedie her darlings Crowns,
In sign of conquest, with etern renowns.
Now (euer-boys) we wax old, while we seek
The Hebrew tongue, the Latin, and the Greek:
We can but babble, and for knowledge whole
Of Natures secrets, and of the Essence sole
Which Essence gives to all, we tire our mind
To vary verbs, and finest words to find;
Our letters and our syllables to weigh:
At Tutors lips we hang with heads all gray,
Who teach us yet to read, and give us (raw)
An A. B. C. for great Justinians law,
Hippocrates, or that Diuiner lore,
Where God appears to whom him right adore.
What shall I more say? then, all spoke the speech The Hebrew Tongue in all
Men's mouths before the confusion of Languages.

Of God himself, the old sacred Idiom rich,
Rich perfect language, where is no point, nor sign,
But hides some rare deep mystery divine:
But since that pride, each people has apart
A bastard gibberish, harsh, and overthwart;
Which daily changed, and losing light, wel-neer
Nothing retains of that first language clear.
The Phrygians once, and that renowned Nation A conclusion tried, whereb
appears that chil dren are naturally apt to learn to speak: not able of
themselves to speak, without example.

Fed with fair Nilus fruitful inundation,
Longing to know their Languages prioritie,
Fondly imposed the censuring authority
To silly Judges, void of judging sense
(Dumb stammerers to treat of eloquence)
To wit, two Infants nursed by Mothers dumb,
In silent Cells, where never noise should com
Of charming humane voice, to echo there,
Till triple-twelue months full expired were.
Then brought before the Memphians, and the men
That dwell at Zant, the faint-breath'd children,
Cry often Bek; Bek, Bek is all the words
That their tongue forms, or their dumb mouth affords.
Then Phrygians, knowing, that in Phrygian
Bek means bread, much to rejoice began,
Glad that kind Nature had now gract them so,
To grant this Sentence on their side to go.
Fools, which perceived not, that the bleating flocks
Which powl'd the neighbor Mountains motly locks
Had taught this term, and that no terms of Rome,
Greece, Egypt, England, France, Troy, Iewry, com
Com born with us: but every Countries tongue
Is learnt by much use, and frequenting long.
Only, we have peculiar to our race,
Aptnes to speak; as that same other grace
Which, richly-diuers, makes us differ more
From dull, dumb wretches that in Deserts roar.
Now, that Bulls bellow (if that any say) Answers to the objection taken from
the consufused voice of Beasts.

That Lions roar, and slothful Asses bray,
Now low, now loud; and by such languages
Distinctly seem to show their courages:
Those are not words, but bare expressions
Of violent fits of certain passions:
Confused signs of sorrow, or annoy,
Of hunger, thirst, of anger, love, or joy. To another Objection, of the
chirping of Birds.

And so I say that all the winged quiers,
Which mornly warble, on green trembling briers,
Ear-tickling tunes: for though they seem to prattle
Apart by payrs, and three to three to rattle;
To wind their voice a hundred thousand ways,
In curious descant of a thousand lays:
TO have taught Apollo, in their School, his skill;
Their sounds want sense; their notes are word-less still:
Their song, repeated thousand times a day,
As dumb discourse, flies in the Woods away.
But, only Man can talk of his Creator, Advantage of Man endued with Reason,
above the rest of the Creatures.

Of heaven, and earth, and fire, and air, and water,
Of Justice, Temperance, Wisdom, Fortitude,
In choice sweet terms that various sense include.
And not in one sole tongue his thoughts dis^under;
But like to Scaliger, our ages wonder, Josephus Scaliger, skillful in 13.
languages.

The Learned's Sun: who eloquently can,
Speak Spanish, French, Italian, Nubian,
Dutch, Chaldee, Syriak, English, Arabik,
(Besides) the Persian, Hebrew, Latin, Greek.
O rich quick spirit! O wits Chameleon!
Which any Authors color can put on.
Great Julius Son, and Syluius worthy brother,
The immortal grace of Gascony, their mother.
And, as for Iayes, that in their wyery gail Answer to a third objection
touching Tarotresembling Echo, and speaking without speech.

Can ask for victuals, and vnvictuail'd rail;
Who, daring us for eloquences meed,
Can plain pronounce the holy Christian Creed,
Say the Lords prayer, and often repeat it all,
And name by name a good great household call:
The are like that voice, which (by our voice begot)
From hollow vale babbles it wots not what.
In vain the air they beat, it vainly cleaving,
And dumbly speak, their own speech not conceiving,
Deaf to themselves: for speech, is nothing (sure)
But the unseen souls resounding purtrature:
And chiefly when'tis short, sweet, painted-plain,
As it was all, yer that rough-hunters reign.
Now, when I note, how the Hebrew breuity,
Even with few words expresses happily The Hebrew Tongue the principal.

Deepest conceits; and leads the hearing part
Through all the closets of the mazy heart:
Better then Greek with her Synonimaes, First reason.

Fit Epithets, and fine Metaphoraes,
Her apt Conjunctions, Tenses, Moods, and Cases,
And many other much esteemed graces:
When I remember, how the Rabbis fet Second reason.

Out of the sacred Hebrew Alphabet
All that our faith believes* or eyes behold;
That in the Law the Arts are all inrold:
Whether (with curious pain) we do transport
Her letters turned in many-various sort
(For, as in ciphering, the only transportation Simile^

Of figures, still varies their valuation:
So the Anagram strengthens or slacks a name,
Giving a secret twist unto the same):
Or whether we (even as in gross) bestowing
The numbers, which, from one words letters flowing,
Unfold a secret; and that word again
Another of like number does contain:
Whether one letter for a word be put;
Or all a sentence in one word be shut:
As Egypts silence sealed-vp (mysterious)
In one Character a long sentence serious.
When I observe, that from the Indian Dawning, Third reason.

Even to our Irish Aetna's fiery yawning:
And from hot Tambut, to the Sea Tartarian,
Thou see (O Sun!) no Nation so barbarian,
Nor ignorant in all the Laws divine,
But yet retains some terms of Palestine,
Whose Elements (how-so disguised) draw-nigh
The sacred names of the old Orthogaphy.
When I consider that Gods ancient WILL Fourth reason*

Was first enrowled by an Hebrew quill:
That never Vrim, Dream, or Vision sung
Their Oracles, but all in Isaaks tongue:
That in the same, the Lord himself did draw
Upon two Tables his eternal Law:
And that (long since) in Sions Languages,
His heavenly Posts brought down his messages. Fifth reason.

And (to conclude) when I conceive, how then
They gave not idle, casual names to men,
But such as (rich in sense) before the event,
Marked in their lives some special accident;
And yet, we see that all those words of old
Of Hebrew still the sound and sense do hold.
For, Adam (means) made of clay: his wife
Eua (translated) signifies life:
Cain, first begot: Abel, as vain: and Seth,
Put in his place: and he that, underneath
The general Deluge, saw the World distressed,
In true interpretation, sounds Rest.
To the Hebrew Tongue (how-euer Greece do grudge)
The sacred right of Eldership I judge.
All hail, therefore, O sempiternall spring Praise of the Hebrew Tongue, Mother
and Queen of all the Rest.

Of spiritual pictures! speech of Heavens high King,
Mother, and Mistress, of all Tongues the Prime:
Which (pure) have past such vast deep gulfs of Time:
Which have no word but weighs, whose Elements
Flow with hid sense, thy points with Sacraments.
O sacred Dialect! in thee the names
Of Men, Towns, Countries register their fames
In brief abbridgements: and the names of Birds,
Of Water-guests, and Forrest-haunting Herds,
Are open Books, where every man might read
Their natures story; till the Heav'n-shaker dread,
In his just wrath, the flaming sword had set*
The passage into Paradise to let. Adam gave Hebrew names to all the Creatures.

For, Adam then (in sign of mastry) giving
Peculiar names unto all creatures living,
When in a general muster ranged right,
They marched by couples in his awful sight,
He framed them so fit, that learned ears
Bearing the soul the sound, the maruails bears,
Wherewith the All-forming voice adorned fair
The Inhabitants of Sea, and Earth, and Air.
And, for each body acts, or suffers ought, He enriched the Language with the
composition of verbs and Clauses.

Having made Nowns, his Verbs he also wrought:
And then, the more to enrich his speech, he brings
Small Particles, which stand in lieu of strings,
The master members fitly to combine
(As two great boards, a little glue does ioyn)
And serve as plumes, which ever dancing light
Deck the proud crests of helmets burnisht bright:
Frenges to mantles; ears, and rings to vessels:
To marble statues; bases, feet, and tressels. The Hebrew Tongue continued from
Adam to the tim* of Nim ro^: Since when it rested in the house of Heber, of
whom it is called Hebrew*

This ( Adams language) pure persisted since,
Til the iron Age of that cloud-climbing Prince:
Resounding only, through all mortal tents,
The peer-les accents of rich eloquence;
But then (as partial) it it self retired
To Hebers house: whether of the conspired
Rebels, he were not; but in sober quiet,
Dwelt far from Shinar, and their furious riot:
Or whether, thither by compulsion brought,
With secret sighs he often his God besought,
So with unwilling hands helping to make
The walls he wished deep sunk in Stygian Lake:
As wretched Galley-slaues (beating the Seas
With forced oars, fighting against their ease Simile.

And liberty) curse, in their grieved spright,
Those, for whose sake they labor day and night:
Or whether else Gods liberal hand, for ever
(As it were) meeting holy men's endeavor,
For his own sake, of his free grace and pleasure,
To the Hebrew race deposited this treasure;
While the proud remnant of those scattered Masons
Had falsed it in hundred thousand fashions,
When every one where Fate him called flew,
Bearing new words into his Country new.
But slippery Time, enuiously wasting all,
Disfigured soon those Tongues authentical, A sub-diuision of the La^guages,
first divided.

Which 'mid the Babel-builders thunder, bred
On Tygris banks, over all the earth were spread:
And, ay the world the more confused to leave,
The least of them in many Tongues did cleave.
Each language alters, either by occasion Whereof proceed the sundry changes in
one selfsame Language.

Of trade, which (causing mutual commutation
Of the Earths and Oceans wares) with hardy luck
Does words for words barter, exchange and truck:
Or else, because Fame-thirsting wits, that toil
In golden terms to trick their gracious style,
With newfound beauties prank each circumstance,
Or (at the least) do new-coyn'd words in haunce
With current freedom: and again restore
The old, rusty, moldy, worm-gnawn words of your. Simile.

For, as in Forests, leaves do fall and spring:
Even so the words, which whilom flourishing,
In sweet Orations shined with pleasing luster
(Like snowe-white Lillies in a fresh green pasture)
Pass now no more; but, banished from the Court,
Dwell with disgrace among the Country sort:
And those, which Eld's strict doom did disallow,
And damn for bullion, go for current now.
A happy wit, with gracious iudgementioyn'd, The liberty of a witty, learned,
and judicious Wrighter.

May give a Pasport to the words new coined
In his own shop: also adopt the strange:
Ingraft the wild: enriching, with such change
His powerful style; and with such sundry ammell
Paynting his phrase, his Prose or Verse enammel.
One language has no law but use: and still
Runs blind, unbridled, at the vulgars will.
Another course, is curiously enclosed
In lists of Art; of choice fit words composed.
One, in the feeble birth, becoming old,
Is cradle-toomb'd: another warreth bold
With the yeer-spinners. One, vnhappy-founded,
Lives in a narrow valley ever bounded:
Another among the learned troup does press
From Alexanders Altars, even to Fez.
And such are now, the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: Excellency of the Hebrew,
Greek and Latin Tongues above the rest.

The Hebrew, because of it we hold the Paten
Of Thrice-Eternalls ever sacred Word:
And, of his Law, that is the first Record.
The Greek, as having cunningly comprised
All kind of knowledge that may be devised.
And manly Roman, since the sword undaunted
Through all the world her eloquence has planted.
Writing these later lines, weary wel-neer A pleasant introduction to his
following Discourse, wherein Poetically He describes and brings in the
principal Languages, together with such as have excelled in each of them.

Of sacred Pallas pleasing labors deer;
Mine humble chin saluteth often my breast,
With an Ambrosial deaw mine eyes possessed
By peece-meal close; all moving powrs be still;
From my dull fingers drops my fainting quill;
Down in my sloath-lov'd bed again I shrink;
And in dark Lethe all deep cares I sink:
Yea, all my cares, except a zeal to len
A gainful pleasure to my Countrymen.
For, the holy loues-charm, burning for their sake,
When I am sleeping, keeps my soul awake.
Gold-winged Morpheus, Eastward issuing The God of Dreams.

By's crystal gate (it earlier opening
Then days bright door) fantastic leads the way
Down to a vale, where moist-cool night, and day:
Still calms and storms: keen cold, and sultry smother:
Rain, and fair weather follow not each-other:
But May still raigns, and rose-crown'd Zephyrus
With wanton sighs makes the green trees to buss;
Whose whispering boughs, in Ouall form do fence
This flowrie field's delightful excellence.
Just in the midst of this enammeld vale
Rose a huge Rock, cut like a Pedestall; Description of the House, and Image of
Eloquence: and of the principal Languages.

And on the Cornich a Colossus stands
Of during brass, which bears in his hands
Both fire and water: from his golden tongue
Grow thousand chains, which all the mead a-long
Draw worlds of hearers with alluring Art,
Bound fast by the ears, but faster by the heart.
Before his feet, Boars, Bears, and Tigers lie
As meek as Lambs, reclaimed from cruelty.
Near hills do hop, and neighbor Forests bound,
Seeming to dance at his sweet voices sound.
Of Carian pillars raisd with curious Art
On bases firm, a double row does girt
The soule-charm Image of sweet Eloquence:
And these fair Piles (with great magnificence)
Bear, four by four, one of the Tongues which now
Our learned Age for fairest does allow.
Now, among the Heav'n-deer spirits supporting here 1. The Hebrew supported by
4. Pillars; (viz.)

The Hebrew tongue, that Prince whose brows appear
Like daunt-Earth Comet's Heav'n-adorning brand,
Who holds a green-drie, wither'd-springing wand,
And in his arms the sacred Register Moses.

Of Gods eternal ten-fold Law does bear;
Is Isreal's guide: first Author, he that first
Unto his heirs his Writings offer durst:
Whose hallowed Pages not alone preceed
All Grecian Writ, but every Grecian Deed.
Dauid's the next, who, with the melody
Of voice-matcht fingers, draws spears harmony, David.

To his Heav'n-tuned harp, which shall resound
While the bright day star rides his glorious Round:
Yea (happily) when both the whirling Poles
Shall cease their Galliard, the euer-blessed souls
Of Christ his champions (cheered with his sweet songs)
Shall dance to the honor of the Strong of strongs;
And all the Angels glory-winged Hosts
Sing Holy, Holy, Holy, God of Hoasts.
The third, his Son, wit-wondrous Solomon, Solomon.

Who in his lines has more wise lessons sow'n,
More golden words, then in his Crown there shined
Pearls, Diamonds, and other Gemms of Inde.
Then, Amos Son, in threatenings vehement, Esaias.

Grace-fellowed, grave, holy and eloquent.
Sweet-numbred Homer here the Greek supports, 2 The Greek by Homer. Plato.
Herodotus. Demosthenes.

Whose School has bred the many-differing sorts
Of ancient Sages: and, through every Realm,
Made (like a Sea) his eloquence to stream:
Plato, the all-diuine, who like the Fowl
(They call) of Paradise; does never foul
His foot on Earth or Sea, but lofty sties
Higher then Heaven from Hell, above the skies:
Cleer-styl'd Herodotus, and Demosthen,
Gold-mouthed hearts-king law of learned men. 3. The Latin by Cicero. Caesar.
Salust. Virgil.

The Arch-Foe to factious Catiline and (since)
To Anthony, whose thundering eloquence
Yields thousand streams, whence (rapt in admiration)
The rarest wits are drunk in every Nation:
Caesar, who knows as well to write, as war:
The Sinnewy Salust: and that Heav'n-fall'n star,
Which straggling Ilium brings to Tybers brink,
Who never seems in all his Works to wink;
Who never stumbled, ever clear and grave;
Bashfully-bold, and blushing modest-braue:
Still like himself, and else, still like to no-man. 4. The Italian by Boccace.
Petrarch. Ariosto. Tasso.

Sustain the stately, graue-sweet ancient Roman.
On mirthsull Boccace is the Tuscan placed:
Bold, choice-tearm'd Petrarch, in deep passions graced:
The fluent fainer of Orlando's error,
Smooth, pithie, various, quick affection-stirrer:
And witty Tasso, worthy to indight
Heroik numbers, full of life and light;
Short, sharpe-conceipted, rich in language clear,
Though last in age, in honor foremost here. 5. The Arabik. by Aben-Roes.
Eldebag. Auicen Ibnu-farid.

The Arabian language has for pillars sound,
Great Aben-Rois most subtle, and profound,
Sharp Eldebag, and learned Auicen,
And Ibnu-farid's figure-flowing Pen.
The Dutch, has him who Germaniz'd the story 6. The Dutch by Peuther. Luther.
Peucer. Butric.

Of Sleidan: next, the Isleban (lasting glory
Of Wittenberg) with Peucer gilding bright
His pleasing style: and Butric my delight.
Gueuarra, Boscan, and Granade, which sup
With Garcilace, in honey Pytho's cup 7. The* Spanish by Gueuarra. Boscan.
Granada. Garcilaco.

The smiling Nectar, bear the Hyberian:
And, but the old glory of the Catalan,
Ravished O syas, he might well have claymed
The Spanish Laurel among these lastly named.
Now, for the French, that shape-less Column rude, 8 The French. by Marot.

Whence the idle Mason has but grossly hewed
(As yet) the rough scales from the upper part,
Is Clement Marot; who with Art-les Art
Busily toyls: and, pricked with praise-full thirst,
Brings Helicon, from Po to Quercy first:
Whom, as a time-torn Monument, I honor:
Or as a broken Toomb: or tattered Banner:
Or age-worn Image: not so much for show,
As for the reverence that to Eld I owe.
The next I know not well; yet (at the least)
He seems some skillful Master with the rest:
Yet doubt I still. For now it does appear
Like Jacques Aymot, then like Uiginere. Amyot. Ronsard.

That, is great Ronsard, who his France to garnish,
Robs Rome and Greece, of their Art-various varnish;
And, hardy-witted, handles happily
All sorts of subject, style, and Poesy.
And this du Plessis, beating Atheism, Plessis.

Vain Paganism, and stubborn Iudaisme,
With their own arms: and sacred-graue, and short,
His plain-prankt style he strengthens in such sort,
That his quick reasons wingd with grace and Art,
Pearce like keen arrows, every gentle heart.
Our English Tongue three famous Knights sustain; 9: The English. by Sir Thomas
Moore. Sir Nicholas Bacone. Sir Phil. Sidney

Moore, Bacone, Sidney: of which, former twain
( High Chancellors of England) weaned first
Our Infant-phrase (till then but homely nursed)
And childish toys; and, rudenes chasing thence,
To civil knowledge, joined sweet eloquence.
And (World-mourn'd) Sidney, warbling to the Thames
His Swan-like tunes, so courts her coy proud streams.
That (all with-childe with Fame) his fame they bear,
To Thetis lap, and Thetis, everywhere.
But, what new Sun dazels my tender eyes?
What sudden trance rapts me above the skies?
What Princely Port? O what imperial grace?
What sweet-bright-lightning looks? what Angels face? And the incomparable
Queen Elizabeth.

Say (learned Heaven-born Sisters) is not this
That prudent Pallas, Albions Misteris,
The Great Eliza, making hers disdaign,
For any Man, to change their Maidens reign? Her prudence, Piety, Justice,
Religion, Lear ning, and Eloquence.

Who, while Erynnys (weary now of hell)
With fire and Sword her neighbors States does quell,
And while black Horror threats in stormy rage,
With dreadful down-fal the universal stage;
In happy Peace her Land does keep and nourish:
Where reverent Justice, and Religion flourish.
Who is not only in her mother-voyce
Rich in Oration; but with phrases choice,
So on the sudden can discourse in Greek,
French, Latin, Tuscan, Dutch, and Spanish eek,
That Rome, Rhyne, Rhone, Greece, Spayn, and Italy,
Plead all for right in her nativity.
Bright Northren pearl, Mars-daunting martialist,
To grace the Muses and the Arts, persist;
And (O!) if ever these rude rimes be blessed
But with one glaunce of Nature's only Best;
Or (lucky) light between those Yuory palms,
Which hold thy State's stern, in these happy calms,
View them with mild aspect; and gently read
That for thy praise, thine eloquence we need.
Then thus I spoke; O spirits divine and learned,
Whose happy labors have your lauds eterned:
O! since I am not apt (alas!) nor able
With you to bear the burden honorable
Of Albions Fame, nor with my feeble sight
So much as follow your Heav'n-neighbouring slight;
At least permit me, prostrate to embrace
Your reverend knees: permit me to inchace
Your radiant crests with Aprils flowrie Crown;
Permit (I pray) that from your high renown,
My freble tunes eternal fames derive;
While in my Songs your glorious names survive.
Granting my suit, each of them bowd his head, (...)the

The valley vanished, and the pillars fled:
And there-with-all, my Dream had flow'n (I think)
But that I lym'd his limber wings with ink.
FINIS.
The COLONIES. THE III. PART OF THE II. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
To stop Ambition, Strife, and Avarice,
Into Three Parts the Earth divided is:
To Sem the East, to Cham the South, the West
To Iapheth falls; their several scopes expressed:
Their fruitful Spawn did all the World supply:
Antiquites uncertain Search, and why:
Assyria sceptred first; and first imparts,
To all the rest, Wealth, Honor, Arms, and Arts:
The Newfound World: Men's diverse humors strange:
The various World a mutual Counter-change.
While through the Worlds vn-haunted wilderness Being here to entreat of the
Transmigration of so many Nations, issued out of the loignes of Noah, our Poet
desires to be ad dressed by some special Favor of God.

I, the old, first Pilots wandering House address
While ( Famous DRAKE- like), coasting every strand
I do discover many a New-fou^d-Land:
And while, from Sea to Sea with curious pain
I plant great Noah's plentious Vine again:
What bright-brown cloud shall in the Day protect me?
What fiery Pillar shall by Night direct me
Toward each Peoples primer Residence,
Predestined in the Court of Providence*
Yer our bi-sexed Parents, free from sin,
In Eden did their double birth begin?
O sacred Lamp! that went so brightly burning
Before the Sages, from the spycie Morning,
To show the Almighty Infants humble Birth;
O! chase the thick Clouds, drive the darkness forth
Which blinds me: that mine aduenturous Rhyme,
Circling the World, may search out every Clime.
For, though my Wits, in this long Voyage shift
From side to side; yet is my special drift, The true, and only drift of all
his endeavors.

My gentle Readers by the hand to bring
To that deer Babe, the Man-God, Christ, our King.
As WHEN the lowering Heavens with loudest raps A comparison expressing the of
fect of the astonishment, which the confusion of Tongues brought into the
Babelbuilders.

Through Forests thrill their roaring thunderclaps,
The shiuering Fowls do suddenly forgo
Their nests and perches, fluttering to and fro
Through the dark air, and round about there rings
A whistling murmur of their whisking wings;
The grissel Turtles (seldoom seen alone)
Dis-payer'd and parted, wander one by one;
And even the feeble downie feathered Young
Venture to fly, before their quils be strong:
Even so, the Builders of that Babel-Wonder,
Hearing Gods voice a-loud to roar and thunder,
In their rude voices barbarous difference,
Take (all at once) their fearful flight from thence
On either hand; and through the Earth voidly-vast
Each packs apart, where God would have him placed.
For, Heavens great Monarch (yer the World began) Why God would not that the
seed of Noah should reside in the Plain of Shynar.

Having decreed to give the World to man;
Would not, the same a nest of thieves should be,
That with the Sword should share his Legacy;
And (bruitly mixed) with mongrell stock to stoar
Our Elements, round, solid, slimie floar:
But rather, fire of Couetize to curb,
Into three Parts he parts he parts this spacious Orb,
'Twixt Sem and Cham, and Iapheth: Sem the East,
Cham South, and Iapheth does obtain the West.
That large rich Country, from Perosite shoars The Earth distributed among the
Sons of Noah.

(Where stately Ob, the King of Rivers, roars,
In Scythian Seas voyding his violent load,
But little less then six dais sailing broad)
To Malaca: Moluques Isles, that bear To Sem the South.

Cloves and Canele: well-tempered Sumater
Sub-equinoctiall: and the golden streams
Of Bisnagar, and Ze^lan bearing gemms:
From the Euxin Sea and surge of Chaldean Twins
To the Anian Straight: the sloathfull, slymy Fens
Where Quinzay stands; Chiorze, where Bulls as big
As Elephants are clad in silken shag,
Is great Sems Portion. For the Destinies
(Or rather Heavens immutable Decrees)
Assure to Assyria send, that in short time
Chale and Rhesen to the Clouds might climb,
And Niniue (more famous then the rest)
Above them raise her many-towred Crest:
The sceptred Elam chose the Persian Hills,
And those fat fields that swift Araxis fills;
Lud, Lydia: Aram all Armenia had:
And Chalde fell to learned Arphaxad.
Cham becam Souerain over all those Realms To Cham the South.

South-bounded round with Sunburned Guinne streams,
Botangas, Benin, Cephal, Guaguametre,
Hot Concritan, too-full of poysony matter:
Northward with narrow Mid'terranean Sea
Which from rich Europe parts poor Africa:
Toward where Titans Evening splendour sank,
With Seas of Fez, Cape-verde, and Cape-blanc:
And toward where Phoebus does each morning wake,
With Adel Ocean, and the Crimsin Lake.
And further, all that lies between the steep
Mount Libanus, and the Arabian Deep,
Between the Erythrean Sea, and Persian Sine,
He (mighty Prince) to's Afrik State does join.
His Darling Canaan does nigh Jordan dwell
(One-day ordained to harbor Israel):
Pheud peopled Lybia: Mizraim Egypt manned:
And's firstborn Chus the Aethyopian strand.
Iapheth extends from struggling Hellespont, To Iapheth the North and West.

The Taken and Euxin Sea, to the double Mount
Of famous Gibraltar, and that deep Main,
Whose tumbling billows bathe the shoars of Spayn:
And from those Seas, where in the steed of Keels
Of winged Ships they roll their Chariot wheels,
To the Marsilian, Morean, and Thyrrhenian;
Ligurian Seas, and learned Sea Athenian,
Just opposite to Asia rich in spice,
Pride of the World, and second Paradise:
And that large Country stretched from Amana
To Tanais shoars, and to the source of Rha.
Forth of his Gomers loigns (they say) sprung all
The warlike Nations scattered over Gaul,
And Germans too (yerst called Gomerits):
From Tubal, Spaniards: and from Magog, Scythes:
From Madai, Medes: from Mesech, Mazacans:
From Iauan, Greeks: from Thyras, Thracians.
Here, if I list, or loved I rouer-shooting, According to his accustomed
modesty and distr^tion, the Poet chooses rather Silence then to Speak
uncertain ly of things unknown.

Or would I follow the uncertain footing
Of false Berosus and such fond Deluders
(Their zealous Readers insolent Illuders)
I could derive the lineal Descents
Of all our Sires; and name you every Prince
Of every Province, in his time and place
(Successively) through-out his Ancient Race:
Yea, sing the Worlds so diverse populations;
And of least Cities show the first Foundations.
But, never will I so my sails abandon.
To every blast, and rowing so at randon
(Without the bright light of that glorious Star
Which shines above all the Heavens) venture so far
On the unknown surges of so vast a Sea
So full of Rocks and dangers every way;
Having no Pylot, save some brainsick Wrighters
Which coin Kings names, vain fabulous Indighters:
Of their own fancies, who (affecting glory)
Upon a Flies foot build a goodly story.
Some words allusion is no certain ground
Whereon a lasting Monument to Found: Reasons why the Search of such
Antiquities is so obscure.

Since fairest Rivers, Mountains strangely steep,
And largest Seas, never so vast and deep
(Though self-eternall, resting still the same)
Through sundry chances often change their name:
Since it befalls not always, that his seed
Who builds a Town, does in the same succeed:
And (to conclude) since under Heaven, no Race
Perpetually possesses any place:
But, as all Tenants at the High Lords will,
We hold a Field, a Forest, or a Hill:
And (as when wind the angry Ocean moves)
Wave hunteth wave, and billow billow shoues;
So do all Nations iustle each the other,
And so one People does pursue another;
And scarce the second has a first vn-housed,
Before a third him thence again have rowsed. Famous examples to this purpose.
Of the ancient Britains.

So, the ancient Britain, by the Saxons chac't
From's native Albion, soon the Gauls displac't
From Armorik; and then victoriously
(After his name) surnamed that Britannie.
So, when the Lombard had surrendered Of the Lombbards.

Fair, double-named Isters flowrie-bed
To skar-fac't Hunnes; he hunteth furiously
The rest of Gauls from wealthy Insubrie,
Which, after fell in French-mens hands again,
Won by the sword of Worthy Charlemain. Of the Alains Goths, and Vandals.

So, the Alain and North Vandal, beaten both
From Corduba and Seuil by the Goth,
Seized Carthage straight; which after-ward they lost
To wise Justinians valiant Roman Host:
And Romans, since, joined with the barbarous troop
Of curled Moors, unto the Arabians stoop. The causes of such Transmigrations.

The sacrilegious greedy appetite
Of Gold and Scepters glistering glorious bright,
The thirst of Vengeance, and that puffing breath
Of eluish Honor, built on blood and death,
On desolation, rapes, and robberies,
Flames, ruins, wracks, and brutish butcheries,
Vn-bound all Countries, making warlike Nations
Through every Clymat seek new habitations.
I speak not here of those Alarbian Rouers,
Numidian Shepherds or Tartarian Drouers,
Who shifting pastures, for their store of Cattle,
Do here and there their hayrie Tents imbattle:
Like the black swarms of Swallows swiftly-light,
Which twice a-yeer cross with their nimble-flight
The Pine-plough'd Sea, and (pleased with purest air)
Seek every Season for a fresh repair:
But other Nations fierce, who far and nigh
With their own bloods-price purchas't Victory;
Who, better knowing how to win, then wield;
Conquer, then keep; to batter, then to build;
And bravely choosing rather War then Peace,
Have ouer-spread the World by Land and Seas.
Such was the Lombard, who in Schonland nursed, The original remoues, voyages
and conquests of the Lombards.

On Rugeland and Liuonia seized first;
Then having well revenged on the Bulgarian
The death of Agilmont; the bold Barbarian
Surpriseth Poland; thence anon he presses
In Rhines fair streams to rense his Amber tresses:
Thence turning back, he seats him in Mora^ia;
After, at Buda; thence he posts to Pauia;
There raigns 200. years: tryumphing so,
That royal Tesin might compare with Po.
Such was the Goth, who whilom issuing forth Of the Goths.

From the cold, frozen Islands of the North,
Incampt by Vistula: but the air (almost)
Being there as cold as on the Baltic Coast,
He with victorious arms Sclauonia gains,
The Transyluanian and Valacchian Plains.
Thence plyes to Thracia: and then (leaving Greeks)
Greedy of spoil, four times he bravely seeks
To snatch from Rome (then, Mars his Minion)
The Palms which she over all the World had won;
Guided by Rhadaguise, and Alaric,
And Vidimarius, and Theodoric:
Then coms to Gaul: and thence repul'st, his Legions
Rest ever since upon the Spanish Regions.
Such the antik Gaul: who rouing every way, Of the ancient Gauls.

As far as Phoebus darts his golden ray,
Seized Italy; the Worlds proud Mistress sacked
Which rather Mars then Romulus compackt:
Then pill'd Panonia: then with conquering ploughs
He furrows-vp cold Strymons slymy slows:
Wastes Macedonia: and (inclined to fleece)
Spares not to spoil the greatest Gods of Greece:
Then (cloyd with Europ) the Hellespont he past,
And there Mount Ida's neighbor world did waste:
Spoyleth Pisidia: Mysia does inthrall:
And midst of Asia plants another Gaul.
Most famous Peoples dark Antiquity,
Is as a Wood: where bold Temeritie
Stumbles each step; and learned Diligence,
It self intangles; and blind Ignorance
(Groping about in such Cimmerian nights)
In pits and ponds, and boggs, and quag-mires lights.
It shall suffice me therefore (in this doubt) He affirms finally that the
three Sons of Noah peopled the World, and shows how.

But (as it were) to coast the same about:
And, rightly tuned unto the golden string
Of Amrams Son, in grauest verse to sing,
That Sem, and Cham, and Iapheth did re-plant
The vn-peopled World with new inhabitant:
And that again great Noah's wandering Boat
The second time over all the World did float.
Not that I send Sem, at one flight vnceast,
From Babylon unto the farthest East,
Tartarian Chorat's silver waves t'essay,
And people China, Cambalu, Cathay,
Iapheth to Spayn: and that profanest Cham,
To thirsty Countries Meder' and Bigam,
To Cephala upon Mount Zambrica,
And Cape of Hope, last coign of Africa.
For, as Hymetus and Mount Hybla were 2. Fit co^parisont to represent the same.

Not ouer-spread and covered in one year
With busy Bees; but yearly twice or thrice
Each Hyve supplying new-com Colonies
(Heavens tender Nurcelings) to those fragrant Mountains,
At length their Rocks dissolved in Honey Fountains:
Or rather, as two fruitful Elms that spread
Amidst a Cloase with brooks environed,
Engender other Elms about their roots;
Those, other still; and still, new-springing shoots
So ouer-growe the ground, that in few years
The sometimes-Mead a greet thick Grove appears:
Even so the ambitious Babel-building rout,
Dispersed, at first go seat themselves about
Mesopotamia: after (by degrees)
Their happy Spawn, in sundry Colonies
Crossing from Sea to Sea, from Land to Land,
All the green-mantled nether Globe has manned:
So that, except the Almighty (glorious Judge
Of quick and dead) this World's ill days abridge,
There shall no soil so wild and savage be,
But shall be shadowed by great Adams Tree.
Therefore, those Countries nearest Tigris Spring, Why the first Monarkie began
in Assyria.

In those first ages were most flourishing,
Most spoken-of, first Warriors, first that guide,
And give the Law to all the Earth beside.
Babylon (living under the awful grace
Of Royal Greatness) swayed the Imperial Mace,
Before the Greeks had any Town at all,
Or warbling Lute had built the Dircean Wall:
Yer Gauls had houses, Latins Burgages,
Our Britains Tents, or Germans Cottages.
The Hebrews had with Angels Conversation, The Hebrews and their next
neighbors were ^^ligious and learned before the Gr^c^ans knew anything.

Held the Idol-Altars in abomination*
Knew the Unknown, with eyes of Faith they saw
The invisible Messiah, in the Law:
The Chaldees, Audit of the Stars had made,
Had measured Heaven, conceived how the Earths thick shade
Eclipst the silver brows of Cynthia bright,
And her brown shadow quenched her brothers light.
The Memphian Priests were deep Philosophers,
And curious gazers on the sacred Stars,
Searchers of Nature, and great Mathematics;
Yer any Letter, knew the ancient'st Attiks.
Proud Egypt glistred all with golden Plate, The Egyptians, and Tyrians had
their fill of Riches, and Pomp, and Pleasure, before the Greeks or Gauls knew
what the world meant.

Yer the lame Lemnian (under Aetna grate)
Had hammered iron; or the Vultur-rented
Prometheus, among the Greeks had fire invented.
Gauls were not yet; or, were they (at the least)
They were but wild; their habit, plumes; their feast,
But Mast and Acorns, for the which they gap't
Under the Trees when any wind had hapt:
When the bold Tyrians (greedy after gain)
Durst row about the salt-blow Africa Main;
Traffikt abroad, in Scarlet Robs were dressed,
And pomp and pleasure Euphrates possessed.
For, as a stone, that midst a Pond ye fling,
About his fall first forms a little ring,
Wherein, new Circles one in other growing
(Through the smooth Waters gentle-gentle flowing)
Still one the other more and more compel
From the Ponds Center, where the stone first fell;
Till at the last the largest of the Rounds
From side to side against every bank rebounds:
So, from the Earths Center (which I here suppose
About the Place where God did Tongues transpose)
Man (day by day his wit repolishing)
Makes all the Arts through all the Earth to spring,
As he does spread, and shed in diverse shoals
His fruitful Spawn, round under both the Poles.
Forth from Assyria, Eastward then they trauail The first Colonies of Sem in
the East.

Toward rich Hytanis with the golden gravel:
Then people they the Persian Oroatis;
Then clear Choaspis, which does humbly kiss
The Walls of Susa; then the Valleys fat
Near Caucasus, where yerst the Arsaces sat:
Then mann they Media; then with humane seed,
Toward the Sea the Hyrcania^ Plain they speed.
The Sons of these (like flowing Waters) spread The second.

Over all the Country which is bordered
With Chiesel River, above Thacalistan;
Gadel and Cabul, Bedan, Balestan.
Their offspring then, with fruitful stems does stoar The Third.

Basinagar, Nayard, and either shore
Of famous Ganges; Aua, Toloman,
The kingdom Mein, the Musky Charazan;
And round about the Desert Op, where often
By strange Phantasmas Passengers are scoft.
Some Ages after, linkt in diverse knots, The fourth.

Tipur they take, rich in Rhinocerots;
Caichin, in Aloes; Mangit, and the shore
Of Quinz' and Any lets them spread no more.
From that first Center to the Westward bending, First Colonies of Iapheth in
the West.

Old Noah's Nephews far and wide extending,
Seiz less Armenia; then, within Cilicia,
Possess the Ports of Tharsis and of Issea,
And the delicious strange Corycian Cave
(Which warbling sound of Cymballs seems to have)
^onia, Cappadocia, Taurus horns,
Bythinia, Troas, and Meanders turns. The second.

Then passing Sestos Straights; of Strymon cold,
Herber and Nest they quaff; and pitch their Fold
In vales of Rhodope, and plow the Plains
Where great Danubius near his death complains.
Thrace, on the other side, subtle Greece beswarms; The third divided into many
branches.

Greece, Italy (famous for Art and Arms):
Italy, France; France, Spayn, and Germany
( Rhines fruitful bed) and our Great Britanie.
On the other side, it spreads about Moldauia,
Mare-Maiour, Podolia, and Morauia,
With Transyluania, Seruia, and Panonia,
The Prussian Plains, and over all Polonia:
The verge of Vistula, and farther forth
Beyond the Alman, drawing to the North. First Colonies of Cham, toward the
South

Now turn thee Southward: see, see how Chaldea
Spews on Arabia, Phoenice, and Judea,
Chams cursed Ligne, which (ouer-fertill all)
Between two Seas does into Egypt fall;
Sowes all Cyrenia, and the famous Coast
Whereon the roaring Punik Sea is tossed:
Fez, Dara, Argier, Galate, Guzol, Aden,
Terminan, Tombut, Melle, Gago, Gogden:
The sparkling Deserts of sad Libya,
Zeczec, Benin, Borno, Cano, Nubia,
And scalding quicksands of those thirsty Plains
Where JESUS name (yet) in some reverence raigns;
Where Prester John (though part he Iudaize)
Does in somsort devoutly Christianize.
But would thou know, how that long Tract, that lies Colonies of the North.

Under Heavens starry Coach, covered with ice,
And round embraced in the winding arms
Of Cronian Seas (which Sol but seldom warms)
Came peopled first? suppose, that passing by
The Plains where Tigris twice keeps company
With the far-flowing silver Euphrates,
They lodged at foot of hoary Nyphates:
And from Armenia, then Iberia manned,
Albania, Colchis, and Bosphorian strand:
And then from thence toward the bright Leuant,
That vast Extent, where now fell Tartars hant
In wandering troops; and toward the other side
Which (near her source) long Volga does divide,
Moscouy Coast, Permia, Liuonia, Prussia,
Biarmia, Scrisinia, White-Lake, Lappia, Russia. How the Newfound World
(discovered in our Time) came peopled. A double question.

But whence (say you) had that New-World his Guests,
Which Spain (like Delos floting on the Seas)
Late dug from darkness of Obliuions Grave,
And it undoing, it new Essence gave?
If long ago; how should it hap that no-man
Knew it til now? no Persian, Greek, no Roman;
Whose glorious Peers, victorious Armies guiding
Over all the World, of this had never tyding?
If but of late; how swarm their Cities since
So full of Folk? how pass their Monuments
The Egyptian Spires, Mausolus stately Toomb,
The Walls and Courts of Babylon and Rome?
Why! think ye (fond) those people fell from Heaven ^. Answer.

All-ready-made; as in a Summer Even
After a swelting Day, some sultry shower
Does in the Marshes heaps of Tadpals pour,
Which in the ditches (chapt with parching weather)
Lie crushed and croaking in the Mud together?
Or else, that setting certain slips, that fixed
Their slender roots the tender mould betwixt,
They saw the light of Phoebus lyuening face;
Having, for milk, moist deaws; for Cradle, grass?
Or that they grew out of the fruitful Earth,
As Toad-stools, Turnips, Leeks, and Beets have birth?
Or (like the bones that Cadmus yerst did sow)
Were bravely born armed from top toe?
That spacious Coast, now called America,
Was not so soon peopled as Africa;
(The ingenious, Towr-full, and Law-louing Soil,
Which, Jove did with his Lemans name en-stile)
And that which from cold Bosphorus does spread
To pearl'd Auroras Saffron-coloured Bed.
Because, they ly nearer the diapry verges
Of tear-bridge Tigris Swallow-swifter surges
Whence our amazed first Grand-sires faintly fled,
And like sprung Patridge euery-where did spread;
Except that World, where under Castiles King,
Famous Columbus Force and Faith did bring.
But the rich buildings rare magnificence,
The infinite Treasures, various Governments,
Show that long since (although at sundry times)
'T had Colonies (although from sundry Climes):
Whether the violence of tempestuous weather
Some broken Vessels have enforced thither;
Whether, some desperate, dire extremity
Of Plague, War, Famine; orth' Authority
Of some brave Typhis (in adventure tossed)
Brought weary Caruels on that Indian Coast.
Who makes doubt but yerst the Quinzay Fraights Conictures touching the
Peopling of the same

As well might venture through the Anian Straights,
And find as easy and as short a way
From the East Indies to the Tolguage Bay,
As usually the Asian Ships are wont
To pass to Greece across the Hellespont:
Spaniards to Fez, a-thwart the Straight Abilia:
Through Messine stream the Italians to Sicilia?
From Tolm and Quiuir's spacious Plains (wherein
Bunch-backed Calves, with Horse-like manes are seen,
And Sheep-like Fleece) they fill Azasia,
Toua, Topir, Canada, Cossia,
Mecchi, Avacal, Calicuaz, Bacalos,
Los Campos de Labor (where Floods are froze).
On the other side, Xalisco soil they Mann Wonders of the Newfound World.

(Now new Galizia) Cusule, Mechuacan:
And cunningly in Mexik Sea they pile
Another Uenice (or a City- I Will).
Strange things there see they (that amaze them much)
Green Trees to wither with their very touch;
And in Nicaragua, a Mountain top,
That ( Aetna-like) bright Flashes belches up.
Thence, reach they the Isthmos of rich Panama,
And on their right hand build Oucanama,
With Cassamalca, Cusco, Quito: and
In famous Perv's very golden Strand
Admire the Lake that laueth Colle about,
Whose Waves be salt within, and fresh without:
And streams of Cinca, that with virtue strange,
To hardest stone, soft Mud and Chalk do change.
Then seiz they Chili, where all day the Deep
Runs roaring down, and all the night does sleep:
Chinca, the Patagons, and all the shore
Where the azure Seas of Magellan do roor.
Left-ward, they spread them 'longst the Darians side;
Where through the Vrabian Fields the Huo does slide,
Near Zenu's stream, which toward the Ocean drags,
Pure grains of Gold, as big as Pullets Eggs:
To new Granada, where the Mount embost*
With Emeralds does shine; Cumanean Coast,
Where noysom vapors (like a dusky night)
Bedimms their eyes; and does impair their sight:
Therefore some troops, from Cumana they carry
To Caripana, Omagu, and Pari:
By Maragnon, all over fell Brasile,
And Plate's fat Plains, where flows another Nile.
Guess too, that Grotland yerst did Picne store,
And Ireland fraught Los Campos de Labor;
As Tombut, Melli, Gago and Terminan,
Planted the Plains and shoars of Corican.
Yet (happily) thou wilt gladly grant me this,
That man's ambition ay so bound-les is, How it was possible that Noah and his
3. Sons should so multiply.

That steepest Hills it over-climbs with ease,
And runs (as dry-shod) through the deepest Seas:
And (maugre meagre Thirst) her Carvells Lands,
On Afrik, Tolmon, and Arabian sands;
But hardly credit'st, that one Family,
Out of four couples should so multiply,
That Asia, Europ, Africa, and All
Seems for their offspring now too straight and small.
If thouset-light by the everlasting Voice, 1. Answer.

Which now again re-blest the Loue-full Choice
Of sacred Wedlocks secret-binding band;
Saying, Increase, Flourish and Fill the Land:
And if (profane) thou hold it for a Fiction, 2.

That Seauenty Jews, in Egypt (in affliction)
Within four hundred years and half threescore,
Grew to fiue-hundred-thousand souls and more:
Consider yet, that being fed that while, 3.

With holesom Fruits of an vn-forced soil,
And kindly meats, not marred by the Book,
And wanton cunning of a saucy Cook:
Weigh furthermore, that being not cut-down
With bloody swords when furious neighbors frown;
Nor worn with Trauail, nor infeebeled
With hateful Sloth: Our Grand-sires flowrished
Hundreds of years in youth; and even in Age
Could render duly Venus Escuage:
And that Polygamy (in those days common)
Most Men usurping more then one sole Woman,
Made then the World so mightily augment
In upright Creatures; and (in continent)
From fruitful Loigns of one old Father-stock,
So many branches of mankind to flock: Comparison to that purpose.

Even as an ear of Corn (if all the yield
Be yearly sow'n still in a fertile Field)
Fills Barns at length; and spreads in spacious Plain
Millions of millions of like ears again.
Or, as two Fishes, cast into a Mere,
With fruitful Spawn will furnish in few year
A Town with victual, and serve (furthermore)
Their neighbor Waters with their Fry to store.
Have not our Days a certain Father known, An example of our days.

Who with the fruit of his own body grow'n,
Peopled a Village of a hundred Fires,
And issue-blest (the Crown of Old Desires)
In his own lifetime, his own offspring saw
To wed each other, without breach of Law?
So far, the branches of his fruitful Bed,
Past all the Names of Kindreds-Tree did spread.
It Is known that few Arabian Families Another example.

New-planted Lybia with their Progenies,
In compass of three hundred years and less;
And Bugie, Argier, Oran, Thunis, Tez,
Fez, Melli, Gago, Tombut, Terminan
With hateful Laws of Heathnish Alcoran.
If this, among the Africans we see,
Whom cor'ziue humor of Melancholy
Does always tickle with a wanton Lust,
Although less powr-full in the Paphian Ioust
For Propagation (for too-often Deed
Of Loues-Delight, enfeebles much their seed:
And inly, still they feel a Wintery Fever,
As outwardly, a scorching Summer ever)
Ghess how much more, those, whose hoar heads approach
And see the turnings of Heavens flaming Coach,
Do multiply; because they seldom venture,
And but in season, Uenus lists to enter.
And, the cold, resting (under the Artick Star)
Still Master of the Field in champian War,
Makes Heat retire into the Bodies-Towr:
Which there united, gives them much more power. The North has exceedingly
multiplied in people: the South not so.

For thence indeed, Hunns, Herules, Franks, Bulgarians,
Circassyans, Sweues, Burgognians, Turks, Tartarians,
Dutch, Cimhers, Normans, Alains, Ostrogothes,
Tigurins, Lombards, Vandals, Visigothes,
Have swarmed (like Locusts) round about this Ball,
And spoiled the fairest Provinces of all:
While barren South had much a-doot' assemble
(In all) two Hoasts; that made the North to tremble:
Whereof; the One, that one-ey'd Champion led,
Who famous Carthage raised, and ruined:
The other (by Tours) Charles Martell martyred so;
That never since, could Afrik Army show. Whence our Author takes occasion to
enter into an excellent discourse of Gods wondrous work in the diverse
temperatures, qualities, complexions, and manners, of so many Nations in the
World.

O! see, how full of Wonders strange is Nature:
Since in each Climat, not alone in stature,
Strength, hair, and color, that men differ do,
But in their humors and their manners too.
Whether that, custom into Nature change:
Whether that, Youth to the Elds example range*
Or diverse Laws of diverse Kingdoms, vary-vs:
Or the influence of Heavenly bodies cary-vs.
The Northern-man is fair, the Southern foul;
That Is white, this black; that smiles, and this does scoul:
The one's blythe and frolik, the other dull and froward;
The one's full of courage, the other fearful coward:
The ones hair is harsh, big, curled, the other's slender;
The one loves Labor, the other Books does render:
The one's hot and moist, the other hot and dry;
The one's Voice is hoarce, the other's clear and high:
The one's plain and honest the other all deceit;
The one's rough and rude, the other handsome neat:
The one (giddy-brain'd) is turned with every wind;
The other (constant) never changes mind:
The one's loose and wanton, the other continent;
The one thrift-less lavish, the other provident:
The one mild Companion; the other, stern and strange,
(Like a wild Wolf) loves by himself to range:
The one's pleased with plainness, the other pomp affects:
The one's born for Arms, the other Arts respects.
But middling folk, who their abiding make
Between these two, of either guise partake:
And such have stronger limbs, but weaker wit,
Then those that near Nyles fertile sides do sit;
And (opposite) more wit, and lesser force
Then those that haunt Rhines and Danubius shoars.
For, in the Cirque of the Universal City;
The Southern-man, who (quick and curious-witty)
Builds all on Dreams, deep Ecstasies, and Traunces,
Who measures Heavens eternall-mouing Daunces,
Whose searching soul can hardly besuffiz'd
With vulgar Knowledge, holds the Place of Priest.
The Northern-man, whose wit in's Fingers settles,
Who what him list can work in Wood and Mettles,
Who ( Salmon-like) can thunder counterfeit;
With men of Arms, and Artizans is set.
The Third (as knowing well to rule a State)
Holds, grauely-wise, the room of Magistrate.
The one (to be brief) loves studious Theory,
The other Trades, the third deep Policy.
Yet true it is, that since some later lustres,
Minerua, Themis, Hermes, and his Sisters
Have set, as well, their Schools in the Artick Parts,
As Mars his Lists, and Vulcan Shops of Arts. Notable differences between the
Nations of Europe.

Nay, see we not among ourselves, that live
Mingled almost (to whom the Lord does give
But a small Turf of Earth to dwell-vpon)
This wondrous ods in our condition?
We find the Alman, in his fight courageous,
But salable; the Italian too-outragious;
Sudden the French, impatient of delay;
The Spaniard slow, but subtle to hetray:
The Alman, in Counsel cold the Italian quick,
The French inconstant, Spaniards politik:
Fine Feeds the Italian, and the Spaniard spares; Especially the French,
German, Italian, and Spaniard.

Prince-like the French, Pig-like the Alman, fares:
Mild speaks the French, the Spaniard proud and brave,
Rudely the Alman, and the Italian grave:
The Italian proud in tire, French changing much,
Fit-clad the Spaniard, and vn-fit the Dutch:
The Frenchman braves his Fo, the Italian cheers-him,
The Alman spoils, the Spaniard never bears-him:
The Frenchman sings, the Italian seems to bleat,
The Spaniard whines, the Alman howleth great:
Spaniards like Iugglers Iett; the Almans like Cocks,
The French goes quick, the Italian like an Ox:
Dutch Lovers, proud; the Italian envious,
Frolik the French, the Spaniard furious.
Yet would the Lord, that Noah's fruitful Race Causes why the Lord would have
Mankind so dispersed over All the World.

Should overspread the Earths universal Face:
That, drawing so his Children from the crimes
Which seem peculiar to their Native Climes,
He might reveal his grace: and that Heavens Lights
Might well incline (but not constrain) our sprights:
That over all the World, his Saints, always
Might offer him sweet Sacrifice of Praise:
That from cold Scythia, his high Name as far
Might ay resound, as Sunburned Zanzibar:
And that the treasures which strange Soyls produce,
Might not seem worth-les, for the want of use;
But that the Inland Lands might truck and barter
And vent their Wares about to every Quarter. The World compared to a mighty
City, wherein dwell People of all conditions, continually traffiking together
and exchanging their particular commodities, for benefit of the Public.

For, as in LONDON (stuffed with every sort)
Here Is the Kings Palace, there the Iunes of Court:
Here (to the Thames-ward, all a-long the STRAND)
The stately Houses of the Nobles stand:
Here dwell rich Merchants; there Artificers;
Here Silk-men, Mercers, Goldsmiths, Iewellers:
There Is a Churchyard furnished with choice of Books;
Here stand the Shambles, there the Row of Cooks:
Here wonn Vp-Holsters, Haberdashers, Horners;
There Pothecaries, Grocers, Taylours, Tourners:
Here Shoo-makers; there Ioyners, Coopers, Coriers;
Here Browers, Bakers, Cutlers, Felters, Furriers:
This Street is full of DRAPERS, that of Diars:
This Shop with Tapers, that with Women's Tyars:
For costly Toys, Silk Stockings, Cambrick, Lawn,
Here Is choice-full Plenty in the curious PAWN:
And All Is but an Exchange, where (briefly) no-man
Keeps ought, as private. Trade makes all things common.
So com our Sugars from Canary Isles:
From Candy, Currance, Muskadels, and Oils:
From the Moluques, Spices: Balsamum
From Egypt: Odours from Arabia com:
From India, Drugs, rich Gemms, and Iuorie:
From Syria, Mummie: black-red Ebonie,
From burning Chus: From Peru, Pearl and Gold:
From Russia, Furs (to keep the rich from cold):
From Florence, Silks: From Spayn, Fruit, Saffron, Sacks:
From Denmark, Amber, Cordage, Firres, and Flax:
From France and Flanders, Linen, Woad, and Wine:
From Holland, Hops: Horse, from the banks of Rhine.
In brief, each Country (as pleased God distribute)
To the Worlds Treasure pays a sundry Tribute. Man, lord of the World: which
for the commodity of his life contributes bountifully all manner of necessaries.

And, as sometimes that sumptuous Persian Dame
(Out of her Pride) accustomed to name
One Province for her Roab, her Rayl another,
Her Partlet this, her Pantofles the the other,
This her rich Mantle, that her royal Chain,
This her rare Bracelets, that her stately Train:
Even so may Man; For, what wild Hill so steep?
What so waste Desert? what so dangerous Deep?
What Scaso wrackfull? or so barren shore
In all the World may be supposed so poor,
But yields him Rent: and free from envious Spite,
Contributes frankly to his Life's Delight? The same more especially dilated in
the particulars.

The inammell'd Valleys, where the liquid glass
Of silver Brooks in curled streams does pass,
Serve us for Gardens; and their flowerie Fleece
Affoords us Sythe-work, yearly twice or thrice:
The Plains for Corn: the swelling Downs for Sheep;
Small Hills for Vines: the Mountains strangely-steep
(Those Heav'n-climbe Ladders, Labyrinths of wonder,
Cellars of wind, and Shops of sulphury Thunder;
Where stormy Tempests have their ugly birth;
Which thou mis-call'st the blemish of the Earth;
Thinking (profane) that God, or Fortune light
Made them of envy or of oversight)
Bound with eternal bounds proud Emperies;
Bear mighty Forests, full of Timber Trees
(Whereof thou buildest Ships and Houses fair,
To trade the Seas, and fence thee from the Air)
Spew spacious Rivers, full of fruitful Breed,
Which neighbour-Peoples with their plenty feed;
Fatten the Earth with fresh, sweet, fertile mists;
Drive gainful Mills; and serve for Forts and Lists
To stop the Fury of Wars waste-full hand;
And ioyn to the Sea, the middle of the Land.
The Wyldes and Deserts, which so much amaze-thee,
Are goodly Pastures, that do daily graze-thee
Millions of Beasts for tillage, and (besides)
Store thee with flesh, with Fleeces, and with Hides.
Yea, the vast Sea (which seems but only good,
To drown the World; and cover with his Flood
So many Countries, where we else might hope
For thrifty pains to reap a thankful Crop)
Is a large Lardar, that in brynie Deeps,
To nourish thee, a World of Creatures keeps:
A plentious Victualler, whose provisions serve
Millions of Cities that else needs must starve
(Like half-dead Dolphins, which the Ebb lets lie
Gasping for thirst upon the sand, a-drie):
'Tincreaseth Trade, Iournies abbreuiates,
The flitting Clouds it cease-les exhalates;
Which, cooling the air, and gushing down in rain,
Make Ceres Sons (in sight) to mounta-main.
But, shall I still be Boreas Tennis-ball? Here (as it were) wearied with so
long a voyage, from so broad and bottom-les an Ocean (in imitation of the
inimitable Author) the Translator hoping kind entertainme^t, puts in for the
Port of England: whose happy praises he prosecutes at large; Concluding with a
zealous Prayer for preservation of the King and prosperity of his Kingdoms.

Shall I be still stern Neptunes tossed Thrall?
Shall I no more behold thy native smoke,
Deer Ithaca? Alas! my Barkis broak,
And leaks so fast, that I can row no more:
Help, help, (my Mates) make haste unto the shore.
O! we are lost; unless some friendly banks
Quickly receive our Tempest-beaten planks.
Ah, courteous ENGLAND, thy kind arms I see
Wide-stretched out to save and welcome me.
Thou (tender Mother) wilt not suffer Age
To snow my locks in Foreign Pilgrimage:
That fell Bresile my breath-les Corpse should shroud,
Or golden Peru of my Praise be proud,
Orrich Cathay to glory in my Verse:
Thou gav'st me Cradle, thou will give me Hearse.
All-haile (deer ALEION) Europ's Pearl of price,
The Worlds rich Garden, Earths rare Paradise:
Thrice-happy Mother, which ay bringest-forth
Such Chiualry as daunteth all the Earth
(Planting the Trophies of thy glorious Arms
By Sea and Land, where ever Titan warms):
Such Artizans as do wel-neer Eclipse
Fair Natures praise in peer-les Workmanships:
Such happy Wits, as Egypt, Greece and Rome
(At least) have equaled, if not ouer-com;
And shine among their (Modern) learned Fellows,
As Gold does glister among paler Yellows:
Or as Apollo the other Planets passes:
Or as His Flowr excels the Medow-grasses.
Thy Rivers, Seas; thy Cities, Shires do seem;
Civil in manners, as in buildings trim:
Sweet is thine Air, thy Soil exceeding Fat,
Fenc't from the World (as better-worth then That)
With triple Wall (of Water, Wood, and Brass)
Which never Stranger yet had power to pass;
Save when the Heavens have for thy heinous Sin,
By some of Thine, with false Keys let them in.
About thy borders (O Heav'n-blessed I WILL)
There never crawls the noy some Crocodile;
Nor Bane-breath'd Serpent, basking in thy sand,
Measures an Acre of thy flowery Land;
The swift foot Tiger, or fierce Lioness
Haunt not thy. Mountains, nor thy wilderness;
Nor ravening Wolves worry thy tender Lambs,
Bleating for help unto their help-les Dams;
Nor subtle Seahorse, with deceiptfull Call,
Entice thy Children in thy Floods to fall.
What though thy Thames and Tweed have never rolled,
Among their grauel, massy grains of Gold?
What though thy Mountains spew no Siluer-streams?
Though every Hillock yield not precious Gemms?
Though in thy Forests hang no Silken Fleeces?
Nor sacred Incense, nor delicious Spices?
What though the clusters of thy colder Vines
Distill not Clarets, Sacks, nor Muscadines?
Yet are thy Wolls, thy Corn, thy Cloth, thy Tin,
Mines rich enough to make thee Europes Queen,
Yea Empress of the World; Yet not sufficient
To make thee thankful to the Cause efficient
Of all thy Blessings: Who, besides all this,
Has (now nine Lustres) lent thee greater Bliss;
His blessed Word (the witness of his favor)
To guide thy Sons unto his Son (their Sauer)
With Peace and Plenty: while, from War and Want,
Thy neighbors Countries never breathed scant.
And last, not least (so far beyond the scope
Of Christians Fear, and Anti-Christians Hope)
When all, thy Fall seemed to Prognosticate,
Has higher raised the glory of thy State;
In raising STVARDS to thy regal Throne,
To Rule (as David and as Solomon)
With prudence, Prowess, Justice, and Sobriety,
Thy happy People in Religious Piety.
Otoo-too happy! too-too fortunate!
Knew'st thou thy Weal: or were thou not ingrate.
But least (at last) Gods righteous wrath consume-vs
If on his patience still we thus presume-vs:
And least (at last) all Blessings had before
Double in Curses to torment-vs more:
Deer Mother ENGLAND, bend thine aged knee,
And to the Heavens lift up thy hands with me;
Off with thy Pomp, hence with thy Pleasures past:
Thy Mirth be Mourning, and thy Feast a FAST:
And let thy soul, with my sad soul, confess
Our former sins, and ^oul unthankfulness.
Pray we the Father, through the adopting Spirit,
Not measure us according to our merit;
Nor strictly weigh, at his High Justice Beam,
Our bold Rebellions, and our Pride extreme:
But, for his Son (our deer Redeemer's) sake,
His Sacrifice, for our Sins Ransom, take;
And, looking on us with mild Mercies Ey,
Forgive our Past, our Future Sanctify;
That never more, his Fury we incense
To strike (as Now) with raging Pestilence
(Much less provoke him by our guilt so far,
To wound us more, with Famine and with War).
Lord, cease thy wrath: Put up into thy Quiver
This dreadful shaft: Deer Father us deliver:
And under wings of thy protection keep
Thy servant JAMES, both waking and a-sleep:
And (furthermore) we (with the Psalmist) sing
Lord give thy judgments to (our Lord) the King, Psalm. 72.

And to his Son: and let there aye be one
Of his Male Seed to sit upon his Throne,
To feed thy Folk in Jacob, and (advance)
In Israel thy (deer) Inheritance,
And (long-long-liued) full of Faith and Zeal,
Reform (like Asa) Church and Commonweal;
Raising poor Virtue, razing proudest Vice,
Without respect of Person or of Price;
That all bold Atheists, all Blasphemers, then,
All Popish Traitors may be weeded clean.
And, Cursed, be All that say not here, Amen.
FINIS.
THE COLVMNES. THE IIII. PART OF THE II. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Seth's Pillars found: Heber instructs his Son
In the use thereof, and who them first begun;
Opens the One, and finds on several Frames,
Four lively Statues of four lovely Dames
(The Mathematiks) furnished each apart,
With Equipages of their several Art:
Wonders of Numbers and Geometry:
New Observations in Astronomy:
Musiks rare force: Canaan (the Cursed) cause
Of Hebers stop; and BARTA swittie pause.
IF ever (Lord) the purest of my Soul Being about to treat of the
M^thematicks, our Poet he^r imploreth especial assistance in handling so high
and difficult a Subi^ct.

In sacred Rage were rapt above the Pole:
If ever, by thy Spirit my spirit inspired,
Offered thee Lays that learned France admired:
Father of Light, Fountain of learned Art,
Now, now (or never) purge my purest part:
Now quintessence my Soul, and now advance
My care-free Powrs in some celestial Trance:
That (purged from Passion) thy Divine address
May guide me through Heavens glistring Palaces;
Where (happily) my deer VRANIA'S grace,
And her fair Sisters I may all embrace:
And (the melodious Sirens of the Spears,
Charming my senses in those sweets of theirs)
So ravished, I may at rest contemple
The Starrie Arches of thy stately Temple:
Unto this end, that as (at first) from thee
Our Grand-sires learned Heavens Course and Quality;
Thou now mai'st prompt me some more lofty Song,
As to this lofty Subject does belong.
AFTER THAT Men's strife-hatching, haut Ambition, The occasion and ground of
this Discourse.

Had (as by lot) made this low Worlds partition;
Phalec and Heber, as they wandered, sand
A huge high Pillar, which upright did stand
(Much like a Rock amid the Ocean set,
Seeming great Neptunes surly pride to threat;
Whereon, a Pharos bears a Lanthorn bright,
To save from Shipwreck those that sail by night)
And afterward, another nigh as great;
But not so strong, so stately, nor so neat:
For, on the flowrie field it lay all flat,
Built but of Brick, of rusty Tyles, and Slat:
Whereas the First was builded fair and strong
Of Jasper smooth, and Marble lasting long.
What Miracles! what monstrous heaps! what Hills Phalecs Question.

Heav'd-vp by hand! what Types of antike Skills
In form-les Forms (quoth Phalec)! Father show
(For, the Ages past I know full well you know):
Pray teach me, who did both these Works erect:
About what time: and then to what effect.
Old Seth (says Heber) Adams Scholar yerst Hebers answer.

(Who was the Scholar of his maker first)
Having attained to know the course and sites,
The aspect and greatness of Heavens glistring Lights;
He taught his Children, whose industrious wit
Through diligence grew excellent in it.
For, while their flocks on flowrie shoars they kept
Of the Eastern Floods, while others soundly slept
(Hushing their cares in a Night-shortning nap,
Upon Obliuions dull and sense-les Lap)
They living lusty, thrice the age of Ravens,
Observed the Twinkling Wonders of the Heavens:
And on their Grand-sires firm and goodly ground
Asumptuous building they in time do found.
But (by Tradition Cabalist^k) taught
That God would twice reduce this world to naught,
By Flood and Flame; they reared cunningly
This stately payr of Pillars which you see;
Long-time safe-keeping, for their after-Kin,
A hundred learned Mysteries therein.
This having said, old Heber drawing nigher, The opening of the Pillars.

Opens a Wicket in the Marble Spire,
Where ( Phalec following) soon perceive they might
A pure Lamp burning with immortal light.
As a mean person, who (though oft-disgrac't
By churlish Porters) is conuaigh'd at last Simile.

To the Kings Closet; rapt in deep amaze,
At the end-les Riches, up and down does gaze:
So Phalec fares. O father (cries he out)
What shapes are these here placed round about,
So like each other wrought with equal skill,
That four rain-drops cannot more like distill?
What Tools are these? what divine secrets lie
Hidden within this learned Mystery?
These four (quoth Heber) Four bright Virgins are, The liberal Sciences.

Heavens Babes, and Sisters the most fair and rare,
That e're begot the eternal Spirit (ex-pir'd
From double Spirit) or humane soul admired.
This first, that still her lips and fingers moves, Arithmetike.

And up and down so sundry-wayes remoues
Her nimble Crowns; the industrious Art it is
Which knows to cast all Heavens bright Images,
All Winters hail, and all the gaudy flowrs
Wherewith gay Flora pranks this Globe of ours.
She Is stately decked in a most rich Attire:
All kind of Coyns in glistering heaps ly by-her:
Upon her sacred head Heaven seems to drop
A richer shower then fell in Dan^es Lap:
A gold-ground Robe; and for a Glass (to look)
Down by her girdle hangs a Table Book,
Wherein the chief of her rare Rules are writ,
To be safe-guarded from times greedy bit.
Mark here what Figure stands for One, the right Her Numbers.

Root of all Number; and of Infinite: 1

Loves happiness, the praise of Harmony,
Nurcerie of All, and end of Polymnie:
No Number, but more then a Number yet;
Potentially in all, and all in it. 2

Now, note Two's Character, One's heir apparent,
As his firstborn; first Number, and the Parent 3

Of Female Payrs. Here now observe the Three,
The eldest of Odds, Gods number properly;
Wherein, both Number, and no-number enter:
Heavens dearest Number, whose enclosed Center
Does equally from both extremes extend:
The first that has beginning, midst, and end.
The ( Cubes-Base) Four; a full and perfect sum, 4

Whose added parts just unto Ten do com;
Number of Gods great Name, Seasons, Complexions,
Winds, Elements, and Cardinal Perfections.
The Hermaphrodite Five, never multiplied 5

By'tself, or Odd, but there is still descri'd
His proper face: for, three times Five arrive
Unto Fifteen; Five Fiues to Twenty- five.
The perfect Six, whose just proportions gather, 6

To make his Whole, his members altogether:
For Three's his half, his Sixth One, Two his Third;
And One Two Three make Six, in One conferd.
The Critical and double-sexed Seav'n, 7

The Number of the vnfixed Fires of Heaven;
And of the eternal sacred Sabbath;
Which Three and Four contains jointly both.
The Eight, double-square. The sacred note of Nine, 8. 9.

Which comprehends the Muses Triple-Trine.
The Ten, which does all Numbers force combine: 10.

The Ten, which makes, as One the Point, the Line:
The Figure, the Hundred, Thousand (solid corpse) 100. 1000.

Which, often re-doubled, on the Atlantik shoars
Can sum the sand, and all the drops distilling
From weeping Auster, or the Ocean filling.
See: many Sums, here written straight and even Addition.

Each over other, are in one contriuen:
See here small Numbers drawn from greater count: Subtraction. Multiplication.

Here Multiplid they infinitely mount:
And lastly, see how (on the other side) Division.

One Sum in many does it self Divide.
That sallow-fac't, sad, stooping Nymph, whose ey
Still on the ground is fixed steadfastly,
Seeming to draw with point of silver Wand Geometry.

Some curious Circles in the sliding sand;
Who wears a Mantle, brancht with flowrie Buds,
Embost with Gold, trayled with silver Floods,
Bordered with greenest Trees, and Fringed fine
With richest azure of Seas storm-full brine:
Whose dusky Buskins (old and tattered out)
Show, she has trauail'd far and near about
By North and South; it is Geometry,
The Crafts-mans guide, Mother of Symmetrie,
The life of Instruments of rare effect,
Law of that Law which did the World erect.
Here Is nothing here, but Rules, Squires, Compasses, Her Instruments and
Figures.

Waights, Measures, Plummets, Figures, Balances.
Lo, where the Workman with a steady hand
Ingeniously a level Line has drawn,
Warlike Triangles, building-fit Quadrangles,
And hundred kinds of Forms of Manie-Angles
Sraight, Broad, and Sharp: Now see on the other side
Other, whose Tracts never directly slide,
As with the Snayl, the crooked Serpenter,
And that which most the learned do prefer,
The complete Circle; from whose euery-place
The Center stands an equi-distant space.
See here the Solids, Cubes, Cylinders, Cones,
Pyramides, Prismas, Dodechaedrons:
And there the Sphere, which (Worlds Type) comprehends
In't-selfit-self; having nor midst nor ends:
Arts excellence, praise of his peers, a wonder
Wherein consists (in diverse sort) a hundred:
Firm Mobile, an vp-down-bending-Vault,
Sloaping in Circuit, yet directly wrought.
See, how so soon as it to veer begins,
Both up and down, forward and back it wends;
And, rapt by other, not it self alone
Moves, but moves others with its motion
(Witness the Heavens): yea, it does seem, beside,
When it stands still, to shake on every side,
Because it has but one small point wher-on
His equal halves are equi-peiz'd upon,
And yet this goodly Globe (where we assemble)
Though hung in the Air) does never selfly tremble:
For, it is the midst of the Con-centrik Orbs
Whom never Angle nor out-nook disturbs.
All Solids else (cast in the Air) reflect
Vn-self-like-forms: but in a Globe each tract
Seems still the same, because it euery-where
Is uniform, and differs not a hair.
More-ouer, as the Buildings Ambligon
May more receive then Mansions Oxigon
(Because the acute, and the rect-Angles too,
Stride not so wide as obtuse Angles do):
So does the Circle in his Circuit span
More room then any other Figure can.
The other are easily broke, because of ioints,
Ends and beginnings, edges, nooks, and points:
But, the Orb's not subject unto such distress,
Because it is joint les, point-les, corner-less.
Chiefly (my Phalec) hither bend thy mind,
And learn Two Secrets which but few shall find,
Two busy knots, Two labyrinths of doubt,
Where future Schools shall wander long about,
Beating their brains, their best endeavors troubling:
The Circles Squareness, and the Cubes Re-doubling.
Print ever faster in thy faithful brain, The certainty of Geometry.

Then on brass leaves, these Problemes proved plain,
Not by Sophistick subtle Arguments,
But even by practice and experience:
Vn-disputable Art, and fruitful Skill,
Which with new wonders all the World shall fill.
Heer-by the Waters of the lowest Fountains, Her rare inventions. Mills.

Shall play the Millers, as the Winds on Mountains:
And grain so ground within a rolling Frame,
Shall pay his duty to his niggard Dame.
Heer-by, a Bullet spewd from Brazen breast
In fiery fume against a Town distressed, Gunnes.

With roaring power shall pash the Rocks in sunder,
And with the noise even drown the voice of Thunder.
Heer-by, the Wings of favorable Winds
Shall bear from Western to the Eastern Indes, Ships.

From Africa to Thule's farthest Flood,
A House (or rather a whole Town) of Wood;
While sitting still, the Pilot shall at ease
With a short Leauer guide it through the Seas.
Heer-by, the PRINTER, in one day shall rid Printing.

More Books, then yerst a thousand Wrighters did.
Heer-by, a Crane shall steed in building, more The Crane.

Then hundred Porters busy pains before:
The Iacobs-staff, to measure heights, and Lands, The Staff.

Shall far excel a thousand nimble hands,
To part the Earth in Zones and Climats even;
And in twice-twenty-and-foure Figures, Heaven.
A Wand, Sand, Water, small Wheels turning ay, Dials and Clocks.

In twice-twelue parts shall part the Night and Day.
Statues of Wood shall speak: and fained Spears Spears.

Show all the Wonders of true Heaven in theirs.
Men, rashly mounting through the empty Sky,
With wanton wings shall cross the Seas wel-nigh:
And (doubt-less) if the Geometrician find
Another World where (to his working mind)
To place at pleasure and conuenience
His wondrous Engines and rare Instruments,
Even (like a little God) in time he may
To some new place transport this World away.
Because these Two our passage open set
To bright Vrania's sacred Cabinet,
Wherein she keeps her sumptuous Furniture,
Pearls, Diamonds, Rubies, and Saphires pure:
Because, to climb starrie Parnassus top
None can, unless these Two do help him up
(For, whosoever wants either of these Two eyes,
In vain beholds Heavens glistering Canapies):
The Caruer (here) close by Geometry Astronomy.

And Numbering Art, has placed Astronomy.
A silver Crescent wears she for a Crown,
A hairy Comet to her heels hangs down,
Brows stately bent in milde-Maiestik wise,
Beneath the same two Carbuncles for eyes,
An Azure Mantle wauing at her back,
With two bright Clasps buckled about her neck;
From her right shoulder sloaping ouer-thwart-her,
A watchet Scarf, or broad imbrodered Garter,
Flourisht with Beasts of sundry shapes, and each
With glistering Stars imbost and poudred rich;
And then, for wings, the golden plumes she wears
Of that proud Bird which starrie Rowells bears.
Bur what fair Globes (quoth Phalec) seems she thus, Her 2. Globes.

With spreading arms, to reach and offer us?
My Son (quoth Heber) that round Figure there, 1. The Terrestrial.

With crossing Circles, is the Mundane Sphere;
Wherein, the Earth (as the most vile and base,
And Lees of All) does hold the lowest place:
Whom prudent Nature girdeth ouer-thwart
With azure Zone: or rather, every part
Couers with Water winding round about,
Save here and there some Angles peeping out:
For, the Oceans liquid and sad slyding Waves
Sinking in deepest of Earths hollow Caves,
Seek not (within her vast unequal height)
The Center of the wideness, but the weight.
There, should be the Air, the Fire, and wandering Seven,
The Firmament, and the first-mouing Heaven
(Besides the Empyreall Palace of the Saincted)
Each over other, if they could be painted.
But the Artist, faining, in the steed of these, His 10. Circles.

Ten Circles, like Heavens Superficies;
To guide us to them by more easy Path,
In hollow Globe the same described has.
'Mid the amplest Six, whose crossing difference 1 The Equi-noctiall.

Diuides in two the Spears Circumference,
Stands the Equinoctial; equi-distant all
From those two Poles which do support this Ball.
Therefore each Star that underneath it slides,
A rest-les, long and weary Journey rides,
Goes larger Circuit, and more speedy far
Then any other steady fixed Star
(Which wexeth slow the more it does advance
Near either Pole his God-directed Dance)
And while Apollo drives his Load of Light
Under this Line, the Day and dusky Night
Tread equal steps: for, learned Natures hand
Then measures them a-like in every Land.
The next, which there beneath it sloaply slides,
And his fair Hindges from the World's diuides
Twice twelve Degrees; is called the Zodiac, 2 The Zodiak.

The Planets path, where Phoebus plies to make
The Years Revolution: through new Houses ranging,
To cause the Seasons yearly fourfold changing.
The other, which (crossing the Universal Props, 3 The 1. Colure.

And those where Titans whirling Chariot sloaps)
Rect-angles forms; and, crooking, cuts in two
Here Capricorn; there burning Cancer too;
Of the Sun's stops, it Colure has to name,
Because his Teem does seem to trot more tame
On these cut points: for here he does not ride
Flatling a-long, but up the Spears steep side.
The other, which cuts this equi-distantly 4 The 2. Colure.

With Aries, Poles, and Scale, is (like-wisely)
The Second Colure: The Meridian, This 5 The Meridian.

Which never in one Point of Heaven persists;
But still pursues our Zenith: as the light 6 The Horizon.

Inconstant Horizon our shifting sight.
For the four small ones: here the Tropiks turn, 7 and 8 The Tropiks.

Both that of Cancer and of Capricorn.
And nearer the Hindges of the golden Sphere,
Here Is the South-Circle; the North-Circle there: 9 and 10 The South and North
Circles.

Which Circles cross not (as you see) at all
The Center-point of the Universal Ball;
But, parting the Orb into vn-equall else,
'Twixtth' Equi-nox and them, rest Parallels. The Celestial Globes.

The other Ball her left hand does support,
Is Heavens bright Globe: for, though that Art com short
Of Nature far, here may ingenious souls
Admire the stages of Star-seeled Poles.
O what delight it is in turning soft The diverse aspects of the celestial
Bodies.

The bright Abbridgement of that Upper Loft,
(To seem) to see Heavens glorious Host to march
In glistring Troops about the Ethereal Arch!
Where, one for Arms bears Bow and Shafts: a Sword
A second has; a trembling Lance a third:
One falls: another in his Chariot rowles
On the azure Brass of the euer-radiant Bowls:
This serves a-foot, that (as a Horseman) rides:
This up, that down; this back, that forward slides:
Their Order order-less, and Peace-full Braul
With-child's the World; fills Sea, and Earth, and All.
I never see their glaunces inter-iect Simile.

In Triangle, Sextile, or Square aspect;
Now mild, now moody: but, me thinks I see
Some frollik Swains amid their dancing glee;
Where Men and Maids together make them merry,
With Iigs and Rounds, till Pipe and all be weary:
Where, on his Love one smiles with wanton eye;
Wher-at his Rival frowns for Jealousy.
But why (quoth Phalec) has the All-Fair, who frames Question.

Naught here below, but's full of Beauties flames;
Ingrav'n on the Orbs of the azure 'Crystalline
(Where Beauties self, and Love should ever shine)
So many hideous Beasts and Monsters fell?
Fellows, more fit for the ugly Fiends in Hell.
Surely (says Heber) God's all-prudent pleasure Answer.

Makes nothing Art-less, nor without just measure:
And this the Worlds chief praise of Beauty carries,
That in each part it infinitely varies.
Our learned Elders then, who on this Sphere, The reason of the names given to
the 12. Signs of the Zodiak.

Heavens shining Signs imagined fitly-fair,
Did unto each, such Shape and Name devise,
As with their Natures nearly symbolize.
In form of Ram with golden Fleece, they put 1. Aries.

The bi-corn'd Sign, which the Years bounds does 'butt;
Because the World (under his temperate heat
In fleece of flowrs is pranked richly neat.
Of Bull the next: because the husbandmen 2. Taurus.

With yoaks of slowe-pac't smoking Bullocks then
Tear-vp their Fallows, and with hope-full toil,
Furbush their Coultars in the Corn-fit soil.
Of Twins the third: because then, of two Sexes 3. Gemini.

Kinde-cruell Cupid one whole body mixes:
Then all things couple, then Fruits double grow,
Then Flowrs do flourish, and corn Fields do show.
The fourth a Lobstars name and frame they made, 4. Cancer.

Because then Southward Sol does retrograde,
Goes ( Crab-like) backward, and so never stinteth,
But still his wheels in the same track reprinteth.
The fifth a Lion: for, as Lions breath 5. Leo.

Is burning hot; so likewise, underneath
This fiery Sign, the Earth sparkles, and the streams
Seem sod-away with the Suns glowing beams. 6. Virgo.

The sixth a Maid: because with Maid-like honor,
The Earth loatheth then the Suns Loue-glances on her
T'inflame her love: and (reclus'd as it were)
This Virgin Season naught at all does bear.
Balance the seventh: because it equal weighs 7. Libra.

Nights louing-silence, and grief-guiding Days;
And Heat and Cold: and in Must-Month, the Beam
Stands equi-poiz'd in equipeizing them.
Scorpion the next: because his percing sting 8 Scorpio.

Does the first tidings of cold Winter bring.
The ninth an Archer both in shape and Name, 9 Sagittarius.

Who day and night follows his fairest game;
And his keen Arrows everywhere bestows,
Headed with Ice, featherd with Sleet and Snowes.
The next a Kid: because as Kids do clime
And frisk from Rock to Rock; about this Time 10 Capricornus.

The Prince of Planets (with the locks of Amber)
Begins again up toward us to clamber.
And then, because Heaven always seems to weep
Under the ensuing Signs; on the Azure steep 11 Aquarius. 12 Pisces. A deeper
and more curious reason of the same.

Our Parents placed a Skinker: and by him,
Two silver Fishes in his floods to swim.
But if (my Son) this superficial gloze
Suffice thee not: then may we thus suppose,
That as before the All-working Word alone
Made Nothing be All Is womb and Embryon,
The eternal Plot, the Idea fore-conceiv'd,
The wondrous Form of all that Form received,
Did in the Work-mans spirit divinelyly;
And, yer it was, the World was wondrously:
The Eternal Trine-One, spreading even the Tent
Of the All-enlightning glorious Firmament,
Filled it with Figures; and in various Marks
The repourtray'd Tables of his future Works.
See here the pattern of a silver Brook In heaven are patterns of all things
that are in earth.

Which in and out on the azure stage does crook,
Here the Eagle plays, there flies the rav'ning Crow,
Here swims the Dolphin, there the Whale does row,
Here bounds the Courser, there the Kid does skip,
Here smoaks the Steer, the Dragon there does creep:
There Is nothing precious in Sea, Earth, or Air,
But has in Heaven some like resemblance fair.
Yea, even our Crowns, Darts, Lances, Skeyns, and Scales
Are all but Copies of Heavens Principals;
And sacred patterns, which, to serve all Ages,
The Almighty printed on Heavens ample stages.
Yea surely, durst I (but why should I doubt A third witty, pleasant, and
elegant reason of the names aforesaid.

To wipe from Heaven so many slanders out,
Of profane Rapin and detested Rapes,
Of Murder, Incest, and all monstrous Scapes,
Wher-with (hereafter) some bold-fabling Greeks
Shall foully stain Heavens Rosy-blushing cheeks?)
Here could I show, that under every Sign
The Eternal engraved some Mystery divine
Of's holy City; where (as in a glass)
To see what shall heer-after com-to-pass:
As publik and autentik Rowles, fore-quoting
Confusedly the Events most worthy noting,
In his deer Church (his Darling and Delight).
O! thou fair Chariot flaming braue-ly bright, Plaustrum.

Which like a Whirl-winde in thy swift Career
Rapt'st up the Thesbit; thou do always veer
About the North Pole, now no more be-dabbling
Thy nimble spoaks in the Ocean, neither stabling
Thy smoking Coursers under the Earth, to bayt: Bo^tes.

The while Elisha earnestly does wayt,
Burning in zeal (ambitious) to inherit
His Masters Office, and his mighty Spirit;
That on the starry Mountain (after him)
He well may manage his celestial Teem.
Close by him, David in his valiant Fist Hercules.

Holds a fierce Lions fiery flaming Crest:
Here shines his golden Harp, and there his Crown: Lyra. Corona Borealis. Vrsa
minor. Pleiades. Cuspis.

There the ugly Bear bears (to his high renown)
Seav'n (shining) Stars: Lo, here the whistling Lance,
Which frantic Saul at him does fiercely glaunce.
Pure Honors Honor, Praise of Chastity,
O fair Susanna, I should mourn for thee,
And moan thy tears, and with thy friends lament Andromeda. Cassiopeia. Cepheus.

(With Heav'n-lift-eyes) thy woeful punishment,
Save that so timely (through Heavens providence)
Young Daniel saues thy wronged Innocence: Perseus.

And by a dreadful radiant splendour, spread
From Times-Child Truth (not from Medusa's head) Caput Medusa.

Condemns the old Leachers, and eft-soons upon
Their cursed heads there hayls a storm of stone.
Also, as long as Heavens swift Orb shall veer,
A sacred Trophee shall be shining here
In the bright Dragon, of that Idol fell, Draco.

Which the same Prophet shall in Babel quel.
Wher-to more fit may Pegasus compair, Pegasus.

Than to those Coursers; flaming in the air,
Before the Tyrant of less-Asia's fury,
Vsurps the fair Metropolis of Jury?
Wher-to the Coachman, but Ezechiel
That so well drives the Coach of Israel?
Wher-to the Swan, but to that Proto-Martyr, Cygnus.

The faithful Deacon which endures torture,
(Yea death) for his dead Lord; whom sure to meet,
So near his end sings so exceeding sweet?
Wher-to the Fish which shines heerso bright, Piscis Borealis.

But to that Fish, that cures Tobies sight?
Wher-to the Dolphin, but to that meek Man, Delphinus.

Who dry-shod guides through Seas Erythean
Old Jacobs Fry: And Iordans liquid glass
Makes all his Host dry (without boat) to pass?
And furthermore, God has not only graven
On the brass Tables of swift-turning Heaven
His sacred Mot; and, in Triangle frame, Trigonos.

His Thrice-One Nature stamped on the same: Ophiucus.

But also, under that stout Serpent-Slayer,
His Satan-taming Son (Heavens glorious heir)
Who with the Engine of his Cross abates
The eternal Hindges of the infernal Gates:
And, under that fair Sun-fixt-gazing Foul, Aquila.

The God of Gods deer Minion of his Soul,
Which from his hand reaves Thunder oftentimes,
His Spirit; his Love, which visits earthly Climes
In plumy shape: for, this bright winged Sign,
In head and neck, and starry back (in fine)
No less resembles the mild simple Dove,
Than crook-bild Eagle that commands above.
What shall I say of that bright Bandeleev,
Which twice-six Signs so richly garnish here?
The Years Usher, does the Paschal Lamb foretell: Aties.

The Bull, the Calf, which erring Israel Taurus.

Sets up in Horeb. These fair shining Twins, Gemini.

Those striving Brethren, Isaacs tender Sons:
The fourth is Solomon, who ( Crab-like) crawls Cancer.

Backward from Virtue; and (fowl Swine-like) falls
In Vices mire: profanest old (at last)
In soul and body grown a-like vn-chaste. Leo.

The fifth, that Lion, which the Hair-strong Prince
Tears as a Kid, without Wars instruments. Virgo.

The sixth, that Uirgin, euer-maiden Mother,
Bearing for us, her Father, Spouse, and Brother.
The next that Beam, which in King Lemuels hand, Libra.

So justly weighs the Justice of his Land.
The next, that Creature which in Malta stings Scorpio.

The Apostles hand, and yet no blemish brings;
For it is indifferent, whether we the same,
A spotted Scorpion, or a Viper name.
The Archer, is Hagars Son: The Goat (I ghess) Sagittarius. Capricornus.
Aquarius.

Is Arons Scapegoat in the Wilderness.
The next, the deer Son of dumb Zacharias,
Gods Harbinger, forerunner of Messiah:
Who in clear Jordan washes clean the sin,
Of all that rightly do repent with-in.
These Two bright Fishes, those wher-with the Lord Pisces.

(Through wondrous blessing of his powtfull Word)
Feeds with five Loaves (upon Asphaltis shore)
Abundantly five thousand Folk, and more.
But, turn we now the twinkling Globe, and there
Let Us mark as much the Southern Hemi-sphear.
Ah! know thou not this glorious Champion here, Orion.

Which shines so brightly by the burning Steer? Eridanus.

It Is Nun's great Son, who through deep Jordan leads
His Army dry-shod; and (triumphant) treads Canis. Canicula. ^epus.

On Canaan Currs, and on the Ammorrean Hare,
Eoyl'd with the fear of his victorious war.
See the ancient Ship, which, over winds and waves
Triumphing safe, the Worlds seed-remnant saues.
Lo, here the Brazen Serpent shines, whose sight Hydra.

Cures in the Desert, those whom Serpents bite.
Here the happy Rau'n, that brings Elias cates; Corvus.

Here the rich Cup, where Joseph meditates Cratera. Centaurus.

His grave Predictions: Here that Heavenly Knight,
Who pressed appearing armed all in white,
To Maccabeus, with his flaming spear
So deep (at last) the Pagan Wolf does tear, Lupus. Ara.

That on Gods Altar (yerst profaned so long)
Sweet Incense fumeth, and the sacred Song
Of Leuits sounds in his House again; Corona australis. Piscis australis.

And that rich Crown the Asmonean Race does gain,
To rule the Jews. Lo, there the happy Fish
Which pays Christ's Tribute (who our Ransom is):
And here the Whale, within whose noysom breast, Balaena.

The Prophet Jonas for three days does rest. A notable correction of the Poet
upon these last Discourses.

But while (my spoaks-man, or I rather his)
Thus Heber comments on Heavens Images,
Through path-less paths his wandering steps does bring,
And boldly quavers on a Maiden string;
Suppose not (Christians) that I take for grounds
Or points of Faith, all that he here propounds;
Or that old Zeno's Portall I sustain,
Or Sto^k Fate (the Almighties hands to chain):
Or in Heavens Volume reading things to-com,
Erroneously a Chaldee-Wise become.
No, no such thing; but to refresh again
Your tired Spirits, I sung this novell strain:
That hither-to having with patience past
Such dreadful Oceans, and such Deserts vast,
Such gloomy Forests, craggy Rocks and steep,
Wide-yawning Gulfs, and hideous Dungeons deep;
You might (at last) meet with a place of pleasure,
Wher-on the Heavens lavish their plentious treasure,
Where Zephyre puffs perfumes, and silver Brooks
Embrace the Meads, smiling with wanton Looks.
Yet (courteous Readers) who is it can say
Whether our Nephews yet another-day
(More zealous than our selves in things Divine)
This curious Art shall Christianly refine;
And give to all these glistring Figures then,
Not Heathen names, but names of Holy men? He ^roc^edes to discover the secrets
of Astronomy.

But, seek we now for Heber, whose Discourse
Informs his Phalec in the Planets course:
What Epicicle means, and Con-centrik,
With Apoge, Perige, and Eccentrik:
And how fell Mars (the Seedster of debate)
Days glorious Torch, the wanton ( Uulcans Mate)
Saturn, and Jove, three Spears in one retain,
Smooth Hermes five, fair Cynthia two-times-twain.
For, the Divine Wits, whence this Art does flow,
Finding their Fires to wander to and fro,
Now near, now far from Natures Nave: above,
Confusion, void; and rupture to remove,
Which would be caused, through their wanderment,
In the Heavens enclosed within the Firmament;
Have (more then men) presumed to make, within
The Eternal Wheels where the erring Tapers been,
Sundry small Wheels, each within other closed,
Such equi-distance each-where inter-posed,
That (though they kiss) they crush not; but the base
Are under the high, the high the low embrace: Simile.

Like as the Chest-nut (next the meat) within
Is covered (last) with a soft slender skin,
That skin enclosed in a tough tawny shel,
That shel in-cas't in a thick thistly fell.
Then taks he the Astrolabe, wher-in the Sphere The use of the Astrolabe.

Is flat reduced: he discovers there
The Card of Heights, the Almycantharats,
With the Azimynths and the Almadarats
(Pardon me Muse, if ruder phrase defile
This fairest Table, and deface my style
With Barbarism: For in this Argument,
To speak Barbarian, is most eloquent).
On the other side, under a veering Sight,
A Tablevcers; which, of each wandering Light
Shows the swift course; and certain Rules includes,
Days, names of Months, and scale of Altitudes.
Removing the Alhidade, he spends some leisure
To show the manner how a Wall to measure,
A Fountains depth, the distance of a place,
A Countries compass, by Heavens ample face:
In what bright starry Sign, the Almighty dread,
Days Princely Planet daily billeted:
In which his Nadir is: and how with-all
To find his Elevation and his Fall.
How long a time an entire Sign must wear
While it ascends on our Hemi-sphear:
Poles elevation: The Meridian line:
And diverse Hours of Day and night to find.
These learned wonders witty Phalec marks,
And heedfully to every Rule he harks:
Wise Alchymist, he multiplies this Gold,
This Talent turns, increasing many-fold:
And then prsents it to his Noble seed,
Who soon their Doctor in his Art exceed.
But, even as Mars, Hermes, and Uenus bright, Simile.

Go visit now the naked Troglodite,
Then Iaue, then Guynney; and (inclined to change)
Often shifting House, through both the Worlds do range Astronomy, by whom, and
how maintained.

(Both Worlds ev'n-halv'd by the Equinoctial Line):
So the perfection of this Art divine,
First under the Hebrews bred and born, anon
Coms to the Chaldes by adoption:
Scorning anon, the old Babylonian Spires,
It leaves swift Tigris, and to Nile retires;
And, waxen rich, in Egypt it erects
A famous School: yet, firm-less in affects,
It falls in love with subtle Grecian wits,
And to their hands awhile it self commits;
But, in renowned Ptolomeus Reign,
It does re-visit the deer Memphian Plain:
Yet, Thence re-fled, it does the Arabians try;
From thence to Rome: From Rome to Germany.
O true Endymions, that embrace above
Upon mount Latmos your Imperial Love
(Great Queen of Heaven) about whose Bed, for Guard, The praise of learned
Astronomers, and the profit of their Doctrine.

Millions of Archers with gold Shields do ward.
True Atlasses: You Pillars of the Poles
Empyreall Palace; you fair learned souls;
But for your Wrightings, the Starrs-Doctrine soon
Would sink in Laethe of Oblivion:
It Is you that Marshall months, and years, and days:
It Is you that quoat for such as haunt the Seas
Their prosperous Days, and Days when Death engraven
On the angry Welkin, warns them keep their Haven:
It Is you that teach the Plough-man when to sow:
When the brave Captain to the Field shall go;
When to retire to Garrison again;
When to assault a battered Piece; and when
To conuoy Victuals to his valiant Host:
It Is you that show what season fitteth most
For every purpose; when to Purge is good,
When to be Bathed, when to be Let-blood:
And how Physicians, skilfully to mix
Their Drugs, on Heaven their curious eyes must fix.
It Is you that in the twinkling of an ey
Through all the Heavenly Provinces do fly:
It Is you that (greater then our greatest Kings)
Possess the whole World in your Governings:
And (to conclude) you Demigods can make
Between your hands the Heavens to turn and shake.
O divine Spirits! for you my smoothest quill
His sweetest honey on this Book should still;
Srill should you be my Theme: but that the Beauty
Of the last Sister draws my Love and Duty,
For, now I hear my Phalec humbly crave
The fourth Mayds name: his Father, mildely-grave,
Replies him thus; Observe (my dearest Son)
Those cloud-less brows, those cheeks vermilion,
Those pleasing looks, those eyes so smiling-sweet, The description of Music.

That grace-full posture, and those pretty feet
Which seem still Dancing: all those Harps and Lutes,
Shawms, Sag-buts, Citrons, Viols, Cornets, Flutes,
Placed round about her; prove in every part
This is the noble, sweet, Voice-ord'ring Art,
Breath's Measurer, the Guide of supplest fingers
On (living-dumb, dead-speaking) Sinnew-singers:
The Accord of Discords: sacred Harmony,
And Numb'rie Law, which did accompany
The Almighty-most, when first his Ordinance
Appointed Earth to Rest, and Heaven to Dance. The Heavens Harmony.

For (as they say) for super-Intendent there,
The supreme Voice placed in every Sphere
A Siren sweet; that from Heavens Harmony
Inferior things might learn best Melody,
And their rare Quier with the Angels Quier accord
To sing aloud the praises of the Lord,
In's Royal Chapel, richly beautified
With glist'ring Tapers, and all sacred Pride. Simile.

Where, as (by Art) one selfly blast breathed out
From panting bellows passes all-about
Winde-Instruments; enters by the under Clavers
Which with the Keys the Organ-Master quavers,
Fills all the Bulk, and severally the same
Mounts every Pipe of the melodious Frame;
At once reviving lofty Cymbals voice,
Flutes sweetest air, and Regals shrillest noise:
Even so the all-quickning spirit of God above
The Heavens harmonious whirling wheels does move;
So that-re-treading their eternal trace,
The one bears the Treble, the other bears the Base. A foure-folde Consort in
the humors, seasons, and Elements.

But, brimmer far than in the Heavens, here
All these sweet-charming Counter-Tunes we hear:
For, Melancholy, Winter, Earth below,
Bear ay the Base; deep, hollow, sad, and slow:
Pale Phleagm, moist Autumn, Water moistly-cold,
The Plummet-like-smooth-sliding Tennor hold:
Hot-humid Blood, the Spring, transparent Air,
The Maze-like Mean, that turns and wends so fair:
Cursed Choler, Summer, and hot-thirsty Fire,
The high-warbling Treble, loudest in the Quire.
And that is the cause (my Son) why stubborn'st things The power of Music
toward all things.

Are stoopt by Music; as reteining springs
Of Number in them: and they feeble live
But by that Spirit which the Heavens dance does drive.
Sweet Musik makes the sternest men-at-Arms
Let-fall at once their anger and their Arms: Toward Men.

It cheers sad souls, and charms the frantik fits
Of Lunatiks that are bereft their wits:
It kills the flame, and curbs the fond desire
Of him that burns in Beauties blazing Fire
(Whose soul, seduced by his erring eyes,
Does some proud Dame devoutly Idolize):
It cures Serpents bane-full bit, whose anguish
In deadly torment makes men madly languish:
The Swan is rapt, the Hind deceived with-all,
And Birds beguiled with a melodious call: Toward Beasts, Birds, Plies, and
Fishes.

The Harp leads the Dolphin, and the buzzing swarm
Of busy Bees the tinkling Brass does charm.
O! what is it that Musik cannot do!
Since the all-inspiring Spirit it conquers too:
And makes the same down from the Empyreall Pole
Descend to Earth into a Prophets soul:
With divine accents tuning rarely right Toward God himself.

Unto the rapting Spirit the rapted Spright?
Since, when the Lord (most moved) threatens most,
With wrathful tempest arming all his Host;
When angry stretching his strong sinnewy arms,
With bended back he throws down thundry storms;
The harmonious sighs of his heart-turning Sheep
Supple his sinnews, lull his wrath a-sleep;
While milde-ey'd Mercy steals from his hand
The sulph'ry Plagues prepared for sinful Man?
But, while that Heber (eloquently) would Conclusion of the 2. Day of the 2.
Week.

Old Musikes use and excellence have told;
Cursed Canaan (seeking Iordans fatal course)
Past by the Pillars, and brake his Discourse,
And mine with-all; for I must rest me here:
My weary Iourny makes me faint well-neer:
Needs must I crave new aid from High, and step
A little back, that I may farther leap.
The end of the Second Day of the Second Week,
ABRAHAM. The THIRD DAY Of The SECOND WEEK;
Containing

1. THE VOCATION, 2. THE FATHERS, 3. THE LAW, 4. THE CAPTAINS.
Acceptam refero.


The VOCATION. THE I. PART OF THE III. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
ABRAM from Chalde is Divinely CALLED:
How Blessed abroad: His (parted) Nephew Thrall'd
(In Sodom's aid) to Chedorlaomer;
Rescued by Him: Type of that bloody War:
Melchisedec His Hap congratulates:
Ismael great; but GOD confederates
With (promised) Isaak, and his ( CHRIST-kin) Seed
Which shall in number even the Stars exceed.
Lot harbors Angels; saved from Sodom's Fire;
His Wife Transformed: His Daughter's foul Desire.
Until this Day (deer Muse) on every side
Within straight lists thou have been boundifi'd,
Pend in a Path so narrow everywhere,
Thou could not manage: only here and there
(Reaching thine arms over the Rails that close
Thy bounded Race) thou caught'st some fragrant Rose,
Some Gilly-flowr, or some sweet Sops-in-Wine,
To make a Chaplet thy chaste brows to bind.
But now, behold the art in the open Plain,
Where thou may lively (like the Horse of Spain, Simile.

That having burst his halter and his hold
Flings through the field, where list him, vncontrol'd)
Coruet, and turn, run, prance, advance, and pride-thee,
As sacred fury of thy Zeal shall guide-thee.
The whole World is thine: he^ceforth thy Sithe may mow
The fairest Crop that in Fame's fields does grow;
And, on the Sea of richest Histories
Hulling at large, a hundred Victories,
A hundred Rowts, a hundred Wonders new
Com huddling in, in heaps before thy view:
So that I fear, lest (trayn'd with various sent)
Thou be at fault in this vast Argument;
And least the best choice in so bound-less Store,
Painthee no less now, than did Want before.
But wotst thou what, my Muse (my deer delight,
My care, my comfort)? we will follow right
The modest hand of a fair Shepheardling, Simile.

Who does not rudely spoil the flowery Spring,
Of all her painted beauties; nor deface
All in one day a pleasant Gardens grace;
But mannerly amid the Quarters seeks
Such rarest flowrs as best her fancy likes:
And here a blew one, there a red she pulls,
A yellow here, and there a white she culls,
Then binds them with her hair, and blessed over
With a chaste kiss, she sends them to her Lover:
We Will ouer-run the Annalls of all Ages,
And choosing-out the chiefest Personages,
And Prodigies amid the Hebrew Story,
We Will offer them on the Altar of Gods glory.
For He (I hope) who, no less good then wise,
First stirred us up to this great Enterprise,
And gave us heart to take the same in hand,
For Level, Compass, Rule, and Squire will stand;
Will change the Pebbles of our puddly thought,
To Orient Pearls, most bright and bravely wrought:
And will not suffer in this precious Frame
Ought that a skillful Builders ey may blame:
Or, if he suffer ought, 't shall be some trace
But of that blindness, common to our Race;
T'abate my glory, and to give me proof
That (mortal) I build but with mortal stuff.
JAMES, richest Iem of Scots, and Scotland's Praise, Dedication to the Kings
Majesty.

Who, with the same hand that the Scepterswayes,
On Heav'n-faln paper in a golden style,
Do happily immortal lines compile;
And (new Apollo) under Others names
Singst in thy Childehood thine Ownefuture Fames:
To whom but thee should I these Verses vow?
Who through the World have made me famous now,
And with a liberal learned hand indew'd
My Muse with luster of a Royal Suit;
Before, so ragged that she blushed wel-neer
That her chaste Sisters should so homly see-her
The scorn of Art, of Helicon the shame,
Usurping (wrong) VRANIA'S sacred Name.
Through thee she is Heavenly. O wise, worthy Prince,
May thou surmount all those in Excellence,
Which have (before thee) Ruled the hard-ruled Scots,
And ruder Picts (painted with Martial spots)
That, first Fergusius (glory of his days)
Ev'nus and Donald may envy thy Praise;
And even the Scott'sh, or (rather the Hebrew) David
( Iesses great son, so holily-behaved)
Give place to thy Renown, and therewithal
Give thee his Zeal and Heart heroical,
And all his best (which does thee best belong)
As he has given thee his sweet Harp and Song.
THOUGH profane service of Idolatry
Had drowned the whole Earth universally:
Though shame-less sin (born with the COLONIES
Through all the World) through all did Tyrannize:
Yet in Chaldea was their chiefest Seat,
Their strength in Shinaar; and that City great,
Built on the slymy strand of Euphrates,
Was the proud Palace where they held their Feasts.
So that, even Sem's and Heber's sacred Ligne
(Where God his grace yet seemed to confine)
Sucking the Sin-bane of Assyrian air,
Did (like the Heathen) every day impair: Simile.

Forgot the true God: followed (rashly-rude)
The gross grand Error of the multitude:
Degeneriz'd, decayed and withered quight:
Likesom rare Fruit-Tree over-topt with spite
Of Briars and Bushes which it sore oppress,
With the sour shadow of their Thorny tress,
Till choakt withal, it dies as they do grow,
And bears naught but Moss and Misseltoe.
But God, desirous (more for us, then him) The Calling of Abraham.

In some one stock to save Faith's sacred stem
(Like as before from the All-drowning Flood
He saved the worlds seed in an Ark of wood)
Marks Abram for his own: and from false Rites
To men, to Beasts, to Stocks, to Stones, to Sprights,
Him graciously to his own Service draws;
Not by mere Conduct of exterior cause,
As by contempling the Artship richly-rare
Which gilds the Seeling of this Globe so fair;
Earthsfruitfull power, producing (goodly-green)
From so small seeds so huge and mighty Treen,
Flowrs fragrant aier, so fresh and divers-died;
Seas foaming Course, whose ever-Tilting Tide
(Ebbing or flowing) is confined to Season,
Bounded with lists, guided with reans of Reason:
But, by the motion of his Spirit, which seals
In our hearts Center what his word reveals,
And prudently in his fit time and place
(Dispensing frankly his free gifts of Grace)
Does inwardly bear-witnes, and aver-it
Under our Spirits that'^is God's Holy Spirit.
The sacred Faith of Abram languisht not
In Idleness, but always waakt and wrought, The fruits of a true faith and the
effect thereof.

And ever lively, brought forth Patience,
Humility, Hope, Bounty, Innocence,
Love, fervent Zeal, Repentance, Temperance,
Sincerity, and true Perseverance;
Fruits that (like Load-stones) have avertue given
(Through Faith) to draw their Father-Tree to Heaven,
And guide the souls to God (the spring of life)
Of's kins-man Lot, and Sara his deer Wife;
Who with him following the Almighti's call,
Wend to the strand where Iordans course does craul,
Their own deer Country willingly forsake,
And (true-religious) less account do make
Of goods and lands, and quiet-lifes content,
Than of an end-les, friend-les Bannishment.
O sacred ground of Vertu's sole perfection!
O shield of Martyrs! Prophets sure direction!
Soul's remedy! O contrite heart's Restorer!
Tears-wiping tame-grief! Hopes guide, hunting* horror,
Path of Salvation! Pledge of Immortality!
O lively FAITH! through thy admired quality,
How many wonders do thou work at once,
When from Sin's slumbers thou have waakt us once,
And made vsmly in our spirits conceive
Beauties that never outward eyes perceive!
Alas! said Abram, must I needs forgo Natural conside rations to have stopped
the Journey of Abraha.

These happy fields where Euphrates does flow?
Here, first I drew this vital air, and (pleased
With my births news) my Mothersthroes I eased:
Here, from her tender breast (as soft as silk)
My tender gums sucked my first drop of milk:
Here, with the pleasure of mine infant-smile
Her Cares and Cumbers I did often beguile:
Here, my chaste Sisters, Uncles, Aunts and Kin,
My prity prattling have delighted in:
Here, many a time I want only have clung,
And on my Fathers wrinkled neck have hung:
Here, I have past my Lad-age fait and good;
Here, first the soft Down on my chin did bud:
Here, I have learned Heavens Motions and the nature
And various force of Fire, Air, Earth, and Water:
Here, I have show'n the noblest tokens forth
Both of my Minds and of my Bodies worth:
Here, I have spent the best part of mine age:
Here, I possess a plentious Heritage:
Here, I have got me many friends and fame;
And by my Deeds attained a glorious Name:
And must I hence: and leave this certain state,
To roam uncertain (like a Runnagate)
Over fearful Hills, and thorough foaming Torrents
That rush-down Mountains with their roaring currents,
In dreadful Deserts, where Heavens hottest beam
Shall burn without; within us, Thirst extreme:
And gloomy Forests full of ghastly fear
Of yelling Monsters that are dwelling there?
To seek a Country (God knows where, and whither)
Whose unknown name has yet scarce sounded hither?
With staff in hand and wallet at our back
From Town to Town to beg for all we lack?
To guise ourselves (like counterfaiting Ape)
To the guise of Men that are but Men in shape?
TO have (briefly) nothing properly our own
In all the World; no not our Grave-place known?
Is It possible I should endure to see
The sighs and tears my friends will shed for me?
O! can I thus my Native soil forsake?
O! with what words shall I my farewell take?
Farewell Chaldea, deer delights adieu:
Friends, Brothers, Sisters, farewell all of you*
Farewell for ever: Can I thus (alas!)
Rudely unwind me from the kind embrace
Of their deer arms that will me faster hold 2. Comparisons.

Than trembling Ivy does the Oak enfolde;
Or then the Vine does with her crawling spray
The boughs of Elm, her limber limbs to stay?
Can I expose (with peril of my life)
The vn-vulgar beauties of my virtuous wife,
To the none-sparing lust of that loose Nation
That brutely burns in all abomination?
Besides, what rigor? nay, what paricide?
To hale from Tygris shoat to Iordans side
A weak olde-man, a man so weak and old,
He scarce can creep without our help and hold?
Yet, 't must be so: for so the Lord commands. His resolution above al discour
se of reason.

A carnal man on carnal reason stands:
But, for all Reasons, Faith suffizeth me.
Who lodge with God can never House-less be.
Then cheerly marched he on, and though the age
And death of Terah slow'd his pilgrimage;
Therest of His he does conduct (in fine)
To Canaan (since called Palaestine):
Where God pours down such floods of goods upon them, The great blessing of God
on his obedience.

And bountiously bestows such blessings on-them,
That their abundance shortly seems t'exceed
God's Promises, and their desires indeed.
Their fruitful Herds, that hill and dale do haunt,
Resemble not the breed of the Elephant,
Which (slow in coupling, and in calving more,
Pyning her Master so long time before Simile.

With lingering hope) brings-forth with painful groans,
But once in twelve years, but one Calf at once:
All Is white with their wool: all their Cattle proves,
Still, still increasing, like to Stares and Doves.
Their Wealth so grows, that wantoniz'd withal, ^arre begun between his
Servants, and the servants of Lot.

Their envious Shepherds broach a civil Brawl.
But, least this Mischief by the Grooms begun,
Between their Masters might unkindly run,
The grave-milde Grand-sire of the Faithful (there)
And Ammon's Father, to cut off the fear
Of farther strife, and to establish rather
Their Minds then Bodies in a league together;
Divided duly with a deep foresight
Their Flocks and Herds in number infinite.
Then pleased, and parted; both go live apart: Abram and Lot to shun
contention, part company.

The Uncle kept the Mountain for his part;
For, 's Nephew chose the fat and flowery Plain,
And even to Sodom stretched his Tent and Train;
And, dwelling there, becam a Citizen
Among those monstrous, Nature-forcing Men.
O Lot (alas!) what lot have thou elect? Lot dwells at Sodom.

The eternal verdure, and the trim prospect,
The plentious Pastures, and the purling Springs
Whose fibrous silver thousand Tributes brings
To wealthy Jordan, watering so the soil
(Like Gods own Garden) does thy sense beguile,
Blinds thy judgment, makes thee (miserable)
To seat thee with a People execrable,
Whose War-thrall'd woes, and odious villainies
To springs of tears shall turn thy tender eyes.
Elam's proud King, great Chedor-laomer, The battle of Siddim fought by the
king of Elam, with his co^federates, against the Kings o^ Sodom and Gomorrha
with theirs.

(Leagued with Arioch, King of Ellazar,
The Sovereign of the Nations, Thadael,
And with the King of Shynaar, Amraphel)
Made war against the Kings of Sodoma,
Gomorrha, Zeboim, Zoar, Adamah;
Who, subject to him for twelve years before,
Rebelled now, and cast the yoke they bore.
Both Camps appoach, their bloody rage does rise,
And even the face of Cowards terriblize;
New Martial heat inflames their minds with ire,
Their blood is moov'd, their heart is all on fire.
Their cheerful limbs (seeming to march too slow).
Longing to meet, the fatal drums out-goe;
And even already in their gesture fight:
The iron-footed coursers, lusty, fresh, and light,
Marying their Masters cause and courage both
Snow all the field with a white foming froth,
And prancing with their load (as proud withal)
With loud-proud neighings for the Combat call.
Now both the Hoasts march forward furiously,
The Plain between soon shrinketh equally:
First in the air begins a fight of dust,
Then on the Earth both Armies bravely ioust.
Brave yet it was: for yet one might behold
Bright swords and shields, and plumed helms of gold*
Vn-goard with blood; no Cask had lost his head,
No Horse his load, no scattered Corpse lay dead,
But, on our Cornfieldsd toward harvest-time Comparison.

(For punishment of some in grateful crime)*
The incensed hand of Heavens Almighty King
Never more thick does slippery Ice-pearls fling,
Than here the arrows shower on every side:
An iro^ Cloud Heavens angry face does hide
From Soldiers sight; and flying weapons then
For lack of ground fall upon horse or men:
There Is not a shaft but has a man for White,
Nor stone but lightly in warm blood does light:
Or, if that any fail their foes to hit
In fall; in flight themselves they enter-split:
The wounds com all from Heaven: the bravest he
Kills and is killed of him he does not see:
Without an aim the Dart-man darts his spear,
And Chance performs the effect of Valor there.
As two stout Rams, both Ieloux-phrensie-sick, Simile.

A front two flocks, spurred on with anger's prick,
Rush-on each other with tempestuous shock,
And butting boisterous, horns and heads do knock:
So these two Armies enterchanged blows,
And doubling steps and strokes upon their Foes,
First flesh their Lances, and their Pikes imbrew,
Then with their swords about them keenly heaw,
Then stab with daggers; standing bravely too-'t,
Till Foe to Foe they charge them foot to foot;
So near, that often ones Targets pike does pearce
Another Shield, and sends him to his Hearse.
And gaudy plumes of Foes (be-Cedered brave)
Often on their Foes (vn-plumed) crests do wave.
Of all their strokes scarce any stroke is vain;
Yet stand they firm, and still the fight maintain:
Still fronting Death, they face to face abide,
None turn their backs, no neither shrink a-side,
Of their own blood, as of their Foe's as frank.
But, too-too-tyred, some at last dis-rank:
Then, Threats, and Cries, and Plaints, redoubled ay,
And so pel-mel rage-blinded Mars does play,
That now no more their Colors they discern;
But knowing none, to all are strangely stern.
The Palestine fights under Elams Standard,
The Shinarite with Sodoms Ensignos wandered:
Even as two swarms of busy Buzzers mounting Simile.

Amid the air, and mutually affronting,
Mingle their Troops; one goes, another coms,
Another turns; a clowd of Moatlings hums
Above our heads, who with their cipres wings
Decide the Quarrel of their little Kings:
Either of which, a hundred times a minute
Does lose a Soldier, and as often re-win-it.
But, may one hope in Champions of the Chamber, A martial brave of an old
Captain against the e^feminate softnes and delicacie of Carpet Knights.

Soft Carpet-Knights, all senting Musk and Amber
(Whose chief delight is to be ouer-com)
Vn-daunted hearts that dare to Over-com?
In Woman-Men a manly Constancy?
In wanton Arms vn-wearied Valiancy?
No, no, ( Gomorrha) this is not the place
For quav'ring Lutes a warbling Voice to grace:
No (filthy S^dom) it is not here the game
To play with Males, inspight of Natures name:
No ( Zeboim) here are no Looking-Glasses
For Para-Nymphs to gaze their painted faces:
To starch Mustachoes, and to prank in print,
And curl the Lock (with favors brayded in it):
No ( Adamah) we spend not here the day
In Dancing, Courting, Banqueting, and Play:
Nor lastly ( Zoar) is it here the guise
Of silken Mock- Mars (for a Mistress-Prize)
With Reed-like Lance, and with a blunted Blade,
To Championize under a Tented shade,
As at your Tourneys. Therefore to your Mew:
Lay-down your weapons, here is no Work for you*
It Is here the Fashion (and the pride of Wars)
To paint the face with sweat, dust, blood, and scars*
Our Glass is here a bright and glistring shield:
Our Satin, steel: the Music of the Field
Does rattle like the Thunders dreadful roar:
Death tilteth here: The Mistress we adore,
Is Victory (true Sovereign of our hearts)
Who without danger graceth no Deserts:
Dead carcasses perfume our dainty Nose:
Our Banquets here, be Banquets for the Crows:
Fly therefore (Cowards) fly and turn your backs,
(As you were wont in your thought-shaming acts)
But with our Swords and Lances (in your haste)
Through-thrilled (Villains) this shall be your last,
Said Amraphel: and charged them in such sort,
That't seems a sudden Whirl-winde does transport
Their fainting Troops. Some (best-aduised) fly Defeature of the Sodomit^s.

To tops of Mountains, that do neighbor by;
Some through the Plain: but, neither (in the chase)
Dares once look back (no, not with half a face)
Their fear had no restraint, and much less Art:
This throws away his shield, and that his dart;
Swords, Morrions, Pouldrons, Vaunt-brace, Pikes, and Lances,
Are no defense, but rather hindrances:
They with their hearts, have also lost their sight,
And recking less a glorious end, in Fight,
Than thousand base deaths, desperately they ran
Into the flood that fats rich Canaan.
Then, Jordan arms him against these infidels,
With rapid course, and like a sea he swells;
Lakes under ground into his channel range,
And shallowest Foords to ground-less gulfs do change:
He fumes, he foams, and swiftly whirling ground,
Seems in his rage, these bitter words to sound:
Die (Villains) die: O more than in famous
Foul Monsters, drench your damned souls in us.
Sa, sa, my Floods: with your cold moisture quench
The lust-full flame of their self-burning stench.
Drown, drown the Hel-hounds, and revenge the wrong,
Which they have done our Mother Nature long.
The River swiftly whirling-in the slaves,
Above with Bows, beneath with Bodies paues:
The gaudy Plume, yet floting light and soft,
Keeps for awhile, the hollow helm aloft;
But yet (at length) even those that smim the best,
Down to the bottom sink among the rest,
Striving and struggling (topsi-turuy tossed)
While fain they would, but cannot yield the ghost;
Because the flood (unwilling to defile
His purest waves with spirits so foul and vile)
Re-spews them still into themselves, and there
Smoothers, and choaks, and rams them, as it were:
Then both at once (Bodies and Souls) at last
To the main Sea, or his own shore does cast.
The Kings of Sodom and Gomorrha then, Their own Ambush serves against
themselves.

Hoping to train the King of Elams men,
Among the Clay-pits which themselves before
(T'intrap the Foe) with boughs had covered over,
Ran thither-ward: but their confused flight,
In their own ambush made their own to light,
Wherein they lost the flowr of all their rest,
Sooner of death, then of deaths fear possessed.
One, as he flies with trembling steps the dart
Which (from behind) nigh pearst him to the heart,
Tangling his foot with twyning tendrels tho
Of a wild Vine that near a pit did grow,
Stumbles, and tumbles in, hung by the heels
Up to the waste in water: where he feels
A threefold Fate: for there (O strange!) he found
Three deaths in one; at once slain, hanged, and drowned:
Another, weening ore a Well to skip,
From the wet brim his hap-less foot does slip,
And he in falls: but instantly (past hope)
He catches hold upon a dangling rope,
And so at length with shifting hands gets-vp
By little and little to the fountains top:
Which Thadael spying, to him straight he hies,
And thus alowd unto the wretch he cries;
Varlet, is this, is this the means you make,
Your wonted yoke of Elam off to shake?
Is this your Skirmish? and are these your blows,
Wher-with t'incounter so courageous Foes?
Sir, leave your ladder; this shall serve as well,
This sword shall be your ladder down to Hell:
Go pay to Pluto (Prince of Acheron)
The Tribute here denied unto your own:
Heer-with he draws his Fauchin bright and keen,
And at a blow heaws both his arms off clean;
His trickling hands held fast, down fell his Trunk,
His blood did swim, his body quickly sunk.
Another (roughly pushed by the Foe)
Falls headlong down into a Bog below:
Where, on his head deep planted in the mud
With his heels vp-ward like a tree he stood;
Still to and fro, wauing his legs and arms, Simile.

As Trees are wont to wave in windy storms.
Another here (on hors-back) posting over
A broad, deep clay-pit that green boughs do cover,
Sinks instantly; and in his sudden Fate
Seems the brave Horse doubly unfortunate:
For, his own neck he breaks, and bruzing in
(With the keen scales of his bright Brigandin)
His Masters bowels, serves (alas!) for Tomb
To him that yerst so many times did comb
His crispy Crest, and him so frankly fed
In's hollow Shield with oats and beans, and bread: Simile.

Even so sometimes, the loving Vine and Elm
(With double damage) jointly over-whelm;
She wails the wrack of her deer Husbands glade;
He moans his Spouses feeble arms and shade:
But most it grieves him with his Trunk to crush
The precious Clusters of her pleasing Bush;
And press to death unkindly with his weight
Her that for love embraces him so straight.
Yet Lot alone (with a small troup assisted) Lots valor.

The Martial brunt with Manly breast resisted,
And thirsting Fame, stands firmly looking for
The furious host of Chedorlaomor:
But as a narrow and thin-planted Cops
Of tender Saplings with their slender tops,
Is felled almost as soon as undertaken
By Multitudes of Peasants Winter-shaken:
Lot's little Number so environed round,
Hemmed with so many swords, is soon hew'n down. His undaunted resolution.

Then left alone, yet still all one he fares;
And the more danger, still the more he dares:
Like a strange Mastif fiercely set upon Simile.

By mongrell Currs, in number ten to one:
Who tired with running (grown more cunning) gets
Into some corner, where upright he sets
Upon his stern, and sternly to his Foes
His rage-full, foaming, grinning teeth he shows,
And snarls, and snaps; and this and that does bite,
And stoutly still maintains the unequal fight
With equal fury, till (disdaining Death)
His Enemies be beaten out of breath.
Arioch, admiring, and (even) fearing too
What Lot had done, and what he yet might do;
Him princely meets, and mildely greets him thus:
Cease (valiant youth) cease, cease to encounter us.
Will thou (alas!) will thou (poor soul) expose
And hazard thus thy life and Fame to lose,
In such a Quarrel, for the cause of such?
Alas, I pity thy misfortune much.
For, well I see, thy habit and thy tongue
Thine Arms (but most) thy courage) yet so young)
Show that in SODOM's wanton walls accursed
Thou were not born, nor in Gomorrha nursed.
O chief of Chivalry, reserve thy worth
For better wars: yield thee: and think henceforth
I highly prize thy prows; and, by my sword,
For thousand kingdoms will not false my word.
Past hope of Conquest (as past fear of death) Lot taken prisoner.

LOT yields him then upon the Princes Faith;
And, from his Camel quick-dismounting, hies
His Royal hand to kiss in humble wise:
And the Army, laden with the richest spoil,
Triumphantly to the Eastward marched the while.
No sooner noise of these sad novels came Abraham with his family of 300. goes
to rescue Lot.

Unto the ears of faithful ABRAHAM,
But instantly he arms to rescue LOT,
And that rich prey the heathen Kings had got.
Three hundred servants of his house he brings
(But lightly armed with staves and darts, and slings
Aided by MAMRE (in whose Plain he wons)
ASCOL and ANER (AMOR's valiant sons)
So at the heels he hunts the fearless Foe,
Yet waits advantage yer he offer blow)
Favored by streightness of the ways they took,
And covered close with nights deceitful cloak. A lively descrip tion of
Sleep, with his Cel, Servants, furniture and company

In Groon-land fields is found a dungeon,
A thousand-fold more dark than Acheron,
It has no door, lest as it turns about
On rusty hooks, it creak too lowdly out,
But Silence serves for Port and Porter there,
A gagged Usher that does never wear
Stif-rustling silks, nor rattling chamlet suits,
Nor gingling spurs, nor creaking spanish boots;
But, that he make no noise (when ere he sturs)
His high-day suits are of the softest Furs,
At other times (less-stately-service-ful)
He Is only clad in cotton, shod in wool:
His left forefinger ore his lips he locks,
With the other beckens to the early Cocks,
The rushing streams, and roaring Eolus,
Seeming (though dumb) to whisper softly thus:
Sleep silver Torrents; cease, sweet Chante-cleer,
To bid Good Morrow to the Morning here:
Be still, ye Winds, keep in your native nest,
Let not your storms disturb this house of Rest.
In midst of all this Cave so dark and deep,
On a still-rocking couch lies blear-eyed Sleep,
Snorting alowd, and with his panting breath
Blows a black fume, that all envapoureth:
Oblivion lies hard-by her drowzy brother,
Who readily knows not her self, nor other:
Then solitary Morpheus gently rockt:
And nasty Sloth self-pyn'd, and poorly-frockt,
Irresolute, vnhandsom, comfortless,
Rubbing her eyes with Poppy, and does press
The yellow Nightshade, and blew Gladiols juice,
Wher-with her sleep-swoln heavy lids she glewes.
Confusedly about the silent Bed
Fantastic swarms of Dreams there hovered,
Green, red and yellow, tawny, black, and blew:
Some sacred, some profane; some false, some true;
Some short, some long; some devilish, some divine;
Some sad, some glad; but monstrous all (in fine):
They make no noise, but right resemble may Simile.

The unnumbered Moats which in the Sun do play,
When (at some Cranny) with his percing ey
He peepeth-in some darker place to spy.
Thither the Almighty (with a just intent
To plague those tyrants pride) his Angel sent.
No sooner entered, but the radiant shine
Of's glistring wings, and of his glorious eyn,
As light as Noon makes the dark House of Night.
The gaudy swarm of Dreams is put to flight,
And opening wide the sable Canapey
The winged Herald summoned Sleep away.
Silence dislodged at the first word he spoke:
But deaf dead Sleep could not so soon awake,
He Is called a hundred times, and tugged, and touz'd,
And by the angel often rubbed and roused:
At length he stirs, and stretching lazily
His legs and arms, and opening half an ey,
Four or five times he yawns; and leaning-on
His (Lob-like) elbowe, hears This Message don.
Great Spirits-restorer, Cares-charm, Chacing-grief,
Night-short'ning Sier, Man's-Rest, and Mind's Relief,
Up, up (said he) dispatch thee hence in post,
And with thy Poppy drench the conquering Host
Of those proud Kings, that (richly charged with Prey)
On Canaan Mountains lodge in dis-aray.
The angel, in the instant back to Heav'n-ward gone,
Sleep slowely harnest his dull Bears anon;
And in a noys-less Coach all darkly dight,
Takes with him Silence, Drowsiness, and Night:
The air thickning where he goes, does nod the head,
The Woolf in Woods lies down the Ox in the Mead,
The Orque under Water; and on Beds of Down
Men stretch their limbs, and lay them softly down.
The Nightingale pearcht on the tender spring
Of sweetest Haw-thorn hangs her drowsy wing,
The Swallow's silent, and the lowdest Humber,
Leaning upon the Earth, now seems to slumber:
The Yew mooues no more, the Aspe does cease to shake,
Pines bow their heads, seeming some rest to take.
So soon as Sleep's black wings had overspread
The Pagan Host; the Soldiers haste to bed:
For, instantly begin they all to wink,
To hang their heads, and let their weapons sink:
Their words half-spoke, are lost between their lips,
Through all their veins Sleep's charming humor slips,
Which to a deep and death like Letharge brings
Both Heathen Soldiers, and their Heathen Kings.
Abram perceiving now the Army near, Abrams oration to his little Troop.

By their own Fires; began thus her Troops to cheer:
Soldiers (said he) behold, this happy Night
Shall make amends for that dis-astrous Fight
Was fought in Siddim, and acquittance cry,
For Sodom's shame, and Lot's captivity:
Me thinks already, Uictory (adorned
With Bows, and Blades, and Casks, and Crowns) returned
From the Enemy, on our triumphant spears
Erecteth Tropheis far more rich than theirs:
Me thinks already on our glistering Crests,
The glorious Garland of the Conquest rests;
Our way to Virtue lies so smooth and plain,
With pain-less Honor, and vn-vent'red Gain.
This Host you see, is not the valiant Troup
That stripped Gomorrha, and made Segor stoop;
That Jordan, Inde, and Euphrates admire;
But a foul heard of Swine wallowing in mire:
Regard them as they are, not as they were:
See but their sloth, do not their number fear:
He that is asleep is dead, and he that is dead
Bites not (they say): what have we then to dread?
Why stay we, Lads? already down they are,
Their throats be naked, and their bosoms bare,
Their lives ly prostrat here at our command;
And Fortune calls but for your helping hand.
Com, follow me; rather, the Lord of Hoasts
(Terror of Tyrants) who through all the Coasts
Of all the Earth confounds (with a thought)
All worldly power, and brings men's plots to naught:
Com (happy Troop) follow with one accord
The invincible brave Standard of the Lord.
This said: eft-soons I wot not what a grace,
What divine beam reflected on his face:
For, as in March, the Serpent, having cast Simile.

His old foul skin, crawls from his hole full fast,
Hisses, and stings, and stares us in the face,
And (gold-like) glistering, glides along the grass:
So Heaven inspires fresh vigor in each part,
His blood renews, his heart does take new heart,
A martial Fury in his breast there boyls,
His stature seems much taller then yer-whiles,
Youth paints his cheeks with Rose and Lilly Dies,
A lovely Lightning sparkles in his eyes;
So that his gallant Port and graceful Voice
Confirms the faintest, makes the sad rejoice.
Then, on the Camp he sets, where round about Abraham sets upon the Camp of
Chedorlaomer.

Lie mingled Carrs, and Horse, and Men that rout:
Rest seizes all; and (wanting what it fed)
The Fire it self slept in his ashy bed.
The Hebrews the-while laid-on on back, or breast,
Or arm, or side, according as their Rest
To the ground had bound them; and those lives bereft
The which Death's Image in an Image reft.
Here, one beheaded on a Trunk of Pine,
Pours-out at once his gore, his ghost, and Wine;
The full Helm hops, and with a voice confused,
Murmurs, as if it his fell Fate accused.
Another, taken by enchanting sleep,
Mid Pots and Cups, and Flagons, quaffing deep;
Does at a wound, given in his rattling gorge,
The Wine again in his own Cup dis-gorge.
Another, while ingeniously he plays
Upon his Lute some passing-pleasing Lays,
Sleep sieles his eyes up with a gloomy clowd;
And yet his hand still quauers light and loud:
But, at the last it sinks; and, offering fair
To strike the Base, strikes but the empty air:
His soul, descending to the Infernal Coasts,
Goes to conclude his Song unto the Ghosts:
Doleful it was, nor for the Argument
(For 't was of Love) but for the sad event.
Another, wak'ned with those loud alarms,
Starts-vp, and groapeth round about for arms;
Which, ah too soon he finds, for his part:
For a keen poignard stabs him to the heart. Simile.

Like as a Tigress, having with the gore
Of Bulls and Heifers made her spots the more,
And paved a Plain with Creatures mangled lims,
Views on each side her valiant stratagems,
Treads on the vanquished, and is prowdly-sad,
That no more Foes, nor no more Maw she had:
So the Hebrew stalking round-about the slain,
Braues (but it boots not) and would very fain
That those dead bodies might their ghosts re-gather,
Or that those Mountains would produce him (rather)
Some Foes more wakefull, that more manfully
In blood-drown'd Valleis might his valor try.
Amor's three sons did no less slaughter make;
Abram for zeal, they but for Furies sake:
This, nayls a Soldier with his sword to the ground;
That, at a blow, the heads of two Heads dis-crown'd.
This, underneath a Chariot kills the Driuer:
That, lops off legs and arms, and heads does shiver.
The Tents already all in blood do swim,
Gushing from sundry Corpse, from several lim.
In brief, so many ravening Woolves they seem,
Within whose breast, fierce Famine biteth keen,
Who softly stealing to some fold of sheep
(While both the Shepherd and his Curr does sleep)
Furbush their hungry teeth, tear, kill, and prey
Upon the best, to eat and bear-away.
Yet, at the length, the vanquished awake,
And (re-aray'd) the Victors undertake;
Putting the three proud Amorites, to flight,
Who but for Abram, had been routed quite.
Sleep, sleep (poor Pagans) since you needs must die,
Go sleep again, and so die easily,
Die yer you think on death, and in your Dreams
Gasp-out your souls; Let not your dazzled beams
Behold the havoc and the horror too
Of the Execution, that our swords shall do,
Hacking your bodies to heaw-out your breaths,
Yer Death, to fright you with a thousand deaths,
Said Abraham: and pointing every word
With the keen point of his quick-whirled sword:
(As swift in doing, as in saying so)
More fiercely charge the insulting Foe,
Than ever Storm-full cloud, which fed with Water's
Thin moist-full fumes (the snowy Mountains daughters) Comparison.

Showered heaps of hail-shot, or poured floods of rain,
On slender stems of the new tender Grain:
Through blood, and blades, through danger, dust, and death,
Through mangled Corpse, and carrs he traverseth;
And partly in the shock, part with ^^^ blows,
He breaks in through thickest of his Foes,
And by his trauail topsi-turneth then
The live and dead, and half-dead horse and men:
His bright-keen Fauchin never threats but hits;
Nor hits, but hurts; nor hurts, but that it splits
Some privy postern, whence to Hell (in post)
Some groaning Pagan may gasp out his ghost:
He all assayls, and him so brave bestows,
That in his Fight he deals more deaths than blows.
As the North-winde, re-cleering-vp the front Simile.

Of clowdy Heavens, toward the South does hunt
The showrs that Austers spungy thirst exhales
Out of those seas that circle Orans walls:
So wher-so-e're our Hebrew Champion wield
His warlike weapon and his glistring Shield
(Whose glorious splendour darts a dreadful light) Elamites ou^rthrowen by
Abraham.

All turn their backs, and all be-take to flight,
Forgetting Fame, Shame, Virtue, Hope, and all,
Their hearts are don, and down their weapons fall:
Or, if that any be so strangely-stout
As not to faint, but bravely yet hold out,
Alas! it boots not, for it cannot stop
The victory, but haste his own mishap.
But in what Fence-schoole, of what master, say, God gives victory.

Brave pearl of Soldiers, learnd thy hands to play
So at so sundry weapons, such passados,
Such thrusts, such foyns, stramazos, and stoccados?
Even of that mighty God, whose sacred might
Made Heaven and Earth (and them so brave bedight)
Of merely nothing: of that God of Power
Who swore to be thy Target and thy Towr:
Of that high God, who fortifies the weak,
Who teaches His, even steely bows to break,
Who does his Childrens zealous hearts inflame;
But daunts the proud, and does their courage tame. Abraham follows the
execution.

Thy sword abates the armed, the strong, the stout;
Thou cleav'st, thou kill'st: The faint dis-armed rout,
The lightning of thine eyes, thy voices thunder,
And thy proud dreadful port confounds with wonder:
Death and Despair, Horror and Fury fight
Under thine Ensigns in this Dismal Night:
Thou slayest this, and that thou threat'st as much:
This thou pursu'st, that thou disdaign'st to touch:
In brief (thou blessed Knight brave) thou quelst at once
Valiant and vile, armed and unarmed ones.
Here, thine even hand (even in a twinkling trice)
In equal halves a Pagans head does slyce:
Down on each shoulder looks either half,
To gaze upon his ghastly Epitaph,
In lines of blood writ round about him fair,
Under the curtain of his parted hair.
Here, through a Ierkin (more then Musket-proof)
Made twelve fold double of East-country Buff,
Clean through and through thy deadly shaft does thril
A Giants bulk; the wounded hulk does reel:
The head behind appears; before, the feathers:
And the Ethnic soul flies both-waies out togethers:
Here thou do cleave, with thy keen Fauchins force,
The Bards and Breast Plate of a furious Horse,
No sooner hurt, but he recoyleth back,
Writing his Fortune in a bloody track:
Thy barbed dart, here at a Chaldee flies,
And in an instant lardeth both his thighs,
While he blaspheming his hard stars and state,
Hops (like a Pie) in stead of wonted gate.
Now LOT (the while) escaped from ELAMS hands, Lot resc^ed, revengeth bravely
his captivity.

Free from the burden of his iron bands;
With just revenge retorts his taken wrong,
His feet grow swift, his sinnews waxen strong,
His heart reviues; and his reviued heart
Supplies new spirits to all and every part:
And as a wild and wanton Colt; got out Simile.

Of some great Stable, staring scuds about,
Shakes his proud head and crest, yerks out his heels,
Butts at the air, beats on the humble fields,
His flying shadow now pursues amain,
Anon (amazed) flies it as fast again*
Again beholds it, with self-prowd delight
Looks on his legs, sets his stiff tail upright*
And neighs so loud to Mares beyond the Mound,
That with the noise the neighbor Hills resound:
So, one while, LOT sets on a Troup of Horse,
A Band of Sling-men he anon does force,
Anon he pusheth through a Stand of Pikes,
A Wing of archers off anon he strikes,
Anon he stalks about a steepfull Rock,
Where some, to shun Death's (never shunned) stroke,
Had clambred-vp; at length a path he spies,
Where up he mounts, and does their Mount surprise:
Whence, stones he heaues, so heavy and so huge,
That in our Age, three men could hardly bouge;
Under whose weight his flying Foes he dashes,
And in their flesh, bones, stones, and steel he pashes:
Sometimes he shoots, sometimes he shakes a Pike,
Which death to many, dread to all does strike.
Some in the breast he wounds, some in the backs,
Some on the hanch, some on the head he hacks,
He heaws down all; and makes where he stood
A Mount of bodies in a Moat of blood. The Pagans wholly put to flight.

At length the Pagans wholly left the place,
Then both sides ran; these chased, those do chase:
These only use their heels, those heels and hands:
Those wish but a fair way; these that the sands
Would quickly gape, and swallow quick to Hell
Themselves that fled, and them that chac't so fell:
These render naught but blows, those naught but blood,
Both sides have broak their Ranks: pel-mel they scud;
Choakt-vp with dust, disordered, dis-aray'd;
Neither, Command, Threat, nor Entreat obay'd.
Thou that (late) bragdst, that thy White Wormly brave
Could dry-foot run upon the liquid Wave,
And on the sand leaving no print behind
Out-swifted Arrows, and out-went the Wind,
With a steel Dart, by ABRAH'M stiffly sent,
Art'twixt thy Cuirace and thy Saddle slent:
And thou that thrice, near Tygris silver source,
Had won the Bell, as best in every Course,
Art caught by LOT, and (thrild from side to side)
Loosest thy speed-praise, and thy life beside.
It seems no Fight, but (rather as befalls)
An execution of sad criminals:
Whosoever escapes the sword, escapes notso
His sad destruction; or, if any tho
Escaped at all, they were but few (at least)
To rue the fatal ruin of the rest:
For the Uncle and the Nephew never lin,
Till out of Canaan they have chac't them clean:
Like to a Cast of Falcons that pursue Simile.

A flight of Pigeons through the welk in blew;
Stooping at this and that, that to their Louver,
(To save their lives) they hardly can recover.
At his return from Fight, the Kings and Lords The Kings of Ca^^^n received
Abraham and his company with great joy and the grateful offer of their homage
unto him.

Of Palestine, with glad and humble words,
Do welcome Abram, and refresh his Troop;
To 's knees their heads, to 's feet their knees they stoop:
Ovaliant Victor! for thy high deserts,
Accept the homage of our humble hearts.
Accept our grateful zeal: or, if ought more
(As well thou may) thou do expect therefore,
Accept (said they) our Lands, our goods, our gold,
Our wives, our lives, and what we dearest hold:
Take all we have; for all we have is thine:
No wrong to us, to take thy Valors fine.
Melthisedec, Gods sacred Minister, Melchisedech blesses Abraham.

And King of Salem, coms to greet him there,
Blessing his bliss, and thus with zealous cry
Devoutly pearc't Heavens starfull Canopey.
Blessed be the Lord, that with his hand does roll
The radiant Orbs that turn about the Pole;
And Rules the Actions of all Humane-kinde
With full command; and with one blast of wind
Razes the Rocks, and Rends the proudest Hills,
Dries-vp the Ocean, and the Empty fills:
Blessed be the great God of grear Abraham:
From Age to Age extolled be his Name:
Let every Place unto him Altars build,
And every Altar with his Praise be filled,
And every Praise above the Welkin ring
As loud or louder then the Angels sing:
Blessed be He that by an Arm-less crew
Of Art-less Shepherds did so quick subdue
And tame the Tamers of Great Syria so;
And to the servants of an exiled Foe
Has given the Riches and the royal store
(Both of their Booty and their Own before)
Of such an Host, of Nations that first see
Sol's early rising from Aurora's knee.
But Abraham, to prove that not for Prey, Abraham distributes the booty,
reserving only a portion for the Amorites that were his confederates.

He put-on arms, divides the Spoils away:
The Tythe's the Priests: the Rest of all the things
(Yerst lost in field) he renders to the Kings,
Save but the Portion He participates
To the Amorites, his stout Confederates:
Showing himself a Prince as politic
Prudent and just, as stout and Souldier-like,
That with his Prowess Policy can mel,
And Conquering, can use his Conquest well,
Magnanimous in deeds, in words as meek,
That scorning Riches, true Renown does seek.
So, from the Sea, even to the Euphratean-source,
And even from Dan, to Nilus crystal course,
Rings his renown: Of him is all the speech, He is famous far and near.

At home, abroad; among the poor and rich,
In war and peace: the Fame of his high deeds
Confirms the Faithful in their fainting Creeds;
And terrifies the Tyrant Infidels,
Shaking the sides of their proud Citadels,
That with their fronts the seat of JOVE do scorn,
And with their feet at I'luto's crown do spurn.
Voice, Harp, and Timbrel sound his praise together,
He Is held a Prophet or an Angel rather,
They say that God talks with him face to face,
Hoasts at his house, and to his happy Race
Givs in Fee-simple all that goodly Land
Even from the Sea, as far as Tygris strand.
And it is certain, the Thrice-sacred-One, God appears unto him, and makes
covenant with him.

The King of Kings, by Dream or Vision,
Speaks with him often; and calls him thus by name:
Faint not my servant, fear not ABRAHAM;
I an no fiend that with a fained lip
Seek guilefully thy simpleness to trip,
Nor to entice thee (with a baen-full breath,
To bite (like ADAM) a new fruit of death:
It Is I, that brought thee from thy Native V R,
From night to day, from death to life (thus far)
I brought thee hither, I have blessed thee here,
I with thy flocks have covered far and near
Canaan's fat Hills; I have preserved thy Wife
From Strangers lust, and thee from Tyrants knife,
When thy faint heart, and thy false tongue, affrai'd
To tell the Truth, her and thy self betrayed:
It Is I, that have so often from Heathens power
Preserved thy person; and (as Conqueror)
Now made thee Trivmph over the Eastern Kings
(Whereof so far thy famous Valor rings):
I am (in brief) I am the Lord thy God,
Thy help at home, thy Guide and Guard abroad.
Keep thou my Covenant: and (to signify,
That, to the World thou di'st, to live to Me) Circumcision instituted.

Go, Circumcise forthwith thy Self and Thine,
Lead holy Life, walk in my Ways divine
With vpright-foot: so shall my favor haunt
Thy House and thee, and thou shall nothing want:
No, I will make thee Lord of all the Land
Which Canaans Children have with mighty hand Canaan promised to Abraham.

So long possessed; a happy Land that flows
With milk and honey: a rich Land where grows
(Even of itself) all kind of Fruit and Corn,
Where smiling Heavens pour-down their Plenties-Horn:
I Will heap thee there with Honor, Wealth, and Power,
I will be thy Reward, thy Shield, and Towr.
O Lord (said ABRAM) though into my lap
In shours of Gold even all the Heavens should drop,
What booted all, to me that am alone?
Alas! my Lord, I have enough, for one
That has no issue after to inherit,
But my good servant ELEAZAR'S merit.
Not so, my Son (replies the Omnipotent)
Mistake not so my bountiful intent;
I Will not disparage to a Servants Fee
The rich estate, and royal Dignity
That in my People shall hereafter shine:
No, no (mine ABRAM) even a stock of thine,
Thine own deer Nephews, even thy proper Seed
Shall be thine Heirs, and in thy state succeed.
Yea, thine own Son's immortal-mortall Race
Shall hold in gage the treasures of my Grace.
The Patriarch, then rapt with sudden Joy,
Made answer thus: Lives then my wandering Boy?
Lives IS MAEL? is IS MAEL alive?
O happy news! (Lord let him everthrive):
And shall his Seed succeed so eminent?
Ah! let me die then, then I die content.
IS MAEL indeed does live (the Lord replies)
And lives, to father mighty Progenies:
For, from the Day when first his Mother (flying
Thy ieloux SARA'S cursed and threatfull crying)
To the dry Deserts sandy horror hi'd,
I have for both been careful to provide;
Their extreme Thirst due-timely to refresh,
Conducting them unto a Fountain fresh,
In liquid Crystal of whose Maiden spowt
Bird never dipped her bill, nor Beast his snowt:
And if I err not (but, I cannot err:
For, what is hid from Hearts-Artificer?
What can the sight of the Sight-maker dim)?
Another Exile yet attends him,
Where-in he shall (in season) feel and find,
How much to him I will be good and kind.
He shall grow Great, yet shall his rest be small;
All shall make war on him, and He on all:
Through Corslets, Rivets, Iacks, and Shirts of Mail. Ismaels mightiness.

His shaft shall thril the Foes that him assail:
A swift Hart's heart he shall (even running) hit:
A Sparrows head he shall (even flying) split:
And in the air shall make the Swallow cease
His sweet-sweet note, and slicing nimblenesse.
Yea (O Saints-Firstling) only for thy sake,
Twelve mighty Princes will I shortly make
Spring from his Loigns, whose fruitful seed shall swaie,
Even unto Sur from golden Havila.
Yet, it is not He, with whom I mean to knit
Mine inward Covenant; the outward seal of it
ISMAEL may bear, but not the efficace
(Thy Son, but after flesh, not after Grace).
But to declare that under Heavens Frame,
I hold naught deerer then mine ABRAHAM,
I Will open SARA'S dry and barren womb, Isaac promised

From whence thine ISAAC (Earths delight) shall com,
To glad the World; a Son that shall (like thee)
Support the Faith, and prop her Family.
Com from thy Tent, com forth and here contemple
The golden Wonders of my Throne and Temple,
Number the Stars, measure their bigness bright,
With fixed ey gaze on their twinkling Light,
Exactly mark their ordered Courses, driven
In radiant Coaches through the Lists of Heaven:
Then mai'st thou also number thine own Seed,
And comprehend their Faith, and plainly read
Their noble Acts, and of their Publike-State
Draw an Idea in thine own conceit.
This, This is He, to and with whom I grant
The eternal Charter of my Covenant. In him the Covenant ratified.

Which if he truly keep, upon his Race
I Will pour an Ocean of my plentious Grace:
I Will not alone give him these Fields here seen,
But even from India, all that flowreth green
To the utmost Ocean's utmost sand and shelf;
I Will give him Heaven, I Will give him even my Self.
Hence, hence, the High and mighty Prince shall spring, Of his ligne shall come
Christ the Redeemer.

Sin's, Death's, and Hell's eternal taming King,
The sacred Founder of Man's sovereign Bliss,
World's peace, world's ransom, and world's righteousness.
The Eternal seemed then toward Heaven to hie,
The olde-man to follow him with a greedy eye:
The sudden dis-appearing of the Lord,
Seemed like to Powder fired on a board,
When smokingly it mounts in sudden flash,
With little flame, giving a little clash.
Plenty and Pleasure had o're-whelm'd the while Prosperity plungeth the
Sodomites in all manner of abominations.

Sodom and Gomor in all Vices vile:
So that, already the most ruth-less Rape
Of tender Virgins of the rarest shape,
The Adulterous kiss (which Wedlocks bands vnbindes)
The Incestuous Bed, confounding Kindreds kinds
(Where Father wooes the Daughter, Sister Brother,
The Uncle the Niece, and even the Son the Mother)
They did not hate, nor (as they ought) abhor;
But rather scorned, as sports they cared not for.
Forbear (deer Younglings) pray awhile forbear,
Stand farther from me, or else stop your ear,
At the obscene sound of the unbeseeming words
Which to my Muse this odious place affords:
Or, if it is horror cannot drive you hence,
Hearing their Sin, pray hear their Punishments.
These beastly Men (rather these man-like Beasts)
Could not be filled with VENUS vulgar Feasts;
Fair Nature could not furnish their Desire; Their most execrable sin.

Some monstrous mess these Monsters did require:
An execrable flame inflamed their hearts,
Prodigiously they played the Women's parts:
Male hunted Male; and acted, openly,
Their furious Lusts in fruitless Venery.
Therefore, to purge Ulcers so pestilent,
Two heavenly Scowts the Lord to Sodom sent; 2. Angels sent down, received and
guested by Lot.

Whom (deeming Mortals) Lot importunates
To take his Lodging and to taste his Cates.
For, Angels, being mere Intelligences,
Have (properly) no Bodies nor no senses:
But (sacred Legates of the Holy-One) Of the nature and essence of Angels.

To treat with us, they put our Nature on;
And take a body fit to exercise
The Charge they have, which runs, and feeds, and flies;
Dures during their Commission; and, that past,
Turns t'Elements whence it was first amasst.
A simple Spirit (the glittering Child of Light)
Unto a body does not so unite,
As to the Matter Form incorporates:
But, for a season it accommodates,
As to his Tool the quaint Artificer,
(That at his pleasure makes the same to stir)
Yet in such sort that the instrument (we see)
Holds much of him that mooves it actively.
But always in some place are Angels: though
Not as all filling (God alone is so,
The spirit which all good spirits in spirit adore,
In all, on all, without all, evermore):
Nor as environed (that alone agrees
To bodies bounded with extremities
Of the next substance; and whose superfice
Unto their place proportionable is):
But rather, as sole selfly-limited,
And joined to place, yet not as quantiti'd,
But by the touch of their live efficace,
Containing Bodies which they seem to embrace:
So, visibly those bodies move, and ost
By word of Mouth bring arrands from aloft,
And eat with us; but not for sustentation,
Nor naturally, but by mere dispensation.
Such were the sacred Guests of this good Prince:
Such, courteous ABRAHAM feasted in his Tents,
When, seeing three, he did adore but one,
Which, coming down from the celestial Throne,
Fore-tolde the sad and sudden Tragedy,
Of these loose Cities, for their Luxury.
You that your Purse do shut, and doors do bar Exhortation to Hospitality.

Against the cold, faint, hungry Passenger,
You little think that all our life and Age
Is but an Exile and a Pilgrimage:
And that in earth whosoever has never given
Harbor to Strangers, shall have none in Heaven,
Wheresolemn N^ptials of the Lamb are held;
Where Angels bright and Souls that have excelled,
All clad in white, sing the Epithalamie,
Carowsing Nectar of Eternity.
Sans Hospitality, the Pilgrim poor The lust-ful Sodomites, inflamed with the
beauty of the Angels, mutiny against Lot for harboring them.

For Bedfellow might have a Wolfor Boar:
What ever is given the Strange and Needy one,
Is not a gift (indeed) but't is a Loan,
A Loan to God, who pays with interest;
And (even in this life) guerdons even the least.
For, alms (like levain) make our goods to rise,
And God his own with blessings plentifies.
O Hosts, what know you, whether (charitable)
When you suppose to feast men at your Table,
You guest Gods Angels in Men's habit hid,
(Heav'n-Citizens) as this good Hebrew did?
Who supped them: and when the time grew meet
To go to bed, he heard amid the street
A wrangling ^angling, and a Murmur rude,
Which great, grew greater through Nights solitude.
For, those that first these two bright Stars survai'd,
Wild Stalion-like, after their beauties naigh'd;
But, seeing them by the chaste stranger saved,
Shame-less and sense-less up and down they raved,
From House to House knocking at every door,
And beastly-brute, thus, thus they rail and rore;
Brethren, shall we endure this Fugitive,
This stranger LOT, our pleasures to deprive?
(O Cowardice*) to suffer in our sights
An exile here t'vsurp our choice delights,
To Embrace a brace of Youths so beauteous
(Rather two Gods com-down from Heaven to us)?
Shall it be said that such an old cold stock
Such rare young Minions in his bed should mock:
While wretched we, unto our selves make moan,
And (Widow-like) wear-out our sheets alone?
Let Us rather break his doors, and make him know,
Such dainty morsels hang not for his Mow.
Even as at Bathe, down from the neighbor Hills, Simile.

After a snow, the melting Crystal trills
Into the Avon ( when the Pythian Knight,
Strips those steep Mountains of their shirts so white)
Through hundred Valleis gushing Brooks and Torrents,
Striving for swiftness in their sundry Currents,
Cutting deep Channels where they chance to run,
And never rest till all do meet in one:
So, at their cry, from every corner throng
Unto LOT'S house, Men, Children, old, and young.
For, common was this execrable sin:
With blear-eyed Age, as nusled long therein;
With Youth, through rage of lust; with Infancy,
Example-led: all through Impunity.
And thus, they all cry out; Open, open the door,
Com, open quickly, and delay no more:
Let-forth that lovely Payr, that they may prove
With us the pleasures of Male-mingled love.
LOT lowely then replies: Brethren and Friends, Lot speaks them fair, and
entreats them earnestly for the safety of his guests.

By all the names that amity commends,
By Nature's Rules, and Rights of Hospitality,
By sacred Laws, and lessons of Morality,
By all respects of our com-Burg^ship
(Which should our minds in mutual kindeness keep)
I do adjure you all, that you refrain
The honor of my harm-less guests to stain,
Nor in your hearrs to harbor such a thought
Whereby their Virtues may be wronged in ought.
Base busy Stranger, come thou hither, thus Their insolent reply.

(Controller-like) to prate and preach to us?
No ( Puritan) thou shall not here do so:
Therefore dispatch and let thy darlings go;
Let-forth that lovely Payr, that they may prove
With us the Pleasures of Male-mingled love.
The horror of this sin, their stubborn rage,
His sacred promise given his Guests for gage,
The old Hebrew's mind so trouble and dismay,
That well he wots not what to do nor say.
For, though we ought not (if Gods Word be true)
Do any evil that good may ensue:
To shun one ill, another ill he suffers,
He prostitutes his Issue; and he offers
Lambs to the guard of Wolves: and thus he cries, He offers them his own
daughters to rescue his Guests.

I have (with that, the tears ran-down his eyes)
I have two daughters that be Virgins both;
Go, take them to you (yet alas full loath)
Go, crop the first fruits to their Bride-grooms due
(O! death to think it): But let none of you
Abuse my chaste Guests with such villainy
As merits Fire from Heaven immediately;
A Sin so odious, that the Name alone
Good men abhor, yea even to think upon. Their monstrous impudence.

Tush: we are glutted with all granted loves,
And common Pleasure naught our pleasure moves:
LOT, our delights (tied to no law's conformity)
Consist not in the pleasure, but the enormity,
Which fools abhor: and, saying so, they rush,
Some upon LOT, Some at his Gates do push.
O cursed City! where the aged Sier,
Vn-able thus to do, does thus desire;
And Younglings, yet scarce weaned from their Nurse,
Strive with their Elders whether shall be worse;
Full is the measure of thy monstrous sin:
Thy Canker now over all thy bulk has been.
God hates all sin: but, extreme Impudence
Is even a greater sin than the Offense: Impudence in sinning, doubles* the
guilt of sins.

The sweet kind Kisses of chaste Man and Wife
Although they seem by God and Nature (ri^e)
Rather commanded then allowed, and graced
In their sweet fruits (their issue choicely-chaste)
With Law's large privilege; yet evermore
(As Modesty and Honesty implore)
Ought to be private, and (as things forbidden
Unto the sight) with Night's black curtin hidden.
Yet, these foul Monsters, in the open street
Where altogether all the Town might see it,
Most impudent, dare perpetrate a sin
Which Hell it self before had never seen;
A sin so odious, that the fame of it
Will fright the damned in the dark some Pit.
But now, the Angels, their celestial kind Before their fearful destruction,
the Angels bring Lot and his family safe out of the City

Vn-able longer to conceal, struck blind
Those beastly Letchers, and brought safe away
LOT and his household by the break of day.
But, O prodigious! never rose the Sun
More beautiful, nor brighter shin'd-vpon
All other places (for he rose betimes
To see such Execution on such Crimes):
And yet, it lowrs, it lightens, and it thunders,
It rores, it rains (O most unwonted wonders!)
Upon this Land, which against the Omnipotent
Had warred so long with sins so insolent:
And against the pride of those detested livers,
Heaven seems to empty all his wrathful Quyvers.
From Acheron, even all the Furies hie,
And all their Monsters them accompany,
With all their tortures and their dismal terrors,
And all their Chaos of confused Horrors;
All on the guilty strand of Jordan storm,
And with their Firebrarnds all to Sodom swarm,
As thick as Crows in hungry shoals do light
On new-sowen lands; where stalking bolt upright, Simile.

As black as Iet they iet about, and feed
On Wheat, Or Rye, or other kind of seed,
Kaaking so loud, that hardly can the Steer
The whistling Goad-man's guiding language hear.
It rained indeed; but not such fertile rain The manner of their punishment by
fire and brimstone from Heaven, and the reason thereof.

As makes the Corn in Summer sprout amain;
And all things, freshed with a pleasant air,
To thrive, and prove more lively, strong and fair:
But in this sink of Sin, this stinking Hell,
A rain of Salt, of Fire and Brimston, fell.
Salt did consume the pleasant fruitfulness,
Which served for fuel to their Wantonness:
Fire punished their beastly Fire within:
And Brimstone's stink the stench of their foul Sin.
So, as their Sin was singular (of right)
Their Punishment was also exquisite:
Here, open Flames, and there yet hidden Fires
Burn all to ashes, sparing neither Spires
Of Brick nor Stone, nor Columns, Gates, nor Arches,
Nor Bowrs, nor Towrs, nor even their neighbour-Marches.
In vain the-while the People weep and cry, The same most lively represented.

To see their wrack and know no remedy:
For, now the Flame in richest Roofs begun,
From molten gutters scalding Lead does run,
The Slats and Tyles about their ears do split,
The burning Rafters Pitch and Rosin spit:
The whirling Fire re-mounteth to the Sky,
About the fields ten thousand sparks do fly;
Half-burned Houses fall with hideous fray,
And VVLCAN makes Midnight as bright as Day:
Heaven flings-down naught but flashing Thunder-shot,
The Air's all a-fire, Earth's exhalations hot
Are spewing AETNA'S that to Heaven aspire;
All the Elements (in brief) are turned to fire.
Here, one perceiving the next Chamber burning,
With sudden leap toward the window turning,
Thinks to cry Fire: but instantly the smoke
And Flame without, his with-in Voice do choke.
Another, sooner feels then sees the Fire.
For, while (O horror!) in the stinking mire
Of his foul Lust he lies, a Lightning flash
Him and his Love at-once to dust does dash:
The abhorred Bed is burnt, and they, as well
Coupled in Plague as Sin, are sent to Hell.
Another yet on tops of Houses crawls:
But his foot slips, and down at last he falls.
Another feeling all his clothes a-fire,
Thinking to quench them yer it should come nigher,
Leaps in a Lake: but all the Lake began
To boil and bubble like a seething Pan, Simile.

Or like a Chaldron that top-full of Oil,
Environed round with fume and flame does boil,
To boil to death some cunning counterfeit
That with false stamp some Princes Coin has beat.
Another, seeing the City all in Cinders,
Himself for safety to the fields he renders;
But flakes of Fire from Heaven distilling thick,
There the horror of a thousand Deaths do strike.
Through Adamah's and Gomor's goodly Plains,
Sodom and Seboim not a soul remains:
Horse, Sheep, and Oxen, Cows and Kids partake
In this revenge, for their vile Masters sake.
Thus has the hand of the Omnipotent
Enrolled the Deed of their drad Punishment,
With Diamantin Pen, on Plates of Brass,
With such an Ink as nothing can deface:
The molten Marble of these cindred Hills,
Asphaltis Lake, and these poor mock-fruit Fields
Keep the Record; and cry through every Age,
How God detesteth such detested rage.
O chastisement most dradly-wonderfull!
The Heav'n-cindred Cities a broad standing Pool
O're-flowes (yet flows not) whose infectious breath
Corrupts the Air, and Earth dis-fertileth:
A Lake, whose back, whose belly, and whose shore,
Nor Bark, nor Fish, nor Fowl has ever bore.
The pleasant Soil that did (even) shame yer-while
The plentious beauties of the banks of Nile,
Now scarr'd, and collowed, with his face and head
Covered with ashes, is all dried and dead;
Void of all force, vital, or vegetive;
Upon whose breast nothing can live or thrive:
For, naught it bears save an abortiue suit
Of seeming-fair, false, vain, and fained fruit,
A fruit that feeds theey, and fills the hand,
But to the stomach in no steed does stand*
For even before it touch the tender lips
Or Ivory teeth, in empty smoke it slips,
So vanishing: only, the nose receives
A noysom savor, that (behind) it leaves.
Here, I adjure you, venurous Trauailours, Exhortation to Trauailers that have
seen, and to others that shall read or hear these fearful monuments of
Gods severe Justice, to make right use of this fearful Example.

That visit the horror of these cursed shoars,
And taste the venom of these stinking streams,
And touch the vain fruit of these wythered stems:
And also you that do behold them thus
In these sad Verses portrayed here by us,
To tremble all, and with your pearly tears
To shower another Sea; and that your hairs
Staring upright on your affrighted head
Heave-vp your Hats; and, in your dismal dread,
To think, you hear like Sulph'ry Storms to strike
On our n^w Monsters for Offenses like.
For, the Almightie's drad all-daunting arm,
Not only strikes such as with Sodom swarm
In these foul Sins; but such as sigh or pity
Sodoms destruction, or so damned a City,
And cannot constant with dry eyes observe
God's judgments just on such as such deserve.
LOT hies to SEGOR: but his wife behind Lots wise metamorphozed.

Lagged in body, but much more in mind:
She weeps and wails (O lamentable terror!
O impicus Pity! O kind-cruell error)
The dire destruction of the smoking Cities,
Her Sons-in-Law (which should have been) she pities,
Grieves so to leave her goods, and she laments
To lose her Jewels and habiliments:
And (contrary to the Angels Words precise)
Toward the Town she turns her woeful eyes.
But instantly, turned to a whitely stone,
Her feet (alas!) fast to the ground be grown;
The more she stirs, she sticks the faster in:
As silly Bird caught in a subtle gin, Simile.

Set by some Shepherd near the Copses side,
The more it struggles is the faster tied.
And, as the venom of an eating Canker Simile.

From flesh to flesh runs every day the ranker,
And never rests, until from foot to head
Over all the Body his fell poison spread:
This Ice creeps-vp, and cease not to number,
Till even the marrow hard as bones become,
The brain be like the seul, and blood convert
To Alablaster over every part;
Her Pulse does cease to beat, and in the air
The Winds no more can wave her scattered hair:
Her belly is no belly, but a Quar
Of Cardon Rocks, and all her bowels are
A precious Salt-Mine, supernatural,
Such, as (but Salt) I wot not what to call;
A Salt which (seeming to be fallen from Heaven)
To curious Spirits has long this Lesson given,
Not to presume in Divine things to pry,
Which seav'n-times sealed, under nine Locks do lie.
She weeps (alas!) and as she weeps, her tears
Turn into Pearls fro'rn on her twinkling hairs:
Fain would she speak, but (forced to conceal)
In her cold throat her guilty words congeal;
Her mouth yet open, and her arms across,
Though dumb, declare both why and how she was
Thus Metamorphos'd: for, Heaven did not change
Her last sad gestures in her sudden Change.
No gorgeous Ma^sole, graced with flattering verse,
Eternizeth her Trunk her House, and Hearse;
But, to this Day (strange will it seem to some)
One and the same is both the Corpse and Tomb.
Almighty Father! Gracious God and Just! Man's pronenesse ^o fall, without the
support of Gods gracious fa^^our*

O! what hard-heartednes, what brutish Lust,
Pursues man: if thou but turn thy face,
And take but from us thy preventing grace:
And, if provoked for our past offenses,
Thou give us up to our Concupiscences?
O Harran'^ Nieces, you (LOTS daughters) saw
SODOM consumed in that Sulphury flaw:
Their Hills and Forests calcined (in fine)
Their liberal fields sown with a burning brine,
Their stately houses like a coal-pitsmoaking,
The Sun it self with their thick vapors choking:
So that within a yard for stinking smother
The Laborers could hardly know each other;
Their flowring Valley to a Fen exchanged,
And your own Mother to a Salt-stone changed:
Yet all (alas!) these famous Monuments
Of the just rigor of God's Punishments
Cannot deter you: but even Sodom-like
Incestuously a holy-man you seek;
Even your own Father, whom with wine you fill;
And then by turns entice him to your will:
Conceiving so (O can Heaven suffer it!) Lot drawn by his Daughter, in
drunkenness to commit Incest with both of the^.

Even of that seed which did your selves beget:
Within your wombs you bear for nine months time
The vpbraiding burden of your shame-less Crime,
And troubling Kindred's names and Nature quight,
You both become even in one very Night,
Wives to your Fathers, Sisters to your Sons,
And Mothers to your Brothers all at once;
All under color, that thus living sole,
Sequestered thus in an unhaunted hole,
Heavens envy should all ADAM'S race have reft,
And LOT alone should in the World be left.
Had't not been better, never to have bred,
Than to have conceived in so foul a bed?
Had't not been better never to have been Mothers,
Than by your Father, to have born your Brothers?
Had't not been better to the death to hate,
Then thus to have loved him, that you both begat?
Him, so much yours, that yours he might not be?
Since of these Rocks God could immediately
Have raised LOT Son-in-lawes; or, striking but
The Earths solid bosom with his brazen foot,
Out of the dust have reared sudden swarms
Of People, stayed in Peace, and stout in Arms.
FINIS.
The FATHERS. A PART OF THE II. PART OF THE III. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
The famous FATHER of the Faithful, here
Limn'd to the life, in strife of Faith and Fear:
His Sonn's sweet nature, and his nurture such,
Endeer his TRIAL with a nearer Touch:
REASON'S best Reasons are by FAITH refell'd;
With GOD, the Affection, for the Action held:
So, counter-manding His command (achieved)
The Sire's approved, and the Son reprieved.
Here ( had our Author lived, to end his Works)
Should have ensued the other PATRIARCHS.
O! It Is a Heavenly and a happy turn,
Of godly Parents to be timely born:
To be brought-vp under the watchful eyn
Of milde-sharp Masters awful Discipline:
Chiefly, to be (even from the very first)
With the pure milk of true Religion nursed.
Such hap had Isaac: but his Inclination
Exceeds his Birth, excels his Education.
His Faith, his Wit, Knowledge, and Judgment sage,
Out-stripping Time, anticipate his age.
For (yet a Child) he fears the Eternal Lord,
And wisely waits all on his Fathers word;
Whose steady steps so duly he observes,
That every look, him for a lesson serves:
And every gesture, every wink and beck.
For a command, a warning, and a check:
So that, his toward Diligence out-went
His Fathers hopes and holy document.
Now, though that Abram were a man discreet,
Sober and wise, well knowing what is meet;
Though his deer Son sometimes he seem to chide,
Yet hardly can he his affection hide;
For, evermore his loue-betraying ey
On's darling Isaac glanceth tenderly:
Sweet Isaac's face seems as his Glass it were,
And Isaac's name is music in his ear.
But God, perceiving this deep-settled Love,
Thence takes occasion Abrams Faith to prove;
And tempts him: But not as does the Devil
His Vassals tempt (or Man his Mate) to evil:
Satan still draws us to Death's dismal Path;
But God directs where Death no entry has:
Ay Satan ayms our constant Faith to foyl;
But God does seal it, never to recoyl:
Satan suggesteth ill; God mooues to grace:
The Devil seeks our Baptism to deface;
But God, to make our burning Zeal to beam
The brighter ay in his Jerusalem.
A Prince that means effectual proof to make Simile.

Of some Man's Faith that he does newly take,
Examins strictly, and with much a-doo,
His Words and Deeds, and every gesture too;
And, as without, within as well to spy-him,
Does carefully by all means sift and try-him.
But God never seeks, by Trial of Temptation,
To sound Man's heart and secret cogitation
(For, well he knows Man, and his ey does see
All thoughts of men, yer they conceived be):
But this is still his high and holy dri^t,
When through temptation he his Saints does si^t,
To leave for pattern to his Churches seed,
Their steadfast Faith, and never-daunted Creed.
Yet, out of season God does never try
His new-converted Children, by and by:
Such novices, would quickly faint and shrink:
Such ill-rigg'd Ships, would even in launching sink:
Their Faith's light blossoms, would with every blast
Be blown away, and bear no fruit at last:
Against so boistrous strokes they want a shield:
Under such weight, their feeble strength would yield.
But when his Words deer seed that he has sown
Within their hearts, is rooted well, and grown:
And when they have a broad thick Breast Plate on,
High peril-proof against affliction:
Such as our Abram: Who, now waxen strong,
Through exercise of many trials long,
Of faith, of love, of fortitude, and right:
Who, by long weary wanderings day and night,
By often Terrors, Lots Imprisonment,
His Wifes twice taking, Ismaels banishment,
Being made invincible for all assaults
Of Heaven and Earth, and the infernal Vaults;
Is tempted by the voice which made all things,
Which sceptreth Shepherds, and vn-crowneth Kings.
Give me a voice, now, O voice all divine*
With sacred fire inflame this breast of mine: Invocation.

Ah! ravish me, make all this Universe
Admire thine Abram pourtrayd in my Verse.
Mine Abram, said the Lord, deer Abraham,
Thy God, thy King, thy Fee, thy Fence I am:
Hie straight to Salem, and there quickly kill
Thine own Son Isaac; on that sacred Hill
Heaw him in pieces, and commit the same
In Sacrifice unto the rage-full Flame.
As he, that slumbering on his careful Bed, Simile.

Seems to discern some Fancy full of dread,
Shrinks down himself, and fearful hides his face,
And scant draws breath in half an howrs space:
So Abraham, at these sharp*sounding words
(Which wound him deeper than a thousand swords)
Seized at once with wonder, grief, and fright,
Is well-nigh sunk in Deaths eternal night;
Death's ash-pale Image in his eyes does swim,
A chilling Iee shivers through every lim,
Flat on the ground himself he grovelling throws,
A hundred times his color coms and goes,
From all his body a cold deaw does drop,
His speech does fail, and every sense does stop.
But, self-return'd, two sounding sobs he cast,
Then two deep sighs, then these sad words at last:
Cruel command, quoth He, that I should kill
A tender Infant, innocent of ill:
That in cold blood I (barbarously) should murder
My (fear-less, fault-less) faithful Friend: nay (further)
Mine own deer Son: and what deer Son? Alas!
Mine only Isaac (whose sweet virtues pass
The lovely sweetness of his angel-face)
Isaac, sole Pattern of now-Vertue known;
Isaac, in years young but in wisdom grown:
Isaac, whom good-men love, the rest envy:
Isaac, my hearts heart my life's life must die.
That I should stain an execrable Shrine,
With Isaac's warm blood, issued out of mine.
O might mine serve, 't were tolerable loss,
'T were little hurt: nay, 't were a welcome cross.
I bear no longer fruit: the best of Me,
Is like a fruit-less, branch-less, sap-less Tree,
Or hollow Trunk, which only serves for stais
To crawling Iuie's weak and winding sprais.
But losing Isaac, I not only leese
My life withal (which Heavens have linkt to his)
But (O!) more millions of Babes yet vn-bore,
Than there be sands upon the L^hian shore.
Can thou, mine Arm? O can thou, cruel arm,
In Isaac's breast thy bloody weapon warm?
Alas! I could not but even die for grief,
Should I but but yield mine Ages sweet relief
(My bliss, my comfort, and mine ey's delight)
Into the hands of Hang-mens spare-less spite:
But that mine own self (O extremest Rigor!)
What my self formed, should my self, dis-figure:
That I (alas!) with bloody hand and knife,
Should rip his bosom, rend his heart and life:
That (odious Author of a Precedent
So rarely ruth-less) I should once present,
Upon a sacred Altar, an Oblation
So barbarous (O brute abomination!)
That I should broyl his Flesh, and in the flame
Behold his bowels crackling in the same:
It Is horrible to think, and hellish too,
Cruel to wish, impossible to do.
Do 't he that list, and that delights in blood:
I neither will, nor can become so wood,
TO obey in this: God, whom we take to be
The eternal Pillar of all verity,
And constant faith; will he be faith-les now?
Will he be false, and from his promise bow?
Will he (alas!) undo what he has don,
Mar what he makes, and loose what he has won?
Sail with each wind? and shall his promise, then,
Serve but for snares to entrap sincerest men?
Sometimes, by his eternal self he swears,
That my Son Isaac's number-passing Heirs
Shall fill the Land, and that his fruitful Race
Shall be the blessed levain of his Grace;
Now he commands me his deer life to spill,
And in the Cradle my health's Hope to kill:
To drown the whole World in the blood of him:
And at one stroke upon his fruitful stem,
To strike-off all the heads of all the flock,
That should heer-after his drad name inuoak,
His sacred nostrils with sweetsmels delight,
His ears with praises, with good deeds his sight.
Will God impugn himself? and will he so
By his command, his covenant over throw?
And shall my faith, my faith's confounder be?
Then faith, or doubting, are both one to me.
Alas! what say thou, Abram? pawse thou must.
He that revives the Phoenix from her dust,
And from dead Silk-worm's Toombs (their shining Clews)
A living bird with painted wings renews;
Will he forget Isaac, the only stock
Of his chaste Spouse (his Church and chosen flock)*
Will he forget Isaac, the only Light
Of all the World, for Virtues luster bright?
Or, can he not (if it please him) even in death
Restore him life, and re-inspire him breath?
But mark, the while thou bring for defense,
The All-proof Towr of his Omnipotence,
Thou shak'st his Justice. This is certain (too)
God can do all, save that he will not do.
He loves none ill: for, when the wreakfull Waves
Were all returned into their wonted Caves;
When all the Meads, and every fruitful Plain,
Began (with joy) to see the Sun again;
So soon as Noah (with a gladsom heart)
Forth of his floating Prison did depart,
God did forbid Murder: and nothing more
Then Murder, does his Majesty abhor.
But (shallow man) sound not the vast Abiss
Of God's deep Judgments, where no ground there is:
Be sober-wise: so, bound thy frail desire:
And, what thou can not comprehend, admire.
God our Lawmakers (just and righteous)
Makes his Laws, not for himself, but us:
He frees himself; and flies with his Powrs wing,
No where, but where his holy will does bring:
All that he does is good: but not therefore
Must he needs do it, 'cause 'twas good before:
But good is good, because it does (indeed)
From him (the Root of perfect good) proceed:
From him, the Fountain of pure Righteousness:
From him, whose goodness nothing can express.
Ah, profane thoughts! O wretch! and think thou then
That God delights to drink the blood of men?
That he intends by such a strange impiety
To plant his service? You, you forged deity
Of Molech, Milcom, Camosh, Astaroth,
Your damned Shrines with such dire Orgies blot:
You Tyrants, you delight in Sacrifice
Of slaughtered Children: it is your bloody guise
(You cruel Idols) with such Hecatombs
To glut the rage of your outrageous dooms:
You hold no sent so sweet, no gift so good,
As streaming Rivers of our lukewarm blood:
Not Abram's God (ay gracious, holy, kind)
Who made the World but only for Mankind:
Who hates the bloody hands: his Creatures loves:
And contrite hearts for sacrifice approues.
You, you, disguised (as angels of the light)
Would make my God Author of this despite,
Supplant my Faith on his sure promise built,
And stain his Altars with this bloody guilt.
No, no, my joy, my Boy thrice-happy born
(Yea more then so, if furious I, forlorn,
Hurt not thy Hap) a Father shall thou be
Of happy People, that shall spring from thee.
Fear not (deer Child) that I, unnatural,
Should in thy blood imbrue my hand at all:
Or by the exployt of such detested deed
Commend my name to them that shall succeed.
I will, the Fame that of my name shall ring
In time to com, shall fly with fairer wing.
The lofty Pine that is shaken to and fro (...)*

With Counter-pufs of sundry winds that blow,
Now, swaying Southward tears some root in twain,
Then, bending Northward does another strain,
Reels up and down, tossed by two Tyrants fell,
Would fall, but cannot; neither yet can tell
(Inconstant Neu^er, that to both does yield)
Which of the two is like to win the Fi^ld*
So Abraham* on each side set-vpon
Betwixt his Faith and his Affection*
One while his Faith, anon Affection sways:
Now wins Religion, anon Reason waighs:
He Is now a fond, and then a faithful Father:
Now resolute, anon relenting rather:
One while the Flesh has got the upper hand:
Anon the Spirit the same does countermand.
He Is loath (alas!) his tender Son to kill;
But much more loath, to break His Fathers will.
For thus (at last) He says, now sure I know
It Is God, it is God; the God that loves me so,
Loves, keeps, sustains: whom I so often have seen:
Whose voice so often has my comfort been.
Illuding Satan cannot shine so bright,
Though Angelliz'd: No, It Is my God of Might.
Now feel I in my Soul (to strength and stir-it)
The sacred Motions of his sacred Spirit.
God, this sad Sacrifice requires of me;
Hap what hap may, I must obedient be.
The sable Night dis-log'd: and now began
Aurora's Usher with his windy Fan
Gently to shake the Woods on every side,
While his fair Mistress (like a stately Bride)
With flowrs, and Gems, and Indian gold does spangle
Her lovely locks, her Lovers looks to tangle;
When gliding through the Air, in Mantle blew,
With silver fringed, she drops the Pearly deaw.
With her goes Abram out: and the third day,
Arriues on Cedrons Margents greenly-gay:
Beholds the sacred Hill, and with his Son
(Laden with sacred wood) he mounts anon.
Anon, said Isaac; Father, here I see
Knife, fire, and faggot, ready instantly:
But where is your Host? Oh! let us mount, my Son,
Said Abram: God will soon provide us one.
But, scant had Isaac turned his face from him,
A little faster the steep Mount to climb,
Yer Abram changed cheer; and, as new Win^, Simile.

Working anew, in the new Cask (in fine)
For being stopped too-soon, and wanting vent,
Blowes-vp the Bung* or does the vessel rent,
Spews out a purple stream, the ground does stain,
With Bacchus color, where the cask has layn:
So, now the Tears (which manly fortitude
Did yerst as captive in the Brain include)
At the deer names of Father and of Son,
On his pale Cheeks in pearly drops did run:
His eye's full vessels now began to leak:
And thus the old Hebrew muttering began to speak,
In submiss voice, that Isaac might not hear
His bitter grief, that he unfolds here.
Sad spectacle! O now my hap-les hand,
Thou whetst a sword, and thou do teend a brand;
The brand shall burn my heart, the sword's keen blade
Shall my bloods blood, and my life's life, invade:
And thou, poor Isaac, bear on thy back,
Wood that shall make thy tender flesh to crack,
And yield'st thee (more for mine, than thine amiss)
Both Priest and Beast, of one same Sacrifice.
O hapless Son! O more then hap-less Sire!
Most wicked wretch! O what misfortune dire
In-gulfs us here! where miserable I,
To be true godly, must Gods law deny:
To be true faithful, must my faith transgress:
To be God's Son, I must be nothing less
Than Isaacs Sire: and Isaac (for my sake)
Must Soil, and Sire, and life and all forsake.
Yet on he goes, and soon surmounts the Mount,
And steeled by Faith, he cheers his mournful Front:
(Much like the Delian Princess, when her Grace Simile.

In Thetis Waves has lately washed her face)
He builds his Altar, lays his wood ther-on,
And tenderly binds his deer Son anon.
Father, said Isaac, Father, Father deer
(What? do you turn away, as loath to hear?)
O Father, tell me, tell me what you mean:
O cruelty vn-knowen! Is this the mean
Whereby my loins (as promised long-since is)
Shall make you Grand-sire of so many Princes?
And shall I (glorious) if I here do die,
Fill Earth with Kings, with shining Stars the Sky?
Back, Phoebus: blush, go hide thy golden head:
Retire thy Coach to Thetis watery Bed:
See not this savage sight. Shall Abram's mind
Be mild to all, and to his Son vn-kinde!
And shall great Abram do the damned deed,
That Lions, Tygres, Boars, and Bears would dread!
See how (incenst) he stops his ear to me,
As dreaming still on's bloody mystery.
Lord, how precise! see how the Paricide
Seems to make conscience in less sins to slide:
And he that means to murder me (his Son)
Is scrupulous in smaller faults to run.
Yet (Father) hear me: not that I desire
With sugared words to quench your Angers fire:
In Gods's name reap the Grain yourself have sown,
Com take my life, extracted from your own,
Glut with my blood your blade, if you it please
That I must die; welcome my death (mine ease):
But tell me yet my fault (before I die)
That has deserved a punishment so high.
Say (Father) have I not conspired your death?
Or with strong poison sought to stop your breath?
Have I devised to short my Mother's life?
Or with your Foestaen part in any strife?
* O thou Ethereal Palace Crystalline
(God's highest Court) If in this heart of mine
So damned thoughts had ever any place,
Shut-vp for ever all thy Gates of Grace
Against my Soul; and never let, that I
Among thy winged Messengers do fly.
If none of these, Abram (for I no more
Dare call thee Father) tell me further-more
What rests besides, that damned I have don,
To make a Father Butcher of his Son:
In memory, that fault I fain would have,
That (after God's) I might your pardon crave
For such offense; and so, the Atonement driven,
You live content, and I may die forgiven.
My Son (said He) thou art not hither brought
By my fell fury, nor thine own foul fault:
God (our God) calls thee, and He will not let
A Pagan sword in thy deer blood be wet;
Nor burning Plague, nor any pining pain
With Languor turn thy flesh to dust again:
But Sacrificed to him (for sweet perfume)
Will have thee here within this fire consume.
What? Fears my Love, my Life my Gem, my Joy?
What God commands, his servants must obey,
Without consulting with frail Flesh and Blood,
How he his promise will in time make good:
How he will make so many Scepters spring
From thy dead dust? How He (All-wise) will bring,
In his due season, from thy sense-less Thighs,
The glorious Son of righteousness to rise,
Who shall the Mountains bruise with iron Mace,
Rule Heaven and Earth, and the Infernal place?
For, he that (past the course of Natures kind)
First gave thee birth, can with his sacred Wind
Raise thee again out of the lowest just*
Ten-thousand means he has to save the just:
His glorious wisdom guides the worlds society,
With equal Reans of Power and of Piety.
Mine own sweet Isaac, dearest of my seed
(Too sweet, alas! the more my grief does bleed,
The more my loss, the more (with cease-less anguish)
My vexed Bowels for thy lack shall anguish)
Adue deer Son (no longer mine, but his
Who call's thee hence) let this vn-happy kiss
Be the sad seal of a more sad Fare-wel
Than wit can paint, or words have power to tell.
Since God commands, and (father) you require
To have it so, com Death (no longer dire,
But glorious now) com gentle death, dispatch:
The Heavens are open, God his arms does reach
TO embrace my Soul: O! let me bravely fly
To meet my Lord, and Death's proud darts defy.
What, Father, weep you now? Ah! cease those showrs:
Weep not for me; for I no more am yours:
I was the Lords yer I was born, you know;
And he but lent me for a while to you:
Will you recoyl, and (Coward) lose the Crown
So near your head, to heap you with renown?
Shall we so dare to dally with the Lord?
To cast his yoke, and to contemn his Word?
Where shall we fly his hand? Heaven is his Throne:
The Earth his footstool: and dark Acheron
(The Dungeon where the damned souls be shut)
Is of his anger evermore the Butt.
On him alone, all our good-hap depends:
And he alone from dangers us defends.
Ah! weep no more: This sacred Turf does crave
More blood than Tears: let us us so behave,
That joined in zeal, we yield us willingly
To make a virtue of necessity.
Let Us testify we have a time abod,
I in your School, you in the school of God:
Where, we have learned that his sacred Word
(Which made of Nothing, all that ever stirred;
Which all sustaines, and all directs still)
To diverse ends, conducts the good and ill.
Who loves not God, more than all Kinn's* respect,
Deserves no place among his deer Elect:
And who does once God's Till age undertake,
Must not look back, neither his Plough forsake.
Here-with, the old Hebrew cheerfuller becam,
And (to himself) cries, Courage Abraham:
The World, the Flesh, Adam, are dead in thee:
God, Spirit, and Faith, alone subsisting be.
Lord, by thy Spirit unto my spirit annex
So lively Faith, that still mine eyes may fix
On thy true Isaac, whose sharp (sin-less) Suffering
Shall purge, from sin, me and my sinful offering.
Scarce had he draw'n his sword (in resolution)
With heaued hand for instant execution,
When instantly the thundering voice of God
Stayed heart and hand, and thus the Fact forbod;
Abram, enough: hold, hold thy hand (said he)
Put-vp thy sword; thine Isaac shall not die:
Now, of thy faith I have had perfect proof,
Thy Will, for Deed I do accept: enough.
Glad Abram, then, to God gives thanks and praise,
Vnbindes his Son, and in his room he lays
A Lamb (there strangely hampered by the head)
And that, to God, devoutly offered.
Renowned Abraham, Thy noble Acts
Excel the Fictions of Heroik Facts:
And, that pure Law a Son of thine shall write,
Shall nothing else but thy brave deeds recite.
Extol who list, thy wisdom's excellence,
Victorious Valor, frank Beneficence,
And Justice too (which even the Gentiles honor):
Ill dares my Muse take such a task vpon-her.
Only thy Faith (not all, with all the Effects)
Only one fruit of thousand she selects,
For glorious subject: which (to say the right)
I rather love to wonder-at, than write.
Go Pagans, turn, turn-over every Book:
Through all Memorials of your Martyrs look,
Collect a Scroule of all the Children slain
On the Altars of your Gods: dig-vp again
Your lying Legends: Run through every Temple;
Among your Offerings, choose the best example
(Among your Offerings which your Fathers past
Have made, to make their names eternal last)
Among them all (fondlings) you shall not find
Such an example, where (vnkindely-kinde)
Father and Son so mutually agree,
To show themselves, Father nor Son to be:
Where man's deep zeal, and God's deer favor strove,
For Counter-conquest in officious love.
One, by constraint his Son does sacrifice:
Another means his Name to immortallize
By such a Fact: Another hopes to shun
Some dismal Plague, or dire Affliction:
Another, only that he may conform
To (Tyrant) Custom's, aw-les law-les Form,
Which blears our eyes, and blurs our Senses so,
That Lady Reason must her seat forgo:
Yea, blindes the judgment of the World so far,
That Uertue's often arraigned at Vice's Bar.
But, vn-constrain'd, our Abram, all alone,
Upon a Mountain, to the guise of none
(For it was odious to the Jews to do)
And in a time of Peace and plenty too,
Fights against Nature (pricked with wondrous zeal)
And, slaying Isaac, wars against his Weal.
O sacred Muse! that on the double Mount,
With withering Bays bind'st not thy Singers Front;
But, on Mount Sion in the Angels Quire,
With Crowns of glory do their brows atrire:
Tell (for thou know) what sacred Mystery,
Under this shadow, does in secret ly?
O Death, Sin, Satan, tremble ye not all,
For hate and horror of your dreadful Fall,
So lively figured? To behold Gods Bow
So ready bent to cleave your heart in two?
To see young Isaac, Pattern of that Prince,
Who shall Sin, Satan, Death, and Hell, convince?
Both only Sons; both sacred Potentates,
Both holy Founders of two mighty States,
Both sanctified, both Saints Progenitors;
Both bear their Cross, both Lamb-like Sufferers,
Both bound, both blame-less, both without reply,
Both by their Fathers are ordained to die
Upon Mount Sion: which high glorious Mount
Serves us for Ladder to the Heavens to mount,
Restores us Edens key (the key of Eden,
Lost through the eating of the fruit forbidden,
By wretched Adam, and his weaker Wife)
And blessed bears the holy Tree of life.
Christ dies indeed: but Isaac is repriv'd
(Because Heavens Council otherwise contrived)
For Isaac's blood was no sufficient price
To ransom souls from Hell to Paradise:
The Leprosy of our contagious sin,
More powr-full Rivers must be purged in.
FINIS.
The LAW. THE III. PART OF THE III. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Envy, in Pharao, seeks to stop the Cause
Of Jews increase: Moses escapes his claws;
Out of a Burning (unburned) Bush, a Voice
For Jacob's Rescue does of Him make choice;
Sends him (with Aaron) to the Egyptian King:
His Hard'ning, PLAGVING, final Ruining
In the Red Sea. Israel ingrate for all:
Christ-Typing Manna, Quails, Rock-waters fall:
The glorious LAW: the golden Calf: strange Fire:
Core in-gulft: MOSES prepared t'expire.
ARm-Arming Trumpets, lofty Clarions,
Rock-battering Bumbards, Valour-murdering Guns,
Think you to drown with horror of your Noise
The choice sweet accents of my sacred Voice?
Blow (till you burst) roar, rend the Earth in sunder;
Fill all with Fury, Tempest, War, and Thunder;
Dire Instruments of Death, in vain ye toil:
For, the loud Cornet of my long-breathed style
Out-shrills ye still; and my Stentorian Song,
With warbled Echoes of a silver tongue,
Shall brim be heard from India even to Spain,
And then from thence, even to the Artik Wayn.
Yet, it is not I, not I in any sort;
My sides's too-weak, alas, my breath's too-short:
It is the spirit-inspiring Spirit, which yerst
On the eldest Waters mildly moved first,
That furnishes and fills with sacred wind
The weak, dull Organs of my Muse and mind.
So, still, good Lord, in these tumultuous times,
Give Peace unto my Soul, soul to my Rimes:
Let me not faint amid so fair a course:
Let the World's end be the end of my Discourse:
And, while in FRANCE fell MARS does all devour,
In lofty style (Lord) let me sing thy Power.
ALL-CHANGING Time had cancelled and suppressed
IOSEPH'S Deserts; his Master was deceast,
His Sons were dead: when currish Envie's strife
Lays each-where ambush for poor ISRAEL'S life:
Who, notwithstanding, does far faster spread Comparison.

And thicker spring, than, in a fruitful Mead
Moted with Brooks, the many-leaved locks
Of thriving Charvel; which the bleating Flocks
Can with their daily hunger hardly mow
So much as daily does still newly grow.
This Monster wuns not in the Cel she wont; Description of the Palace of Envy.

Sh'hath reared her Palace on the steepest Mount,
Whose snowy shoulders with their stony pride
Eternally do Spain from France divide:
It has a thousand loop-holes every-way;
Yet never enters there one sunny ray:
Or if that any chance so far to pass,
It Is quickly quenched by her cloudy face:
At every Loop, the Workman wittily
Has placed a long, wide, hollow Trunk, wher-by
Prattling Renown and Fame with painted wing,
News from all corners of the World do bring,
Buzzing there-in: as, in a Summer Even, Simile.

From clefts of Medows that the Heat has riven,
The Grass-hoppers, seeming to fain the voices
Of little Birds, chirp-out ten thousand noyses.
It fortuned now that a swift-flying Fame, To whom Fame reports Isreal's
prosperity.

Which (lately but) from stately Memphis came,
Sweating, and dusty, and nigh breath-less, fills
With this Report one of her listening Quills:
O curious Nymph (lives there a Wit with us,
Acute and quick, that is not curious?)
Most wakefull Goddess, Queen of mortal hearts,
Consort of Honor, Wealth, and High-Deserts,
Doo'st thou not know, that happy ISRAEL
(Which promises, the Conqueror of Hell,
That twice-born King, here-after to bring-forth,
Who dead shall live again; and by his Worth
Wipe-out Man's Forfait, and God's Law fulfill,
And on his Cross the envy of Envy kill)
Does (even in sight) abundantly increase?
That Heaven and Earth conspire his happiness?
That seaventy Exiles, with vn*hallowed Fry
Cover the face of all the World well-nigh?
And, drunk with wealth, weigh not thy force a jot?
Envy, thou scest it; but fore-seest it not.
Swollen like a Toad, between her bleeding iaws ^^^y incenseth Pharaoh to
oppress them.

Her hissing Serpents wriggling tails she chaws:
And, hasting hence, in ISIS form she iets;
A golden vessel in one hand she gets,
In the other a sweet Instrument; her hood
Was Peacocks feathers mixed with Southernwood;
A silver Crescent on her front she set,
And in her bosom many a fostering teat:
And, thus disguised, with pride and impudence
She presses-in to the Bubastik Prince,
Who, slumbring then on his vn-quiet Couch,
With ISRAEL's greatness was disturbed much:
Then she (the while, squinting upon the luster
Of the rich Rings which on his fingers glistre;
And, snuffing with a wrythed nofe the Amber,
The Musk and Civet that perfumed the Chamber)
'Gan thus to greet him: Sleep'st thou? sleep'st thou, son?
And see thou not thy self and thine vn-don,
While cruel Snakes, which thy kind breast did warm,
Sting thee to death, with their ungrateful swarm?
These Fugitives, these outcasts do conspire
Against rich Egypt, and (ingrate) aspire
With odious Yoke of bondage to debase
The noble PHARAOH's, Godd's immortal Race.
With these last words, into his breast she blows
A banefull air, whose strength vnfeltly flows
Through all his veins; and, having gained his heart,
Makes Reason stoop to Sense in every part: Simile.

So the Aspick pale (with too-right aim) does spit
On his bare face, that coms too-neer to it,
The froth that in her teeth to bane she turns;
A drowzy bane, that inly creeps, and burns
So secretly, that without sense of pain,
Scar, wound, or swelling, soon the Partie's slain.
What shall I farther say? This Sorrow's-Forge,
This Rack of Kings, Care's fountain, Courtier's scourge,
Besides her sable poison, does inspire Enuies* two Twins.

With Hate and Fear the Princes fell desire.
Henceforth therefore, poor ISRAEL has no peace,
Not one good day, no quiet nap, no ease;
Still, still oppressed, Tax upon Tax arose,
After Thefts, Threats, and after Threats com blows. Slavery of the Israelites.

The silly wretches are compelled som-while
To cut new Channels for the course of Nile:
Sometimes some Cities ruins to repair:
Sometimes to build huge Castles in the air:
Sometimes to mount the Parian Mountains higher
In those proud Towrs that after-worlds admire;
Those Towrs, whose tops the Heavens have terrified:
Those Towrs, that scuse the audacious Titan's pride
(Those Towrs, vain Tokens of a vast expense;
Tropheis of Wealth, Ambition's Monuments)
To make with their own sweat and blood their mortar:
To be at-once Brick-maker, Mason, Porter.
They labor hard, eat little, sleeping less,
No sooner laid, but thus their Task-lords press;
Villains, to work: what are ye grown so sloth?
We Will make ye yield us wax and honey both.
In brief, this Tyrant, with such servitude, Pharao his rain policy.

Thought soon to waste the sacred multitude;
Or, at the least, that over-layd with woe,
Weakened with watching, worn with toyling so,
They would in time become less service-able
In VENUS Battails, and for breed less able
(Their spirits dispersed, their bodies over-dri'd,
And Cypris sap vn-duly qualified):
But, when he saw this not succeed so well,
But that the Lord still prosper'd ISRAEL;
Inhumane, he commands (on bloody Pain) His cruel Edict against the male
children.

That all their male-babes in their birth be slain:
And that (because that charge had don no good)
They should be cast, in CAIRO's silver Flood.
O Barbarism, learned in Hell below!
Those, that (alas!) nor steel nor stream do know,
Must Die of steel or stream: cruel Edicts!
That, with the Infant's blood, the Mother's mix;
That, Child and Mother both at once cut off;
Him with the stroke, her with the grief thereof:
With twofold tears Jews greet their Native Heaven:
The day that brings them life, their life has reav'n.
But, IOCHEEED would fain (if she had durst)
Her deer son MOSES secretly have nourc't:
Yet thinking it better her Babeforgo,
Than Child and Parents both to hazard so,
At length she lays it forth, in Rush-boat weaves-it,
And to God's Mercy and the Flood's she leaves-it.
Though Rudder-les, not Pilot-les, this Boat
Among the Reeds by the Floods side did float,
And saues from wrack the future Legislator,
Lighting in hands of the Kings gracious Daughter: His Daughter finding Moses
exposed, causes him to be Princely brought up.

Who opening it, finds (which with ruth did strike-her)
A lovely Babe (or little Angel liker)
Which with a smile seemed to implore the aid
And gentle pity of the Royal Maid.
Love, and the Graces, State and Majesty,
Seem round about the Infants face to fly,
And on his head seemed (as it were) to shine
Presagefull rays of som-what more divine.
She takes him up, and rears him royal-like;
And, his quick Spirit, trained in good Arts, is like
A well breathed Body, nimble, sound, and strong, 2. Similes.

That in the Dance-school needs not teaching long:
Or a good Tree set in as good a soil,
Which grows a-pace, without the Husband's toil.
In time, he puts in Practice what he knows;
With courteous Mildness, manly Courage shows:
H'hath nothing vulgar: with great happiness,
In choice discourse he does his mind express;
And as his Soul's-type his sweet tongue affoords,
His graceful Works confirm his gracious Words:
His Virtues make him even the Empire's heir:
So means the Prince, such is the peoples prayer.
Thus, while o're-whelmed with the rapid course Gods providence in his
preservation.

Of Mischief's Torrent (and still fearing worse)
ISRAEL seems help-les and even hope-les too
Of any help that Mortal hand can do:
And, while the then-Time's hideous face and form
Boads them (alas!) nothing but wrack and storm,
Their Castor shines, their Savior's saved: and He
That with high hand shall them from bondage free,
Scourging with Plagues, scarring with end-les shame
The Egyptian Court, is raised by the same.
For, though him there they as a God adore, Moses affection and duty toward his
Parents and care of his Brethren.

He scorns not yet his friends and kindred poor:
He feels their Yoke, their mournings he laments:
His word and sword are pressed in their defense;
And, as ordained, for their Deliverance,
And sent express by Heavens pre-ordinance,
Seeing a Pagan (a proud Infidel,
A Patagon, that tasted naught so well
As ISRAEL's blood) to ill-intreat a Jew,
Him bold incounters, and him bravely slew.
But, fearing then least his inhumane Prince He flies out of Egypt.

Should hear of it, young MOSES flies from thence:
And, hard by Horeb, keeping IETHRO'S sheep,
He Fasts and Prays; with Meditations deep
His virtuous zeal he kindles more and more,
And prudently he lays-vp long-before
Within his Soul (his spiritual Armory)
All sacred Weapons of Sobriety,
Wherewith to encounter, conquer, and suppress
All Insurrections of Voluptuousness.
Also, not seldom some deep Dream or Trance God talks to him in the Wilderness.

Him suddenly does even to Heaven advance:
And He, that whilom could not find the Lord
On plentious shoars of the Pelusian Foord,
In walled Cities with their Towred Ports,
In learned Colleges, nor sumptuous Courts;
In Desert meets him; greets him, face to face,
And on his brows bears tokens of his Grace.
For, while he past his sacred Pentiship
(In Wilderness) of the Hebrews Shepheardship; Moses vision of the flaming Bush

In driving forth to kiss-cloud SINA'S foot
His fleecy Flock, and there attending too 't'
He sudden sees a Bush to flame and fume,
And all a-fire, yet not at all consume;
It flames and burns not, cracks and breaks not in,
Kisses, but bites not no not even the skin:
True figure of the Church, and speaking Sign
Which seems thus to, of it self, define:
What? (AMRAM'S son) Does JACOB'S bitter Teen
Dismay thee so? Behold, this Haw-thorn green
Is even an Image of thine ISRAEL,
Who in the Fire of his Afflictions fell
Still flourishes, on each side hedged round
With prickly Thorns, his hateful Foes to wound:
This Fire does seem the Spirit Omnipotent,
Which burns the Wicked, tries the Innocent;
Who also adds to the sacred Sign,
The more to move him, his own Word Divine. The voice of the Lord speaking out
of the Bush.

I AM I that I am, in me, for me, by me:
All Beings else Be not (or else vn-selfly be)
But, from my Being, all their Being gather;
Prince of the World, and of my Church the Father:
Only Beginning, Midst, and End of all;
Yet sans Beginning, Midst, and End at all:
All in my self comprised; and all comprising
That in the World was, is, or shall be rising:
Base of this Universe: the uniting Chain
Of the Elements: the Wisdom Sovereign:
Each-where, in Essence, Power and Providence;
But in the Heavens, in my Magnificence:
Fountain of Goodness: ever-shining Light:
Perfectly Blessed: the One, the Good, the Bright:
Self-simple Act, working in frailest matter:
Framer of Forms: of Substances Creator:
And (to speak plainer) even that GOD I AM
Whom so long since religious ABRAHAM,
ISAAC, and JACOB, and their Progenies
Have worshipped and praised in humble wise.
My sacred ears are tired with the noise God has pity on his people afflicted
in Egypt.

Of thy poor Brethren's iust-complayning voice:
I have beheld my Peoples burdens there;
MOSES, no more I will, nor can, forbear:
The have groaned (alas!) and panted all too-long
Under that Tyrants vn-relenting wrong.
Now, their Deliverer I authorize thee, He ordains Moses for their Deliverer,
and gives him commission to go to Pharao.

And make thee Captain of their Colony;
A sacred Colony, to whom (as mine)
I have so often bequeathed rich Palestine.
Therefore from me command thou PHARAO
That presently he let my People go
Into the Dry-Arabian Wilderness,
Where far from sight of all profane excess,
On a new Altar they may sacrifice
To ME the LORD, in whom their succourlies:
Haste, haste (I say) and make me no excuse
On thy Tongue's rudenes (for the want of use)
Nor on thy weakness, nor vnworthyness
To vnder-go so great a Business.
What? cannot He, that made the lips and tongue,
Prompt Eloquence and Art (as does belong)
Unto his Legate? And, who every thing
Of Nothing made, and All to naught shall bring;
The Omnipotent, who does confound (for His)
By weak the strong; by what is not, what is,
(That in his wondrous Judgments, men may more
The Workman then the Instruments adore)
Will he forsake, or leave him vn-assisted,
That in his service duly has insisted?
Since faithful Servant, to do-well affected,
Can by his Master never be rejected. Moses (accompanied with his brother
Aaron) sets forward in his high Embassage.

No sooner this, the Divine Uoice had ended,
And up to Heaven the Bushy Flame ascended,
But MOSES, with (his fellow in Commission)
His Brother AARON, wends with expedition
First to his People, and to PHARAO then,
The King of Egypt (cruellest of Men):
And inly filled with a zealous flame,
Thus, thus he greets him, in the Almighties name;
Great NILVS Lord, thus says the Lord of Hoasts,
Let go my People out of all thy Coasts,
Mine ISRAEL (PHARAO) forthwith release,
Let them depart to HOREB'S Wilderness;
That unto me, without offense or fear,
Their Hearts and Heifers they may offer there.
Base Fugitive, proud slave (that art returned, Pharaos proud answer.

Not to be whipped, but rather hanged, or burned)
What Lord, said PHARAO? ha! what Sovereign?
O seaven-horn'd Nile! O hundred-pointed Plain!
O City of the Sun! O Thebes! and Thou
Renowned Pharos, do ye all not bow
To us alone? Are ye not only Ours?
Ours at a beck? Then to what other Powrs
Owes your great PHARAO homage or respect?
Or by what Lord to be controlled and checked?
I see the Drift. These off-scums all at once
Too idly pampred, plot Rebellions:
Sloth marrs the slave^, and under fair pretense
Of new Religion (Trayrours to their Prince)
They would Revolt. O Kings! how fond are we
To think by Favors and by Clemency,
To keep men in their duty? To be mild,
Makes them be mad, proud, insolent and wild:
Too-much of Grace, our Scepters does dis-grace,
And smooths the path to Treason's plots a pace.
The dull Ass, numbers with his stripes his steps:
The Ox, over-fat, too-strong, and resty, leaps
About the Lands, casts his yoke, and strikes,
And waxen wild, even at his Keeper kicks. The true Anatomy of a tyrant.

Well: to enjoy a People, through their skin
With scourges slyc't, must their bare bones be seen:
We must still keep them short, and clip their wings,
Pare near their nails, and pull out all their stings;
Lade them with Tribute, and new Towle, and Tax,
And Subsidies, until we break their backs:
Tire them with travail, flay-them, pole-them, pil-them,
Suck blood and fat, then eat their flesh, and kil-them.
It Is good for Princes, to have all things fat,
Except their Subjects: but beware of that.
Ha, Miscreants! ha, rascal excrements,
That lift your heel against your gracious Prince;
Henceforth, you get nor wood nor straw no more,
To burn your Bricks as you have had before:
Your selves shall seek it out; yet shall you still
The number of your wonted task fulfill.
I have Commission from the King of Kings, Moses reply.

Maker, Preserver, Ruler of all things,
Replies the Hebrew, that (to know the Lord)
Thou feel his hand, unless thou fear his word.
In the instant, AARON on the slippery sand Aaron casts down his Rod: which
immediately turns into a Serpent.

Casts down his Rod; and boldly thus began:
So shall thy golden Scepter down be cast,
So shall the Judgments of the Lord at last
(Now deemed dead) revive, to daunt thy power:
So ISRAEL shall Egypts wealth devour,
If thou confess not God to be the Lord:
If thou attend not, nor observe his Word:
And if his People thou do not release,
To go and serve him in the Wilderness.
Before that AARON this Discourse had done,
A green-gold-azure had his Rod put-on,
It glistered bright: and in a fashion strange,
Into a Serpent it did wholly change;
Crawling before the King, and all along
Spetting, and hissing with his forked tongue. The Magicians of Egypt
counterfeit that miracle, and bewitch the eyes of the King.

The Memphian Sages then, and subtle Priests,
TO uphold the Kingdom of their OSIRIS,
Upbraid them thus: Alas! is this the most
Your God can do, of whom so much you boast?
Are these his Wonders? Go (base Monte-banks)
Go show els-where your sleights and Iuggling pranks.
Such tricks may blear some vulgar innocents,
But cannot blind the Counsel of a Prince;
Who, by the Gods instructed, does contain
All Arts perfection in his sacred brain.
And, as they spoke, out of their cursed hands
They all let-fall their strange-inchanted Wands,
Which instantly turn into Serpents too,
Hissing, and spetting, crawling to and fro.
The King too much admires their cunning Charms:
The place with Aspicks, Snakes, and Serpents swarms;
Creeping about: as an ill-Huswife sees
The Maggots creeping in a rotten Cheese. Simile.

You, you are Jugglers, the Hebrew then replied:
You change not Nature, but the bare outside;
And your Enchantments only do transform
The face of things, not the essential form.
You (Sorcerers) so mock the Princes ey,
And, his Imagination damnifie,
That common Sense to his external, brings
(By re-percussion) a false shape of things.
My Rod's indeed a Serpent, not in show,
As here in sight your selves by proof shall know.
Immediately his Dragon reared his head,
Roul'd on his breast; his body wriggelled
Som-times aloft in length; sometimes it sunk
Into it self, and altogether shrunk:
It slides, it sups the air, it hisses fell,
In steed of eyes two sparkling Rubies swell:
And all his deadly baens, entrenched strong
Within his trine Teeth and his triple Tongue, Moses rod-Serpent deuoureth the
Serpents of the Egyptians.

Call for the Combat: and (as greedy) set
With sudden rage upon those Counterfeit,
Those seeming-Serpents, and them all devour:
Even as a Sturgeon or a Pike, does scour
The Creeks and Pills in Rivers where they lie,
Of smaller Fishes and their feeble fry.
But, at high Noon, the Tyrant wilfull-blinde, Pharao and his people hardened:
Therefore God plagued Egypt.

And deaf to his own good, is more inclined*
To Satan's tools: the people like the Prince,
Prefer the Night before Light's excellence.
Wherefore the Lord, such proud contempts to pay,
Ten sundry plagues upon their Land does lay:
Redoubling so his drad-full strokes, that there,
Who would not love him mild, him rough should fear.
Smiting the Waves with his Snake-wanded wood, 1. By turning their Waters into
blood.

AARON anon converts the Nile to blood;
So that the stream, from fruitful MEROE,
Runs red and bitter even unto the Sea.
The Court re-courst to Lakes, to Springs, and Brooks;
Brooks, Springs, and Lakes had the like taste and looks:
Then, to the Ditches; but even to the brink
There flowed (alas!) in steed of Water, ink:
Then, to the likeliest of such weeping ground
Where, with the Rush, pipe-opening Fern is found;
And there they dig for Water: but (alas!)
The wounded soil spets blood into their face.
O iust-iust Judgment! Those proud Tyrants fell,
Those bloody Foes of mourning ISRAEL;
Those that delighted, and had made their game
In shedding blood, are forced to drink the same:
And those, that ruthe-les had made Nile the slaughter
Of the Hebrew Babes, now die for want of Water.
Anon, their Fields, Streets, Halls and Courts he loads 2 Covering their Land
with Frogs.

With foul great Frogs, and ugly croking Toads;
Which to the tops of highest Towrs do clamber
Even to the Presence, yea the privy Chamber:
As starry Lezards in the Summer time
Upon the walls of broken houses climb.
Yea; even the King meets them in every dish
Of Privy-diet, be it Flesh or Fish:
As at his Board, so on his royal Bed;
With stinking Frogs the silken quilts be spread. The Magicians counterfeit the
same, but their deceipts are vain

The Priests of PHARAO seem to do the same:
AARON alone in the Almighties Name,
By Faith almighty: They for instruments
Use the black Legions of the Stigian Prince:
He by his Wonders labors to make known
The true Gods glory; only they their own:
He seeks to teach; they to seduce awry:
He studies to build up; they to destroy:
He, striking Strangers, does His people spare;
They spoil their own, but cannot hurt a hair
Of the least Hebrew: they can only wound;
He hurts, and heals: He breaks, and makes sound:
And so, when PHARAO does him humbly pray,
Re-cleers the Floods, and sends the Frogs away.
But (as in Heaven there did no Justice reign) The King eased of his punishment,
is again hardened

The Kings repentance ends with his pain.
He is re-hardned: like a stubborn Boy
That plies his Lesson (Hypocritely-coy)
While in his hand his Master shakes the Rod;
But, if he turn his back, does flowt and nod.
Therefore the Lord, this Day, with loathsome Lice Therefore 3. Egypt is plagued
with Lyce.

Plagues poor and rich, the nasty and the nice,
Both Man and Beast; For, AARON with his wand
Turns into Lice the dust of all the Land.
The morrow after, with huge swarms of Flies,
Hornets and Wasps, he hunts their Families 4. With Flies. etc.

From place to place, through Medows, Fens and Floods,
Hills, Dales, and Deserts, hollow Caves and Woods.
Tremble therefore (O Tyrants) tremble ay,
Poor worms of Earth, proud Ashes, Dust and Clay;
For, how (alas!) how will you make defense
Against the tri-pointed wrathful violence
Of the drad dart, that, flaming in his hand,
Shall pash to powder all that him withstand?
And against the rage of flames eternal-frying,
Where damned souls ly ever-never-dying:
Since the least Flies, and Lice, and Vermin too
Out-braue your braves, and Triumph over you.
Gallop to Anian, sail to Iucatan, Man cannot hide him from the hand of God,
nor avoid his vengeance.

Visit Botongas, dive beyond the Dane:
Well may you fly, but not escape him there:
Wretches, your haltars still about you bear.
The Almighties hand is long, and busy still;
Having escaped his Rod, his Sword you feel:
He seems sometimes to sleep, and suffer all;
But calls at last for Use and Principal:
With hundred sorts of Shafts his Quiver's full,
Some passing keen, some som-what sharp, some dull,
Some killing dead, some wounding deep, some light;
But all of them do always hit the White,
Each after other. Now the Omnipotence
At Egypt shoots his Shafts of Pestilence:
The Ox falls-down in his yoke, Lambs bleating die, 5. With the Plague of
Pestilence.

The Bullocks as they feed, Birds as they fly.
Anon he covers Man and Beast with cores
Of angry Biles, Botches, and Scabs, and Sores; 6. With Ulcers and grievous
Scabs or Murrain.

Whose vlcerous venoms, all inflaming, spread
Over all the body from the foot to head.
Then, Rain, and Hail, and flaming Fire among
Spoil all their fields: their Cattle great with young 7. With hail and Fire
from Heaven

All brained with hailstones: Trees with tempest cleft,
Robbed of their boughs, their boughs of leaves bereft.
And, from Heavens rage, all to seek shelter, glad;
The Face of Egypt is now dradly-sad:
The So^ in Virgins tear-their Beauties honor; Egyptians amazed at this
extraordinary scourge.

Not for the waste, so much, as for the manner.
For, in that Country never see they Clowd,
With weight of Snowes their trees are never bowed,
They know no Ice: and though they have (as we)
The Year entire, their Seasons are but three:
They neither Rain-bowe, nor fat Deaws expect,
Which from elsewhere Sol's thirsty rays erect: The natural fruitfulness
and prosperity of Egypt, in it self maruailous.

Rain-les, their soil is wet; and, Clowd-les, fat;
Itself's moist bosom brings it this and that:
For, while elsewhere, the River's roaring pride
Is dryed-vp; and while that far and wide
The Palaestine seeks (for his thirsty Flock)
Jordan in Jordan, Iaboc in Iaboc;
Their flood o'reflowes, and parched M^sraim
A season seems in a rich Sea to swim,
Niles billows beat on the high-dangling Date;
And Boats do slice, where Ploughs did slide of late.
Steep snowy Mounts, bright Stars, Etesian gales,
You cause it not: no, those are Dreams and Tales:
The Eternall-Trine, who made all compassly,
Makes the under waves, the vpper's want supply;
And, Egypts Womb to fill with fruits and Flowrs,
Gives swelling Nile the office of heavenly Showrs.
Then, the Thrice-Sacred with a sable Clowd
Of horned Locusts does the Sun be-clowd,
And swarmeth down on the rebellious Coast 8. They are vexed with Grasshoppers.

The Grass-hoppers lean, dam-devouring Host;
Which gleans what Hail had left, and (greedy) crops
Both Night and Day the Husband's whole-year's hopes.
Then, gross thick Darkness over all he dight,
And three fair Days turns to one fearful Night: 9. With palpable darkness.

With Ink-like Rheum the dull Mist's drouzy vapors
Quench their home-Fires, and Temple-sacred Tapers.
If hunger drive the Pagan from their dens,
One against a settle breaks both his shins;
Another, groping up and down for bread,
Falls down the stayrs, and there he lies for dead.
But, though these works surmount all Natures might,
Though his own Sages them of guile acquight,
Though the are not casual (since the holy-man The Israelites in all these
plagues untouched, yet Pharao still hardened.

Fore-tels prefixtly What, and Where, and When)
And though that (living in the midst of His)
The Israelites be free from all of This,
The incensed Tyrant (strangely-obstinate)
Retracts the Leave he granted them of late.
For, the Ever-One, who with a mighty hand
Would bring his People to the plentious Land
Of Palestine: Who providently-great,
Before the eyes of all the World would set
A Tragedy, where wicked Potentates
Might see a Mirror of their own estates:
And, who (most-iust) must have meet Arguments,
To show the height of his Omnipotence;
Hardens the King and blinding him (self-blinde)
Leaves him to Lusts of his own vicious mind.
For, God does never (ever purely bent)
Cause sin, as sin; but as Sin's Punishment.
For the last Charge, an Angel in one night, 10. Therefore all the first borne
of Egypt are slain in one night by the Angel.

All the first born through all the Land does smite;
So that from Sues Port to Birdene Plain,
There Is not a House, but has some body slain,
Save the Israelites, whose doors were marked before,
With sacred Pass-Lamb's sacramental gore.
And therefore ever-since on that same day,
Yearly, the Jews a Yearling Lamb must slay;
A token of that Passage, and a Type
Of the Holy-Lamb, which should (in season ripe)
By powring-forth the pure and plentious Flood
Of his most precious Water-mixed Blood,
Preserve his People from the drad Destroyer,
That fries the wicked in eternal fire.
Through all the Land, all in one instant cry,
All for one cause, though yet all know not why.
Night heaps their horrors: and the Morning shows
Their private griefs, and makes them public woes.
Scarce did the glorious Governor of Day After so many grievous plagues the
Egyptian^ery out upon their King to let the Israelites go.

Over Memphis yet his golden tress display,
When from all parts, the Maidens and the Mothers,
Wives, Husbands, Sons, and Siers, Sisters, and Brothers,
Flock to the Court, where with one common voice
They all cry-out, and make this mournful noise:
O stubborn stomach! (cause of all our sadness)
Dull Constancy! or rather, desperate Madness!
A Flood of Mischiefs all the Land does fill,
The Heavens still Thunder; the Air does threaten still:
Death, ghastly death triumphs everywhere,
In every house; and yet without all fear,
Without all feeling, we despise the Rod,
And scorn the Judgments of the mighty God.
Great King, no more bay with thy wilfullings
His Wrath's dread Torrent. He is King of Kings;
And in his sight, the Greatest of you all
Are but as Moats that in the Sun do fall:
Yield, yield (alas!) stoop to his powrfull threat;
He Is warned enough that has been ten times beat.
Go, get you gone: hence, hence vn-lucky race; They hasten and importune them to
be gone.

Your eyes bewitch our eyes, your feet this Place,
Your breath this air: Why haste you not away?
Hebrews, what lets you? wherefore do you stay?
Step to our houses (if that ought you lack)
Choose what you like, and what you like go take,
Gold, Plate, or Jewels, Earrings, Chains, or Ouches,
Our Girdles, Bracelets, Carkanets, or Brouches,
Bear them unto your gods, not in the sands
Where the Heav'n-kissing Clowd-browd Sina stands;
But much, much farther, and so far, that here
We never more your odious news may hear:
Go Hebrews, go, in God's Name thrive amain;
By loosing you, we shall sufficient gain.
With the Kings leave, then the Hebrews Prince collects After their departure,
Pharao immediately pursues them.

His Legions all, and to the Sea directs:
Scarce were they gone, when Pharaoh does retract,
And arms all Egypt to go fetch them back;
And camping near them, execrably-rude,
Threatens them death, or end-less Se^uitude,
Even as a Duck, that nigh some crystal brook Simile.

Has twice or thrice by the same Hawk bin struck,
Hearing aloft her gingling silver bells,
Quivers for fear, and looks for nothing else
But when the Falcon (stooping thunder-like)
With sudden souse her to the soil shall strike,
And with the stroke, make on the sense-less ground
The gut-less Quar, once, twice, or thrice rebound:
So Israel, fearing again to feel
Pharao's fell hands, who hunts him at the heel,
Quivers and shivers for despair and dread;
And spits his gall against his godly Head.
O base ambition! This false Politic, The Israelites fear, and murmuring
against Moses.

Plotting to Great himself, our deaths does seek:
He mocks us all, and makes us (fortune-less)
Change a rich Soil for a dry Wilderness;
Allured with luster of Religious shows,
Poor souls, He sels us to our hateful Foes:
For, O! what strength? alas! what stratagem?
Or how (good God) shall we encounter them?
Or who is it? or what is it, shall save us
From their fell hands that seek to slay, or slaue-vs?
Shall we, dis-armed, with an Army fight?
Can we (like Birds) with still-steep-rising flight
Surmount these Mountains? have we Ships at hand
To pass the Sea (this half a Sea half sand)?
Or, had we Ships, and Sails, and Owers, and Cable;
Who knows these Waters to be navigable?
Alas! some of us shall with Scithes be slasht;
Some, with their Horse-feet all to pieces pash^,
Some, thrilled with Swords, or Shafts, through hundred holes
Shall ghastly gasp-out our untimely souls:
Since die we must, then die we voluntary:
Let Us run, our selves, where others would us carry;
Com Israelites, com, let us die together,
Both men and women: so we shall (in either)
Prevent their rage, content their avarice,
And yield (perhaps) to MOSES, even his Wish. Moses instruction to encourage
them, with assured confidence in God.

Why brethren? know ye not, their Ruler says,
That in his hand God holds life and death?
That He turns Hills to Dales, and Seas to Sands?
That He has (pressed) a thousand winged Bands
T'assist his Children, and his Foes t'assail?
And that He helps not, but when all helps fail?
See you this mighty Host, this dreadful Camp,
Which dares Heaven, and seems the Earth to damp;
And all enraged, already charge ours,
As thick, or thicker than the Welkin powrs Simile.

His candi'd drops upon the ears of Corn,
Before that Ceres yellow locks be shorn?
It all shall vanish, and of all this Crew
(Which thinks already to have swallowed you)
Of all this army, that (in Armor bright)
Seems to outshine the Sun, or shame his light;
There shall tomorrow not a man remain:
Therefore be still; God shall your side sustain.
Then (zealous) calling on the immortal God, Calling upon God he parts the Red
Sea, so that the people pass thorough as on dry land.

He smot the Sea with his dead-living Rod:
The Sea obay'd, as bay'd: the Waves, controlled,
Each upon other up to Heaven do fold:
Between both sides, abroad deep Trench is cast,
Dried to the bottom with an instant blast:
Or rather, it is a Valley paved (else)
With golden sands, with Pearl, and Nacre-shels,
And on each side is flanked all along
With walls of crystal, beautiful and strong.
This flood-less Foord, the Faithful Legions pass,
And all the way their shoo scarce moisted was.
Dream we (said they)? or is true we try?
The Sea start at a stick? The Water dry?
The Deep a Path? The Ocean in the air suspending?
Bulwarks of Billows, and no drop descending?
Two Walls of Glass, built with a word alone,
Afrik and Asia to con-ioyn in one?
The all-seeing Sun new bottoms to behold?
Children to run, where Tunnies lately rolled? The Egyptians following them are
swallowed in the Sea.

The Egyptian Troops pursue them by the track;
Yet wayts the patient Sea, and still stands back,
Till all the Host be marching in their ranks
Within the lane between his crystal banks:
But, as a wall weak'ned with mining-vnder,
The Piles consumed falls suddenly a-sunder,
O're-whelmeth all that stand too near the breach, Simile.

And with his Ruins fils-vp all the ditch:
Evenso Gods finger, which these Waters bay'd,
Being with-drawen, the Ocean swelled and swayed;
And, re-conioyning his congealed Flood,
Swallows in the instant all those Tyrantswood.
Here, one by swimming thinks himself to save:
But, with his scarf tangled about a Naue,
He Is strangled straight; and to the bottom sinking,
Dies; not of too-much drink, but for not drinking:
While that (in vain) another with loud lashes
Scours his proud Coursers through the scarlet Washes;
The streams (wher-on more Deaths than waves do swim)
Bury his Chariot, and his Chariot him:
Another, swallowed in a Whirl-Whales womb,
Is laid a-liue within a living Tomb:
Another, seeing his Twin-brother drowning,
Out of his Coach, his hand (to help him) downing;
With both his hands grasping that hand, his Twin
Unto the bottom hales him headlong in;
And instantly the Water covers either:
Right Twins indeed; born, bred, and dead together.
Nile's stubborn Monarch, stately drawn upon Pharao profanely blaspheming and
prowdly brauing Moses and the Sea, is notwithstanding drowned with the rest.

A curious Chariot chac't with pearl and stone,
By two proud Coursers, passing Snow for color;
For strength, the Elephants; Lions for valor;
Curses the Heavens, the Air, the Winds, and Waves;
And, marching vp-ward, still blasphemes and braues:
Here, a huge Billow on his Targe does split;
Then, coms a bigger, and a bigger yet,
To second those: The Sea grows ghastly great;
Yet stoutly still, He thus does dare and threat:
Base roaguing Iuggler, think thou with thy Charm*
Thou shall prevail against our puissant arms?
Think thou poor shifter, with thy Hel-spels thus
To cross our Counsels, and discomfit us?
And, O proud Sea! false, traiterous Sea, dare thou?
Dare thou conspire against thine own Neptune now?
Dare thou presume against us to rise and roar?
I charge thee cease: be still I say: no more:
Or I shall clap thine arms in Marble stocks,
And yoke thy shoulders with a Bridge of Rocks;
Or banish thee from Ethans far for ay,
Through some new Chanel to go seek thy way.
Heer-at, the Ocean more than ever frets,
All topsi-turuy vp-side-down it sets;
And a black billow that aloft does float,
With salt and sand, stops his blasphemous throat.
What now betydes the Tyrant? Waters now
Have reft his neck, his chin, cheeks, eyes, and brow;
His front, his fore-top: now there is nothing seen,
But his proud arm, shaking his Fawchin keen;
Wher-with, he seems, inspight of Heaven and Hell,
To fight with Death, and menace Israel.
At last he sinks all under water quite,
Spurning the sand, again he springs upright;
But, from so deep a bottom to the top,
So clogged with arms, can cleave no passage up:
As the poor Partridge covered with the net Simile.

In vain does strive, struggle, and bate, and beat;
For the close meshes, and the Fowler's craft,
Suffer the same no more to whu^e aloft.
I, to your selves leave to conceive the joy,
Of JACOB'S heirs, thus rescued from annoy;
Seeing the Sea to take their cause in hand,
And their dead Foes shuffled upon the sand;
Their shields, and staves, and Chariots (all-to-tore)
Floating about, and flung upon the shore:
When thus the Almighty (glorious God most High)
For them without them, got the Victory,
They skip and dau^ce; and marying all their voices,
To Timbrels, Hawbois, and loud Cornets noyses,
Make all the shoars resound, and all the Coasts,
With the shril Praises of the Lord of Hoasts. 2. Part of this Tract: where is
discoursed of the estate of the People of Israel in the Wilderness, until
the death of Moses.

Eternal issue of eternal Sire,
Deep Wisdom of the Father, now inspire
And show the sequel that from hence befell,
And how He dealt with his deer Israel,
Amid the Desert, in their Pilgrimage
Toward the Promised plentious Heritage:
Tell for (I know) thou know: for, compast ay
With Fire by Night, and with a Clowd by Day,
Thou (my soul's hope) were their sole guide and guard,
Their Meat and Drink in all their Journey hard.
Marching amid the Desert, naught they lack:
Heaven still distills an Ocean (for their sake)
Of end-les-good: and every Morn does send
Sufficient Food for all the day to spend.
When the Sun rises, and does haste his Race,
(Half ours, half theirs, that underneath us pase)
To re-beholde the bewty, number, order,
And prudent Rule (preventing all mis-order)
Of the awefull Host lodged in the Wilderness,
So favored of the Sun of Righteousness:
Each coms but forth his Tent, and at his door
Finds his bread ready (without seeking more):
A pleasant bread, which from his plentious clowd,
Like little Hail, Heavens wakefull Steward strow'd.
The yellow sands of Elim's ample Plain
Were heaped all with a white sugared grain,
Sweet Corianders; Iunkets, not to feed God gives them Manna.

This Host alone, but even a World (for need).
Each has his part, and every one is fed,
With the sweet morsels of an vn-bought bread. It is given from day to day.

It never rains for a whole year at-once,
But daily for a day's provisions:
To the end, so great an Host, so curbed straight,
Still on the Lord's wide open hand should wayt,
And every Dawning have due cause to call
On him, their Founder, and the Fount of all:
Each, for his portion has an Omer-full;
The sur-plus rots, mould, knead it how they will.
The Holy-one (just Arbitrer of wrong)
Allows no less unto the weak, than strong:
On Sabbaoth's Eve, he lets sufficient fall,
To serve for that day, and the next with-all,
That on his Rest, the sacred Folk may gather,
Not Body's meat, but spiritual Manna rather.
Thou that from Heaven thy daily White-bread have,
Thou, for whom Harvest all the Year does last,
That in poor Deserts, rich abundance heap'st,
That sweat-les eat'st, and without sowing reap'st,
That have the Air for farm, and Heaven for field
(Which, sugared Mel, or melled sugar yield)
That, for taste-changing do not change thy cheer,
God's Pensioner, and Angel's Table-peer: It is a lively figure of Christ the
true bread of life.

O Israel! see in this Table pure,
In this fair glass, thy Savior's pourtraiture,
The Son of God, MESSIAH promised,
The sacred seed, to bruize the Serpents head:
The glorious Prince, whose Scepter ever shines,
Whose Kingdom's scope the Heaven of Heavens confines;
And, when He shall (to light thy Sin-full load)
Put Manhood on, dis-knowe him not for God.
This Grain is small, but full of substance though: The same demo^strated by
particular conference.

CHRIST strong in working, though but weak in show.
Manna is sweet: Christ as the Honeycomb.
Manna from high: and CHRIST from Heaven does com.
With that, there falls a pleasant pearly deaw:
CHRIST comming-down does all the Earth be-streaw
With spiritual gifts. That, unto great and small
Tastes to their tastes: and CHRIST is all to all:
(Food to the hungry, to the needy wealth,
Joy to the afflicted, to the sickly health,
Pardon to those Repent, Prop to the bowed,
Life's savor to the Meek, Death's to the Proud).
That Is common good: and Christ communicate.
That Is purely-white: and Christ immaculate.
That gluts the wanton Hebrews (at the last):
Christ and his Word the World does soon dis-taste.
Of that, they eat no less that have one measure,
Than who have hundred: and in Christ his Treasure
Of Divine Grace, the faith-full Proselite
Has no less part, than Doctors (deep of sight).
That Is round: Christ simple, and sincerely-round.
That in the Ark: Christ in his Church is found.
That does (with certain) stinking worms become:
Christ (the Ever-Word) is scandal unto some.
That raineth not, but on the sacred Race:
Christ to his Chosen does confine his Grace.
That Is broken every grain: Christ (Lamb of God)
Upon his Cross-press is so torn and trod,
That of his Blood the precious Flood has purl'd,
Down from Mount Sion over all the World. The people lust for flesh.

Yet glutted now with this ambrosiall Food,
This Heavenly bread, so holy and so good,
The Hebrews do lust for flesh: a fresh South-winde
Brings shoals of Fowls to satisfy their mind; God sends them Quails.

A clowd of Quails on all the Camp is sent,
And every one may take to his content:
For, in the Host, and all the Country by,
For a days-iourney, Cubit thick they lie.
But though their Commons be thus delicate,
Although their eyes can scarce look out for fat,
Although their Bellies strout with too much meat,
Though ( Epicures) they vomit as they eat;
Yet still they howl for hunger: and they long
For Memphian hotch-potch, Leeks, and Garlic strong: They long for the Garlike
and Onions of Egypt.

As Childe-great Women, or green Maids (that miss
Their Terms appointed for their flourishes)
Pine at a Princely feast, preferring far,
Red Herrings, Rashers, and (some) sops in T^r* Simile.

Yea, coals, and clowts, sticks, stalks, and dirt, before
Quail, Pheasant, Partridge, and a hundred more:
So their fantastic wearisom disease,
Distastes their tastes, and makes them strange to please.
But, when the Bull, that lately tossed his horn
In wanton Pride, hangs down his head, for lorn
For lack of Water: and the Soldier bleak
Grows (without Arms) for his own weight too-weak,
When fiery Thirst through all their veins so fierce
Consumes their blood, into their bones does pearce;
Sups-vp their vital humor, and does dry
Their whilom-beauties to Anatomy:
They weep and wail, and but their voice (alas!)
Is choakt already that it cannot pass They murmr for want of water with
grievous imputation to their good Guide.

Through the rough Sraight^ of their dry throats; they wo^
Roar-out their grief, that all men hear them should.
O Duke! (no Hebrew, but an Ethnic rather)
Is this (alas!) the guerdon that we gather,
For all the service thou have had of us?
What have we don, that thou betray'st us thus?
For our obedience, shall we ever-more
With Fear and Want be hanted at our door?
O windy words! O perjured promises!
O gloze, to gull our honest simpleness!
Escaped from Hunger, Thirst does cut our throat:
Past the Red Sea, here up and down we float
On firm-less sands of this vast Desert here,
Where, to and fro we wander many a year:
Looking for Liberty, we find not Life:
No, neither Death (the welcome end of strife).
Envy not us, deer Babes: we envy you,
You happy ones, whom Egypt's Tyrant slew;
Your Birth and Death came hand in hand together,
Your end was quick, nay'twas an Entry rather
To end-less Life: We wretches, with our age
Increase our Woes, in this long Pilgrimage:
We hope no Harbor where we may take breath:
And Life to us is a continual Death.
You blessed live, and see the Almighties face:
Our Days begin in tears, in toyls they pass,
And end in dolours (this is all we do):
But Death concludes tears, toyls, and dolours too.
Stif-necked People, stubborn generation, Moses reproues them, and smites the
Rock, from whence issues plenty of water.

Egypt does witness (in a wondrous fashion)
God's goodness (to thee): all the Elements
Expound unto thee his Omnipotence:
And do thou murmr still? and dare thou yet
Blaspheme his promise, and discredit it?
Said MOSES then, and gave a sudden knock
With his dear Scepter on a mighty Rock;
From top to toe it shakes, and splits with-all,
And wel-nigh half, unto the ground does fall,
As smit with Lightning: then, with rapid rush,
Out of the stone a plentious stream does gush,
Which murmurs through the Plain; proud, that his glass
Gliding so swift, so soon re-youngs the grass;
And, to be gaz'd-on by the wanton Sun,
And, through new paths so brave a course to run.
Who has not seen (far up within the Land) Simile.

A shoal of Geese on the dry-Sommersand
In their hoarce language (som-times lowely-lowd)
Suing for succor to some moyst-ful clowd;
How, when the Rain descends, their wings they beat,
(With the fresh drops to cool their swelting heat)
Bib with their Bill, bouz with their throats, and suck,
And twenty times unto the bottom duck?
Such the Hebrews glee: one, stooping down, does sup
The clear quick stream; another takes it up
In his bare hand, another in his hat;
This in his busk in, in a bucket, that
(Well fresht him-self) bears some unto his Flock;
This fills his pitcherful, and that his Crock:
And other-som (whose Thirst is more extreme) They march toward Mount Sina,
where God delivers them his LAW.

Like Frogs lie paddling in the crystal stream.
From Rephidim, along the Desert Coast,
Now to Mount Sina marches all the Host;
Where, the everlasting GOD, in glorious wonder,
With dreadful voice his fearful LAW does thunder;
To show, that His reverent, Divine Decrees
(Wher-to all hearts should bow, and bend all knees)
Proceed not from a Politic Pretense,
A wretched Kingling, or a petty Prince;
(Nymph-prompted NVMA, or the Spartans Lord,
Or him that did Cecropian Strifes accord)
Nor from the mouth of any mortal man;
But from that King, who at his pleasure can
Shake Heaven, and Earth, and Air, and all ther-in:
That ISRAEL shall find him (if they sin)
As terrible with Vengeance in his hand,
As dreadful now in giving the COMMAND:
And, that the Text of that drad Testament
Grav'n in two Tables, for us impotent,
Has in the same, a sadder load comprised,
And heavier yoke, then is the yoke of Christ.
That, that does show us Sin; threats, wounds, and kills:
This offers Grace, Balm in our sores distills.
Redoubled Lightnings dazleth' Hebrews eyes, With what dredful Majesty it was
delivered.

Clowd-sund'ring Thunder roars through Earth and skies,
Louder and louder it careers and cracks,
And stately SINA'S massy center shakes,
And turns round, and on his sacred top,
A whirling flame round like a Ball does wrap;
Under his rocky ribs, in Coombs below,
Rough-blustering BOREAS, nursed with Riphean snow,
And blub-checkt AVSTER, puffed with fumes before,
Met in the midst, iustling for room, do roar:
A cloak of clouds all thorough-lin'd with Thunder,
Muffles the Mountain both aloft and under:
On PHARAN now no shining PHARVS shows.
A Heavenly Trump a shrill Tantara blows,
The winged Winds, the Lightning's nimble-flash,
The smoking storms, the whirl-fire's crackling clash,
And deafning Thunders, with the same do sing
(O wondrous consort!) the everlasting King
His glorious Wisdom, who does give the Law
To the Heavenly Troops, and keeps them all in aw.
But, as in Battle, we can hear no more Simile.

Small Pistol-shot, when once the Canons roar:
And as a Cornet sounds clear and rife, Simile.

Above the warbling of an Alman Fife;
A dradder voice (yet a distincter voice)
Whose sound does drown all the other former noise,
Roars in the Vale, and on the sacred Hill,
Which thrills the ears, but more the heart does thrill
Of trembling Jacob: who all pale for fear,
From God's own mouth these sacred words does hear;
Hark Israel: O Jacob hear my Law:
Hear it, to keep it (and thy self in aw).
I am IEHOVA, I (with mighty hand)
Brought thee from bondage out of Egypt Land:
ADORE ME ONLY for thy God and Lord,
With all thy heart, in every Deed and Word.
MAKE THEE NONE IMAGE (not of any sort) The Decalogue.

To thy own Works My Glory to transport.
USE NOT MY NAME without respect and fear,
Never Blaspheme, neither thy self for-swear.
SIX DAYS WORK for thy food: but then (as I)
REST ON THE SEVENTH, and to my Temple hye.
TO THOSE that gave thee life, due REVERENCE give,
If thou desire long in the Land to live.
IMBRVE thou NOT THY HAND IN HVMAN BLOOD.
STAIN NOT another BED. STEAL NO MAN'S GOOD.
BEAR NO FALSE WITNESS. COVET NOT to have
Thy Neighbors Wife, his Ox, his Ass, his Slave,
His House, his Land, his Cattle or his Coin,
His Place, or Grace; or ought that is not Thine. The excellency of the Law of
God.

Eternal Tutor, O Rule truely-right
Of our frail life! our footsteps Lanthorn bright:
O Soul's sweet Rest! O biting curb of Sin!
Which Bad despise, the Good take pleasure in:
Reverent EDICTS upon Mount SINA given,
How-much-fold sense is in few words contriven*
How wonderful, and how exceeding-far!
How plain, how sacred, how profound you are!
All Nations else, a thousand times (for cause)
Have Writ and Rac't, and chopped and changed their Laws:
Except the Jews; but they, although their State
With every Moon almost did innovate
(As sometimes having Kings, and sometimes none)
In all their changes kept their Law still one.
What rests at this day, of Salaminian, The inconstancy and vanity of Humane
Laws.

Laconian LAWS, or of the Carthaginian?
Yea Rome, that made even all the World one City,
So strong in Arms, and in State's-Art so witty;
Has, in the Ruins of her Pride's rich Babels,
Left but a Relic of her Twice-Six-Tables.
But, since in Horeb the High-Thundring ONE Stability and authority of the Law
of God.

Pronounced This Law, three-thousands times the Sun
Has gallopt round Heaven's golden Bandeleer,
Imbosst with Beasts, studded with stars so clear;
And yet one tittle has not Time bereft,
Although the People unto whom 'twas left,
Be now no People, but (expulst from home)
Through all the corners of the World do roam:
And though their State, through every Age almost,
On a rough Sea of Mischiefs has been tossed.
A Butt, a Brook, a Torrent does confine
All other Laws: Megarian Discipline
Has naught of the Attick: nor the Coronan
Of Theban Rytes: nor Thebes of Cadmean:
But, this Set LAW given JACOB'S Generations,
Is the true Law of Nature, and of Nations,
Which (sacred) sounds wher-ever (to descry)
The all-searching Sun does cast his flaming eye.
The Turks embrace, the Christians honor it,
And Jews with Fear, do even adore it yet.
I only, I (Great GOD) thy LAWS do spurn How all men transgress the same in
every part.

With my foul feet, I do thy Satutes scorn:
Puffed in my Soul with extreme Pride, before,
Nay in thy stead, I do my self Adore.
I Serve no wooden gods, nor Kneel to Stones;
But Covetous, I Worship Golden ones.
I Name thee not, but in vain Blasphemy,
Or (ACHAB-like) in sad Hypocrisy.
I Rest the Sabboath: yet I break thy LAW,
Serving (for thee) mine idle Mouth and Maw.
I Reverence Superiors, but in show;
Not out of Love, but as compelled so.
I Murder none, yet does my Tongue too-rife
Wound others Fame, and my Hearts-hate their life.
I Civilize, lest that I seem Obscoene:
But Lord (Thou know) I am Unchaste, unclean.
I seem no Thief: yet tempted with my Want,
I take too often the Fruit I did not plant.
I speak not much: yet in my little Talk,
Much Vanity, and many Lies do walk.
I Wish too-earnest, and too-oft (in fine)
For others Fortunes, malcontent with mine.
Here lie I naked: lo the Anatomy Remedy for all our sins.

Of my foul Heart. O Humane-Deity!
O Christ! the Almightie's like All-mighty Word,
O put-me-on Thy Robe! as whilom (Lord)
Thou putst-on Mine: me in Thy Blood be-laue;
And in my Soul thy sacred Laws ingraue.
While with the Duke, the Eternal did devise,
And to his inward sight did modulize
His Tabernacle's admirable Form;
And prudently him (faithful) did inform
In a new Rubrik of the Rytes Divine,
To the end the Heirs of promised Palestine,
After their fancy should not worship him,
Nor (Idol-prone) example leading them,
Into his sacred TEMPLE introduce
The Sacrifices that the Heathen use:
But, by their Rytes to guide their spiritual eye
To Christ, the Rock on whom their hopes should lie; In Moses absence Aaron
makes the golden Calfe.

Behold (alas!) frail Aaron, Deputied
During his absence, all the Flock to guide,
Dumb coward Curr, barks not against their ill;
But giving way to the mad Peoples will,
Casts a Golden Calf, and sets it up,
For them to worship, and unto it stoop:
Gold, Rings, and Jewels, which the Lord of Heaven
Had (as Loue-tokens) lately to them given,
Are cast into a Mould; and (which is worse)
Jacob, to wed a Calf, does God divorce.
Those Feet, that dry-shod past the Crimsin Gulf,
Now Dance (alas!) before a Molten Calf:
That Voice, which late on ETHAM sands had rung
The Almightie's glory, now to Satan sung.
The zealous Prophet, with just fury moov'd, Moses sharply reproves Aaron,
breaks the Idol, and punishes the Idolaters.

Before all the Host, his Brother sharp reproov'd:
And pulverized their Idol: and eft-soons
Flankt by old LEVI'S most religious Sons,
Throngs through the Camp, and each-where strowes his way
With blood and slaughter, horror and dismay:
As half a score of Reapers nimbly-neat, Simile.

With cheerful ey choosing a plot of Wheat,
Reap it at pleasure, and of Ceres locks
Make hand-fulls sheaves, and of their sheaves make Shocks;
And through the Field from end to end do run,
Working a-vie, till all be down and don:
Or, as so many Canons shot at-once
A-front a Camp; The Earth with the Thunder groans; Simile.

Here flies a broken arm, and breaks another;
There stands the one half of a halv'd body, the other
Falls-down a furlong thence: here flies a shield;
And deep-wide windows make they in the field.
All these sure signs of God's deer estimate, Aaron and Mary (or Miriam)
murmr against Moses.

Cannot confirm the Hebrew Magistrate
In his Authority: even AARON spights-it,
And MIRIAM (his Sister) too back-bites-it.
But suddenly, on her in his Defense,
Foul Leprosy did punish this Offense. Nadab and Abihu for offering of strange
Fire, are killed by Fire from Heaven.

His Nephews, scorning his Command, aspire
Before the Lord to offer foreign Fire:
But, on them soon a heavenly Flame down-falling
(As in the Summer some hot-dry Exhaling,
Or blazing-Star with sudden flash does fall
At Palmers feet, and him affright with-all:)
Fires instantly their beards and oyled hair,
And all the sacred vestiments they wear;
Exhales their blood, their Bodies burns to ashes,
Their Censers melts with heat of Lightning flashes,
Their coals are quenched all, and sacred Flame
The vn-hallowed Fire devoured and over-came.
His Kins-man CORE then (with DATHAN joined Core, Dathan, and Abiram, their
conspiracy.

And with ABIRAM) murmured and repined:
O see (says he) how many a subtle gin
The Tyrant sets to snare our Freedoms in!
How we, abused with Oracles most vain,
(Which MOSES and his brother AARON fain)
For idle hopes of promised Signories,
Do simply lose our sweetest Liberties!
See, how they do ingross between them two,
Into one House, SCEPTER and EPHOD too:
See, how they dally, and with much delay
Prolong our Journey to prolong their Sway:
And (to conclude) see how sly Course they take,
To build their Greatness on our grievous wrack.
Hear'st thou me (MOSES) if thou chiefly joy
To see thy Brethren's torments and annoy,
'T were good to walk us yet for ten years more
About these Mountains in these Deserts poor:
Keep us still Exiles; Let us (our Desire)
Languish, wax-olde, and in these sands expire,
Where cruel Serpents haunt us still at hand,
A Fruit-les, Flood-les, yea a Land-les Land.
If, reared from Youth in Honor, thine Ambition
Cannot com down to private men's condition,
Be Captain, Duke and King: for, God approves-thee,
Thy Virtues guard, the People fears and loves-thee.
But as for AARON, what is his desert?
What High-exploit, what Excellence, what Art
Gained him the High Priesthood? O good God, what shame?
Alas! has he for any thing got ^ame
But HOREBS Horn-God? for despising thee,
And thy Commands; and for Conspiracy?
The morrow next, before the Sacred Tent
This Mutiner with sacred Conserwent
Adorned, self-gazing, with a lofty ey,
His faction present: AARON also by.
Lord shield thy Cause, approve thee veritable,
Let not thy Name be to the Lewd a Fable:
Oint thine Anointed publicly: by Miracle,
Show whom thou have selected for thine Oracle:
Said MOSES then; and even as yet he spoke,
The groaning Earth began to reel and shake,
A horrid Thunder in her bowels rumbles, Their dreadful punishment.

And in her bosom up and down it tumbles,
Tearing her Rocks, Until she Yawn a way
To let it out and to let in the Day:
Heaven sees to Hell, and Hell beholds Heaven,
And Devils dazzled with the glistring leav'n
Of the ancient Sun, yet lower fain would dive;
But chained to the Center all in vain they strive.
CORE, round compast with his Rebel friends,
Offers to BELZEBVE and to the Fiends:
His body's battered with Rocks falling down,
And arms of Trees there planted vp-side-down:
He goes with Noise down to the Silent Coast,
Intoombd alive, without all Art or cost.
And all the rest that his proud side assumed,
Scaping the Gulf, with Lightning are consumed.
And AARON'S Office is confirmed by God, Aarons charge is confirmed by miracle.

With wondrous Signs of his oft-quickned Rod,
Which dead, re-buda, re-blooms, and Almonds bears;
When all his Fellows have no life in theirs.
Now, shall I sing, through MOSES prudent Sway, Sundry victories of the
Israelites, under the conduct and direction of Moses.

How ISRAEL does AMALEC dismay,
ARAD and OG (that of huge Giants springs)
Proud HESEBON, and the five Madian Kings,
With the false Prelat, who profanely made
Of Prophets-gifts a sacrilegious trade;
Who false, says true; who striving (past all shame)
To force the Spirit, is forced by the same:
Who, snaring the Hebrews with frail Beauties graces,
Defiles their bodies, more their souls defaces?
Doubt-les his Deeds are such, as would I sing
But half of them, I undertake a thing
As hard almost, as in the Gangik Seas
To count the Waves, or Sands in Euphrates;
And, of so much, should I a little say,
It were to wrong him, and his Praise betray.
His Noble Acts we therefore here suspend, Reserving the Wars for another
Discourse, our Poet hastes to the death of Moses.

And skip unto his sweet and happy End:
Since, the End is it whereby we judge the best
(For either Life) how Man is Cursed or Blessed.
Feeling his vigor by degrees to waste,
And, one Fire quenched, another kindling fast,
Which does his Spirit re-found, his soul refine,
And raise to Heaven, whence it was sent divine;
He does not ( Now) study to make his Will, By his example Men are warned not
to defer to make their Will till it be too late to be troubled with the
business of this world.

TO Entail his Land to his Male-Issue still:
Wisely and justly to divide his Good,
To Sons and Daughters, and his nearest Blood:
TO assign his Wife a Dowry fair and fit,
A hundred times to add, and alter it:
To quittance Friendships with frank Legacies:
To guerdon Service with Annuities,
To make Executors, to Cancel some,
TO appoint himself a Palace for a Tomb.
(I praise a Care to settle our Estate:
But, when Death threats us, then it is too-late.
A seemly Burial is a sacree Rite:
But let the living take that charge of right.)
He (lifting higher his last thoughts) besides
The Common-Weale's care, for the Church prouides,
And graving his discourse with voice devout,
Bids thus far-well to all that stand about;
O Jacob's seed (I might say, my deer sons) He pronounces the blessings and
the curses written in Leviticus 26 and Deutro. 28. where unto the people say
Amen.

Y' are sense-les more then metalls, stocks or stones,
If y' have forgot the many-many Miracles
Wher-with the Lord has sealed my sacred Oracles;
And all the Favors (in this savage Place)
In forty years received of his grace.
Therefore (O ISRAEL) walk thou in his fear,
And in thy hearts-heart (not in Marble) bear
His ever-lasting LAW: before him stand,
And to his Service consecrate thy hand.
If this thou do, thy Heav'n-bles^ fleecy Flocks Blessings on those that obey.

Shall bound about thy Pastures, Downs and Rocks;
As thick as skip in Summer, in a Mead,
The Grass-hoppers that all with Deaw are fed:
Thy fruitful Eaws fat Twins shall bring thee ever,
And of their Milk shall make a plentious River:
The old Tyrant loads not with so-many loans,
Toules, Taxes, Succors, Impositions,
The panting Vassalls to him Tributary*
As thy rich Fields shall pay thee voluntary:
Thy children, and thy children's children, set
About thy Table side by side at meat,
Shall flourish like a long and goodly row
Of pale-green Olives that uprightly grow
About a ground, and (full of Fruit) presage
Plenty of Oil unto their Master sage:
Sons of thy sons shall serve thy reverend Eld:
Thou shall die quiet, thou shall live vnqueld:
Blessed at home, and blessed in the Plain:
The blessed God shall send thee timely Rain*
And holsom winds, and with his keys of grace
Open Heavens storehouse to thy happy Race:
Thy proud fell Foes with Troops of armed men
Shall charge thee one way, but shall fly thee ten:
The Peace-Plant Olive, or Triumphant Bay
Shall shade thy gates: Thy valor shall* dismay,
And daunt the Earth: and with his sacred aw
Thy Saviour-King shall give the World the law.
If other-wise; the Megrim, Gowt, and Stone, Curses on the Disobedient.

Shall plague thee fell with thousand pangs in one:
Thy numbry Flocks in part shall barren ^e,
In part shall bring abortives unto thee:
Accursed at home, accursed in the Plain,
Thy labor boot-les, and thy care in vain:
Thy Field shall be of steel, thy Heaven of brass,
Thy Fountains dry: and God displeased (alas!)
In steed of holsom showrs, shall send down flashes
Of Lightning, Fire, Hail, Sulphur, Salt, and Ashes:
Thou shall reap little where thou much have shed,
And with that little shall thy Foe be fed;
He shall the fattest of thy Heard devour
Before thy face, and yet thou must not lowr:
Thou shall build fair, another have thy Place:
Thou wed a wife, another before thy face
Shall loose her Bride-belt: God with rage shall smight
Thy stubborn heart, with blindness and affright;
So that a wagging leaf, a puff, a crack,
Yea, the least creak shall make thee turn thy back:
Thou never shall thine adverse Host survay,
But to be beaten, or to run away.
A People stout, for strength and number ample,
Which the Aegle has for Ensign and Example,
With a new Wall thine ancient Wall shall dam,
And make thee (Famisht) thy void bowels cram
With thine own bowels, and for want of meat
Thine own deer Children's trembling flesh to eat.
And then, thy Remnant (far dispersed from home)
Over all the Corners of the earth shall roam:
To show their Curse, they shall no Country ow'ne,
And (which is worse) they shall not be their Own.
AMEN, said all the Host. Then (like the Swan)
This dying Song, the Man of GOD began:
Since ISRAEL (O wil-full!) will not hear; The SONG OF MOSES.

Hearken O Heavens, and O thou Earth give ear
Unto my voice, and Witness (on-my part)
Before the Lord, my zeal and their hard heart.
O Heaven and Earth attend unto my Song,
Hear my discourse, which sweetly slides along
As silver showrs on the dry Meads do trill,
And honey deaws, on tender grass distill.
God grant (I pray) that in their hearts, my Verse
(As water on the withered Lawns) may pearce:
And that the honey dropping from my tongue
May serve the old for rain, for deaw the young.
I sing the Eternal: O let Heaven and Earth
Com praise him with me, sound his glory forth,
Extol his Power, his perfect Works record,
Truth, Goodness, Greatness, Justice of the Lord.
But, though for ever He have showen him such;
His children yet (no Children, rather-much
A Bastard Race) full of malicious sin,
All kind of vice have foully wallowed in.
O foolish People! do thou thus requight
His Father-care, who fenc't thee day and night,
As with a Shield? Who chose thee as his heir?
Who made thee, of so foul a mass, so fair?
Vn-winde the bottom of old Times again,
Of Ages past vn-reel the snarled skain,
Ask of thy Parents, and they shall declare,
Thine Elders, and they will tell thee Wonders rare.
They Will tell thee, how, when first the Lord had spread
Men on the Earth, and justly levelled
His strait long Measure the All-Bal to divide,
He did for thee a plentious Land provide.
For his deer JACOB, whom his favor then
Seemed to have sequestered from the rest of men,
To the end his Blessed Seed (in future age)
Should be his Care, Love, Lot, and Heritage.
They Will tell thee too, how through the sandy horro^
Of a vast Desert, Den of ghastly Terror,
Of Thirst and Hunger, and of Serpents fell,
He by the hand conducted ISRAEL:
Yea (of his goodness) to direct him still,
By Word and Writ showed him his sacred Will;
Under his wings shade hid him tenderly,
And held him deer, as apple of his ey.
As is the royal Eagle's sacred wont,
When she would teach her tender Birds to mount,
To fly and cry about her Nest, to cheer-them,
And when they faint, on her wingd back to bear-them:
God (without aid of other Gods or Graces)
Safe guide, has made him mount the highest Places,
Suck Oil and Honey from the Rocks distilling,
In plentious Land with pleasant Fruits him filling.
He gave him Milk and Butter for his meat,
Kid, Lamb, and Mutton, and the flowr of Wheat;
And for his Drink, a most delicious Wine
(The spright full blood of the broad-spreading Vine).
But, waxen fat, he lifts his wanton heel
Against his God (to whom his Soul should kneel)
Forsakes his Maker, and contemns the Same
That saved him from danger, death, and shame.
Then, he inflamed the fury of the Lord,
With profane bowing to false Gods abhord:
With serving Idols, and with Sacrificing
To Fiends, and Phansies of his own devising.
For vain false Gods, Gods vn-renown'd, and new,
Gods that his Fathers nor he never knew,
He has forgot the true eternal BEING,
The God of whom he holds his bliss and being.
God saw it well, and Ielously a-fire,
Against his Children thus he threats his ire:
No; I will hide the brightness of my face,
I Will take from them the treasures of my grace:
Then let us see what will of them become:
But, what but mischife can unto them com,
That so perverse with every puff let fly
Their Faith, sole constant in inconstancy?
The have made me ieloux of a God, no God:
I Will make them ieloux, I will Wed (abroad)
A People (yet) no People: And their breast
Shall split, for spite, to see the Nations blessed.
Devouring Fire, that from my heart does fume,
Shall fiercely burn and in my wrath consume
The deep of Deeps, the middle Downs, and Fields,
And strong foundations of the steepest Hills.
I Will spend on them my store of Punishments.
And all mine Arrows; Famine, Pestilence,
Wild Beasts, and Worms that basely crawling are,
Without remorse shall make them end-les War.
Abroad the Sword their strong men shall devour;
At home, through Fear, the Virgin in her flowr:
The fresh young Youth, the sucking Children small,
And hoary head, dead to the ground shall fall.
Yea, even already would I quite deface
And clean destroy them, I would JACOB race,
Raze his Memorial from the Earth for ay,
But that I fear the Heathen thus would say:
We have prevailed, we by our strength alone
Have quelled this People, and them over-throwen:
'T was not their God that did it for their Sins:
No, He himself is vanquished with his Friends.
Ha! sottish blocks, void of all sense and sight:
Could one man put a thousand men to flight?
And two, ten thousand? if the God of Arms
Had not even sold their Troops and bound their arms?
For God, our God, does all their Gods surpass:
They know it well: but, their Wine springs (alas!)
From SODOM's Vine, and grew in GOMER's fields,
Which Gall for Grapes, for Raysins Poison yields.
It is no Wine: no, the black bane it is,
The killing vomit of the Cockatrice;
It Is bitter venom, it is the same that coms
From the fell ASPIK's foul infecting gums.
Do not I know it? keep not I account
(In mine Exchequer) how their Sins do mount?
Vengeance is mine: I will (in fine) repay
In my due time: I will not long delay.
Their Ruin posteth: then, the Omnipotent
Shall judge for JACOB: then I will repent
To quite-destroy mine own beloved People,
Seeing their strength all failed and wholly feeble.
'T will then be said, Where are there Gods become,
(Their deaf, dull Idols, sent-les, sight-les, dumb)
To whom they lift their hearts, and hands, and eyes,
And (as their Guards) so often did sacrifice?
Now let those trim Protectors them protect;
Let them them rise quickly and defend their Sect,
Their Fires and Altars; and com stand before,
To shield the Fondlings that their Fanes adore.
Know therefore, Mortals, I the IMMORTAL am:
There Is none like Me, in or above this Frame:
I wound, I heal; I kill, I fetch from Grave,
And from my hands none can the Sinner save.
I Will lift my hand toward the arched Heavens on high,
And swear with-all by mine Eternity,
(Which only Being, gives to all to Been)
That if I whet my Sword of Vengeance keen:
If once (I say) as soverain King alone,
I sit me down on my high Justice Throne,
I Will venge me roughly on mine Enemies,
And guerdon justly their iniquities:
My heart-thrill Darts I will make drunk with blood,
I Will glut my Sword with slaughter; all the brood
Of rebel Nations I will race (in fine)
To recompense the blood and death of Mine.
O Gentiles, then his People praise and fear,
Since to the Lord it is so choisely-deer:
Since He Will avenge his Cause, and beating down
His Enemies, will mildly cheer his Own.
FINIS.
The CAPTAINS. THE IIII. PART OF THE III. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Just- Duked IOSVAH cheers the Abramides
To CANAAN's Conquest: Jordan self-divides:
Re- Circumcision, what, and where, and why:
Sack^ Jericho: Hai won (so Achan die):
Gabaonites guile: strange Hail: the Sun stands still:
Nature repines. Jews (Guide-les) prone to ill.
Adoni-Bezec. Sangar, DEBORA,
Barac and Iahel conquer SISARA.
Samuel succeeds: Jews crave a KING: a vie
Of People-Sway; States-Rule: and MONARCHY.
HAil holy JORDAN, and you blessed Torrents Canaan ^al^ted.

Of the pure Waters of whose crystal Currents
So many Saints have sipt* O Walls, that rest
Fair Monuments of many a famous Guest:
O Hills, O Dales, O Fields so flowery sweet,
Where Angels often have set their sacred feet:
And thou O sacred Place, which were the Cradle
Of the only MAN-GOD, and his happy Swadle:
And thou O Soil, which drank'st the crimsin Show^
That (for our health) out of his veins did pour:
And you fat Hillocks (which I take as given
For a firm pledge of the full joys of Heaven)
Where Milk and Honey flow; I see you all,
Under the conduct of my General
NVN's valiant Son: and under G^DEO's Sway,
SANGAR, and SAMSON, BARAC, DEBORA.
For, here (brave Heroes) your high Feats I sing; Argument of this Tract.

Thrice* sacred Spirit, thy speedy succor bring:
O Spirit, which were their Guide, Guard, strength and stay,
Let not my Verse their Virtue's praise betray.
IOSVAH, by Favor nor by Bribes, obtains
A higher Rank then Royal Sovereigns Iosuah his just authority, over the
People of Israel.

(Who buies in gross, he by retail must sell:
And who gives Favor, Favor asks as well):
He gets it not by Fortune (she is sight-les):
Neither by Force (for, who so enters (Right-les)
By Force, is forced to go out with shame):
Norsodain climbs he (raw) unto the same
(For, to high Place, who mounts not step by step,
He coms not down, but headlong down does leap):
But, even as that grave-gracefull Magistrate, Simile.

Which (now) with Conscience, Law does Moderate,
Was first a Student ( under others aw)
Then Barister, then Counselor at-Law,
Then Queens-Solicitor, then Roules- Arbitrer,
And then Lord Keeper, now LORD CHANCELER;
He coms to 't by degrees: and having first
Show'n himself wise inspying Canaan yerst,
Faith-full to MOSES in his Ministrings,
And Stout in Fight against the Heathen Kings,
God makes him CAPTAIN, and the sacred Priests
Pronounce him so, the People pleased is.
But in his State yer he be stall'd (almost) His first Oration to the People.

Set in the midst of God's beloved Host,
He thus dilates: O happy Legions deer,
Which sacred Arms under Heavens Ensigns bear,
Fear not that I, yet forty years, again
Your wandering Troops in these vast sands should train
'Twixt Hope and Fear: the vn-hallowed Offerings,
The proud revolts, blasphemous Murmurings
Of your stiff Fathers, have withheld rather
Then whole with-draw'n the aid of your heavenly Father:
God tenders it in time, and (pacified)
Nills the set Term without effect should slide.
Serve him therefore, now take him at his word,
And now to Canaan march with one accord,
And bravely show that the Host of ISRAEL,
In Valor, far does his drad Fame excel.
Courageous JACOB, ARAD's stoutest hearts
And strongest Holds have proved thy Pikes and Darts,
The Madianits have thine Arms thunder known,
The have razed Bazan, ransackt Hezebon,
Escaped scaly Serpents (in these Deserts vast)
Crossed the Red Sea, and Heav'n-prop SINA past,
And sent to Hell thy draddest Foes: Lo, now
God offers thee the Crown, accept it thou. He urges particularly Ruben, Gad,
and Manasses, to take part with their Brethren, in prosecuting the Conquest of
Canaan.

Then turning him to RVBEN and to GAD,
And to MANASSES, who their Portion had
By MOSES grant on Iordan's Eastern verge;
War-eloquent, he thus proceeds to urge:
Can you (my Hearts) find in your hearts to leave
Your Ranks, and us thus of your aids bereave?
Will you ly wrapped in soft beds a-sleep,
While in cold Trenches your poor Brethren keep?
Will you sit washing (when your Feasts be don)
In sweet Rose Water, while that Orion
His cloudy store in storm-full fury pours,
And drowns your Brethren with continual showrs?
Will you go Dance and dally to and fro,
While in the Field they march to charge the Foe?
Will you expect a part with them in gain,
While they the blows and all the brunt sustain?
God shield you should dishonor so your Blood:
Nay rather (leaving on this side the Flood
Your Wives and Children, and (unfit for Battle)
Your aged Parents, and your Herds of Cattle)
Com arm your selves, to advance our Victories, The general and ^oifull answer
of the people.

And share with us in Peril, as in Prize.
O noble Prince (then all the Host replied)
March-on a Gods name; and good Hap betide:
Were Canaan turned another Wilderness,
Were there before us yet more crimsin Seas,
Were Horeb, Carmel, and Mount Se^r set
Each upon other (vpto Heaven to get)
We'll follow thee through all; and only the end
Of our own lyves shall our brave Journey end.
After the Ark, then march they in array
Direct to Jordan, praising all the way
That living God, whose match-les mighty hand
Parted the Sea, that they might pass by land.
Hoar-headed Jordan neatly lodged was A Poetical and pleasant description of
the River Jordan.

In a large Cave, built all of beaten Glass;
Whose waved Seeling, with exceeding cost,
The Nymphs (his Daughters) rarely had imboss^
With Pearls and Rubies, and in-lay'd the rest
With Nacre checks, and Coral of the best:
A thousand Streamlings that never saw the Sun,
With tribute silver to his service run:
There, IRIS, AVSTER, and Clouds blewly black
Continually their licour leave and take:
There, the aged Flood laid on his mossie bed
And pensive leaning his flag-shaggie head
Upon a Tuft, where the eating waves incroach,
Did gladly wait for ISREAL'S approach:
Each hair he has is a quick-flowing stream,
His sweat the gushing of a storm extreme,
Each sigh a Billow, and each sob he sounds
A swelling Sea that over-flowes his bounds:
His weak gray eyes are always seen to weep,
About his loins a rush-Belt wears he deep,
A Willow Wreathe about his wrinkled brows;
His Father NEREVS his complexion shows.
So soon as He their welcome rumor heard,
His frosty head above the Waves he reared,
With both his hands struck back behind his ears
The waving Tresses of his weeping hairs,
And then perceiving Jacob's Army stayed
By his proud streams; he chid them thus, and said:
Presumptuous Brook, dare thou (ungrateful Torrent) Prosopopoeia.

Lift-vp thy horn, lash-out thy swelling Current
Against the Lord, and over-flowe thy bound
To stop his passage? Shall the Floods profound
Of the proud Ocean to his Host giue-way?
Shall Egypt's honor, shall that Gulf (I say)
That long large Sea, which with his plentious waves
A third or fourth part of the World be-laues;
Shall That yield humbly at his Servant's beck?
And thou, poor Rill, or gutter (in respect)
Resist himself (his glorious self) that Inns
Here in his Ark, between the Cherubins?
And saying so, he on his shoulder flung
His deep wide Crock, tkat on his hip had hung,
And down his back powrs back-ward all his Course:
The stream returns toward his double source;
And, leaving dry a large deep lane betwixt,
The fearful waves in heaped Hills were fixed,
To give God place, and passage to his host,
Toward their Promised and appointed coast.
So, dry they pass (after the sacred Oracle) The Israelites pass dry shod
through Jordan

And leave Memorials of that famous Miracle
Upon Mount Gilgal: and their flesh anon
They seal with Sign of their Adoption.
For, the All-guiding God, the Almighty Prince,
To give His some special difference,
Willed that all Males of Abram's Progenies Circumcision.

With sacred Rasor should them Circumcise;
And ever-more, that Isaac's blessed Race
Should in their Foreskin bear his gage of Grace.
But, why (say thou) should ancient ISRAEL, A curious Question, why it was
appointed in such a place.

In such a secret place Record and Seal
The Act of the Covenant: and with bloody smart,
Ingraue their glory in a shameful part?
Who blushes at it, is a grace-less Beast:
Who shames to see the Sign of Grace impressed A sharp and sober answer.

In shameful part, he is ashamed of CHRIST
Born of that Race, and selfly Circumcised.
A hundred subtle Reasons from the Writs
Of Rabines could I bring: but, sober Wits
Rest satisfied, conceiving that the incision
Of the obscoene Fore-^kin, signifies the abscision, The right application and
use thereof.

Or sacred cutting-off of foul Affects,
Beseeming those whom God, for his, elects:
That God the Fruits of Flesh and Blood does hate:
And that through CHRIST we must regenerate.
Now, the Hebrews kept their Passover: and go The Passover.

(By Heavens address) to mighty Jericho,
Besieging so the City round about,
That fear got in, but nothing could get out.
Soldiers (said then the undaunted General) The Siege of Jericho, after a
strange manner.

Prepare no Mattocks, Ladders, nor Rams at all,
To mine, or scale, or batter-down these Towrs:
The great, the high, the mighty God of Powrs
Will fight himself alone: and then he bod
(As first himself had been informed by God)
That daily once they all should march the Round
About the City, with horn-Trumpets sound,
Bearing about for only Banneret,
The lightfull Ark, GOD's sacred Cabinet:
Their swords vn-draw'n, not making any noise,
Threat-less their brows, and without braves their voice,
No shaft to shoot, no sign of War, no glance,
And even their March does rather seem a dance.
What Childre-spell? what May Game have we here? The Citizens devide it.

What, dare you (Gallants) dare you com no near?
Is this your brave Assault? is this your Fight?
Ween you with Scar-crowes us (like birds) to fright?
(Said the besieged) get you some where else
(Poorsots) to show your Bug-bears and your spells:
Cease your hoarse music, leave the stage alone:
Fools, draw the Curten, now your Play is done.
Six days together had the Hebrews thus't On the 7 day, their walls of
themselves fall down.

About the town, seaven-times the seventh they must;
When sacred Levits sound more loud and high
Their horny Trumps; then all the people cry
Com, com (great God) com, batter, batter down
These odious walls, this Idol-wedded Town.
It cracks in the instant, the foundation shrinks,
The mortar crumbles from the yawning chinks,
Each stone is loose, and all the wall does quiver,
And all at once unto the ground does shiver
With hideous noise; and the Heathen Guarison
Is but immured with Clouds of dust alone:
So shall you see a Clowd-crown'd Hill sometime,
Torn from a greater by the waste of Time,
Dreadly to shake, and boundling down to hop;
And roaring, here it roules tall Cedars up,
There aged Oaks; it turns, it spurns, it hales
The lower Rocks into the affrighted Vales,
There sadly sinks, or sudden stops the way
Of some swift Torrent hasting to the Sea.
Boast you (O Bombards) that you Thunder drown:
And vaunt you (Mines) that you turn up side-down
Rampires and Towrs, and Walls the massie-most:
Yet, your exploits require both time and cost;
You make but a small breach, but a rough way,
And (by mischance) often your own side betray.
But, the Hebrews with a sudden showt and cry,
A whole great Town dis-mantle instantly,
And (unresisted) entering everywhere,
They exercise all hostile vengeance there.
And, as a sort of lusty Bil-men, set Simile.

In Wood-sale time to fell a Cops, by great;
Be-stir them so, that so on with sweating pain,
They turn an Oak-groue to a Field of grain:
So the Hebrew Host, without remorse or pity, Ierico sacked and consumed with
fire, and all her inhabitants put to the sword: without respect of State, Sex
or Age.

Through all sad corners of the open City,
Burn, break, destroy, bathe them in blood, and toil
To lay all level with the trampled soil:
The Idol's Temples, and the delicat
Prince-Palaces are quickly beaten flat:
The Fire lowd-crackling with the Clouds does meet,
A bloody Torrent runs through every street,
Their venge-full sword spares neither great nor small;
Neither the Child that on his hands does crawl,
Nor him that wears snow on his shaking head,
Ice in his heart; nor the least Beast they bred.
A deed (indeed) more worthy the Hesiline,
Than the holy Hebrews; had the voice Divine
Not charged them so, and choycely armed them
Against Jericho, with his own Curse.
Anathem:
Reserving only for his Sacred Place,
The Gold and Silver, the Iron and the Brass.
Yet sacrilegious Achan dared to hoord Achan's Sacrilege.

Some precious Pillage: which incenst the Lord
Against the Camp, so that he let them fly
(For this Offense) before their Enemy.
For, when three thousand chosen Israelites
Were sent to Hai to assault the Cananites, Hai summoned, the Towns men's sally
and put the Israelites to flight.

The Town all arm's: their Prince the forwardest
(No less-brave Soldier then bold Atheist)
Arms the broad mountain of his hairy breast,
With horrid scales of Nilus greedy beast:
His brawny arms and shoulders, with the skin
Of the dart-darting wily Porcupin:
He wears for Helm a Dragon's ghastly head,
Wher-on for Plume a huge Horse-tail does spread;
Not much unlike a Birch-tree bare below, The antik armor of the king. His
insolent and blasphemous Oration.

Which at the top in a thick tuft does grow,
Waving with every wind, and made to kiss
The Earth, now on that side, and anon on this:
In Quyver made of Lezard's skins he wears
His poisoned Arrows; and the Bow he bears,
Is of a mighty Tree strung with a Cable,
His Shaft a Lever, whose keen head is able
To pearce all proof, stone, steel, and Diamant.
Thus furnished, the Tyrant thus does vaunt:
Sirs, shall we suffer this ignoble Race,
Thus shamefully us from our Own to chase?
Shall they be Victors yer they overcom?
Shall our Possessions and our Plenty com
Among these Mongrels? Tush: let Children quake
At dreams of ABRAM: let faint Women shake
At their drad God, at their Sea-drying Lord;
I know no Gods, above my glittering Sword:
This said, he sallies, and assaults the Foe
With furious skirmish, and does charge them so,
As stormy billows rush against a Rock: 3. Similes.

As boystrous winds (that have their prison broak)
Roar on a Forest: as Heavens sulph'ry Flash
Against proud Mountains surly brows does dash.
The sacred Troops (to conquer always wont)
Could not sustain his first Tempestuous brunt,
But turn their backs: and as they fly amain,
Four less than forty of their band were slain.
The son of NVN then (with the Isacian Peers) Iosuah and the Princes of Israel
humbled before the Lord in Prayer.

Before the Ark in postrate wise appears;
Sack on his back, dust on his head, his eyes
Even great with tears, thus to the Lord he cries:
O! what alas? what have we don, O Lord?
The People, destined to thy Peoples sword,
Conquers thy people; and the Cananites
(Against thy Promise) chase the Israelites.
O Lord, why did not Iordans rapid Tide,
Still stay our Host upon the other side?
Since here, in hope, to get the Promised more,
We hazard all that we had won before.
Regard, and guard us; nay, regard thy Name:
O! suffer not the seed of Abraham
(Almighty Father, O thou God most high!)
To be exposed to Heathen's Tyranny!
Much less thy sacred Ark, for them to burn:
And least of all, thy glorious Self, to scorn.
IOSVAH (said God) let the Host be sanctified,
And let the Church-thief die, that dared to hide
The vn-lawfull Pillage of that cursed Town
(Thy Maiden Conquest, prime of thy Renown):
Then shall thou vanquish, and the lofty Towrs
Of HAI, shall fall under thy warlike powrs.
The morrow next, after the great Assise,
ACHAN (convicted, not by bare surmize, Acha^ executed

But by God's Spirit, which undermines our minds,
And clearly sees our secretest designs,
To whom, Chance is no Chance, and Lot no Lot,
To whom the Die uncertain rouleth not)
Is brought without the Host, with all he has,
And sacrificed unto the Almighties wrath.
Now, between Bethel and HAI's western wall,
There lies a valley close environed all
Between the forking of a Hill so high,
That it is hidden from all passers-by:
Whose horned clifts, below are hollowed,
And with two Forests arbour'd over-head;
It Is long and narrow; and a rapid Torrent,
Bounding from Rock to Rock with roaring Current,
Deaffens the Shepherds: so that it should seem
Nature forecast it for some stratagem.
Thither the Duke (soon after midnight) guides A^ ambush.

His choycest Bands, and them there war'ly hides:
Each keeps his place, none speaks, none spits, none coughs;
But all as still, as if they marchton moss:
So fallow Wolves, when they intend to set Simile.

On fearful flocks that in their Folds do bleat*
Through silent darkness secret ways do groap;
Their feet are feathered with the wings of hope*
They hold their breath, and so still vn-descri'd,
They pass hard by the watchful Mastie's side.
Meanwhile the howrs opened the doors of Day,
To let out Titan that must needs away:
Whose radiant tresses, but with trayling on,
Began to gild the top of Libanon;
When, with the rest of all his Host, the Signifies but an Earl: but here ^^
^^ vsur^ed for the chief Captain Io^uah.
GRAVE
Marches amain to give the Town a brave,
They straight re-charge him: as in season warm
The hony-makers busie-buzzing swarm,
With humming threats throngs from the little gates Simile.

Of their round Towr, and with their little hates
Fiercely assail, and wound the naked skins
Of such as come to rob their curious Inns.
Why (Cowards) dare you com again for blows*
Or, do you long your wretched lives to lose?
Com, we are for you; we will dispatch you soon,
And for the many wrongs that you have don
Unto ourselves, our Neighbors, and our Friends,
This day our swords shall make us full amends
(Cry the Amorites): and the Hebrew Captain then ^ ^^ratagem.

Flies, as afraid, and with him all his men
Disorderly retire; still faining so,
Till (politik) he has in-trayn'd the Foe
Right to his Ambush: then the Soldiers there
Hid in the Vale, hearing their noise so near,
Would fain be at them, were they not withheld
By threatening gestures of Commanding Eld:
So have I seen on LAMBORN's pleasant Douns, Simile.

When yelping Begles or sons deeper Hounds
Have start a Hare, how milk-white Minks and Lun
( Gray-bitches both, the best that ever run)
Held in one leash, have leapt and strained, and whin'd
To be restrained, till (to their masters mind)
They might be slipped, to purpose; that (for sport)
Watt might have law, neither too-long nor short.
But, when the Heathen had the ambush past,
The Duke thus cheers his sacred Troops as fast,
Sa, sa, my Hearts; turn, turn again vpon-them,
They are your own, now charge, and cheerly on-them.
His ready Soldiers at a beck obey,
And on their Foes courageous load they lay; H^i conquered.

They shoot, they shock, they strike, they stab, they kill
The unhallowed Currs, that yet resisted still;
Until behind them a new storm arose
With horrid noise, which daunts not only those,
But with the fury of it is force does make
The Hills and Forests, and even Hell to quake.
Pagans, what will you do? if here you fly,
You fall on Caleb, where y' are sure to die:
If there, on Iosuah: O unfortunate*
Your help-less Gods in vain you invocate.
You Are (O forlorn!) like Rabbets round be-set
With wily Hunters, Dogs, and deadly Net: Simile.

With shrill Sa-haw, heer-heer-ho, heer-again,
The Warren rings; the amazed Game amain
Runs here and there; but, if they escape away
From Hounds, staves kill them; if from staves, the Hay*
Yield, yield, and die then, strive not to retire:
For, even in death behold your Town a-fire.
Then Gabaon, a mighty City near,
That these Exploits of Heavens drad hand did hear,
Sent subtly, to League with Israel.
No: y' are deceived (said then the Arch-Colonel)
The Cananites are destined long ago
To Fire and Sword, and utter Over-throwe;
From Heavens high Judge the sentence does proceed:
Man may not alter what God has decreed.
Alas! my Lord replied the Ambassadors) The Gabaonites cunning policy, to make
League with Israel.

You may perceive we are no Borderers
Upon these countries; For, our suits, our slops,
Our hose and shoos, were new out of the shops
When we set forth from home; and even that day
This Bread was baked when we came away;
But the long Journey, we have gone, has wore
Our clothes to rags, and turned our Victuals hoar.
W' adjure you therefore in the sacred name
Of that drad GOD to whom your vows you frame,
By the sweet air of this delightful Coast,
By the good Angel that conducts your Host,
By deer Embraces of your deerer Wives,
And by your Babes (even) deerer then your lives;
By each of these, and all of these together,
And by your Arms, whose Fame has drawn us hither,
TO have pity on us, and to swear vnto-vs,
To save our lives* and not so to vndo-vs,
As these near Nations: Israel accords,
And with an Oath confirms the solemn words.
So, I (good Lord) perceiving all the Seed A sacred application of their
profane example

Of Sin-full Adam, unto Death decreed,
Doomed to the Vengeance of thy Fury fell,
And damned for ever to the deepest Hell*
Would fain be free: but, if I should (alas!)
Com, as I am, before thy glorious face,
Thou (righteous God) wilt turn thine eyes away;
For, Flesh and Blood possess not Heaven, for ay;
And, the strict Rigor of thy Justice pure
Cannot (O Lord) the least of sins endure.
Oh then! what shall I do? I Will similize
These Gabaonites: I will myself disguize
To gull thee, Lord (for, even a holy Guile
Finds with thee grace and favor often-while):
I Will put-on (crafty) not the cloak of Pride
(For, that was it whereby our Grandsires di'd,
And Lucifer, with his associates, fell
From Ioys of Heaven, into the Pains of hell):
But the humble Fleece of that sweet sacred Lamb
Which (for our sakes) upon the Cross became
So torn and tattered; which the most refuse:
Scorn of the Gentiles, Scandal of the Jews.
And, as a piece of Silver, Tyn, or Lead, Simile.

By cunning hands with Gold is covered;
I, that am all but Lead (or dross, more base)
In fervent Crusible of thy free Grace,
I Will gild me all with his pure Beautie's Gold:
Born a new man (by Faith) I Will kill mine old:
In Spirit and Life, Christ shall be mine example,
His Spirit shall be my spirit* and I his Temple.
I being thus in Christ, and Christ in me,
O! will thou, can thou, drive us far from thee?
Deprive from promised new- Jerusalem,
Christ thine own Likeness, and me, like to him?
Bannish from Heaven (whose Blis^ shall never vade)
Thy Christ, by whom; and me, for whom 't was made?
But, O presumption! O too rash Design!
Alas! to Will it only, is not mine:
And, though I Would, my flesh (too-Winter-chill)
My Spirit's small sparkles does extinguish still.
O! therefore thou, thou that can all, alone;
All-sacred Father's like all-sacred Son,
Through thy deep Mercy daign thou to transform
Into thy Self me sin-full silly worm;
That so, I may be welcome to my God,
And live in Peace, not where the Jews abode,
But in Heaven- Sion: and that thou may be
The uniting glue between my God and me.
Now, Eglon's, Hebron's, Iarmuth's, Salem's Lords,
And Lachis Kingling (after these Accords)
Wroth that their Neighbors had betrayed so
Their common Country, to their common Foe,
Had made so great a breach, and by the hand
Led (as it were) the Hebrews into their Land;
Set-vpon Gabaon: but the Isacian Prince,
As just as valiant, hastes to hunt them thence;
And, resolute to rescue his Allies,
He straight bids Battle to their Enemies.
The Fight grows fierce; and winged Victory, The Battle of the five Kings.

Shaking her Laurels, rusht confusedly
Into the midst; she goes, and coms, and goes,
And now she leans to these, and now to those.
Auster the while from neighbor Mountains arms
A hundred Winters, and a hundred storms
With huge great Hail-shot, driving fiercely-fell
In the stearn visage of the Infidel:
The roaring Tempest violently retorts Extraordinary Volleys of Hailshot from
Heaven upon the Infidels.

Upon themselves the Pagans whirling darts,
And in their own breasts, their own Lances bore,
Wher-with they threatened the Host of God before:
And (even) as if it envied the Renown
Of valiant Iosuah (now by Ganges known)
With furious shock, the foremost Ranks it whirr'd
Upon the next, the second on the third:
Even as a Bridge of Cards, which Play-full Child Simile.

Does in an evening on a Carpet build,
When some Wag by, upon his Work does blow;
If one Arch fail, the rest fall all arowe
Each upon other, and the Child he Cries
For his lost labor, and again he tries.
If any, resting on his knotty Spear
*Against Arms and storms, yet stand out stiffly there,
The Hail, which the Wind full in his face does yerk,
Sma^ter than Racquets in a Courtre-ierk
Balls against the Walls of the black-boorded house,
Beats out his eyes, battters his nose, and brows.
Then turn the Pagans, but without a vail:
For, instantly the stony storm of Hail
Which flew direct a-front, direct now falls
Plumb on their heads, and cleaues their sculs and cauls:
And ever, as they waver to and fro,
Over their Host the Haily Clowd does go:
And never hits one Hebrew, though between,
But a sword's length (or not so much) be seen:
A bluckler one, another a bright helm
Over his threatened or sick head does whelm;
But the shield broken, and helm beaten in,
The Hail makes the hurt bite on the bloody green.
Those, that escape, be take them to their heels;
Iosuah pursues: and though his sweat distills
From every part, he wounds, he kills, he cleaues:
Neither the Fight imperfect so he leaves,
But full of faithful zeal and zealous faith,
Thus (O strange language!) thus alowd he says;
Beam of the Eternal, days bright Champion, At the command of Iosuah the Sun
sta^d^th still.

Spiall of Nature, O all-seeing Sun,
Stay, stand thou still, stand still in Gabaon;
And thou, O Moon in the vale of Aialon,
That the Ammorites now by their hare-like flight
Escape no^ my hands under all-hiding Night.
As a Caroche, draw'n by four lusty steeds, Simile.

In a smooth way whirling with all their speeds,
Stops suddenly, if it slip into a slough,
Or if it cross some Log or massy bough;
The Day-reducing Chariot of the Sun,
Which now began, toward his West to run,
Stops instantly, and gives the Hebrews space
To rid the Pagans that they have in chase.
Nature, amazed; for very anger shakes, Description of Na ture, who offended
thereat, makes her complaint to GOD.

And to the Almighty her complaint she makes:
Seemly she marches with a measured pase,
Choler puts color in her lovely face,
From either nipple of her bosom-Twins
A lively spring of pleasant milk their spins,
Upon her shoulders ( Atlas-like) she bears
The frame of All, down by her side she wears
A golden Key, wher-with she lette^h-forth,
And locketh-vp the Treasures of the Earth:
A sumptuous Mantle to her heels hangs down,
Wher-in the Heavens, the Earth, and Sea is showen;
The Sea in Silver woven, the Earth in Green,
The Heavens in azure, with gold threads between:
All-quickning Love, fresh Beauty, smiling Youth,
And Fruitfulness, each for her favor su'th:
Grace still attends ready to do her honor,
Riches and Plenty always wait upon her.
Accoutred thus, and thus accompanied,
With thousand sighs, thus to the Lord she cried: Prosopopoeia.

Shall it be said, a Man does Heaven command?
Will thou permit a braving Soldiers hand
To wrong thine eldest Daughter? ah! shall I
Have the bare Name, and He the authority
To Govern all, and all control (O Lord)
With the bare wind of his ambitious word?
Shall I (the World's Law) then, receive the Law
At others hands? of others stand in aw?
If It be thy pleasure, or thou think it fit,
To have it so, or so to suffer it,
(Pardon me, Father, that I am so free)
I here surrender thy Lieutenancy:
Bestow't on him, put all into his hand:
Who Heavens commands, He well may Earth command.
Why (daughter) know thou not (God answers her)
That many times my Mercy does transfer
Into my Children mine own power, wher-by
They work (not seldom) mine own Wonders high?
That the are my sacred Viceroys? and that He, The power of a steadfast Faith.

Who (stripped of Flesh) by Faith is joined to me,
May remove Mountains, may dry-vp the Seas,
May make an Ocean of a Wilderness?
The have seen it, Daughter: therefore, but thou pine
In Jealousy of this drad arm of mine,
Grudge not at theirs: for they can nothing do,
But what my Spirit inables them unto.
O happy Prince! I wonder not at all, IOSVAH his victories.

If at thy feet the stout Anachian fall,
If the Amorrhite, Hevite, and Canaanite,
The Pheresite, Hethite, and Iebusite,
And* huge Basanian, by thy daunt-les Host
Were over-throwen: and, if as swift (almost)
As my slow Muse thy sacred Conquests sings,
Thou Came, Saw, Conquer'dst more then thirty Kings;
Sub duing Syria, and dividing it
Unto twelve Kindreds in twelve portions fit:
Since (O grand Vicar of the Almighty Lord)
With only summons of thy mighty Word,
Thou make Rivers the most deafly-deep
To lobstarize (back to their source to creep);
Walls give thee way: after thy Trumpets charge,
Rock-rushing Tempests do retreat, or charge:
Sol's at thy service: and the starry Pole
Is proud to pass under thy Muster-Roule.
As a blind man, forsaken of his guide Simile.

In some thick Forest, sad and self-beside,
Takes now a broad, anon a narrow path,
His groaping hand his (late) eyes office has,
Here at a stub he stumbles, there the bushes
Rake-off his Cloak, here on a Tree he rushes,
Strayes in and out, turns, this and that way tries,
And at the last falls in a Pit, and dies:
Even so (alas!) having their Captain lost, After his death Israel having lost
his guide, falls from his God.

So blindely wanders Jacob's wilful Host,
Contemns the Fountain of God's sacred Law,
From I doll-Puddles poisoning drink to draw;
Forsakes the old true God, and new fals-gods fains,
And with the Heathen friendship entertains.
The Almighty saw it (for, what sees he not?) God therefore forsakes him.

And so dainly his fury waxed hot;
And on their neck, for his sweet yoke, he laid
The Strangers yoke that hard and heavy waigh'd. Simile.

But, as an Infant which the Nurce lets go
To go alone, waves weakly to and fro,
Feels his feet fail, cries out, and but (alas!)
For her quick hand, would fall and break his face:
So JACOB, justly made afflictions thrall,
Is never ready in the Pit to fall
Of pale Despair, but (if he cry, and craue-him)
God still extends his gracious hand to save-him; Upon his Repentance God again
receives him to favor.

Raising some Worthy that may break insunder
The Gyves and Fetters that he labors under.
So then, assisted by the immortal hand,
Brave ISRAEL brings under his Command
JERUSALEM, LVS, BETHEL, ACCARON,
SESAI, and THOLMAI, GAZA, and ASCALON,
And BEZEC too; whose bloody Tyrant, fled,
Is caught again, and paid with Cake for Bread:
To self-taught Torture he himself is put, The Tyrant Adoni-Bezec ta ken and
entreated as He had handled others.

His sacrilegeous Thumbs and Toes be cut.
Whereby, more inly pricked, then outly payn'd,
God's Vengeance just he thus confess't, and playn'd;
O hand, late Scepter-grac't! O hand, that late
EGYPT did dread, and EDOM tremble at! His Complaint.

O hand, that (armed) durst even MARS defy,
And could have pulled proud IVPITER from high!
Now, where-to serv'st thou, but to augment my moan?
Thou can not now buckle mine Armor on;
Nor wield my mighty Lance with brazen head,
Ah! no (alas!) thou can not cut my bread.
O feet (late) winged to pursue the flight
Of hundred Armies that I foiled in fight,
Now you have lost your office* now (alas!)
You cannot march; but limp about this place.
But, it is the just God, the just hand of Heaven His confession.

In mine own Coin has me my payment given:
For, seventy Kings, thus maimed of Toes and Thumbs,
I, insolent, have made to lick the crumbs
Under my board (like Dogs) and drawn perforce
To serve for blocks when I should mount my horse.
Therefore (O Kings!) by mine example learn His ca^ eat to all Tyrants and
cruel minded men.

To bound your rage, limit your fury stearn:
O Conquerers! be warned all by me;
Be to your Thralls, as God to you shall be:
Men, pity Man, wretched and over-throwen;
And think his case may one-day be your own:
For, Chance does change: and none alive can say,
He happy is, until his dying day:
The Foe that after Victory survives,
Not for himself but for your glory lives:
The Oliue's above the Palm: and the happiest King
His greatest Triumph, is Self-triumphing.
But Israel, wallowing in his mire again, Israel again and again relapseth.

Soon lost the glory former Arms did gain;
And goods and bodies easy booties bin
To Aram, Moab, and the Phil^st^m.
What help ( O Jacob)? the have nor arms, nor head, Again humbled.

Thy Fields with bones of thine own bands be spread,
And the only name of thy profaner Foe,
Congeals thy blood, and chils thy heart for Woe.
Fly, fly, and hie thee quickly to recover
The all-proof Target of thine ancient Lover,
Thy gracious God, the glorious Tyrant-tamer,
Terror of terrors, Heathen's dreadful hammer.
Ah! see already how he rescues thee Again and again* relieved.

From the odious yoke of Pagan Tyranny,
Breaking the Fetters of thy bondage fell,
By Ahod, Bara^, and Othoniel,
And Goad-man SANGAR, whose industrious hand Sangar a Plow-Swain^a famous
Champion of Israel.

With Ox-teem tills his tributary Land,
When Philistines, with Sword and Fiery fury,
Slaughter the Jews, and overrun all Jury,
Deflowr the Virgins, and with lustfull-spight
Ravish chaste Matrons in their Husbands sight:
He leaves his Plough, he calls upon his God,
And only armed with his slender Goad,
Alone he sets on all the Heathen Camp:
A Pagan Captain weens him thus to damp;
What means this Fool (says he)? go silly Clown,
Get thee to Plough, go home and till thy ground,
Go prick thy Bullocks; leave the Works of MARS
To my long-train'd, still-conquering Souldiars.
First learn thou Dog (replies the Israelite)
To know my strength (rather the Almightie's might):
And on his head he lays him on such load
With two quick vennies of his knotty Goad,
And with the third, thrusts him between the eyes,
That down he falls* shaking his heels, and dies.
Then steps another forth, more stout and grim,
Shaking his Pike, and fierce lets fly at him:
But SANGAR shuns the blow, and with his stroke,
The Pagan leg short-off in sunder broak;
On the other yet, a while he stands and fights:
But the Hebrew Champion such a back-blowesmights
That flat he lays him; then with fury born,
Forward he leap^, and in a Martial scorn,
Upon his panch sets his victorious foot,
And treads and tramples, and so stamps into it,
That blood and bowels (mingled with the bruise)
Half at his mouth, half at his sides he spews: Simile.

As, on Wine-hurdles those that dance (for meed)
Make with sweet Nectar every wound to bleed,
Each Grape to weep, and crimsin streams to spin
Into the Vate, set to receive them in.
Thence thirty steps, a chief Commander pressed,
And prowdly wags his feather-clouded Crest,
And cries, Com hither (Cow-heard) com thou hither,
Com let us cope, but thou and I together;
I Will teach thee (peasant) and that quickly too,
Thou have not with thy fellow swains to do,
That on Mount Carmel's stormy top do feed.
No, here (poorsot) thou other fence shall need.
SANGAR runs at him, and he runs so fierce,
That on his staf, him six steps back he bears;
Bears down another with him, and another,
That but with gesture stood directing other:
As, when it is dark, when 't rains, and blusters rough, Simile.

A thundering tempest with a sulphury puff
Breaks down a mighty Gate, and that another,
And that a third, each opposite to other:
Smoke, dust, and door-falls, with storms roaring din,
Dismay the stoutest that command within;
The common sort (beside their little wits)
Scarr'd from their beds, dare not abide the streets:
But, in their shirts over the walls they run,
And so their Town, ye^ it be taken, is wun;
The sudden Storm so inly-deep dismaies-them,
That fear of Taking, to despair betrays them.
Amid their Host, then bravely rushes SANGAR,
His sinnewy arm answers his sacred Anger:
Who flies, or follows, he alike besteads:
On scattered heaps of slaughtered Foes he treads.
This, with his elbow here he over-turns,
That, with his brow; this, with his foot he spurns;
Here, with his Staff he makes in shivers fly
Both cask and scull, and there he breaks a thigh,
An arm, a leg, a rib, a chin, a cheek;
And the hungry Shepherd hardly beats so thick Comparison.

Nuts from a Tree, as SANGAR Foes beats down:
With swords and shields, and shafts, the Field is sown:
Alone he foils a Camp: and on the Plain
Therely six hundred of the Heathen slain.
Almighty God, how thou to Thine art good!
Thy peoples Foes are not alone subdued
By a rude Clown, whose hard-wrought hands, before
Nothing but spades, coulters, and bills had bore:
But, by a silly Woman, to whose hand
Thou for a time committest the Command
Of ISRAEL: for, of no other Head,
Nor Law, nor Lord, they for a time are sped, DEBORA.

But prudent DEBORA: unto whose Throne
Fly those whose heads with age are hoary grown,
And those great Rabbis that do gravely sit,
Revolving volumes of the highest Writ,
And He that in the Tabernacle serves,
Her sacred voice as Oracles observes:
None from her presence ever coms confused.
And, got on skill, gives place to skill infused.
O JACOB'S Lanthorn, Load-star pure, which lights
On these rough Seas the rest of Abramites
(Said then the People) what shall us befall?
IABIN'S fell yoke our weary necks does gall:
We are the Butts unto all Pagan darts,
And cold Despair knocks at our doors (our hearts).
ISRAEL (says she) be of good cheer; for now
God wars upon your Foes, and leagues with you:
Therefore to Field now let your youth advance,
And in their rests couch the revenging Lance:
This said, on BARAC she a Shield bestows, Barac.

Indented on the brims, which plain fore-showes His shield given by Debora.

Incurious Boss-work (that does neatly swell)
The (won and lost) Battails of Israel,
As an abbridgement, where to life appear
The noblest Acts of eight or nine score year.
Lo here an army, stooping by the side Gedeon.

Of a deep River (with their Thirst half dried)
Sups, licks, and laps the stream: of all which rout,
The Captain chooses but three hundred out,
And arming each but with a Trump and Torch,
About a mighty Pagan Host does march,
Making the same, through their drad sudden sound,
With their own Arms themselves to inter-wound:
A hellish rage of mutual fury swells
The bloody hearts of barbarous Infidels,
So that the friends that in one Couch did sleep,
Each others blade in eithers breast do steep:
And all the Camp with head-les dead is sown,
Cut Off by Cozen-swords, killed by their own.
Lo there, another valiant Champion, ^ I^phthe.

Who having late triumphant Laurels won;
His heed-les Vow (in-humane) to ful-fill,
His only Daughter does unkindly kill:
The frantik Mother, all vnbrac't (alas!)
With silver locks vnkemb'd about her face;
Arming her rage, with nails, with teeth, and tongue,
Runs-in, and rushes through the thickest throng:
And, she will save, and she will have (she says)
Her Deer, her Daughter; and then hold she lays
Upon the Maid, and tearing-off her Coat,
Away she runs, thinking she her had got.
The Priest dissolues in tears, the Offering is cheerful*
The Murdred's valiant, and the Murderer fearful;
The Father leads with slow and feeble pase*
The Daughter seems to run to death a-pace,
As if the Chaplet that her temples ties,
Were Hymen's Flowrs, not Flowrs for Sacrifice:
Her grace and beauties still augment; (in ^ine)
Who so beholds her sweet, loue-darting Eyn,
Her Cheeks, Lips, Brow's; fresh Lillies, Coral, Iet:
He sees (or seems to see) a Sun to set.
And (to conclude) the Graver, Maul, and Mould,
Have given such life to the Iron, Brass, and Gold,
That here wants nothing but the Mothers screech,
The Father's sigh, and the sweet Daughter's speech.
Lo here, another shakes his vnshav'n tresses, Samson.

Triumphing on a Lion torn in pieces:
O match-les Champion! Pearl of men-at-arms,
That emptiest not an Arcenal of Arms,
Nor need shops of Lemnian Armourers,
To furnish weapons for thy glorious Wars:
An Asse's Iaw-bone is the Club wher-with
Thy mighty arm, brains, beats, and battereth
The uncircumcised ^amp* all quickly scud;
And the Host that ^lew in dust, now flows in blood*
Here, the Iron Gates, whose hugeness woo^t to shake
The massy Towrs of Gaza, thou do take
On thy broad shoulders: there (in seeming jest)
Crushing their Palace-pillars (at a feast)
Thou over-whelm'st the House, and with the fall
The Philistines blaspheming Princes all.
Here, from ones head, which two huge coins do crush,
(As whay from Cheese) the battred brains do gush:
Here lies another in a deadly sound*
Nailed with a broken rafter to the ground:
Another, here pasht with a pane of wall,
Has lost his soul, and bodies shape withal:
Another, here o're-taken as he fled,
Lies (Tortois-like) all hidden but the head:
Another covered with a heap of lome,
Seems with his mooving to re-moue his Toomb:
Even as the soft, blind, Mine-inventing Moule, Simile.

In velvet Robes under the Earth does roll,
Refusing light, and little air receives,
And hunting worms her mooving hillocks heaves.
Lo lower here, a beastly Multitude The Levites wise.

On one poor Woman all their lusts intrude;
Whose Spouse (displeased with the execrable Fact)
Into twelve Pieces her dead Body hackt;
And, to twelve Parts of ISRAEL them transfers,
As twelve quick tinders of intest in Wars.
And lower yet, behold) with hateful scorn) The Arc taken by the Philistines.

The ARK of God to DAGON'S Temple born;
But, the Idol yields to GOD, and DAGON falls
Before the ARK, which Heathen's pride appalls.
BARAC thus armed, the ASORIANS sets-vpon, The Battle between the Israelites
and Asorians with their iron Chariots.

That bright in brass, steel, gold, and silver shone:
But, his young Soldiers were much daunted tho,
To see the fearful Engines of the Foe*
Nine hundred Chariots, whirling swift and light*
Whose glistering irons dazzle even their sight;
Whose barded Steeds bear in their heads a Blade
Of the right temper of DAMASCVS made
(As proud of it, as Unicorns are wont
Of their rich Weapon that adorns their ^ront)
Amidst their Pettral stands another Pike:
On either-side, long grapples (Sickle-like);
The like at either Nave: so that (in Wars)
It Is present death to approach these broaching Cars.
But DEBORA, her Troops encouraging, Debora coms^rteth and incourageth the
Israelites.

Bestirs her quick, and steps from wing to wing:
Courage (says she) brave Soldiers, sacred Knights,
Strike, and strike home, lay-on with all your mights:
Stand, fear them not (O Champions of the Faith)
God drives your Foes into the snares of Death.
Doubt-les, they are your own: their armed Charrets
They are but Buggs to daunt dejected spirits.
No, no (my Hearts) not Arms, nor Engines glorious,
But it is the heart that makes a Camp victorious:
Or rather, it is God's Thunder-throwing hand,
Which only does all Warr's success command:
And, VICTORIE'S his Daughter, whom he now
(For his own sake) frankly bestows on you.
Even as a sort of Shepherds, having spied Simile.

A Wolf com stealing down a Mountains side,
Cry shrill, Now-now, vp-hill, a Wolf a Wolf*
Now, now (says Echo) vp-hill, a Wolf, a Wolf;
And such a noise between the Vales does rise,
That the hungry Thief hence without hunting flies:
So the Hebrews, heartned with her brave Discourse, Gods enemies ^^er thrown
by their own Engin^^.

Gave such a showt, that the armed Carrs and Horse
Turn sudden back, their Drivers Art deceive*
And, changing side, through their own Army cleave.
Some, with the blades in every Coursers brow,
Were (as with Lances) ^ored through and through:
Some torn in pieces with the whirling wheels,
Some trod to death under the Horses heels:
As (in some Countries) when in Season hot,
Under Horse feet (made with a whip to trot) Simile.

They use to thresh the sheaves of Winter-Corn,
The grain spurts-out, the straw is bruised and torn.
Some (not direct before the Horse, nor under)
Were with the Sythes mow'n in the midst a-sunder:
As in a Mead the Grass yet in the flowr, Simile.

Falls at the foot of the wide-straddling Mower,
That with a stooping back, and stretched arm,
Cuts-cross the swathes to Winter-feed his Farm.
If there rest any resolute, and loath
To lose so soon their Arms and honors both
At first assault, but rather bravely bent
To see so fierce and bloody Fight's event;
Both DEBORA and BARAC thither pli'd:
But (as it is writ of the mild AMRAMIDE,
And NVN'S great Son* that Heav'n-deer MARS-like man, Debora prays, while
Barac fights.

Who did transplant the Tribes to CANAAN)
She (in the zeal of her religious spirit)
Lifts-vp her hands to pray, and he to fight.
He charges fierce, he wounds, he slaughters all The Infidels utterly over
thrown and Sisara their Captain slain by Iahel.

But SISARA, their Captain general;
Who flies to IAHEL, and by her is slain
Driving a nail into his sleeping brain*
At last, the Helm of headstrong ISRAEL
Coms to the hand of famous SAMVEL;
One rarely-wise* who weds his Policy,
To divine gifts of sacred Phophecie* Samuel, Judge.

But, his too greedy Sons, digressing quite
From his good steps, dis-taste the ISRAELITE
Of the ancient RVLE of the Heavenly Potentate: Israel a^^es* 6. KING.

So that all seek a sudden Change of S^ATE.
Assembled then in sacred PARLIAMENT,
Up starts a Fellow of a mean Descent
(But of great spirit, well-spoken, full of wit,
And courage too* ^spiring high to fit) ^. A Declamatio^ of a Plebeian for
Democratie or People-Sway.

And having gained attention, thus he says*
Divine Design* O Purpose worthy-prayse*
To now- Reform the STATE, and soundly heal
With holsom Laws the hurts of the Commonweal:
But (prudent ISRAEL) take now heed (or never);
Change not an Ague for a burning-Fever;
In shaking-off confused Anarchie,
To beintic't to embrace a Monarchy,
Admired of Fools, adored of Flatterers,
Of Softlings, Wantons, Braves, and Loyterers:
The Freedom and Defense of the base Rabble,
But to brave minds a Yoke intolerable.
For, who can brook, millions of men to measure
Breath, Life, and Mooving, all at One man's pleasure?
One, to keep all in aw? One, at a beck
A whole great Kingdom to control and check?
Is It not a goodly sight, to see a Prince,
Void of all Virtue, full of insolence,
To Play with Noble States, as with a straw?
A Fool, to give so many Wise the Law?
A Beast, to govern Men? An Infant, Eld?
A Hare to lead fierce Lions to the Field?
Who is it but knows, that such a Court as this, The corruption and
licentiousnes of most Princes Courts.

Is the open Shop of selling Offices?
The harbor of Riot, stews of Ribal dry,
The haunt of Profusion, the Hell of Tyranny?
That nowhere shines the REGAL Diadem,
But (Comet-like) it boads all Vice extreme?
That not a King among ten thousand Kings,
But to his Lust his Law in bondage brings?
But (shame-les) triumphs in the shame of Wives?
But bad, prefers the bad, and good deprives?
But gildeth those that glorify his Folly;
That sooth, and smooth, and call his Hell-ness holy?
But with the Torrent of continual Taxes
(Poured everywhere) his meanest Subjects vexes:
As an ill-stated Body does distill Simile.

On's feeblest parts his cold-raw humors still.
That Form of RVLE is a right Commonweal,
Where all the People have an Enter-deal:
Where (without aw or law) the Tyrants sword
Is not made druak with blood, for a Miss-word:
Where, Each (by turn) does Bid and does Obey;
Where, still the Commons (having Soverain- Sway)
Share equally both Rigor and Reward
To each-man's merit; giving no regard
To ill-got Wealth, nor moldy Monuments
From great-great-Grand-sires scutcheon'd in Descents:
Where, Learned Men, vn-soule-clogd (as it were)
With servile gives of Kings imperious Fear,
Fly even to Heaven; and by their Pensinspire
Posterity with Virtue's glorious Fire:
Where, Honor's honest Combat never ceasses,
Nor Virtue languishes, nor Valor leeses
His sprightfull nerves, through the Envy of a PRINCE,
That cannot brook another's excellence;
Or, Pride of those, who (from great Elders sprung)
Have nothing but Their glory on their tongue;
And deeming Others Worth, enough for them,
Virtue and Valor, and all Arts contemn:
Or, base Despair, in those of meaner Calling,
Who, on the ground still (woorm-like) basely crawling,
Dare not attempt (nor scarcely think, precise)
Any great Act or glorious Enterprise;
Because Ambition, Custom, and the Law,
From high Estate has bounded them with aw:
Where, He that never rightly learned t*obay
Commands not, with heavy Sword of Sway:
Where, each in the Publik having equal part,
All to save all, will hazard life and heart:
Where, Liberty (as deer as life and breath)
Born with us first, consorts us to our Death.
Shall savage Beasts like-better Nuts and Mast Simile.

In a free Forest, than our choice Repast
In iron Cages? and shall we (poor Sots)
Whom Nature Masters of our selves allots,
And Lords of All besides* shall we go draw
On our own necks an ease-les Yoke of Aw*
Rather (O JACOB) choose we all to die,
Than to betray our Native Liberty,
Than to become the sporting Tennis-ball
Of a proud Monarch; or to yield us thrall
To seive or honor any other King
Than that drad LAW which did from SINA ring.
Another then, whom Age made venerable, 2. Another, of a reverent Senator for
Aristocracy, or the rule of a chosen Syn^de of the best men.

Knowledge admired, and Office honorable,
Stands-vp, and speaks (maiestically-milde)
On other Piles the COMMONWEAL to build.
Doubt-les (said he) with waste of Time and Soap,
You Have labored long to wash an AETHIOPE:
You Have drawn us here a goodly form of STATE
(And well we have had proof of it of late):
Shall we again the Sword of JUSTICE put
In mad men's hands, soon their own throats to cut?
What Tiger is more fierce? what Bear more fell? Comparisons.

What Chaff more light? What Sea more apt to swel
Than is the unbridled Vulgar, passion-toss't;
In calms elated, in foul-weather lost?
What boot deep Proiects, if to the eyes of all
They must be published in the common Hall?
Since known Designs are dangerous to act:
And, the vn-close Chief did never noble fact.
DEMOCRACY is as a tossed Ship
Void both of Pole and Pilot in the Deep: Simile.

A Senate framed of thousand Kinglings slight;
Where, voices pass by number, not by weight;
Where, wise men do propound, and Fools dispose:
A Fair, where all things they to sale expose: Simile.

A Sink of Filth, where ay the infamousest, Simile.

Most bold and busy, are esteemed best:
A Park of savage Beasts, that each-man dreads: Simile.

A Head-les Monster with a thousand heads.
What shall we then do? shall we by and by
In Tyrants paws deiect us servilely?
Nay, rather, shunning these extremities,
Let us make choice of men up right and wise;
Of such whose Virtue does the Land adorn,
Of such whom Fortune has made Noble-born,
Of such as Wealth has raised above the pitch
Of the abject Vulgar; and to the hands of such
(Such as for Wisdom, Wealth, and Birth excel)
Let us commit the Reans of ISRAEL;
And ever from the sacred Helm exclude
The turbulent, base, moody Multitude.
Take away Choice, and where is Virtue's grace?
What? shall not Chance unto Desert give place?
And Lots, to Right? Shall not the blind be led Simile.

By those whose eyes are perfect in their head?
Chiefly, amid' such baulks, and blocks and Pits,
As in best State-paths the best Statesman meets?
Who may be better trusted with the key Comparison.

Of a great Chest of Gold and gems than they
That got the same? And who more firm and fit
At careful Stern of POLICY to sit,
Than such as in the Ship most venture bear:
Such as their own wrack with the State's wrack fear:
Such as, Content, and having Much to lose,
Even Death it self, rather than Change, would choose?
While he discourst thus on a Theme so grave, 3. The Oration of a Noble young
Prince, for Monarchy or the sole Soverainti^ of a KING.

Vp-rose a Gallant, noble, young, and brave,
Fo to the Vulgar, one that hoped (perchance)
One-day t'attain a Scepters governance,
And thus he speaks: Your RVLE is yet too Free.
You Have proin'd the leaves, not boughs of Publik-Tree:
You Have qualified, but not yet cured our Grief:
You Have in our Field still left the tares of Strife,
Of Leagues and Factions. For, plurality
Of Heads and Hands to sway an Emperie,
Is for the most part like untamed Bulls:
One, this way hales; another that way pulls: Simile.

All, every-way; hurried with Passion's winds
Whither their Lust-storms do transport their minds;
At length, the strongest bears the weakest down,
And to himself wholly vsurps the Crown:
And so (in fine) your Aristocracie
He by degrees brings to a Monarchy.
In brief, the Scepter Aristocratike,
And People-Sway, have A passion following any sickness.
symptoms both a-like:
And neither of them can be permanent
For want of Union; which of Government
Is both the Life-bloud, and Preservative,
Whereby a STATE, young, strong, and long does thrive.
But, MONARCHY is as a goodly Station,
Built skilfully, upon a sure Foundation:
A quiet House, wherein (as principal)
One Father is obeyed and served of all:
A well-rigd Ship, where (when the danger's near)
A many Masters strive not who shall steer.
The world has but One God: Heaven but One Sun:
Quails but One Chief: the Hony-Birds but One
One Master-Bee: and Nature (natively)
Graves in our hearts the Rule of MONARCHY.
At sound of whose Edicts, all ioynt-proceed:
Under whose Sway, Seditions never breed:
Who, while consulting with Colleagues he stands,
Lets not the Victory escape his hands:
And, that same Majesty, which (as the Base
And Pedestal) supports the weight and grace,
Greatness and glory of a well-Rul'd State,
It not extinguished nor extenuate,
By being parcelliz'd to a plurality
Of petty Kinglings, of a mean Equality:
Like as a goodly River, deep and large, Simile.

Able to bear Ships of the greatest Charge,
If, through new Dikes, his trade-full Waters guided,
Be in a hundred little Brooks divided;
No Bridge more fears, nor Sea more waighs the same*
But soon it loses both his trade and name.
And (to conclude) a wise and worthy Prince,
A KING, complete in Royal excellence,
Is even the Peoples prop, their powrfull nerves,
And lively Law, that all entire preserves:
His Countrie's life, and soul, sight, and foresight;
And even the Almightie's sacred Picture right.
While yet he spoke, the People loudly cried,
A KING, a KING; we will have a KING for Guide.
He shall command: He shall conduct our Hoasts,
And make us Lords of the IDVMEAN Coasts.
Ingrate, said SAMVEL, will you then reject
The Almighties Scepter: do you more affect
New POLICY, than his old PROVIDENCE?
And change the Immortal for a mortal Prince?
Well (Rebels) well, you shall, you shall have one: A KINGs Prerogative.

But, do ye know what follows ther-vpon?
He, from your Ploughs shall take your Horses out,
To serve his Pomp, and draw his Train about
In gilden Coaches (a wild wanton sort
Of Popiniayes and Peacocks of the Court):
He shall your choicest Sons and Daughters take
To be his Servants (nay, his slaves to make):
You shall plant Vineyards, he the Wine shall sup:
You shall sow Fields, and he shall reap the Crop:
You shall keep Flocks, and he shall take the Fleece:
And PHARAO'S Yoke shall seem but light to his.
But, IZARAEL does wilful still persevere,
And SAMVEL (pressed and importuned ever) Saul anointed King of Israel.

Anointeth SAVL (the son of CIS) a Man
Whose cursed end marred what he well began.
You, too-too-light, busy, ambitious wits,
That Heaven and Earth confound with furious fits:
Fantastik Frantiks, that would innovate, A check to busy, seditious, and
ambitious Malcontents in any State.

And every moment change your form of STATE:
That weening high to fly, fall lower still:
That though you change your bed, change not your Ill:
See, See how much the Almighty (the most High)
Heer-in abhors your fond inconstancy.
The PEOPLE-STATE, the ARISTOCRACY, The authority of every kind of Government
is from God.

And sacred KINGDOM, took authority
A-like from Heaven: and these three Scepter-forms
Flourish a-vie, as well in Arts and Arms,
As prudent Laws. Therefore, you stout Helvetians,
Grisons, Genevians, Ragusins, Uenetians,
Maintain your Liberties, and change not now Therefore every People to persist
in the State established.

Your sacred Laws rooted so deep with you.
On the other side, we that are born and bred
Under KINGS Aw, under one Supreme Head,
Let us still honor their drad Majesty's,
Obey their Laws, and pay them Subsidies.
Let Us read, let us hear no more these factious Teachers,
These shame-les Tribunes, these seditious Preachers,
That in all places always belch and bark
Aloud a-broad, or whisper in the dark,
Railing at Princes (whether good or bad)
The true Lieutenants of Almighty God.
And let not us, before a KING, prefer
A Senate-sway, nor Scepter Popular.
It Is better bear the Youth-slips of a KING,
IN the Law some fault, IN the State some blemishing,
Than to fill all with Blood-flouds of Debate;
While, to Reform, you would Deform a STATE.
One cannot (without danger) stir a stone
In a great Building's old foundation:
And, a good Leach seeks rather to support,
With ordered diet, in a gentle sort,
A feeble Body (though in sickly plight)
Than with strong Medicines to destroy it quight.
And therefore, Cursed, ever Cursed be
Our A just Execration of the Popish Powder Plot on the fifth of November, 1605.
Hell- spurred PERCIE'S fell Conspiracy;
And every head and every hand and heart,
That did Conceive or but Consent his part:
POPE- prompted Atheists, faining Superstition,
To cover Cruelty and cloak Ambition:
Incarnat Devils, Enemies of Man,
Dam-Murdering Vipers, Monsters in-humane,
Dis-natur'd NERO'S, impious EROSTRATES,
That with one Puff would blowe-vp all Estates;
Prince's and Peer's, and Peoples Government
( For, of all Three consists our PARLIAMENT)
Religion, Order, Honesty, and all,
And more then all that Fear can fear to fall.
And therefore, Blessed, ever Blessed be
Our glorious GOD's immortal Majesty;
ENGLANDS Great Watchman, he that Israel keeps,
Who never slumbers and who never sleeps:
Our gracious Father, whose still-firm affection
Defends us still with wings of his Protection:
Our loving Savior that thus Saues us still
(Us so unworthy, us so prone to ill):
Our sacred Comforter (the Spirit of Light)
Who steers us still in the True FAITH aright:
The TRINITY, the Eternal THREE in ONE,
Who by his Power and Providence alone,
Has from the Furnace of their Fiery Zeal
Preserved our PRINCE, our PEERS, our PVBLIK-WEAL,
Therefore, O PRINCE (our nostrils dearest breath)
Thou true Defender of true Christian FAITH,
O! let the Zeal of GOD'S House eat thee up:
Fill BABYLON her measure in her Cup:
Maim the King-maiming Kinglings of Bezec:
Pity not Agag, spare not Amalech:
Hunt, hunt those Foxes that would vnder-mine
Root, Body, Branches of the Sacred Vine:
O! spare them not. To spare Them, is to spoil
Thy Self, thy Seed, thy Subjects, and thy Soil.
Therefore, O PEERS, Prince-loyall Paladines,
True-noble Nobles, lay-by by-Designes;
And, in God's quarrel and your Countries, bring
Counsel and Courage to assist your KING
To counter-mine against the Mines of ROME;
To conquer Hydra, and to ouer-com
And clean cut off his Horns, and Heads, and all
Whose hearts do Vow, or knees do Bow to Baal:
Be Zealous for the LORD, and Faith-full now,
And honor Him, and He will honor you.
FATHERS, and Brethren, Ministers of CHRIST,
Cease civil Wars: war all on Antichrist;
Whose subtle Agents, while you strive for shells,
Poison the kernel with Erroneous Spells:
Whose Envious Seed-men, while you Silent Sleep,
Sow Tares of Treason, which take root too-deep.
Watch; watch your Fold: Feed; feed your Lambs at-home:
Muzzle these Sheep-clad bloody Wolves of ROME.
Therefore, O PEOPLE, let us Praise and Pray
The Almighty-most (whose Mercy lasts for ay)
To give us grace, to euer-keep in mind
This MIRACLE of his Protection kind:
To true- Repent us of our heinous Sin
( Pride, Lust, and Looseness) we have wallowed in:
To stand still constant in the pure Profession
Of true RELIGION (with a due discretion
To try the Spirits, and by peculiar choice
To know our Shepherds from the Hyana's voice):
And, ever loyal to our PRINCE, t'expose
Goods, Lands, and Lives, against his hate-full Foes:
Among whom (Lord) ^f (yet) of Thine be found,
Convert them quickly; and the rest Confound.
And (to Conclude) PRINCE, PEERS, and PEOPLE too,
Praise all at once, and selfly each of you,
His Holy Hand, that (like as long-agoe,
His Sidrach, Misach and Abednego)
From the hot Furnace of POPE-Powder'd Zeal
Has Saved our PRINCE, our PEERS, our PVELIK-weal.
The End of the THIRD DAI^ of the SECOND WEEK.
DAVID. The FOVRTH DAY Of The SECOND WEEK;
Containing

1. THE TROPHEIS, 2. THE MAGNIFICENCE, 3. THE SCHISM, 4. THE DECAY.
Translated and Dedicated

To Prince HENRY his Highness.

Acceptam refere.


To Prince HENRY his Highness.
A SONNET.
Having new- mustred the HOST of all this ALL:
Your Royal Father In our Fore ward stands;
Where ( Adam-like) Himself alone Commands
A WORLD of Creatures, ready at his Call.
Our Middle-ward does not unfitly fall
To famous Chiefs, whose graue-braue heads and hands
In Counsail'd Courage so Conduct our Bands,
As (at a brunt) affront the force of Baal.
Our Rere-Ward (Sir) shall be your Princely Charge,
Though last, not least (since it most Honor brings)
Where Honor's Field before you lies more large:
For, Your Command is of a Camp of KINGS,
Some good, some bad: Your Glory shall be, here
To Choose and Use the good, the bad Cassier.
A STANZA.
Jewel of NATVRE, Joy of ALBION,
To whose perfection Heaven and Earth conspire:
That, in Time^ fulness, Thou may bless this* Throne
(Succeeding in the Virtues of thy Sire)
As happily thou have begun, goe-on;
That, as thy Youth, we may thine Age admire;
Acting our Hopes (which shall revive our hearts)
Pattern and Patron both of Arms and Arts.
Iosuah Syluester.

THE TROPHEIS. THE FIRST BOOK OF the fourth Day of the second Week, of BARTAS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Readiness fall from Favor, into Gods Disgrace.
David designed Successor in his Place;
Brauing Goliath, and the Philistines
He bravely foyles: He flies his furious Prince.
Seem- Samuel raised: Saul routed; Selfely-slain.
King- David's TROPHEIS, and triumphant Reign:
His heavenly Harp- skill (in King JAMES renewd):
His humane frailty, heavily pursewd.
Bersabe batheing: Nathan bold-reprouing:
David repenting (Our REPENTANCE moving).
HEroike force, and Prince-fit form withal, Saul king of Israel, fortunate
at the first, is afterward rejected, and David elected in his fleed.

Honor the Scepter of courageous Saul;
Success confirms it: for the power Divine
Tames by his hand the outrageous Philistine,
Edom, and Moab, and the Ammonite,
And the euer-wicked, cursed Amalekite:
O too-too-happy! if his arrogance
Had not transgrest Heavens sacred Ordinance:
But therefore, God in's secret Counsel (just)
Him even already from his Throne has thrust,
Degraded of his gifts: and in his steed
(Though privily) anointed Iesse's Seed,
The honor of Jacob, yea of the Universe,
Heavens darling DAVID, Subject of my Verse.
Lord, since I cannot (nor I may not once) Invocation.

Aspire to DAVID'S Diadems and Thrones;
Nor lead behind my bright Tryumphal-Car
So many Nations Conquered in War:
Nor ( DAVID-like) my trembling Asps adorn
With bloody TROPHEIS of my Foes forlorn:
Vouch safe me yet his Verse, and (Lord) I crave
Let me his Harp-strings, not his Bowe-strings have;
His Lute, and not his Lance, to worthy-sing
Thy glory, and the honor of thy King.
For, none but DAVID can sing DAVID's worth:
Angels in Heaven thy glory sound; in Earth,
DAVID alone; whom (with Heavens love surpised)
To praise thee there, thou now have Angeliz'd.
Give me the Laurel, not of War, but Peace;
Or rather give me (if thy grace so please)
The Ciuik Garland of green Oaken boughs,
Thrice-three times wreathed about my glorious brows,
To euer-witnes to our after-frends
How I have reskew'd my con-Citizens,
Whom profane Fames-Thirst day and night did move
To be be-slav'd to the yoke of wanton Love:
For, (not to me, but to thee, Lord, be praise)
Now, by the example of my Sacred Lays,
To Sacred Loves our noblest spirits are bent,
And thy rich Name's their only Argument.
HE WHOM in private walls, with privy sign,
The great King-maker did for King assign,
Begins to show himself: a fire so great
Could not live flame-les long: nor would God let
So noble a spirits nimble edge to rust
In Sheapheards idle and ignoble dust.
My Son, how certain we that Saying prove, Iesse (or Ishai) sends David to
see his brethren in the Camp.

That doubtful Fear still wayts on tender Love?
DAVID (says Iesse) I am full of fears
For thy deer Brethren: Each Assault, salt tears
Draws from mine eyes; me thinks each point does stab
Mine Eliab, Samna, and Aminadab.
Therefore go visit them, and with this Food
Bear them my Blessing; say I wish them good;
Beseeching God to shield and them sustain,
And send them (soon) victorious home again.
Gladly goes DAVID, and anon does spy
Two steep high Hills where the two Armies lie, Description of Goliath.

A Vale diuides them; where, in raging mood
( Colossus-like) an armed Giant stood:
His long black locks hung shagged (slouen-like)
A down his sides: his bush-beard floated thick;
His hands and arms, and bosom bristled were
(Most Hedge-hog-like) with wire instead of hair.
His foul blasphemous mouth, a Caves mouth is;
His eyes two Brands, his belly an Abyss:
His legs two Pillars; and to see him go,
He seemd some steeple reeling to and fro.
A Cypresse-Tree of fifteen Summers old,
Pyramid-wise waves on his Helm of gold.
Whose glistring brightness does (with rays direct)
Against the Sun, the Sun it self reflect:
Much like a Comet blazing bloodie-bright Simile.

Over some City, with new threatfull light,
Presaging downfall, or some dismal fate,
Too-neer approaching to some ancient State.
His Lance a Loom-beam, or a Mast (as big)
Which yet he shakes as an Osier twig;
Whose harmful point is headed stifly-straight
With burnisht Brass above an Anuils weight:
Upon whose top (in stead of Bannaret)
A hissing Serpent seems his foes to threat:
His brazen Cuirasse, not a Squire can carry;
For it is the burden of a Dromedarie:
His Shield (where Cain his brother Abel slaies,
Where Chus his son, Heav'n-climbing Towrs does raise;
Where the Ark of God, to the Heathen captiuate,
To Dagon's House is led with scorn and hate)
Is like a Curtain made of double planks
To save from shot some hard-besieged Ranks.
His threatfull voice is like the stormefull Thunder
When hot-cold Fumes tear sulphury clouds asunder.
O Fugitives! this is the fortieth day His brauing Defiance to the Host of
Israel.

(Thus barks the Dog) that I have stalked aye
About your fearful Host: that I alone
Against your best and choicest Champion,
In single Combat might our Cause conclude,
To shun the slaughter of the multitude.
Come then, who dares; and to be slain by me,
It shall thine honor and high Fortune be.
Why am I not less strong? my common strength
Might find some Brave to cope with at the length.
But, fie for shame, when shall we cease this gear?
I to defy, and you to fly for fear?
If your hearts serve not to defend your Lot,
Why are you armed? why rather yield you not?
Why rather do you (since you dare not fight)
Not prove my mildness, than provoke my might?
What needed Coats of brass and Caps of steel
For such as (Hare-like) trust but to their heel?
But, since I see not one of you (alas!)
Alone dares meet, nor look me in the face,
Come ten, come twenty, nay come all of you,
And in your aid let your great God come too:
Let him rake Hell, and shake the Earth in sunder,
Let him be armed with Lightning and with Thunder:
Come, let him come and buckle with me here:
Your goodly God, less then your selves, I fear.
Thus having spewd, the dreadful Cyclop stirred
His monstrous Limbs; beneath his feet he reard
A Clowd of dust: and, wheresoever he wend,
Flight, Fear, and Death, his ghastly steps attend.
Even as a payr of busy chattering Pies, Simile.

Seeing some hardy Tercell, from the skies
To stoop with ravenous seres, feel a chill fear,
From bush to bush, wag-tayling here and there;
So that no noise, nor stone, nor st^^ke can make
The timorous Birds their Covert to forsake:
So the Hebrew Troops this brauing Monster shun;
And from his sight, some here, some there, do run.
In vain the King commands, entreats, and threats;
And hardly three or four together gets.
What shame (says he) that our victorious Host Saul stirs up his Soldiers
and proposes ample Reward to him that shall undertake the Philistine.

Should all be daunted with one Pagans boast?
Brave Jonathan, how is thy courage quaild
Which, yerst at Boses, all alone aslaild
The whole Heathen Host? O Worthy Abner too,
What chance has cut thy Nerves of Valor now?
And thou thy self (O Saul) whose Conquering hand
Had yerst with Tropheis filled all the Land,
As far as Tigris, from the Iap^ean Sea:
Where is thy heart? how is it fallen away?
Saul is not Saul: O ^ then, what Izraelice
Shall venge God's honor and Our shame acquight?
Who, spurrd with anger, but more stirrd with Zeal,
Shall foil this Pagan, and free Izrael?
O! who shall being me this Wolf's howling head,
That Heaven and Earth has so vn-hallowed?
What e're he be, that (lavish of his soul)
Shall with his blood wash-out this blot so foul,
I will innoble him, and all his House;
He shall enjoy my Daughter for his Spouse:
And ever shall a Deed so memorable
Be (with the Saints) sacred and honorable.
^^ Yet, for the Duel no man dares appeer:
All wish the Prize; but none will win't so deer:
Big-looking Minions, brave in vaunts and vows,
Lions in Court, now in the Camp be Cows:
But, even the blast that cools their courage so,
That makes my DAVID's valiant rage to glowe.
My Lord (says He) behold, this hand shall bring David's offer.

The heav'n-scorning head unto my Lord the King.
Alas, my Lad, sweet Shepherd (answers Saul)
Thy heart is great; although thy limbs be small:
High fly thy thoughts; but we have need of more,
More stronger Toils to take so wild a Boar:
To tame Goliath, needs some Demi-god,
Some Nimrod, rather then a Shepheard-Lad
Of slender growth, upon whose tender Chin
The budding down does scarcely yet begin.
Keep therefore thine own Rank, and draw not thus
Death on thy self, dishonor upon us,
With shame and sorrow on all Izrael,
Through end-les Thral dom to a Fo so fell.
The faintest Hearts, God turns to Lions fierce, His assurance.

To Eagles Doves, Vanquished to Vanquishers:
God, by a Woman's feeble hand sub dews
Iabins Lieutenant, and a Judge of Jews.
God is my strength: therefore (O King) forbear,
For Izrael, for Thee, or Me, to fear:
No self-presumption makes me rashly brave;
Assured pledge of his proud head I have.
See thou these arms (my Lord) these very arms
(Steeld with the strength of the great God of Arms)
Have bathed Mount Bethlem with a Lions blood:
These very arms, beside a shady Wood,
Have slain a Bear, which (greedy after prey)
Had torn and born my fattest sheep away.
My God is still the same: this savage Beast,
Which in his Fold would make a Slaughter-feast,
All-ready feels his fury, and my force;
My foot al-ready tramples on his Corpse:
With his own sword his cursed length I lop,
His head al-ready on the geound does hop.
The Prince beholds him, as amazed and mute,
To see a mind so young, foresolute:
Then son (says he) since so confirmd thou art,
Go, and Gods blessing on thy valiant heart;
God guide thy hand, and speed thy weapon so,
That thou return triumphant of thy Fo.
Hold, take my Corslet, and my Helm, and Lance,
And to the Heavens thy happy Prowes advance.
The faithful Champion, being furnished thus,
Is like the Knight, which twixt Eridanus
And the heavenly Star-Ship, marching brauely-bright
(Having his Club, his Casque, and Belt bedight
With flaming studs of many a twinkling Ray)
Turns Winters night into a Summers day.
But, yer that he had half a furlong gone,
The massy Lance and Armor he had on
Did load him so, he could not freely move
His legs and arms, as might him best behooue.
Even so, an Irish Hobby, light and quick Simile.

(Which on the spur over the bogs they prick
In highest speed) If on his back he feel
Too-sad a Saddle, plated all with steel,
Too-hard a Bit with in his mouth; behind,
Crooper and Trappings him too-close to bind;
He seems as lame, he flings, and will not go;
Or, if he stir, it is but stiff and slow.
DAVID therefore lays-by his heavy load,
And, on the grace of the great glorious GOD
(Who by the weakest can the strongest stoop)
He firmly founding his victorious hope,
No Arrows seeks, nor other Arcenall;
But, by the Brook that runs amid the Vale,
He takes five Pebbles and his Sling, and so,
Courageously incounters with his Foe.
What Combat's this? On the one side, I see
A moving Rock, whose looks do terrify
Even his own Host; wbose march does seem to make
The Mountain tops of Sucoth even to shake:
On the other side, a slender tender Boy
Where grace and beauty for the prize do play:
Shave but the down that on his Chin does peer,
And one would take him for Anchises Pheer:
Or, change but weapons with that wanton E^^,
And one would think that it were Cupids self.
Gold on his head, skar^er in either Cheek,
Grace in each part and in each gest, alike;
In all so lovely, both to Foe and Friend,
That very Envy cannot but commend
His match-les beauties: and though ardent zeal
Flush in his face against the Infidel,
Although his Fury fume, though up and down
He nimbly trauerse, though he fiercely frown,
Though in his breast boiling with manly heat,
His swelling heart do strongly pant and beat;
His Storm is Calm, and from his modest eyes
Even gracious seems the grimmest flash that flies.
Am I a Dog, thou Dwarf, thou Dandiprat,
To be with stones repelled and palted at?
Or art thou weary of thy life so soon?
O foolish boy! fantastical Baboone!
That never saw but sheep in all thy life;
Poor sotte, it is here another kind of strife:
We wrestle not (after your Shepherds guise)
For painted Sheep-hooks, or such petty Prize,
Or for a Cage, a Lamb, or bread and cheese:
The Vanquished Head must be the Victors Fees.
Where is thy sweatie dust? thy sunburned scars,
(The glorious marks of Soldier strained in Wars)
That make thee dare so much? O Lady-Cow,
Thou shall no more be-star thy wanton brow
With thine eyes rays: Thy Mistress shall no more
Curl the quaint Tresses of thy Golden ore:
I Will trample on that Gold; and Crows and Pyes
Shall peck the pride of those sweet-smiling eyes:
Yet, no (my guirle-boy) no, I will not file
My feared hands with blood so faintly-vile:
Go seek thy match, thou shall not die by me,
Thine honor shall not my dishonor be*
No (silly Lad) no, were thou of the Gods,
I would not fight at so vn-knightly ods.
Come barking Curre (the Hebrew taunts him thus)
That have blasphemed the God of Gods, and us;
The ods is mine (villain, I scorn thy Boasts)
I have for Aid the almighty Lord of Hoasts.
The Ethnik's a-fier* and from his goggle eyes*
All drunk with rage and blood, the Lightning flies:
Out of his beuer, like a Boar he foames:
A hellish Fury in his bosom roames:
As mad, he marches with a dreadful pase,
Death and destruction muster in his face;
He would a-fresh blaspheam the Lord of Lords
With new despights; but in the steed of words Simile.

He can but gnash his teeth. Then, as an Ox
Straid twixt the hollow of steep Hills and Rocks,
Through craggie Coombs, through dark and ragged turnings*
Lowes hideously his solitary Moornings:
The Tyrant so from his close helmet blunders
With horrid noise, and this harsh voice he thunders:
Thy God reigns in his Ark, and I on Earth:
I Challenge Him, Him (if he dare come forth)
Not Thee, base Pigme. Villain (says the Jew)
That blasphemy thou instantly shall rue,
If ever you saw (at Sea) in Summer weather, Simile.

A Galley and a Caraque cope together;
(How the one steers quick, and the other veers as slow*
Lar-boord and star-boord from the poop to prowe;
This, on the wind; that, on her Owres relies;
This daunteth most; and that most damnifies)
You may conceive this Fight: the huge Polypheme
Stands stiffly shaking his steel-pointed beam:
David does trauerse (round about him) light,
Forward and back, to the left hand, and the right,
Steps in and out; now stoops, anon he stretches;
Then he recoyls, on either hand he reaches;
And stoutly-actiue, watching the adverse blows,
In every posture does himself dispose.
As, when (at Cockpit) two old Cocks do fight, Simile.

(Bristling their plumes, and (red with rage) do smight
With spurs and beak, bounding at every blow,
With fresh assaults freshing their fury so,
That, desperate in their un yielding wrath,
Nothing can end their deadly fewd but death)
The Lords about, that on both sides do bet,
Look partially when the one the Field shall get,
And, trampling on his gaudie plumed pride,
His prostrate Fo with bloody spurs bestride,
With clanging Trumpet and with clapping wing,
Triumphantly his Victory to sing:
So the Hebrew Host, and so the Heathen stranger
(Not free from fear, but from the present danger)
Behold with passion these two Knights, on whom
They both have wagerd both their Fortunes sum:
And either side, with voice and gesture too,
Hartens and cheers their Champion well to do;
So earnest all, that almost every one
Seems even an Actor, not a looker-on:
All feel the Skirmish twixt their Hope and Fear:
All cast their eyes on this sad Theater:
All on these two depend, as very Founders
Of their good Fortune, or their Fates Confounders.
O Lord, said DAVID (as he whirld his Sling)
Be bow and Bowe-man of this shaft I fling.
With sudden flerk the fatal hemp lets go
The humming Flint, which with a deadly blow
Pearc't instantly the Pagans ghastly Front,
As deep as Pistol-shot in board is wont.
The villain's sped (cries all the Hebrew band) Goliath overthrown.

The Dog, the Atheist feels Gods heavy hand.
The Isacian Knight, seeing the blow, stands still.
Fro the Tyrants wound his ruddy soul does trill,
As from a crack in any pipe of Lead
(That conuoyes Water from some Fountains head) Simile.

Hissing in the Air, the captive Stream does spin*
In silver threads her crystal humorthin.
The Giant, wiping with his hand his wound,
Cries, tush, it is nothing: but eft soones the ground*
Sunk under him, his face grew pale and wan,
And all his limbs to faint and fail began:
Thrice heaues he up his head; it hangs as fast,
And all a-long lies Isaac's dread at last,
Covering a rood of Land; and in his Fall, Simile.

Resembles right a lofty Tower or Wall,
Which to lay leuel with the humble soil
A hundred Miners day and night do toil;
Till at the length rushing with thundrous roar,
It open a breach to the hardy Conqueror.
Then, two loud cries, a glad and sad were heard:
Wherewith revived, the vaunting Tyrant stird,
Re-summoning under his weak Control
The fainting Remnants of his flying Soul;
And (to be once more buckling yer he dies,
With blow for blow) he strives in vain to rise.
Such as in life, such in his death he seems;
For even in death he curses and blasphemes:
And as a Curre, that cannot hurt the flinger, Simile.

Flies at the stone and biteth that for anger;
Goliath bites the ground, and his own hands
As Traitors, false to his fell hearts commands.
Then the Hebrew Champion heads the Infidel
With his own sword, and sends his soul to Hell.
Pagans disperse; and the Philistian swarms
Have arms for burden, and have flight for arms;
Danger behind, and shame before their face:
Rowting themselves, although none give them chase*
Armi-potent, Omnipotent, my God, David's Thanksgiving for the victory.

O let thy Praise fill all the Earth abroad;
Let Izrael (through Thee, victorious now)
Incessant songs unto thy Glory vow:
And let me Lord (said DAVID) ever choose
Thee sole, for subject of my sacred Muse.
O wondrous spectacle! vnheard-of-Sight!
The Monster's beaten-down, before the Fight:
A Dwarf, a Shepherd, conquers (even vn-armd)
A Giant fell, a famous Captain, armd.
From a frail Sling this Battery never came,
But 'twas the Breach of a Tower-razing Ram:
This was no cast of an uncertain Slinger,
'T was Crosse-bow-shot: rather it was the finger
Of the All-mightie (not this hand of mine)
That wrought this work so wondrous in our eyne:
This has He done, that by a woman weak
Can likewise stone the stout Abimelech:
Therefore, for ever, singing sacred Lays,
I will record his glorious Power and Praise.
Then, Jacob's Prince him joyfully embraces,
Prefers to honors, and with favors graces,
Imployes him far and nigh; and far and near,
From all sad cares he does his Sovereign clear.
In Camp he curbs the Pagans arrogance:
In Court he cures the Melancholy Trance
That toyls his soul; and, with his tunefull Lyre, Effect^ of Music

Expels the ll Spirit which does the body tire.
For, with her sheath, the soul commerce frequents,
And acts her office by his instruments;
After his pipe she dances: and (again)
The body shares her pleasure and her pain;
And by exchange, reciprocally borrowes
Some measure of her solace and her sorrows.
The Ear (door of knowledge) with sweet warbles pleased,
Sends them eft soones unto the Soul diseased,
With dark black rage, our spirits pacifies,
And calmly cools our inward flame that fries.
So, O Tyrteus, changing Harmony, Examples of the same.

Thy Rowt thou changest into Victory.
So, O thrice-famous, Princely Pellean,
Holding thy hart's re^nes in his Tune-full hand*
Thy Timothy with his Melodious skill
Arms and dis-armes thy Worlds-drad arm (at will),
And with his Phrygian Music, makes the same
As Lion fierce; with Dorik, mild as Lamb.
So, while in Argos the chaste Violon
For's absent Sovereign does graue-sweetly groan,
Queen Clytemnestra does resist the alarmes
Of lewd Aegysthus, and his lustful Charms.
So, at the sound of the sweet-warbling brass;
The Prophet rapting his soul's soul a space,
Refines him self, and in his fantasy
Graves deep the seal of sacred Prophecy.
For, if our Soul be Number (some so thought)
It must with number be refreshed often;
Or, made by Number (so I yield to sing)
We must the same with some sweet Numbers bring
To some good Tune: even as a voice (sometime) Simile.

That in its Part sings out of tune and time,
Is by another voice (whose measured strain
Custom and Art confirms) brought in again.
It may be too, that DAVID'S sacred Ditty
Quickened with Holy-Writ, and couched witty,
Exorcist-like, chac't Natures cruel Fo,
Who the Kings soul did toss and torture so.
How ever it were, He is (in every thing)
A profitable servant to the King:
Who envious yet of his high Feats and Fame,
His Faith, and Fortitude, distrusts the same:
And, the divine Torch of his Virtues bright
Brings him but sooner to his latest Night;
Save that the Lord still shields him from on hy,
And turns to Triumph all his Tragedy.
O bitter sweet! I burst (thus raues the King)
To hear them all, in Camp and Court to sing, Saul's Envy to David.

SAVL he has slain a thousand, DAVID ten,
Ten thousand DAVID. O faint scorn of men!
Lo, how, with Luster of his glorious parts,
He steals-away the giddy peoples hearts;
Makes lying Prophets sooth him at a beck;
Thou art but King in name, He in effect:
Yet thou endur'st it; haste thee, haste thee (Sot)
Choke in the Cradle his aspiring Plot;
Prevent his hopes, and wisely-valiant
Off with his head that would thy foot supplant.
Nay, but beware; his death (beloved so well)
Will draw thee hatred of all Izrael.
Since then so high his heady valor flies,
Since common glory cannot him suffice,
Since Danger upon Danger he pursews,
And Victory on Victory renewes;
Let Us put him to 't: Let Us make him General,
Feed him with wind, and hazard him in all:
So shall his own Ambitious Courage bring
For Crown a Coffin to our Junior King:
Yea, had he Sangars strength, and Sampsons too,
He should not escape the task I Will put him to.
But yet, our DAVID more then all archieues,
And more and more his grace and glory thriues:
The more he doos, the more he dares adventure,
His rest-les Valor seeks still new Adventure.
For, feeling him armd with the Almighty's Spirit,
He recks no danger (at the least to fear it).
Then, what doos Saul? When as he saw no speed
By sword of Foes so great a Fo to rid,
He tries his own: and one-while throws his dart,
At vn-awares to thrill him to the heart:
Or treacherously he lays some subtle train,
At board, or bed, to have him (harm-les) slain:
On nothing else dreams the disloyal wretch,
But David's death; how David to dispatch.
Which had bin don, but for his Son the Prince,
(Who deerly tenders David's Innocence, Ionathan's love to David.

And nearly marks and harks the Kings Designs,
And warns the Iessean by suspect-les signs)
But for the kind Courageous Jonathan,
Who (but attended only with his man)
Near Senean Rocks discomfited, alone,
The Philistines victorious Garrison.
About his ears a Shower of Shafts, does fall;
His Shield's too-narrow to receive them all:
His sword is duld with slaughter of his Foes,
Wherefore the dead he at the living throws,
Head-lined helmes, heawn from their trunks he takes,
And those his vollies of swift shot he makes.
The Heathen Host dares him no more affront,
Late number-les; but easy now to count.
David therefore, flying his Princes Fury,
From end to end flies all the land of ^urie:
But now to Nob; to Adullam then, anon
To Desert Zif, to Ke^lah, M^aor,
Having for roof heavens arches starry-seeld,
And, for rep^st what wauing woods do yield.
The Tyrant (so) frustrate of his intent,
Wreakes his fell rage upon the innocent;
If any wink, as willing to have not seen-him,
Or if (vnweeting what is the odds between-him
And the angry king) if any had but hid-him,
He dies for it (if any have but spid him):
Yea the High Priest, that in Gods presence stands,
Escapes not his paricidiall hands;
Nor does he spare, in his unbounded rage,
Cattle, nor Curre, nor state, nor sex, nor age.
Contrariwise, David does good for ill,
He hates the haters of his Sovereign still.
And though he often encounter Saul less strong
Than his own side; forgetting all his wrong,
He shows him, aye, loyal in deed and word
Unto his Liege, the Anointed of the Lord;
Respects and honors him, and minds no more
The Kings unkindness that had past before.
One day as Saul (to ease him) went aside
Into a Cave, where David wont to hide,
David (vn-seen) seeing his Foe so near
And all alone, was struck with sudden fear,
As much amazed and musing there-vpon;
When whispering thus his Consorts egg him on:
Who sought thy life is fallen into thy lap;
Doo'st thou not see the Tyrant in thy Trap?
Now therefore pull this Thorn out of thy foot:
Now is the Time if ever thou will do it:
Now by his death establish thine estate:
Now hug thy Fortune, yer it be too-late:
For, he (my Lord) that will not, when he may,
Perhaps he shall not, when he would (they say).
Why tarriest thou? what do thou trifle thus?
Will thou, for Saul, betray thy self and us?
Won with their words, to kill him he resolves:
But, by the way thus with himself revolues.
He is a Tyrant; true: But now long since, Anti-Bell^rmin and His Disciples;
Authors or Fautors of our Powder-Mine.

And still, he bears the mark of lawful Prince:
And the Ever-King (to whom all Kings do bow)
On no pretext, did ever yet allow
That any Subiest should his hand distain
In sacred blood of his own Sovereign.
He hunts me cause-les; true: but yet, Gods word
Bids me defend, but not offend my Lord.
I am anointed King; but (at Gods pleasure)
Not publicly: therefore I wait thy leisure.
For, thou (O Lord) regardest Thine, and then
Reward'st, in fine, Tyrants and wicked men.
Thus having said, he stalks with noise-les foot
Behind the King, and softly off does cut
A skirt or lap of his then-vpper clothing;
Then quick avoydes: and, Saul, suspecting nothing,
Comes forth anon: and David afterward
From a high Rock (to be the better heard)
Cries to the King (upon his humble knee)
Come near (my Liege) com near, and fear not me,
Fear not thy servant David. Well I know,
Thy Flatterers, that miss-inform thee so,
With thousand slanders daily thee incense
Against thy Servants spot-les innocence:
Those smooth-sly Aspicks, with their poysony sting
Murder mine honor, me in hatred bring
With thee and with thy Court (against all reason)
As if Convicted of the Highest-Treason:
But, my notorious Loyalty (I hope)
The venom of their viperous tongues shall stop;
And, with the splendour of mine actions bright,
Disperse the Mists of Malice and Despite.
Behold, my Lord, (Truth needs no excuse)
What better witness can my soul produce
Of faithful Love, and Loyal Vassalage,
To thee, my Liege, than this most certain gage:
When I cut off this lappet from thy Coat,
Could I not then as well have cut thy throat?
But rather (Sovereign) through all my veins
Shall burning Gangrens (spreading deadly pains)
Benum my hand, then it shall lift a sword
Against my Liege, the anointed of the Lord;
Or violate with any insolence,
Gods sacred Image, in my Sovereign Prince.
And yet (O King) thy wrath pursews me still;
Like silly-Kid, I hop from hill to hill;
Like hated Wolves I and my Soldiers starve:
But, judge thy self, if I thy wrath deserve.
No (my Son David) I have don thee wrong:
Good God requight thy good: there does belong
A great Reward unto so gracious deed.
Ah, well I see it is above decreed
That thou shall sit upon my Seat supreme,
And on thy head shall wear my Diadem:
Then, o thou sacred and most noble Head,
Remember Me, and mine (when I am dead)
Be gracious to my Blood, and raze not fell
My Name and Issue out of Israel.
Thus said the King; and tears out-went his words:
A pale despair his heavy heart still-girds:
His feeble spirit praesaging his Miss-fortune,
Does every-kinde of Oracles importune;
Suspicious, seeks how Clotho's Clew does swell;
And, cast of Heaven, will needs consult with Hell.
In Endor dwelt a Beldam in those days; The Woman Witch of Endor.

Deep-skild in Charms (for, this weak sex always*
Has in all Times ben taxt for Magik Tricks,
As pronest Agents, for the Prince of Styx:
Whether, because their soft, moist, supple brain,
Does easy print of every seal retain:
Or, whether wanting Force and Fames desert,
Those Wyzards ween to winn it by Black-Art.)
This Stygian scum, the Furies fury fell,
This Shop of Poisons, hideous Type of Hell,
This sad Erinnys, Milcom's Favorite,
Chamosh his Joy, and Belzebubs delight,
Delights alonely for her exercise
In secret Murders, soudain Tragoedies;
Her drink, the blood of Babes; her dainty Feast
Men's Marrow, Brains, Guts, Livers (late deceast).
At Weddings aye (for Lamps) she lights debates;
And quiet Love much more then Death she hates:
Or if she reak of Love, it is but to trap
Some severe Cato in incestuous Lap:
Sometimes (they say) she dims the Heavenly Lamps,
She haunts the Graves, she talks with Ghosts, she stamps
And Cals-vp Spirits, and with a wink controules
The infernal Tyrant, and the tortured Souls.
Arts admiration, Izraels Ornament,
That (as a Queen) Command'st each Element,
And from the Toomb deceased Trunks can raise,
(The unfaithful King thus flatters her with praise)
On steepest Mountains stop the swiftest Currents,
From driest Rocks draw rapid-rowling Torrents,
And fitly hasten Amphitrites Flood,
Or stay her Eb (as to thy self seems good):
Turn day to night: hold Winds within thy hand,
Make the Spears move, and the Sun still to stand:
Enforce the Moon so with thy Charms som-times,
That for a stound in a deep Swoun she seems:
O thou al-knowing Spirit! daign with thy spell
To raise-vp here renowned Samuel,
To satisfy my doubtful soul, in sum,
The issue of my Fortunes yet to com.
Importuned twice or thrice, she, that before
Resembled one of those grim Ghosts (of yore)
Which she was was wont with her vn-holsom breath
To re-bring-back from the black gates of death,
Grows now more ghastly, and more Ghost-like grim,
Right like to Satan in his Rage-full Trim.
The place about darker then Night she darkes,
She yelles, she roars, she houles, she brayes, she barks,
And, in vn-heard, horrid, Barbarian terms,
She mutters strange and execrable Charms;
Of whose Hell-raking, Nature-shaking Spell,
These odious words could scarce be hearkened well:
Eternal Shades, infernal Deities,
Death, Horrors, Terrors, Silence, Obsequies,
Demons, dispatch: If this dim stinking Taper
Be of mine own Sons fat; if here, for paper,
I write (detested) on the tender skins
Of time-les Infants, and abortiue Twins
(Torn from the womb) these Figures figure-les:
If this black Sprinkle, tuft with Virgins tress,
Dipped, at your Altar, in my kinsmans blood;
If well I smell of humane flesh (my food):
Haste, haste, you Fiends, you subterranean Powers:
If impiously (as fits these Rites of yours)
I have invok't your grizly Majesty's,
Harken (O Furies) to my Blasphemies,
Regard my Charms and mine enchanting Spell,
Reward my Sins, and send up Samuel
From dismal darkness of your deep Abyss,
To answer me in what my pleasure is:
Dispatch, I say, (black Princes) quick, why when?
Have I not Art, for one, to send you ten?
When? stubborn Ghost! The Palfraies of the Sun
Do fear my Spells; and, when I spur, they run:
The Planets bow, the Plants give ear to me,
The Forests stoop, and even the strongest Tree,
At driery sound of my sad whisperings,
Does Prophecy, fore telling future things:
Yea (maugre Jove) by mine almighty Charms,
Through Heaven I thunder with imperious Arms:
And comst not thou? O, so: I see the Sage,
I see the ascent of some great man: his age,
His sacred habit, and sweet-graue aspect
Some God-like rays about him round reflect:
He Is ready now to speak, and plyant too
To clear thy doubtings, without more a do.
Saul flat adores; and wickedly-devout,
The fained- Prophets least word leaves not out.
What do thou Saul? o Izraels Sovereign, Against those that resort to Witches.

Witches, of late, feared only thy disdain:
Now the are thy stay. O wretch do thou not know
One cannot use the aid of the Powers below
Without some Pact of Counter-Seruices,
By Prayers, Perfumes, Homage, and Sacrifice?
And that this Art (mere Diabolical)
It hurts all, but the Author most of all?
And also, that the impious Atheist,
The Infidel, and damned Exorcist,
Differ not much. The one, Godhead quight denies:
The other, for God, foul Satan magnifies:
The other, Satan (by Enchantment strange)
Into an Angel of the Light does change.
When as God would, his voice thou would not hear,
Now he forbids thee, thou consult'st els-where:
Whom (living Prophet) thou neglect'st, abhorr'st,
Him (dead) thou seek'st, and his dead Trunk ador'st:
And yet, not him, nor his; forth' ougly Fiend
Has no such power upon a Saint to extend, Against the illusion of Satan
false Apparitio^s and Walking Spirit^.

Who fears no force of the blasphemous Charms
Of mumbling Beldams, or Hels damned Arms:
From all the Poisons that those powers contriue,
Charm-charming Faith's a full Preservatiue.
In Soul and Body both, He cannot come;
For, they re-ioyne not till the day of doom:
His Soul alone cannot appeer; for why,
Souls are invisible to mortal eye:
His Body only, neither can it be;
For (dust to dust) that soon corrupts (we see).
Besides all this, if 'twere true Samuel,
Should not (alas) thine eyesight serve as well
To see and know him, as this Sorceresse,
This hateful Hag, this old Enchanteresse,
This Devil incarnate, whose drad Spell commands
The rebell-Fury of the Infernal Bands?
Has Lucifer not Art enough to fain
A Body fitting for his turn and train?
And (as the rigor of long Cold congeals Simile.

To harsh hard Wool the running Water-Rils)
Cannot he thicken thinnest parts of Air,
Commixing Vapors? glew-them? hue them fair? Simile.

Even as the Rain-Bowe, by the Suns reflection
Is painted fair in manifold complexion:
A Body, which we see all-ready formd,
But yet perceive not how it is performd:
A Body, perfect in apparent show;
But in effect and substance nothing so:
A Body, hart-les, lung-les, tongue-les too,
Where Satan lurks, not to give life ther-to,
But to the end that from this Counter-mure,
More covertly he may discharge more sure
A hundred dangerous Engines, which he darts
Against the Bulwarks of the bravest hearts:
That, in the Sugar (even) of sacred Writ,
He may em-pill us with some Banefull bit:
And, that his counterfeit and fained lips,
Laying before us all our heinous slips,
And Gods drad Judgments and just Indignation,
May vnder-mine our surest Faiths Foundation.
But, let us hear now what he says. O Saul,
What frantic fury art thou moov'd with-all,
To now re-knit my broken thread of life?
To interrupt my rest? And 'mid the strife
Of struggling Mortals, in the Worlds affairs
(By power-full Charms) to re-entoyl my Cares?
Inquir'st thou what is to-come? O wretched Prince!
Too much, too-soon (what I foretold long since):
Death's at thy door: to morrow Thou and Thine
Even all shall fall before the Philistine:
And great-good David shall possess thy Throne,
As God has said, to^ be gain-sayd by none.
The Author of Lies (against his guise) tells true: How Satan comes to tell
things to-come.

Not that at-once he Selfly all fore-knew,
Or had revolved the Leaves of destiny
(The Child alonly of Eternity):
But rather through his busy observation
Of circumstance, and often iteration
Of reading of our Fortunes and our Falls,
In the close Book of clear Coniecturals,
With a far-seeing Spirit; hits often right:
Not much unlike a skillful Galenite,
Who (when the Crisis comes) dares even foretell
Whether the Patient shall do ill or well:
Or, as the Star-wise sometimes calculates
(By an Eclipse) the death of Potentates;
And (by the stern aspects of greatest Stars)
Prognosticates of Famine, Plague, and Wars.
As he foretold (in brief) so fell it out: Saules death.

Brave Jonathan and his Two Brethren stout
Are slain in Fight; and Saul himself forlorn,
Lest (Captive) he be made the Pagans scorn,
He kills him-Self; and, of his Fortune froward
To seem not conquered, shows him Self a Coward.
For, it is not Courage (whatsoever men say) Against Selfkilling.

But Cowardice, to make ones Self away.
It Is even to turn our back at Fears alarms:
It Is (basely-faint) to yield up all our Arms.
O extreme Rage! O barbarous Cruelty ^
All at one Blow, to offend Gods Majesty,
The State, the Magistrate, Thy Self (in fine):
The one, in destroying the deer work divine
Of his almighty Hands; the next, in reaving
Thy needful Service, it should be receiving;
The third, in rash usurping his Commission*
And last, Thy Self, in thine own Selfs-Perdition,
When (by two Deaths) one voluntary Wound
Does both thy body and thy soul confound.
But Isbosheth (his deer Son) yet retains
His Place a space: and David only Raigns
In happy Judah. Yet, yerlong (discreet)
He makes the whole Kingdoms wracked ribs to meet:
And so He rules on the holy Mount (a mirror)
His Peoples Joy, the Pagans only Terror.
If ever, standing on the sandy shore, Comparison.

Y' have thought to count the rolling waves that roar
Each after other on the British Coast,
When Aeolus sends forth his Northern Poast;
Wave upon Wave, Surge upon Surge does fold,
Sea swallows Sea, so thickly-quickly roul'd,
That (number-les) their number so does mount,
That it confounds the Accompter and the Account:
So Dauid's Virtues when I think to number,
Their multitude does all my Wits incumber;
That Ocean swallows me: and mazed so,
In the vast Forest where his Praises grow,
I know not what high Fir, Oak, Chest-nut-Tree,
(Rather) what Brasil, Cedar, Ebonie,
My Muse may choose ( Amphion-like) to build
With curious touch of Fingers Quauer-skild
(Durst she presume to take so much vpon-her)
A Temple sacred unto David's honor.
Others shall sing his minds true Constancy, Epitome of David's Virtues.

In oftlong exiles tried so thoroughly:
His Life composed after the life and likeness
Of sacred Patterns: his mild gracious meeknes
Toward railing Shime^, and the N^b^^.
Churlish Gull:
His lovely Eyes and Face so bewtifull.
Some other shall his Equity record,
And how the edge of his impartial sword
Is ever ready for the Reprobate,
To hew them down; and help the Desolate:
How He, no Law, but Gods drad Law enacts:
How He respects not persons, but their Facts:
How brave a Triumph of Selfs-wrath he shows,
Killing the Killers of his deadly Foes.
Some other shall unto the Empyreall Pole
The holy fervor of his Zeal extol:
How for the wandering Ark he does provide
A certain place for ever to abide:
And how for ever every his design
Is ordered all by the Oracle Divine.
Upon the wings of mine (els-tasked) Rhyme,
Through the clear Welkin of our Western Clime,
I Will only bear his Music and his Mars
(His holy Songs, and his triumphant Wars):
Lothere the sacred mark whereat I aim;
And yet this Theme I shall but mince and maim,
So many Yarnes I still am fain to strike
Into this Web of mine intended WEEK.
The Twelve stout Labors of the Amphitryonide Of his valor and victories.

(Strongest of Men) are justly magnified:
Yet, what were They but a rude Massacre
Of Birds and Beasts, and Monsters here and there?
Not Hoasts of Men and Armies over throw'n;
But idle Conquests; Combats One to One:
Where boisterous Limbs, and Sinnews strongly kni^,
Did much avail with little aid of Wit.
Bears, Lions, Giants, foild in single fight,
Are but the Essays of our redoubted Knight:
Under his Arms sick Aram deadly droops:
Unto his power the strength of Edom stoops:
Stout Amalek even trembles at his name:
Proud Ammons skorn he does return with shame:
Subdueth Soba: foyls the Moabite:
Wholly extirps the down-trod Iebusite:
And (still victorious) every month almost
Combats and Conquers the Philistian Host.
So that, Alcides massy Club scarce raught
So many Blows, as David Battails fought.
The expert Great Pompey.
Captain, who the Pontiks quaild,
Wun in strange Wars; in civil Fights he faild:
But, David thriues in all: and fortunate,
Triumphs no less of Saul's intestine hate,
Of Isbosheth's and Absalo^'s designs,
Then of strong Aram, and stout Philistines.
Good-Fortune always blows not in the Poop
Of valiant Caesar, she defeats his Troop,
Slayes his Lieutenants; and (among his Friends)
Stabbed full of Wounds, at length his Life she ends:
But David always feels Heavens gracious hand;
Whether in person He himself command
His royal Host: or whether (in his sted)
By valiant Ioab his brave Troops be led:
And Happiness, closing his aged eye,
Even to his Toomb consorts him constantly.
Fair Victory, with Him (even from the first)
Did pitch her Tent: his Infancy she nursed
With noble Hopes, his stronger years she fed
With stately Tropheis, and his hoary head
She Crowns and Comforts with (her cheerful Balms)
Triumphant Laurels and victorious Palms.
The Mountains stoop to make Him easieway;
And Euphrates, before Him, dryesaway;
To Him great Jordan a small leap does seem;
Without assault, strong Cities yield to Him:
The Engine alone of His far-feard Renown
Beats (Thunder-like) Gates, Bars, and Bulwarks down:
Gads goodly Vales, in a gore Pond he drenches;
Philistian Fires, with their own Blood he quenches;
And then, in Gob (pursewing still his Foes)
His wrath's just Tempest on fell Giants throws.
O strong, great, Worthies (will so^m one-day lay,
When your huge Bones they plough-vp in the Clay)
But, stronger, greater, and more WORTHY He,
Whose Heav'n-lent Force and Fortune made you be
(Maugre your might, your masly Spears and Shields)
The fatt'ning dunghill of those fruitful Fields.
His Enemies, scarcely so soon he threats
As overthrowes, and utterly defeats.
On David's head, God does not spin good-hap;
But pours it down abundant in his Lap:
And He (good Subject) with his Kingdom, ever
TO increase the Immortal Kingdom does endeavor.
His swelling Standards never stir abroad,
Till he have Called upon the Almighty God:
He never Conquers but (in heavenly Songs)
He yields the Honor where it right belongs:
And evermore the Eternals sacred Praise
(With Harp and Voice) to the bright Stars does raise.
Scarce was he born, when in his Cradle pressed His Poesi^.

The Nightingale to build her tender nest:
The Be within his sacred mouth seeks room
To arch the Chambers of her Honeycomb:
And the Heavenly Muse, under his roof descending
(As in the Summer, with a train down-bending,
We see some Meteor, winged brightly-fair
With twinkling rays, glide through the crystal Aier,
And soudainly, after long-feeming Flight,
To seem amid the new-shav'n Fields to light)
Him softly in her Iuory arms she folds,
His smiling Face she smylingly beholds,
She kisses him, and with her Nectar kisses
Into his Soul she breathes a Heaven of Blisses:
Then lays him in her lap, and while she brings
Her Babe a-sleep, this Lullabie she sings.
Live, live (sweet Babe) the Miracle of Mine, VRANIA's Lullaby.

Live ever Saint, and grow thou all Divine:
With this Celestial Wind, wherewith I fill
Thy blessed Boosom, all the World ful-fill:
May thy sweet Voice, in Peace, resound as far
And speed as fair as thy drad Arm in War:
Bottom nor bank, thy Fames-Sea never bound:
With double Laurels be thy Temples Crowned.
See (Heav'n-sprung Spirit) see how the allured North,
Of thy Childs-Cry (shril-sweetly warbling forth)
Al-ready tastes the learned, dainty pleasures.
See, see (young Father of all sacred Measures)
See how, to hear thy sweet harmonious sound,
About thy Cradle here are thronging (round)
Woods, but with ears: floods, but their fury stopping:
Tigres, but tame: Mountains, but always hopping:
See how the Heavens, rapt with so sweet a tongue,
To list to thine, leave their own Dance and Song.
O Idiot's shame, and Envy of the Learned!
O Verse right-worthy to be ay eterned!
O richest Arras, artificial wrought
With liueliest Colors of Conceipt-full Thought!
O royal Garden of the rarest Flowers
Sprung from an April of spiritual Showers!
O Miracle! whose star-bright beaming Head
When I behold, even mine own Crown I dread.
Never els-where did plentious Eloquence, Excellency of the Psalms of David.

In every part with such magnificence
Set-forth her Beauties, in so sundry Fashions
Of Robes and Jewels (suting sundry Passions)
As in thy Songs: Now, like a Queen (for Cost)
In swelling Tissues, rarely-rich imbost
With Precious Stones: neat, Citty-like, anon,
Fine Cloth, or Silk, or Chamlet puts she on:
Anon, more like some handsome Shepherdess,
In courser Clothes she does her cleanly dress:
What e're she wear, Wool, Silk, or Gold, or Gems,
Or Course or Fine; still like her Self she seems;
Fair, Modest, Cheerful, fitting time and place,
Illustring all even with a Heav'n-like grace.
Like proud loud Tigris (ever swiftly roul'd)
Now, through the Plains thou powr'st a Flood of gold:
Now, like thy Jordan, (or Meander-like)
Round-wyndingnimbly with a many-Creek,
Thou runn'st to meet thy Self's pure streams behind thee,
Mazing the Meads where thou do turn and winde-thee.
Anon, like Cedron, through a straighter Quill,
Thou strainest out a little Brook or Rill;
But yet, so sweet, that it shall ever be
The immortal Nectar to Posterity:
So clear, that Poesy (whose pleasure is
To bathe in Seas of Heavenly Mysteries)
Her chastest feathers in the same shall dip,
And deaw with-all her choicest wormanship:
And so devout, that with no other Water
Deuoutest Souls shall quench their Thirst heer-after.
Of sacred Bards Thou art the double Mount:
Of faith-full Spirits the Interpreter profound:
Of contrite Hearts the clear Anatomy:
Of every Sore the Shop for Remedy:
Zeal's Tinder-box: a Learned Table, giving
To spiritual eyes, not painted Christ, but living.
O divine Volume, Sion's clear deer Voice,
Saints rich Exchecker, full of comforts choice:
O, sooner shall sad Boreas take his e wing
At Nilus head, and boisterous Aust r spring
From the icie floods of Izeland, than thy Fame
Shall be forgot, or Honor fail thy Name:
Thou shall surviue through-out all Generations,
And (plyant) learn the Language of all Nations:
Naught but Thine Aiers through Air and Seas shall sound,
In high-built Temples shall thy Songs resound,
Thy sacred Verse shall clear Gods clowdy face,
And, in thy steps the noblest Wits shall trace.
Gross Vulgar, hence; with hands profanely-vile,
So holy things presume not to defile,
Touch not these sacred stops, these silver strings:
This Kingly Harp is only meet for Kings.
And so behold, toward the farthest North,
Ah see, I see upon the banks of FORTH
(Whose force-full stream runs smoothly serpenting)
A valiant, learned, and religious King,
Whose sacred Art retuneth excellent
This rarely-sweet, celestial Instrument:
And Dauid's Truchman, rightly does refound
(At the Worlds end) his eloquence renowned.
Dombertans Clyde stands still to hear his voice.
Stone-rowling Tay seems the rat to rejoice:
The trembling Cyclads, in great Loumond-Lake,
After his sound their lusty gambols shake:
The (Trees-brood) Bar-geese, mid the Hebridian wave,
Unto his Tune their far-flow'n wings do wave:
And I my Self in my pyde A kind of light mantle made of a thin checkerd
Cloth, worn by the Hilmen in Scotland: and now much used with us for
Saddleclothes.
Pleid a-slope,
With Tune-skild foot after his Harp do hop.
Thus, full of God, the Heaven- Sirene (Prophet-wise)
Powres-forth a Torrent of mel-Melodies,
In DAVID'S praise. But DAVID'S foul defect
Was yet vn-seen, vncensur'd, vn-suspect:
Often in fair Flowers the bane-full Serpent sleeps:
Sometimes (we see) the bravest Courser trips:
And som-times Dauid's Deaf unto the Word
Of the Worlds Ruler, the everlasting Lord;
His Songs sweet fervor slakes, his Souls pure Fire
Is dampt and dimmed with smoke of foul desire:
His Harp is laid a-side, he leaves his Lays,
And after his fair Neighbors Wife he neighs. Bersabe hathing.

Fair Bersabe's his Flame, even Bersabe,
In whose Chaste bosom (to that very day)
Honor and Love had happy dwelt together,
In quiet life, without offense of either:
But, her proud Bewty now, and her Eyes force,
Began to draw the Bill of their Divorce:
Honor gives place to Love: and by degrees
Fear from her heart, Shame from her forehead flies.
The Presence Chamber, the High street, the Temple,
These Theaters are not sufficient ample
To show her Bewties, if but Silk them hide:
She must have windows each-where open wide
About her Garden-Baths, the while therein
She basks and bathes her smooth Snow-whiter skin;
And one-while set in a black Iet-like Chair,
Perfumes, and combs, and curls her golden hair;
Another-while under the Crystal brinks,
Her Alabastrine well-shap't Limbs she shrinks
(Like to a Lilly sunk into a glass:
Like soft loose Venus (as they paint the Less)
Born in the Seas, when with her eyes sweet-flames,
Tonnies and Tritons she at-once inflames:
Or like an Iuory Image of a Grace,
Neatly enclosed in a thin Crystal Case):
Another-while, unto the bottom dives,
And want only with the vnder-Fishes strives:
For, in the bottom of this liquid Ice,
Made of Musaick work, with quaint device
The cunning workman had contrived trim
Carpes, Pikes; and Dolphins seeming even to swim. David gazing.

Ishai's great son, too-idlely, walking hie
Upon a Tarras, this bright star does spy:
And sudden dazzled with the splendour bright,
Fares like a Prisoner, who new brought to light Simile.

From a Cimmerian, dark, deep dungeon,
Feels his sight smitten with a radiant Sun.
But too-too-soon re-cleer'd, he sees (alas)
The admired Tracts of a bewitching Face.
Her sparkling Eye is like the Morning Star,
Her lips two snips of crimsin Satin are,
Her Teeth as white as burnisht Silver seem
(Or Orient Pearls, the rarest in esteem):
Her Cheeks and Chin, and all her flesh like Snowes
Sweet intermixed with Vermillion Rose,
And all her sundry Treasures selfly swel,
Proud, so to see their naked selves excel.
What living Rance, what rapting Iuory
Swims in these streams? O what new Victory
Triumphs of all my TROPHEIS? O clear Therms,
If so your Waves be cold; what is it warms,
Nay, burns my heart? If hot I (pray) whence comes
This shivering winter that my soul benums,
Freezes my Senses, and dis-selfs me so
With drousie Poppy, not my self to know?
O peer-les Bewty, merely Bewtifull;
(Vnknow'n) to me thou art most vn-mercifull:
Alas! I die, I die, (O dismal lot)
Both for I see thee, and I see thee not,
But a-far-off, and under water too:
O feeble Power, and O (what shall I do?)
Weak Kingly-State! since that a silly Woman
Stooping my Crown, can my soul's Homage summon.
But, o Imperial power! Imperial State!
Could (happy) I give Bewties Check the Mate.
Thus spoke the King, and like as parkle small Simile.

That by mischance does into powder fall,
He Is alla-fire; and pensive, studies naught,
But how to accomplish his lascivious thought:
Which soon he compast: sinks himself therein;
Forgets David; adds Sin to Sin: Simile.

And lustful, plays like a young lusty Rider
(A wilful Gallant, not a skillful guider)
Who, proud of his Horse pride, still puts him to it:
With wand and spur, lays on (with hand and foot)
The too-free Beast; which, but too-fast before
Ran to his Ruin, stumbling evermore
At every stone, till at the last he break
Against some Rock his and his Riders neck.
For, fearing, not Adulteries fact, but fame:
A jealous Husbands Fury for the same:
And, lessening of a Pleasure shared to twain:
He (treacherous) makes her valiant Spouse be slain.
The Lord is moov'd: and just, begins to stretch
His Wraths keen dart at this disloyal wretch*
When Nathan (then bright Brand of Zeal and Faith)
Comes to the King, and modest-boldly says.
Vouchsafe my Liege (that our Chief Justice art) The Prophet Nothan's Parable,
reproving David.

To list awhile to a most heinous part;
First to the fault give ear, then give Consent
To give the Faulty his due Punishment.
Of late, a Subject of thine own, whose flocks
Powl'd all Mount Liban's pleasant plentious locks;
And to whose Herds could hardly full suffice
The flowery Verge that longst all Jordan lies;
Making a Feast unto a stranger-Guest,
None of his own abundant Fatlings dressed;
But (privy Thief) from a poor Neighbor by
(His Faithful Friend) He takes feloniously
A goodly Lamb; although he had no more
But even that one; whereby he set such store,
That every day of his own hand it fed,
And every night it coucht upon his Bed,
Supt of his Cup, his pleasant morsels picked,
And even the moisture from his lips it lickt.
Nay, more my Lord. No more (replies the King,
Deeply incenst) It Is more than time this thing
Were seen into, and so outrageous Crimes,
So insolent, had need be curbd be times:
Whatever Wretch has done this Villainy
Shall Die the Death; and not alonely Die,
But let the horror of so foul a Fact
A more then common punishment exact.
O painted Toomb (then answered sacred Nathan)
That have God in thy Mouth, in thy Mind Satan,
Thou blam'st in other thine own Fault denounc't,
And vn-awares have against thy self pronounced
Sentence of Death. O King, no King (as than)
Of thy desires: Thou art the very man:
Yea, Thou art he, that with a wanton Theft
Have just Vriah's only Lamb bereft:
And him, o horror! (Sin with Sin is furthered)
Him with the sword of Ammon have Thou murdered.
Bright Beauties Eye, like to a glorious Sun,
Hurts the sore eye that looks too-much ther-on:
Thy want on Eye, gazing upon that Eye,
Has given an Entrance too-too-foolishly
Unto that Dwarf, that Devil (is it not?)
Which out of Sloth, within us is begot:
Who entering first but Guest-wise in a room,
Does shortly Master of the house become:
And makes a Saint (a sweet, myld-minded Man)
That against his Life's Fo would not lift his hand,
To plot the death of his deer faith-full Friend,
That for his Love a thousand lives would spend.
Ah! shak'st thou not? is not thy Soul in trouble
(O brittle dust, vain shadow, empty bubble!)
At Gods drad wrath, which quick does calcinize
The marble Mountains and the Ocean dries?
No, thou shall know the weight of Gods right hand;
Thou, for example the other Kings shall stand.
Death, speedy Death, of that adulterous Fruit,
Which even al-ready makes his Mother rue't,
Shall vex thy soul, and make thee feel (in deed)
Forbidden Pleasure does Repenrance breed.
Ah shame-les beast* Since thy brute Lust (forlorn)
Has not the Wife of thy best Friend forborne,
Thy Sons (dis-natur'd) shall defile thy bed
Incestuously; thy fair Wives (ravished)
Shall doublely thy lust-full seed receive:
Thy Concubines (which thou behind shall leave)
The wanton Rapes of thine own Race shall be:
It shall befall that in thy Family,
With an vn-kins-mans kiss (vn-louing Lover)
The Brother shall his Sisters shame discover:
Thou shall be both Father and Father-in-law
To thine own Blood. Thy Children (past all aw
Of God or Man) shall by their insolence
Eyes justify thy bloody foul offense.
Thou sinn'dst in secret: but Sol's blushing Eye
Shall be eyewitness of their villainy:
All Izrael shall see the same: and then,
The Heav'n-sunk Cities in Asphaltis Fen,
Out of the stinking Lake their heads shall show,
Glad, by thy Sons, to be out-sinned so.
Thou, thou (inhumane) did the Death conspire
Of good Uriah (worthy better Hire):
Thou cruel did it: therefore, Homicide,
Cowardly treason, cursed Paricide,
Vn-kinde Rebellion, ever shall remain
Thy household Guests, thy House with blood to stain.
Thine own against thine own shall thril their darts:
Thy Son from thee shall steal thy peoples hearts:
Against thy Self he shall thy Subjects arm,
And give thine age many a fierce Alarm:
Till hanged by the hair 'twixt Earth and sky,
(His Gallow's pride, shame of the Worlds bright Eye)
Thine own Lieutenant, at a crimsin spout,
His guilty Soul shall with his Lance let-out.
And (if I fail not) O what Tempest fell
Beats on the Head of harm-les Izrael!
Alas! how many a guilt-les Abramide
Diesin Three days, through thy too-curious Pride? The Plague of Pestilence.

In hate of thee, the Air (thick and sloathful) breeds
No ^lowe Disease; both young and old itspeeds;
All are indifferent: For through all the Land
It spreads, almost in turning of a hand:
To the so-sick, hard seems the softest plumes;
Flames from his eyes, from's mouth come Iakes-like fumes:
His head, his neck; his bulk, his legs does tire;
Outward, all water; inward, all a-fire:
With a deep Cough his spungy Lungs he wastes,
Black Blood and Choler both at-once he casts:
His voices passage is with Biles be-layd,
His Soul's Interpreter, rough, foul, and flayd:
Thought of the Grief it is rigor often augments:
'Twixt Hope and fear it has no long suspense:
With the Disease Death jointly traverseth:
The Infections stroke is even the stroke of Death.
Art yields to the anguish, Reason stoops to rage:
Physicians skill, himself does ill engage.
The streets too still; the Town all out of Town:
All Dead, or Fled: unto the hallowed ground
The howling Widow (though she loved him deer)
Yet dares not follow her dead husbands Beer.
Each mourns his Loss, each his own Case complains,
Pel-mel the living with the dead remains.
As a good-natured and wel-nurtur'd Child, ^mile.

Found in a fault (by's Master sharply myld)
Blushing and bleaking, betwixtshame and fear,
With down-cast eyes laden with many a tear,
More with sad gesture, than with words, does crave
An humble Pardon, of his Censor grave:
So David, hearing the holy Prophets Threat, David's Repentance.

He apprehends Gods Judgments dradly-great,
And (thrilled with fear) flies for his sole defense
To pearly Tears, Mournings and sad Laments:
Off-goes his Gold; his Glory treads he down,
His Sword, his Scepter, and his precious Crown:
He fasts, he prays, he weeps, he grieves, he groans,
His hamous Sins he bitterly be-mones:
And, in a Cauehard-by; he roareth out
A sigh-full Song, so dolefully devout,
That even the Stone does groan, and pearc't withal,
Lets it is salt tears with his sad tears to fall.
Ay-gracious Lord (thus Sings he night and day) Psalm. 51.

Wash, wash, my Soul in thy deep Mercies sea:
O Mercy, Mercy Lord, alowd he Cries;
(And Mercy, Mercy, still the Rock replies). Application to France.

O God, my God, since for our grievous Sin,
(Which will-full we so long have weltred in)
Thou powr'st the Torrents of thy Vengeance down
On the azure Field with Golden Lillies sow'n:
Since every moment thy just Angerdrad
Roars, thunders, lightens on our guilty head:
Since Famine, Plague, and War (with bloody hand)
Do all at once make havoc of this Land:
Make us make use of all these Rods aright;
That we may quench with our Tears-water quight
Thine Ire-full Fire: our former Vices spurn:
And, true-reform'd, Justice to Mercy turn.
And so, O Father, (fountain of all Good, The like to England, now for many
years together grievously afflicted with the Plague.

Ocean of Justice, Mercie's bound-les Flood)
Since, for Our Sins, exceeding all the rest,
As most ingrate-ful, though most rarely blessed
(After so long Long-Sufferance of Thine:
So-many Warnings of thy Word divine:
So-many Threatenings of thy dread-full Hand:
So-many Dangers seap't by Sea and Land:
So-many Blessings in so good a King:
So-many Blossoms of that fruit-ful Spring:
So-many Foes abroad; and False at home:
So-many Reskue^ from the rage of Rome:
So-many Shields against so many Shot:
So-many Mercies in that Powder Plot
(So light regarded and so soon forgot).
Since, for Our Sins, so many and so great,
So little moved with Promise or with Threat,
Thou, now at last (as a just ielouze God)
Strik'st us thy Self with thine immediate Rod,
Thy Rod of PESTILENCE: whose rage-full smart,
With deadly pangs pearcing the strongest*hart,
Tokens of Terror leaves us where it lights:
And so infects (or so at least affrights)
That Neighbor Neighbor, Brother Brother shuns;
The tendrest Mother dares not see her Sons;
The nearest Friend his dearest Friend does fly;
Yea, scarce the Wife dares close her Husbands eye.
For, through the Example of our Vicious life,
As Sin breeds Sin; and Husband marr's the Wife, Simile.

Sister prowdes Sister, Brother hardens Brother,
Andone Companion does corrupt another:
So, through Contagion of this dire Disease,
It (justly) does thy heavenly Justice please,
To cause us thus each other to infect:
Though This we fly, and That too-nigh affect.
Since, for our Sins, which hang so fast vpon-vs;
So dreadfully thy Fury frowneth on-vs;
Since still thou Strikest, and still Threat'nest more
More grievous Wounds then we have felt before:
O gracious Father, give us grace (in fine)
To make our Profit of these Rods of thine:
That, true- Converted by thy mild Correction,
We may abandon every foul Affection:
That Humblenes may flaring Pride dis-plume:
That Temperance may Surfaiting consume:
That Chastity may chase our wanton Lust:
That Diligence may wear-off Slothful rust:
That Love may live, in Wrath and Envies place:
That Bounties hand may Avarice deface:
That Truth may put Lying and Fraud to flight:
That Faith and Zeal may keep thy Sabbaths right:
That Reverence of thy drad Name may banish
Blasphemous Oaths: and all Profaneness vanish.
Since, for our Sins (as well in Court as Cottage)
Of all Degrees, all Sexes, Youth and Dotage,
Of Clarks and Clownes; Rich, Poor; and Great and Small,
Thy fear-ful Vengeance, hangs over all;
O Touch us all with Horror of our Crimes:
O Teach us all to turn to thee be-times:
O Turn us (Lord) and we shall turned be:
Give what thou bidst, and bid what pleases thee:
Give us REPENTANCE; that thou may repent
Our present PLAGVE, and future Punishment.
FINIS.
THE MAGNIFICENCE. THE SECOND BOOK OF the fourth Day of the second Week, of
BARTAS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Death-summon'd DAVID, in his sacred Throne
Instals (instructs) his young Son SOLOMON:
His (pleas-God) Choice of WISDOM, wins him Honor
And Health and Wealth (at-once) to wait upon her:
His wondrous Doom, quick Babe's Claim to decide:
Mis-Matches taxt, in His with PHARAONIDE:
Their pompous Nuptials: Seav'n Heaven- Masquers there.
The glorious TEMPLE, Builded richly-rare.
Salem's Renown draws Saba to his Court:
King JAMES, to His, brings BARTAS, in like sort.
HAppy are You (o You delicious Wits)
That stint your Studies, as your Fury fits:
That, in long Labors (full of pleasing pain)
Exhaust not wholly all your learned brain:
That, changing Note, now light, and grave anon,
Handle the Theme that first you light upon:
That, here in Sonnets, there in Epigrams,
Euaporate your sweet Soule-boyling Flames.
But, my deer Honor, and my sacred Vows,
And Heavens decree (made in that Higher-House)
Hold me fast fettered (like a Gally-slaue)
To this hard Task. No other Care I have,
Naught else I dream of; neither (night nor day)
Aim at ought else, or look I other-way:
But (always busy) like a Mil-stone seem Simile.

Still turned round with the same rapid stream.
Thence is 't that often (maugre Apollos grace)
I humme so harsh; and in my Works in chase
Lame, crawling Lines, according to the Fire,
Which (more or less) the whirling P^les inspire:
And also mingle (Linsie-woolsie-wise)
This gold-ground Tissue with too-mean supplies.
You, all the year long, do not spend your wing:
But, during only your delightful Spring,
(Like Nightingales) from bush to bush you play,
From Tuneto Tune, from Myrtle spray to spray:
But, I too-bold, and like the Swallow right,
Not finding whereto rest me, at one flight
A bound-les ground-les Sea of Times I pass,
With Auster now, anon with Boreas.
Your quick Career is pleasant, short, and eath;
At each Lands-end you sit you down and breathe
On some green bank; or, to refresh you, find
Some Rosie-arbour, from the Sun and wind:
But, end-les is my Course: for, now I glyde
On Ice; then (dazzled) headlong down I slide:
Now up I climb: then through the Woods I craul,
I stray, I stumble, sometimes down I fall.
And, as base Mortar serves to unite Simile.

Red, white, gray Marble, Jasper, Galactite:
So, to con-nex my queint Discourse, sometimes
Imix loose, limping, and ill-polisht Rimes.
Yet will I not this Work of mine give over.
The Labor's great; my Courage yet is more;
My hart's not yet all void of sacred heat:
There Is nothing Glorious but is hard to get*
Hills were not seen but for the Vales betwixt:
The deep indentings artificial mixed
Amid Musaiks (for more ornament)
Have prizes, sizes, and dies different.
And O, God grant, the greatest spot you spy
In all my Frame, may be but as the Fly,
Which on her Ruff (whiter than whitest snowes)
To whiten white, the fairest Virgin fowes:
(Or like the Velvet on her brow: or, like
The dunker Mole on Venus dainty Cheek:)
And, that a few faults may but luster bring
To my high furies where I sweetest sing.
DAVID waxt old and cold; and's vital Lamp,
Lacking it is oil of Native moist, grew damp
(But by degrees); when with a dying voice
(But lively vigor of Discretion choice)
He thus instructs his young Son SOLOMON,
And (as Heaven calls) instals him in his Throne.
Whom, without Force, Vproar, or Ryualing, David's instructions to his Son
Solomon.

Nature, and Law, and Fortune make a King;
Even He (my Son) must be both Just and Wise,
If long He look to Rule and Royalize:
But he, whom only Fortunes Favors rears
Unto a Kingdom, by some newfound stairs;
He must appear more than a man; and cast
By rarest Worth to make his Crown sit fast.
My SOLOMON, thou know thou art my Youngest:
Thou know, besides, out of what Bed thou sprungest:
Thou see what love all Izrael bears thy Brother:
To honor Thee, what wrong I do to other;
Yea even to Nature and our Native Law:
It Is thy part therefore, in all points to draw
To full Perfection; and with rare effect
Of Noblest Virtues hide thy Births defect.
Thou, Izraels King, serve the great King of All, A king (first of all) ought
to be Religious.

And only on his Conducts pedestall
Found thine Affairs: upon his Sacred Lore
Thine eyes and mind be fixed evermore:
The barking rage of bold Blasphemers hate:
Thy Soueraign's Manners (Viceroy) imitate.
Nor think, the thicknes of thy Palace Walls,
Thine iron Gates, and high gold-seeled Halls,
Can let his Eye to spy (in every part)
The darkest Closets of thy Mazie Heart.
If birth or Fate (my Son) had made thee Prince
Of Idumeans or of Philistines, Valorous.

If Pharaoh's Title had be-fall'n to thee,
If the Medes Myter bowed at thy knee,
Were thou a Sophy; yet with Virtues luster
Thou oughtst (at least) thy Greatness to illustre:
But to Command the Seed of Abraham,
The Holy Nation to Control and tame,
To bear a Iosuahs or a Samsons load,
To be Gods Viceroy, needs a Demi-God.
Before old Servants give not new the start Impartial in bestowing Preferments.

(Kings-Art consists in Action more then Art.)
Old Wine excels new: Nor (giddily)
Will a good Husband grub a goodly Tree
In his fair Orchards midst, whose fruitful store
Has graced his Table twenty years and more; Simile.

To plant a Graft, yer ever he taste the same,
Save with the teeth of a (perhaps) false Fame.
These Parasites are even the Pearls and Rings
(Pearls, said I? Perils) in the ears of Kings:
For O, what Mischief but their Wiles can work? Impatient of Parasites and
Flatterers.

Since even within us (to their aid) does lurk
A smoother Soother, even our own Selfs-loue
(A malady that nothing can remove)
Which, with these strangers, secretly Combined
In League offensive (to the firmest Mind)
Persuades the Coward, he is Wisely-meek:
The drunkard, Stout: the Periure, Politic:
The cruel Tyrant, a just Prince they call;
Sober, the Sot; the Lavish, Liberal*
And, quick-nos'd Beagles, senting right his lore
(Trans-form'd into him) even his Faults adore.
Fly then those Monsters: and give no access To banish Atheists and all
notoriously wicked persons from his presence.

To men infamous for their wickedness:
Endure no Atheist, brook no Sorcerer
Within thy Court, nor Thief, nor Murderer:
Least the contagion of their banefull breath
Poison the public fountain, and to death
Infect Thy manners (more of force then Law)
The spring, whence Subjects good or bad will draw. To Overruled his own
Passions and Affections.

Rule thine Affects, thy fury, and thy fear:
He Is no true King, who no self's-sway does bear:
Not what thou could, but what thou should, effect:
And to thy Laws, first thine owne-self subject.
For ay the Subject will (fear set a-side)
Through thick and thin, having his King for guide. To be mild and gracious.

Show thy Self gracious, affable and meek;
And be not (proud) to those gay godlings like,
But once a year from their gilt Boxes taken,
To impetrate the Heavens long wisht-for rain.
To fail his Word, a King does ill beseem: To be faithful of his promise.

Who breaks his faith, no faith is held with him,
Deceipt's deceived: Injustice meets unjust:
Disloy all Prince arms subjects with distrust;
And neighbor States will in their Leagues commend
A Lion, rather then a Fox, for Friend.
Be prodigal of Virtues just reward: To be readier to Reward then Punish.

Of punishments be sparing (with regard).
Arm thou thy breast with rarest Fortitude;
Things Eminent are ever most pursued:
On highest Places, most disgraces threat:
The roughest winds on widest gates do beat. Not to be Quarellous yet quick
and courageous in a just Cause.

Toil not the World with Wars ambitious spite:
But, if thine Honor must maintain thy Right,
Then show thee DAVID's Son; and wisely-bold
Follow't as hot, as thou beginst it cold:
Watch, Work, Devise, and with vn-weary limb,
Wade thorough Foords, and over Channels swim.
Let tufted Planes for pleasant shades suffice, His exercises in War.

In heat; in Cold, thy Fire be Exercise:
A Targe thy Table, and a Turf thy Bed:
Let not thy Mouth be ouer-dainty fed;
Let Labor be thy sauce, thy Cask thy Cup;
Whence, for thy Nectar some ditch-water sup:
Let Drums, and Trumpets, and shril Fifes and Flutes
Serve thee for Citterns, Virginals and Lutes:
Trot up a Hill; Run a whole Feeld for Race;
Leap a large Dike; Toss a long Pike, a space:
Perfume thy head with dust and sweat: appeer
Captain and Soldier. Soldiers are on fire,
Having their King (before them Marching forth)
Fellow in Fortune, witness of their Worth.
I should inflame thy heart with Learnings love; In Peace not to be
over-studious: yet, to understand the Principals of all Prince-fit Sciences.

Save that, I know what divine habits move
Thy profound Spirit: only, let the ornament
Of Letters wayt on the Art of Regiment:
And take good heed, least as excess of humor
In Plants, becomes their Flowring Life's consumer;
So too-much Study, and delight in Arts,
Quench the quick vigor of thy Spiritual parts,
Make thee too-pensiue, ouer-dull thy Senses,
And draw thy Mind from Public cares of Princes.
With a swift-winged soul, the Course suruay
Of Nights dim Taper and the Torch of Day:
Sound round the Cells of the Ocean dreadly-deep:
Measure the Mountains snowie tops and steep:
Ferret all Corners of this nether Ball;
But, to admire the Makers Art in all,
His Power and Prudence: and, resemble not Simile.

Some simple Courtier, or the silly Sot
That in the base-Court all his time has spent,
In gazing on the goodly Battlement,
The chamfred Pillars, Plinths, and antique Bosses,
Medals, Ascents, Statues, and strange Colosses;
Amazed and musing upon every piece
Of the uniform, fair, stately Frontispice;
Too-too-self-rapt (through too-self-humoring)
Losing him-self, while others find the King.
Hold even the Balance, with clean hands, closed eyes: The principal and
peculiar office of a King.

Revenge severely Public Injuries;
Remit thine Own, Hear the Cries, see the Tears
Of all distressed poor Petitioners.
Sit (often) thy Self in Open Audience:
Who would not be a Judge, should be no Prince.
For, Justice Scepter and the Martial Sword
Ought never sever, by the Sacred Word.
Spare not the Great; neither despise the Small:
Let not thy Laws be like the Spiders Caul, Simile.

Where little Flies are caught and killed; but great
Pass at their pleasure, and pull-down the Net.
Away with Shepherds that their Flocks deface:
Choose Magistrates that may adorn their Place,
Such as fear God, such as will judge uprightly:
Men by the servants judge the Master lightly.
Give to the Virtuous; but thy Crown-Demain
Diminish not: give still to give again:
For there too-deep to dip, is Prodigality;
And to dry-vp the Springs of Liberality.
But above all (for Gods sake) Son, beware, Hic labor, hoc Opus.

Be not intrapt in Women's wily snare.
I fear, alas (good Lord, supreamly sage,
Auert from Mine the effect of this Praesage)
Alas! I fear that this sweet Poison will
My House here-after with all Idols fill.
But, if that neither Vertu's sacred love,
Nor Fear of Shame thy wanton Mind can move
To watch in Arms against the Charms of Those;
At least, be warned by thy Fathers Woes.
Fare-wel my Son: the Almighty calls me hence:
I pass, by Death, to Life's most excellence:
And, to go Reign in Heaven (from World-cares free)
The Crown of Izrael I resign to thee.
O thou that often (for a Princes Sin)
Transport'st the Scepter, even from Kin to Kin,
From Land to Land; Let it remain with Mine:
And, of my Sons Sons (in successiue Ligne)
Let that Al-Power full deer-drad Prince descend,
Whose glorious Kingdom never shall have end;
Whose iron Rod shall Satan's Rule vn-doo:
Whom Jacob trusts in; Whom I thirst for too.
' DAVID deceast: His Son (him tracking right) Initium Regni SOLOMON.

With heart and voice worships the God of Might;
Enters his Kingdom by the Gate of Piety;
Makes Hym^s and Psalms in Laud of the true Deity;
Offers in Gabeon; where, in Spirit he sees
(While his Sense sleeps) the God of Majesty's, His Vision.

The Lord of Hoasts; who, Crowned with radiant flames,
Offers him choice of these four lovely Dames.
First, Glory, shaking in her hand a Pike
(Not Maid-like Marching, but brave Souldier-like) Description of Glory.

Among the Stars her stately head she bears,
A silver Trumpet shril a slope she wears,
Whose Wind is Praise, and whose Stentorian sound
Does far and wide o'r all the world redound.
Her wide-side Robes of Tissue passing price,
All Story-wrought with bloody Victories,
Tryumphs and Tropheis, Arches, Crowns and Rings;
And, at her feet, there sigh a thousand Kings.
Not far from her, coms Wealth, all rich-bedight Of Riches.

In Rhea's, Thetis, Pluto's Treasures bright:
The glittering stuff which does about her fold
Is rough with Rubies, stiff with beaten Gold.
With either hand from hollow steans she powrs
Pactolian surges and Argolian showrs.
Fortune, and Thrift, and Wakefulnes and Care,
And Diligence, her daily Servants are.
Then cheerful Health* whose brow no wrinkle bears, Of Health.

Whose cheek no palenesse, in whose eye no tears;
But like a Child she is pleasant, quick, and plump,
She seems to fly, to skip, to dance, and iump:
And Life's bright Brand in her white hand does shine:
The Arabian Birds ^are plumage (platted ^ine)
Serves her for Su^-coat: and her seemly ^^ain,
Mirth, Exercise and Temperance sustain.
Last, Wisdom comes, with sober countenance: Of Wisdom.

To the euer-Bowrs her often a-loft t'aduance,
The light Mamuques wing-les wings she has:
Her gesture cool, as comly-graue her pase:
Where ever she go, she never goes without
Compass and Rule, Measure and Waights about:
And by her side (at a rich Belt of hers)
The Glass of Nature and her-Self she wears.
Having beheld their Bewties bright, the Prince
Seems rapt all-ready even to Heaven from hence;
Sees a whole Eden round about him shine:
And, 'mid so many Benefits Divine,
Doubts which to choose. At length he thus begun:
O Lord (says he) what has thy Servant don,
That so great Blessings I should take or touch,
Or thou should daign to honor me so much?
Thou do prevent my Merit: or (deer Father)
Delight'st to Conquer even my Malice rather.
Fair Victorie's a noble Gift: and naught
Is more desired, or is sweeter thought,
Than even to quench our Furie's thirst with blood,
In just Revenge on those that wrong our Good:
But often (alas) foul Insolence comes after;
And, the long Custom of in humane Slaughter,
Transforms in time the myldest Conquerors
To Tigers, Panthers, Lions, Bears, and Boars.
Happy seems He, whose count-les Herds for Pasture
Dis-robe (alone) Mount Carmels moatly Vesture:
For whom alone a whole rich Country, torn
With timely Tools, brings forth both Wine and Corn:
That has soft Sereans yellow Spoils, the Gems
And precious stones of the Arabian streams,
The Mines of Ophir, the Entidorian Fruits,
The Saban Odours, and the Tyrian Suits.
But yet we see, where Plenty chiefly sways,
There Pride increases, Industry decays:
Rich-men adore their Gold: whosoever aspires
To lift to Heaven his sight and Souls Desires,
He must be Poor (at leastwise like the Poor).
Riches and Fear are fellows euer-more.
I would live long, and I would gladly see
My Nephews Nephews, and their Progeny:
But the long Cares I fear, and Cumbers rife,
Which commonly accompany Long-Life.
Who well lives, long lives: for, this age of ours
Should not be numbered by years, days, and howrs:
But by our brave Exploits: and, this Mortality
Is not a moment, to that Immortality.
But, in respect of Lady Wisdoms grace,
(Even at their best) the rest are all but base.
Honor is but a puff; Life but a vapor; Salomons choice.

Wealth but a wish; Health but a sconce of paper:
A glistering Scepter but a Maple twig;
Gold, Dross; Pearls, Dust, how-euer bright and big.
She Is Gods own Mirror, she is a Light, whose glance
Springs from the Lightning of his Countenance:
She Is mildest Heavens most sacred influence:
Never decays her Bewties excellence;
Aye like her-Self: and she does always trace
Not only the same path, but the same pase.
Without her, Honor, Health, and Wealth would prove
Three Poisons to me. Wisdom (from above)
Is the only Moderatrix, spring, and guide,
Organ and honor of all Gifts beside.
Her, her I like, her only (Lord) I crave,
Her Company for-euer let me have:
Let me for-euer from her sacred lip,
The Ambrosial Nard, and rosial Nectar sip:
In every Cause, let me consult with her:
And, when I Judge, be She my Counsailer.
Let, with her Staff, my yet-Youth govern well
In Pastures fair the Flock of Izrael,
A compt-les Flock, a Flock so great (indeed)
As of a Shepherd sent from Heaven had need.
Lord, give her me: alas* I pine, I die;
Or if I live, I live her Pyrausta.
Flame-bred-Flie:
And (new Farfalla) in her radiant shine,
Too-bold, I burn these tender wings of mine.
Hold, take her to thee, said the Lord: and since
No Bewty else thy soul enamoreth;
For ready handmaids to attend upon her,
I Will give thee also Health, and Wealth, and Honor;
(For'tis not meet, so High-descended Queen,
So great a Lady, should alone be seen)
The rather, that my Bounty may inuit
Thee, serving Her, to serve Me day and night.
King SOLOMON, awaked, plainly knew
That this Divine strange Uision never grew
From the sweet Temper of his sound Complexion;
But that it was some Piece of more Perfection,
Some sacred Picture admirably draw'n
With Heavenly pencil, by an Angels hand.
For (happy) He had (without Art) the Arts,
And learning (without learning) in all parts:
A more then humane Knowledge bewtifies
His princely actions: up to Heaven he flies,
He dyues to Hell, he sounds the Deeps, he enters
To the in most Cells of the Worlds lowest Centers.
The secret Riddles of the sacred Writ His excellent Uisedome and understanding
in all things.

Are plain to him: and his deep-pearcing Wit,
Upon few Words of the Heav'n-prompted style,
In a few Days, large Volumes can compile.
He (learned) sees the Sun's Eclipse, sans terror:
He knows the Planets never erring Error;
And, whether Nature, or some Angel move
Their Spears, at once with triple Dance above:
Whether the Sun self-shine; his Sister, not:
Whether, Spring, Winter, Autumn, Summer hot,
Be the Suns Sons: what kind of mounting Vapor
Kindles the Comet and the long-taild Taper:
What boy strous Lungs the roaring Whirlers blow'n:
What burning Wings the Lightning rides upon:
What Curb the Ocean in his bounds does keep:
What power Night's-Princesse powrs upon the Deep.
Whether the Heavens sweet-sweating Kiss appear
To be Pearls parent, and the Oyster's pheer;
And whether, dusk, it makes them dim withal;
Clear, breeds the clear; and stormy brings the pale.
Whether, from Sea the Ambergris be sent;
Or be some Fishes pleasant excrement.
He knows, why the Earth's immovable and round,
The lees of Nature, Center of the Mound:
He knows her measure. And he knows beside,
How Coloquintida (duly applied)
With-in the darkness of the Conduit-Pipes,
Amid the windings of our in-ward Tripes,
Can so discreetly the White humor take;
Rheubarb, the Yellow; Hellebore, the Black:
And, whether That in our weak Bulks be wrought,
By drawing 't to them; or by driuing't out.
In brief, from the Hysop to the Cedar-Tree,
He knows the Virtues of all Plants that be.
He knows the Reason why the Woolfs fell tooth
Gives a Horse swiftnes; and his footing, sloth:
Why thy Sex-changing, fierce Hyena's eye
Puts curstest Curres to silence suddenly:
Why the irefull Elephant becomes tame
At the approaching of the fleecie Lamb:
Why the eye-bold Eagle never fears the flash
Or force of Lightning, nor the Thunder-clash:
Why the wild Fen-Goose (which keeps warm her eggs
With her broad feet under her heatfull legs,
And, tongue-les, cries) as wing-lym'd, cannot fly,
Except she (glad) Seas brynie glass descrie.
He knows also, whether that our Stone
Be baked Earth, or Exhalation:
Whether the Metals (that we daily see)
Be made of Sulphur and of Mercury;
Or, of some Liquor by long Cold condens't,
And by the Heat well purified and cleans'd;
Or, of a certain sharp and cindrous humor:
Or, whether He that made the Wauing Tumor,
The motly Earth; and the Heavenly Spears refined,
All-mighty, made them such as now we find.
He comprehends from whence it is proceeding,
That spotted Iasper-stones can staunch our bleeding:
Saphires, cure eyes: the Topaz to resist
The rage of Lust; of drink the Amethist:
And also, why the clearest Diamant
( Ielous) impugns the thefts of the Adamant.
Tunes, Measures, Numbers, and Proportions
Of Bodies with their Shadows, als' he kons;
And (filled with Nectar-Deaws, which Heaven drips)
The Bees have made Honey within his lips.
But he imbraceth much more earnestly
The gain-full Practice, than cold Theorie:
Nor reaks he so of a Sophistick pride
Of prattling Knowledge (too-self-magnifi'd)
As of that goodly Art to govern well
The sacred Helms of Church and Commonweal,
And happily to entertain in either,
A harmony of Great and Small together.
Especially He Is a good Iusticer,
And to the Laws does Life and strength confer. Simile.

And, as the highest of Bigaurian Hills
Ay bears his head vp-right, and never yields
To either side, scorns Wind and Rain and Snow,
Abides all weathers, with a cheerful brow;
Laughs at a Storm, and bravely tramples under
His steady Knees, the proud, loud, rolling Thunder:
So, He Is a Judge inflexibly-vpright.
No Love, nor Hatred, of the Guilty wight
(What ever he wear for Calling, small or great)
His Venging blade can either blunt or whet;
He spurneth Favors, and he scorneth Fears,
And under foot he treads private Tears:
Gold's radiant Luster never blears his Eye:
Nor is he led through Ignorance a-wry.
His Voice is held an Oracle of all:
The soul of Laws he wisely can exhale:
In doubtful Cases he can subtilize,
And wyliest pleaders hearts anatomize.
Scarce fifteen times had Ceres (since his Birth)
With her gilt Tresses glorified the Earth;
When he decides by happy Wisedoms means,
The famous Quarrel of Two crafty Queans.
Is It possible, O Earth, (thus cries the first)
But that (alas) thou should for anger burst, The Controversy between the
2. Harlots for the live Child.

And swallow quick this execreable Queen!
Is It possible (O gracious Soueraign)
That coming new from doing such a deed
So horrible, she shame-les dares proceed
TO approach thy sight, thy sacred Throne to abuse,
Not begging Pardon, but even bent t'accuse?
Last night, with surfeit and with sleep sur-cloyd,
This care-les step-dam her own Child o'r-layd:
And softly then (finding it cold and dead)
Lays it by me, and takes mine in the stead.
Here, old, bold strumpet, take thy bastard brat,
Hence with thy Carrion, and restore me that,
Restore me mine, my lovely living Boy,
My hope, my hap, my Love, my life my Joy.
O cruel Chance! O sacrilegious!
Shall thy foullips my little Angel busse?
At thy fond prattling, shall he pret'ly smile?
And tug, and touze thy greasy locks the-while?
And all his Childhood fill thy soul with glee?
And, grow'n a man, sustain thine age and thee?
While wretched I, have only for my share,
His Births hard Trauail, and my burthen's Care,
His rest-les rocking, wyping, washing, wringing;
And to appease his way ward Cries with singing.
O most unhappy of all Woman-kinde!
O Childe-les mother! O! why is my Mind
More passion-stirred, than my hand is strong?
But, rather, than I Will pocket up this wrong,
To be revenged, I Will venture two for one,
I Will have thy Life, although it cost mine own.
O filthy Bitch! Vile Witch (says the other tho)
O! who would think, that Wine could mad one so?
O impudent! though God thou fear not, fear
The Kings clear judgment, who Gods place does bear.
Art not content to have called (or rather cried)
Me Whore, and Thief, Drunkard and Paricide:
But thou will also have my Child, my deer,
(Whom with so strong a knot Love links so near)
My Babe, my Bliss? Yea marry (Minks) and shall:
Who takes my Child, shall take my life with-all.
Just David's just Son; for thy Father's sake,
For his deer love, for all that he did make
Of thee a Child, when he (re-childing) sought
With childish sport to still thy cries, and taught
(Or'gan to teach) with language soft and weak,
Thy tender tongue some easy term to speak:
Or, when (all bloody, breath-les, hot) he came
Laden with spoils of Kings he overcame,
He ran t'imbrace thee, rockt thee in his Targe,
And when thou Cry'dst, upon his shoulder large
Did set thee up, while thou his beard did tug,
Play'dst with his nose, about his neck did hug,
Gap'tst on his glittering Helm, and smil'dst to see
Another SOLOMON there smile on thee:
And underneath his dancing Plume did play
Like Bird in bush, sporting from spray to spray;
I do adjure thee to attend my Plea:
By the sweet name of thy deer Bersabe,
Who in the night, shiuering for cold, so often
Has bowed her self over thy Cradle soft;
Who both the Bottles of her Nectar white
Has spent upon thee, hundred times a night;
Who on thy head has set her pearly Crown,
And in Thy life lived more than in her Own:
I do adjure thee (O great King) by all
That in the World we sacred count or call,
To do me Right: and if, too-mylde, alas,
Too merciful thou will not Sentence pass
Of just revenge for my received wrong;
Yet, reaue me not what does to me belong,
What liberal Nature has bestowed on me,
What I am seis'd-of (without thank to thee):
For pity do not my heart blood deprive,
Make me not Childe-les, having Child a-liue.
While both, at once, thus to the King they Cry,
It Is mine, It Is mine: thouly'st; and thou do lie:
The partial People diverse Verdict spend;
Some favor the one, others the other friend: Simile.

As, when two Gamesters hazard (in a trice)
Fields, Vine-yards, Castles, on the Chance of Dice,
The standers-by, diversely stird with-in,
Wish, some that This, and some that That may win;
Waver twixt Hope and Fear: and euery-one's
Moved, with the moving of the guile-ful Bones.
Only, the King demurres: his prudent ears
Find like, both reasons, both Complaints, both tears:
The Infants face could not discipher whether
Of both should be the very Mother: neither
Could calculation of their ages, clear
The Judges doubt: nor any proof appear.
Then, thus He waighs (but as in dreaming wise);
The industrious Judge, when all proofs fail him, flies
Unto Conjectures, drawn (the probablest)
Out of the book of Natures learned breast;
Or to the Rack: Now, Mothers love (thinks he)
Is Natures own unchangeable Decree:
And there is no Torture that exceeds the pains
Which a kind Mother in her Child sustains.
Then (as awake) Come, come, no more a-doo, The Doubt admirably decided.

Dispatch (says he) Cleave the quick Child in two,
Look that the Sword be sharp; in such a case,
Needs must our Pity give our Justice place:
Justice (ye see) can judge him whole to neither:
Divide him therefore, and give half to either.
O difficult! but thus the King descries
Their hearts deep secrets: all discovered lies,
The vizor's off; their Tongues, sincerely pressed
With true instinct, their very Thoughts expressed:
Be It (said the stepdam) so, sith't must be so:
Divide him justly from the top to toe.
No (said the other) rather, I renounce
My Right in him, take thou him all at once,
Enjoy him all; I Will rather have him Thine
A-liue, and whole, than dead and mangled Mine.
Thine (quoth the King) he is Thine by Birth (I see)
Thine by thy Love, and thine by my Decree.
Now, as with Gold grows in the self-same Mine Simile.

Much Chrysocolle, and also Silver fine: The wonderful Prosperity of Solomon
and his People.

So, supreme Honor, and Wealth (matched by none)
Second the Wisdom of great SOLOMON.
He far and near commands by Land and Seas;
A hundred Crowns do homage unto His:
His nearest Bounds Nile's Sea and Sidon seem,
And Euphrates bows his moist horns to him:
Peru, they say (supposing Ophir so)
By yearly Fleets into his Fisk does flow:
In Sion Gold's as common as the Sand,
As Pebbles, Pearls: Through-out all Iury-Land,
There seems an Ocean of all happiness
To ouer-flowe; and all do all possess:
Each under his own Vine and his own Tree,
His Grapes and Figs may gather quietly.
Thus he abounds in Bliss* not so to change-ill
Man into Beast, but make of Man an Angel,
To praise the Immortal, who to him has given
Even here a Taste of the delights of Heaven.
This great, wise, wealthy, and wel-spoken King
His sweet renown o'r all the World does ring:
The Tyrian, for Confederate desires him:
Pharao for Son: the Alien no less admires-him
Than his own Subject: and his eyes sweet flames,
As far as Nilus, fire the flower of Dames.
O SOLOMON, see thou not (O miss-hap!) Misse-Matches justly taxed.

This Marriage is no Marriage, but a Trap?
That such a mongrel Match of differing Creed,
Of mortal quarrels is the immortal seed?
That Ox and Ass can never well be broak
To draw one Plough together in one yoke?
Who-euer weds a Miscreant, forthwith
Diuorceth God: our Faith still wauereth;
It needs an Aid and not a Tempter nigh,
Not the instrument of the old Deceiuer sly,
Not deadly Poison in our Couch to couch,
Sleep in our bosom, and our breast to touch,
And breathe into us (in a kind of kissing)
An Ir-religion, of the Serpents hissing.
She that from Egypt comes (O King) is none
Flesh of thy Flesh, nor yet Bone of thy Bone:
But a strange Bone, a barbarous Rib, a Piece
Impoysoned all with Memphian Leprosies.
But, thou will say, thy Love has stripped yer-while
Her spotted suite of Idol-seruing Nile:
And clad her all, in Innocence, in White;
Becom'n by Faith a true-born Abramite.
It might be so: and to that side I take,
The rather, for that sacred Beauties sake,
Where-of she is a figure. Yet, I fear
Her Train will stain thy Kingdom euery-where,
Corrupt thy Court: and God will be offended,
To have his People with strange People blended;
The mighty Lord, who has precisely said,
You shall not Theirs, nor they your daughters wed.
Under the gentle Equinoctial Line, A pleasant Description of Love's fruitful
Grove.

Fair amorous Nature waters freshly-fine
A little Grove clad in eternal green,
Where all the year longlusty May is seen,
Suiting the Lawnes in all her pomp and pride
Of lively Colors, lovely varyfied:
There smiles the ground, the starry-Flowers each one
There mount the more, the more the are trod-vpon:
There, all grows toil-les; or, if tild it were,
Sweet Zphyrus is the only Husband there.
There Auster never roars, nor Hail dis-leaues
The immortal Grove, nor any Branch bereaues.
There the straight Palm Tree stoopeth in the Calm
To kiss his Spouse, his loyal Female Palm:
There with soft whispers whistling all the year
The Broad-leau'd Plane-Tree Courts the Plane his Pheer,
The Poplar wooes the Poplar, and the Vine
About the Elm her slender arms does twine:
The Iuie about the Oak: there all does prove,
That there, all springs, all grows, all lives in Love.
Opinion's Porter, and the Gate she bars
Against Couetize, cold Age, and sullen Cares,
Except they leaue-off and lay-down before
Their troublous load of Reason at the door;
But opens wide, to let-in Bashful-Boldnes,
Dumb-speaking Signs, Chill-Heat, and Kindled-Coldnes,
Smooth soothing Vows, deep Sorrows soon appeased,
Tears sudden dried, fell Angers quickly pleased,
Smiles, Wyly-Guiles, queint wittie-pretty Toys,
Soft Idleness, and ground-les, bound-les Joys,
Sweet Pleasure plunged over head and ears
In sugared Nectar, immateriall Fears,
Hoarse Waaks, late Walks, Pain-pleasing kindly cruel,
Aspiring Hope ( Desire's immortal fuel)
Licentious Loosnesse, Prodigal Expense
Enchanting Songs, deep Sighs, and sweet Laments.
These frollike Louelings fraighted Nests do make
The balmy Trees o'r-laden Boughs to crack;
Bewty lays, Fancy sits, the inflamed heat
Of Love does hatch their Couvies nicely-neat:
Some are but kindled yet, some quick appear,
Some on their backs carry their Cradles deer.
Some downie-clad, some (fledger) take a twig
To pearch-vpon, some hop, from sprig to sprig:
One, in the fresh shade of an Apple Tree
Lets hang its Quiver, while soft-pantingly
'Tex hales hot Vapor: one, against a Sparrow
Tries his stiff Bow and Giant-stooping Arrow:
Another sly sets lime-twigs for the Wren,
Finch, Linot, Tit-mouse, Wag-Tail (Cock and Hen):
See, see how some their idle wings forsake,
And (turned, of Flyers, Riders) one does take
A Thrush, another on a Parrot rides,
This mounts a Peacock, that a Swan bestrides,
That manageth a Phaisant: this does make
The Ring-Doue turn, that brings the Culuer back:
See how a number of this wanton Fry
Do fondly chase the gawdie Butter-Fly,
Some with their flowerie Hat, some with their hands,
Some with sweet Rose-boughs, some with Myrtle wands:
But, the horned Bird, with nimble turns, beguiles
And scapes the snares of all these Loves a-whiles.
Leave, Wags (Cries Venus) leave this wanton Play:
For so, in steed of Butter-Flyes, you may,
You may (my Chicks) a Child of Venus strike:
For, some of mine have Horns and all alike.
This said: eft soons two twins whose gold-head darts
Are never steeped but in Royal hearts;
Come, Brother deer (said either) come let us to 't,
Let Us each a shaft at yon two bosoms shoot.
Their winged words the effect ensues as wight,
Two or three steps they make to take their flight,
And quick-thick shaking on their sinnewie side
There long strong sarcels, richly triple-died
Gold-Azure-Crimsin; the one aloft does soar
To Palestine, the other to Nilus shore.
Pharao's fair daughter (wonder of her Time) PHARONIDA.

Then in the blooming of her Beauties Prime,
Was queintly dressing of her Tress-full head
Which round about her to the ground did spread:
And, in a rich gold-seeled Cabinet,
Three Noble Mayds attend her in the feat;
One with a piece of double dented Box
Combs out at length her goodly golden locks:
Another 'noynts them with Perfumes of price:
The other with bodkin or with fingers nice,
Frizles and Furls in Curls and Rings a part;
The rest, loose dangling without seeming Art,
Wave to and fro, with cunning negligence
Gracing the more her Beauties excellence:
When, armd with Arrows burning, brightly keen,
Swift Swallow-like, one of these Twins comes in;
And, with his left wing hiding still his Bow,
Into her bosom shot (I woat not how). Loves first Fever.

O, my side! oh! my heart (the Royal Maid Cries out)
O! I am slain: but, searching all about,
When she perceived no blood, nor bruise; alas,
It is no wound; but sleeping in the grass,
Some Snake (says she) has crept into me quick,
It gnawes my heart: ah, help me, I am sick,
Have me to bed: ay me, a freezing-Frying,
A burning-cold torments me liuing-dying.
O cruel Boy, alas, how mickle gal
Thy baenfull shaft mingles my Mel withal!
The Royal Maid, which with her Mates was wont
Smile, Skip, and dance on Fields inammeld front,
Loves solenesse, sadness, and Self-priuacie;
Sighs, sobs, and throbs, and yet she knows not why:
The sumptuous pride of massy Piramides
Presents her eyes with Towers of Iebusides;
In Niles clear Crystal she does Jordan see;
In Memphis, Salem; and vn-warily
Her hand (vn-bidden) in her Sampler sets
The King of Iuda's Name and Counterfets:
Who, mediting the Sacred TEMPLE's Plot,
By the other Twin at the same time is shot:
The shaft sticks fast, the wound's within his veins:
Sleep cannot bring a-sleep his pleasing pains;
PHARONIDA's his heart, PHARONIDA
Is all his Theme to talk-of, night and day:
With-in his soul a civil War he feeds:
The all-seeing Sun, now early backs his Steeds,
Now mounts his Midday, and then Sets soon:
But still his Love stands at the hot high Noon.
He Rides not his brave Coursers (as he wont),
Nor Reads, nor Wrights, nor in his Throne does mount,
To hear the Widdow's Cause: neglects his Court,
Neglects his Rule; Love rules him in such sort.
You prudent Legates, Agents for this Marriage,
Of Rings and Tablets you may spare the Carriage:
For, witty Love has with his lovely shaft
In eithers heart grav'n others lively Draught:
Each Lives in other, and they have (O strange!)
Made of their burning hearts a happy Change.
Better abroad, then home, their hearts delight;
Yet long their bodies to their hoasts t'vnite.
Which soon ensues: the Virgin's shortly had
From Mothers arms embracing gladly-sad:
And the aged Father, weeping as he spoke,
Bids thus adieu when she her leave does take.
Sweet Daughter deer, O siris be thy guide,
And Loving Isis bless thee and thy Bride,
With golden Fruit; and daily without cease
Your mutual Loves may as your years increase.
Wives, Maids, and Children, young and old, each-where,
With looks and vows from Turrets follow her:
Calm Nilus calmer then it wont is grow'n,
Her Ships have merry winds, the Seas have none:
Her footing makes the ground all fragrant-fresh:
Her sight re-flowres the Arabian Wilderness:
Jury reioyces, and in all the way
Nothing but trumpets, Fifes, and Timbrels play:
The Flower-crownd People, swarming on the Green,
Cry still, God save, God save, God save the Queen:
May she be like a scion, pale and sick
Through the ouer-shading of a Sire two thick:
Which being Transplanted, free, sweet air does sup,
To the sweating Clouds her grouie top sends up,
And prospers so in the strange soil, that tild,
Her golden Apples all the Orchard gild.
No streets are seen in rich JERUSALEM.
For, underfoot fine Skarlet paueth them,
Silks hang the sides, and ouer-head they hold
Archt Canapeis of glistering Cloth of gold:
They throng, they thrust, an ebbing-flowing Tide,
A Sea of Folk follows the adored Bride:
The joyful Ladies from their windows shed
Sweet showers of flowers upon her radiant head;
Yet ielous, least (died in their native grain)
Her Rosy Cheeks should Natures Roses stain.
But lo, at last, the honor of Majesty,
Glory of Kings, King SOLOMON draws nigh:
Lo now both Lovers, enter-glauncing sweet
(Like Sun and Moon, when at full view they meet
In the mid-month) with amorous rays reflection
Send mutual Welcoms from their deep affection:
Both a-like young, like beautiful, like brave,
Both graced a-like; so like, that whosoever have
Not near observed their heads vnlikenesses,
Think them two Adons or two Venusses.
These nouice Lovers at their first arrive
Are bashful both; their passions strangely strive:
Their souls sweet Fire his ruddy flames does flush
Into their Faces in a modest blush:
Their tongues are tied, their star-bright eyes seem veiled
With shame-fac't Cipres; all their senses faild.
But, pompous Hymen, whither am I brought?
Am not I (heathen) under the happy Vault
Where all the Gods, with glorious mirth Inhaunst,
At Thetis Nuptials eat, and drank, and daunc't?
Here, the Idumeans mighty Jove treads under Salomons Nuptials.

His tripping feet, his bright-light burning Thunder;
Awhile, he lays his Majesty a-side,
To Court, and sport, and revel with his Bride;
King, plays the Courtier; Soueraign, Suitor comes;
And seems but equal with his Chamber-Groomes:
But yet, whate'r he do, or can devise,
Disguised Glory shines in his eyes.
Here, many a Phoebus, and here many a Muse
On heavenly Lays so rarely-sweet do use
Their golden bows, that with the rapting sound
The Arches and Columns wel-nigh dance the Round.
Here, many a Juno, many a Pallas here,
Here many a Venus, and Diana clear,
Catch many a gallant Lord, according as
Wealth, Beauty, Honor, their affection draws.
Here, many an Hebe fair, here more then one
Quick-seruing Chiron neatly waits upon
The Beds and Boords, and pliant bears about
The boules of Nectar quickly turned out;
And the ouer-burthned Tables bend with weight
Of their Ambrosial ouer-filled freight.
Here, many a Mars vn-bloody Combats fights,
Here, many a Hermes finds out new delights,
Here, many a horned Satyr, many a Pan,
Here, Wood-Nymphs, Flood-Nymphs, many a Faerie Faune
With lusty frisks and lively bounds bring-in
The Antike, Morisko, and the Mattachine.
For even Gods Servants (God knows how) have supt
The sugared baen of Pagan Rites corrupt.
But, with so many lively Types, at will
His rich rare Arras shall some other fill:
Of all the Sports, I Will only choose one Measure,
One stately Mask composed of sage-sweet pleasure;
A Dance so chaste, so sacred, and so grave
(And yet so graceful, and so lofty-braue)
As may beseem (except I me abuse)
Great SOLOMON, and my celestial Muse.
The Tables voyded of their various Cates,
They rise at once; and suiting their Estates,
Each takes a Dame, and then to Dance they come
Into a stately, rich, round-arched Room,
So large and light-some that it (right) they call
The Universal, or The Worlds great Hall.
O what delight, to see so rich a Show
Of Lords and Ladies dancing in a row
All in a Round, reaching so far and wide
O'rall the Hall to foot-it side by side!
Their eyes sweet splendour seems a Pharos bright,
With clinquant Rays their Body's clothed light:
It Is not a Dance, but rather a smooth slyding,
All move a-like, after the Musicks guiding:
Their Tune-skill'd feet in so true Time do fall,
That one would swear one Spirit does bear them all:
They post vn-moouing; and though swift they pass
It Is not perceived: of hundred thousand pase,
One single back they: Round on Round they dance;
And, as they trauerse, cast a fruitful glance.
Just in the middle of the Hall, a-sloap The MASK of Planets.

(Even from the floor unto the very top)
A broad rich Baldrik there extends round,
In-laid with gold upon an azure ground,
Where (covered all with Flames) with wondrous Art
Five Lords, two Ladies dance; but each apart. Saturn.

Here trips an old man in a Mantle died
Deep Leaden-hue, and round about him tied
With a Snake-girdle biting off her tail.
With-in his Robe's stuff (in a winding trayl)
Creeps Mandrake, Comin, Rue, and Hellebore;
With lively figures of the Bear and Boar,
Cammel, and Ass (about to bray wel-nigh):
There the Strimonian Foul seems even to cry,
The Peacock even to prank. For Tablet fine,
About his neck hangs a great Cornaline,
Where some rare Artist (curiousing upon it)
Has deeply cut Times triple-formed Front:
His pase is heavy, and his face severe;
His Body here; but yet his mind els-where.
There the Lord Zedec him more sprightly bears, Jupiter.

Mild, fair, and pleasant; on his back he wears
Tin-colour'd Tissue, figured all with Oaks,
Ears, Violets, Lillies, Olives, Apricocks;
Bordred with Phaisants, Egles winged-black,
And Elephants, with Turrets on their back,
Pointed with Dimonds, powdered and imbost
With Emeralds, perfumed with wondrous Cost.
The third leads quicker on the self same Arch Mars.

His Pyrrhik Galiard, like a Warlike March:
His Face is fiery: Many an Amethist,
And many a Iaspire of the perfectest
Does brightly glister in the double gilt
Of the rich Pommel and the precious Hilt
Of his huge Fauchin, bowed from hand to heel:
His boistrous body shines in burnisht Steel:
His Shield flames bright with gold, imbossed high
With Wolves and Horse seem-running swiftly by,
And freng'd about with sprigs of Scammonie,
And of Euphorbium, forged cunningly. Venus.

But O fair Faerie, who art thou, whose eyes
Inflame the Seas, the Air, the Earth and Skies?
Tell us, what art thou, O thou fairest fair,
That trimm'st the Trammels of thy golden hair.
With Myrtle, Thyme, and Roses; and thy Breast
Gird'st with a rich and odoriferous A Spouse-belt.
Cest,
Where all the wanton brood of sweetest Loves
Do nestle close; on whom the Turtle-Doues,
Pigeons, and Sparrowes day and night attend,
Cooing and wooing, wherso'er thou wend:
Whose Robe's imbrodered with Pomgranet boughs,
Buttoned with Saphires, edged with Beryl rows:
Whose capering foot, about the starrie floor,
The Dance-guide Prince, now follows, now is before?
Art thou not She, that with a chaste-sweet flame
Did both our Brides hearts into one heart frame?
And, was not He, that with so curious steps, Mercury

Next after thee, so nimbly turns and leaps,
Say, was not He the witty Messenger,
Their eloquent and quick Interpreter?
How strange a suit* His medly Mantle seems
Scarlet, Waue-laced with Quicksilver streams,
And the end of every Lace, for tuft has on
A precious Porphyre, or an Agate stone:
A Cry of Hownds have here a Deer in Chase,
There a false Fox, here a swift Kid they trace:
There Larks, and Linots-and sweet Nightingals
(Feigned upon feigned Trees) with wings and tails
Loose hanging, seem to swell their little throats,
And with their warblings, shame the Cornets notes.
Light Fumitorie, Parsley, Burnets blade
And winding leaf his crispie Locks beshade.
He Is light and lively, al in Turns and Tricks;
In his great Round, he many small does mix:
His giddy course seems wandering in disorder,
And yet there is found in this disorder, order.
Avoid base Vulgar, back Profane, stand-by;
These sacred Revels are not for your eye:
Come, gentle Gentiles, Noble Spirits draw near,
Preace through the Preace, come take your places here,
To see at full the Bridegroom and the Bride,
A lovely pair, exactly bewtifi'd
With rare perfections, passing all the rest,
Sole-happy Causes of this sumptuous Feast.
Lo where they come: O what a splendour bright!
Mine eyes do dazzle. O thou primer Light!
Sun of the Sun, thy Rays keen point rebate,
Thy dread-spread Fire a little temperate:
O, dart (direct) on thy fair Spouse a-space
Thine eyes pure light, the luster of thy Face:
For I no longer can endure it, I
Am burnt to ashes: o I faint, I dye.
But (blessed Couple) since (alas) I may-not
Behold you both unmasked, nor I can-not;
Yet in these Verses let me tell (I pray)
Your Dance, your Courting, and your rich Array.
The Queen's adorned down to her very heels Luna.

In her fair hair (whence still sweet deaw distills)
Half changing down; the rest in rings and curls,
Platted with strings of great, round, orient Pearls:
Her gown is Damask of a Siluer-ground,
With Silver Seas all deeply-frenged round;
With Gourds and Moon-wort branched richly-fair,
Flourisht with Beasts that only eat the Aier.
But why (my Muse) with Pencil so precise
Seek'st thou to paint all her rich Rarities?
Of all the Bewties, Graces, Honors, Richesse
Wherewith rich Hev'n these Maskers all inriches,
She Is even the Mother: and then, as a Glass,
On the Beholders their effects she casts.
A Garland braided with the Flowery folds Sol.

Of yellow Citrons, Turn-Sols, Mary-golds,
Beset with Bal'nites, Rubies, Chrysolites,
The royal Bride-groom's radiant brows be-dights:
His saffron'd Ruff is edged richly-neat
With burning Carbuncles, and every set
Wrought rarely-fine with branches (draw'n upon)
Of Laurel, Cedar, Balm, and Cinnamon:
On his Gold-grounded Robe the Swan so white
Seems to his honor some new Song t'indight,
The Phoenix there builds both her nest and toomb,
The Crocodile out of the Waves does come,
The amazed Reaper down his Sickle flings
And soudain Fear grafts to his Ankles wings:
There the fierce Lion, from his furious eyes,
His mouth and nosthrils fierie-Flames let-flyes,
Seems with his whisking train his rage to whet,
And, wrath-full ramping, ready even to set
Upon a Heard of fragrant Leopards:
When lo, the Cock (that light his rage reguards)
A purple Plume tymbers his stately Crest,
On his high Gorget and broad hardy Breast
A rich Coat Armor ( Or and Azure) shines,
A frenge of raveld gold about his Loins:
In lieu of bases. Beard as red as blood;
A short Beak bending like the Egles brood:
Green-yellow eyes, where Terrors Tent is pight:
A martial gaite, and spurred as a Knight:
Into two arches his proud Train diuides,
With painted wings he claps his cheerful sides,
Sounds his shrill Trumpet, and seems with his sight
The Lions courage to have danted quight.
These happy Lovers, with a practiced pase
For-ward and back-ward and a-side do trace;
They seem to dance the Spanish Pauane right:
And yet their Dance, so quick and liuely-light,
Does never pass the Baldricks bounds (at all)
Which grav'n with Star-Beasts ouer-thwarts the Hall.
When the brave Bridegroom toward Mount Silo traces,
A thousand Flowers spring in his spright-full pases:
When toward Mount Oliu^t he slides, there grows
Under his Feet a thousand Frosty Snowes:
For, the Floor, beaten with his Measures ever,
Seems like the Footing of the nimble Weaver.
This lovely Couple, now kiss, now recoil,
Now with a lowering eye, now with a smile:
Now Face to Face they Dance, now side by side,
With Course vn-equall: and the tender Bride
Receives strange Changes in her Countenance,
After her Lovers divers-seeming glance.
If unawares some Envious come between
Her and her Love, then is she sad be-seen,
She shuts her eye, she seems even to depart:
Such force has true Love in a noble heart.
But all that is nothing to their music choice:
Tuning the warbles of their Angel-Voice
To Foot and Viole, and Care-charming Lute,
In amorous Ditty they do thus dispute.
"O bright-ey'd Virgin! o how fair thou art! The Epithalamy

"O how I love thee, My Snowe-winged Dove!
"O how I love thee! Thou have rapt my heart:
"For thee I Die: For thee I live, my Love.
" How fair art thou my Deer! How dear to me!
"Deer Soul (awake) I faint, I sink, I sownd,
"At thy deer Sight: and when I sleep; for Thee,
"Within my breast still wakes my sharp-sweet Wound.
"My Love, what Odours thy sweet Tresse it yields!
"What Ambergris, what Incense breathe thou out
"From purple fillets! and what Myrrh distills
"Still from thy Fingers, ring'd with Gold about!
"Sweet-Hart, how sweet is the Odor of thy Praise!
"O what sweet aiers does thy sweet air deliver
"Unto my burning Soul! What honey Lays
"Flow from thy throat, thy throat a golden River.
"Among the Flowers, my Flower's a Rose, a Lilly;
"A Rose, a Lilly; this a Bud, that blow'n:
"This fragrant Flower first of all gather wil-I,
"Smell to it, kiss it, wear it as mine own.
"Among the Trees, my Love's an Apple Tree,
"Thy fruit-full Stem bears Flower and Fruit together:
"I Will smell thy Flower, thy Fruit shall nourish me,
"And in thy Shadow will I rest forever.
While Hesperus, in azure Wagon brought
Millions of Tapers over all the Vault,
These gorgeous Revels to sweet Rest give place,
And the Earths Venus does Heavens Venus trace.
These Spousals past: the King does nothing mind
But the Lords House; there is his Care confined:
His Checker's open, he no Cost respects)
But sets a-work the wittiest Architects.
Millions of hands be busy laboring; The building of the TEMPLE.

Through all the Woods, wedges and beetles ring:
The Tufted Tops of sacred Libanon,
To climb Mount Sion, down the stream are gone:
Forests are sawed in Transomes, Beams, and Summers:
Great Rocks made little, what with Sawes and Hammers:
The sturdy Quar-man with steel-headed Cones
And massy Sledges slenteth out the Stones,
Digs through the bowels of the earth baked stiff,
Cuts a wide Window through a horned Cliff
Of ruddy Porphire, or white Alabaster,
And masters Marble, which no Time can Master.
One melts the White-stone with the force of Fire:
Another, leveld by the Lesbian Squire,
Deep under ground (for the Foundation) ioynes
Wel-polisht Marble, in long massy Coins;
Such both for stuff, and for rare artifice,
As might beseem some royal Frontispice.
This heaws a Chapter; that a Frize does frame;
This Carues a Cornich; that prepares a Iambe,
This forms a Plynth; that fits an Architraue;
This planes a Plank; and that the same does grave,
Gives life to Cedars dead, and cunningly
Makes Wood to move, to sigh and speak wel-nigh:
And others, rearing high the sacred Wall,
By their bold Labors Heaven it self appall:
Cheerly they work, and ply it in such sort
As if they thought long Summer-dayes too-short.
As in Grape-Harvest, with vnweary pains, Simile.

A willing Troup of merry-singing Swains,
With crooked hooks the strouting Clusters cut,
In Frails and Flaskets them as quickly put,
Run bowed with burdens to the fragrant Fat,
Tumble them in, and after pit-a-pat,
Up to the Waste; and dancing in the Must
To the vnder-Tub a flowery Shower do thrust:
They work a-vie, to the eye their Work does grow,
Who saw't in the Morning, scarce at Night can know
It for the same: and God himself does seem
To Have taken to Task this Work, and work for them,
While in the Night sweet Sleep restores with rest
The weary limbs of Workmen ouer-prest.
Great King, whence came this Courage ( Titan-like)
So many Hills to heap upon a rick?
What mighty Rowlers, and what massy Cars
Could bring so far so many monstrous Quars?
And, what huge strength of hanging Vaults embow'd
Bears such a weight above the winged Cloud?
If on the outside I do cast mine eye,
The Stones are joined so artificially,
That if the Macon had not checkerd fine,
Syrian.
Syre's Alabaster with hard Serpentine,
And hundred Marbles no less fair than firm;
The whole, a whole Quar one might rightly term.
If I look In, then scorn I all without:
Surpassing Riches shines all about:
Floor, Sides, and Seeling, couerd triple-fold,
Stone lyn'd with Cedar, cedar limn'd with Gold:
And all the Parget carved and branched trim
With Flowrs and Fruits, and winged Cherubim.
I over-passe the sacred Implements,
In worth far passing all these Ornaments:
The Art answers to the stuff, the stuff to the use.
O! perfect Artist, thou for Mould did choose
The Worlds Idea: For, as first the same
Was severed in a Threefold diverse Frame,
And God Almighty rightly did Ordain
One all Divine, one Heavenly, one Terrene;
Decking with Virtues one, with Stars another,
With Flowrs and Fruits, and Beasts, and Birds the other:
And played the Painter, when he did so gild
The turning Globes, blew'd Seas, and green'd the field,
Gave precious Stones so many-coloured luster,
Enameld Flowers, made Metals beam and glister:
The Caruer, when he cut in leaves and stems
Of Plants, such veins, such figures, files and hems:
The Founder, when he cast so many Forms
Of winged Fouls, of Fish, of Beasts, of Worms:
Thou do divide this Sacred House in Three;
The HOLY OF HOLIES, wher-in none may be
But God, the Cherubims, and (once a year)
The Sacred Figure of Perfection deer,
Of Gods eternal Son (Sins sin-les check)
The ever-lasting true MELCHISEDEC:
The fair mid-TEMPLE, which is open alone
To Sun-bright Levites, who on Izrael shone
With Rays of Doctrine; and who, feeding well
On the Laws Honey, seem in Heaven to dwell:
And the utter PORCH, the Peoples residence,
The Vulgars I Will, the World of Elements:
And various Artist honour'st all the Parts
With Myron's, Phydias, and Apelles Arts.
This Pattern pleased thee so, the have framed by it,
The eternal Watch-births of thy sacred Wit:
Thy pithy Book of Proverbs richly-graue,
Unto the PORCH may rich relation have:
For that it gives us Oeconomike Laws,
Rules Politic, and Private civil Sawes;
And for (the most) those Lessons general
At Humane matters aim the most of all.
Ecclesiastes the Mid-TEMPLE seems:
It treads down what ever Flesh esteems
Fair, pleasant, precious, glorious, good, or great;
Draws us from earth, and us in Heaven does seat;
And, all the World proclaiming Uain of Vains,
Man's happiness in Gods true Fear maintains.
SANCTVM-SANCTORVM, is thy Song of Songs,
Where, in Mysterious Verse (as meet belongs)
Thou Mariest Jacob to Heavens glorious King:
Where, thou (devoted) do divinely sing
CHRIST'S and his CHVRCHES Epithalamie:
Where (sweetly rapt in sacred Ecstasy)
The faith-full Soul talks with her God immense,
Hears his sweet Voice, her self does quintessence
In the pure flames of his sweet-pearcing eyes
(The Cabinets where Grace and Glory lies)
Enioyes her Joy, in her chaste bed does kiss
His holy lips (the Love of Loves) her Bliss.
When he had finished and had furnished full
The House of God, so rich, so bewtifull:
O God (said Solomon) great Only-Trine! Dedication of the Temple.

Which of this Mystike sacred House of Thine
Have made me Builder; build Me in the same
A living Stone. For thy deer DAVID'S name,
On DAVID'S branches DAVID'S bliss reviue;
That on his Throne his Issue still may thrive.
O All-comprising, None-comprised Prince,
Which art in Heaven by thy Magnificence,
In Hell by Justice, each-where by thy Powers:
Dwell here (deer Father) by thy Grace (to Ours).
If, in a doubtful Case, one needs must swear,
Loose thou the Knot, and punish thou severe
The audacious Periure; that henceforth none chance
Tax thee of Malice, or of Ignorance.
If our dis-flowred Trees, our Fields Hail-torn,
Our empty Ears, our light and blasted Corn,
Presage us Famine; if with ten-fold chain,
Thy hand has locked thy Water-gates of Rain;
And, toward this House we humbled cast our eye,
Hear us (O Lord) hear our complaint and cry.
If Captives we in a strange Land bewayl,
If in the Wars our Force and Fortune fail;
And, toward this House we humbled cast our eye,
Hear us (O Lord) hear our complaint and cry.
If Strangers, moov'd with rumor of thy Miracles,
Com here to Offer, to consult thine Oracles,
And in this House to kneel religiously,
Hear them, O Lord, hear their complaint and cry:
Hear them from Heaven; and by thy Favors pressed,
Draw to Thy TEMPLE, North, South, East, and West.
The passe-Man Wisdom of the Isacian Prince,
A Light so bright, set in such eminence
(Vn-hideable by envious Arrogance,
Under the Bushel of black Ignorance)
Shines every where, illustres every place;
Among the rest it Lightens in the Face
Of the fair Princess, that with prudent hand
The soft Arabian Scepter does command,
The Queen of Saba, where continual Spring The Queen of Saba.

Red Cinamom, Incense, and Myrrh does bring;
Where private men do Prince-like Treasures hold,
Where Pots be Silver, Bedsteds beaten Gold,
Where Walls are rough-cast with the richest Stones
Cast in Devises, Emblems, Scutchions.
Yet, leaving all this Greatness of her own,
She comes to view the State of SOLOMON,
To hear his Wisdom, and to see his City,
Refuge of Virtues, School of Faith and Pity. A just Reproose of all obstinate
Recusants.

You, that do shut your eyes against the rays
Of glorious Light, which shines in our days;
Whose spirits self-obstin'd in old musty Error,
Repulse the Truth ( The Almighties sacred Mirror)
Which day and night at your deaf Doors does knock;
Whose stubbornness will not at all vn-lock
The sacred Bible, nor so much as look,
To talk with God, into his holy Book:
O, fear you not that this great Princess shall
Of thank-les Sloth one-day condemn you all?
Who (both a Woman, Queen, and Pagan born)
Ease, Pleasures, Treasures, does despise and scorn;
To pass with great pains, and with great expense,
Long weary Iourneys full of diffidence:
And nobly travels to another Land
To hear the words but of a (mortal) Man?
Her Time's not lost: there (rapt) she does contemple
The sumptuous bewties of a stately TEMPLE,
The lofty Towers of hundred Towns in one,
A pompous Palace, and a peer-les Throne,
Walls rich without; furnished in richer sort:
Number of Servants does adorn the Court,
But more their Order; there, no noise is heard,
Each his own Office only does reguard:
And, (in one instant) as the quaverings
Of a quick Thumb, moves all the diverse strings
Of a sweet Guittern; and, its skill to grace,
Causes a Trebble sound, a Mean, a Base:
So SOLOMON, discreetly with a beck,
A wink a word, does all the Troop direct:
Each of his Servants has his proper Lesson,
And (after his Degree) each has his fashion.
This Queen, yer parting from her fragrant Isles,
Armed her with Riddles and with witty Wyles,
TO appose the King; and she resolves she will
With curious Questions sift and sound his Skill.
But lo what Oedipus! The Law-learn'd Sage,
Which at the Bar has almost spent his age,
Cannot so soon a common Doubt decide,
Where Statutes, Customs* and Book-Cases guide,
As he dissolues her Gordian-knots, and sees
Through all her nights, and even at pleasure frees
Such Doubts, as doubt-les might have taskt, t'vntwist,
The Brachman, Druide, and Gymnosophist:
And knowing, Good becomes more Good, the more
It is en-common'd, he applies there-fore
T'instruct her in the Faith; and (enuious-idle)
His brains rich Talent buries not in Idle.
Alas, I pity you: alas (quoth He)
Poor Souls besotted in Idolatry,
Who worship Gold and Silver, Stocks and Stones,
Men's workmanship, and Fiends Illusions;
And, who (by your sage Mages Lore miss-led)
So-many Godlings have imagined:
Madame, there is but one sole God, most-High,
The Eternal King, nay, self-Eternity,
Infinite, All in all, yet out of all,
Of Ends the End, of Firsts Original,
Of Lights the Light, Essencesur-passing Essence,
Of Powers pure Act, of Acts the very Puissance,
Cause of all Causes, Ocean of all Good,
The Life of Life, and of all Bewty Flood:
None-seen All-Seer, Starr's-guide, Sight of Seeing,
The Vni-forme, which gives all Forms their Being.
God, and One, is all One; whosoever the Unity
Denies, he (Atheist) disannuls Divinity:
The Unity dwells in God, in the Fiend the Twine:
The greater World has but one Sun to shine,
The lesser but one Soul, both but one God,
In Essence One, in Person Trinely-odde.
Of this great Frame, the Parts so due-devis'd,
This Body, tuned so, measured, sympathiz'd,
This TEMPLE, wheresuch Wealth and Order meet,
This Art in every part, cannot proceed
But from one Pattern; and that but from one
Author of all, who all preserues alone.
Else should we see in set Batalions
A hundred thousand furious Partisans,
The World would nource civil intestine Wars,
And wrack itself in itselfs factious Iars.
Besides, God is an Infinite Divinity:
And who can think of more than one Infinity?
Seeing the one restrains the others might,
Or rather reaues its name and being quight.
Therefore (O Pagans) why do you confine
The Infinite in narrow Walls of lime?
Why shut you Him in a base Trunk or Tree?
Why paint you Whom no mortal eye can see?
Why offer you your carnal services
Unto the Lord, who a mere Spirit is?
Why then do you (said she) by our example,
Incloseth' Immortal in this Earthly TEMPLE?
Lock him within an Arc? and, worse than we
Feed him with Fumes, and bloody Butcherie?
This Sacred House so fair (replied he then)
Is not to contain God, but godly men
Which worship him: and, we do not suppose
That He, whose Arms do Heaven and Earth enclose,
Is closed in a Chest; but the ancient Pact,
The solemn Covenant, and the sure Contract,
Which leagues us with our God, and each with other,
And (holy Bond) holds Heaven and Earth together.
As for our Incense, Washings, Sacrifices,
They are not (as is thought) Our vain Devices;
But, God's their Aurthor, and himself Ordains
These Elements, whereby he entertains
And feeds our understanding in the hope
Of his deer Son (of all these Things the Scope);
Setting before us the Only Sacrifice,
Which in CHRIST'S Blood shall wash-out all our vice.
Come then, O Lord, Come thou Laws finisher,
Great King, great Prophet, great Selfs-Offerer:
Come, come, thou thrice-Great Refuge of our State,
Come, thou out Ran come, Judge, and Advocate:
Mild Lamb, Salue-Serpent, Lion generous,
Vn-challeng'd Vmpire betwixt Heaven and Us,
Come thou, the Truth, the Substance and the End
Of all our Offerings, (whither, all do tend):
Come o MESSIAH, and do now begin
To Reign in Sion, to triumph of Sin;
And, worshipped in Spirit and Truth, restore
Upon the Earth the Golden Age of yore:
Accept this Queen, as of all Heathen Princes
The deer First Fruits: take on thee our Offenses,
That, stripped of Adam's Sinful suit, in fine
With sacred Angels we in Heaven may shine.
The Queen, nigh sunk in an Amaze-full Swoun,
Bespake him thus: My Lord, prattling Renown
Is wont in flying to increase so far,
That she proclaims things greater than they are: Simile.

And, rarest Spirits resemble Pictures right,
Whereof the rarest seem more exquisite,
Far-off, then near: but, so far as thy Fame
Ezcels all Kings, thy Virtues pass the same:
Thy peer-les Praise stoops to thy Learned tongue,
And envious bruit has done thy Wisdom wrong.
So may I say, even so (o SCOTTISH King) Application to the Kings Majesty.

Thy winged Fame, which far and wide does ring,
From the edge of Spain has made me venturously
To cross the Seas thy Britain's end to see:
Where (Lord!) what saw I? nay, what saw I not?
O King (Heav'n-chosen, for some special Plot)
Worlds Miracle, o Oracle of Princes?
I saw so much, my Soul mistrusts my Senses.
A gray-beards Wisdom in an amber-bush,
A Mars-like Courage in a Maid-like blush,
A settled Judgment with a supple Wit,
A quick Discourse, profound and pleasing yet;
Virgil and Tully, in one spirit infused,
And all Heavens Gifts into one Head diffused.
Persist, O King, glory on glory mount;
And as thy Virtues thine own Fame surmount,
So let thy future pass thy former more,
And go-before those that have gone-before:
Excel thy Self: and brave, grave, godly Prince,
Confirm my Songs eternal Evidence.
FINIS.
THE SCHISM. THE III. BOOK OF THE IIII. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Rejecting Old, Yong-Counsail'd rash ROBOAM
Loses Ten Tribes; which fall to JEROBOAM.
He, Godding Calves, makes Izrael to Sin:
His Scepter therefore shortly fails his Kin.
BAAZ, ZIMRI, OMRI, ACHAB (worst of all)
With IEZABEL. Elias conquers Baal;
Commands the Clouds; rapt-vp to Heaven, alive.
Elisha's Works: his bones the dead revive.
SAMARIA'S tragik Siege. A Storm at Sea,
For Jonas sake: repentant NINIVE.
Here sing I ISAAC'S civil Brauls and Broils; The misery of a State
distracted by factions into Civil Wars.

Jacobs Revolt; their Cities sack, their Spoils:
Their cursed Wrack, their Godded Calves: the rent
Of the Hebrew Tribes from the Isheans Regiment.
Ah! see we not, some seek the like in France?
With rage-full swords of civil Variance,
To share the sacred Gaulian Diadem?
To strip the Lillies from their native stem? Application.

And (as it were) to Cantonize the State
Whose Law did aw Imperial Rhine (of late)
Tiber and Iber too; and under whom
Even silver Iordan's captive floods did foam.
But, let not us, good Lord, O let not us Apprecation.

Serve servilely a hundred Kinglings thus,
In stead of one great Monarch: never let
The lawful Heir from his own Throne be beat;
This Scepter yearly to be new possessed;
Nor every Town to be a Tyrants nest:
Keep all entire, re-stablish prudent Reign,
Restore the Sword to Justice hand again;
That, blessed with Peace, thy blessed Praise (O Lord)
My thankful Lays may more and more record.
THE GENERAL States of Israel, gathered all, A Parliament, or Assembly of the
Estates of Israel.

By thousands now, within strong Sichem's Wall;
All jointly name ROBOAM for their King,
But (strictly-stout) his Power thus limiting:
Command (say they) and Rule in Abram's Fold,
Not as a Wolf, but as a Shepherd should:
Slacken the reans of our late Servitude: The People capitulate with their new
King.

Lighten our galled backs of those Burdens rude,
Those heavy Imposts of thy Father (fierce):
Repress the rapin of thine Officers:
So, we will serve thee, life and goods at-once:
If other-wise; thy Service we renounce.
Heer-with amazed, the moody Prince, in post
Sends for those Ancients which had swayed most
His Fathers Counsails: and he seems to crave
Their sage Advises, in a case so grave.
God has not made, say they (iumping together)
Subjects for Kings, but Kings for Subjects rather:
Then, let not thine (already in distress) The Counsel of the ancient Nobles.

^e gnaw'n by others; by thy Self much less.
What boots a Head, without the hand and foot?
What is a Scepter, and no Subjects to it?
The greater Milt, the Body pines the more:
The Checker's fatting makes the People poor:
A Princes Wealth in Subjects Wealth is set;
The Bank of Thrift, where gold does gold beget:
Where the good Prince coms never but at need:
For, he is praised for a good Heard (indeed)
Whose Flock is fat and fair, with frolik bounds
Frisking and skipping up and down the Douns.
Among the Beasts fullest of furious gall,
The Vulgar's fiercest, wildest, worst of all:
Hydra with thousand heads, and thousand stings,
Yet soon agreed to war against their Kings.
If then you wish, their barking rage to cease,
Cast them a bone; by an Abatement, ease
Their wringing Yoke: thy Pity let them prove,
And ground thy Greatness on thy Peoples love.
Or, if thou (fell) wilt needs feed on their ice,
Yet use no threats, nor give them flat Denies:
But, to establish thy yet-new Estate,
Give them some hope, and let them feed on that:
And (wisely) mind thy Fathers Saying sage,
That A soft answer (soon) appeaseth rage.
ROBOAM, scorning these old Senators, Roboam, leaving their sound advice
leans rather to the young fury of his Minions and Flatteries.

Leans to his Yonglings, Minions, Flatterers
(Birds of a feather) that with one accord
Cry-out, importune, and persuade their Lord,
Not sillily to be by such disturbed,
Nor let him-self so simply to be curbed;
But, to repress, press, and oppress the more
These Mal-contents, but too-well used before:
With iron teeth to bruise their idle bones,
To suck their Marrow out; and (for the nonce)
Their rebel Pride to fetter (as it were)
And lock their Fury in the stocks of Fear:
And, to shake-off (on the other side) and shun
Those Gray-beards old and cold direction,
Their saucy censures, snibbing his Minority;
Where-by (too-proud) they trip at his Authority,
Vsurp his place; and (too-too-malapert)
Would teach a wiser then themselves his part:
To know that he is a King; and that he took
Even in the womb, as the outward limbs and look,
So the inward graces, the Discretion
And deep Fore-fight of prudent SOLOMON;
And, in the Shop of Nature, learned (long since)
The Art of State, the Office of a Prince.
Wisdom (fond King) her sacred Seaterects
In hoarie brains: and Day the Day directs:
The old-man-fore-sees a-far; by past events
He (prudent) ponders future accidents:
The Young Man knows not (new-com, as it were)
This wily World, but as a passenger;
And, more with courage then with Counsail's guide,
Barely beholds things on the outer side.
Yet, to the last thou lean'st; and, frowning fell,
Checkst thus the Son's of noble Israel:
Ah! rebel Slaves! you, you will Rule your King: The Kings rashness threatening
rigor.

You Will be his Carvers: you will clip his wing:
You Will hold the sacred helm, control the Crown:
You Will rate his State, and turn all vp-side-down.
But, know you (varlets) whom you dally-with?
My little finger over-balanceth
My Father's loigns: he did but rub you light,
I Will flay your backs; he bowed, I Will break ye quight;
He threatened Rods (or gentle Whips of cord)
But I will have your carrion shoulders goar'd
With scourges tangd with rowels: and my Name
Shall make you quake, if you but hear the same.
As rapid streams, incountring in their way Simile.

With close-driv'n piles of some new bank or bay,
Or steady pillars of a Bridge built new,
Which last-past Summer never saw, nor knew;
Swell, roar, and rage far fiercer then they wont,
And with their foam defile the Welkins front:
So yerst grieved Isaac, now grown desperate,
With loud proud terms does thus expostulate:
Why? what have we to do (what part? what place?)
With Boozian Ishay's avaricious race? The Revolt of the 10. Tribes.

Go, Reign (proud Judah) where thou will; for we
Nill bear the burden of thy Tyranny:
Go use els-where thy cruel threats and braues;
We are thy Brethren, we, and not thy Slaves.
Thus cry the People, and the ill-counsal'd King
Vn-kingly yields to their rude Mutining:
And flies eft-soons with some few Beniamites,
The zealous Levites, and the ^^daites:
The rest revolt, and choose for Sovereign
A shame-les, faith-les, bold and busie-brain,
An Ephraimite, who (double-false) does fall Jeroboam.

Both from his King and from his God withal.
For, he fore-sees that if the Isacians still
(As Law inioyn'd (should mount on Sion Hill,
To sacrifice; with beauty of that Temple,
Their Princes sight, the Doctrine and Example
Of sacred Levites, they would soon be taken,
And drawn aboard the Bark they had forsaken.
To rent the Church therefore he does devise,
And God's true Spouse does Harlot*like disguise:
Will have them henceforth Worship God the Lord
Under the Form of Hay-fed Calves (abhorred)
In Dan and Bethel: brings-vp Service new;
Profane, usurping sacred Aron's Dew.
But, how (ingrate) requit'st thou God, in this?
He, of a Servant, made thee King of His:
Thou, of a God, make him a horned Steer;
Sett'st Altar against Altar; and, the deer,
Clear Star of Truth beclouding with the vail
Of thine Ambition, make all Israel fail,
And fall with-all into the Gulf of Death,
So deep (alas!) that from thence-forth, vn-eath
Could the operation of so many Miracles,
In their hard hearts re-print the Sacred Oracles.
One-day, the while this Priest-King sacrifiz'd
To's clov'n-foot God in Bethel (self-deviz'd)
A zealous Prophet from the Lord there came,
Who boldly thus his brutish rage does blame:
O odious House, O execrable Cell,
O Satan's Forge, O impious Shop of Hell;
Accursed Altar, that so braves and hoasts
Against the Altar of the Lord of Hoasts;
Behold, from David shall a King return
That on thy stones thine own Priests bones shall burn,
Thus says the Lord: and this shall be the Sign
(Prodigiously to seal his Word, in mine)
Thou now in the instant shall in sunder shatter,
And in the Air shall thy vile cinders scatter.
Take, take the Sot, said then the ungodly Prince,
And (as he spoke in rage-full vehemence)
Reacht-out his arm: but, instantly the same
So strangely withered and so number became,
And God so rustied every joint, that there
(But as the Body stird) it could not stir:
The vnsacred Altarsodain slent in twain;
And the ashes, flying through the un. hallowed Fane,
Blind the blind Priests; as in the Summer (often) Simile.

The light, white Dust (driven by the Wind aloft)
Whirling about, offends the tendrest eye,
And makes the Shepherds (without cause) to cry.
O holy Prophet (prays the Tyrant then)
Deer man of God, restore my hand again:
His hand is healed. But (obstinate in ill)
In His Calf-service He persevers still,
Still runs his Race, still every day impairs,
And of his Sins makes all his Sons his heirs.
The King of Judah little better proves,
His Fathers bypath so Abijam loves;
The People, pliant to their Princes guise,
Forget their God, and his drad Law despise.
God, notwithstanding (of his special grace)
Entails the Scepter to the sacred race
Of his deer David: and he binds with boughs
Of glorious Laurels their victorious brows:
And evermore (how-ever Tyrants rave)
Some form of Church in Sion will he have.
Aza, Abijam's Son; Iehosaphat
The son of Aza (rightly zealous) hate
All Idol-gods: and, warring with success,
Dung Isaak's Fields with foreign carcases.
In Aza's aid fights the arm armi-potent Aza.

(Which shakes the Heavens, rakes Hills, and Rocks does rent)
Against black Zerah's ouer-daring boast,
That with drad deluge of a Million Host
O'r-flow'd all I^d^; and, all sacking (fell)
Transported Afrik into Israel:
He fights for His; who, seeing the Ammonite,
The Idumaean, and proud Moabite,
In Battle ray, caused all his Host to sing
This Song aloud, them thus encouraging:
Sa, sa, (my hearts) let us cheerly to the charge;
Having for Captain, for Defense, and Targe,
That glorious Prince to whom the raging Sea
Has heertofore, in foming pride, given way:
Who, with a sigh (or with a whistle, rather)
Can call the North, South, East, and West together:
Who, at a beck, or with a wink, commands
Millions of millions of bright-winged Bands:
Who, with a breath, brings (in an instant) under
The proudest Powrs: whose arrows are the Thunder.
While yet they sang, fell Discord reaching-far, Description of Discord.

Hies to the Heathen that encamped are:
Clean through her mantle (tatterd all in flakes)
Appears her breast all-over gnaw'n with Snakes,
Her skin is scarr'd, her teeth (for rage) do gnash,
The Basilisk with-in her eyes does flash;
And, one by one, she plucks-off (in despite)
Her hairs (no hairs, but hissing Serpents right)
And, one by one, she severally bestows-'em
Through all the Camp, in every Captains bosom,
Blows every vein full of her furious mood,
Burns every Soldier with the thirst of blood:
And, with the same blade that she died once
In valiant Gedeon's (Brother-slaughtered) Sons,
She sets the Brother to assail the Brother,
The Son the Sier, and dearest Friends each-other.
The swords new draw'n against their Enemies, Miraculous slaughter of the
Heathen by their mutual swords, divided among themselves.

Now (new revolted) hack their own Allies:
And Mars so mads them in their mutual Iar,
That strange, turns civil, civil, household War:
Proud Edom heaws Moab and the Ammonite;
Amon hunts Edom and the Moabite;
Moab assaults Amon and Edom too;
And each of them wars first with the other two,
Then with themselves: then Amon Amon thrills,
Moab wounds Moab, Edom Edom kills.
From Host to Host, blinde-fold Despair, in each,
Disports her self; those that are one in speech,
Under one colors, of one very coat,
Combat each other, cut each others throat.
Rage-full confusion everywhere commands, The Confusion of such a Camp so
together by the cares.

Against his Captain the Lieutenant stands,
The Corporal upon his Seriant flies,
And basest Boys against their Masters rise.
Nay, drad Bellona passes fiercely further,
The own Uncle does his own deer Nephew murder,
The Nephew the Uncle with the like repayes,
Cosen thrils Cosen, Kins-man Kins-man slayes:
Yea, even the Father kills his Son most cruel,
And from one Belly springs a bloody Duel;
Twins fiercely fight: and while each wounds other,
And draws the lifeblood of his half-self Brother,
Feels not his own to fail, till in the place
Both fall; as like in fury as in face:
But, strength at length (not stomach) fails in either;
And, as together born, they die together.
The faithful Host draws near, and gladly goes
Viewing the bodies of their breath-les Foes.
Men, Camels, Horse (some saddled, some without)
Pikes, Quivers, Darts, lie mingled all about
The bloody Field; and from the Mountains nigh
The Rav'ns begin with their pork-porking cry:
Here seems an Arm, a Giant late did owe,
As if it would to a Dwarf's shoulder grow:
A Princes hand there (known by precious signs)
Unto the arm of a base Porter ioyns;
An olde-Man's head here to a Stripling's neck;
And there, lean buttocks to a brawny back:
Here, of a Body justly cloven in two,
The bloody tripes are trailing to and fro;
There, five red fingers of a Hand cut off
Gripe still the truncheon of a steeled staff;
And, there (at-once, all broached on one Lance)
Lie three brave Horsemen in a deadly Trance.
Chariots, unfurnished and vnharnest stood,
Over the spoaks, up to the naves in blood*
The Engaddian Snowes melt in vermilion streams,
And (now no marvel) Iaruel warmly steams,
Stopped with dead bodies; so, that never-more
It should have seen the Ocean (as before)
Nor paid the Tribute that his Duty craves,
Save that the crimsin holp the crystal waves.
Praised be God (said Judah) praised be
The Lord of Hoasts, the King of Majesty,
That moawes his Foes; that does his own protect,
That holds so deer the blood of his elect:
That fights for us, and teaches us to fight,
Conquer, and triumph of the Pagan's might:
And (finally) does punish Tyrants fell,
With their own swords, to save his Israel.
But, notwithstanding Ieroboam's Plot, Wicked generation of the wicked.

His third Successor yet succeeds him not;
A barbarous Fury reigns in his Race,
His bloody Scepter shifteth hands apace:
Nadab his son, and all his seed beside,
Feels cursed Baasha's cruel Paricide;
And Baasha's issue is by Zimri slain,
Zimri by Zimri; then does Omri reign,
Omri, accursed for his own transgression,
But more accursed for the foul succession
Of such a Son as Achab (sold to Sin)
That boldly brings Sidonian Idols in,
Builds unto Baal; and, of all Kings the worst,
Weds Iezabel, adds Drunkenness to Thirst.
Blind Superstition's like a drop of Oil 2. Similes.

Still spreading, till it all a Garment spoil:
Or, like a spark, fallen in a floor of Mat,
Which soon inflameth all the Chamber; that,
Fires the whole House; the House, the Town about;
Consuming all, and never going-out,
Till Goods, and Bodies, Towrs, and Temples high,
All in a Toomb of their own ashes lie:
When one begins (how little be it) to stray
From the divine Law's little-beaten way,
We cursed fall into the black Abyss
Of all foul Errrors: every Sin that is
Donns sacred Mask; and, monsters most ahhord,
Killing the Saints we think to please the Lord,
As Achab did; who vanquished with the spel,
Speech, grace, and face of painted Iezabel,
Presumes to lay his sacrilegious hand
On the oyled Priests that in Gods presence stand,
Of honest Men his Towns depopulates,
Lessens the Number of his Noble States,
T'augment his Lands; and, with the blood of His,
Wrights the Instruments of his new Purchases.
But slain (at last) by the Host of Benhadad,
His Son Ahaziah.
succeeds him (and almost as bad)
He breaks his neck, and leaves his fatal place,
To 's brother Ioram, last of Achab's race;
An odious race, the alliance of whose blood
Corrupts the Heirs of Iosaphat the good,
Causing his Son (charmed with Athalia's wile)
In's Brother's blood his armed arms to file,
And Ahaziah's giddy brain t'infect
With the damned Error of Samarian Sect.
But, though these Kings did openly oppugn
And stubbornly the King of Heaven impugn;
Though Abrah'ms issue (now degenerate)
Did but too-neer their Princes imitate;
Though over all, a Chaos of confusion,
A Hell of Horror, Murder, and Delusion,
A Sea of Sins (contempt of God and Good)
Covered these Kingdoms (as another Flood);
God left not yet that Age without his Oracles:
A hundred Prophets, strong in word and miracles,
Resist their rage and from sad drowning keep
The wracked planks on the Idol-Ocean deep.
Clear Summer Noons need not a candlelight; Simile.

Nor sound, Physician; but clean opposite:
So, in our Souls, the more Sin's Floods do flow,
The more God makes his Mercie's Gulf to grow.
For his Embassage in sad Achab's days, Elijah the Prophet.

These bite Elijah did the Almighty raise;
Who, burning-bold in spirit and speech, cries-out,
In Achab's ears and all his Court about:
O impious Achab, fear thou not (quoth he)
The sulphury flames and Thunderbolts that be
Already roaring in the dreadful fist
Of God the Lord, that does the proud resist,
Revengeth wrongs, the outrageous Heathen's Hammer,
Terror of Terrors, and all Tyrants Tamer?
Do thou not know, He threats to Israel
A Heaven of Brass, if they his grace repel,
Reject his love, and get them other Loves,
Whoring about with foreign* Gods, in Groves?
God cannot lie: His dreadful Threatenings ever
Draw dreadful Judgments (if our Sin persever):
As the Lord lives, this thirsty yawning Plain
In seav'n six Month's drinks not a drop of Rain.
No sooner spoken, but in present view, Description of the extreme Drought in
Israel for three years and a half.

The Heavens begin to change their wonted hew;
The Air deadly thick, does quickly vanish quight;
To a sad Day succeeds a sadder Night:
A bloody vapor and a burning cloud,
By day, begirt the Sun (all coaly-browd);
By night, the Moon denies to fading Flowrs
Her silver sweat, and pearly-purled showrs:
The Welkin's studded with new Blazing-Stars,
Flame-darting Lances, fiery crowns and Cars,
Kids, Lions, Bears, wrapped in prodigious Beams,
Dreadful to see: and Phoebus (as it seems)
Weary of travail in so hot a time,
Rests all the while in boiling Cancer's clime.
Hills, lately hid with snow, now burn a main:
May has no Deaw, nor February Rain:
Sad Atlas Nieces, and the Hunter's Star
Have like effect as the Canicular:
Zephyre is mute, and not a breath is felt,
But hectik Auster's, which does all things swelt,
And (panting-short) puffs everywhere upon
The withered Plains of wicked Shomeron,
The unsavory breath of Serpents crawling over
The Lybians pest-full and vn-blest-full shore.
Now Herbs to fail, and Flowrs to fall began; The miserable effects thereof.

Mirtles and Bays for want of moist grew wan:
With open mouth the Earth the aid does crave
Of black-blew Clouds: clear Kishon's rapid wave
Wars now no more with Bridges arched round;
Sorek, for shame, now hides him under ground:
Mokmur, whose murmur troubled with the noise
The sleeping Shepherds, has nor stream, nor voice,
Cedron's not Cedron, but (late) Cedron's bed,
And Iordan's Current is as dry, as dead.
The beam-brow'd Stag, and strong-neckt Bull do ly
On palc-fac't banks of Arnon (also dry)
But, neither sup, nor see the Crystal Wave,
Over the which so often swom they have:
The lusty Courser that late scorned the ground,
Now lank and lean, with crest and courage downd,
With rugged tongue out of his chained mouth,
With hollow-flanks panting for inward drouth,
Rouling his Bit, but with a feeble rumor,
Would sweat for faintnes, but he wants humor:
The Towr-backt Camel, that best brooketh Thirst,
And on his bunch could have transported yerst
Near a whole Household, now is able scant
To bear him self, he is so feebly-faint.
Both young and old, both of the base and best,
Feel a fell Aetna in their thirsty breast:
To temper which, they breath, but to their woe:
For, for pure air, they sup into them, so,
A putride, thick, and pestilentiall fume,
Which stuffs their Lights and does their lives consume.
There Is not a Puddle (though it strangely stink)
But dry they draw't, Sea-Water's dainty Drink:
And fusty-Bottles, from Beyond Sea (South)
Bring Nile to Somer, for the Kings own mouth.
For, though the Lord the whole Land of Syria smights,
The heat of his Anger on Samaria lights
With greatest force; whose furious Prince implies,
The Prophet Cause of all these miseries.
Therefore, he fearing Achab's ragefull hate,
Down to Brook Ch^rith's hollow banks he gate;
Where, for his Cooks, Caters, and Wayters, tho
From the four winds the winged people go.
Thence, to Sareptha* where he craves the aid The Widow of Sarepta.

Of a poor Widow, who thus mildely said,
Alas! fain would I, but (God wot) my store
Is but of bread for one meal (and no more):
Yet, give me (says he) give me some (I pray);
Who sows sparing, sparing reapeth ay:
Sure a good turn shall never guerdon want;
A Gift to Needlings is not given, but lent:
T's a Well of Wealth, which does perpetual run:
A fruitful Field which thousand yields for one.
While thus he said, and staid; the Widow glad, The fruits of Charity.

Gives to him frankly all the bread she had:
She lost not by it: for, all the Famin-while,
That raged in Tire, her little Flowr and Oil
Decreased not, yet had she plenty still,
For her and hers to feed in time their fill.
At length befell fell Death to take-away
Her only Son, and with her Son her Joy:
She prays her Guest, and he implores his God,
And stretching him upon the breath-les Lad,
Thus cries aloud: Vouch safe me, Lord, this boon,
Restore this child's soul, which (it seems) to-soon
Thou have bereft: O! let it not be said,
That here for naught I have so ought been fed:
Let not my presence be each-where abhorred;
Nor Charity with thee to want Reward.
As a small seedling of that fruitful Worm, Simile.

Which (of it self) fine shining Sleaves does form,
By the warm comfort of a Virgin breast,
Begins to quicken, creeps (as the rest)
Re-spins a-fresh, and, in her witty loom,
Makes of her corpse her corpse a precious Toomb:
This Child (no Man, but Man's pale Module now)
With death ith bosom, horror on the brow,
The bait of Worms, the Booty of the Beer,
At sacred words begins his ey to rear;
Swimming in Death, his powrs do re-assemble,
His spirits (rewarm'd) with-in his artirs tremble;
He fetched a sigh, then lively rising too,
Talks, walks, and eats, as he was wont to do.
Fain would the Mother have besought the Seer
TO have past the rest of his cold Olde-age here:
But the holy spirit him sudden hence does bring
Unto Samaria to the incensed King;
Who rates him thus: O Basilisk! O Bane!
Art not thou He that sow'st the Isaacian Plain
With Trouble-Tares? Seditious, have not thou The like Imputations, in our
days, the blind Popelings and profane ^^ orldlings have laid upon the Gospel
and the Preachers thereof.

Profaned the Laws of our Forefathers now?
Broken all Orders, and the Altars bann'd
Of the holy Gods, Protectors of our Land?
Since thy fond Preaching did here first begin,
More and more heavy has Heavens anger bin
Upon us all; and Baal, blasphemed by thee,
Has since that season never left us free*
From grievous Plagues: it is a Hellwe feel,
Our Heaven is Brass, our Earth is all of Steel.
No, no, O King (if I the Truth shall tell)
Thou, thou art he that troublest Israel.
Thou (give me leave) thou and thy Grand-sires, mad*
After strange Gods in every Grove to gad,
Have left the true, wise, wondrous (all-abroad)
Omnipotent, victorious, glorious God:
Such shall you prove him, if you dare oppone
All your Baal-Prophets against me, but one.
Content, quoth Achab: then to Carmel's top
The Schismik Priests were quickly called up:
Unto their Baal an Altar build they there;
To God, the Prophet does another rear:
Both have their Beasts; and by their prayer must prove
Whose God is GOD, by Fire from Heaven above.
The People's eyes, and ears, and minds are bent
Upon these Maruails, to observe the event
(Maruails, which might well clear the difference
That had so long depended in suspense
'Twixt Israel and Judah; and direct
The Earth how to serve Heavens sacred Architect)
As when two Bulls, inflamed fiercely-fell, Simile.

Met front to front, their forked arms do mell,
The feeble Herds of Heifers in a maze
Twixt hope and fear, vnfeeding, stand at gaze,
To see the Fight, and censure which do prove
The valiantest, that he may be their Love.
Baal's baalling Priests call and cry out for life,
They gash their flesh, with Launcet and with knife, Baals Priests.

They cruel make their blood to spin about
(As Claret wine from a pearc't Piece does spout)
And, madly shaking heads, legs, sides and arms,
They howling chant these Dithyrambik charms;
Help, help, O Baal, O Baal attend our cries,
Baal, hear us Baal, O Baal, bow down thine eyes:
O Stratian, Clarian, Eleutherian Powrs,
Panomphaean God, approve us thine, thee ours:
O Epicarpian! O Epistatirian,
Phyxian, Feretrian, O Exacestirian,
Xenian, Messapian, O Lebradean BAAL,
O Assabine, BAAL-SAMEN, hear our Call.
Elijah, that their bloody Rites abhord,
And knows aright the service of the Lord,
TO appease his wrath he does not scarre his skin;
Nor with self-wounds presume his grace to win,
Nor makes himself unfitting for his function,
By selfly stripes (as causing more compunction)
Nor, thrild with bodkins, raves in frantik-wise,
And in a fury seems to prophetize:
But offers God his heart, in steed of blood;
His speech is sober, and as mild his mood.
Cry loud, quoth he: your God is yet perchance Ir^nia.

In a deep sleep, or does in Arms advance
Against his Foes (the Egyptian Deities)
Or is consulting how to keep the Flies
From off his Altar. But, O Izrael!
Alas! why yoakst thou God with Baal (or Bell)?
Alas! how long thus will thou halt twixt either,
And fondly mix Darnel and Wheat together
In thy Faith's Field? If Baal be God indeed,
Then boldly serve him, seek him sole at need:
But, if blew Sea, and winged Firmament,
The all-bearing Earth, and Storm-breed Element,
Be but the least Works of the Almighty hand
Of Jacob's God: If Heaven, Air, Sea, and Land,
And all in all, and all in every one,
By his own finger be sustained alone:
If he have cast those cursed Nations out,
Which yerst defiled this fair, fat Land about;
To give it thee, to plant thee in their place,
Why him alone do thou not ay embrace,
And serve him only in thy Soul and Heart,
Who in his Love brooks none to share a part?
The cord vn-twisted weakens: and who serves
Two Lords at-once, to lose them both deserves.
Baal dead (thouseest) hears not his Servants call,
Much less can grant them their Desires at all:
But, Iaacob's God, IEHOVA, ELOHIM,
Never deceives their hope that trust in him.
Hear me therefore, O Lord, and from above
With Sacred Fire (thy Soverain power to prove)
Consume this Bullock, and show by the same
That thou art GOD, and I thy Servant am:
And to thy Fold (thy Churches Lap) repeal
Thy wandering Flock, thy chosen Izrael.
As falls a Meteor in a Summer Even, Simile.

A sudden Flash coms flaming down from Heaven,
Licks dry the Dikes, and instantly, at-once,
Burns all to Ashes, both the Altar-stones,
And the Offered Bullock: and the People fall
In zealous fury on the Priests of Baal;
And, by Elijah's prayer, soon obtain
Rain, which so often they had asked in vain.
For, what is it Elijah cannot do?
If he be hungry, Fouls, and Angels too,
Become his Stewards. Fears he the armed Bands
Of a fell Tyrant? from their bloody hands
To rescue him, Heaven (his confederate)
Consumes with Fire them and their fiery hate.
Or, would he pass a Brook that brooks no bay,
Nor Bridge, nor Bank? The Water gives him way.
Or, irks him Earth? To Heaven alive he hies,
And (saving Henoch) only He not-dies.
This Man of God, discoursing with his heir Elijah taken up alive into Heaven.

Of the upper Kingdom and of Gods Affair,
A sudden whirl-winde, with a whiffing Fire,
And flaming Chariot rapts him up entire,
Burns not, but fines; and does (in fashion strange)
By death-les Death, mortal immortal change.
A long-tail'd squib, a flaming ridge, for rut
Seems seen a while, where the bright Coach has cut.
This sacred Rape, nigh rapt Elisha too;
Who, taking up his Tutors Mantle, tho,
Follows as far as well he could with ey
The fire-snort Palfreys, through the sparkling Sky;
Crying, My father, father mine farewell,
The Chariots and the Horse of Izrael.
The Thisbian Prophet hangs not in the Air,
Amid the Meteors to be tossed there,
As Mists and Rains, and Hail, and hoarie Plumes,
And other Fiery many-formed Fumes:
Amid the Air tumultuous Satan roules;
And not the Saints, the happy, heavenly Souls.
Nor is he nailed to some shining Wheel,
Ixion-like continually to reel;
For CHRIST his flesh transfigur'd, and divine,
Mounted above the Arches Crystalline:
And where CHRIST is, from pain and passion free,
There (after death) shall all his Chosen be.
Elijah therefore climbs the Empyreal Pole,
Where, ever-blest in body and in soul,
Contemns this World, becoms an Angel bright,
And does him firm to the TRINE-ONE unite.
But how, or why should He this vantage have
Yer CHRIST (right called the first fruits of the Grave)?
O happy passage! O sweet, sacred Flight!
O blessed Rape! thou raptest so my spright
In this Dispute, and make my weaker wit
So many ways to cast-about for it,
That (I confess) the more I do contend,
I more admire, and less I comprehend.
For lack of wings, then biding here below
With his Successor, I proceed to show,
How, soon as he took-vp his Cloak (to bear-it) Elizeus or Elisha.

Within Elisha shined Elijah's Spirit;
By power whereof, immediately he cleaves
An vn-couth way through Iordan's rapid waves:
Past hope he gives to the Sunamian Wife
A Son; and soon restores him dead to life:
With sudden blindness smightes the Syrian Troup
The which in Dothan did him round in coup:
Increases bread, and of a pound of Oil
Fills all the Vessels in a Town that while:
His hoary head (in Bethel) laughed to scorn,
Is veng'd by Bears, on forty children torn:
Naaman's cleans'd; and, for foul Simonie,
Gehazi's punished with his Leprosy:
Mends bitter Broth, he makes Iron swim,
As porie Cork, upon the Water's brim.
Rich Iericho's (sometimes) sal-peetry soil,
Through brinie springs that did about it boil,
Brought forth no fruit, and her vn-holsom Brooks
Voyded the Town of Folk, the Fields of Flocks:
The Townsmen, therefore, thus besought the Seer;
Thou see our Citie's situation here
Is passing pleasant; but the ground is naught,
The Water worse: we pray thee mend the fault,
Sweeten our Rivers, make them pleasanter,
Our Hills more green, our Plains more fertiler.
The Prophet calls but for a Cruse of Salt
(O strangest cure!) to cure the brynie fault
Of all their Floods; and, casting that in one
Foul stinking Spring, heals all their streams anon:
Not, for an hour, or for a day, or twain,
But to this Day they sweet and sound remain.
Their Valley, walled with bald Hills before,
But even a horror to behold, of-yore;
Is now an Eden, and the All-circling Sun,
For fruitful beauty, sees no Paragon.
There (labour-les) mounts the victorious Palm,
There (and but there) grows the all-healing Balm,
There ripes the rare cheer-cheek Myrobalan,
Minde-gladding Fruit, that can vn-olde a Man.
O skillful Husbands, give your fattest Plains
Five or six earths; spare neither cost nor pains,
To water them; rid them of weeds and stones,
With Muck and Marle batten and baste their bones;
Unless God bless your Labor and your Land,
You plough the Sea, and sow upon the sand.
This, Jury knows; a Soil sometimes (at least)
Sole Paradise of all the proudest East:
But now the brutest and most barren place,
The curse of God, and all the Worlds disgrace:
And also Greece, on whom Heavens (yerst so good)
Rain nothing now but their drad Furie's Flood.
The grace of God is a most sure Revenue,
A Sea of Wealth, that ever shall continue,
A never-failing Field, which needs not ay
The cool of Night, nor comfort of the Day.
What shall I say? This sacred Personage
Not only profits to his proper Age;
But, after life, life in his bones he leaves,
And dead, the dead he raises from their graves.
Nor is Elisha famous more for Miracles,
Than for the Truth of his so often Oracles:
He shows the Palms and Foils of Israel,
Benhadad's death, the Reign of Hazael:
Beyond all hope, and passing all appearance,
Dejected Ioram's near relief he warrants.
For, now the Syrian, with insulting Powrs, The fiege and Famine of Samaria.

So streict besieges the Samarian Towrs,
That even al-ready in each nook agrising,
Fell, wall-break (all-break) Famine, ill-advising
Howls hideously: even the bare bones are seen
(As sharp as knives) thorough the empty skin
Of the best bred: and each-man seems (almost)
No Man indeed, but a pale ghastly Ghost.
Some snatch the bread from their own Babes, that pine;
Some eat the Draff that was ordained for Swine,
Some do defile them with forbidden flesh,
Some bite the grass their hunger to refresh;
Some, gold for Birds-dung (weight for weight) exchange;
Some, of their Boots make them a Banquet strange,
Some fry the Hay-dust, and it savorie find;
Some, Almond-shels and Nut-shels gladly grind,
Some mince their Fathers Wills, in parchment writ,
And so devour their Birthright at a bit.
The King, when weary he would rest awhile,
Dreams of the Dainties he has had yer-while,
Smacks, swallows, grindes both with his teeth and iaws;
But, only wind his beguiled belly draws:
And, then awaking, of his own spare Diet
Robbs his own breast, to keep his Captains quiet.
He is importuned here and there, about:
Above the rest, a Woman skrieketh out
In moornfull manner, with disheueled hair;
Her face despite, her fashion shows despair.
O! stay my Liege, heat, hear a grievous thing; Mothers eat their own Children.

Justice, great Ioram, Justice, gentle King.
O, no, not Justice: (did I Justice crave?)
Fondling, in Justice, thou can nothing have
But a just death; nay, but a Torture fell,
Nay, but a Torment, like the pains of Hell.
Yet, even this Plea is worse then death to me:
Then grant me Justice, Justice let it be.
For (O!) what horror can restrain desire*
Of just Revenge, when it is once afire?
My Lord, I bargained, and (to bind the Pact)
By solemn Oath I sealed the Contract;
Contract, indeed cruel, yet could not be
Infringed, or broken, without Cruelty.
(Tell it O Tongue, why stay'st thou so vpon-it?
Dare thou not say-it, having dared and don-it?
Not having feared Heavens King, how can thou fear
An earthly King?) Then, thus (my Liege) while-yer.
I, and my Neighbor desperately agreed,
Jointly to eat, successively, our seed;
Our own deer Children: and (O luck-les Lot!)
Mine first of all, is destined to the Pot:
Forthwith I catch-him and I snatch him to-me
Up in mine arms: he straight begins to woo-me,
Strokes, colls, and huggs me, with his arms and thighs:
And, smiling sweet, Mam-mam, mam-mam, he cries,
Then kisses me; and, with a thousand toys,
Thinks to delight me with his wonted joys.
I look away, and with my hand addressed,
Bury my knife within his tender breast:
And, as a Tigresse, or the Dam of Bears,
A Fawn or Kid in hundred gobbets tears,
I tear him quick, dress him, and on our Table*
I set him: oh! ('it is now no time to fable)
I taste him first, I first the feast begin,
His blood (my blood) runs round about my Chin,
My Child returns, re-breeding in my Womb;
And of my Flesh my Flesh is shameful Tomb:
Soon cloyd (alas!) but little could I eat,
And up again that little strives to get.
But she, she lays it in, she greedy plyes-it,
And all night long she sits to gourmandize-it:
Not for her fill so much, of such (think I)
As to prolong the more my misery:
O God, said she (and smiles in eating it)
What a sweet morsel! what a dainty bit!
Blessed be the breast that nu^c't such meat for me;
But more the Womb that bare it, so to be.
So (to be brief) my Son is eat: But hers
Alive and lusty in her arms she bears.
Why should her Pity, rather her despite,
Do both her Faith, Me, and my Son, vn-right?
Ah! for her belly, rather then her Boy,
She played this prank (and robbed me of my Joy).
She did it not, of tender heart to save him;
But, greedy-gut, that she alone might have him.
Therefore, O King, do Justice in this case:
Nor crave I pardon of thy princely grace
For mine Offense; (such an Offense, I know,
As yet grim Minos never judged below)
For if I should, how should I do, for meat;
Not having now another Child to eat?
No: this is all I crave before I die,
That I may taste but of Her sonns sweet thigh:
Or, that (at least) mine eye, more just then cruel,
May see him slain by her, my Horrors Fuel.
But, if you weigh not mine unfeigned ^ears
(Indeed vn-worthy): yet vouchsafe your ears
To the loud Plaints of my lamenting Son;
Who, with strange murmurs rumbling up and down,
Seems in my bowels as revived to groan,
And to your Highness, thus to make his moan;
Sir, will you suffer, without all revenge,
Men's cursed malice boldly to infringe
Law, Faith, and Justice, Vows, and Oaths, and all;
As buzzing Flies tear Cob-webs on a wall?
Ah! shall I then descend alone below?
Die vn-reveng'd? foster my cruel Foe?
And then-cast-forth in foulest Excrement,
Infect the Aier, offend the Element;
The while her Darling, on his Hobbyhorse
About the Hall shall ride, and prance, and course;
And imitate Men's actions (as an Ape),
Build paper-Towrs, make Puppets, sit in Lap?
No: let him die, let him (as I) be cut,
Let him (as I) be in two Bellies put:
Full-fill the Pact; that so our wretched Mothers
Their Guilt and Grief, may either's match with others.
The King, less moved with pity than with horror,
Thunders these words, raging in threat-full terror;
Vengeance and mischief on mine own head light,
If cursed Elisha keep his head this night:
And, as he spoke, forth in a rage he flings,
To execute his bloody Threatenings.
Sir, said the Prophet, you have seen the skathe
Devouring Famine here performed has:
But, by tomorrow this time (God has said)
Samaria's Gates shall even abound with Bread.
Tush (said a Minion of the Court, hard by,
Of surly speech, proud gait, and lofty ey)
Though God should open all Heavens windows wide,
It cannot be: Yes, Infidel (replied
The zealous Prophet) Thouthy Self (in sum)
Shall see it then: but slialt not taste a Crum.
Thus said Elisha, and the Almighty Power
Performed his Sayings in the very howr.
Her scarlet Robe Aurora had not donn'd,
Nor had she yet limn'd the Euphratean strond
With trembling shine, neither was Phoebus yet
Willing to wake out of a drouzie Fit,
When pallid FEAR, flies to the Pagan Host, Description and effects of Fear.

Wilde-staring Hag, shivering, and wavering most;
She, that her voice and visage shifts so often:
She that in Counsails strives to lift aloft
Irresolution, to be President
(Canker of Honor, curse of Government):
She that even trembles in her surest Arms,
Starts at a leaf, swouns at report of harms:
Believes all, sees all; and so swayeth all,
That, if she say, the Firmament does fall:
There be three Suns: This, or that Mountain sinks:
Paul's Church does reel, or the foundation shrinks:
It is believed, it is seen: and, seized by Her,
The other Senses are as apt to err.
Clashing of Arms, Rattling of iron Cars,
Murmur of Men (a World of Soldiars)
Neighing of Horse, noise of a thousand Drums
With dreadful sound from the next Vale there coms.
The Syrian Camp, conceiving that the Troops
Of Nabathits, Hethits, and Ethyops,
Hyr'd by the Isaacians, came from every side,
To raise their Siege, and to repel their pride;
Fly for their lives, disordered and dispersed
(Amid the Mountains) so well-ordered yerst.
One, in his Cap-case leaves-behinde his Treasure:
To bridle's horse another has not leisure;
Another, hungry on the grass has set
His Breakfast out, but dares not stay to eat.
One thinks him far, that yet has little gone;
Another weens him in plain ground, anon
He breaks his neck into a Pit: another
Hearing the Boughs that brush against each other,
And doubting it to be the Conqueror,
He wretched dies of the only wound of FEAR.
As, after tedious and continual rain, Simile.

The honey-Flies haste from their Hiues again,
Suck here and there, and bear into their bowr
The sweetest sap of every fragrant flowr:
So from besieged Samaria each man hies,
Unto the* Tents of fear-fled Enemies;
Wherein, such store of corn and wine they pill,
That in one day their hungry Town they fill:
And in the Gate, the Crowd that issues,
Treads the unbelieving Courtier down to death;
So that (at once) even both effects agree
Just with Elisha's holy prophecy.
From this School comes the Prophet Amethite,
The twice-born Preacher to the Niniuite.
Jonas, be gone: hie, hie thee (said the Almighty) The Shipwreck of JONAS.

To Niniue, that great and wanton City:
Cry day and night, cry out unto them all;
Yet forty days, and Niniue shall fall.
But, against the Eternal, Jonas shuts his ear,
And ships himself to sail another-where:
Wherefore, the Lord (incensed) stretched his arm,
To wrack the wretch in sudden fearful Storm.
Now, Nereus foams, and now the furious waves A lively Description of a storm
at Sea.

All topsie-turned by the Aeolian slaves,
Do mount and roll: Heavens war against the Waters,
And angry Thetis Earth's green bulwarks batters:
A sable ayrso muffles-vp the Sky,
That the sad Sailors can no light descry:
Or, if some beam break through their pitchy night,
It Is but drad flashing of the Lightning's light.
Strike, strike our sail (the Master cries) amain,
Vail misne and sprit-sail: but he cries in vain;
For in his face the blasts so bluster ay,
That his Sea-gibberish is straight born away.
Confused Cries of men dismayed in mind,
Seas angry noise, loud bellowing of the wind,
Heavens Thunderclaps, the tackles whisteling
(As strange Musicians) dreadful descant sing.
The Eastern wind drives on the roaring train
Of white-blew billows, and the clouds again
With fresh Seas cross the Sea, and she does send
(In counter-change) a rain with salt y-blend.
Heavens (headlong) seem in Thetis lap to fall,
Seas scale the skies, and God to arm this All
Against one ship, that skips from stars to ground,
From wave to wave (like Balloons windy bound)
While the sad Pilot, on a foamy Mount,
Thinks from the Pole to see Hells pit profound;
And, then, cast down unto the sandy shole,
Seems from low Hell to see the lofty Pole:
And, feeling foes within and eek without,
As many waves, so many deaths does doubt.
The Billows, beating round about the ship,
Vncauk her keel, and all her seams unrip;
Whereby the waters, entering vncontroul'd,
Ebbing abroad, yet flow apace in hold:
For every Tun the plied Pump does rid,
A flood breaks in; the Master mastered
With dread and danger (threatening euery-way)
Doubts where to turn him, what to do, or say,
Which wave to meet, or which salt surge to fly;
So yields his charge in Sea to live or die.
As, many Cannons, against a Castle bent, Simile.

Make many holes, and much the rampire rent,
And shake the wall, but yet the latest shock
Of fire-wingd bullets batters down the Rock:
So, many mounts that muster against this Sail,
With roaring rage do this poor ship assail;
But yet the last (with foaming fury swollen,
With boistrous blasts of angry tempests boln)
Springs the mainmast: the mast with boystrous fall
Breaks down the deck, and sore affrights them all.
Pale Idol-like, one stands with arms across:
One moans himself: one mourns his childrens loss:
One, more than Death, this form of Death affrights:
Another calls on Heavens vn-viewed Lights:
One, before his eyes his Ladies looks beholds:
Another, thus his deadly fear unfolds:
Cursed thirst of gold! O how thou causest care!
My bed of Down I change for hatches bare:
Rather than rest, this stormy war I chose:
TO enlarge my fields, both land and life I lose:
Like piezless plume, born-vp by Boreas breath,
With all these wings I soar, to seek my death,
To Heaven and Hell, by angry Neptune led,
Where least I escape it, all these sails I spread.
Then thus another: Sure no wind (quoth he)
Could raise this Storm; some rarer Prodigy
Has caused this Chaos (cause of all our grief)
Some Atheist dog, some Altar-spoyling thief
Lurks in this ship: com (Mates) by lot let us try
(To save the rest) the man that ought to die.
It Is I (quoth Jonas) I indeed am cause
Of this black night, and all the fearful flaws
Of this rough Winter; I must sole appease
(By my just death) these wrath-full wrackfull Seas.
Then up they heave him straight, and from the waste
Him suddenly into the Sea they cast.
The King of Winds calls home his churlish train,
And Amphitrite smooths her front again:
The Air's cloudy Robe returns to crystal clear,
And smiling Heavens bright Torches re-appeer,
So soon as Jonas (to them all appease)
Over head and ears was soused in the Seas.
Thrice coms he up, and thrice again goes down
Under the waves (yer he do wholly drown):
But then he sinks, and (wretched) roul'd along
The sands, and Oase, and rocks, and mud among;
Thus, thus he cries with lips of zealous faith:
Mercy (my God) show mercy Lord (he says).
Then God (who ever hears his childrens wish)
Provided straight a great and mighty Fish,
That swilling swallowed Jonas in her womb,
A living Corpse laid in a living Toomb.
Like as a Roach, or Ruff, or Gudgeon, born. Simile.

By some swift stream into a weer (forlorn)
^risks to and fro, aloft and under dyves,
Fed with false hope to free their captive lyves:
The Prophet so (amazed) walks about
This wondrous Fish to find an issue out,
This mighty Fish, o^ Whale-like huginess,
Or bigger-bellied, though in body less.
Where am I, Lord? (alas!) within what vaults?
In what new Hell do thou correct my faults?
Strange punishment! my body thou bereav'st,
Of mother earth, which to the dead thou leave:
Whither thy wrath drives me, I do not know.
I am deprived of air, yet breathe and blow:
My sight is good, yet can I see no sky:
Wretch, nor in Sea, nor yet ashore am I:
Resting, I run; for moving is my Cave:
And, quick, I couch within a living Grave.
While thus he plained; the third day, on the sand
The friendly Fish did cast him safe a-land.
And then, as if his weary limbs had been
So long refresht, and rested at an Inn,
He seems to fly; and, com'n to Niniue,
Your sins have reached up to Heaven (quoth he)
Woe and alas, woe, woe unto you all:
Yet forty days and Ninive shall fall.
Thus Jonas preached: But, soon the Citizens,
Sincerely touched with sense of their foul sins,
Dispatch (in haste) to Heaven, Repentance sad,
Sweet-charming Prayer, Fasting hairy-clad.
Repentance makes two Torrents of her eyes,
Her humble brow dares scant behold the skies:
Her sobbing breast is beaten blew and black:
Her tender flesh is rent with rugged sack:
Her head (all hoar'd with hearty sorrows past)
With dust and ashes is all over-cast.
Prayer's head, and sides, and feet are set about
With gaudy wings (like Jove's Arcadian Scout):
Her body flaming, from her lips there fumes.
Nard, Incense, Mummy, and all rich Perfumes.
Fasting (though faint) her face with joy she cheers,
Strong in her weakness, young in aged years;
Quick health's preserver, curbing Cupid's fits,
Watchful, purge-humors, and refining-wits.
Then Faith (Grand Usher of the Empyreal Court)
Vshers these Legates by a golden Port
Into the Presence, and them face to face
Before the All-Monarch's glorious Throne does place;
Where (zealous) prostrate on her humble knee,
Thus Prayer speaks in name of all the Three:
God, slow to wrath! O Father, prone to grace!
Lord, sheath again thy vengeance sword a space.
If at thy beam of Justice thou will weigh
The works of men that wander every day:
If thou their metal by that touchstone try,
Which fearfull-sounding from thy mouth does fly:
If thou shall sum their Sins (which pass the sand)
Before thee (Lord) who shall endure to stand?
Not Ninive alone shall perish then;
But all this All be burnt to ashes clean:
And even this day shall thy just wrath prevent
The dreadful Day of thy last Dooms event.
This world to Chaos shall again return;
And on thine Altars none shall incense burn.
O therefore spare (Lord) spare the Ninivites,
Forgive their Sins; and, in their humbled sprights,
From this time forth thy sacred Laws ingrave:
Destroy them not; but daign them Lord to save:
Look not (alas!) what they have been before;
But us regard, or thine own mercy more.
Then, God reached out his hand, unfolds his frowns,
Dis-arms his arm of Thunder brusing-Crowns,
Bows graciously his glorious flaming Crest,
And mildely grants (in the instant) their request.
FINIS.
THE DECAY. THE IIII. BOOK OF THE IIII. DAY OF THE II. WEEK.
THE ARGUMENT.
Ambition's bitter fruit, fell Achab's Stock,
With his proud Queen (a painted Beauty-mock)
Extirpt by IEHV, IEHV's ligne likewise
Shallum supplants. King-killing Treacheries
Succeed a-rowe, with Wrack of ISRAEL.
Time-suiting Batts. Athaliah Tigress fell.
IOASH well-nurtur'd, natur'd-ill, does run
After his kind: he kills his Tutor's Son.
ZENACHERIB: life-lengthned EZECHIAH:
NABVCHADNEZAR: Captive ZEDECHIAH.
HVff-pufft AMBITION, Tinder-box of WAR, Ambition pourtrayed to the life.

Downfall of Angels, Adam's murderer,
Patent of Treasons, Reason's Contradiction,
Earth's Enemy, and the Heavens Malediction,
O! how much Blood has thy respect-lesrage
Shed in the World! showred on every Age!
O! Scepter's, Throne's, and Crown's insatiat Thirst,
How-many Treasons have thou hatched yerst!
For, O! what is it that he dares not do,
Who the helm of Empire does aspire unto?
He (to beguile the simple) makes no bone
To swear by God (for he believes there is none);
His Sword's his Title; and who scapes the same,
Shall have a Pistol, or a Poysonie dram:
He, feared of all, fears all: he breaks at once
The chains of Nature and of Nations:
Sick of the Father, his kind heart is woe,
The good Old Man travails to Heaven, so slow:
His own deer Babes (yet Cradled, yet in Clouts)
Haste but too-fast; are at his heels, he doubts:
He passes to his promised Happiness,
Upon a Bridge of his Friends Carcases;
And Mounts (in fine) the golden Throne, by stayrs
Built of the Sculs of his own Country's heirs.
Yet, thou permit t'st it, Lord; nay, with thy wings,
Coverest such Tyrants (even the shame of Kings).
But, not for nothing doo'st thou them for bear;
Their cruel scalps a cruel end shall tear:
And, when the Measure of their Sin is full,
Thy Hands are iron, though thy Feet be woll.
The Throne of Tyrants totters to and fro:
The blood-gained Scepter lasts not long (we know):
Nail drives Nail: by tragik death device,
Ambitious hearts do play at A kind of Christmas play: wherein each hunteth
other from his Seat. The name seems derived from the French leuez sus, in
English, arise up.
leuel sice;
Proved but too plain, in both the Houses Royal
Of Jacobs issue, but too-too dis-loyall:
As, if thou further with thy grace divine
My Verse and Vows, shall here appear (in time).
GOD NOW no longer could support the excess
Of Achab's House, whose cursed wickedness
Was now top-full: and, Dogs already stood
Fawning and yawning for their promised blood.
Heavens haste their Work. Now, in tumultuous wise,
Against Achab's Son do his own Soldiars rise; Ichu.

Iehu's their Captain: who fore-sees, afar,
How-much, dispatch advantageth in War;
And, politik, doubles his Armie's speed,
To get before, yea, before Fame, indeed.
Ioram, surprised in feeble Bull-warks then
Unfurnished of Victuals and of Men)
And, chiefly, wanting royal fortitude,
Vn-kingly yields unto the Multitude.
Bold Nimshi's Son, Sir Iehu, what is this Thing?
What mean these Troops? what would you of the King?
Where shall the bolt of this black Thunder fall?
Say, bring'st thou Peace? or bring'st thou War, withal?
Said Ioram, loud: but, Iehu louder says,
No (wretch) no Peace, but bloody Wars and death.
Then fled the King: and (as a Ship at Sea, Simile.

Hearing the Heavens to threaten every way,
And Winter Storms with absent Stars compact,
With the angry Waters to conspire her wrack,
Strives not to ride it out, or shift abroad,
But plyes her Oars, and flies into the Road)
He ierks his Iades, and makes them scour amain,
Through thick and thin, both over Hill and Plain.
Which, Iehu spying, and well eying too,
As quick resolved what he has to do;
Cries, Boy, my Bow: then nocks an Arrow right,
His left hand meets the head, his breast the right;
As bends his Bow, he bends; lets go the string:
Through the thin air, the winged shaft does sing
King Ioram's Dirge; and, to speed the more,
Pearces behind him, and peeps-out before.
The Prince, now hurt (that had before no heart)
Falls present dead, and with his Courtly-Cart
Bruised in the Fall (as had the Thisbite said)
The Field of Naboth with his blood berayd:
And Salem's King had also there his dew,
For joining hands with so profane a Crew.
Then, the proud Victor leads his loyal Troops
Toward the Court (that all in silence droops);
And, more for Self's love, than for God's pure zeal,
Means to dispatch the Earth's burden Iezabel. Iezabel.

The Queen had inkling: instantly she sped
To curl the Cockles of her new-bought head:
The Onyx, the Saphyr, Garnet, Diamand,
In various forms, cut by a curious hand,
Hang nimbly dancing in her hair, as spangles:
Or as the fresh red-yellow Apple dangles
(In Autumn) on the Tree, when to and fro
The Boughs are waved with the winds that blow.
The upper garment of the stately Queen, Her Pride.

Is rich gold Tissu, on a ground of green;
Where the art-ful shuttle rarely did encheck
The Changeable.
cangeant color of a Mallards neck:
It Is figured over with sundry Flowrs and Fruits,
Birds, Beasts, and Insects, creeping Worms, and N^uts,
Of Gold-Smith's Work: a fringe of Gold about,
With Pearls and Rubies richly rare set-out,
Borders her Robe: and every part descries
Cunning and Cost, contending for the prize.
Her neat, fit, startups of green velvet be,
Flourisht with silver, and beneath the knee,
Moon-like, indented; but t'ned down the side
With Orient Pearls, as big as Filberd's pride.
But, besides all her sumptuous equipage Her Painting

(Much fitter for her State, then for her age)
Close in her Closet, with her best Complexions,
She mends her Face's wrinkle-full defections,
Her Cheek she cherries, and her Ey she cheers,
And fains her (fond) a Wench of fifteen years;
Whether she thought to snare the Dukes affection:
Or dazzle, with her pompous Prides reflection,
His daring eyes (as Fowlers, with a Glass,
Make mounting ^arks com down to death apace):
Or, were it, that in death she would beseen
(As 'twere) interi'd in Tyrian Pomp, a Queen.
Chaste Lady-Mayds, here must I speak to you,
That with vile Paynting spoil your native hue A just I^vectiue against those
2. (Predominant) Court-Qualities.

(Not to inflame yonglings with wanton Thirst;
But to keep fashion with these Times accursed)
When one new taen, in your seem-Beauties snare,
That day and night to Hymen makes his Prayer,
At length espies (as who is it but spies?)
Your painted breasts, your painted cheeks, and eyes,
His Cake is dough; God dild you, he will none;
He l^aues his Suit, and thus he says anon:
What should I do with such a wanton Wife,
Which night and day would ^ruciate my life
With Ieloux pangs? since every-way she sets
Her borrowed snares (not her own hairs) for Nets*
To catch her Cuckows; with loose, light Attires,
Opens the door unto all lewd Desires?
And, with vile Druggs, adultering her Face,
Closely allures the Adulterer's Embrace.
But, Judge the best: suppose (says he) I ^^nde
My Lady Chaste, in body and in mind
(As sure I think): yet, will she Me respect,
That dares disgrace the eternal Architect?
That (in her pride) presumes his Work to tax
Of imperfection; to amend his tracts,
To help the Colors which his hand has laid,
With her frail fingers with foul dirt berayd?
Shall I take her, that will spend all I have,
And all her time, in pranking proudly-braue?
How did I dote! The Gold upon her head,
The Lillies of her breasts, the Rosy red*
In either Cheek, and all her other Riches,
Wherewith she bleareth sight, and sense bewitches;
Is none of hers: it is but borrowed stuff,
Or stolen, or bought, plain Counterfeit in proof:
My glorious Idol I did so adore,
Is but a Visard, newly varnisht ore
With spauling Rheums, hot ^umes, and Ceruses:
Fo, fie; such Poisons one would loath to kiss:
Iwed (at least, I ween I wed) a Lass
Young, fresh, and fair: but, in a year (alas!)
Or two, at most; my lovely lively Bride*
I^ turned a Hagg, a Fury by my side;
With hollow, yellow teeth (or none perhaps)
With stinking breath, swart-cheeks, and hanging chaps;
With wrinkled neck; and stooping as she goes,
With driveling mouth, and with a sniveling nose.
The Queen, thus pranked, proudly gets her up
(But sadly though) to her gilt Palace top;
And, spying Iehu, from the window cried:
Art thou there, Zimri, cursed Paricide,
Fell Maister-killer, can thou choose but fear
For like Offense, like punishment severe?
Bitch, cries the Duke, art Thou there barking still?
Thou, Strumpet, Thou art Cause of all this Ill:
Thou, brought Samaria to Thine Idol-Sin:
Painting and Poysning, first thou broughtest in
To Court and Country, with a thousand mo
Loose Syrian Vices, which I shame to show.
Thou brought'st-in Wrong, with rapine and Oppression,
By Perjury supplanting Men's Possession
And Life with-all: yea, Thou have been the Baen
Of Peers and Seers (at thy proud pleasure slain):
Thou, life of Strife, thou Horse-leach sent from Hell,
Thou Drouth, Thou Dearth, Thou Plague of Israel,
Now shall thou dye: Grooms (is their none for me?)
Quick, cast her down, down with her instantly.
O tickle Faith! O fickle Trust of Court* The perfection of Court-ship.

These Palace-mice, this busie-idle sort
Of fawning Minions, full of sooths and smiles,
These Carpet-Knights had vowed and sworn yer-whiles,
Promised, protested unto Iezabel,
Raved, Braved, and band (like Rodomont in Hell)
That in her cause they every Man would die,
And all the World, and Hell and Heaven defy;
Now, Icy Fear (shivering in all their bones)
Makes them with Fortune turn their backs at-once.
They take their Queen between their traytorous hands,
And hurl her headlong, as the Duke Commands;
Whose Courser, snorting, stamps (in stately skorn)
Upon the Corpse that whilom Kings had born:
And, to fulfill from point to point the Word
Elijah spoke (as Legate of the Lord)
The dogs about do greedy feed upon
The rich-perfumed, royal Carrion:
And Folk by thousands issuing at the Gate,
To see the sight, cry thus (as gladther-at)
Ses, ses, here Dogs, here Bitches, do not spare
This Bitch that gnawed her subjects bones so bare;
This cruel Cur, that made you often become
Saints Torturers, and many a Prophets Tomb:
This Whore of Baal, tear her so small, that well
No man may say, Here lies Iezabel.
Iehu's drad Vengeance does yet farther flow;
Cursed Achab's issue he does wholly mow:
He slayes (more-over) two and forty men
Of Ahaziah's hap-les Brethren:
Baal's idol Clergy he does bring to naught,
And his proud Temple turns into a Draught:
Good proofs of Zeal. But yet, a Diadem,
Desire of Reign, keeps from Jerusalem
His service due; content (at home) by halves
To worship God, under the form of Calves.
His Son and Nephews, track too-neer his trace;
And therefore Shallum does vn-horse his race:
The murderer Shallum (after one Months Reign)
By Manahem, as murdrously is slain:
The traitor Manahem's wicked-walking Son,
By traiterous Pekah unto death is don:
And so, on Pekah, for Pekaiah's death,
Hosheah's treason, treason quittanceth;
Aproud, in grate, perfidious troublous King,
That to Confusion did Samaria bring.
Their Towns trans-villag'd, the Ten Tribes, transported
To a far Clime (whence never they reverted)
Soiourn in foreign soil, where Chobar's streams
Serve them for Jordan; Basan, Chison seems:
While Assur's scorn, and scum of Euphrates
Dance up and down the Isaacian Palaces,
Drink their best Nectars, anchor in their Ports,
And lodge profanely in their strongest Forts.
But, changing air, these change not mind (in Iewry).
For, though fierce Lions homicidial fury
Make them retire under the Almightie's wing,
Their Country Gods with the true God they ming:
They mix his Service, plough with Ass and Ox;
Disguise his Church in suits of Flax and Flocks,
Cast (in one wedge) Iron and Gold together:
Iew-Gentiles, both at-once: but, both is neither.
There is a Tale, that once the Host of Birds, Tale of the Batt.

And all the Legions of Groue-haunting Herds,
Before the Earth ambitiously did strive,
And counter-plead, for the Prerogative:
Now, while the Judge was giving audience,
And either side in their seem-Rights defense
Was hot and earnest at the noyse-full Bar,
The neuter Bat stood fluttering still afar:
But she no sooner hears the sentence past
On the Beasts side, but shuffling her in haste
Into their Troop, she them accompanies,
Shows her large forhead, her long ears, and teeth.
The Cause was (after) by Appeal removed
To Nature's Court; who by her Doom approved
The others Plea: then flies the shame-les Bat
Among the Birds, and with her Chit-chit-chat
She seems to sing; and proud of wings, she plays
With nimble turns, and flies a thousand ways.
Hence, beak-les Bird, hence, winged-Beast (they cried)
Hence, plume-les wings (thus scorn her, either side)
Hence, harlot, hence; this ever be thy Dole;
Be still Day's Prisoner in thy shameful hole:
May never Sun (vile Monster) shine on thee:
But the hate of all, for ever, may thou be.
Such is this People: for, in plentious showrs
When God his Blessings upon Isaak powrs, Application.

Then are they Isaak's Sons: but, if with thunder
He wrath-full tear the Hebrew Tree in sunder,
These Traitors rake the boughs, and take the Fruit;
And ( Pagans then) the Jews they persecute.
And such are those, whose wily, waxen mind
Takes every Seal, and sails with every Wind;
Not out of Conscience, but of Carnal motion,
Of Fear, or Favor, Profit, or Promotion:
Those that to ease their Purse, or please their Prince,
Pern their Profession, their Religion mince;
Prince- Protestants, Prince- Catholics; Precise,
With Such a Prince; with other, otherwise:
Yea, oldest Gangraens of blinde-burning Zeal
(As the Kings Evil) a new KING can heal.
And those Scoene-servers that so loud have crid
Against Prelates sweeping in their silken Pride,
Their wilful Dumbness, forcing others dumb
(To Sion's grievous Loss and Gain of Rome)
Their Courting, Sporting, and Non-residence,
Their Avarice, their Sloth, and Negligence:
Till some fat Morsels in their mouths do fall;
And then, as choakt, and sudden changed with-all,
Themselves exceed in all of these, much more
Than the Right Reverend whom they taxt before.
And those Chamaeleons that con-sort their Crew;
In Turkey, Turks; among the Jews, a Jew;
In Spain, as Spain: as Luther, on the Rhine:
With Calvin here: and there, with Bellarmine:
Loose, with the Lewd: among the gracious, grave:
With Saints, a Saint: and among Knaves a Knave.
But all such Neuters, neither hot nor cold,
Such double Halters between GOD and GOLD,
Such Lukewarm Lovers will the Bridegroom spue
Out of his mouth: his mouth has spoke it true.
O ISRAEL, I pity much thy case:
This Sea of Mischiefs, which in every place
So over-flowes thee, and so domineres;
It drowns my soul in griefs, mine eyes in tears:
My heart's through-thrilled with your miseries
Already past; your Fathers Tragedies.
But (O!) I die; when in the sacred stem
Of royal IVDA, in Jerusalem,
I see fell Discord, from her loath some Cage,
To blow her poison with ambitious rage:
Sion to swim in blood: and Achab's Daughter
Make David's House the Shambles of her Slaughter.
Cursed Athaliah (she was called so) Athaliah.

Knowing her Son, by Mimshi's Son, his so
(For Ioram's sake) to be dispatched; disloyal,
On the holy Mount vsurps the Scepter Royal:
And, fearing, lest the Princes of the Blood
Would one-day rank her where of right she should,
She cuts their throats, hangs, drowns, destroys them all,
Not sparing any, either great or small;
No, not the infant in the Cradle, lying
Help-les (alas!) and lamentably crying
(As if bewailing of his wrongs vn-knowen);
No (O extreme!) she spares not her own.
Like as a Lion, that has tatterd here Simile.

A goodly Heifer, there a lusty Steer,
There a strong Bull (too-weak for him by half)
There a fair Cow, and there a tender Calf;
Strouts in his rage, and wallows in his Prey,
And proudly does his Victory suruay;
The grass all goary, and the Heard-groom up
Shivering for fear upon a Pine-Trees top:
So swells she: so grows her proud Despite;
Nor Aw, nor Law, nor Faith she reaks, nor right.
Her Cities are so many Groves of Thieves:
Her Courta Stews, where not a chaste-one lives:
Her greatest Lords (given all, to all excess)
In stead of Prophets, in their Palaces
Have Lectures read of Lust, and Surfaiting,
Of Murder, Magik, and Impoysoning.
While thus she builds her tottering Throne upon
Her childrens bones, Iehosheba saves one
One Royal Imp, young Ioash, from the pile
(As, when a Fire has fiercely raged awhile Simile.

In some fair House, the avaricious Dame
Saues some choice Casquet from the furious flame)
Hides him, prouides him: and, when as the Sun Iehoiada preserves Ioash.

Six times about his larger Ring has run,
Iehoiada (her husband) brings him forth
To the chief Captains and the Men of worth;
Saying: Behold, O Chiefs of Judah, see
See here your Prince, great David's Progeny,
Your rightful King: if me you credit light,
Believe this Face, his Fathers Picture right;
Believe these Priests, which saw him from the first,
Brought to my House, there bred, and fed, and nurc't.
In so just Quarrel, holy Men-at-arms,
Employ (I pray) your anger and your Arms:
Plant, in the Royal Plot, this Royal bud:
Venge Obed's blood on Strangers guilty blood:
Shake-off, with showts, with Fire, and Sword together,
This Woman's Yoke, this Furie's Bondage, rather.
Then showt the People, with a common cry,
Long live King Ioash; long, and happily: Ioash.

God save the King: God save the noble seed
Of our true Kings; and ay may They succeed.
This news now bruited in the wanton Court,
Quickly the Queen coms in a braving sort,
Toward the Troop; and spying there anon
The sweet young Prince, set on a royal Throne,
With Peers attending him on either hand,
And strongly guarded by a gallant Band;
Ah! Treason, Treason, then she cries aloud:
False I'oyada, disloyal Priest, and proud,
Thou shall abie it: O thou House profane!
I Will lay thee level with the ground again:
And thou, young Princox, Puppet as thou art,
Shall play no longer thy proud Kingling's Part
Upon so rich a stage: but, quickly stripped,
With wyery Rods thou shall to death be whipped;
And so, go see thy Brethren, which in Hell
Will welcome thee, that bad'st not them farewell.
But, so dainly the Guard lays hold on her
And drags her forth, as 'twerea furious Cur,
Out of the sacred Temple; and with scorn,
Her wretched corpse is mangled, tugged, and torn.
The High Priest, inspired with a holy zeal,
In a new League authentikly does seal
The obedient People to their bountious Prince;
And both, to God; by joint Obedience.
Now, as a Bear-whelp, taken from the Dam, Simile.

Is in a while made gentle, meek, and tame
By witty usage; but, if once it hap
He get some Grove, or thorny Mountains top,
Then plays he Rex; tears, kills, and all consumes,
And soon again his savage kind assumes:
So Ioash, while good Ioyada survives,
For Piety, with holy David strives;
But he once dead, walking his Father's ways,
(Ingrately-false) his Tutor's Zachariah.
son he slayes.
Him therefore shortly his own Servants slay:
His Son, soon after, does Them like re-pay:
His People, him again: then, Amaziah
Uzziah follows, Ioatham Vzziah.
As one same ground indifferently does breed Simile.

Both food-fit Wheat and dizzie Darnell seed;
Baen-baening Ar^emisia.
Mug-wort, and cold Hemlock too;
The fragrant Rose and the strong-senting Rue:
So, from the Noblest Howses often there springs
Some monstrous Princes, and some virtuous Kings;
And all*fore-seeing God, in the same Ligne
Does often the god-les with the godly twine.
The more to grace his Saints, and to disgrace
Tyrants the more, by their own proper Race.
Ahaz, betwixt his Son and Ioathan
(He bad, they good) seems a swart Mauritan
Betwixt two Adons: Ezekiah, placed
Between his Father and his Son, is graced
(He good, they bad) as twixt two Thorns, a Rose;
Wher-by, his Virtue the more virtuous shows.
For, in this Prince, great DAVID, the divine, Ezekiah.

Devout, just, valiant, seems again to shine.
And, as we see from out the several Seat
Of the ASIAN Princes, self-surnamed Great Simile.

(As the great Cham* great Turk* great Russian,
And if less Great, more glorious Persian)
Araxis, Chesel, Uolga, and many more
Renowned Rivers, Brooks, and Floods, do flow,
Falling at once into the Caspian Lake,
Withal their streams his streams so proud to make: The true pattern of an
excellent Prince.

So, all the Virtues of the most and best
Of Patriarchs, meet in this Princes breast:
Pure in Religion, Wise in Counsailing,
Stout in Exployting, Just in Governing;
Vn-puft in Sunshine, vn-appall'd in Storms
(Not, as not feeling, but not fearing Harms)
And therefore bravely he repels the rage
Of proudest Tyrants (living in his Age)
And (ayvn-daunted) in his God's behalf
Hazards at once his Scepter and himself.
For, though (for Neighbors) round about him reign
Idolaters (that would him gladly gain):
Though Godlings, here of wood, and there of stone,
A Brazen here, and there a Golden one,
With Lamps and Tapers, even as bright as Day,
On every side would draw his mind astray:
Though Assur's Prince had with his Legions fell
Forrag'd Samaria, and in Israel
Quenched the small Faith that was; and utterly
Dragged the Ten Tribes into Captivity,
So far, that even the tallest Cedar-Tree
In Libanon they never since could see:
Yet, EZECHIAH serves not Time; nor Fears His Constancy in the service of God,
and zealous Reformation of all Abuses in the same.

The Tyrants fury: neither roars with Bears,
Nor howls with Wolves, nor ever turns away:
But, godly-wise, well-knowing, that Delay
Gives leave to Ill; and Danger still does wait
On lingering, in Matters of such weight;
He first of all sets-vp the Almightie's Throne,
And under that, then he erects his own.
The establishing of Gods pure Law again,
Is as the Preface of his happy Reign:
The Temple purged, the High Places down he pashes,
Fells the hallowed Groves, burns the Idol-Gods to ashes.
Which his own Father served; and, Zeal-full, brake
The Brazen Serpent, Moses yerst did make.
For, though it were a very Type of CHRIST,
Though first it were by the Holy Ghost devised,
And not by Man (whose bold-blinde Fancie's pride
Deforms God's Service, strayes on either side,
Flatters itself in his Inventions vain,
Presumes to school the Sacred Spirit again,
Controules the Word, and (in a word) is hot
In his own fashion to serve God, or not);
Though the Prescript of Ancient use defend it,
Though Multitude, though Miracles commend it
(True Miracles, approved in conclusion,
Without all guile of Men's or Fiends illusion)
The King yet spares not to destroy the same,
When to occasion of Offense it came;
But, forth' Abuse of a fond Peoples will,
Takes that away which was not selfly ill:
Much less permits he (thorough all his Land)
One rag, one relic, or one sign to stand
Of Idolism, or idle superstition
Blindely brought-in, without the Words Commission.
This zealous Hate of all Abomination,
This royal Work of thorough Reformation,
This worthy Action, wants not Recompense:
God, who his grace by measure does dispense,
Who honors them that truly honor him,
To EZHCHIAH not so much does seem
His sure Defense, as his Confederate:
His Quarrel's His, He hates whom him do hate,
His Fame He bears about (both far and high)
On the wide wings of Immortality:
To Gath He guides his victorious Troup,
He makes proud Gaza to his Standards stoup,
Strong Ascalon he razeth to the ground:
And punishing a People wholly drowned
In Idolism, and all rebellious Sins,
Adds to his Land the Land of Philistines.
Yea, further more, it is He that him with-draws
From out the bloody and ambitious paws
Of a fell Tyrant, whose proud bounds extend
Past bounds for breadth, and for their length past end;
Whose swarms of Arms, insulting everywhere,
Made All to quake (even at his name) for fear.
Already were the Coelo-Syrian Towrs
All sacked, and seized by the Assyrian Powrs:
And, of all Cities where the Isaacians reigned,
Only the great Jerusalem remained;
When Rabsakeh, with railing insolence, Railing Rabsaketh ( in the name of his
Master Zenacherib) brauing and blaspheming against God and good king Ezekiah.

Thus braues the Hebrews and up braids their Prince)
(Weening, them all with vaunt-full Threats to snib);
Thus says the almighty, great Zenacherib,
O Salem's Kingling, wherefore art thou shut
In these weak Walls? Is thine affiance put
In the Aid of Egypt? O deceitful prop!
O feeble stay! O hollow-grounded hope!
Egypt's a staff of Reed, which broken soon,
Runs through the hand of him that leans ther-on.
Perhaps thou trustest in the Lord, thy God:
What! whom so bold thou have abused so broad,
Whom to his face thou daily have defied,
Deprived of Altars, robbed on every side
Of his High Places, hallowed Groves, and all
(Where yerst thy Fathers wont on him to call)*
Whom (to conclude) *thou have exiled quite
From every place, and with profane despite
(As if condemned to perpetual dark)
Keepst him close-Prisoner in a certain Ark:
Will He (can He) take Sion's part and Thine;
And with his Foes will He unjustly ioyn?
No (wretched) know, I have His Warrant too
(Express Commission) what I have to do:
I am the Scourge of God, it is vain to stand
Against the power of my victorious hand:
I execute the counsails of the Lord:
I prosecute his Vengeance on the abhorred
Profaners of his Temples: and, if He
Have any Power, it is all conferred to me.
Yield therefore, Ezechia, yield; and weigh
Who I am; who Thou art: and by delay
Blow not the Fire which shall consume thee quite,
And utterly confound the Israelite.
Alas! poor People, I lament your hap:
This lewd Impostor does but puff you up
With addle hope, and idle Confidence
(In a delusion) of your God's Defense.
Which of the Gods, against my Power could stand,
Or save their Cities from my mightier hand?
Where Is Hamath's God? Where Is Arpad's God become*
Where Sepharvaim's God? and where (in sum)
Where are the Gods of Heva, and Ivah too?
Have I not Conquered all? So will I do
You and your God; and I will lead you all
Into Assyria, in perpetual Thrall:
I Will have your Manna, and your Aron's Rod,
I Will have the Ark of your Almighty God,
All richly furnished, and new furbisht o'r,
To hang among a hundred Tropheis more:
And your great God shall in the Roll be read
Among the Gods that I have Conquered:
I Will have it so, it must, it shall be thus,
And worse then so, except you yield to us.
Scarce had he don, when Ezechias, gored
With blasphemies so spewd against the Lord,
Hies to the Temple, tears his purple weed,
And falls to Prayer, as sure hold at need.
O King of All, but Ours, especially; Prayer, The Refuge of the Godly.

Ah! sleep'st thou Lord? What boots it that thine ey
Perceth to Hell, and even from Heaven beholds
The dumbest Thoughts in our hearts in-most folds;
If thou perceiv'st not this proud Chalenger,
Nor hear the Barking of this foul-mouthed Cur?
Not against us so much his Threats are meant,
As against Thee: his Blasphemies are bent
Against Thy Greatness; whom he (proudly-rude)
Yoaks with the Godlings which he has sub dew'd.
It Is true indeed, he is a mighty Prince,
Whose numbrous Arms, with furious insolence,
Have overborn as many as with-stood,
Made many a Province even to swim in blood,
Burnt many a Temple; and (insatiate still)
Of neighbor Gods have wholly had their will.
But, O! What Gods are those? Gods void of Being
(Save, by their hands that serve them) Gods vn-seeing,
New, vp-start Gods, of yerster-dayes devise;
To Men indebted, for their Deities:
Gods made with hands, Gods without life, or breath;
Gods, which the Rust, Fire, Hammer conquereth.
But, thou art Lord, the invincible alone,
The All-seeing GOD, the Everlasting ONE:
And, who so dares him against thy Power oppose,
Seems as a Puff which roaring Boreas blows,
Weening to tear the Alps off at the Foot,
Or Clowds-prop Athos from his massy Root:
Who but mis-speaks of thee, he spets at Heaven,
And his own spettle in his face is driven.
Lord, show thee such: take on thee the Defense
Of thine own glory, and our innocence:
Clear thine own name, of blame: let him not thus
Triumph of Thee, in tryumphing of us:
But, let there (Lord) unto thy Church appear
Just Cause of Joy, and to thy Foes of fear.
God hears his Cry, and (from the Empyreal Round) Miraculous slaughter of the
Assirians.

He wrathful sends a winged Champion down;
Who, richly armed in more than humane Arms,
Mowes in one night of Heathen men at Arms
Thrice-three-score thousand, and five thousand more,
Feld round about; beside, behind, before.
Here, his two eyes, which Sun-like brightly turn, Simile.

Two armed Squadrons in a moment burn:
Not much unlike unto a fire in stubble,
Which, sudden spreading, still the flame does double,
And with quick succor of some Southren blasts
Crick-crackling quickly all the Country wastes.
Here the stiff Storm, that from his mouth he blows,
Thousands of Soldiers each on other throws: Simile.

Even as a Wind, a Rock, a sudden Flood
Bears down the Trees in a side-hanging Wood;
The Yew overturns the Pine, the Pine the Elm,
The Elm the Oak, the Oak does the Ash ore-whelm;
And from the top, down to the Vale below,
The Mount's dis-mantled, and even shamed so.
Here, with a Sword (such as that sacred blade
For the bright Guard of Eden's entry made)
He hacks, he hews; and sometimes with one blow
A Regiment he all at once does mow:
And, as a Cannon's thundrie roaring Ball, Simile.

Battering one Turret, shakes the next withal,
And often in Armies (as by proof they find)
Kills oldest Soldiers with his very wind:
The whiffing Flashes of this Sword so quick,
Strikes dead a many, which it did not strike.
Here, with his hands he strangles all at-once
Legions of Foes. O Arm that Kings dis-throans!
O Army-shaving Sword! Rock-razing Hands!
World-tossing Tempest! All-consuming Brands!
O, let some other (with more sacred fire,
Than I, inflamed) into my Muse inspire
The wondrous manner of this Overthrowe,
The which (alas!) God knows, I little know:
I but admire it, in confused sort;
Conceive I cannot; and, much less, report.
Com-on Zenacherib: where is now thine Host?
Where are thy Champions? Thou did lately boast,
The had in thy Camp as many Soldiers,
As Sea has Fishes, or the Heavens have Stars:
Now, the art alone: and yet, not all alone;
Fear, and Despair, and Fury wait upon
Thy shame-full Flight: but, bloody Butcher, stay*
Stay, noysom Plague, fly not so fast away,
Fear not Heavens Fauchin; that foul breast of thine
Shall not be honored with such wounds divine:
Nor shall thou yet, in timely bed decease;
No: Tyrants use not to Depart in Peace:
As blood they thirsted, they are drowned in blood;
Their cruel Life a cruel Death makes good.
For (O just Judgment!) lo, thy Sons (yer-long) Zenacherib slain by his own
sons.

At Nisroch's Shrine revenge the Hebrews wrong:
Yea, thine own Sons (foul eggs of fouler Bird)
Kill their own Father, sheath their either sword
In thine own throat; and, heirs of all thy vices,
Mix thine own blood among thy Sacrifices.
This Miracle is shortly seconded
By one as famous and as strange, indeed.
It pleased the Lord with heavy hand to smight
King Ezechiah; who in doleful plight Ezekiah's sickness.

Upon his bed lies vexed grievously,
Sick of an Ulcer past all remedy.
Art fails the Leach, and issue fails Art,
Each of the Courtiers sadly wayles apart
His loss and Lord: Death, in a mourn-ful sort,
Through every Chamber daunteth all the Court:
And, in the City, seems in every Hall
TO have light a Taper for his Funeral.
Then Amos The Prophet Isaiah.
Son, his bed approaching, pours
From plentious lips these sweet and golden showrs;
But that I know, you know the Laws Divine,
But that your Faith so everywhere does shine,
But that your Courage so confirmed I see;
I should, my Liege, I should not speak so free: A comfortable Visitation of
the sick.

I would not tell you, that in continent
You must prepare to make your Testament:
That your Disease shall have the upper hand:
And Death already at your Door does stand.
What? fears my Lord? Know you not here beneath
We always say I toward the Port of Death;
Where, who first anch'reth, first is glorified?
That it is Decreed, confirmed, and ratified,
That (of necessity) the fatal Cup.
Once, all of us must (in our turn) drink up?
That Death's no pain, but of all pains the end,
The Gate of Heaven, and Ladder to ascend?
That Death's the death of all our storms and strife,
And sweet beginning of immortal Life?
For, by one death a thousands death's we slay:
Thear-by, we rise from Body-Toomb of Clay.
Thear-by, our Souls feast with celestial food,
Thear-by, we com to the heavenly Brotherhood,
Thear-by, we are changed to Angels of the Light,
And, face to face, behold Gods beuties bright.
The Prophet ceast: and soon the Isaacian Prince,
Deep apprehending Death's drad form and sense,
Unto the Wall-ward turns his weeping eyes;
And, sorrow-torn, thus (to himself) he cries:
Lord, I appeal, Lord (as thine humble child) A Prayer for a sick person,
mutatis mutandis.

From thy just Justice to thy Mercy mild:
Why will thy strength destroy a silly-one,
Weakened and wasted even to skin and bone;
One that adores thee with sincere affection,
The wrack of Idols, and the Saints protection?
O! shall the Good thy servant had begun
For Sion, rest now by his death undone?
O! shall a Pagan After-king restore
The Groves and Idols I have razed before?
Shall I dye Childe-les? Shall thine Heritage
In vain exspect that glorious golden Age
Under thy CHRIST? O! mercy, mercy, Lord:
O Father mild, to thy dear Child accord
Some space of life: O! let not, Lord, the voice
Of Infidels at my poor death rejoice.
Then said the Seer; Be of good cheer, my Liege: The Kings prayer heard, and
his life prolonged 15 years.

Thy sighs and tears and prayers so be siege
The throne of Pity, that, as pierct with-all,
Thy smyling Health God yields to re-call,
Wills, to his Temple (three days hence) thou mount,
Retracts his Sentence, and corrects his count:
Makes Death go back, for fifteen years: as lo,
This Dial's shadow shall here back-ward go.
His Word's confirmed with wonderful Effect: The Sun goes back.

For, lo, the Dial, which does hours direct
(Life's-guider, Daye's-divider, Sun's-Consorter,
Shadow's dull shifter, and Time's dumb Reporter)
Puts-vp-again his passed Hours (perforce)
And, back-ward goes against his wonted course.
It Is Noon at Midnight; and a triple Morn
Seems that long Day to brandish and adorn:
Sol goes, and coms; and, yer that in the Deep
Of Atlas shade he lay him down to sleep,
His bright, Light-winged, Gold-shod wheels do cut
Three times together in the self-same rut.
Lord! what are we! or, what is our deserving!
That, to confirm our Faith (so prone to swarving)
Thou daign'st to shake Heavens solid Orbs so bright;
The Order of Nature to dis-order quight;
To make the Sun's Teem with a swift-slowe pase,
Back, back to trot; and not their wonted Race?
That, to dispell the Night so blindely-black,
Which siels our Souls, thou make the shade go back
On Ahaz Dial? And, as Self-vn-stable,
Seem to revoke thine Acts irrevocable,
Raze thine own Dooms (tossed in vn-steddy storm)
And, to reform us, thine own speech reform;
To give thy Self the Ly: and (in a Word)
As Self-blam'd, softly to put-vp thy Sword?
Thrice-glorious God! thrice-great! thrice-gracious!
Heer-in (O Lord) thou seem to deal with us,
As a wise Father, who with tender hand Simile.

Severely shaking the correcting Wand,
With voice and gesture seems his Son to threat:
Whom yet indeed he does not mean to beat;
But, by this curb of fained Rigor, aims
To aw his Son; and so him often reclaims.
This Prince no sooner home to Heaven returns,
But Israel back to his vomit turns;
Him re-bemires: and, like a headstrong Colt,
Runs headlong down into a strange Revolt.
And, though ^osias, Heav'n-deer Prince (vho young
Coms wisely-olde, to live the older long)
Had re-aduanc't the sacred Laws divine,
Propt Siou's Wall (all ready to decline)
With his own back; and, in his happy Reign,
The Truth re-flowr'd, as in her Prime again:
Yet Iaeob's Heirs strive to resemble still Simile.

A stiff-throw'n Bowl, which running down a Hill,
Meets in the way some stub, for rub, that stops
The speed a space; but instantly it hops,
It ouer-iumps; and stays not, though it stumble,
Till to the bottom vp-side-down it tumble.
With puissant Host proud Nebuchadnezzar
Now threatened Judah with the worst of War: Nabuchadnezar besieges Jerusalem.

His Camp coms marching to Jerusalem,
And her old Walls in a new Wall does hem.
The busy Builders of this newer Fold,
In one hand, Swords, in the other Trowels hold,
Nor felder strike with blades than hammers there;
With firmer foot the Sieged's shock to bear,
Who seem a swarm of Hornets buzzing out
Among their Foes, and humming round about
To spet their spite against their Enemies,
With poysonie Darts, in noses, brows and eyes.
Cold Capricorn has paved all Judah twice
With brittle plates of crystal-crusted Ice,
Twice glased Jordan; and the Sappy-blood
Of Trees has twice re-perriwigd the Wood,
Since the first Siege: What? said the younger sort,
Shall we grow old, about a feeble Fort?
Shall we (not Martial, but more Macon-skild)
Shall we not batter Towrs, but rather build?
And while the Hebrew in his sumptuous Chamber
Disports himself, perfumed with Nard and Amber,
Shall We, swelting for Heat, shivering for Cold,
Here, far from home, lie in a stinking Hold?
Shall time destroy us? shall our proper sloth
Annoy us more than the Hebrews valor does?
No, no, my Lord: let not our Fervor fault,
Through length of Siege; but let us to the Assault.
Let Us win't and wear it: tut (Sir) nothing is
Impossible to Chaldean courages.
Contented, said the King: brave Bloods away,
Goeseck Renown, 'mid wounds and death, today.
Now, in their breasts, brave Honor's Thirst began: Nabuzaradan.

Me thinks, I see stout Nabuzaradan
Already trooping the most resolute
Of every Band, this plot to prosecute.
Each has his Ladder; and, the Town to take,
Bears to the Wall his Way upon his back:
But, the brave Prince cleaues quicker then the rest
His slender Firr-poles, as more prowes-full pressed.
Alike they mount, affronting Death together; A Scal^d^.

But, not alike in face, nor fortune neither:
This Ladder, slippery placed, does slide from under:
That, over-sloap, snaps in the midst asunder,
And soldiers falling, one another kill
(As with his weight, a hollow Rocky-Hill, Simile.

Torn with some Torrent, or Tempestuous winds,
Shivers it self on stones it vnder-grindes):
Some, rashly climbed (not wont to climb so high)
With giddy brains, swim headlong down the Sky:
Some, over-whelmd under a Mill-stone-storm,
Lose, with their life, their living bodies form.
Yet mounts the Captain, and his spacious Targe
Bears-off a Mountain and a Forest large
Of Stoans and Darts, that fly about his ears;
His teeth do gnash, he threats, he sweats, and swears:
As steady thear as on the ground he goes;
And thear, though weary, he affronts his Foes,
Alone, and halfly-hanging in the air,
Against whole Squadrons standing firmly fair:
Upright he rears him and his Helmet brave
(Whear, not a Plume, but a huge Tree does wave)
Reflecting bright, above the Paripet,
Affrights the whole City with the shade of it.
Then as half Victor, and about to venture
Over the Wall, and ready even to enter;
With his bright Gantlet's scaly fingers bent
Grasping the coping of the battlement,
His hold does fail, the stones, vn-fast^ed, fall
Down in the ditch, and (headlong) he with-all:
Yet, he escapes, and getts again to shore;
Thanks to his strength: but, to his courage more.
Now, here (me thinks) I hear proud Nergal rave, Nergal.

In War (quoth he) Master or Match to have,
By Mars I skorn* yea, Mars himself in Arms;
And all the Gods, with all their braving Storms.
O wrathful Heavens, roar, lighten, thunder, threat;
Gods, do your worst; with all your batteries beat:
If I begin, in sp^ght of all your powrs,
I Will skale your Walls, I Will take your Crystal Towrs.
Thus spewd the Curr; and (as he spoke) withal
Climbs-vp the steepest of a dreadful Wall,
With his bare-feet on roughest places sprawling,
With hook-crookt hands upon the smoothest crawling.
As a fell Serpent, which some Shepheard-lad Simile.

On a steep Rock incounters gladly-^ad,
Turning and winding nimbly to and fro,
With wriggling pase does still approach his Foe,
And with a Hiss, a Frisk, and flashing ey,
Makes soudainly his faint Assailer fly:
Even so the Duke, with his fierce countenance,
His thundring-voice, his helms bright radiance,
Drives Pashur from the Walls and Iucal too
(A jolly Prater but a Jade to do;
Brauer in Couns^il then in Combat, far)
With Sephatiah, tinder of this War;
And Malchy, he that does in Prison keep
Under the ground (a hundred ^ubits deep)
Good ^eremie, and instrument, alone
Inspired with breath of the ever-living ONE.
Let Us fly, cries P^shur: fly this Infidel,
Rather this Fiend, the which no weight can fell.
What force can front, or who in count ^r can
An armed Faulcon, or a flying Man?
While Nergal speeds his Victory too-fast,
His hooks dis-pointed disappoint his haste;
Prevent him, not of praise, but of the Prize
Which (out of doubt) he did his own surmize.
He swears and tears: (what should? what could he more)?
He cannot up, nor will he down, therefore.
Unfortunate! and vainly-valiant!
He Is fain to stand like the Funambulant Simile.

Who seems to tread the air, and fall he must,
Save his Self's weight him counter-poyseth just;
And save the Lead, that in each hand he bears,
Does make him light: the gaping Vulgar fears,
Amazed to see him; weening nothing stranger
Than Art to master Nature, lucre danger.
At last, though loath (full of despite and rage)
He slideth down into a horrid hedge,
Cursing and banning all the Gods; more mad
For the disgrace, than for the hurt he had.
Els-where the while (as imitating right
The Kinde-blinde Beast, in russet Velvet dight) Mines and Cou^termine^.

Covertly marching in the Dark by day,
Samgarnebo seeks under ground his way.
But Ebedmelech, warned of his Designs,
With-in the Town against him counter-mines
Courageously, and still proceeds on,
Till (resolute) he bring both Works to one;
Till one strict Berrie, till one winding Cave
Become the Fight-Field of two Armies brave.
As the self-swelling Badgerd* at the bay Simile.

With boldest Hounds (inured to that Fray)
First at the entry of his Burrow fights,
Then in his Earth; and either other bites:
The eager Dogs are cheered with claps and cries,
The angry Beast to his best chamber flies,
And (angled there) sits grimly inter-gerning;
And all the Earth rings with the Terryers yearning:
So fare these Miners; whom I pity must,
That their bright Valor should so darkly ioust.
While hotly thus they skirmish in the Vault,
Quick Ebedmelech closely thither brought
A Dry-Fat sheathed in latton plates without,
With-in with Feathers filled, and round about
Bored full of holes (with hollow pipes of brass)
Save at one end, where nothing out should pass;
Which (having first his Jewish Troops retired)
Just in the mouth of the enter-Mine he fired:
The smoke whereof with odious stink does make
The Pagans soon their hollow Fort forsake:
As from the Berries in the Winter's night Simile.

The Keeper draws his Ferret (flesht to bite).
Now Rabshakeh (as busy) other-where
A rolling Towr against the Town does rear,
And on the top (or highest stage) of it
A flying Bridge, to reach the Courtin ^it,
With pullies, poles; and planked Battlements
On every story, for his Men's defense.
On the other side, the Townsmen ar^ not slow
With counter-plots to counter-push their Foe:
Now, at the wooden side, then at the front;
Then at the Engines of the Persian Mount,
With Brakes and Slings, and Instruments of War wherein wild fire is put.
Phalariks they play,
To fire their Fortress and their Men to slay:
But yet, a Cord-Mat (stiffly stretched about)
Defends the Towr, and keeps their Tempests out.
While thus they deal; Sephtiah, desperate,
Him secretly out of the City gat,
And with a Pole of rozen-weeping Fir,
So furiously he does himself bestir,
That with the same the walking Fort he fires:
The cruel flame so to the top aspires,
That (maugre Blood, shed from above in slaughter,
And, from below, continual spouting Water)
It parts the Fray: stage after stage it catches,
And the half-broyld Soldiers head long down it fetches.
The King (still constant against all extremes)
To press them nearer yet; with mighty beams
Rears a new Platform, nearer to the Wall,
And covers it, with threefold shelter, all;
The Timber (first) with Mud, the Mud with Hides,
The Hides with Woll-sacks (which all Shot derides). Simile.

As the Aier exhaled by the fiery breath
Of the Heavenly Lion, on an open Heath,
Or on the tresses of a tufted Plain,
Pours-down at-once both Fire and Hail and Rain:
So all at-once the Isaacia^ Soldiers threw
Floods, Flames, and Mountains on these Engines new;
But the hungry Flames the Muddy-damp repels,
The Mounts, the Wool; the drowning Floods, the Fel^.
Thear-vnder (safe) the Ram with iron horn,
The brazen-headed clov'n-foot Capricorn,
The boistrous Trepane, and steel Pick-ax play
Their parts apace, not idle night nor day.
Here, thorough-riv'n from top to toe, the Wall
On reeling props hangs, ready even to fall:
There, a vast-Engine thundreth vp-side-down
The feeble Courtin of the sacred Town.
If you have been, where you have seen som-whiles, Simile.

How with the Ram they driue-in mighty Piles
In Dover Peer, to bridle with a Bay
The Sand-cast Current of the raging Sea;
Swift-ebbing streams bear to the Sea the sownd,
Echo assisteth, and with shrill rebound
Fills all the Town, and (as at Heavenly Thunder)
The Coast about trembles for fear and wonder:
Then have you heard and seen the Engines beating
On Sion's Walls, and her foundations threating.
In fine, the Chaldeis take Jerusalem,
And reave for ever Iuries Diadem.
The smoaky burning of her Turrets steep
Seems even to make the Sunn's brightey to weep:
And wretched Salem, buried (as it were)
Under a heap of her own Children dear,
For lack of Friends to keep her Obsequies,
Constrains sighs (even) from her Enemies.
Her massy Ruins and her Cinders show
Her Wealth and Greatness, yer her overthrowe.
A sudden horror seizes every eye
That views the same: and every Passer-by
(Yea, were he Get, or Turk, or Troglodite)
Must needs, for pity of so sad a Sight,
Bestow some tears, some swelling sighs, or groans
Upon these battered sculs, these scattered stones.
In Palaces, where lately (gilded rich)
Sweet Lutes were heard, now luck-les Oules do screech:
The sacred TEMPLE, held (of late) alone
Wonder of Wonders, now a heap of stone:
The House of God ( the Holyest-Holy-Place)
Is now the House of Vermin vile and base:
The Vessels, destined unto sacred use,
Are now profaned in Riot and Abuse:
None scapeth wounds, if any escape with life:
The Father's reft of Son, the Man of Wife:
Jacob's exiled, Iuda's no more in Jury,
But (wretched) sighs under the Chaldean fury.
Their King in chains, with shame and sorrow thrilled, Hoshea.

Before his face sees all the fairest pill'd;
Yea, his own Daughters, and his* Wives (alas!)
(Rich Vines and Olives of his lawful Race)
Whose love and beauty did his age delight,
Shared to the Soldiers, ravished in his sight.
O, Father, Father, thus the Daughters cry
(About his neck still hanging tenderly)
Whither (alas!) O, whither hale they us?
O, must we serve their base and beastly Lusts?
Shall they dissolve our Virgin-zones? Shall they
(Ignoble Grooms) gather our Mayden-May,
Our spot-les Flowr, so carefully preserved
For some great Prince, that might have us deserved?
O Hony-dropping Hills we yerst frequented,
O Milk-full Vales, with hundred Brooks indented*
Delicious Gardens of deer Israel;
Hills, Gardens, Vales, we bid you all farewell:
We (will-we-nill-we) hurried hence, as slaves,
Must now, for Cedron, sip of Tygris waves;
And (weaned from our native Earth and Air)
For Hackney-Iades be sold in every Fair.
And (O hearts-horror!) see the shame-les Foe,
Forcing our Honors, triumph in our woe.
All-sundring Sword! and (O!) all-cindring Fire!
Which (mercy-les) do SION's Wrack conspire,
Why spare you us, more cruel (cried the Wives)
In leaving ours, then reaving other's lives?
Your Pitie's pity-les, your Pardon Torture:
For, quick dispatch had made our Sorrows shorter;
But your seem-Favour, that prolongs our breaths,
Makes us, alive, to die a thousand Deaths.
For, O deer Husband, dearest Lord, can we,
Can we survive, absented quight from Thee,
And slaves to those whose Talk is nothing else
But thy Disgrace, thy Gyves, and Isreal's?
Can we (alas!) exchange thy Royal bed
(With cunning-cost rare richly furnished)
For the ugly Cabin and the louzie Couch
Of some base Buffon, or some beastly Slouch?
Can we, alas! can wretched we (I say)
We, whose Commands whole Kingdoms did obey,
We, at whose beck even Princes knees did bend,
We, on whose Train there daily did attend
Hundreds of Eunuchs, and of Maids of Honor
(Kneeling about us in the humblest manner)
To dress us neat, and duly every Morn
In Silk and Gold our Bodies to adorn;
Dress others now? work, on disgrace-full frame
(Weeping the while) our SION's wo-full flame?
Dragging like Moyls? drudge in their Mills? and hold
Brooms in our hands, for Sceptre-Rods of gold?
Com, Parrots, com, y' have prated, now enough
(The Pagans cry in their insulting ruff)
On Chalde shoars you shall go sigh your fill,
You must with us to Babel: there at will
You may bewail: there, this shall be your plight,
Our Mayds by day, our Bed-fellows by night.
And, as they spoke, the shame-les lust-full crew
With furious force the tender Ladies drew
Even from between the arms of the woe-full King,
Them haling rough, and rudely hurrying;
And little lackt the act of most despite,
Even in their Father's and their Husbands sight,
Who, his hard Fortune does in vain accuse,
In vain he raves, in vain he roars and rews:
Even as a Lion, prisoned in his grate,
Whose ready dinner is bereft of late,
Roars hideously; but his fell Fury-storm
May well breed horror, but it brings no harm.
The proud fell Pagans do yet farther pass:
They kill, they tear, before the Father's face
(The more to gore: what Marble but would bleed?)
They massacre his miserable seed.
O! said the Prince, can you less pitious be
To these Self-yielders (prostrate at your knee)
Than sternly-valiant to the stubborn-stout
That against your rage courageously stood-out?
Alas! what have they don? what could they do
To urge revenge and kindle wrath in you?
Poor silly Babes under the Nources wing,
Have they conspired against the Chaldean King?
Have these sweet Infants that yet cannot speak,
Broak faith with you? Have these, so young and weak,
Yet in their Cradle, in their Clouts, bewayling
Their Woes to-come (to all Mankind, vnfayling)
Dis-ray'd your Ranks? Have these that yet do craul
Upon all four, and cannot stand, at all,
With-stood your Fury, and repulst your Powrs,
Frustred your Rams, fiered your flying Towrs?
And, bravely sallying in your face (almost)
Hew'n-out their passage thorough all your Host?
O! no, Chaldeans, only I did all:
I did complot the King of Babels fall:
I foyld your Troops: I filld your sacred Flood
With Chaldean bodies, died it with your blood.
Turn therefore, turn your bloody Blades on-me;
O! let these harm-less Little-ones go free;
And stain not with the blood of Innocents
The immortal Tropheis of your high Attents.
So, ever may the Riphean Mountains quake
Under your feet: so ever may you make
South, East, and West your own: on every Coast
So, ay victorious march your glorious Host:
So, to your Wives be you thrice welcome home,
And so God bless your lawfull-loved womb
With Self-like Babes, your substance with increase,
Yourselues (at home) with hoary hairs in Peace. Simil^.

But, as a Rock, against which the Heavens do thunder,
The Air roars about, the Ocean rages under,
Yields not a jot: no more this savage Crew;
But rather, muse to finde-out Tortures new.
Here, in (his sight) these cruel Lestrigons
Between them take the eldest of his Sons,
With keenest swords his trembling flesh they heaw,
One gobbet here, another thear they streaw.
And from the veins of dead-lyve limbs (alas!)
The spirit-full blood spins in his Father's face.
Thear, by the heels his second Son they take,
And dash his head against a Chimnies back:
The skull is pasht to pieces, like a Crock,
Or earthen Stean, against a stony Rock:
The scatterd batterd Brains, about besmeard,
Some hang (O horror*) in the Fathers beard.
Last, on himself their savage fury flies,
And with sharp bodkins bore they out his eyes*
The Sun he loses, and an end-les night
Beclowds for ever his twin-balled sight:
He sees no more, but feels the woes he bears;
And now for crystal, weeps he crimsin tears.
For, so God would (and justly too, no doubt)
That he which had in Judah clean put-out
The immortal Lamp of all religious light,
Should have his eyes put-out, should lose his sight;
And that his body should be outward blind,
As inwardly (in holy things) his mind.
O Butchers (said he) satiat your Thirst,
Swill, swill your fill of Blood, until you burst:
O! broach it not with bodkin, but with knife;
O! reaue me not my body's light, but life:
Give me the sight not of the Earth, but Skies:
Pull-out my heart: O! poach not out mine eyes.
Why did you not this barbarous deed dispatch,
Yer I had seen me an vn-sceptred Wretch,
My Cities sacked, my wealthy subjects pilld,
My Daughters ravished, and my Sonns all killd?
Or else, why stayed you not till I had seen
Your (Beast-like) Master grazing on the Green:
The Medes conspiring to supplant your Throne:
And Babel's glory utter overthrown?
Then had my soul with Fellow-Falls bin eased,
And then your pain, my pain had part appeased.
O ragefull Tyrants! moody Monsters, see,
See here my Case; and see yourselues in me.
Beware Contempt: tempt not the Heavenly Powrs,
Who thunder-down the high-aspiring Towrs;
But mildely pardon, and permit secure
Poor Cottages that lie below obscure:
Who Pride abhor; who lift us up so high,
To let us fall with greater infamy.
The Almighty sports him with our Crowns and us;
Our glory stands so fickle-founded thus
On slippery wheels, already rolling down:
He gives us not, but only shows the Crown:
Our Wealth, our Pleasure, and our Honor too
(Where at the Vulgar make so much a-doo)
Our Pomp, our State, our All that can be spoken,
Seems as a glass, bright-shining, but soon broken.
Thrice-happy He, whom with his sacred arm,
The Eternal props against all Haps of harm:
Who hangs upon his providence alone,
And more preferrs GOD'S Kingdom than his own.
So happy be great BRITTANNE Kings (I pray)
Our Sovereign JAMES, and all his Seed, for ay;
Our hope-full HENRY, and a hundred mo
Good, faithful STVARTS (in successiue row)
Religious, righteous, learned, valiant, wise,
Sincere to Virtue, and severe to Vice;
That not alone These days of Ours may shine
In Zeal-full Knowledge of the TRVTH divine
And We (illightned with her sacred rays)
May walk directly in the Saving ways
Offaith-full Service to the ONE true Deity,
And mutual Practice of all Christian Piety;
But, that our Nephews, and their Nephews (till
Time be no more) may be conducted still
By the same Cloud by day, and Fire by night
(Through this vast Desert of the World's despite)
Toward their Home, the heavenly CANAAN,
Prepared for us yer the World began:
That they with us, and we (complete) with them,
May meet triumphant in JERUSALEM;
With-in whose Pearly Gates and Jasper Walls
(Whear, the Holy LAME keeps his high Nuptials,
Whear needs no shining of the Sun, or Moon;
For, God's own face makes there perpetual Noon:
Whear shall no more be Waylings, Woes, nor Cries*
For, God shall wipe all tears from weeping eyes)
Shall enter nothing filthy or unclean;
No Hog, no Dog, no Sodomit obscoene,
No Witch, no Wanton, no Idolater,
No Thief, no Drunkard, no Adulterer,
No Wicked-liuer, neither wilful Liar:
These are without, in Tophet's end-les Fire.
Yet, such as these (or some of these, at least)
We all have been: in som-what all have mist
(And, had we broken but one Precept sole,
The Law reputes us guilty of the whole):
But, we are washed, in the Sacred-Flood;
But, we are purged, with the Sprinkled-Blood;
But, by the Spirit, we now are sanctified;
And through the Faith in IHSVS, iustify'd.
Thearfore no more let us our selves defile,
No more return unto our Vomit vile,
No more profane us with Concupiscence,
Nor spot the garment of our Innocence:
But, constant in our Hope, fervent in Love
(As even al-ready conversant Above)
Proceed we cheerely in our Pilgrimage
Toward our happy promised Haeritage,
Toward That City of heart-bound-les Bliss
Which CHRIST has purchased with his Blood, for His:
To Whom, with FATHER, and the SPIRIT, therefore
Be Glory, Praise, and Thanks, for-evermore.
Amen Amen Amen.
FINIS.
PIBRAC. Quad. 5.
Say not, My hand This Work to END has brought:
Nor, This my Virtue has attained to:
Say rather thus; This, GOD by me has wrought:
GOD's Author of the little Good I do.
D. O. M. S. GVLIHLMO SALVSTIO POETARVM FACILE PRINCIPI, SCRIPTORI MIRABILI,
PIO MIRABILIVM ASSERTORI, PRAECONI VIRT VTIS DVLCI

DOCTOQ. CVIVS MONVMENTA DOCVMENTA POSTER IS FVTVRA SVNT: QVI MVS AS EREPTAS
PROFANAE' LASCIVIAE SACRIS MONTIBVS* REDDIDIT, SACRIS FONTIBVS ASPERSIT, SACRIS
CANTIBVS

IMBVIT, VIRO VERE NOBILI, MORTALIBVS EXVVIIS SPOLIATO, IMMORTALITATIS COMPOTI,

A^MM. PP.

HIs, fateor, nemo exuuijs inscribere honorem,
Aut pater Aonij debuit ipsechori:
Gratia sed quoniam taciti prope nulla doloris,
Neu videar moest as non maduissegenas;
Audiat ecce gemensetiam me turba gementem:
Ecce, meus vano munere peccet amor.
Et titulus saltem esto, BONA SVPER AETHERA FAMA NOTVS, EGET NVLLO, QVI IACET
HIC, TITVLO.
Iac. Lectius.

TO MY EVER-MOST-honoured Mistress, Mris Essex, wife to the right worthy
William Essex of Lamborn, Esquier; and eldest Daughter of the right valiant,
and Nobly-descended, Sir Walter Harecourt of Stanton-Harecourt Knight, Baron of
Ellen-Hall.
WIt's, Beautie's, Virtue's perfect Quintessence
(Yet graced in soul with more Divine perfection)
Grace, with a glance of your mild Eye's reflection,
This humble Pledge of Zeal and Reverence:
Which (as the Stork, for grateful recompense,
Where she has bred, one of her Birds bestows)
My thankful Muse (who you like Duty owes)
Here consecrates to your dear excellence.
Deer ESSEX here (to make your Faith apparent
Unto the Faithful, and confirm the same)
Embrace (I pray) the Faith of ABRAHAM
Offering his Isaac (on the Almighties warrant):
So shall the Imputer of his Righteousness
Impute you yours; and your young Isaacs bless.
Your Virtue's euer-vowed Servant, IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

TO VERTVES Pattern, and Beauties Paragon, Mris Ione Essex: now wife to the
right worthy William Anderson Esquier (second Son of the late Lord Anderson)
and only Sister of the Honorably-descended William Essex of Lamborn, Esquier.
URANIA (noblest of the learned NINE)
Coming from Heaven, to call my Muse from Earth,
From Loves loose Sonnets, and lascivious Mirth;
In sacred WEEKS to sing the Works divine:
Of all the Nimphs extract from mortal Ligne,
For sweet Companion picks you only forth
(As best resembling her self's grace and worth)
Deer Beauties best, Wits wonder, Virtue's shrine.
Sweet, heavenly temper of a humane soul
(Whose lovely smiles set coldest hearts a-fire;
But, instantly, with modest brows control
The aspiring hope of any bold desire)
Daign t'entertain in your mild graceful manner
This Heavenly Maid, the mirror of your Honor.
Your Virtue's humble Votarie, IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

URANIA. OR The Heavenly Muse.
1
SCarce had I the April of mine Age begun,
When brave desire to immortallize my Name,
Did make me (often) Rest and repast to shun,
In curious project of some learned Frame.
2
But, as a Pilgrim, that full late does light
Upon a crosse-way, stops in sudden doubt;
And, 'mid the sundry Lanes to find the right,
More with his Witthan with his feet does scout:
3
Among the many flowrie paths that lead
Up to the Mount, where (with green Bays) Apollo
Crowns happy Numbers with immortal meed,
I stood confused, and doubtful which to follow.
4
One while I sought, the Greekish-Scaene to dress
In French Disguise: in loftier Style anon
T'mbrew our Stage, with Tyrants bloody Gests,
Of Thebes, Mycaena, and proud Ilion.
5
Anon, I sacred to the Aonian Band
My Countries Story; and, condemning much
The common error, rather took in hand
To make the Mein, French, than the Sein be Dutch.
6
Anon, I meant with fawning pen to praise
Vn-worthy Prince; and with gold and glory,
T*inrich my Fortunes, and my Fate to raise,
Basely to make my Muse a Mercenarie.
7
Then (gladly) thought I, the Wagg-Son to sing
Of wanton Uenus; and the bitter-sweet,
That Too-much Love to the best wits does bring:
Theme, for my nature and mine age, too-meet.
8
While to and fro thus (tossed by Ambition)
Yet vn-resolued of my Course, I rove;
Lo, suddenly a sacred Apparition;
Some Daughter (think I) of supernall Jove.
9
Angelical her gesture and her gait;
Divinely-sweet her speech and countenance;
Her Nine-fold Voice did choicely imitate
The Harmonious Musik of Heavens nimble Dance.
10
Upon her Head, a glorious Diadem,
Seaven-double-folded, moving diversely;
And on each fold sparkled a precious Gem,
Obliquely turning over our heads on high:
11
The first of Lead, the second Tin (me thought)
Third Steel, the fourth of yellow Gold was cast,
The fifth of pale Electrum seemed wrought;
Sixth Mercury; of Silver was the last.
12
An azure Mantle on her back she wore,
With art-les Art, in orderly disorder;
Flourisht, and filled with thousand Lamps and more,
Her sacred Beauty to set-forth and further:
13
Here flames the Harp, there shine the tender Twinns,
Here Charles his Wayn, there twinkling Pleiades,
Here the bright Balance, there the silver Finns,
And thousand Stars more then I can express.
14
I am URANIA (then a-loud said she)
Who humane-kinde above the Poles transport,
Teaching their hands to touch, and eyes to see
All the enter-course of the Celestial Court.
15
I quint-essence the Soul, and make the Poet
(Passing himself) in a Divine Discourse
To draw the deafest, by the ears vnto-it,
To quicken stones, and stop the Oceans course.
16
I grant, my learned Sisters warble fine,
And ravish millions with their Madrigalls:
Yet all, no less inferior unto mine,
Than Pies to Sirens, Geese to Nightingalls.
17
Then take Me (BARTAS) to conduct thy ^e^*
Soar-vp to Heaven; Sing-me the Almightie's praise,
And tuning now the Iessean Harp again,
Gayn thee the Garland of eternal Bays.
18
I cannot (grief-less) see my Sisters wrongs
Made Bawds to Lovers, in deceitful faynings,
In forged sighs, false tears, and filthy Songs,
Lascivious shows and counterfeit complaynings.
19
Alas! I cannot* with dry eyes behold
Our holy Songs sold and profaned thus
To grace the grace-less; praising (too-too bold)
Caligula, Nero, and Commodus.
20
But, most I mourn to see r^^e Verse applied
Against the Author of sweet Composition:
I cannot brook to see Heavens King defied
By his own Soldiers, with his own Munition.
21
Man's eyes are ^ield-vp with Cimmerian mist:
And, if ought precious in his Life he reach,
Through sundry hands, by the Heavens bounty is it:
But God, himself, the Delphian Songs does teach.
22
Each Art is learned by Art: but PO^SI^
Is a mere Heavenly gift; and none can taste
The Deaws we drop from Pindus plentiously,
If sacred Fire have not his breast embraced.
23
Thence is it, that many great Philosophers,
Deep-learned Clarks (in Prose most eloquent)
Labor in vain to make a grace-full Verse,
Which many a Novice frames most excellent.
24
Thence is it, that yerst, the poor Meonian Bard,
Though, Master, means, and his own eyes he misses,
Of Old and New is for his Verse preferred,
In's stout Achilles, and his wise Ulysses.
25
Thence is it, that Ovid cannot speak in Prose:
Thence is it, that David (Sheapheard, turned Poet)
So soon does learn my Songs: and Youths compose
After our Art, before (indeed) they knowe-it.
26
Dive day and night in the Castalian Fount,
Dwell upon Homer and the Mantuan Muse,
Climb night and day the double-topped Mount,
Where the Pierian learned Maidens use:
27
Read while thou will, read over every Book
In Pergamus, and in the famous City
That her great name, of Alexander took;
Still ply thy Pen, practice thy language (witty):
28
Take time enough, choose seat and season fit,
To make good Verse at best advantage place thee:
Yet worthy fruit thou shall not reap of it,
For all thy toil, unless Minerua grace thee.
29
For, out of Man, Man must him all advance,
That time-proof Poems ever hopes to utter;
And, extased (as in a holy Trance)
Into our hands his Sensiue part must put-her.
30
For, as a humane Fury makes a man
Less than a man: so Diuine-Fury makes-him
More than himself; and sacred Phrenzie than
Above the Heavens bright-flaming Arches takes-him.
31
Thence, thence it is that Divine Poets bring
So sweet, so learned, and so lasting Numbers,
Where Heavens and Nature's secret works they sing,
Free from the power of Fates eternal slumbers.
32
True Poets, right are like winde-Instruments,
Which full, do sound; empty, their noise surceases:
For, with their Fury lasts their Excellence;
Their Muse is silent, when their Fury ceases.
33
Since therefore Verses have from Heaven their spring,
O rarest spirits! how dare you (damned scorners)
Profanely wrest against Heaven's glorious King,
These sacred gifts given for your lives adorners?
34
Shall your ungrateful Penns be always waiting,
As Servants to the Flesh, and slaves to Sin?
Will you your Volumes evermore be fraighting
With Dreams and Fables, idle Fame to win?
35
Still will you fill the World with Loue-sick groans?
Still will you fawn on Fools, and flatter Evil?
Still will you parbreak loathsome passions?
Still will you make an Angel of a Devil?
36
Still will you comment on this common Story?
And (Spider-like) weaue idle Webs of folly?
O! shall we never hear you sing the glory
Of God, the great, the good, the just, the holy?
37
Is It not enough, that in Your souls, ye feel
Your Paphian Fire? but every Brothel-Lover,
TO inchaunt the wanton with his wanton style,
Must (Strumpet-like) his lust full flame discover?
38
Is It not enough that you your selves do wallow
In foul delights? but that you must entice
Your heed-less Readers your loose Race to follow;
And so, for Virtue, make them fall to Uice?
39
Tunes, Notes, and Numbers (whence we do transfer
The harmonious power that makes our Verse so pleasing)
The sternest Catoes are of force to stir,
Man's noblest spirits with gentle Fury seazing.
40
And, as a Seal printeth in wax (almost)
Another Seal; A learned Poet graveth
So deep his passions in his Readers ghost,
That often the Reader, the Authors form receives.
41
For, Verse's virtue, slyding secretly
(By secret pipes) through the intellectual Notions;
Of all that is pourtraid artificially
Imprinteth there both good and evil motions.
42
Therefore did Plato, from his Nonesuch banish
Base Poetasters, that with vicious verse
Corrupted manners, making virtue vanish,
The wicked, worse; and even the good perverse.
43
Not those, that cared to match their graceful Phrazes
To grave-sweet matters: singing now the praise
Of iustest Jove; anon from errors mazes
Keeping the vn-steady, calling-back the strayes.
44
O profane Wrighters* your lascivious Rhyme
Makes our best Poets to be basely deemed,
As Iugglers, Iesters, and the scum of Time;
Yea, with the Vulgar less than these esteemed.
45
You make chaste Clio, a light wanton Minion;
Mount Helicon, a Stews: your ribaldrie
Makes prudent Parents (strict in their opinion)
To bar their Children reading Poetry:
46
But, if you would (yet'at the last) inure-yee
Your Gnidian Idols in the dust to trample,
And rouse the Genius of your sacred-Furie,
To show the World some holy Works example;
47
All would admire your Rimes, and do you honor,
As Secretaries of the Heavenly Court;
And Majesty would make you wait vpon-her,
To manage Causes of the most import.
48
The chain of Verse was at the first invented
To handle only sacred mysteries
With more respect: and nothing else was chanted
For long time after in such Poesies.
46
So did my David on the trembling strings
Of his divine Harp only sound his God:
So milde-soul'd Moses, to lehouah sings
Jacobs deliverance from the Egyptian's Rod.
50
So Debora and Judith, in the Camp;
So Job and Jeremy, in cares oppressed;
In tune-ful Verses of a various stamp,
Their ioys and sighs, divinely-sweet expressed.
51
And therefore Satan (who transforms him slily
TO an Angel of the Light, the more to abuse)
In's Oracles and Idols speaking wily,
Not common Prose, but curious Verse did use.
52
So the fond Maid-Priests of Apollo sung
His Oracles in sweet Hexameters,
With doubtful Riddles from a double tongue,
To hap-less-hopefull, conquered-Conquerers.
53
So the ancient voice in Dodon worshipped,
So Aesculapius, Hamon, and the fair
And famous Sibyls spoke and prophesied
In Verse: in Verse the Priest did make his prayer.
54
So Orpheus, Linus, and Hesiodus
(Where of the first charmed stocks, and stones, they say)
In sacred Numbers dared (to profit us)
Their divine secrets of deep skill conuaigh.
55
O! you that long so, for the Laurel Crown,
Where Is possible a richer Theme to take,
Than his high praise, who makes the Heavens go round,
The Mountains tremble, and dark Hell to quake?
56
This subject, is a deep, broad, bound-les Ocean,
The abundant Horn of Plentiful discourse;
The Magazin of wealth for Wits quick motion;
Of divine Eloquence the immortal source.
57
Base Argument, a base style ever yields:
But (of it self) a lofty subject raises
Graue-stately words, and (of it self) it gilds
It self; and crowns the Author's Pen with praises.
58
If then you would survive yourselues so gladly,
Follow not him, who burnt (to purchase fame)
DIANA's Temple: neither him that madly
To get renoun, a Brazen Bull did frame.
59
Employ no more the Elixir of your spirit
On Cytherea and her winged Son.
How better never to be named were-it,
Then named (blamed) for a mischief donn?
60
We, Thrice-three Sisters of Parnassus Hill,
Be Virgins all: your Pallas self is so,
So is that sacred Tree-turn'd Lady still,
From whose pure Locks your stil-green Laurels grow.
61
Then, consecrate-me (rather) your Wits miracles,
To sacred Stories: spend your Eloquence
In singing loud those holy heavenly Oracles,
Pour there your Souls pure precious quint-essence.
62
Let CHRIST (as Man-God) be your double Mount
Whereonto Muse, and, for the winged hoove
Of Pegasus, to dig the Immortal Fount,
Take the Holy Ghost, typ't in a Silver Dove.
63
Excelling Works, preserve the Memory
Of those that make them: The Mausolean Toomb
Makes Artemisia, Scopas, Timothy,
Live to this day, and still in time to com.
64
Name-les had Hiram been, but for his aid
Toward God's Temple, built in Israel:
And, but for God's Ark, in dark silence laid
Long since had been the Hebrew Bezaleel.
65
Then, since these great and goodly Monuments
Can make their makers, after death abide;
Although themselves have Vanished long since,
By Age, and Rage, Fire, Arms and Storms destroyed:
66
O think (I pray) how-much-much greater glory
Shall you attain, when your Diviner quality,
In sacred strains shall singth' Almightie's Story,
Since from immortal things springs Immortality.
67
I know, you will answer, that the Ancient Fictions
Are (even) your Song's soul: and that every Fable
Aye breeding other, makes by their commixtions,
(To Vulgar ears) your Uerse more admirable.
68
But, what may be more admirable found,
Then Faith's Effects? or what does more control
Witt's curious pride? or with more force confound
The reach and reason of a humane soul?
69
I Would rather sing the Towr of Babylon,
Than those three Mountains, that in frantik mood
The Giants pyl'd to pull love from his Throne:
And Noah's rather than Deucalion's Flood.
70
I Would rather sing the sudden shape-depriving
Of Assur's Monarch, than the Arcadian King:
And the Bethanian Lazarus reviving,
Than valiant Theseus Sonn's re-sodering.
71
The one, only does delight their ears, that hear it;
The other tends to profit in some measure*
But, only He the Laurel Crown does merit,
Who wisely mingles profit with his Pleasure.
72
As sweetest walks are by the waters side,
And safest swimming near the flowery shore:
So, prudent writers never do divide
Knowledge from Mirth, Mirth from instruction's lore.
73
Such shall you be, if such a task you take;
For, teaching others, you your selves shall learn-all
Rules of good life: and happy so shall make,
As is your subject, your own Songs eternal.
74
Abandon then those Olde-wiues-Tales and Toys;
Leave the Blind Lad, who but the blind abuses;
And only, addle, idle hearts annoyes.
Henceforth no more profane the Sacred Muses.
75
But (O!) in vain, in vain (alas!) I plain-me;
Some (subtle Aspiks) to eschew my Charming,
Stop their dull ears; some ( Epicures) disdain-me
And my advice; and scoff my zealous warning.
76
Some, for a season listen to my Laws,
But soon Relapse, through the Worlds sorceries;
And this discourse (which but the Virtuous draws)
Enters at one ear, and at the other flies.
77
Alas! I see scarce one (nay, none at all)
That courts not Venus; or corrupts not more
His golden Honey, with profaner Gall:
Although this Age of happy Wits have store.
78
But thou (my Darling) whom before thy birth,
The Sacred Nine that lip the immortal spring
Of Pegasus, predestined to set forth
The Almightie's glory, and his praise to sing:
79
Although their Subject seem a barren soil,
Which finest Wits have left for fallow fields;
Yet, do thou never from this task recoil:
For, what is rarest, greatest glory yields.
80
Faint not (my- Salust) though fell Envy bark
At the bright Rising of thy fair Renown;
Fear not her malice; for, thy living Work
(In spite of spite) shall not be trodden down.
81
That Fames-foe Monster, is much like a Curr,
That fiercely barks at every new-com Guest;
But, once-acquainted, after does not sturr,
Saving at strangers; fawning on the rest.
82
Or like a thick, dark, pitchie Clowd of smoke,
That round-about, a kindling Fire suppresses
With waving smother, the new Flame to choke:
But, as the Flame augments, the Fume decreases.
83
Wherefore (my deer) that sacred Path pursue,
Where none but Heav'n*blest happy spirits can pase:
And here I swear, that shortly for thy due,
Among best Wits thou shall have worthy place.
84
With these sweet accents (graced in utterance)
URANIA, holding in her Maiden-hand
A glorious Crown, rapt-vp (in sacred Trance)
My prostrate soul, pressed to her high Command.
85
Since when, alone that Love my hearthath fired;
Since when, alone that Wind my sayls has spread:
O happy! might I touch that Crown (desired)
But with my hand, not put it on my head.
86
Now out of zeal to your deer Name and You
(Deer noble Name, that I must aye affect:
And whose Disasters; I must ever rue)
This MONVMENT of Honor I erect
To you (sweet ESSEX) as your Virtues due,
For an eternal token of Respect:
Where, your great worth, and my good will shall stand
Inrowld for ever, with VRANIA's hand.
FINIS.
THE TRIVMPH of FAITH, formerly DEDICATED, and now again, for ever Consecrated
to the grate-ful Memory of the first kind Fosterer of our tender Muses, my
neuersufficiently-Honored deer Uncle W. PLVMB, Esquire.

For whose deer Bones we would a Toomb advance Of Gold, and Silver, and
CORINTHIAN Brass, With Ivorie Pillars mixed with Iette and Rance, Rarer and
richer than the old CARIAN's was;

And stately deck the same
With Stories of his Fame:
And round-about it wright
His Virtues shining bright:


But, since the most of our poor Means (alas!) Not the least part of that Rich
Pride affoords; For want of Wealth, we build a Toomb of Words:

Which (though it cost less) shall out-last
The proud cloud threatening Battlements,
The aspiring Spires by NILVS placed,
And Hell-deep-founded Monuments.
For greedy waste of Hours, that al things else deuours, Spares the sweet
Maids of sacred HELICON: And those fair Ladies, to their Friends alone, This
precious Gift do give, Still (after Death) to Live.

THE TRIVMPH OF FAITH.
To Guy de Faur, Lord of Pibrac: W. Salustius du BARTAS.
I Hate those Satyrs, that the best still bite:
I hate the shameless Penns that sooth the vicious:
For, these be flatterers, and those malicious:
But, wise is he can hit the Mean aright.
I pinch not often, nor do I often praise:
Yet, must I needs praise the praise-worthie still:
I cannot hold my free and forward quill
From those whom Heaven adorns with special rays.
Now, all that God does by retail bestow
On perfect'st men, to thee in gross he gives:
Therefore my Muse thy praise so often drives,
For duties sake, but not to flatter so.
Our Age's wonder! when thy tongue (refined
By use and Art) in our King's name dilates
With Counsails, Germain or furred Polish States,
The sweet-tongu'd Cyneas thou do make us mind.
In Privy counsel, when our miseries
Thou do be-moan, most Nestor-like thou art:
And when, in Paris Parliament, thy part*
Of Laws thou plead'st, thou seem to Scaeuolize.
Thy Latin Prose does match smooth Salusts style:
And when thy Pen distills the Nectar sweet
Of Helicon (where all the Muses meet)
Me thinks I read sweet Virgill all the while.
In honor of these gifts, this gift I bring,
Small for my pains, great for the Argument:
But if the Heavens had richer treasure lent,
Thy New-yeeres-gift should be some better thing.
THE TRIVMPH OF FAITH.


THE TRIVMPH OF FAITH.
Canto I.
1
Near the hour that Erycin' Aurora calls,
And she the Sun, sad Morpheus entering in
Through's hornie gate, to show me did begin
A sacred Virgin's stately TRIVMPHALS.
2
Then Faith (for so she hight) bids, with celeritie,
Of Pen and Paper that I make provision
To wright the sum of this celestial Vision,
To be recorded unto all Posterity.
3
I know my task to be impossible:
I know, in this, man's eyes are beetle-blinde:
His ears quite deaf: clean void of sense his mind:
But, hardest things Faith makes most possible.
4
Eternal Sun, O scatter with thy Light
All mistie clouds, that make me not to see
Thy health-full face; and give true Faith to me,
Since Faith (sans Faith) cannot be known aright.
5
FAITH sits triumphant on a Carr of gold,
Of Tubals making, where blew Saphires shine,
Rich Diamonds, and many Rubies fine,
And if ought else the world more costly hold.
6
Her glorious Charret's rolling wheels are like
The holy wheels the great Ezekiel saw;
For, one self spirit, self wind, and will does draw,
Their restless courses, equal, both a-like.
7
The Bird that led the Roman Standards out:
The Bird, that fixtly can oppose his eyes
Against the greatest light in all the skies;
High through the air, draws this rich Coach about.
8
Faith flaunts it not in silver, silk, nor gold,
Nor precious scarlet of the Tyrian Die,
Nor paints her face to hide deformity;
But, as she is, she does her self unfold.
9
Her body (that all bodies does disgrace)
Like Juno's Bird, is full of watchful eyes
Whose holy glaunces pearce the lofty skies,
Pearce Air, and Heaven, and see God face to face.
10
Sh' has many sweet and flowing tongues to praise
The Lord of Hoasts: sh' has strong and mighty wings
(Passing the swiftnes of all earthly things)
That in a moment up to Heaven her raise.
11
Her glorious head is compast with a Crown,
Not made of Olive, Pine, or Laurel bough,
Nor Parsley Wreath, which Grecians did allow
The Olympian games, for signals of renown:
12
But, of fresh Roses plucked from Honors Tree,
That never shrink for Winters chilling frost,
Nor wither not, when Titan patcheth most:
For, by the Lord they ever watered be.
13
Now, stain-les Truth for Standards does display
Two Testaments: next, Courage marshals right
The undaunted Troops that are prepared to fight
Under her Colors, into ba^^ail-ray.
14
Then, Constancy bears a two-edged Blade,
And Patience an impenetrable Shield,
Whose brightness has enforced more Monsters yield,
Then that which of grim Gorgon's head was made.
15
Next, Charity, that kindly does prefer
Her neighbors good before her own vtility:
Repentance, Hope, and hearty-milde Humility,
Do flank the wings of Faith's triumphant Carr.
16
For, Faith (indeed) without her Maids were vain.
But, as the Sun can never lack his light,
Nor fire want heat: so (if we mark-aright)
Faith cannot want these Hand-mayds in her train.
17
Before this Coach, there is a Beldam gone,
That seems (at first) fairer then Hellen was:
But, nearer viewed, she is more foul (alas!)
Then fell Megera, Alecto 'r Tesiphon.
18
She never goes (like Faith) with open face;
But seeks for masks, vizards, and garments gay,
For cloak on cloak, to keep the light away,
Of her loathed limbs to hide the foul disgrace.
19
Sh' has tongues (like Faith) with which she boldly chats,
Blaspheming Heaven with filthy vanities;
Sh' has eyes, like Faith: but yet (alas!) those eyes
See clear by night, by day are blind as Bats.
20
Sh' has wings (like Faith) with which she soars on hie,
Like Icarus, she proudly mounts aloft;
Forgetting that her feathers are so soft,
Till Phoebus force her waxen wings dofri^.
21
She (whom, sans reason, men have Reason hight)
Since first, in Fire, the Lord the Air enclosed;
In Air the Sea, in Sea the Earth disposed;
Has with mild Faith maintained continual fight;
22
Now, arming Kings, and putting in their brains,
That nothing less beseems their Royal State,
Than under Faith their Scepters to abate:
Then to endure her gentle-ruling reans.
23
Another-while, she puffs with poysony pride
(Whom their Disciples only Doctors deem)
Such as (I grant) have spent much oil, and time,
To draw men's souls from the true way, too-wide.
24
Yet still, the Lord (who still vpholds the just)
Has still the cause of holy Faith maintained:
Has still, so well her holy side sustayn'd,
That still her Foes lie grovelling in the dust.
25
A thousand Princes, bound in fetters fast,
Before her march, that her mild Yoke disdeign'd:
That all the Earth with blood of Saints disteyn'd,
And Christ his Church with Fire and Sword did waste.
26
He that (the first) in this worlds Pupillage,
Brained his own brother, leads this bloody crew: Cain.

Then the hardened Tyrant that did dare pursue
Through the Red Sea Gods chosen Heritage. Pharaoh.

27
Then saw I him, that Zachary did stone, Ioash.

Athalia, Ahab, wicked Abian,
Occozias, Amon, Ahaz, and Ioram:
Then all that sat on the Samarian Throne.
28
I saw Senacherib, and Him whose Grace Nebuchadnezar

Was turned to grass, proud Hammon and with-all
Brave Holophernes, and who on the Wall
Read how his Kingdom to the Medes should pass. Baltsazar.

29
Annas and Caiaphas, and he that set
His hateful Idol in the holy Place,
Which five Iew-brethren bravely did deface: Antiochus illustris.

These all, too-late, in sad repentance fret.
30
The Tyrant too, that (at our Saviors birth) Herod.

In Cradles killed so many Innocents:
And that vile Judge, whose seared conscience Pilat.

Condemned the guilt-les Judge of all the earth.
31
That viperous Monster (of Mankind the shame) Nero.

Who, Mother, Wives, Brethren, and Sisters slew,
Then from a lofty Towr did laugh to view
Rome's glittering Spires all on a burning flame,
32
With Seventh Seuerus came accompanied:
Iule, Maximin, with fell Maximian,
Cruel Gallerian, fond Domitian,
That (God-less) would like God be honored.
33
Then saw I him, that served Sapores
For footstool base: I saw Aurelian, Valeri^^.

Decius, Lycinus, and Hostilian;
And fell Maxentius, marching next to these.
34
I saw great Traian, learned Aurelius,
And learned Dioclesian: all which three
Among wise Caesar's might well praised be,
Had they not been against Christians barbarous.
35
Justin, Theodorus, Constantinus Son, An^stasius.

Heraclius, Ualence, Constance, Manuel,
And that Bizantian Prince, that did mis-tell
A fourfold Essence in the only ONE. Comn^^^^s.

36
Then ( Goaths and Uandals) Gens'ric, Trasimond)
Honorius, Theodorus, Totilas,
Alaricus, and Rhotoris (alas!)
Who Rome, and Afrik with S(...) blood have drowned,
37
But who is this that laden so with chains,
By thousand hang-men racked with despite,
By thousand furies tortured day and night,
For God-les deeds receives so righteous pains?
38
It Is Mahomet, who more by Mauors Art, Sergius a Nestorian Monk holp Mahomet to
make his Alcoran.

Than's Alcaron (Bird of a Friars nest)
Has all subdued the wealthy golden East,
And won with-all the triple world's best part.
39
I see Prince Saladine, of match-les force,
But the Alcaron, too-deeply favoring:
Haly the Caliphe, and the wanton King
That did our Maids on Edess Altars force.
40
With wrath and woe, old Ottoman oppressed,
Too-late repentance in his face presents;
And Mahomet, the second, much laments
That he the Greekish Emperie suppressed.
41
So the proud scorn of (scourge-Turk) Tamberlain, Baiazeth.

That in an iron Cage was cooped straight;
And he that first presumed to pass the Straight,
Which Europ's bounds divides from the Asian.
42
Then he that quittance did with Scythia cry,
And over Sea his Scepter raised again; Mahomet 3

And Amurath, that did repel amain
Uincenslaus, that first had made him fly.
43
Orcan (the Phrigian*s fear) and Calipine,
Who foiled Sigismond's host, his Father feared;
And Baiazeth, that, being haughty reared
By Germain Tropheis, did their peace repine.
44
He that his Sire and Brother put to death, Selim ^

Is with a Cable killed; his Son, that quail'd
The Hungarian King, and Rhodes, and Bud assailed, Solomon.

With trembling fear now quakes like Aspen leaf.
45
And near this Solomon there does remain
An empty room for him that yet survives, Selim.

Who (by our Kings strange iars) so richly thrives,
That (proud) he threats both Germany and Spain.
46
O wretched Christians! while your civillrage
Against your own hearts does arm your proper hands,
O see you not the Turks invade your Lands,
And safely spoil the Lords choice heritage?
47
The discord grown 'twixt the Bulgarian King,
And the Eastern Caesar, even the Bridge it was
For hate-Christ Turks the Hellespont to pass,
And so in Greece a Pagan Scepter bring.
48
The discord of two brethren Morea lost,
And (O!) I fear lest Christians homebred frayes
(Dejecting quite Christ's name, and all his praise)
Bring Turks to land in farthest Western coast.
49
Forget then (Christians) your unchristian iarr^
(Your civil strife for wagging of a straw)
Ioyn hearts and hands, and all joint weapons draw
In Faith's defense to fight Iehoua's wars.
50
In Asia and Egypt make your Forces known:
Recover Gaza, A^tioch, Ascalon,
Tire, Sidon, Ioppa, and King David's Throne,
And Famagosta lost a year agon.
Canto II.
1
THough bloody Tyrants had in every age,
Busiris Altars, Bulls of Phalaris,
Gemonid Ladders, making Land and Seas,
And fire, and air, racks of their beastly rage:
2
Yet could they never wound the Church so much,
As have the Writings of the worldly Wise,
Which on men's souls do felly tyrannize;
The tortures, only did the bodies touch.
3
These Sages, puffed with self-conceited pride,
Dare to control the Almighties match-less work,
Where mystik Secrets from our senses lurk,
The search whereof the Lord has us denied.
4
And, though the spread of our too-feeble wings,
Scant raise us from the ground, they mount aloft
Even up to Heaven, where they do measure often
(By their Wits compass) God's eternal things.
5
Their knowledge is but merely ignorance,
They lose the truth in seeking it too much:
For, Truth does still conceal her self from such,
And to the humble does herself advance.
6
Truth always dwells within the holy Tables
Of God's live Word; not in our wanton brain,
Which daily coining some strange Error vain,
For Gold takes Lead, for Truth electeth Fables.
7
Long time their reasons were with Reason ri^e,
To wrack the Church, and Faith to ruinate:
But, now I see they do detest too late,
Their former errors and their former life.
8
In foremost rank, march all Gymno-sophists 1 The ancient Sages of the world

Followed by all the cunning Persian Mages,
The old French Druids, learned Calde-Sages,
And flower of all the Brachmane-sophists.
9
Pathagoras, Zeno, Xenophanes, 2 Philosophers, Greeks and Latins

Parmenides, merry Democritus,
Empedocles, and sad Heraclitus,
Archytas, Naucides, Nausiphanes.
10
Brief, all the Doctors of the Latin Sect
Tearing their Tresses, melting into tears,
Beating their breasts, detest those Dreams of theirs:
And so the greatest of the Greeks Elect.
11
Anaximander, Anaximenes,
Mylesian Thales, Anaxagoras,
Gnawen with continual care, cry out (alas)
On their own Errors, and so Socrates.
12
Cleanthes, and Chrysippus next to these,
With Zeno (Sto^k^) that have often strayed:
And next the Cyn^ks (all as ill-appay'd)
Diogenes, Crates, Antisthones.
13
There, the grand Patrons of each A^adem,
Plato, Speusippus, and Zenocrates,
Clytomachus, Crantor, Carneades;
And he that labors to conciliate them.
14
There mourns in vain Pirrhon (Son of Plistarchus)
That (fond) believes not what his ears do hear,
Eyes see, nose smells, tongue tastes, and hands do bear:
Then Timon, Hecate, and Anaxarchus.
15
There, the Stagirian (that with learned vain, Aristotle.

In's Works includes the Encyclopedy)
Sorry to have led so many souls awry,
With Strato and Theophrastus does complain.
16
There carnal Epicurns wayls with tears,
And Metodorus, next to whom there came
Both Aristipp^, Aretas, and that same
Vile wretch that coined a worser sect than theirs:
17
I mean that Monster Theodorus hight,
Who shame-less says, There is no God at all:
And that the Wise may (when occasion^ fall)
Be Liar, Traitor, Thief, and Sodomite.
18
Alas! how true the Proverb proves too plain,
Saying, Bad weeds grow euery-where a-pace:
But, wholesome herbs scant spring in any place
Without great labor, and continual pain.
19
O Graecians Baen, thy mortifying mores
To grow in Rome the swelling Seas have crossed;
From Rome too soon over the Alps have past
As far as France, and all her neighbor shoars.
20
Thy deadly Plant now buds on Justice Throne,
In Christian Camps, and Courts of Christian Kings,
In Church and Chair, and everywhere so springs,
That with thy thistles all is over-growen.
21
But, now return we to our task again:
All these Wisemen, of God have false defined,
Of Cheefest-good, Souls, or wrong place assigned,
Where (dead) we feel, or end-les peace or pain.
22
Those that since Christ (true Son of righteousness) 3. Deceiptfull Sophists
and Apostataes, open Enemies of Christ.

On our Horizon brought the days broad light,
Have led men's souls in dark eternal night,
Feel torments worthy of their wickedness.
23
Next Symmachus, Porphirius marches first,
Lucian, and Celsus then, whose hardened heart
The Gospel (known) did labor to subvert,
And Julian also, of all Caesar's worst:
24
Who, knowing well that tortures were but vain
To force the Saints from the right Faith to straie;
(By sugared style) studies another way,
Turns truth to lies, and lies to truth again.
25
Next, I perceive the Circumcised Crew 4. Cabalists, and Talmudists, Rabbis.

Of Cabalists, and butly Talmudists,
Troubling the Church with their mysterious Mists,
Who wel-nigh dead'gainst CHRIST do spet and spew:
26
Much like to Snakes, that wagg their sting-les sting,
When as (their heads and bodies being slain)
They threat their Foes with force-less fury vain,
And to their Graves their Thirst of vengeance bring.
27
Now com the Doctors of the Alcaron, 5. Turkish Doctors.

Who mingling poison, by their subtle gloss,
The World's blind eyes with darker Clouds enclose;
They show their sorrow by their saddest moan.
28
But, who are these that wear Faith's Livery, 6. Heretics old and new.

And bear the badge of Faith's best Souldiars;
And yet are laden with such bolts and bars;
And so despised of Faith's company?
29
These (if I err not) are the Heretics*
Who (pusht by proud and curious spirits) do blend
Both Heaven and Earth, and busily contend,
To lead the World in crooked paths and Creeks.
30
Now, as soft winds, with straight constrained breath
(Through chinks and crannies stealing privily)
Hurt more our health, than boistrous blasts that fly
And roll (abroad) the stones upon a heath:
31
And, as the Foe that shakes the Citie's wall^
With thundering shot, is not so dangerous,
As a lewd Burgess false and mutinous,
That in the Town stirs-vp domestik brauls:
32
So, Pagans, Turks, Jews, do not damnifie
The Faith, like these: their open violence
May be avoided: but false fair-pretence
Is hardly escaped with much ieopardie.
33
They make (like us) a fair religious show:
They have (like us) one Church, one FAITH, one Lord:
They read (like us) one Bible, and one Word:
So sly they are, Gods Church to over-throwe.
34
In foremost rank, here go the Sadduces,
That to deny Angels, and Resurrection;
Both Spirits of grace, and of reiection:
Then the Esseans foul, and Formal Pharisees.
35
Next, that deceiver, that devised first Simon Magus. Nicolaus, Author of the
Sect of the Nicolaites.

Church-chaffering: and after him insues
That mariage-Foe, who brutishly renews
Pluto's (not Plato's) Common Law accursed.
36
Cerinthus next, all bruised, and bleeding fresh,
Of Beam-pasht wounds that brained him suddenly,
When in the Baths (profane) he did deny
Christ's holy Godhead, hidden in our flesh.
37
For having likewise warred against the same
Godhead of the only Man-God; Ebion,
Paul, Samyan, Photin, Carp'crate, Artemon,
Show by their looks their sorrow and their shame.
38
There mourns that Manes; who did fondly fain
Two diverse Gods, Authors of Good and Ill;
There Valentin the air with cries does fill,
Who did deny that bodies Rise again.
39
Cerdon (great Patron of the Stoicall)
Marcion, Menander pitious Moan do make:
There sighs Apelles, saying Christ did take
Not (simply) flesh, but flesh fantastical.
40
There goes Basilides, who canonized
Cyrenean Simon, in our SAVIOVRS steed;
Montanus there (afrantik head indeed)
Who guiltless Children killed and sacrifiz'd.
41
There, Tatians, Encrati^s, Severio^s,
Sabellians too, which (seeking the unity,
In Gods great Essence) lost the Trinity;
Abhor too-late their fond conclusions.
42
There, the Alexandrian Priest, that yerst did void Arrius.

His entrails at the stool, whose Heresy
(Witching wel-neer the Earths University)
With Sword and Schism the World so much annoyed,
43
Sadly beholds sad-marching Macedonius
And Eunomus, who at the first had sown
His poysonie seeds; but after, of their own
They gathered two other Sects erroneous.
44
Bizantian Nestor, and ( our own) ^^lagius,
Libian Donatus, Luciferians,
Euticheans fond, and fond Priscillians,
All frown and fret, for inward grief outrageous.
45
Shall I conceal Seruetus, and the train
Of those Deists that in Sarmatia swarms:
And (Kingling) Muncer, that with frantik arms,
Founds hundred sorts of Anabaptists vain?
46
Both Syrtes sands I might as easily number,
As number those, whose sweet in chanting Writs
With Error's dregs have drenched wanton Wits,
Chiefly'n this Age, which all corruptions cumber.
47
For, Satan now him so insinuates
In faithless hearts, that ween themselves be wise,
That so foul Error can he not devise,
But shall be backed by strong associates.
48
I see the Beast, that bears the purple Whore
(Great Antichrist usurping power divine) 7. Antichrist and the Schismatiks.

Set on Seven Hills; who with her whordom's wine
Makes drunk the Princes that her Seat adore.
49
And (last of all) I see the Schismatiks,
Which (renting Christ's unseamed coat in twain)
Trouble the Church-peace with contentions vain;
Following too near the steps of Heretics.
Canto III.
1
GReat Sire's great Son! Olive, God's lively face,
Wisdom conceived of the only Wise:
To us given Giver: First and Last: born twice;
Once, in full Time; once, out of all Times space.
2
Beam of that Sun which fills the world with Light:
Life of our life, our death's death, Stinger's sting:
Our perfect, wise, just, holy, valiant King,
Word, that no word can full express aright:
3
O Lord, draw, draw me, draw me from this throng,
Whose feet and hands are bold to war with thee;
For, with dry eyes I can them never see,
Nor without grief recite them in my Song.
4
Ah! I am out; now (my deer God) I go
From Babel to Iernsalem, the Land
Of Life, Saints house, and holy Ark, to stand
Against all Seas, and all rough storms that blow.
5
Lo here these Champions that have (brauely-bold)
Withstood proud Tyrants, stoutly consacring
Their lives and souls to God, in suffering:
Whose names are all in Life's fair Book in-roll'd.
6
All-hail, Saint-Souldiers, let us once embrace:
O valiant Knights! let me your hands and brows
Adorn with Palms, and with Apollo's boughs:
Let present honors former shames deface.
7
Com, sacred Kings; O holy Princes com:
Com to this Triumph, Lords, whose valiant hands
Have Satan's kingdom sought to bring in bands,
And in your Crowns given Faith the chiefest room.
8
He, that (the first) Isaac infranchized, Moses. Joshua.

Leads by the hand that Duke, whose faithful word
Stopped Phoebus Coursers, and whose conquering Sword
Subdued the Land the Lord had Promised.
9
He that, but armed with an Asses bone, Samson.

Slew thousand Foes, Sangar, Othoniel,
Ahod, and Ieptha, Barac, Samuel,
And (the Heathen's scourge) triumphant Gedeon.
10
That great King-Prophet, Poet, Conqueror, David.

Sweet Psalmograph: Asa, that Idols brake:
He that made all the Idol-altars quake; Josias.

And (after) did the Paschal Lamb restore.
11
Iehosaphat, Ioathan, Azarias;
And he, whose life the Lord did dis-abbridge,
Whom Heavenly arms, from Assure did vnsiedge,
The most religious, match-less Ezechias.
12
Wise Mardochey; and the five Maccabees;
All, the right heirs of heart and zeal paternall,
Receive their guerdon from the great Eternal,
And up again their stooping standards raise.
13
Before these Warriors, and the Royal band,
March holy Fathers, that with virtue rare,
And holy Doctrine, did the Devil dare;
Foyling the force of his infernal hand.
14
Enos, by whom this World's great Archi-tect
Was called upon, leads (religious)
That holy Father God took up from us: Henoch. Noah.

And him whose ship did save the world Elect.
15
Then Sem and Iapheth, and great Abraham, Isaak.

The Faithfull's Father; and his faithful Son,
And then his Nephew that saw Angels run Jacob.

Both up and down from Heaven to the earthly frame.
16
Aron, Eleazar, Phinees full of zeal,
Good Ioyada, and hundred Priests select,
That were by Heaven, by zeal, and Church elect,
To keep the law, the Lord did once reveal.
17
His Father, who was sent to sweep the way Zacharias. Joseph.

Of sweet Messiah; then, the man supposed
To be His Sire, then He that Him enclosed
In's joyful arms, and sung a Swan-like Lay. Simeon.

18
Then Barnabas, Titus, and Timothy,
( Paul's famous Friends, Sins fierce and deadly Foes)
And he that did, by Sol's Eclipse, suppose
Some greater Sun to be Eclips't than he.
19
Then (this brave Triumph to adorn the more)
All on a row a hundred Prophets com,
Which have so sure foretold the things to-com,
As if (indeed) they had been don before.
20
There first coms he, that in the Coach of fire Elias.

By Gods strong Spirit was rapt above the Air: Elizeus.

And then his Servant, that was made his heir
Of cloak and knowledge, as he did desire.
21
He that reproov'd old Ishay's Sceptred Son, Nathan.

For double fault; Amos, Ezechiel,
Joel, Semyah, Abdiah, Daniel,
And he that three days in the Sea did won. Jonas.

22
With these, I see the Son of Barachie, Zachariah.

Both Michais, Baruc, Iehu, Ieremias,
Agg', Abacuc, Nahum, and Sophonias.
Ahias, Hose, Esdras, Malachie.
23
The glorious troop, that march before this troop,
Are Martyrs all, who (full of constant zeal)
Their faith infract with their own bloods did seal,
And never did to any Tyrant stoop.
24
Their blessed blood is like the morning dew,
To make more fertile all the Churches field:
These are the weapons that enforce to yield
The furious foe (examples not a few).
25
For, as a fruit-Treelopped in December,
For one old Trunk, many new twigs returns,
Which Nature kindly with sweet fruit adorns:
So, one sole Martyr many does engender.
26
First Abel goes, then Ioyad's zealous Son
That near the Altar (constant) yielded breath; Esaias. John Baptist.

The next goes he Manasses put to death;
Then he whose head the incestuous Dancer won.
27
Next Salone and her Sons, who rather chose
To cross the King than God, strengthening each other
Even in their death; Sons worthy such a Mother,
And Mother worthy of such Sons as those.
28
That Proto-Martyr, the young faithful Steven,
Whom the hateful Jews with hellish rage did stone;
Who, dying, saw Christ Jesus on his Throne,
Leads those that for like cause their lives have given.
29
Some, smeared with honey, for the Flies were feasts:
Some, men did eat, some were on Gridirons broyl'd:
Some, nayl'd on Crosses, some in Caldrons boiled.
And some were thrown to most devouring beasts.
30
After the Champions of this humble Troop,
I see fair Sara, Rebecca, Rachel:
Then Debora, stout Iudeth, and Iahel,
Who (Faiths Viragoes) their proud Foes did stoop.
31
Then she that (raised to Royal state and style) ^ester.

Preserved her people, in a rank she goes
With Naomi, Ruth, and the Dame that chose
Rather to die, than Nuptial bed defile. Susanna.

32
From these, mineeie no sooner trauerseth,
But I discern three Ladies zealous-led,
That sought their living Lord among the dead:
Then Anna, Martha, and Elizabeth.
33
But, my weak eyes cannot endure to gaze The Virgin Mary.

On beaming beauties of that Mother-Maid,
Who Sier-less bore her Sire, yet ever-maid;
Of Faith and Love the inimitable maze.
34
This, this (my Muse) this is the Aurora clear
Which brought the Sun to light the world unkind,
A Virgin pure in body and in mind,
Christ's Mother, Sister, Spouse, and Daughter deer.
35
God's holy Temple, and the happy stair,
Wher-by the Heavens came down to dwell with Earth,
Rich-fraighted Ship, Vessel of rarest worth,
Where Phoebus hid his beams most bright and fair.
Canto IIII.
1
I Thought to have been now at my Races end,
TO have (though unworthy) born away the prise:
But I fall short, my task does longer rise;
For, half the Trophe is yet hardly penned.
2
Before Faith's Coach, born in convenient height,
Are curious Tables draw'n by cunning hand,
Where (after guise of warlik Romans) stand
The Victories of never-conquer'd Faith.
3
Here, Iericho's cloud-kissing Towrs do fall, Joshua. 6. 20.

Battered alone by Faith's great Ordinance:
A coumpt-less host of craking Idolants, 2. King. 18, 13 2. Chron. 32, 20 Esa.
37, 21

By Esa^e's Faith, is here confounded all.
4
By Faith, meek Moses with a zeal-full ire
Arms smallest Worms, the Egyptian King to vex; Exodus 7, 8, 9

Daniel, by Faith, fierce Lions fury checks, Dan. 6. 12

And quenches Dragons hot impoysoning fire.
5
Here, Paul, by Faith, fears not (in Mitylene) Act. 28, 5

The deadly sting of the ugly Viper-worm:
Here, myching Jonas (sunk in sudden Storm) Jonas 22

Of his Deliverance finds a fish the mean.
6
Then, in another Table, that was framed
By Art, exceeding Art; I did epsy
Pale Death, blithe Health, and frail Infirmity,
That had by Faith a thousand times been tamed.
7
Moses, by Faith does Myriam leperize: Number. 12, 10

By Faith, Elisha (curing Naaman 2. King. 6, 14, 17

The Syrian Prince) strikes instantly his man
With his Disease, for Bribing Covetize.
8
A man of God, by Faith, first strangely dried, 1. King. 13, 4, 6

Then healed again that King's unholy hand,
Who made ten Tribes of God's (then) chosen Land
From God, and from their lawful Prince to slide.
9
By Faith, Saint Paul stark-blinded Elymas: Act. 13, 11

By Faith, Saint Peter (full of just disdaign)
With sudden death did smite those perjured twain
That durst dissemble with the Spirit of Grace. Act. 5, 5, 16

10
By Faith* young Toby kindly does restore Tob. 11, 11 Act. ^, 6, and 14, 10.

His Father's sight; by sacred Faith likewise
Two crooked Cripples are made straight to rise;
In Listra the one, the other at Templedore.
11
By Faith, Saint Paul did a rich Maltois cure
Of grievous Flix, that him afflicted sore: Act. 21, 8

By Faith, Saint Peter likewise did restore
A Palsie-sick that eight years did endure. Act. 9. 34

12
By Faith, Saint Paul did Eutichus re-lyue: Act. 20, 10 1. King, 17, 21 2.
King, 4, 33

By Faith, Elias raised the Sareptite;
Elisha raised the young Sunamite:
At Ioppa, Peter Dorcas did revive. Act. 9, 40

13
Then in another Picture I did view The four Elements.

The four first bodies of this massy Globe;
Green-gowned Tellus, Uulcan Scarlet-robe,
Py'd mantled Juno, Neptune clad in blew.
14
Elisha's Faith brought, from the lofty Skies, 2. King. 6. 17

Bright fiery Charrets against the Syrian host; 1. King. 18, 38

Elias Faith (scorning the Baal-Priests boast)
Fier'd without fire his moated Sacrifice.
15
By Faith, three Hebrews, cast in seaven-fold flame
By a proud Prince, escape the raging Fire Dan. 3, 27

(Their very garments sent-less and entire)
While their Tormentors perish in the same.
16
Moses, by Faith, makes fire from Heaven to fall Leuit. 10, 21 Number. 16, 35

In the Hebrew host, those wretches to consume,
Whose profane hands with profane Fire and Fume,
God's holy Altar had polluted all.
17
Moses by Faith (heard by the God of power)
Compels the Mountain's burly sides to shake;
Commands the Earth to rent, and yawn, and quake, Number. 16, 30

To swallow Rebels, and them quick devour.
18
Moses by Faith divides the Sea in twain, Exodus 14, 21

When Israel came out of Egypt Land:
Then, in the Desert's dry and barren sand, Exodus 17, 9

From flinty Rocks does plentious Rivers strain.
19
Moses, by faith converts to foul black blood Exodus 7, 20

The Crystal Current of the seaven-fold Nile:
By Faith again, he makes (another while) Exodus 15, 25

Those stinking waters, holsom, sweet, and good.
20
Thrice, silver Jordan did it self divide,
To give safe passage to God's deer-belov'd;
Once by the Faith of valiant Iosuah proov'd: Joshua. 3, 16 2. King. 2, 8, 14

Elias once: once by Elisha tried.
21
The zealous Thisbit did by Faith seal-vp
The Heavens wide windows, that there fell no Rain
In seaven-six months; and then by Faith again 1. King. 18, 41

(To drench the dry Earth) set them all wide-ope.
22
Likewise by Faith the nimble-winged train,
That cleave the Air, are to our service set,
The Ravens are made to bring Elias meat, 1. King. 16, 6 Gen 8, 11 Exodus 16, 13

The Dove serves Noah, Quails for Moses rain*
23
O! who is able Faith to countermand?
If Faith do force all-taming iron yield,
If Faith make iron flote on Neptunes field, 2. King. 6, 6

If that Elisha's Faith strong steel command.
24
Faith has not only power on things terrene,
Both high and low; but often times does force,
Gods justice too, and sometimes seems (perforce)
God's purposes to change and alter clean.
25
The Niniuits, by Faith (repenting) shun
Their over-throwe, that Jonas threatened near: Jonas. 3, 10

And Ahaz Son by Faith adds fifteen year 2. King. 20. 10

To his short life, that seemed already don.
26
Now, if the giver of this Faith (we see)
Seem to incline and bow unto her still,
As bound and ready to obey her will;
What marvel is it if Angels be not free?
27
The Angels serve in Ezechias pay; 2. King. ^9, ^5 1. King, 19 Acts 12. 7 Genesis
32, 1.

By Faith, they bring the Thisbit needful Cates:
By Faith, they open for Peter prison gates:
By Faith, to Jacob they direct the way.
28
About twelve pases past these former Pomps,
Full many sacred Minstrels sound, on hie,
Triumphant Faith's great name and dignity,
Tuning aloft their Clarions, Flutes, and Tromps.
29
Mark, Matthew, Luke, and (the Lords dearest) John,
Christ's Secretaries, wind with such a breast,
Their warbling Cornets, that from East to West
Through all the World their sacred sound is gone.
30
Both Iameses, one the Son of Zebedeus,
The other Alphcus, Thomas, Simon, Andrew,
Peter, Mathias, Philip, Bartholomew,
Paul (Gentile's Doctor) with-the good Thaddeus,
31
Sound with so sweet accord their Sagbuts long,
And their shril Fifes (heard from the North to Nile)
As if one spirit did fill them all the while,
And one same hand had set their holy Song.
32
While thus my spirit this strange discourse did cumber,
Rare-builder Progne, earlier then the rest,
Beginning the out-most of her curious nest,
Brake, with her prattling, my deep pleasing slumber.
33
Sorry to be so sudden wak't; I would
I were a Dor-Mouse for a hundred year,
That I might sleep full twenty Lustres here,
To shun the woes that waking I behold.
34
For now (alas!) waking (with grief) I see
Babel tryumphing over Sion still:
And on the Good the Ungodly work their will:
The Wicked praised, the Righteous scorned be.
35
I see (alas!) in these lamented Times,
Men's greatest zeal in bloody murder stands:
Profane our hearts, and so profane our hands:
Bare Christian Name serves but to cloak our crimes.
36
Incest's a sport, and Murder Manhood thought:
Disloyalty a special Virtue deemed:
And Perjury sound Policy esteemed:
Medea's Arts, and Sodomie are taught.
37
Maidens be bold, and Wives be impudent,
Princes are Tyrants, people full of rage:
This Age is sink of every former Age,
Receiving each Sinn's vgliest excrement.
38
But, my swollen breast, shut-vp thy sighe's sad gate:
Stop, Stop, mine eyes, the passage of your tears;
Cast-off, my heart, thy deep despairing fears;
That which most grieves me, most does consolate.
39
No, no: my Dream is true; soon shall we see
Faith's glory shine; Satan (perceiving nie
His prides Eclipse) his greatest force does try,
To stop great Faith's triumphant victory.
40
Sure if my Card and Compass do not fail,
W' are near the Port, where (danger being past)
We need not fear the billow, nor the blast
Of blustering winds, nor Seas that can assail.
41
Our beastly manners, like Gomorrha's guise:
The troubled Seasons: Wars domestical:
The threats of Heaven: are the forerunners all
Of CHRIST that coms to hold his last Assise.
42
That drad-desired Day shall soon appeer,
Christ coms the Rav'ns from Swans to set a-side:
The Tares from wheat: and Goats from Lambs divide:
And this brave Triumph (that I sing) is near.
43
O Father! while this Triumph I expect,
Waiting to see the Wicked's utter Fall,
And thy just Scepter Ruling over all;
Let lively Faith my Reason still direct.
FINIS.
TETRASTICHA. OR The Quadrains of Guy de Faur, Lord of Pibrac.

Translated, By IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

Acceptam referro.


TO The right excellent, and most hopeful young Prince, Henry.
AFfter so many golden Rules of State,
Religious Lessons, Moral Precepts grave,
As in your Fathers ROYAL-GIFT you have; (...).

These seem supersfluous, or to come too-late:
Yet, it is no Error tore-iterate
The Voice of Wisdom to the tender Ear
Of Princes (chiefly) such as You, that bear
The Hope and Hap of Europe in your Fate:
And, though You want not these weak helps of ours,
To consummate Your Self in Excellence:
Yet may those Subjects, which shall once be Yours,
Draw virtuous Wisdom, and all Duty hence:
If You but daigne with your deer Name to grace it,
Which (Load-stone-like) shall draw them to embrace-it.
Iosuah Syluester.

The Quadrains of Pibrac.
1
DIEV tout premier, puis Pere and Mere honor.
Sois just and droict: and en toute saison
Del' innocent pren en main la raison:
Car Dieu te doit la-haut iuger encore.
First honor God, and then thy Parents dear;
Be true and Just: and see thou never grudge*
The Innocents oppressed cause to clear;
For one-day God shall also be thy Judge.
2
Si en iugeant la faueur te command,
Si corrompu par or ou par presens,
Tu fais justice au gre des Courtisans,
Ne doubt point que Dieu ne te le rende.
If gold and bribes corrupt thy conscience,
If fear or favor in thy Judgment sway thee,
If thou respect the Persons difference;
Be sure that God will in the end re-pay-thee.
3
Auecle iour commence ta iournee,
De l'Eternel lesainct nom benissant:
Le soir aussi ton labeur finissant,
Loue-le encor', and pass ainsi l'annee.
Begin thy Dayes-work when the Day begins,
First blessing Gods thrice-blessed Name (devout)
And then, at Evening when thy labor ends
Praise him again: so bring the year about.
4
Adore assis (comme le Grec ordonne)
Dieu en courant ne veut estre honor:
D'vn fer me cueur il veut estre adore,
Mais ce cueur la il fault qu'il nous le done.
Adore thou, sitting (as the Greek does bid)
For running Prayer is praeposterous:
With steadfast Heart God will be worshipped,
But such a heart himself must give to us.
5
Ne va disant, ma main a faict cest oeuure,
Oumavertu cebel oeuure a parfaict:
Mais dis ainsi, Dieu par moy l'oeuure a faict:
Dieu est l'autheur du peu de bien que i'oeuure.
Say not; My hand this Work to end has brought:
Nor, This my Virtue has attained to:
Say rather thus; This, God by me has wrought:
God's Author of the little Good I do.
6
Tout l'Vniuers n'est qu'vne cite ronde:
Chacun a droict de s'en dire bourgeois,
Le Scythe and More autant que le Gregeois,
Le plus petit que le plus grand du monde.
The World is all but a round City like,
Where each may right be said a Citizen:
As well the rude Barbarian as the Greek,
As well the meanest as the mightiest men.
7
Dans le pourpris de ceste cite belle
Dieu a loge l'homme comme en lieu saint,
Comme en un Temple, ou luy mesmes s'est peinct
En mil endroicts de couleur immortelle.
In this fair Citie's goodly Walls God planted,
And placed man as in a Sanctuary,
Where He, himself in thousand parts has painted
With lively colors that do never vary.
8
Il n'y a coing si petit dans ce temple,
Ou la grandeur n'apparoisse de Dieu:
L'homme est plant iustement au milieu,
A fin que mieux par tout il la contemple.
There Is not a nooke so small in all this Temple,
Wherein God's Greatness does not plain appear:
Which that we might the better all contemple,
He placed man just in the middle here.
9
Il ne scauroit ailleurs mieux la cognoistre
Que dedans soy, ou, comme en un miroir,
La terre il peut and le ciel mesme voir:
Car tout le monde est compris en son estre.
Yet can he nowhere better know the same
Then in himself, where-in he may behold
(As in a Glass) Earth, Water, Air, and Flame:
For, All the World, his Essence does in-fold.
10
Qui a de soy parfaicte cognoissance,
N'ignore rien de ce qu'il fault scauoir.
Mais le moyen asseure de l'auoir,
Est se mirer dedans la sapience.
Who of Himself has perfect Knowledge gained,
Ignoreth nothing that he ought to know:
But the best means whereby it is attained,
Is oftentimes to Wisdoms Glass to go.
11
Ce que tu vois de l'homme n'est pas l'homme,
C'est la prison ou il est enserre,
C'est le tombeau ou il est enterre,
Le lict branlant ou il dort un court sum.
That which thou see of Man, it is not Man:
It Is but a Prison that him Captive keeps:
It Is but a Toombe where He Is interred (wan):
It Is but the Cradle where a while he sleeps,
12
Ce corpse mortel, ou l'oeil rauy contemple
Muscles and nerfs, la chair, le sang, la peau,
Ce n'est pas l'homme, il est beaucoup plus beau,
Aussi Dieu l'a reserve pour son temple.
This mortal Body, where the ravished sense
Sees sinnewes, flesh, bones, muscles, blood, and skin,
It is not Man: Man's of more excellence,
As the fair Temple that God dwelleth-in.
13
Abien parler, ce que l'homme on appelle,
C'est un rayon de la divinity:
C'est un atome esclos de l'vnite:
C'est un degout de la source eternelle.
Rightly to speak: what Man we call, and count,
It is a beamling of Divinity:
It is a dropling of the Eternal Fount:
It is a moatling hatched of the Unity.
14
Recognoy donc (homme) ton origin:
Et brave and haut dedaigne ces bas lieux,
Puis que fleurir tu dois la hault es cieux,
Et que tu es vne plant divine.
Then know (O Man) thine own Original:
And braue-ambitious, scorn base Cells of Earth,
Since thou shall flourish in Heavens glistring Hall,
And art indeed a Divine Plant by Birth.
15
Il t'est permis t'orgueillir de la race,
Non de ta mere, outon pere mortel,
Mais bien de Dieu ton vray pere immortel,
Qui to a moule au moule de sa face.
Well may thou vaunt thee of thy glorious Race,
Not from thy mortal Parents either Ligne:
But from thy true Immortal Father's Grace,
Who, by the Model of his Face, made thine.
16
Au ciel n'y a nombre infiny d'Idees,
Platon s'est trop en cela mesconte
Denostre Dieu la pure volonte
Est le seul moule a toutes chooses nees.
There Is not in Heaven, a number infinite
Of bright Ideas ( Plato did mistake):
God's only Will (the only Rule of Right)
Was the only mould of all that he did make.
17
Il veut, c'est faict: sans trauail and sans peine
Tous animaux, iusqu'au moindre qui vit,
Il a cree, les soustient, les nourrit,
Et les deffaict du vent de son aleine.
He Willed, and it was done: He (without pain)
All kind of Creatures (to the least that is)
Created, feeds, and does still sustain:
And re-dissolues them with that breath of his.
18
Hausse tes yeux: la voute suspendue,
Ce beau lambris de la couleur deseaux,
Ce rond parfaict de deux globes i^meaux,
Ce firmament esloigne de la veue:
Lift up thine eyes: The hanging Vault above,
The goodly Seeling of a Waterie hew,
The perfect Orbs of Twins that ever move,
The spangled Firmament so far from view:
19
Brief, ce quiest, qui fut, and qui peut estre,
En terre, en mer, au plus cache das cieux,
Si tossed que Dieu l'a voulu pour le mieux,
Tout aussi tossed il a receu son estre.
All (to be brief) past, present, and to come,
In Earth and Sea, and Air (beyond your seeing);
So soon as God thought good, each in their room,
Immediately received all their Being.
20
Ne va suiuant le troupeau d'Epicure,
Troupeau vilain, qui blaspheme en tout lieu,
Et mescroyant ne cognoit autre Dieu,
Que le fatal order de la nature.
Shun Epicures profane and filthy Sect*
(Boldmis-creants, blaspheming every way)
The which no God acknowledge nor respect,
Save only Nature and her fatal Sway.
21
Et ce pendant il se veautre and patrouille
Dans un bourbier puant de tous costez:
Et du l^mon des sales voluptez
Il se repaist, comme vne orde grenouille.
And in the meane-while (like the grunting Hogg)
Lie always wallowing in the stinking Mire:
And feed on filth (like to the loath some Frogg)
Uoluptuous filth, of every flesh desire.
22
Heureux qui met en Dieu son esperance,
Et qui l'inuoque en sa prosperity,
Autant ou plus qu en son aduersite:
Et ne se fie en human asseurance.
Happy whose hope on God alone relies;
And who on him in either Fortune call;
As well in calmes as in calamities:
And put no Trust in humane helps at all.
23
Voudroistu bien mettre esperance seure
En ce qui est imbecille and mortel?
Le plus grand Roy du monden'est que tell,
Et a besoing plus quetoy qu'on l'asseure.
Can thou assure thy hopes on worldly things,
Frail mortal things (I pry-thee tell me how)
Such are the greatest of all earthly Kings,
And have more need to be secured then Thou?
24
De l'homme droict Dieu est la sauuegarde,
Lors que de tous il est abandonne,
C'est lors que moins il se trouue estonne,
Car il scait bien que Dieulors plus le guard.
God is the iust-man's Anchor and his Aid,
His sure Defense, when all the World forsakes-him;
And therefore, then is he the least dismayde,
Knowing that God then most to safe-gard takes-him.
25
Les biens du corpse, and ceux de la Fortune,
Ne sont pas biens, a parler proprement:
Ils sont subjects au moindre changement,
Mais la virtue dem^ure tousiours vne.
The Goods of Fortune and the Body (called)
They are not Goods, if we them rightly name;
For, to least changes they are ever thrall'd:
"But Only Virtue still persists the same.
26
Virtue qui gist enter les deux extremes,
Enter le plus and le moins qu'il ne fault;
N'excede en rien, and rien ne luy default:
D'autruy n'emprunte, and suffit a soy-mesmes.
Virtue, between the Two extremes that haunts,
Between too-mickle and too-little sizes;
Exceedes in nothing, and in nothing wants:
Borrowes of none: but to it-selfe suffizes.
27
Quite pourroit, Virtue, voir toute nue,
O qu'ardemment detoy seroit espris?
Puis qu'en tout temps, les plus rares esprits
T'ont faict l'amour au trauers d'vne nue.
O Virtue! could we see thy naked face,
How would thy sacred Beauties sweetly madd-vs?
Since rarest Wits (rapt with a Seeming Grace)
Have in all Ages courted (even) thy Shadows.
28
Le sage fills est du pere la joy:
Or, si tu veux ce sage fills auoir,
Dress le ieune au chemin du deuoir:
Mais ton exemple est la plus court voye.
The Parent's comfort is a prudent Son:
Now, such a Son if thou desire aye,
Direct him young in Duties race to run:
But, Thine Example is the nearest way.
29
Si tu es ne, enfant d'vn sage pere,
Que ne suis tu le chemin ja battu?
S'il n'est pas tell, que ne t'esforces tu,
En bien faisant, couurir ce vitupere?
If thou be borne Son of a prudent Sire,
Why tread'st thou not in his fair beaten Trace?
If otherwise: why do not thou desire
(By virtuous Deeds) to cover this Disgrace?
30
Ce n'est pas peu, (naissant d'vn tige illustre)
Estre esclaire par ses antecesseurs:
Mais c'est bien plus luire a ses successeurs,
Que des ayeux seulement prendre luster.
It Is no small Honor, from illustrious Ligne
To be descended by our Predecessors:
But it is much more, then by their Light to shine,
Our selves to shine unto our own Successors.
31
Iusqu' au cercueil (mon fills) vueilles apprendre,
Et tien perdu le iour qui s'est pass,
Si tu n'y as quelque chose amasse,
Pour plus scauant and plus sage te render.
Cease not to learn until thou cease to live:
Think that Day lost, wherein thou draw'st no Letter,
Nor gain'st no Lesson, that new grace may give,
To make thy Self Learneder, Wiser, Better.
32
Levoyageur qui horse du chemin err,
Et esgare se perd dedans les bois,
Au droict chemin remettretule doibs:
Et s'il est cheu, le releuer de terre.
If any Stranger in his Journey stray
Through doubtful Paths (as happens now and then)
Direct him rightly in his ready way;
And if He fall, soon help him up again.
33
Aim l'honneur plus que ta proprevie:
I'entens l'honneur, qui consiste au deuoir
Que render on doit (selon l'humain pouuoir)
A DIEV, au Roy, aux Loix, a sa Patrie.
Thine Honor, more then thine own Life respect,
The honor (I mean) which each man's duty draws
(Toth'vttermost we are able to effect)
To GOD, our King, our Country, and our Laws.
34
Ce que tu peux maintenant, ne differe
Aulendema^n, comme les paresseux:
Et guard aussi que tu ne sois de ceux
Qui par autruy font'ce qu'ils pourroient fair.
What Now thou can, defer not till tomorrow,
Like selfe-lame Sloth (of foulest Sins the Mother):
Nor be like those who others hands do borrow,
And what themselves might do* will do by other.
35
Hante les bons, des meschans net'accointe,
Et mesmement en la ieune saison,
Que l'appetit pour forcer la raison
Arm nos sens d'vne brutale poincte.
Frequent the good, fly from ungodly folk,
Especially in thy Youths tender season,
The while outrageous appetites provoke,
And arm thy Sense against the sway of Reason.
36
Quand au chemin fourchu de ces deux Dames
Tu te verras comme Alcide semond,
Suy celle-la qui par un aspremont
Teguide au ciel, loing des plaisirs infames.
When to the double Way of those two Dames
( Alcides-like) thou shall be summoned,
Follow thou her who far from glorious shames,
Over steep Mountains up to Heaven does lead*
37
Ne mets ton pied au trauers de la voye
Du pauure aueugle: and d'vn piquant propos:
De l'homme mortne trouble lerepos:
Et du malheur d'autruy ne fay ta joy.
Set not thy foot to make the blind to fall:
Nor wilfully offend thy weaker Brother.
Nor wound the Dead with thy Tongues bitter gall:
Neither rejoice thou in the fall of other.
38
En ton parler so is tousiours veritable,
Soit qu'ilte faille en tesmoignage ouyr,
Soit quepar fois tu veuilles resiouir
D'vn gay propostes hosts a latable.
Let thy Discourse be True in every Word,
Whether as public Witness thou be pressed
To clear a Question: whether, at thy Board
With pleasant chat thou cheer thy welcome Guest.
39
La Verite d'vn Cube droict se form,
Cube contraire au ledger mouuement:
Son plan quarre iamais ne se dement,
Et en tout sens a tousiours mesme form.
The Truth resembles right the right Cubes Figure
(The Cube, contrary to light instabilitie)
Whose quadrat flatnes never does dis-figure;
Whose solid Form admits no mutabilitie.
40
L'oyseleur caut se sert du doulx ramage
Desoysillons, and contrefaict leur chant
Aussi, pour mieux deceuoir, le meschant
Des gens de bien imite le language.
The crafty Fowler, to beguile the Birds,
Deceit fully their own sweet Notes does feign:
So subtle Mates do counterfeit the words,
And simple guise of honest men and plain.
41
Ce qu'en secret lon t'a dit ne reuele:
Des faicts d'autruy ne sois trop enquerant.
Le curieux volontiers tousiours meant:
L'autre merit estre dict infidele.
Reveal not what in secret has been told;
Nor busily of Others things require.
The inquisitiue can hardly Counsel hold:
The carrie-Tale is commonly a Liar.
42
Fay pois egal, and loyale mesure,
Quand tu deurois de null estre apperceu:
Mais le plaisir que tu auras receu,
Ren le tousiours auecques quelque usure.
Make always equal weight and lawful measure,
Though none could spy, thy dealing to discover:
But where thou have received any Pleasure,
Restore it still with some advantage over.
43
Guard, soigneux, le depost a toute heure:
Et quand on veult de toy le recouurer
Neva subtle des moyens controuuer
Dans un palais, a fin qu'ilte demeure.
Keep carefully what thou have taken in charge:
And when the Owner shall demand-againe-it,
Deny it not; neither with Conscience large
By subtle Law-tricks strive thou to detaine-it.
44
L'homme de sang te soit tousiours en haine:
Hue sur luy, comme fait le berger
Numidien surle Tygre ledger,
Qu'il voit de loing ensanglanter la plain.
Hate evermore the bloody Homicide;
Hunt him with hue and cry: as Shepherds hunt
The Lybian Tigre which they have espide
Spoiling his Prey, and rioting upon-'t.
45
Ce n'est pas toutne fair a null outrage:
Il faut de plus s'opposer a l'effort
Du malheureux, qui pourchasse la mort,
Ou du prochain la honte and le dommage.
It Is not enough, that thou do no man wrong:
Thou even in others must suppress the same;
Righting the Weak^, against the unrighteous Strong,
Whether it touch his Life, his Goods, or Name.
46
Qui a desir d'exploiter sa prouesse,
Domteson ire, and son ventre, and ce feu,
Qui dans nos cueurs s allume peu a peu,
Souffle du vent d'erreur and de paresse.
Whosoever the Fame of Valor does desire,
Must Tame his Anger and his Belly both,
And that heart-swelting, Marrow-melting Fire,
Blown by the wind of Error and of Sloth.
47
Vaincre soy mesme est la grande victoire:
Chacun chez soy loge ses ennemis,
Qui par l'effort de la raison soubmis,
Ouurent le pas a l'eternelle gloire.
Our-owne-Selfes Conquest is the most victorious:
For in our Selves ambush our greatest Foes;
And the only way to make us ever glorious,
Is by stout Reason still to vanquish those.
48
Si ton amy a commis quelque offense,
Ne va soudain contre luy t'irriter:
Ains doucement, pour ne le despiter,
Fay luy ta plainte, and recoy sa defense.
If so thy Friend have done thee some Offense,
Fall not out flat, nor urge him with abuse;
But mild and meekely, without insolence,
Make thy complaint, and take thou his excuse.
49
L'homme est fautif: null viuant ne peut dire
N'auoir failly: es hommes plus parfaicts,
Examinant and leurs dicts and leurs faicts,
Tu trouueras, si tu veux, a redire.
All men are faulty: none a-liue can say,
I have not Erred; even the Perfectest,
If thou his Life in word and deed suruaigh,
Thou shall perceive he has Perfection mist.
50
Voy l'hypocrite auec sa triste mine,
Tu le prendrois pour l'aisne des Catons,
Et ce pendant toute nuict a tastons
Il court, il va pour tromper sa voysine.
See the Hypocrites severe and Saint-like guise,
Whom the elder Cato thou would think for life;
Yet in the dark he groaping hunts and hies
T'entice and trap his honest Neighbors wife.
51
Cacher son vice est vne peine extreme,
Et peine en vain: fay ce que tu voudras,
A toy au moins cacher ne te pourras:
Car null ne peult se cacher a soy mesme.
It Is a most busy, yet a boot-les pain,
To hide ones fault: for do the best thou can
Thou can not hide it from thy Self (though feign)
For who can hide him from himself (O Man)!
52
Aye de toy plus que des autres honte,
Null plus que toy par toy n'est offense,
Tu dois premier, si bien y as pense
Render de toy-mesme le compte.
More of thy Self, then others he ashamed;
Thy Self art most wr^ng'd by thine own offenc^,
And of thy Self, thy Self first (Selfly-blam'd)
Must give account to thy Selfs Conscience.
53
Point ne te chaille estre bon d'apparence,
Mais bien de l'estre a preuue and par effect:
Contre un faulx bruit que le vulgaire faict,
Il n'est rempart tell que la conscience.
Care not so much, to seem in outward show,
As to be good (in deed and in the proof)
For, from false Rumors which the Uulgar blow,
A selfe-cleere Conscience is Defense enough.
54
A l'indigent monstre toy secourable,
Luy faisant part de tes biens a foi^on:
Car Dieu benit and accroit la mai^on
Qui a pity du pauure miserable.
Relieve the Needy, after thine ability,
And in their wants participate thy store.
For, God does Bless with Plenty and Tranquillity
The House that pitties the distressed Poor.
55
Las! que te sert tant d'ordedans la bourse,
Au cabinet maint rich vestement,
Dans tes greniers tant d'orge ou de froment,
Et de bon vin en ta cau evne source?
What boot thy bags to be so crammed with Coin?
Thy Wardrobe stuffed with such store of change?
Thy Cellars filled with such choice of Wine?
And of all Grains such plenty in thy Grange?
56
Si ce pendant le pauure nud frissonne
Deuant ton huys: and languissant de faim,
Pour tout en fin n'a qu'vn morceau de pain,
Ou s en reua sans que rien on luy done?
If all the while the naked Poor (half dead
With cold and hunger) shiuer at thy Gate;
And at the length gets but a piece of bread,
And many times (perhaps) but hardly that?
57
As tu, cruel, le cueur de tell sort,
De mespriser le pauure infortune,
Qui, comme toy, ^s^ en ce monde ne,
Et, comme toy, de Dieu l'image port?
Have thou a heart so cruel, as to scorn
The unhappy Poor, that at thy beck does bow,
Who like thy Self into this World is borne,
And bears Gods Image even as well as Thou?
58
Le malheur est commun a tous les hommes,
Et mesmement aux Princes and aux Roys:
Le sage seul est exempt de ces loix:
Mais ou est-il, las, au siecle ou nous sommes?
Misfortune is a common lot to all;
Yea, even to Princes, Kings, and Emperors:
Only the Wise are freed from her thrall,
But O, where are they, in this Age of ours*
59
Le sage est libre enferre de cent chains,
Il est seul rich, and iamais estranger:
Seul asseure au milieu du danger,
Et le vray Roy des fortunes humain^^.
The Wiseman's free, among a thousand chains;
He Is only Rich (content with his estate)
Only secure in Dangers, eased in Pains;
Only true King of Fortune and of Fate.
60
Le menasser du Tyrann nel' estonne:
Plus se roidit quand plus est agite:
Il cognoist seul ce qu'il a merit,
Et nel'attend horse de soy de person.
He is not daunted with a Tirants threat,
But by his Trouble grows more strong and hard:
Knows his own merit, looks not from the Great
For Recompense; Virtue's her own Reward.
61
Virtue es moeurs nes'acquiert parl' estude,
Ne par argent, ne par faueur des Roys,
Ne par un act, ou par deux, ou par trois,
Ains par constante and pas longue habitude.
True Moral Virtue cannot purchased be
By Study, Treasure, or the Grace of Kings:
Nor by one action, nor by two, nor three:
But long-long practice her perfection brings.
62
Qui lit beaucoup, and iamais ne medite,
Semble a celuy qui mange auidement,
Et de tous mets surcharge tellement
Son estomach, querien neluy profit.
Who Reads much and never Meditates,
Is like a greedy Eater of much Food.
Who so sur-cloyes his stomach with his Cates,
That Commonly they do him little good.
63
Maintvn pouuoit par temps deuenir sage,
S'iln'eust cuidel' estre ja tout a faict.
Quel artisan fut onc maistre parfaict,
Du premier iour de son apprentissage?
How many might (in time) have wise been made;
Before their time, had they not thought them so?
What Artist e're was Master of his Trade,
Yer he began his Prentiship to know?
64
Petite source ont les grosses Riuieres:
Qui bruit si hault a son commencement,
N'a pas long course, non plus que letorrent
Qui perd son nom es prochaines fondrieres.
From smallest springs, the greatest Rivers rise:
But those that roar so loud and proud at first,
Run seldom far, but soon their glory dies
In some near Bogg, by their selfs-furie burst.
65
Maudit celuy qui fraud la semence,
Ou qui retient le salaire promis
Au mercenaire: ou qui desesamis
Ne se souuie^t si non en leur presence.
Cursed is he that does de fra^d the seed:
Or who detains the Hirelings promis'dright:
Or who (ungrateful for the kindest deed)
Thinks never of his Friends but in their sight.
66
Nete pariure en aucune maniere,
Et situ es contrainct fair serment,
Le ciel ne iure, oul' homme, oul' element,
Ains pasle nom de la cause premiere:
Forswear thee not, what ever cause be given:
And if for ought thou needs an Oath must take,
Swear not by Man, nor by the Earth, nor Heaven,
But by his sacred Name who all did make.
67
Car Dieu qui hait le pariure execrable,
Et le punit comme il a merit,
Neveult quelon tesmoigne verite,
Par ce qui est mensonger ou muable.
For God, who does all Perjury detest,
And justly plagues it as most execrable:
Would not we should the constant Truth contest
By anything that is false or alterable.
68
Un art sans plus, en luy seul t'exercite:
Et du mestier d'autruy ne t'empeschant,
Va dans letien le parfaict recherchant:
Car exceller n'est pas gloire petite.
To some one Art apply thy whole affection;
And in the Craft of others seldom mell:
But in thine own, strive to attain perfection.
For'tis no little honor, to excelle:
69
Plus n'embrasser que lon ne peut estraindre:
Aux grandshonneurs conuoiteuxn' aspirer:
Vser des biens, and ne les desirer:
Ne souhaiter la mort, and nela craindre.
To Embrace no more then one can manege fit,
Not to the top of Greatness to aspire:
To use the World, and yet not covet it:
Neither to dread Death, neither death desire.
70
Il nefault pas aux plaisirs de la couche,
De chastete restreindre le beau don:
Et ce pendant hurer a l'abandon
Ses yeulx, ses mains, son oreille and sa bouche.
We must not Chastities fair Gift restrain,
Only to the actual Pleasure of the Night:
And in the mean while not aw hit refrain
Our heart, our hand, our tongue, our ear, our sight.
71
Ha le dur coup qu'est celuy del' oreille!
On en deuient quelque foisforcene:
Mesmes alors qu'il nous est assene
D'vn beau parler plein de doulce merueille.
O what a hard blow is a box on the Ear!
Som-time it drives men even besides their Wit,
Especially when (stunned as it were)
With the sweet wonder of smooth words, it is smit.
72
Mieulx nousvaudroit des aureillettes prendre,
Pour nous sauuer de ces coups dangereux:
Par la s'armoient les Pugils valeureux,
Quand surl'areneil leur falloit descendre.
It Is therefore best our tender Ears to arm,
To shun the danger of those deadly blows:
Wary Ulysses so eschew'd the Charm
Of those soule-rapting Impes of Acheloes.
73
Ce qui en nous par l'oreille penetre,
Dans le cerueau coule soudainement,
Et ne scaurions y pouruoir autrement,
Que tenant close au mal ceste fenestre.
What e're it be that enters by the Ear,
Immediately unto the Brain does creep;
And the only mean to shun the mischief there,
Is the Ears Casements ever close to keep.
74
Parler beaucoup on ne peut sans men song,
Ou pour le moins sans quelque vanite:
Le parler brief conuient a verite,
Et l'autre est propre a la fable and au song.
Much talk is seldom without Lies among,
Or at the least without some idle bables:
Unto the Truth, brief Language does belong:
And many words are fit for Dreams and Fables.
75
Du Memphien la grave contenance,
Lorsque sa bouche il ^erre auec le doigt,
Mieulx que Platon enseigne comme on doit
Reueremment honnorer le silence.
The Egyptians grave aspect and sober brow,
When his forefinger seals his lips so sure;
Better then Plato, does instruct us how
To honor Silence, with devotion pure.
76
Comme lon voit, a l'ouurir de la port
D'vn cabinet Royal, maint beau tableau,
Mainte antiquaille, and tout ce que de beau
Le Portugais des Indes nous apporte:
As at the Opening of the Cabinet
Of some great Prince, many rare Things we see,
Rich Monuments, and all that fair and neat,
From either Inde, Portingals bring, or we:
77
Ainsi deslors que l'homme qui medite,
Et est scauant, commence de s'ouurir,
Un grand thresor vient a se descouurir,
Thresor cache au puis de Democrite.
So when the Wise and Learned does begin
T'open the Organs of his plentious Wit,
A wondrous Treasure suddenly is seen,
A Treasure hidden in the Abderians Pit:
78
On dict soudain, voila qui fut de Greece,
Cecy de Rome, and cela d'vn tell lieu,
Et le dernier est tire de l'Hebrien,
Mais tout en sum est remply de sagesse.
And Standers by, say by and by, This came
From Greece, from Rome That That from such a Place,
And (lastly) That from the Hebrew: and the same,
And all the rest most full of Prudent grace.
79
Nostre heur, pour grand qu'il soit, nous semble moindre:
Les ceps d'autruy portent plus de raisins:
Mais quant aux maulx que souffrent nos voysins,
C'est moins que rien, ils ont tort de s'en plaindre.
Our Goods (how ever great) the least do seem,
Our Neighbors Fields still bear the better Grain:
But Others harms we always light esteem;
Tush they are Nothing: why should they complain?
80
A l'enuieux null tourment ie n'ordonne,
Il est de soy le judge and le bourreau:
Et ne fut one de DENIS le Toreau
Supplice tell, que celuy qu'il se done.
To the Enuious-man no Torment I assign;
For, Judge and Hangman to himself he is:
And there is no Denis Bull, nor Rack (in fine)
So fell a Torture as that Heart of his.
81
Pour bien au vi^ peindre la Calomnie,
Il la faudroit peindre quand on la sent:
Qui par bon heur d'elle ne se ressent,
Croire ne peult quelle est ceste Fury.
To pourtray Slander, to the life, behooues
To do it in the instant while one feels her:
For who so happy that her never proves,
Can scarce imagine what she is, or where,
82
Elle ne faict en l'air sa residence,
Ny soubs les eaux, ny au profond des bois:
Sa maison est aux ore^lles des Roys,
D'ou elle brave and flestrit l'innocence.
Neither in the Air has She her residences,
Nor in the wild Woods, nor beneath the Waves:
But she inhabits in the ears of Princes,
Where the Innocent and Honest she depraues.
83
Quand vne fois ce monstre nous attache,
Il scait si fort ses cordillons nouer,
Que bien qu'on puisse en fin les desnouer,
Restent tousiours les marquis de l'attache.
And when this Monster has once chaunc't to trap-vs,
Her spightfull Cords she can so closely knit:
That though at last we happen to vn-wrap-vs;
The print thereof still in our Fames will sit.
84
Judge ne done en ta cause sentence:
Chacun se trompe en son faict aizement:
Nostre interest force le judgment,
Et d'vn cost faict pancher la balance.
Never give Sentence in thy proper cause:
In our own case, we all Err easily:
Our interest our partial Judgment draws;
And ever makes the Balance hang a-wry.
85
Dessus la loy tes iugemens arreste,
Et non sur l'homme: ell sans affection,
L'homme au contraire est plein de passion:
L'vn tient de Dieu, l'autre tient de la best.
Upon the Law thy Judgments always ground,
And not on Man: For that is affection-les;
But Man in Passions strangely does abound:
The one all like God; the other too-like to Beasts.
86
Le nombre saint se judge par sa preuue,
Tousiours egal, entier ou departy:
Le droict aussi en Atoms party,
Semblable a soy tousiours egal se treuue.
The sacred Number proves always even,
Whether divided or entire it be:
So Justice (shared in Atomies) is given
Still like it self, in just equality.
87
Nouueau Vlysse appren du long voyage
A gouuerner Ithaque en equite:
Maint-vn a Scylle and Charybde euite,
Qui heurte au port, and chez soy faict naufrage.
Learn by long Trauail (as Ulysses conned)
To govern right thy Native Ithaca:
Many have Scylla and Charybdis shunned,
That have at home been after castaway.
88
Song long temps auant que de promettre:
Mais si tu as quelque chose promis,
Quoy que ce soit, and fust-ce aux ennemis,
De l'accomplir en deuoir te fault mettre.
Before thou Promise, ponder what and why:
But having Promised, what-so-euer 'twere,
Yea, were it to thy greatest Enemy,
Thou must perform, thy Tongue has tied thee there.
89
La loy soubs qui l'estat sa force a prise,
Guard la bien, pour goffe qu'elle soit:
Le bon heurvient d'ou lon ne s'appercoit,
Et bien souuent de ce que lon mesprise.
Maintain those Laws (how ever rude and plain)
Whereby (before) thy Commonwealth has thrived:
Good Fortune often comes by the meanest mean,
How or from whence sometimes is scarce perceived.
90
Fuy ieune and vieil de Circe le bruuage:
N'escouteaussi des Sirenes les chants,
Car enchante tu courrois par les champs,
Plusabruty qu'vne best sauuage.
In youth and age shun Circes banefull Boule,
Lend not thine Ear to Sirens wanton Notes:
Least thou (enchanted in thy sense and Soul)
Become more brute then Hoggs, and Dogs, and Goats.
91
Vouloir ne fault chose que lon ne puisse,
Et ne pouuoir que cela que lon doit,
Mesurant l'vn and l'autre par le droit,
Surl' eternel moule de la Justice.
We must our Will still limit with our Power,
And bound our Power within the Lists of Law;
Measuring both, and what so else is our,
By the Right line the eternal Just did draw.
92
Changer a coup de loy and d'ordonnance,
En faict d'estat est un poinct dangereux:
Et si Lycurgue en ce poinct fut heureux,
Il ne fault pas en fair consequence.
A sudden Change in any mighty State,
Is full of Danger unto each Degree:
And though Lycurgus found it fortunate,
No consequent can that Example be.
93
Ie hay ces mots, De puissance absolve,
De plein pouuoir, de propre mouuement:
Aux saints Decrets ils ont premierement,
Puis a nos loix, la puissance tolue.
I hate these phrases: Of Power absolute:
Of full Authority: Of proper motion.
The Divine Laws they have trod under foot,
And Humane-too; for private Men's promotion.
94
Croire ledger, and soudain se resoudre,
Ne discerner les amiss des flateurs:
Ieune conseil, and nouueaux seruiteurs,
Ont missouuent les haults estats en pouldre.
Not right-discerning Friends from Flatterers,
Light-crediting, and sudden Resolution,
Young giddie Counsel, and new Seruitors,
Have often caused the highest States confusion.
95
Dissimuler est un vice servile,
Vice suiuy de la desloyaute:
D'ou sourd es cueurs des grands la cruaute,
Qui aboutit a la guerre civil.
Dissimulation is a servile Vice,
A vice still followed by Disloyalty,
Whence in Great hearts does Cruelty arise,
Which always ends in civil Mutiny.
96
Donner beaucoup sied bien a un grand Prince,
Pourueu qu'il done a qui l'a merit,
Et par proportion, non par equalite,
Et que cesoit sans fouler sa Province.
Naught more beseems a Prince then Liberality,
So it be given to those that Merit well,
By due proportion, not by just equality,
And without Burden to the Commonweal.
97
Plus que Sylla c'est ignorer les lettres,
D'auoir induit les peuples a s'armer:
On trouuera les voulant desarmer
Que desubiects ils sont deuenus maistres.
It Is to be more then Sylla Letter-lesse,
To hurrie Arms into the Vulgars hand:
For, when again you think them to suppress,
Instead of Subjects, they will All command.
98
Ry situ veux un ris de Democrite,
Puis que le monde est pure vanite:
Mais quelque fois touch d'humanite,
Pleure noz maux des larmes d'Heraclite.
Since all the World is naught but merely vanity,
Laugh if thou list like blythe Democritus:
Yet sometimes touched with tender-soul'd humanity,
Weep for our Woes with sad Heraclitus.
99
A l'estranger sois humain and propice,
Et s'il se plainct incline a sa raison:
Mais luy donner les biens de la maison,
C'est fair aux tiens and honte and injustice.
Be kind to Strangers and propitious,
And to their cause thy willing ear incline:
But to bestow thy Goods out of thy House,
Is shame and wrong unto thy self and thine.
100
Ie t'apprendray, situ veux, en peu d'heure,
Le beau secret du breuuage amoureux:
Aim lestiens, tu seras aim d'eux:
Il n'y a point de recepte meilleure.
I Will teach you here (if any list to prove)
A passing Loue-drink, any heart to get;
Love virtuously, and be assured of Love:
And this (beleeue-it) is the best Receipt.
101
Crainte qui vient d'amour and reverence,
Est un appuyferme de Royaute:
Mais qui se faict craindre par cruaute,
Luy-mesm^ craint, and vit en deffiance.
The Fear that springs from Love and Reverence,
A firm support to Royal Greatness gives:
But he that makes him feared for Uiolence,
Himself fears most, and in distrust still lives.
102
Quiscauroit bien que c'est qu'vn Diadem,
Il choisiroit aussi tossed le tombeau,
Que d'aff^ubler son chef de ce bandeau:
Car aussibien il meurt lors a soy mesme.
He that knew right what were a Diadem,
As soon would seek in a cold Toombe to lie,
As girt his Temples with that glorious Gem:
For, then begins he to himself to die.
103
Deiour, denuict fair la sentinelle,
Pour lesalut d'autruy tousiours veiller,
Pour le public sans null gre trauailler,
C'est en un mot ce qu'Empire i'appelle.
For, day and night to stand as Sentinel;
For Public good, ungrateful toil to take;
Incessantly to watch for others weal:
This is, to Reign, if we it rightly take.
104
Ie ne veis one prudence auec ieunesse,
Bien commander sans auoir obey,
Estre fort craint, and n'estre point hay,
Estre Tyran, and mourir de vieillesse.
I never saw Wisdom and Youth, but two:
Nor him Commandwell, that had not Obay'd:
Nor any feared, that was not hated too:
Nor Tirant, aged in his Toombe be-lay'd.
105
Ne voise aubal qui n'aymera la danse,
Ny au banquet quine voudra manger,
Ny sur la mer qui craindra le danger,
Ny a la Cour qui dira ce qu'il pense.
Come not at Reuells, who delights not Dance:
Nor on the Sea, who fears rough waves and wind:
Nor at a Feast, who a good stomach wants:
Nor at the Court, who means to speak his mind.
106
Du mesdisant la langue venimeuse,
Et du flateur les propos emmielez,
Et du moqueur les brocards enfielez,
Et du maling la poursuite animeuse:
The soothing honey of smooth Parasites:
The poys'nie Tongues of slanderous Sycophants:
The ieering Buffon, that the best still bites:
The brazen-face of begging Cormorants.
107
Hayr le vray, se feindre en toutes chooses,
Sonder le simple a find l'attraper,
Brauer le foible, and sur l' absent draper,
Sont de la Cour les oeillets and les roses.
To gull the Simple; and the Weak to brave:
To hate the Truth; to halt in euery-thing:
To vnder-mine: The Absent to deprave:
These are the Flowers that in the Court do spring.
108
Aduersite, des faueur, and querelle,
Sont trois essais pour sonder son amy:
Tell a ce nom qui nel'est qu'a demi,
Et ne scauroit endurer la coupelle.
An Enemy, Misfortune, and Disgrace,
Are three Essays to prove if Friends be loyal:
For many have the Name, and bear the face;
That are not so, if they be put to trial.
109
Aymel' estattel que tu le vois estre:
S'il est royal, aim la Royaute:
S'il est de peu, ou bien communaute,
Aymel' aussi, qu and Dieu t'y a faict naistre.
Commend the State where-vnder born you are:
If it be Royal, love the Royalty:
If, of the Best, or merely Popular;
Allow of either, where thy Lot shall be.
110
Il est permis souhaiter un bon Prince,
Maistel qu'il est, il le conuient porter:
Car il vault mieux un tyran supporter,
Que de troubler la paix de saprouince.
It Is lawful (where they want) to wish good Princes:
But men the while must bear them as they are,
It Is better bear a Tyrants insolences,
Then to disturb the Commonweal with War.
111
A ton Seigneur and ton Roy nete jove:
Et s'il t'en pry, il t'en faut excuser:
Qui des faueurs des Roys cuide abuser,
Bien tossed, froisse, choit au bas de la roue.
Sport not too-boldly with thy Lord and King;
And though he bid thee (if thou can) refuse:
From highest Fortunes sudden down they ding,
Who do presume a Princes grace to abuse.
112
Qui de bas lieu (miracle de fortune)
En un matin t'es haulse si auant,
Penses tu point que ce n'est que duvent,
Qui calmera, peut estre, sur la brune?
Thou (Fortunes wonder) that from lowest place
Doo'st in a morning to the top attain:
Suppose it but a wind that blew a-space
Which yet yer night (perhaps) will calm again.
113
L'estat moyen est l'estat plus durable:
On voit des eaux le plat pays noye,
Et les haults monts ont le cheffoudroye:
Un petit tertre est seur and agreeable.
The mean Estate is the most permanent:
We see the Vales with every shower are drowned;
And Mountain tops with every Thunder rent:
But Little Hills are pleasant, safe, and sound.
114
De peu de biens nature se content,
Et peu suffit pour viure honestement:
L'homme ennemy de son contentement,
Plus a, and plus pour auoir se tourmente.
Nature's with little pleased: enough's a Feast:
A^sober life, but a small charge requires:
But Man, the Author of his own vn-rest,
The more he has, the more he still desires.
115
Quand tu verras que Dieu au ciel retire
A coup a coup les hommes vertueux,
Die hardiment, l'orage impetueux
Viendra bien tossed es branler cest Empire.
When thou shall see the Almighty take from hence,
By one and one the Virtuous of the Land,
Say boldly thus; These are the Arguments
Of some drad Tempest of his Wrath at hand.
116
Les gens debien cesont comme gros terms,
Ou forts pilliers, qui seruent d'arcs-boutans,
Pour appuyer contre l'effort du temps
Les haults estats, and les maintenir fermes.
For Virtuous Men are even the Buttresses,
The mighty Columns and the Arches strong,
Which against all Times fellest outrages
Support a State and do maintain it long.
117
L'homme se plaint de satrop court vie,
Et ce pendant n'employe ou il deuroit
Le temps qu'il a, qui suffir luy pourroit,
Si pour bien viure auoit de viure envy.
Man does the shortness of his Life repine;
Yet does not duly spend nor rightly drive
The Time he has: which might suffice his mind,
If, To live well, he did desire to live.
118
Tu ne scaurois d'assez ample salaire
Recompenser celuy quit'a soigne
En ton enfance, and qui t'^ enseigne
A bien parler, and surtout a bienfaire.
Thou hardly can sufficiently requite
Him, who thy Childhood has been Tutorto;
Nor Him, that has instructed thee a-right,
Both, well to speak, but chiefly, well to do.
119
Es ieux publics, au theater, a la table,
Cedeta place au viellard and chenu:
Quand tu seras a son age venu,
Tu trouueras qui fera le semblable.
In Theaters, at public Plays and Feasts,
Give always place unto the hoary head:
So, when like age shall siluerize thy Tresse,
Thou shall by others be like-honoured.
120
Cil qui ingrat enuerstoy se demonstre,
Va augmentant le loz de ton bien faict:
Le reprocher maint homme ingrat a faict:
C'est se payer, que du bien fair monstre.
Who, for thy Friendship shows himself ingrate,
Unwillingly extolls thy Benefit:
But to vp-brayde one, makes a Man ingrate;
Who vaunts his Kindness, pays himself for it.
121
Boire, and manger, s'exercer par mesure,
Sont de sante les outils plus certains:
L'excez enl'vn de cestrois, aux humains
Haste la mort, and force la nature.
To eat, and drink, and exercise, in measure,
Three props of Health, the certainest she has:
But the excess in these (or other Pleasure)
Enforces Nature, and does hasten Death.
122
Si quelquefois le meschant te blasonne,
Que t'en chautil? helas, c'est ton honneur:
Le blasme prend la force du donneur:
Le loz est bon, quand un bon nous le done.
If evil men speak sometimes ill of thee,
What need'st thou care? alas, it is thy Praise:
Blame, from the Author takes authority,
And'tis a good Report that good men raise.
123
Nous meslons tout, le vray parler se change:
Souuent le vice est du nom reuestu
De la prochain opposite virtue:
Le loz est blasme, and le blasme est louange.
We all confound; true Language is trans-formed:
Vice oftentimes puts-on the Uertues name
Next opposite: It Is Form to be de-formed:
Blame is a Praise; and Commendation Blame.
124
En bonne part ce qu'on dit tu dois prendre,
Et l'imparfait du procham supporter,
Couurir ^a fault, and ne la rapporter,
Prompt a lover, and tardif a reprendre.
Of what is spoken, ever make the best:
Bear the defect of Neighbor and of Friend:
Cover their fault; publish it not (at least):
Ready to praise, and slow to reprehend:
125
Cil qui se pense and se dit estre sage,
Tien le pourfol, and celuy qui scauant
Se faict nommer, sonde le bien auant,
Tu trouueras que ce n'est que langage.
He that esteems and vaunts himself for wise,
Think him a fool: And Him that does assume
The name of Learned, whosoever soundly tries,
Shall find him nothing but bare words and fume.
126
Plus on est docte, and plus on se deffie
D'estre scauant: and l'homme vertueux
Iamais n'est veu estre presumptueux.
Voila des fruicts de ma Philosophy.
The better Learned, learn the more their want,
And more to doubt their own sufficiency:
And Virtuous men are never Arrogant.
These are the Fruits of my Philosophy.
FINIS.
SONNETS Upon the (late) miraculous Peace in France.

Acceptam refero.


To the most honorable, learned, and religious Gent. M. Anthony Bacone.
BOund by your Bounty and mine own desire,
To tender still new tribute of my zeal
To you (your Countries watchful Sentinel,
Whose Wisdom, ours and other States admire)
Lo, here I tune vponmine humble Lyre
Our neighbor Kingdoms vn-expected weal,
Through sudden ceasing of Wars enter-deale;
As Celtike Muses to my Muse inspire.
Miraculous the Work; and so his wit
That firstly sung this sacred MIRACLE:
A gracious Theme (If I dis-grace not it)
That your grave eyes my daigne for spectacle.
What ever it be, accept it as a due
From him whose all does all belong to You.
Iosuah Syluester.

To the French King, Henry the fourth.
SONNET 1.
HEnry, triumphant though thou were in War,
Though Fate and Fortitude conspired thy glory,
Though thy least Conflicts well deserve a Story;
Though Mars his fame by thine be dark'ned far;
Though from thy Cradle (Infant Conqueror)
Thy martial proofs have dimmed Alcides praise;
And though with Garlands of victorious Bays
Thy Royal temples richly crowned are:
Yet (matchles Prince) naught have thou wrought so glorious
As this vn-lookt-for, happy PEACE admired;
Whereby, thy self art of thy self victorious:
For, while thou might the worlds Throne have aspired,
Thou by this Peace thy warlike heart have tamed:
What greater conquest could there then be named?
SONNET 2.
But, what new Sun does now adorn our Land,
And gives our sky so smooth and smiling cheer?
For, it is not Phoebus; else his golden brand
Shines brighter now then 'thath don many a year.
Sweet Angel-beauty (sacred PEACE) Heavens present;
Is It not the Rising of thy new-com starr,
Which makes the Air more clear, the spring more pleasant,
Zephyre more calm, and Flora merrier?
Ah, I perceive the Olive, Dove, and Bow,
Divine presages that the Flood abates
(The dismal flood where blood and tears did flow)
And Ianus now locks-vp his Temple gates:
Justice and Faith do kindly kiss each other:
And Mars, appeased, sits down by Cupids Mother.
SONNET 3.
Fair fruitful Daughter of the Omnipotent,
Great Vmpire that do either World sustain,
Without whose help all would return again
(Like hideous Chaos) to confusion bent.
O Mother of the living, second Nature
Of the Elements (Fire, Water, Earth, and Air)
O Grace (whereby men climb the heavenly stair)
Whence void, this world harbors no happy creature.
Pillar of Laws, Religions pedestall,
Hope of the godly, glory of the Immortal;
Honor of Cities, Pearl of Kingdoms all;
Thou Nurse of Virtues, Muses chief supportall;
Patron of Arts, of Good the special spring:
All hail (deer Peace) which us all heal do bring.
SONNET 4.
Comforth (deer France) from thy dark Cell of moan,
Com (as newborn) from Wars unkindly quarrels:
Turn tragic Cypress to triumphant Laurels;
Change black to green, and make thy Grave a Throne.
Let Cores dwell upon thy Desert Plain,
Bacchus, and Dian, on thy Hills and Groves,
Pomana in Gardens, Pan among thy Droues,
Secure all Rhoades, and open all Gates again.
Resume (O Cities) Rule and Reverence;
Revest (ye States) your Robes of dignity;
Rise-vp (ye Ruins) in fair Battlements;
Com, Muses, Pallas, Themis, Mercury,
Restore us Laws, Learning, and Arts, and Trade:
And let our Age, a golden Age be made.
SONNNET 5.
Most Christian Kingdom, thou were never so near
Drowned in the deep Gulphes of thy Civil war,
As in the tempest of this later lar,
Which past conceit of calming did appear.
When all the winds adversly armed were,
(Though selfly-foes, yet friends to work thy wrack)
Thy Ship a helm, thy self a heart did lack,
On troubled waters tossed here and there:
Then* from above (O bounty most admired!)
Saint Hermes shined* whose gentle light presageth
That then the anger of the Heavens asswageth.
O happy PEACE! less hoped then desired:
O grace much honored, little yet conceived;
O blessed guile, that thus our sense deceived.
SONNET 6.
Who could expect (but past all expectation)
So sudden order, from so sad confusion;
So loyal friendship, from false emulation;
So firm possession, from so fierce intrusion?
Who could expect (but past all likelihood)
From such a storm, such and so sweet a calm;
From France her cyndars, such a Phoenix-brood;
Pandoras box to yield so rare a balm?
Who could expect (but past all humane thought)
So frank a freedom from a thrall so late,
Or certain Rudder of so rent a State?
True Aesculapius, thou alone have wrought
This MIRACLE, not on Hyppolitus,
But on this Kingdom, much more wondrous.
SONNET 7.
The vnlookt-forworking of all things almost,
Inconstant-constant, in succession strange,
Amazeth those whose wits we chiefly boast,
To see this sudden vn-expected change.
Each feels the effect, but none the cause descries
(No though he have with stars intelligence):
God to himself reserues such Mysteries,
Disposing Kingdoms by his Providence.
O end-less Bounty! In the midst of Broyls
He gives us PEACE, when War did us inflame;
And reaues the mischief we pursued yer-whiles:
But, this does most extol his glorious Name,
That when most sharply this extremest Fit
Strove to be cure-les, soon he cured it.
SONNET 8.
Some reasoned thus; No violence can last:
Revolted Subjects, of themselves will quail:
Just Sovereignty can never be displac't;
And lawful Princes first or last preuail:
But, who could think, that the conjoined powers
Of Spain and Rome, with an exceeding number
Of rebel Cities, and false States of ours,
So weak a King so little should encumber?
Others discoursed in another sort,
While all things sorted to another end
Then their imaginations did purport:
That earth may know, it cannot comprehend
The secret depths of Judgments all-divine,
No: there is no ground, beginning, midst, nor fine.
SONNET 9.
Admire we only Gods Omni-potence,
His deep-deep Wisdom, and his Mercy deer.
For, with these three, he has surmounted here
Our hateful foes, our hopes, and all our sense:
His power appears upon our Lord and King,
As yerst on David: for, they both attain
By warlike broyls their pre-appointed Reign;
Strangers, and subjects, and selves conquering:
His Prudence shines, when to preserve us thus,
All humane wit his wisdom does convince:
His gracious bounty in our bountious Prince.
Ovarious wonders! mel delicious
Flows from a living Lion, Mars is quiet,
Valor relenting, Conquest void of riot.
SONNET 10.
This was no action of a humane hand,
But the only work of the great Thunderer,
Who (wise-directing all the things that are)
In us divinely works his own command.
Some men, unwilling, benefit their Land,
Or vn-awares their Countries good prefer;
Another motions PEACE, but minds War,
And PEACE, succeeds whatever drifts withstand.
The Arch-Architect, the matchles Artizan
All instruments unto good uses proves:
Man's but a wheel, which that great Moover moves;
Each gracious gift in that first cause began:
Each good's a gleam of that first light alone,
If Ill approach us, only that is our own.
SONNET 11.
If God dart lightning, soon he dewes down rain;
A dreadful Judge, and yet a gentle Father:
Whose wrath slowe-kindled is soon quenched again,
To move us sinners to repent the rather.
Against Hel-bred Hydra, Heaven-born Theseus brings
The great Alcides arm and armory:
Of greatest Ill, a greater Good there springs;
And Mercy still does Rigor qualify.
Ah France, so many Monsters to suppress,
Thou had great need of Royal fortitude,
Else had thou been an Afrik Wilderness.
O happy lost Realm* for, it has ensude,
That now thy gain is more, in restoration,
Then was thy loss in all thy desolation.
SONNET 12.
But, if I sing great Henry's fortitude;
Shall I not then be blamed for ouer-daring?
If over-slip it, then be taxt for fearing,
Of silent dread, and dumb in gratitude?
What e're befall, my youth-bold thoughts conclude
(Like Icarus) my nimble Muse to raise:
And if I fall in such a Sea of praise:
What rarer Mausole may my bones include?
A sacred rage of some sweet-furious flame,
Will-nill-I, rapts me boldly to rehearse
Great Henry's Tropheis, and his glorious name.
Then roll thou Torrent of my tender verse:
Though his high Theme deserve a consort rather
Of all the Muses, and all musikes Father.
SONNET 13.
Great Prince, not pleased with a vain vertue-seeming:
Great Victor, prone to pardon humblenes,
Happy, all Hap Heavens only gift esteeming;
Warrior, whose wars have wrought his Countries PEACE:
Noble by deeds, and noble by descent;
Ancient Achilles, youthful Nestor sage,
Whose ripe-experienc't courage confident,
To knocks knits counsel, and gives rule to rage.
As hard in toil, as in compassion soft:
Inured to that, by nature born to this;
Who sheds no blood, but sheddeth tears as often,
Who never fights but still the field is his.
So like to Mars, that both in loves and wars,
Bellona and Uenus take him still for Mars.
SONNET 14.
A spirit, to virtues cheerfully addressed;
Apt to all goodness, to no ill inclined;
Quick to conceive, ingenious to digest;
Whose tongue is still true Trumpet of the mind:
A body, testing when it has no rest;
A waxen mildnes in a steely mind;
A soul tra-lucent in an open breast,
Which others thoughts through boany walls can find;
Whose front reflects maiestical-humillity,
Whose graue-sweet look commandingly-intreats,
Which in one instant fear and love begets:
A King still warring to obtain tranquillity,
To save his Country scorning thousand dangers;
Mirror of France, and miracle of Strangers.
SONNET 15.
If that, before thee fall rebellious Towers,
If battered walls, before thy Soldiers, loofe:
If hugest Rocks be pierced by thy powers;
If against thine Arms, no armor be of proof:
If that our fields flow with Iberian blood,
If that thy Camp composed of many a Caesar
Can by no dismal dangers be withstood;
Iousting with Giants, as it were at pleasure:
If lofty Mountains to thine homage vail;
If valleys rise to bulwark thee about;
If for thy sake, rivers do flow and fail;
'T was neither Canons, nor our conflicts stout,
Nor strength, nor stomach got these victories:
No, 't was thy presence ( Henry) and thine eyes.
SONNET 16.
They be to blame then, that thy boldness blame,
For having put thy self so often in danger:
Since, against Rebels and against the Stranger,
Thy looks, like lightning did thy Troops inflame.
France fought before, all bloody, faint, and lame,
Craving thine aid to venge her hateful wrong:
When, like a Lion to preserve her young
Thou lay'dst about thee to redeem the same.
Then had thou cause to hazard so thy life
(In extreme perils, extreme remedies)
But spare thee now, thy State is free from strife:
Sovereign, our safety in thy safety lies.
Codrus could keep his, only by his death:
Thou thine, alone by thine own living breath.
SONNET 17.
What wreath were worthy to become thy Crown,
What Carr-Triumphant equal with thy worth,
What marble statue meet for thy renown,
Thou that have raised the Lilly of the Earth?
What honorable Title of Addition
Do thou deserve, who (joining might with mildenes)
Have saved this great Ship from a sad perdition,
Nigh lost in the Ocean of wars civil wildenes?
O modern Hercules (thy Countries Father)
Hope not of us thy iust-deserved meed:
Earth is too-base, in Heaven expect it rather.
Our Laurels are too-pale to crown thy deed,
Who thus have salv'd the universal Ball:
For, the health of France imports the health of all.
SONNET 18.
Pardon me ( Henry) if Heavens silver rain,
Dewing thy Pearls, impearle mine humble Lays:
And if my verse (void both of price and pain)
Presume thy Virtues passing-price to praise:
Pardon (great King) if that mine Infant Muse
Stutter thy name; and if with skill too-scant
I limne thee hear, let zeal my crime excuse;
My steel's attracted by thine Adamant.
For, as the Sun, although he do reflect
His golden Rays on grosser Elements,
Does never spot his beautiful aspect:
So, though the praises of thine Excellence
Do brightly glister in my gloomie style,
They nothing lose of their first grace the while.
SONNET 19.
Now, since as well by conquest as succession
France is thine own; O keep it still therefore.
It Is much to conquer: but to keep possession
Is full as much, and if it be not more.
Who well would keep so plentiful a portion,
Must stablish first the Heavenly Discipline;
Then humane Laws, restraining all extortion;
And Princely wealth with public weal combine.
A Princes safety lies in loving People;
His Fort is Justice (free from Stratagem)
Without the which strong Cittadels are feeble.
The Subjects love is won by loving them:
Of loving them, n' oppression is the trial:
And no oppression makes them ever loyal.
SONNET 20.
Bold Martialists, brave Imps of noble birth,
Shining in steel for France, and for your King:
Ye Sons of those that heretofore did bring
Beneath their yoke, the pride of all the earth.
It is an honor to be high-descended;
But more, to have kept ones Country and fidelity.
For, our own virtues make us most commended:
And Truth's the title of all true Nobility.
Your shoulders shoar'd up France (even like to fall)
You were her Atlas; Henry, Hercules:
And but for you, her shock had shaken All;
But now she stands steadfast on Civil PEACE:
Wherefore, if yet your warlike heat do work,
With holy Arms go hunt the hateful Turk.
SONNET 21.
But, you that vaunt your antike Petigrees,
So stately tymbring your surcharged shields,
Perking (like Pines above the lower Trees)
Over the Farmers of your neighbor fields;
Is It lack of love, or is it lack of courage,
That holds you (Snaile-like) creeping in your houses,
While over all your Countries Foes do forage,
And rebel outrage every corner rouses?
If no example of your Ancesters,
Nor present instance of bright-armed Lords,
The feeble Temper of your stomach stirs,
If in your lives ye never drew your swords
To serve your King, nor quench your Countries flames,
Pardon me, Nobles, I mistook your names.
SONNET 22.
You sacred Order, charged the Church to watch,
And teach the holy Mysteries of Heaven,
From henceforth all seditious plots dispatch,
And (Father-like) to all be always even.
Through superstition stir to strife again;
Reuolts a mischief evermore pernicious:
Pluck up abuses, and the hurtful grain
Sprung from the Ignorant and Auaricious.
Avoid Ambition (common cause of strife)
Your reverend Robe be free from stains of blood,
Preach holy Doctrine, prove it by your life:
Fly Idleness, choose exercises good;
To wit, all works of lively faith and piety.
So, to your fold shall flock the blessed Society.
SONNET 23.
You grave assembly of sage Senators,
Right Oracles, ye Ephori of France;
Who, for the States and Justice maintenance,
Of Sword and Balance are the Arbitrers:
That from henceforth (against all enemies)
Our PEACE may seat her in a settled Throne;
Repress the malice of all mutinies,
Which through the advantage of these times have grown.
At a low tide it is best to mend a breach,
Before the flood return with violence:
It Is good in health to counsel with a Leach:
So, while a People's calm from insolence,
It Is best that Rulers bridle them with awe;
And (for the future) curb the lewd with law.
SONNET 24.
People, less settled then the sliding sand;
More mutable then Proteus, or the Moon;
Turned, and returned, in turning of a hand:
Like Euripus ebbe-flowing every Noone.
Thou thousand-headed head-les Monster-most,
Often slain (like Antheus) and as often new rising,
Who, hard as steel, as light as wind arttost;
Chameleon-like, each objects color prysing.
Vnblinde thy blind soul, opethine inward sight;
Be no more Tinder of intestine flame:
Of all fantastike humors purge thy spright:
For, if past-follies urge yet grief and shame,
Lo (like Obliuions law) to cure thy passion,
State-stabling Peace brings froward minds in fashion.
SONNET 25.
Engines of Uulcan, Heav'n-affrighting wonders,
Like brittle glass the Rocks to cyndars breaking;
Deafning the winds, dumbing the loudest thunders;
May ye be bound a thousand years from speaking.
Ye hate-peace Hacksters flesht in Massacres,
Be you for ever banished from our soil;
Ye steeled Tools of slaughter, wounds, and wars,
Be you condemned to hang, and rust a while:
Or (not to languish in so fruit-lesrest)
Be you transformed to husband-furniture,
To plow those fields you have so often deprest:
Of (if you cannot leave your wonted ure)
Leave (at the least) all mutinous alarmes,
And befrom henceforth Justice lawful Arms.
SONNET 26.
O Paris, know thy self, and know thy Master,
As well thy heavenly as thine earthly guider:
And be not like a Horse, who (proud of pasture)
Breaks Bit, and Reanes, and casts his cunning Rider
Who nill be Subjects, shall be slaves in ^ine:
Who Kings refuse, shall have a Tyrant Lord:
Who are not moved with the mild rods divine,
Shall feel the fury of Heavens venging Sword.
Thy greatness stands on theirs that wear the Crown,
Whereof, the have had now seventy (saving seven)
Think one sufficient soon to pull thee down:
Kings greatness stands on the great King of Heaven.
Knowing these two, then Paris know thy self,
By Wars afflictions, and by PEACES wealth.
SONNET 27.
Swell not in pride O Paris (Princely Dame)
To be chief City, and thy Sovereigns Throne:
City? nay model of this total Frame,
A mighty Kingdom of thy self alone.
The scourge that lately with paternall hand
For thine amendment did so mildely beat-thee,
If any more against thy Kings thou stand,
Shall prove that then God did but only threat-thee.
Were thou a hundred-thousand-fold more mighty,
Who in the Olympike Court commands the thunders,
In his least wrath can wrack thee (most Almighty).
Thebes, Babel, Rome, those proud heav'n-daring wonders,
Low under ground in dust and ashes lie:
For earthly Kingdoms (even as men) do die.
SONNET 28.
But, O my sorrows ^ whither am I tos^?
What? shall I bloody sweet ASTREAS Songs?
Re-open wounds that are now healed almost,
And new-remember nigh-forgotten wrongs?
Since storms are calmed by a gentle Star,
Forget we (Muse) all former furie-moods,
And all the tempests of our viper-Warre:
Drown we those thoughts in deep-deep Lethe floods.
O but (alas) I cannot not-retaine
So great, notorious, common miseries,
Nor hide my plaint, nor hold my weeping rain:
But 'mid these hidious hellish outrages,
I Will show and prove by this strange spectacle,
Our civil PEACE, asacred Miracle.
SONNET 29.
As he that, escaped from Shipwreck on a planke,
Doubts of his health, and hardly yet believes
(Still faintly shiuering on the feare-les bank)
That (through that frail help) certainly he lives:
As he that new freed from strange servitude,
Returns again to tread his native allies,
Seems still to fear his Patrons rigor rude,
And seems still tugging, chayned in the Galleys:
So always, ruth, ruin, and rage, and horror
Of troubles past do haunt me euery-where,
And still I meet Furies and ghastly Terror:
Then, to my self thus rave I (rapt with fear)
From pleasures past, if present sorrow spring,
Why should not past cares present comfort bring?
SONNET 30.
We must not now up braid each others crimes
Committed wrongly in the time of War;
For we have all (alas) too oftentimes
Prouok't the vengeance of the Lord too far:
Some robbing Justice, under mask of Reason;
Some blowing coals, to kindle-vp Sedition;
Some against their King attempting open Treason;
Some Godding Fortune (Idol of Ambition).
Alas, we know our cause of malady,
All apt t'accuse, but none to cleanse the impure;
Each does rebuke, but none does remedy:
To know a grief, it is but half a cure:
Is it our sins? let us purge away that bane;
For what helps Physic if it be not taken?
SONNET 31.
Who cloak their crimes in hoods of holiness,
Are double villains: and the Hypocrite
Is most-most odious in Gods glorious sight,
That takes his Name to cover wickedness.
Profane Ambition, blind and irreligious,
In quest of Kingdoms, holding nothing holy:
Think thou the Eternal blind (as thou in folly)
Or weak to punish Monsters so prodigious?
O execrablevizard, can thou hide thee
From the All-pierce Eye? are treason, rape, and murder
Effects of Faith, or of the Furies-order?
Thy veil is rent, the rudest have descride thee.
It Is now apparent to each plain Opinion,
Thy hot Devotion hunted but Dominion.
SONNET 32.
It Is strange to see the heat of Civil brands.
For, when we arm us brother against brother,
O then how ready are our hearts and hands,
And Wits awake to ruin one another!
But, come to counter-mine against secret treason,
Or force the forces of a stranger foe,
Alas, how shallow are we then in reason,
How cold in courage, and in camping slow*
France only strives to triumph over France:
With selfe-kill Swords to cut each others throat.
What swarms of Soldiers every where do float,
To spend and spoil a Kingdoms maintenance?
But, said I Soldiers? ah I blush for shame,
To give base Thieves the noble Soldiers name.
SONNET 33.
Is It not an endless scandal to our days:
(If possible our heirs can credit it):
That the holy name of PEACE, so worthy praise,
Has been our Watchword for a fault unfit?
That the pure Lilly, our own native flower,
Has been an odious object in our eyes?
That kingly Name, and Kings heav'n-stablisht power,
Has been with us a mark of trecheries?
To Have banished hence the godly and the wise,
Whose sound direction kept the State from danger;
Yea, made their bodies bloody Sacrifice?
And (to conclude) seeking to serve a Stranger,
To Have stabbed our own? but (O Muse) keep that in,
The fault's so foul, to speak it were a sin.
SONNET 34.
I wail not I so much wars wastefull rigours,
Nor all thy ruins make me half so sorry,
As thy lost honor ( France) which most disfigures,
Losing thy loyalty, thy Native glory.
From Moors to Moscouites (O cursed change!)
The French are called, Faith-les Parricides:
The yerst-most-prince-^oyall people (O most strange!)
Are now Prince-treachers more than all besides:
With us, Massacres pass for Piety;
Theft, rape, and wrong, for iust-attaind possessions;
Revolt for Merit, Rage for Equity:
Alas, must we needs borrow the transgressions
And imperfections of all other Nations,
Yerst only blamed for inconstant fashions?
SONNET 35.
Not without reason has it often been spoken;
That through fair Concord little things augment,
And (opposite) that mightiest things are broken
Through the ugly Discord of the discontent.
When many tunes do gently symphonize
It conquers hearts and kindly them compounds;
When many hearts do gentle sympathize
In sacred friendship, there all bliss abounds.
Alas, if longer we divide this Real me,
Loosing to every Partizan apart;
Farewell our Lillies and our Diadem.
For, though it seem to breath now somewhat peart,
Our sins (I fear) will work worse after-claps:
And there is most danger in a re-relaps.
SONNET 36.
O, how I hate these partializing words,
Which show how we are in the Faith devised:
Is It possible to whet so many Swords,
And light such flames among the In-one-Christ-baptized:
Christians to Christians to be brute and bloody,
Altars to Altars to be opposite,
Parting the limbs of such a perfect Body,
While Turks with Turks do better fa^revnite?
We, in our Truth find doubts (whence follow Schisms)
They, whose fond Law does all of Lies consist,
Abide confirmed in their vain Paganismes.
One naught believes, another what him list,
One ouer-Creeds, another Creeds too-short;
Each makes his Church (rather his Sect) apart.
SONNET 37.
Put-off (dear French) all secret grudge and gall,
And all keen stings of vengeance on all parts:
For, if you would have PEACE proclaimed to all,
It must be first fair printed in your hearts.
Henry, the mildest of all Conquerers
(Your perfect glass for Princely clemency)
He, to appease and calm the State from ^arres,
For his friends sake, has saved his enemy.
Let Us all be French, all subjects to one Lord;
Let France from henceforth be one only State;
Let Us all (for Gods sake) be of one accord:
So (through true zeal Christ's praise to propagate)
May the most Christian King with prosperous power
On Sion walls re-plant our Lilly-flower.
SONNET 38.
O Christian cor'siue! that the Mahomite
With hundred thousands in Vienna Plain,
His Mooned Standards has already pight,
Pressed to join Austrich to his Thracian Reign:
Malth, Corfu, Candie, his proud Threats disdain;
And all our Europe trembles in dismay;
While striving Christians (by each other slain)
Each other weak'ning, make him easieway.
Rhodes, Belgrade, Cyprus, and the Realms of Greece,
Thrall'd to his barbarous yoke, yet fresh-declare,
That while two strive, a third obtaines the fleece.
Though name of Christian be a title fair;
If, but for Earth, they all this while have striu'n,
They may have Earth, but others shall have Heaven.
SONNET 39.
May I not one day see in France again
Some new Martellus (full of stout actiuitie)
To snatch the Scepter from the Saracen,
That holds the Holy Land in strait captivity?
May I not see the selfe-weale-wounding La^nce
Of our brave Bloods (yerst one another goring)
Turned with mo^e valor on the Musulmans,
A higher pitch of happy prowess soaring?
But who (dear France) of all thy men-at-armes
Shall so far ^e^ce renew thine ancient Laurels:
Since here they plot thine and their proper harms?
I rather fear, that (through these fatal quarrels)
That hate-Christ Tyrant will in time become
The Lord and Sovereign of all Christendom.
SONNET 40.
Mid all these mischiefs, while the friend foe Strangers,
With us. against us, had intelligence;
Henry our King, our Father, voides our dangers,
And (O Heavens wonder) planteth PEACE in France.
Thou Judge that sitt'st on the supernall Throne,
O quench thy fury, keep us from hostility:
With eyes of mercy look thou still upon
Our PEACE, and found it on a firm stabilitie:
Since (in despite of discord) thou alone,
Inward and outward, have thus salv'd us (Lord)
Keep still our France (or rather Lord thine own)
Let Princes love, and live in just accord:
Dis-arme them (Lord) or, i^ Arms busy them,
Be it alone for thy Jerusalem.
FINIS.
A Dialogue upon the Troubles past: BETWEEN HERAclitus and Democritus, the
weeping and the laughing Philosophers.

Acceptam refero.


A DIALOGVE.
Heraclitus. ALas, thou laugh'st, perhaps not feeling well
The painful torments of this mortal Hell:
Ah! can thou (teare-les) in this iron Age,
See men massacred, Monsters borne to rage?

Democritus. Ha, but why weep'st thou? wherefore in this sort
Do thou lament amid this merry sport?
Ha, can thou choose but laugh, to see the State
Of men's now-follies, and the freaks of Fate?

Heraclitus. He has no heart that melts not all in tears,
To see the treasons, murders, massacres,
Sacks, sacrileges, losses, and alarmes
Of those that perish by their proper arms.

Democritus. Who all dismayed, swouneth suddenly
To hear or see some fained Tragedy
(Held in these days, on every Stage as common)
Is but a heart-les man, or but a woman.

Heraclitus. O! would to God our Countries tragic ruth
Were but a fable, no effected truth:
My soul then should not sigh to angry Heaven,
Nor for her plagues my tender heart be riv'n.

Democritus. I take the world to be but as a Stage,
Where net-maskt men do play their personage.
It Is but a mummerie, and a pleasant show;
Since over all, strange vanities do flow.

Heraclitus. Those vanities I have in detestation,
As cursed causes of Gods indignation:
Which makes me always weep, since on the earth
I see no object for the meanest mirth.

Democritus. Thus, from one Subject sundry sequels spring,
As diversely our wits conceive a thing.
I laugh to see thee weep; thou weep'st to see
Me laugh so much, which more afflicts thee.

Heraclitus. Laugh while thou list at mortal miseries,
I cannot choose but even weep out mine eyes:
Finding more cause for tears in bloody slaughter,
Then for thy sense-les, ill-beseeming laughter.

Democritus. Melt thee, distill thee, turn to wax or snow;
Make sad thy gesture, tune thy voice to woe;
I cannot weep, except sometimes it hap
Through laughing much, mine eyes let fall a drop.

Heraclitus. I weep to see thus every thing confused,
Order disordred, and the Laws abused;
Justice reuerst, and Policy perverted;
And this sick State near utterly subverted.

Democritus. I laugh to see how Fortune (like a ball)
Plays with the Globe of this inconstant All:
How she degradeth these, and graceth those;
How, whom she lifts-vp, down again she throws.

Heraclitus. I rain down Rivers, when against their King
Cities rebel, through subjects bandying:
When Colleges (through Arms) are rest of Art:
When every County Kingdomes-it apart.

Democritus. I burst with laughter, when (confounding State)
I see those Rebels hunt their Magistrate:
When I hear Porters prate of State-designes,
And make all common, as in newfound Indes.

Heraclitus. I weep to see Gods glory made a veil
To cover who his glory most assail:
That sacred Faith is made a mask for sin,
And men run headlong to destructions ginne.

Democritus. I laugh (with all my heart) at the transforming
Of Iugling Proteis, to all times Conforming:
But, most I laugh to have seen the world so mad
To starve and die, when those damned Atheists bad.

Heraclitus. I weep (alas) to see the People weep,
Oppressed with rest-les weight in danger deep;
Crying for PEACE, but yet not like to get-her,
Yet her condition is not greatly better.

Democritus. I laugh to see all cause of laughter gone,
Through those which (yerst thou said) have caused thy moan:
Noting the old guise, I laugh at all their new;
I laugh at more, but dare not tell it you.

Heraclitus. Some sorrows also I in silence keep;
But in the Desert, all my woes shall weep:
And there (perhaps) the Rocks will help me then;
For, in these days they are more mild then men.

Democritus. I Will dwell in Cities (as my Genius guides)
To laugh my fill; for, smiling PEACE prouides
Such plentious store of laughing-stuffe to fill me,
That still I Will laugh, vn-les that laughing kill me.

FINIS.
AN ODE OF THE LOVE AND beauties of Astraea.
To the most matchles-faire, and virtuous, M. M. H.
TETRASTICON.
THou, for whose sake my freedom I forsake,
Who, murdring me, do yet maintain my life:
Here, under PEACE, thy beauties Type I make,
Fair, warlike Nymph, that keep'st me still in strife.
Sacred PEACE, if I approve thee,
If more then my life I love thee,
It Is not for thy beauteous eyes:
Though the brightest Lamp in skies
In his highest Summer shine,
Seems a spark compared with thine,
With thy pair of selfe-like Suns,
Past all els-comparisons.
It Is not (dear) the dewes Ambrosiall
Of those pretty lips so Rosiall,
Make me humble at thy feet:
Though the purest honey sweet
That the Muses birds do bring
To Mount Hybla every spring,
Nothing near so pleasant is,
As thy lively loving kiss.
It Is not (Beauties Emperesse)
The Amber circlets of thy tresse,
Curled by the wanton winds,
That so fast my freedom binds:
Though the precious glittering sand
Richly strow'd on Tagus Strand;
Nor the grains Pactolus rol'd
Never were so fine a gold.
It Is not for the polisht rows
Of those Rocks whence Prudence flows,
That I still my suit pursue;
Though that in those Countries new
In the Orient lately found
(Which in precious Gemmes abound)
Among all baytes of Avarice
Be no Pearls of such a price.
It Is not (Sweet) thine yuorie neck
Makes me worship at thy beck;
Nor that pretty double HILL
Of thy bosom panting still:
Though no fairest Laedas Swan,
Nor no sleekest Marble can
Be so smooth or white in show,
As thy Lillies, and thy Snow.
It Is not (O my Paradise)
Thy front (euener than the ye)
That my yielding heart does tie
With his milde-sweet Ma^ostie:
Though the silver Moon befaine
Still by night to mount her waine,
Fearing to sustain disgrace,
If by day she meet thy face.
It Is not that soft Satin limme,
With blew trailes enameld trim,
Thy hand, handle of perfection
Keeps my thoughts in thy subjection:
Though it have such curious cunning,
Gentle touch, and nimble running,
That on Lute to hear it warble,
Would move Rocks and ravish Marble.
It Is not all the rest beside,
Which thy modest veil does hide
From mine eyes (ah too injurious!)
Makes me of thy love so curious:
Though Diana being bare,
Nor Leucothoe passing rare,
In the Crystall-flowing springs
Never bathed so beauteous things.
What then (O diuinest Dame)
Fires my soul with burning flame,
If thine eyes be not the matches
Whence my kindling Taper catches?
And what Nectar from above
Feeds and feasts my joys (my Love)
If they taste not of the dainties
Of thy sweet lips sugared plenties?
What fell heat of couetize
In my feeble bosom fries;
If my heart no reckoning hold
Of thy tresses purest gold?
What inestimable treasure
Can procure me greater pleasure
Then those Orient Pearls I see
When thou daign'st to smile on me?
What? what fruit of life delights
My delicious appetites,
If I ouer-passe the mess
Of those apples of thy breasts?
What fresh buds of scarlet Rose
Are more fragrant sweet than those
Then those Twins, thy Strawberrie teates,
Curled-purled Cherrielets?
What (to finish) fairer limme,
Or what member yet more trim,
Or what other rarer Subject
Makes me make thee all mine object?
If it be not all the rest
By thy modest veil suppressed
(Rather) which an envious cloud
From my sight does closely shroud.
Ah't's a thing far more divine,
It Is that peere-les Soul of thine,
Masterpiece of Heavens best Art,
Made to maze each mortal heart.
It Is thine all-admired wit,
Thy sweet grace and gesture fit,
Thy mild pleasing courtesy
Makes thee triumph over me.
But, for thy fair Souls respect,
I love Twin-flames that reflect
From thy bright tra-lucent eyes:
And thy yellow locks likewise:
And those Orient-Pearly Rocks
Which thy lightning Smile vn-lockes:
And the Nectar-passing blisses
Of thy honey-sweeter kisses.
I love thy fresh rosy cheek
Blushing most Aurora-like,
And the white-exceeding skin
Of thy neck and dimpled chin,
And those Iuorie-marble mounts
Either, neither, both at once:
For, I dare not touch, to know
If they be of flesh or no.
I love thy pure Lilly hand
Soft, and smooth, and slender; and
Those fine nimble brethren small
Armed with Pearle-shel helmets all.
I love also all the rest
By thy modest veil suppressed
(Rather) which an envious cloud
From my longing sight does shroud.
FINIS.
SONNET 1.
Sweet mouth, that send'st a musky-rosed breath;
Fountain of Nectar, and delightful Balm;
Eyes cloudy-clear, smile-frowning, stormy-calm;
Whose every glance darts me a living-death:
Brows, bending quaintly your round Ebene Arkes:
Smile, that then Uenus sooner Mars besots;
Locks more then golden, curled in curious knots,
Where, in close ambush wanton Cupid lurkes:
Grace Angel-like; fair forehead, smooth, and high;
Pure white, that dimm'st the Lillies of the Vale;
Vermilion Rose, that make Aurora pale:
Rare spirit, to rule this beauteous Emperie:
If in your force, Divine effects I view,
Ah, who can blame me, if I worship you?
SONNET 2.
Thou, whose sweet eloquence does make me mute;
Whose sight does blind me; and whose nimblenes
Of feet in dance, and fingers on the Lute,
In deep amazes makes me motion-les.
Whose only presence, from my self absents me;
Whose pleasant humors, make me passionate;
Whose sober mood, my follies represents me:
Whose graue-milde graces make me emulate.
My heart, through whom, my heart is none of mine:
My All, through whom, I nothing do possess
Save thine Idea, glorious and divine.
O thou my Peace-like War, and warlike PEACE,
So much the wounds that thou have given me, please;
That it is my best ease, never to have ease.
Epigramms and Epitaphes upon War and Peace.
Upon the League.
France, without cause thou do complain
Against the League for wronging thee.
Sh'hath made thee large amends again,
With more then common usury:
For, for thy one King which she slew,
Sh'hath given thee now a thousand new.
Upon the taking of Paris.
1
When Paris (happily) was won
With small or no endangering,
Such sudden common joy begun,
That one would say (to have seen the thing)
The King took not Paris, Paris took the King.
2
O rarest sight of joyful woe,
Adorned with delightful dread;
When Henry with oneself-same show,
Conquered at once and triumphed!
3
Since, thee from danger and distress to free,
The King thus took, or rather entered thee;
Paris, it was not in stern Mars his Month,
But in the month that mild ASTREA owneth.
Upon the fall of the Millars-bridge.
1
The Millars in the River drowned,
While Paris was beleagerd round;
To die were all resolved in mind,
Because they had no more to grind.
2
Then was their fittest time to die,
Because they might intend it best:
But their intent was contrary,
Because they then lived so at rest.
3
As, after long sharp famine, some (fo^lorn)
Of surfeit Die, their greedines is such:
This Mill-bridge, having fasted long from corn,
Is drowned (perhaps) for having ground too-much.
Upon the recovery of Amiens.
I know not which may seem most admirable;
To take or re-take such a Cities force:
But, yet I know which is most honorable,
To take by fraud, or to re-take by force.
2
Each where they sing a thousand ways
The glory of this enterprise:
But yet of all their merry Lays.
The best is still in the Re-prise.
3
Hernand was happy by this Enterprise,
To take so soon our Amiens without blow:
More happy yet, to die yer the Re-prise,
Else had he died for shame to leave it so.
Upon the Reduction of Nantes.
Nantes would not yield so soon (they said)
Nor be recovered so good cheap:
And yet, for all defense it made,
'T was made to make the Britton Leap.
Upon PEACE.
^
Soldiers, late pressed, are now suppressed;
Crossed and cassierd from further pay:
Yet will they (in this time of rest)
Take up their lendings by the Way.
2
This PEACE (it seems) does not sound
To all the world; for everywhere
More Sergeants now do go the Round,
Then Soldiers yerst accustomed were.
Upon Captain Coblar.
A merry Coblar left the wars,
To turn unto his Occupation:
And, asked by his Customers
The reason of his alteration:
'T has pleased (quoth he) the King t'ordain
That each his Office take again.
Upon War.
Here, under this huge heap of stones
Lately enterr'd, lies cruel WAR:
Pray God long rest her soul and bones:
Yet, there is nothing worse for her.
Upon Rowland Rob-Church.
Here lies Rowland, that was lately slain,
In robbing of a wealthy Chapel, spyde:
Yet I believe he does in Heaven remain,
Since only for the Churches Good he did.
Upon Captain Catch.
Here under, Captain CATCH is laid,
Who six times changed from side to side,
Of neither side (it seemed) afraid:
He wore a white Scarf when he di'de:
Yet some suspect (and so do I)
For his inconstance shown before,
That to the Black-band he did fly:
But now he can revolt no more.
Upon Sir Nequam Neuter.
Here lies he, who the more safe to pray
On both sides; Neuter, between both abode:
Whether his Soul is gone, I can not say,
Since he was, nor for Devil, nor for God.
Pax omnibus vna.
FINIS.
A l'honeur de la Paix, chantee par Monsieur du NESMF, and rechantee en Anglois
par Monsieur SYLVESTRE.
SAns Paix rien ne sub siste: en Paix tout croist and dure:
Dieu maintient par sa Paix le beau Grand Universe
Et le Petit, bastis de members si diverse,
Touts s'entr' aydans l'vnl' autre en commune facture:
Elle unit a son Dieu l'humaine creature:
Elle emplit de Citez les Royaumes deserts:
Elle bride les fols, and rend les champs couverts
De biens donans plaisirs, vesture, and nouriture.
Enuoy-la donc (O Dieu) a nos Princes and Roys,
En nos maisons, en nous; and fay que d'vne voix
Nous suyvions les accords de ton Nesme admirable:
Lors (a iamais) ser as love de nos Gaulois
Par ses chants tout-divins: and Syluestre, en Anglois
Redoublerace loz d'vn style immitable.
P. CATELLE.
I'attens le temps.
THE PROFIT of Imprisonment.

A PARADOX, Written in French by Odet de la Noue, Lord of Teligni, being
Prisoner in the Castle of Tournay.

Translated by IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

Acceptam refero.


To his long-approoued friend, M. R. Nicolson, I. S. wishes ever all true
content.
TO thee (the same to me as first I meant)
Friend to the Muses, and the well-inclinde,
Loving, and loved of every virtuous mind:
To thee the same, I the same Song present
(Our mutual love's eternal Monument)
Wherein, our Nephews shall heer-after find
Our constant Friendship how it was combinde
With linkes of kindness and acknowledgement.
Accept again this Present in good part,
This simple pledge of my sincere affection
To Tangley, Thee, and thy Soon-calm-in-hart
(Perfect good will supplies all imperfection).
Chameleons change their color: Guile her game:
But (in both Fortunes) Virtue's still the same.
A Sonnet of the Author to his Book.
THe body, over prone to Pleasures and delights
Of soft, frail, dainty flesh, and to selfe-ease addicted,
Abhors Imprisonment, as a base pain inflicted
To punish the defaults of most unhappy wights.
The soul, as much surpised with love of heavenly sights,
And longing to behold the place that appertaines-her,
Does loath the body, as a Prison that detaines-her
From her high happiness among the blessed sprights.
Then, since both body and soul their bondage never brook,
But soul and body both do love their liberty:
Tell, tell me (O my Muse) who will believe our Book?
He that has learned a-right both these to mortify,
And serve our Savior Christ in body and in spirit,
Who both from thrall has freed by his own only merit.
A Paradox, That Adversity is more necessary then Prosperity; and that, of all
afflictions, close Prison is most pleasant, and most profitable.
HOw-euer fondly-false a vain Opinion seem,
If but the Vulgar once the same for right esteem;
Most men account it so: so (in absurdest things)
Consent of multitude exceeding credit brings.
Nor any mean remains when it is once received,
To wrest it from the most of erring minds deceived.
Nay, whose shall but say, they ought to alter it,
He headlong casts himself in dangers deepest Pit.
For, never nimble Bark that on adventure runs
Through those blew bounding Hills where hoarie Neptune wunnes,
Was set-vpon so sore with neuer-ceast assault
Maintained on every side by winds and waters salt,
When, raging most, they raise their roughest tempest dreaded,
As the idiot multitude, that Monster many-headed
Bestirres it self, with wrath, spite, fury, full of terror,
Against whatsoever man that dares reprove her error.
Who undertakes that task, must make account (at first)
To take hot wars in hand, and bear away the worst.
Therefore a many Works (worthy the light) have died
Before their birth, in breasts of Fathers terrified,
Not by rough deeds alone; but even by foolish threats:
Yet, only noise of words base cowards only beats.
Then fear who list (for me) the common peoples cry,
And who so list, be mute, if other-minded: I
(Scorning the feeble force of such a vain endeavor)
Will freely (spite of fear) say what I censure ever:
And, though my present State permit me not such scope,
Mine vn-forbidden pen with Errors pride shall cope.
Close Prison (now a-daies) the extremest misery
The world does deem, I deem direct the contrary:
And there-with-all will prove, that even Adversities
Are to be wished more then most Prosperities.
And, for Imprisonment, though that be most lamented,
Of all the griefs wherewith men fear to be tormented;
Yet, that is the Sat most stored with pleasure and delight,
And the most gain-full too to any Christian wight.
A Paradox, no doubt more true, then creditable;
The which my self sometimes have also thought a fable,
While guile-full vanities, fed not, but filled my mind,
For strengthening sustenance, with vn-substantiall wind.
I hated Death to death, I also did detest
All sickness and disease that might a man molest.
But, most I did abhor that base esteemed State,
Which to subiections Law our selves does subiugate,
And our sweet life enthralls unto another will,
For, as my fancy wished I would have walked still.
Death (thought I) soon has done, and every grief besides,
The more extreme it is, the lesser time abides:
But now, besides that I esteemd the prisoners trouble
Much worse, me thought the time his martyrdom did double.
So that, to escape that scourge, so irk some to my heart,
I could have been content to suffer any smart.
Lo, by blind ignorance how judgments are misled:
Now that full thirty months I have experienced
That so-much-feared ill, it is now so used to me,
That I (a prisoner) live much more content and free,
Then when as (under cloak of a false freedom vain)
I was base slave (indeed) to many a bitter pain.
But, now I see my self mocked euery-where almost,
And feeble me alone met by a mighty host
Of such, as (in this case) do not conceive as I,
But do esteem themselves offended much thereby.
And therefore (Father dear) this weak abortiue Child,
For refuge runs betweeneth' arms of his Grand-sire mild.
If you accept of it, my labor has his hire:
For, careless of the rest, all that I here desire,
Is only that yourselfe (as in a Glass) may see
The Image of the estate of my Captivity:
Where, though I nothing can avail the Commonweal,
Yet, I avail my self (atleast) some little deal.
Praising the all-powerfull Lord, that thus vouch safes to pour
Such favors manifold upon meeuery hour;
Whereof your self (yer while) so sweet sure proof have tasted,
In cruel bitterness of bands that longer lasted.
Now, I beseech his Grace to bless mine enterprise,
My heart and hand at once to govern in such wise,
That what I write, may naught displeasing him contain:
For, void of his sweet aid, who works he works in vain.
Within the wide-spred space of these round Elements,
Whatsoever is indewd with living soul and sense,
Seeks (of it self) selfe-good; this instinct natural
Nature her self has graven in hearts of Creatures all:
And of all living things (from largest to the least)
Each one to fly his ill does evermore his best.
Thereof it comes (we see) the wild Horse (full of strength)
Tamely to take the bit into his mouth at length;
And so, by force we tame each most untamed beast,
Which, of it self, discreet, of evils takes the least:
And though that that which seems to be his chief restraint
He oftentimes despise, that is by a worse constraint:
As when the Lion fierce, feare-lesse pursues the shining
Of bright keen-piercing blades, and's royal crest declining,
Full of the valiant Fire, that courage woonts to lend,
Runs midst a million swords, his whelplings to defend,
More fearing far that they their liberty should lose,
Than on himself the smart of thousand wounding blows.
But, all things have not now the self same goods and ils;
What helps one, the same another hurts and kills:
There Is ods between the good that savage Beasts do like,
And that good (good indeed) which soul-wiseman must seek:
When Beasts have store of food, and free from foe's annoy,
Smart-lesse, and sound, and safe, may (as they list) enjoy
Their fill of those delights, that most delight the sense:
That, that is the happiness that fully them contents:
But reasonable souls (as God has made mankind)
Can with so wretched Good not satisfy their mind.
But, by how much the more their inly sight excels
The brutish appetite of every creature else,
So much more excellent the good for which they thirst:
Man of two parts is made: the body is the worst,
The Heaven-born soul, the best, wherein man's bliss abides;
In body that of beasts, naught having else besides:
This body stands in need of many an accessorie,
To make it somewhat seem: the soul receives this glory,
That selfly she subsists; and her abundant wealth
(Unlike the bodies store) is ever safe from stealth.
Our body took his birth of this terrestrial clod:
Our spirit, it was inspired of the inly breath of God;
And either of them still strives to his proper place,
This (earth-born) stoopes to earth; that stics to heaven apace.
But, as the silly bird, whose wings are wrapped in lime,
Feign (but in vain) attempts to fly full many a time:
So, our fair soul, surcharged with this foul robe of mud,
Is too-too often held from mounting to her GOOD.
She strives, she strikes, sometimes she lifts her up aloft:
But, as the worser part (we see) prevails often,
This false frail flesh of ours with pleasure's painted lure,
Straight makes her stoop again down to the dust impure.
Happy who the honor has of such a victory,
He crowns his conquering head with more true majesty
Then if he had subdued those Nations, by his might,
Which do discover first Aurora's early light,
And those whom Phoebus sees from his Meridian Mount,
The Anti-podes, and all; more then the sand to count.
For, small the honor is to be acknowledged King
And Monarke of the world, ones self vn-maistering.
But, each man on his head this Garland cannot set,
Nor is it given to all this victory to get,
Only a very few (Gods deere-belov'd Elect)
This happy Goal have got by Virtues live effect:
Therest, soon weary of this fame so painful War,
Like well of Heaven, but love the earth above it far:
Some, drunk with poysony dregs of worldly pleasures brute,
Know where true good consists, but never do ensue't:
Some do ensue the same, but with so faint a heart,
That at the first assault they do retire and start:
Some, more courageous, vow more then they bring to pass
(So much more easy it is to say, then do, alas)
And all, through too-much love of this vain worlds al^urements,
Or too-much idle fear of sufferings and endurements:
Meerevanities, whereto the more men do incline,
The farther-off they are from their chief Good divine.
Therefore, so many think themselves so miserables:
Therefore the air is filled with outcries lamentable,
Of such as do^ disdain the thing that better is,
To entertain the worse, with forfeit of their bliss:
Therefore we see those men that riches do possess,
Afflicted still with care: and therefore, heaviness
Abandons never those, that, fed with honors fill,
Fawn upon Potentates, for ^litting favors still.
And, cause (God wot) they have, to be at quiet never,
Since their felicity is so uncertain ever.
Neither are Kings themselves exempted from vexation,
How-euer Soueraignesway they bear in any Nation:
For, now they wish to win, anon fear loss no less,
Yea, though (for Empire) they did this wide world possess,
Not one of them, withal, could full contented be:
For, how man more attaines, the more attempteth he.
Who (therefore) couets most such soon-past goods uncertain,
Shall never enjoy the joy of goods abiding certain:
But, who so seeks to build a true content, to last;
On else-what, must elsewhere his first foundation cast.
For, all things here below are apt to alter ever;
Here Is nothing permanent, and therefore whosoever
Trusts thereto, trusts to a broken staff for stay;
For no earth's vanity can bless a man for aye.
We must, to make us blessed, our firm assurance found
Els-where then in this world, this change-inthralled ground:
We must propose our selves that perfect, perish-les,
That true unfeigned good, that good all danger-les
From the unjust spoil of thieves, which never, never stands
In need of guard, to guard from Soldiers pilling hands.
Now, it is with spiritual hands and not with corporal
That we do apprehend these heavenly treasures all:
Treasures so precious, that the only hope to haue-them
In full fruition once, with him that frankly gaue-them,
Fills us with every joy, our sorrows choakes and kills,
And makes us feel, amid our most tormenting ills,
A much more calm content, then those that every day
On this frail earth enjoy their hearts-wish every way.
It Is therefore in the spirit, not in the flesh that we
Must seek our Sovereign Good and chief Felicity.
The one is not capable of any injury,
The other's thrall to the yoke of many a misery,
The one end-les, euer-lasts, the other endures so little,
That wel-nigh yer't be got it is gone, it is so brittle.
For, who is he that now in wealth abounds most,
Or, he that in the Court Kings favors best may boast,
Or, he that is most with robes of dignity bedight,
Or, he that swimmes on Seas of sensual sweet delight,
But is in peril still to prove the contrary,
Poor, hated, honour-les, and full of misery?
But, one, that scorning all these rich proud pomps and pleasures
About him ( Bias-like) bears always all his treasures,
Even (like to him) can leave his native Country sacked,
Without sustain of loss: and, with a mind infract,
Even vanquished bereave, the Victors victories,
Who, though his La^d he win, cannot his heart surprise.
Let exile, prisonment, and tortures great and small,
With their extremest pains at-once assail him all:
Let him be left alone among his mighty foes,
Poor, friendles, naked, sick (or if ought worse then those)
He does nor only bear all this with patience,
But takes (even) delight in such experience:
Regarding all these griefs, which men so much aff^ight,
As Baby fearing buggs, and skar-crowes void of might:
He chooses rather much such exercise as these,
Then mid the flesh-delights to rust in idle ^ase.
But, very few there are, that thus much will admit:
Nay, few or none there are that easily credit it;
The most part taking-part with common most conceit,
Yet they have heard of this, sustain the the other straight:
Not seeing, that themselves shun and refuse as ill,
What unto other men, for good they offer still.
Not one of them will brook his Son in sloth to lurk,
But moves, and stirs him up incessantly to work:
Forbids him nothing more then sin-seed idleness:
Nor any pleasure vain permits him to possess,
(For well he knows, that way to virtue does not lead,
But thither-ward who walks a path of pain must tread)
If he offend in ought, he chastens and reproues him,
In so much sharper sort by how much more he loues-him.
Thus handles man the thing that most he holds dear,
Yet thinks it strange himself should be so handled here.
May we not rather think we are beloved of God,
When as we f^ele the stripes of his iust-gentle rod?
And that, whom here he lets live as they list in pleasure,
Are such as least he loves, and holds not as his treasure?
(...), not of our slaves, but of our sons elect*
By sharp-sweet chastisements the manners we correct.
In very deed God does as does a prudent Sire,
Who little cares what may cross his child's desire,
But what may most avail unto his betterment:
So, knowing well that ease would make us negligent:
He exercises us* he stires us up, and presses,
And, though we murmur much, yet neuer-more he cease^,
He chastens, he afflicts, and those whom most he strikes,
Are those whom most he loves, and whom he chiefly likes.
No valiant men of war will murmur or mislike,
For being placed to prove the for most push of pike^*
Nay, rather would they there already front the foe,
With loss of dearest blood; their dauntlesse hearts to show.
If an exploit approach, or Battel-day drawnie,
If ambush must be laid, some St^atagem to try;
Or, must they (...) the foe in eger ^kirmish fell,
Or, for the sleepy host all night keep sentinel:
From gr^dging at the pains, so far off are they all,
That blessed they count themselves; therefore their General
Imployes them oftentimes, as most^ o^^^agious,
And, them approved, he plants in places dangerous;
But, no man makes account of such as shu^^ the charge*
Whose pain is not so little as their shame is large*
All of us (in this world) resemble Soldiers right,
From day-breake of our birth even to* our dying night:
This life it is a war, wherein the vall^ntest;
With hottest skirmishes are ever plied and pr^sh*
Whom our grand-Captaine most sets-by, he sets a-(...)
The foreward as most fit to bear the chiefest brunt:
Cares, e^iles, prisonments, diseases, dolours, losses,
Maimes, tortures, torments, spoils, contempts, dishonour^, crosses,
All these are hard exploits, and full of ^ickrings bold,
Which he commits to those whom he does dearest hold:
But, leaves those behind for whom he cares little,
To stretch themselves at ^ase amid their honors brittle,
their pomps, their dignities, their ioies, their gems, their tres^^^
Their dainties, their delights, their pastimes and their plesures*
Like coward Grooms that guard the baggage and the stuff,
While others meet the foe, and show their valors proof.
But have not these (say some) in these afflictions part?
No; but of punishment, they often feel the smart.
Afflicted those we count, whom chastnings tame, and turn*
The other punished, that at correction spurn,
The first (still full of hope) reap profit by their rods,
The later (desperate) through spite wax worse by ods.
Boy-st^^gle^s of a Camp, so should be punished then,
Being naked forc'^ to fight with troops of armed men,
Who cannot reap nor reach the pleasure, nor the meed,
Nor the honor incident for doing such a deed:
To such praise-winning place, brave Soldiers gladly run,
Which as a dangerous place these faint-harts sadly shun.
What Warrior in the world, that had not rather try
A million of extremes (yea rather even to die)
Then with disgraceful spot to stain his Honor bright
In these corporeal Wars? Yet, in the ghostly fight
(Of glory careless all) we shun all labors pain,
To purchase with reproach a rest-nestidly-vain.
Virtue is not a^chiu'd, by spending of the year
In pleasures soft, sweet shades, down beds and dainty cheer*
Continual travel 't is that makes us there ariue,
And so by travel too Virtue is kept a-liue:
For, soon all virtue vades without some exercise,
But, being stird, the more her vigor multiplies.
Besides, what man is he, that feels some member rotten,
Whereof he fears to die, but causes straight be gotten
Some surgeon, that with saw, with cauter, or with knife,
May take that part away, to save his threatened life:
And suffers (though with smart) his very flesh and bones
To be both seared, and sawed, and clean cut off at-once.
But, to recure the soul (the soul with sin infected)
All wholesome remedies are hated and rejected:
With the Physician kind the impatient Patient frees,
Nor to come near him once his helpful hand he lets:
We are half putrified, through sins contagious spot,
And without speedy help the rest must wholly rot:
Cut Off the infected part, then are we sound and free,
Else all must perish needs, there is no remedy.
Most happy they, from whom in this frail life, the Lord
(With smart of many pains) cuts-off the pains abhord
Of the euer-neuer death, wherein they lie and languish,
That here have had their ease and never tasted anguish.
But many, which as yet the adverse part approve,
Conceive (^^not confess) that it does more behooue.
By faintless exercise fair Virtue to maintain,
Then ouer-whelm'd with Vice, at rest to rust in vain.
But y^^ th* extremity of sufferings does dismay-them,
The force where-of they fear would easily ouer-lay them:
They love the exercise, the chastenings likewise like them,
But yet they would have God but seld and softly strike-them,
Else are they pressed to run, to ruin, with the Devils,
They are so* sore afeard of false-supposed evils:
Most wretched is the man that for the fear of nis^^^,
All liuely-breathing hopes of happy goodness stifles.
Of nifles, sir, say they? seem all their bitter crosses,
As nothing? nor their pains, nor lamentable losse^,
That daily they endure? were not the wretches blessed,
If from their heaule load their shoulders were releast?
Who is not happy (sure) in misery and woe,
No doubt prosperity can never make him so:
No mo^e then he that is sick should find more ease upon
A glorious golden bed, then on a wooden one.
Man harbors in himself the evil that afflicts him,
And his own fault it is, if coffeehouse pricks-him:
And all these outward ills are wrongfully accused;
Which flesh and blood does blame; for, being rightly ^sed,
They all turn to our good: but whosoever takes offense
Thereby, has by and by his just rough recompense*
For neither in their power, nor in their proof the same
Are evil lau^ effect, but in conceit and name,
Which when we lightly weigh, the least of us surmounts them,
Nor hurt they any one but him that ouer-counts them.
Neither ought that (indeed) for evil to be rated,
Which may by accident be unto good translated:
Fo^^ll is ever ill, and is contrary ever
Directly unto good, so that their natures never
Can be constrained to brook each other, neither yet
Can the ^^e ^^ ever turned to the other opposite:
But, plainly we perceive, that there is no languor such,
But long continuance and custom lighten much:
Familiarizing so the Fit, that how so fret it,
Even in the extremity one may almost forget it.
What better proof of this, then those poor Gally-slaues,
Which (having been before such Rogues and idle Knaves)
As shunning services to labor were so loath,
That they would starve and die rather then leave their sloth,
But being used a while to tug the painful Oar,
Labor that yerst they loathed they now desire the more:
Or those that are assailed with burning Feuer-fit,
Even then when least of all they dread or doubt of it:
Who carefully complain, and cry, and rave, and rage,
Frying in inward flames, the which they cannot swage;
Yet, if it wax not worse, the daintiest body makes it
In eight days as a use, and as a trifle takes it:
Or, those that have sometimes the painful rack endured,
Who without change of pain being a while inured,
The pain that did constrain them to bewail and weep,
Seems them so easy then, they almost fall a-sleepe.
All are no^ evils then, that are surnamed so,
Since evil never can his nature mingle, no,
Nor turn it into good; whereas we plainly see
On the other side, that these are changed suddenly.
And, were they ills (indeed) since they so little last,
Were It no^ ^^eri^ sha^e to be so much agast^
But here again (say they) the ones nature never takes
The others nature on, but still the stronger makes
His fellow give him place, and only bears sway
Till that, returned again, drive it again away.
Nay, that can never be: for never perfect good
Can by his contrary be banished (though withstood):
For, good is ever good, and where so e're it go
Evil does ever strive, but with too strong a foe.
There is no reason then, these, good, or ill to call,
That alter in this sort, and never rest at all:
Neither to bless or blame them for the good or ill
That ever in her self our soul concealeth still.
For, if that from without, our bale, or else our bliss
Arrived: evermore withal must follow this,
That always, unto all, self ill, self pain, would bring:
Self good, one self content: but it is a certain thing,
They are not taken for their quality and kind,
But rather as the affects of men are most inclined.
One, loosing but a crown has lost his patience quight:
Another, having lost five hundred in a night,
Is never mo^'d aiote, though (having less in store,
Then the other has by ods) his loss might grieve him more.
One, being banished, does nothing but lament,
Another (as at home) is there as well content.
And, one in prison pent, is utterly dismaide,
Another, as at home, lives there as well appaid.
Needs must we then confess, that in our selves does rest
That which vphappieth us, and that which makes us blessed:
In us (indeed) the ill, which of our selves does grow:
And in us too the good, which from God's grace does flow,
To whom it pleases him: true good that none can owe-yet,
Save those on whom the Lord vouch safeth to bestow-it:
And that the bitter smart of all the pains that wring-vs,
From nothing but our sin, receives strength to sting-vs.
Yea, surely in our selves abides our misery:
Our Grand-sire Adam left us that for Legacy,
When he enthralled himself unto the Law of sin,
Wherein his guilty heirs their griefe-full birth begin.
The Lord had given to him a Nature and a feature,
Perfect (indeed) and blessed above all other creature;
And of this Earthly world had stablisht him as King,
Subiecting to his rule the reanes of every thing:
His spirit within it self noselfe-debates did nurse,
Having no knowledge yet of better nor of worse:
His body ever blithe and healthful felt no war
Of those four qualities that now do ever jar:
Nor any poysony plant, nor any Serpent fell,
Nor any noisome beast could hurt in any deal:
He might, without the taste of bitter death attain
Unto the Haven of Heaven, where all true Ioyss do reign.
And, had he not misdone, he might have well bequeathed
The same inheritance to all that ever breathed:
How happy had he been, if he had never eaten
The unlawful fatal fruit that double Death did threaten?
O that he never had preferred the Serpents flatter
Before the eternal Law of all the worlds Creator.
You shall be (said the Fiend) like supreme Deities:
This sweet fruits sugared juice shall open both your eyes
Which now your tyrant God (envying all your bliss)
Blindes with a filmy veil of black Obscurities,
Least that you should become his equals in degree,
Knowing both good and ill as well as ever he.
Poor Eve believes him straight, and Man believes his wife,
And biteth by and by the Apple asking-life:
Whereof so soon as he had tasted, he begins
(But all too-late alas) to see his cursed sins.
His eyes (indeed) were open, and then he had the skill
To know the difference between the good and ill,
Then did he know how good, good wa^ when he had lost-it,
And evil too he knew (but ah too dearly cost-it)
Leaving himself (besides the sorrow of his loss)
Nothing but sad despair of succourin his cross.
He found himself fallen down from blisse-full state of peace
Into a civil war where discords never cease:
His soul reuolting, soon became his bitter foe.
But (as it often befalls that worst do strongest grow)
She is not eased at all by the inly striving iarres,
Which do annoy her more then the irefull open wars.
Wrath, hatred, envy, fear, sorrow, despair, and such:
And passions opposite to these, afflict as much,
Distracting to and fro the Princess of his life,
In restles mutinies, and never ceasing strife.
Then the humor-brethren all, hot, cold, and wet, and dry,
Fallen out among themselves, augment his misery.
So that (by their debate) within his flesh there seeded
A harvest of such weeds as never can be weeded.
All creatures that before (as Subjects) did attend-him,
Now, among themselves conspire by all means to offend-him:
In brief, Immortal borne, now mortal he became,
And bound his soul to bide Hells euer-burning flame,
Leaving his woeful heirs (even from their births beginning)
Heirs of his heavy pain, as of his heinous sinning.
So that, in him, the Lord condemned all mankind,
To bear the punishment to his foul sin assigned:
And none had ever escaped, had not the God of grace
(Desiring more to save, then to subvert his race)
Redeemed us by the death of his deer only Son,
And chosen us in him before the World begun:
Forgiving us the fault, and with the fault the fine;
All save this temporal death; of Adams sin the sign.
Now in the horror of those ease-lesse, end-lesse pains,
It may be rightly said that evil ever reigns:
That Is euill's very self; and not this seeming-woe,
Whereof the want on world complains daily so.
Lived we ten thousand years continually tormented*
In all fell tortures strange that ever were invented,
What Is that compared to time, that never shall expire,
Amidth'infernall flames, whose least-afflicting fire*
Exceeds all the pains, all mortal hearts can think?
Sure, all that we endure, till Laethe drops we drink,
Is all but ease to that, or if it be a pain,
It Is in respect of that a very trifle vain.
But, were it a great deal worse, why should we evil name
That which we rather find a medicine for the same?
Health, wealth, security, honor, and ease do make us
Forget our God, and God for that does soon for sake us:
Whereas afflictions are the ready means to moouevs,
To seek our health in him that does so dearly loue-vs.
It Is true indeed (say some) that benefit they bring-vs,
But yet the smart thereof does so extremely wring-vs,
That the evil which they feel that do endure the same,
Makes them esteem it just to give it that for name.
Man's nature, certainly (it cannot be denied)
Is thrall to many throes, while here on earth we bide
In body and in soul: the troubled soul sustaines
A thousand passions strong, the body thousand pains,
And that is the wretched State, the which yer-while I said,
Was justly due to us, when Adam disobay'd.
But, he that is once newborn in Jesus Christ by faith,
Who his assured hope in God sole settled has,
Who does believe that God gives essence unto all;
And all sustaineth still: that nothing does befall
But by his sacred will, and that no strength that strives
To stop his just decrees, can stand, or ever thriueth:
Not only does accept all pains with patience,
The which he takes for due unto his deep offense:
Nor only is content (if such be Gods good pleasure)
To feel a thousand-fold a much more ample measure,
But even delights therein, and void of any fear,
Expects the extremity of all assaults to bear:
Whether almighty God abate their woonted vigor,
Or (that his may not feel their crosses cruel rigor)
Do wholly arm them with new forces for the nonce,
To bear the bitter brunt: or whether both at-once.
And, to approve this true; how many daily drink
Of torments bitter Cup, that never seem to shrink?
Alas, what sharper smart? what more afflicting pains?
What worser grie^e then that, which ceas-lesly sustaines
He that by some mischance, or else by martial thunder,
Unhappily has had some maine bone broke in sunder?
What torment feels not the sore-sicke deepe-diseased?
One while with cruel fit of burning Fever seized:
Another while assailed with Colic and with Stone,
Or, with the cure-lesse Gout, whose rigor yields to none?
Or, thousand other griefs, whose bitter vexing strife
Disturbes continually the quiet of our life?
Yet notwithstanding this, in all this painful anguish,
(Though the most part repyne, and plain, and mourn, and languish,
Murmuring against the Lord, with malcontented voice)
Some praise his clemency, and in his rods rejoice.
How many such (dear Saints) have fell tormenters seen,
To die between their hands, through moody tyrants teen?
So little daunted at their martyrdom and slaughter,
That in the extremity they have expressed laughter?
How many at the stake, nay, in the very flame,
Have sung with cheerful voice, the Almighties prais-ful name?
Yet were they all compact of artirs and of veins,
Of sinews, bones, and flesh: and sensible of pains
(By nature at the least) as much as any other,
For being issued all from one self earthly Mother.
What makes the^ then to find such extreme smart so sweet?
What makes them patiently those deadly pangs to meet?
No doubt it is the Lord, who first of nothing made-vs,
Who with his liberal hand of goodness still does lade-vs,
Some more and other less: and never cease space
From making us to feel the favors of his grace.
Accursed are they (indeed) whom he does all abandon
To do their Lust for Law, and run their life at randon:
Accursed who never taste the sharp-sweet hand of God:
Accursed (ah, most accursed) who never feel his rod.
Such men (by nature borne the bond-slaues unto sin)
Through selfe-corruption, end worse then they did begin:
For, how they longer live, the more by their amiss,
They draw them nearer Hell, and farther-off from bliss.
Such men, within themselves their evils spring contain:
There is no outward thing (as falsely they complain)
Cause of their cureles ill: for good is euerything,
And good can (of it self) to no-man evil bring.
Now, if they could aright these earthly pleasures prize
According to their worth, they would not in such wise,
For lack, or loss of these (so vain and transitory)
Lament so bitterly, nor be so sadly-sorrie.
But, ouer-louing still these outward things unstable,
To rest in true content an hour they are not able,
No, not a moments time, their fear does so assaile-them:
And, if their fear fall true, that their Good-fortune faile-them,
Then swell their sullen hearts with sorrow till they burst,
And then (poor desperate souls) they deem themselves accursed
And so (indeed) they are: but yet they err in this,
In blaming other things, for their own selfe-amisse,
Other indifferent things, that neither make, nor mar,
But to the good, be good; to the evil, evil are.
Is It not great foolishnes, for any to complain,
That something is not don, which does him naught co^strain?
Since, if he use the same, soule-health it hurts not,
Or, if he do not vse*t, it helps not a jot.
But needs must we complain (say some) for we have cause:
Then at your peril be it; for, that which chiefly draws
You thereto, it is in truth your brutenesse in mis-deeming
Things evil, that are good (for sense-contrary seeming)
And, while that in the dark of this foul errors mist,
Your drowsy spirits do droope, alas what marvel is it*
If evil follow you, and if (injurious) still
To others you impute your selfe-ingendred ill?
Happy are they to whom the Lord vouch safeth sight*
To see the lovely beams and life-infusing Light*
Of his sweet sacred Truth; whereby we may perceive
And judge a-rightly, what to love, and what to leave.
Such men within their souls, their goods have wholly placed,
Such goods, as never fire can either burn or waste:
Nor any Thief can steal, nor Pyrate make his pray,
Nor usury consume, nor Tyrant take away;
Nor times all-gnawing tooth can fret away, nor finish,
Nor any accident of sad mischance diminish.
For, it is built on God, a Rock that ever stands:
Not on the vanities of these inconstant sands,
Which are more mutable then wind, and more unstable,
And day by day do make so many miserable.
O, to what sweet content, to what high joys aspires
He that in God alone can limit his desires!
He that in him alone his hopes can wholly rest,
He that for only end, waits for the wages blessed,
Wherewith he promises for ever (sans respect
Of their selfe-meriting) to guerdon his Elect?
What is it can bereave the wealth of such a man?
What is it that disturb his perfect pleasures can?
What is it can supplant his honors and degrees?
Since all his treasures, his delights, his dignities
Are all laid up in Heaven, where it were all in vain
For all the sons of earth to war with might and maine.
No doubt (will some man say) each Christian does aspire
(After their bodies death) to those dear treasures higher,
That are reserved in Heaven, whereof the sweet possession
Fears not the violence of all the worlds oppression:
But, while that here below this frail flesh-burthen ties-him,
But the bare hope he has: which how can it suffice-him
Against the sharp assaults of passions infinite,
Whose glad-sad cross conflicts afflict him day and night?
Needs must I grant (indeed) that that same perfect joy
We cannot perfitly upon this earth enjoy:
But, that that Hope alone does not sufficiently
Bless his life where it lives (for my part) I deny.
Some do not fear (we see) to spend their stock and store,
To undertake the task of many travails sore,
To hazard limbs, and lives in service of some Lord;
Depending often upon his foole-fat-feeding word;
Or waiting else (perhaps) without all other hold,
Until it please himself his franknes to unfold:
Not reaking all their pain, they are so inly pleased
With hoped benefit, whereof they are not seaz'd?
And, shall the assured hope of euer-blisses then,
For which we have the word, not of vain mortal men,
That teach their tongues to lie; but of the highest God,
The God of truth, truth's self, where truth has still abode:
Shall that (I say) not serve to settle our faint hearts,
Against (I will not say) like dangers and like smarts:
But against these petty griefs, that now and then do pain-vs,
No more like those then heaven near earth that does sustain-vs?
Ah, shall we then despise all trouble and vexation,
Supported by a prop of doubtful expectation?
And, while for earthly things we can endure all this,
Shall we not do as much for an immortal bliss?
Indeed not of our selves: for, selfly naught we can,
But God (when pleases him) does give this strength to man,
Whereby he stands stout; even like a mighty rock
Amid the mounting waves when Eole does unlock
Stern Austers stormy gate, making the waters wrestle
And rush with wrathful rage against the sturdie castle,
While it (for all the force of their fell fury shown)
Is not so much as moved, and much less overthrown.
So fares such a man: for, if from high degree,
He suddenly do slide to live contemnedly
With the vile vulgar sort: that cannot make him waver:
For, well he is assured that Gods high holy favor
Depends not on the pomp* nor vaine-proud state and port,
That for the grace of Kings adornes the courtly sort.
If he be kept in bands, thr^l to the tyrannies
And extreame-cruell laws of ruthless enemies,
Both void of help and hope, and of all likelihood
Of being ever freed from their hands thirsting-blood;
Inspight of them, he knows that one day he shall die,
And then he shall enjoy an endless Liberty.
If he be forced to fly from his dear country-clime,
In exile to expire the remnant of his time,
He does suppose the World to be a Country common,
From whence, no tyranny (till death) can banish no-man.
If that he must forsake his Parents and his Kin,
And those whose amity he most delights in:
He knows, that where he finds a man, he finds a Kins-man,
For, all mankind is come from oneselfe Father (sinnes-man).
If (being spoiled of wealth, and wanton-pampering plenty)
He find upon his board two dishes scant of twenty,
And to his back one coat to keep the cold away,
Whereas he had before, a new for every day:
He learneth of Saint Paul, who bids us be content
With food and furniture to this life competent:
Since nothing (as says Job) into this world we brought,
Nor with us when we die can we hence carry ought.
If he be passing poor, and in exceeding glack
Of every needful thing for belly and for back,
He learneth of the Son, that God the Father heedeth
To give to every one (in time) the thing he needs:
And that the Fowls of Heaven, and Cattle small and great,
Do neither sow nor reap, yet find they what to eat:
Yea, that the Lillies fair which grow among the grass,
Do neither spin nor work, and yet their garments pass
(For color and for cost, for Art and ornament)
The glorious Salmon's rich robes of Parliament.
If so, that he be sick, or wounded; in the arm,
In body, back, or breast, or such like kind of harm:
If in extremity of angry pain and anguish,
Enfeebled still by fits, he bedridden lie and languish:
If all the miseries that ever martyred man,
At once on every side afflict him all they can:
The more that he endures, the more his comforts grow,
Since so his wretchedness he sooner comes to know;
That from worlds vanities he may himself advance,
Which hold all those from heaven, that still delight that dance:
He fears not those at all that with their utmost might,
Having the body slain, can do no farther spite:
But only him that with ten thousand deaths can kill
The soul and body both; for ever if he will:
He knows it is their lot that seek to please their God
To be afflicted still with persecutions rod:
So that, what ever cross, how ever sharp assaile-him,
His constant harts-content and comfort cannot faile-him.
But, he must die (say you): alas can that dismay?
Where is the Labourer that (having wrought all day
Amid the burning heat, with weariness oppresl)
Complains that night is come when he shall go to rest?
The Merchant that returns from some far for rain Lands,
Escaping dreadful rocks, and dangerous shelfs and sands,
When as he sees his ship her home-hauen enter safe,
Will he repine at God, and (as offended) chafe
For being brought too soon home to his native soil,
Free from all perils sad that threaten Saylours spoil?
He knows, from thousand deaths that this one death does lose him,
That in heavens euer-ioyes, he ever may repose-him:
That he must bring his Bark into this Creek, before
In the everlasting Land he can set foot a-shoare:
That he can never come to in-corruption,
Unless that first his flesh do feel corruption:
So that, all rapt with joy, having his help so ready,
This shipwreck he escapes, as on a rock most steddie.
But, more (perhaps) then death the kind of death dismaieth,
Which serves him for a bridge that him to heaven co^uaieth.
Whether he end his days by natural disease:
Or in a boisterous storm do perish on the Seas:
Or, by the bloody hands of armed foes be slain:
Or by mischance a stone fall down, and dash his brain:
Or by the murdering ball of newfound earthly thunder,
By day, or else by night his bones be pasht a-sunder;
Or burned at a stake; or bitterly tormented
By cruel slaughter-men, in tortures new-inuented.
Alas, alas, for that, much-lesse then least he cares:
For, as a man fallen down into a Pit, he fares;
Who, if he may be drawn up from the noisome place,
Where Adders, Toades, and Snakes crawle over feet and face,
Respects not, whether that ye use a silken skaine,
Hemp-rope, or chain of gold, so he get up again:
Even so, so he may come to his desired bliss,
The manner and the means to him in different is:
As for the differing pain (if any him do torture)
If it be violent, he knows it is the shorter:
But, be it never so long, long sure it cannot last
To us, whose Post-like life is all so quickly past.
Now, such a man, in whom such firm contents do hyue,
Who can deny to be the happiest man alive?
And who so impudent, that dares now profess
That this worlds fained sweet (whose unfeigned bitterness
Brings (to this very life) full many torments fell,
And after dingeth down to the endless pain of Hell)
Should be preferred before these seeming-sowrs, that make us
Taste many true-sweet sweets yer this dead life forsake us,
And after, lift us up to that same blessed joy,
That evermore shall last, exempt from all annoy.
So few there will be found (as I suppose) so deeming,
As many which (more feared with these ills falsly-seeming,
Than inlie falne-in-loue with Heauen-ioyes excellence)
Approouing this estate, flye't as the pestilence.
And yet, in this estate is found felicity
(As far forth as it may, amid the vanity
Of this frail fading world, where each thing hourly changes):
For, never from itself true happiness estranges:
It never does decay, it never does decrease,
Inspight of angry War, it ever lives in peace:
Maugre poor want, it has ten thousand kinds of wealth:
Amid infirmities it has continual health:
Inuiron'd round with woe, it does rejoice and sing:
Deprived of dignities, it is greater than a King:
It sits secure and safe, free from hart-pining fears:
For, ever with it self it all dear treasures bears.
Not needing any aid of men-of-armes to watch them,
Nor fearing fraud, nor force of any foe to catch-them.
Whereas, we daily see so many men, whose mind
To transitory trash of world-wealth is inclinde,
In their abundance beg, and in their plenty poor
(For who has had so much, that has not wished more?)
No treasures can suffice the gulf of their desire,
Yea, make them Emperors, yet will they more aspire:
Peace cannot pacify the fell rebellious broyle
That in their troubled soul does ever burn and boil.
For every short content of any false delight,
A thousand bitter throws torment them day and night.
All their estate does stand abroad in hands of Strangers:
Therefore, the more their wealth, the more their daily dangers,
The more their miseries, because the more they need
Much strength and many men unto their hoords to heed:
Dreading (with cause) least craft and cruelty, or either
Bereave them of their bliss, and treasure both together.
Needs must we then confess, that in adversity
There is more happiness then in prosperity;
Since that the mind of man so soon it self betrays
Unto the guilefull snares that worldly pleasure lays,
Which make us at the last headlong to Hell to run:
All which, adversity does make us safely shun.
But here it may be asked, if pleasure, state, and store
Plunging us in the Pit of vices more and more)
Be subject so to make us more and more accursed,
Must we esteem that grief (which sense esteems worst)
More fit to better us, and bring us unto bliss,
Then those whose smarting sting is not so strong as this?
Sure, since that in ourselves our cause original
Of bliss and bale we hide, it matters not at all:
For, still the faithful man one and the same remains,
Whether the grief be great or little he sustains:
Since, how so e're it be, he takes occasion thence,
To seek in God alone, his comfort and defense.
But for because our soul (the while she does consort
With this gross fleshly lump) cannot, but in some sort
Suffer as sensible, yea, oftentimes so far,
That her best functions all, less apt and able are,
Than else at other times: I do suppose the proof
Of one, then other ill, auailes more in behoof.
That this is so, we see, a sick-man often to find
Such joyful quietness, and comfort in his mind;
That he esteems himself the best content a-liue:
But yet the sharp disease (which does his health deprive)
Withholds in some sort his senses and his wit,
That freely other-where he cannot use them fit.
And so it fares with him, that (through-resolued well)
Endures the cruel strains of any torture fell.
Now, for the banished man, the changing of his dwelling
Never disturbes his joy. And he whose wealth excelling
Turns in a trice to want, by whatsoever chance,
His courage never shrinks, nor yet his countenance.
So that in their content, all four are all a-like,
A-like rejoicing all in their afflictions eke:
A-like contemning all worlds pompous vanities:
But, the two last have odds in their extremities;
In that, without impeach, they may apply their mind
To many goodly things, wherein great joy they find
(I mean when each distress offends a man alone,
Not when he is assailed at once of every one.)
Yet, perill's quickly past, danger endures not,
Exile so easy grows that it is soon forgot,
The greatest loss that is we mind not many hours:
For, thousand accidents distract this soul of ours,
Which cannot in such sort the senses still restrain,
But that they will go feed on many objects vain;
Whereby at vn-awares she oftentimes, surprised,
Is ouer-reacht by those, whose rigor she despised:
And so, the pleasant taste she does untimely miss,
Wherewith affliction sweet does season here her bliss.
So that, some other State (wherein our soul, less fed
With sundry objects vain, shall be more settled)
May rightly be preferred to these which make her stay,
And stumble oftentimes, unto her own decay.
And therefore, I maintain, close Prison to be best,
Of all afflictions that may a man molest.
Considering, all defects to other crosses common,
In this are seldom found, and almost, felt of no man.
For Prison is a place where God sequesters men,
Far from the vile prospect of vanities terrene,
To make them thence with-drawe their hearts, and to confess
That in his grace alone consists their happiness.
It is a learned School, where God himself reads clearly
True wisedoms perfect rules, to those he loves deerly.
There, the understanding (free, amid the many chains,
That bind the body fast) finds out a thousand means,
To learn another day to be more apt and able
(According to our place) for uses serviceable,
To profit publike-weal: for evermore we ought
(In seeking self-gain) see that common good be sought.
Knowledge is only learned by long exercitation:
For which, what fitter mean then such a sequestration,
Where each-man vndisturb'd, through diligence may grow
According to the gifts that gracious Heavens bestow:
One, in ability to rule a lawful State,
The virtuous to advance, and vicious to abate:
Another, from the Tomb to fetch Antiquity:
Another to discern true Truth from Sophistry,
Another (by the feats of elder men at Arms)
To frame wise Stratagems for woeful wars alarmes,
For, Soldiers oftentimes may more experience get
By reading, then they can where Camp and Camp is met)
And (briefly to conclude, some, gravely to advise,
Some, bold to execute, as each man's calling lies:
But most of all, to search within the sacred Writ,
The secret mysteries to man's salvation fit.
A world of vanities, that do distract us here,
During our Liberty; in Durance, com not near:
The wall that lets our legs from walking out of door,
Bounding us round about within a narrow floor,
Does guard us from the gall which Satan (spring of spite)
Mingles among the sweet of this vain worlds delight.
If he be happier man that lives free from foes,
Then he whom angry troops of enemies in close:
Much more the Prisoner then of his high bliss may boast,
For being so far off from such a hugie host
Of hateful foes so fierce in malice and in might,
Himself so faint and weak, and so unfit to fight:
For he, and we (God wot) in steed of standing to-it
(How-euer in a vein, we vaunt that we will do-it)
When It comes to the brunt we cannot brook the field,
But either fly like Hares, or else like cowards yield.
The sundry objects fond, which make us soon forget
Each other chastisement, in this do never let.
For turn we where we list, and look which way we will,
At all times to our sight one thing is offered still:
Whether on pauement, roof, or wall, we cast our eye,
Always of our estate an Image we descry,
And so it also fares with our newes-greedy ear,
One very sound resounds about us every where:
Where-euer harken we, we hear of naught but foes,
Our Keepers commonly are not too-kinde (God knows)
By the least noise that is, continually they tell
In what estate we stand, and in what house we dwell.
So that, incessantly our hearts are lift on high:
Som-times to praise the Lord for his benignity,
Who does not punish us after our foul offense,
Though by a thousand sins we daily him incense:
Som-times to magnify his admirable might,
Which has our feeble hearts with such great force be light,
That we, in steed of grief, or grudging at the pains
Of sharpest chastisements, whereof the world complains,
Leaving this loathed Earth, we mount the bighest place,
Where (through true faith) we taste his honey-sweeter grace:
Som-times to give him thanks for all the wealth exceeding,
Which from his liberal hand we have to help our needing:
And to be short, sans cease to meditate on all
The countles benefits that from his goodness fall,
Not suffering any hour to pass away for naught
Without exalting him, in deed, or word, or thought.
Yet, does the world esteem this, a most hard estate,
And him that feels the same, it counts un fortunate:
But I would gladly see some other state, wherein
(With such commodity) so much content is seen;
Wherein less hinderance, and less incomberance lies,
To make men miss the path unto perfections prise.
Sure sir (will some man say) you set a good face on-it,
One might at length convert, commenting so vpon-it,
The cruell'st Prisonhouse into a Mansion fair,
Where 'twere not hard to live content, and void of care:
You take your Prisoner for a practiue man of Art,
But such as those God knows you find the fewest part:
You fain him to be friend to solitude and quiet,
But the most part are prone to revel and to riot:
One must be free from noise that means to study well:
Whereof, who can be sure in such a servile Hell?
Besides, he must have Books, and Paper, Pen, and Ink,
All which in Prisoners hands are seldom left I think;
So that, you do not fain your gail so good and gainful,
As to find out the same is difficult and painful.
I answer in a word (if any so shall wrangle)
I do not bound all bliss within so straight an Angle:
I say, great happiness and hart-reviuing joy
Follows the afflicted sort in every sharp annoy:
But that there is no cross that does so much ^uail,
To make us fit to help our neighbor, as the gail,
Wherein the God of grace at his good pleasure gives
Means to effect the same, unto the least that lives.
But be it so, in bands, that nothing learn we can,
It Is to be learned enough, to be an honestman:
And this is the only School, wherein the Arch-maisterteacheth,
Himself, by secret means, rules that the rudest reaches.
The advise of such a one more profit does impart,
Then of the wicked sort with all their curious Art.
Concerning solitude, although that commonly
Our nature be inclined unto the contrary:
There, the assistant grace of God we chiefly find,
Who changing of our place does also change our mind.
For being free from noise, and for obtaining tools
To help our knowledge with, as in all other Shools:
God ever cares for those that fear his name for love:
And, if that any such, such inconvenience prove,
If any money need, or else (through ample distance)
Be destitute of friends, he gets them (for assistance)
The favor of their foes, whose hearts he handles so
(How ever they intend his childrens overthrow)
That his, of what they need have evermore enough,
According as he knows to be to their behoof.
Now say that we consent (say some) that this is true:
But what, if somewhat worse then all this worst ensue?
What, if he be enforced his Country to forsake?
What, if continual fits his sickly body shake?
What, if he lose at once his wealth and reputation?
Repleat on every side with every sharp vexation?
Can he still keep his joy, and can he still retain
Such means to profit still, for all his grief and pain?
Concerning his content, it is always all a-like,
Whether that every grief particularly strike,
Or, whether all at once he feel their vt most anger:
And if he be surprised with so extreme a languor
That (as I said before) the spirit it in force
(Through suffering of the smart that does afflict the corpse)
To leave his Offices so that he cannot write
Nor read, nor meditate, nor study, nor indight;
It is so quickly past, that in comparison,
Regarding so great good, it is not to think upon.
For by a mighty grief, our life is quickly ended,
Or else, by remedy itself is soon amended:
And, if it be but mean, then is it born the better,
And so unto the soul it is not any letter.
Besides, we must conceive, our spirit (as oppressed
With fainting wearines) sometimes desires rest,
To gather strength again, during which needful pawse
We are not to be blamed since need the same does cause:
So, that the time that is lost while such sharp pangs do pain,
May be supposed a time of taking breath again.
In prison (to conclude) a man at once may t^^e
All manner of extremes of earthly misery:
In which respect (perhaps) the worsesom deem of it,
Being (as 'twere) the Butt that all men strive to hit;
But, I esteem the same the perfecter for that:
For, if one cross alone can make us eleuate
Our groueling earth-desires from cogitations base,
To have recourse to God, and to implore his grace;
Seeking in him alone our perfect joy and bliss:
Much more shall many griefs at once, accomplish this.
For many can do more then one (without respect)
And still, the greater cause, the greater the effect.
Indeed (say other-som) these reasons have some reason:
But, then whence comes it, that so many men in Prison
With hundred thousand pains, pincht and oppressed sore;
In steed of bettering there, wax worser then before:
In steed of sweet content, do still complain and cry;
In steed of learning more, lose former industry?
Though (in appearance great) your sayings seem but just,
Yet plain experience (sure) we think is best to trust.
That hidden virtue ^are, that so great good atchiues,
Lies in the Prisoners heart, not in his heavy Gyues;
The good grow better there, the bad become the wurse:
For, by their sin they turn Gods blessing into curse.
And that is the cause the most are mal-content and sad:
Since ever more the good are fewer then the bad.
But, wherefore does not God to all vouchsafe this grace?
Proud earthworms, pawse we there: let us fear before his face,
Admiring humbly all his holy Judgments high,
Exceeding all too far our weak capacity.
The Potters vessel vile, does us our lesson show,
Which argues not with him why he has made it so:
Much less may we contend, but rather rest content
With that which God has given. He is omnipotent,
All gracious, and all good, most just, and perfect wise:
On some, he poures a Sea of his benignities,
On some, a shallow Brook, on other some, a Flood:
Giving to some, a small; to some, a greater Good:
As, from eternity has pleased the eternal Spirit
To love men more or less, without respect of merit.
For my part, should I live ten Nesto^s years to pass,
Had I a hundred tongues more smooth then Tully's was,
Had I a voice of steel, and had I brazen sides,
And learning more then all the Helyconian guides;
Yet were I all too-weak to tell the many graces
That in ten thousand sorts, and in ten thousand places,
Ten hundred thousand times he has vouchsafed me
(Not for my merits sake, but for his mercy free):
But yet, among all the goods that of his liberal bounty
I have received so often, none to compare accoumpt-I
With this close prisonment, wherein he does with-drawe-me
Far from the wanton world, and to himself does draw-me.
I posted on apace to ruin and perdition,
When by this sharp-sweet Pil, my cunning kind Physician
Did purge (maugre my will) the poysony humor fell
Where with my sin-sick hartal^oady began to sivell.
I look^ for nothing less then for these miseries
And pains that I have provid: the worlds vain vanities
Had so seduc'tany soul with baits of sugared bane,
That it was death to me, from pleasure to be taken:
But (crossing my request) God (for my profit) gave
Me quite the contrary to that which I did crave
So that, my body barring from a freedom small,
He set my soul at large, which unto sin was thrall.
Wounding with musket shot my feeble arm, he cured
The festring sores of sin, the which my soul endured:
Tripping me from the top of some mean dignity,
Which drew me vpto climb the Mount of vanity,
He raised me from the depth of vices darksom Cell,
The which incessantly did ding me down to Hell:
Easing me (to conclude) of all the grief and care,
Wherewith these false delights forever sauced are,
He made me find and feel (amid my most annoyes)
A thousand true contents, and thousand perfect joys.
But some (perhaps) amazed, will muse what kind of pleasure
Here I can take, and how I pass my time and leisure:
For, in foul idleness to spend so large a time,
It cannot be denied to be a grievous crime.
First, in the morning, when the spirit is fresh and fit,
I suck the honey sweet from forth the sacred Writ,
Wherein (by faith) we taste that true celestial bread,
Whence our immortal souls are ever only ^ed:
Then, search I out the sawes of other sage Divines
(The best here to be had) among whose humainlines,
Supported by the grace of Gods especial power,
I leave the thorn behind, and pluck the healthsom flower.
Sometimes, I do admire, in books of Heathen men,
Graue-sayings savoring more a sacred Christian pen,
Than many of our age, whose bold unlearned pride
Thinking to honor God, has erred on every side:
Sometimes when I observe in every ancient story,
Such virtues presidents, trim patterns of true glory;
I woefully bewail our wretched wicked days,
Where virtue is despised, and vice has all the praise.
Often I lament to see so many noble Wits
(Neglecting Gods high praise, that best their learning fits)
To sing of naught but lies, and loves, and wanton Theames,
False sooth-sin flatteries, and idle Fairie dreams.
Then, turning toward those, that filled with holier flame,
For only object choose the Eternalls sacred name:
These chiefly I admire, whose honorable brows
Disdain the fained crown of fading Laurel boughs:
Then full-gorg'd with the sweets of such a dainty feast
(Pricked forward with desire to imitate the best)
Oft-times I exercise this Art-les Muse of mine
To sing in holy Verse some argument divine.
One while to praise my God for all received good:
Another while to beg, that in his dear Sons blood
My black sins he will wash, and that he will not weigh
At his high Justice beam, how I have gone a-stray.
Sometimes, these wretched times to pity and deplore,
Wherein the wicked ones do flourish more and more.
Sometime to wail the State of sad distressed Sion
Imploring to her aid the Tribe of Judah's Lion.
If any other Theme at any time I take,
Yet never does my Verse the settled bounds forsake
That Verity prescribes, nor now no more disguise
The ugly face of sin with mask of painted lies.
And though that (heretofore) I also in my time
Have writ Loves vanities, in loose and wanton r^me:
'Twas as a whet-stone that, whereon I whet my style,
Yer it were ably-apt ought grauer to compile:
Yet I repent thereof: for, we must never tend
To bring by evil means a good intent to end.
When as my weary spirits some relaxation ask,
To recreate the same, I take some other task:
One while upon the Lute, my nimbleioints I plie,
Then on the Virginalls: to whose sweet harmony
Marrying my simple voice, in solemn Tunes I sing
Some Psalm or holy Song, unto the heavenly King*
So that, the idlest hour of all the time that flies
So fast, is never free from some good exercise:
Where in I joy as much, as ever I have done,
In the most choice delights found underneath the Sun.
But, you can never walk, nor go to take the air,
Nor once look out of door, be weather never so fair:
But there in solitude you lead your life alone,
Bard from the fellowship of (almost) every one:
Which doubtless (at the last) must grieve you needs I think.
A man that never thirsts has never need of drink:
So, though I be bereft these other things you speak of,
I miss nor mind them not, as things I never reake of.
For, I have schooled my heart since my captivity,
To wish for nothing else, but what is granted me:
And, what is granted me, contents me passing well.
In each condition does some contentment dwell:
But men of differing states have difference in delights,
What pleases common eyes, that irketh Princes sights,
What rashlings do delight, that sober men despise,
What fools take pleasure in, does but offend the wise,
What prosperous people loath, afflicted folk will love,
And what the free abhor, that prisoners will approve:
But all have equally indifferent power to make
Them equally content, that can them rightly take:
For, whosoever presently himself can rightly bear,
Has neither passed ill, nor future ill to fear:
The one, which is now no more, ought now no more affrayvs.
The other, which is not yet, as little can dismay-vs.
For, what no essence has, that also has no might,
And that which has no power, can do a man no spite:
Besides, since that our life is but a pilgrimage
Through which we daily pass to the heavenly heritage:
Although it seem to thee that these my bands do let me,
Yet haste I to the goal the which my God has set me,
As fast as thou that runst thy self so out of breath
In poasting night and day, by dales and hills and heath.
If thou have open fields, and I be prisoner;
T'mporteth me no more, then to the mariner
Whether he go to sea shipped in some spacious arc,
Or else (at lesser scope) aboard some lesser bark.
Nay, here the least is best, since this vast Ocean wide
Whereon we daily sail, a thousand rocks does hide,
Against which the greater ships are castaway full often;
While small boats (for the most) float over, safe, aloft.
Then may I well conclude with reason and assurance
That there is no better state then to be kept in durance.
A sweeter kind of life I never proved then there:
Nor was I ever touched with lesser grief and c^re:
If that I care at all, it is for others cause,
And for the miseries this times corruption draws.
But, being well a^^ur'd that nothing here ^^^^deth
Against Gods ordinance and will that all things guides:
And knowing him to be good, just, and most of might,
I gladly yield myself to the order he has ^ight.
For he it is, that now makes me accept so^^ll
And like of this estate which others hate as hell:
He'tis, that heretofore vouchsaf't me like relief,
When as I was oppressed with a more grievous grief:
He'tis from whom I hope in time to-come no less,
Although a hundred fold were doubled my distress.
Yea, he it is that makes me profit every day,
And also so content in this estate to stay,
That of my liberty I am not now so feign
To think by liberty a happier life to gain:
For, I were well content no more from hence to go,
If I might profit most my friends and country so.
Now here I humbly pray (expecting such an end)
The Lord still toward me his favor to extend,
And that he will vouchs^^e still to allot like grace,
To all that for like cause are handled in like case.
FINIS.
OF THE WORK, AVTHOR, AND TRANSLATOR.
LOheer, a MONVMENT admired of all
That weigh the compass, weight, and height of It;
O'retopping E^uie's clouds, and ever shall,
Since built by deepest Art, and highest Wit.
The BAS^ that bears it, is the WORD that stands
True GROUND of highest glory, truth, and grace:
The BVILDING reared by two rare Heads and Hands
(Divinely holp) to glorify that BASE.
Here French and English, ioyn in friendly fight
(On even Ground) to prove their utmost power;
Who show such equal Skill, and equal Might,
That hard it is to say who is Conqueror.
But, English bound to foot it like the French,
And offer naught, but what shall like her foe,
It is as glorious seld to take a Wrench,
As, being free, to give an Overthrowe.
If French to English were so strictly bound,
It would but passing lamely strive with it;
And soon be forc'^ to lose both grace and ground,
Although they straue with equal Skill and Wit.
Besides, all Prose is easier to translate
Than Uerse; and easier low, than lofty Lines:
Then, these LINES, reaching to the top of STATE,
Are hard'st of all; yet none of all declines.
O fair Translation then, with smoothed face,
Go forth t'allure TIMES Turns to turn Thee over:
So shall they in thy folds unfold thy grace;
And, grace thee with Fames glory, more and more.
If O^id. Metamor.
HE, that churn'd the cream of Poetry,
To honied Butter, that the Muses feeds,
Divined truly, it should never die;
Then, what shall This, that far the same exceeds?
He labored Lines, which though they do endure
All turns of Time, yet was their Stuf profane:
But, These are drawn of STVF more heavenly-pure,
That most shall shine; when Those are in the wane.
He, though his Brains (profanely) were divine,
And glorious Monuments of Art composed,
Was yet exiled for many a looser Line,
That made them wantons, chastely else disposed:
But, Thou ( clear BARTAS, his dear SYLVESTER,
Whose Lines do lead to VERTVES only gain,
And with sweet Poesies strew'st the way to Her)
How should the World remunerate thy pain?
And, if from Hearts Abundance Tongues do speak;
And what we most affect, we most do mind:
It argues, thou this Argument did seek;
Since, in thy Soul before, thou did it find.
So, BARTAS was but Midwife to thy Muse,
With greater ease to utter her Conceits;
For whose dear birth, thou did all ease refuse,
Worlds-weal, and (being a Merchant) thy Receipts.
This pain, so pleased thy laboring Thoughts, that thou*
Forsook'st the Sea, and took'st thee to the Soil;
Where (from thy royal Trade) thou fell'st to Plow*
Arts furrows with thy Pen, that yield but toil.
This stole thee from thy self, thy self to find
In sacred Raptures on the Muses Hill:
And, went out of thy Body with thy Mind,
More freely so, to use thy Wit and Will.
And (O!) how hapless had we Bri^tans been,
(Since here is stored such sweet Soul- rauishments)
Had thou not made them to us clearly seen:
Who give thee for it praising- Discontents.
If so great Art and Grace, find naught but Fame
Of famous Men for grace; the Press shall be
Pressed but for Vices Service (Sourse of Shame).
So, Times to come, in Print our shame shall see.
But O* be it far from this so famous Isle
For Arms and Learning, either to neglect;
Sit it does grace and glory quite exile;
And is the cause of many a bad effect.
O terren Gods, as ye to State aspire
Lift Learning up with you; especially
If matched with Wisdom, and divine desire:
So shall yetwice be like the DEITY!
And, weigh what power the PENS of such possess
(Of such; for others will but gild your Crimes)
Their PENS eternize can your worthiness,
And make ye glorious past succeeding Times.
But you do justly to neglect and scorn
The cursed crew, that do the Muse abuse:
For, they your praises to dispraises turn;
As Vice, in praising VERTVES grace, does use.
Their wine-driuen Brains, inuolv'd in Follies Cloud,
Fly here, and there, (and where not?) with a trice;
And, though both Beggars base, yet passing proud;
Constant in nothing but in constant Vice.
Making loose lines (forsooth) their Scala Coeli;
A Tavern for a Temple to adore
Their only god, their guts, their beastly Belly;
To whom they offer all their slender Store.
The Lauds of such, are odious like their Lives)
They ( Pitch) pollute what-ere they do but touch;
Whose glory to the fowlest shame arrives:
Then, well you fence your fame to keep off such*
But they whose lives, and lauds, and lines are SOVRCE
Of Moral virtue, running by each stone
(Men High, and Hard; that let them in their Course)
To Seas of glory, like clear Helicon;
O! these ye should support, and still receive
Into the Ocean of your bound-less love:
For, these (like truest Friends) will take, and give
No more but what true Virtue shall approve.
If these should pine away, through your neglect,
Your memories shall die, or live with shame;
Since such a Muse is the chief Architect,
To rear, from Earth to Heaven, a lasting NAME.
Achilles fame, with him, had been interred,
Had HOMER'S lines notty'd it to the Stars;
And, of Aeneas we had never heard,
Had Virgils STRAINS not been his Trumpetters.
One of the NINE had been our Warwick's GVY,
(The NINE, whose worth all Times so much commend;
And so disrankt great BVLLENS GODFEREY)
Had he but had a TASSO for his friend.
LAVRA had nere so greenly grown above
Her Peers, as now she does, to aftertimes,
Had she not had a PETRARCH to her Love;
Which made her mount, with N^TCTAR dropping Rimes.
No, no: ye cannot but out-liue your Eame,
If yev phold not FAME'S best Notaries:
If these yescorn, your glory is but game;
For, when ye dye, in game your glory dies.
And, though blessed PHACE has turned our Spears, to Spades,
Let it not turn our Pens to Ploughes, or worse;
By Learning some should live, as some by Trades,
In blessed STATES, that would incur no curse.
Where Virtue is not raised, and Vice suppressed,
There all to Vice will run; and so to wrack:
For, then the worst shall Lord it ore the best;
And where that is, all goes to utter sack.
Reward and Punishment (like Arms of Steel)
Do still uphold each KING upholding STATE:
For, neither wants, but it begins to reel;
But, both employed, stands sure in spite of Hate.
Then may thy HOPES (wingd by thy virtuous Muse,
Dear Syluester) expect some cherishment,
In this blessed State, that still those Arms will use,
To stay her Grace, and grace her Government:
But, if thy pains acquire but pure renown,
Thou art Christ's Image; crossed, for Glories crown.
Beneficium dando accipit, qui digno dedit.
The unfeigned lover of thine Art, honesty, and virtue, JOHN DAVIES of Hereford.

FINIS.
A brief Index, explayning most of the hardest words scattered through this
whole Work, for ease of such as are least exercised in these kind of readings.
A
A Bysse a gulf or bottomless pit. Abderian and Abderite, Democritus, the
laughing Philosopher of Abdera, a city in Thracia. Aben-Roes, a learned
Philosopher of Corduba, sprung from Arabian parents. Abidus, Leanders Town.
Academian Shades, Platos School. Aceberon, a river in Hell. Acconite, Libbards
(or Wolfes) bane. Achilles, the most valiant captain of the Myrmidons. Adonis,
a most beautiful young man, beloved of Venus. Adrian, Sea, the gulf of Uenice.
Adriatike Sea, the gulf of Uenice. Aeson, the father of Iaso made young again
by the skill of Medea. Aeth^riall, heavenly. Aes^ulapius, an excellent
Physician, father of Apollo. Africa, the South-quarter of the World. Ajax
Shield, a proverb, for asure defense. Aiguescald, a bath in Gasconie. Alarbies,
and Alarbians, wild and vpland Arabian thieves. Albion, England, the I Will of
great Britain. Alcest^, the most chaste and loving wife of admetus, that gave
her own life to save her husbands. Alcides, Hercules: Alcides spires Hercules
Pillars: Alcides grief, the falling Sickness. Alcmaena, the mother of Hercules.
Alcaron, the Turks Law, and Religion. Aleband, a City in Caria, of old
famous for the best Bowe-strings. Alecto, look Furies. Alexanders Altars, were
at the foot of the Ryphean Mountains. Almic^^th^rats, and Almadarats, Arabian
names of Circles which are imagined to pass through every degree of the
Meridian, Parallel to the Horizon up to the Zenith. Alhidade, a Rule on the
back of the Astrelabe to measure heights, breadths and depths. Amafrosse,
gutta serena a disease in the sinnewes of the Sight. Amalthean Horn, plenty of
all things. Amblygone, a flat Triangle. Ambrosia, the Gods meat. American, the
French disease brought first from the Indies to Naples, from thence to France,
etc. Amia, a fish like a Tunny, found in the Seaneere Constantinople.
Amphitrite, the Sea. Amphisbaena, a Serpenthauing a head at both ends. Amphion,
the author of Harmony and builder of Thaebes. Amyclean Harp, Arion, the
Lesbian Harper. Amyot, a learned Frenchman, translator of Plutarke, and other
Greek Authors. Ancossa, a Bath in Gasconie: Andromeda, the Wife of Perse^is,
(with her husband, Father and Mother) turned into a Star. Androdus, a Roman
slave gratefully requited of a Lion. Anorexia a queasinesse of stomach.
Antheus, Antenors son, beloved and unwillingly slain by Paris. M. Anthony,
competitor with Octauius and Lepidus for the Roman Empire. Antiperistasis,
encounter of contraries, or contrarie-circumstance. Antipodes, those people
that dwell directly vndervs. Antartike, Southern. Aonian band, the Muses.
Apelles, an excellent Painter. Apiumrisus, a kind of Crowfoote that killes men
with laughing. Appi^n way, one of the broadest ways in Rome. Apollo, the
Sun* the God of Music and Physic. Apoplexy, a kind of dead palsy.
Apog^, the point farthest from the Center of the earth. Arabians, people of
Asia, inhabiting between Iud^a and Egypt, rich in aromatical spices and sweet
Odors. Arcadian scoute, Mercury. Arcenal, an Armorie or storehouse. Archelaus,
a king much praised by Plutarch and others for wisdom and temperance, and for
delight in husbandry. Archimedes a famous Mathematician of Syracusa. Architas,
a noble Philosopher of Tarentum. Arion, a famous Harper and lyrike poet, born
at Methymna in the I Will of Lesbos. Arne, a River in Italy. Arcenik, or pine*
supposed okar Artemisia, Queen of Caria, wife of Mausolus. Artemisia^ stem,
mugg-woorte. Armorik, Britain in France. Armados, Spanish Armies, or great
ships of War. Artik* Northre^, or of the north Aristotle, the most famous
Philosopher of Stagyra. Asia, a third part of the world, in former times most
famous for Learning and Religion; but now for the most part miserably yoaked
under the Turks tyranny. Asylum, a refuge or defense. Assure, one of the Sone
of S^^^: also the country of Assyria. Astaroth, an Idol of the Philistines.
Astraea, Justice. Astrelabe, an instrument to gather the motion of the Sta^^.
Ast^m^, short windednesse. Attaius, a wealthy King of Pergamus, delighted in
the country life. Atlantik Sea, is the Mediterranean, or a part thereof. Atlas,
a King skillful in Astronomy, therefore fained to bear up Heaven, it is also a
mountain in Barbary. Athenian Sage, Socrates. Attick Muse, Xenophon. Atheists,
those that acknowledge no God, infidels. Aurora, the morning. Auster, the South
wind. Auernus, Hell. Auicen, a learned Philosopher and Physician, borne at
Seuil, of Arabian stock. Aziminths, great Circles meeting in the Zenith, or
vertical Point. Anian, a Straight, or narrow Sea between Asia and America, as
yet little discovered. Aglaia, look Graces. A^tna, a burning Mountain in
Sicilia. Asphalti^, Mare mortnu^. The stinking lake, where Sodo^ and her
execrable sisters stood. Annals, Histories from yeeree to year. Arch. Colonel,
usurped for the General, or chief Captain of the Host. Anathem, execration,
curse, excommunication. Anatomy, the incision or cutting up of the body of Man
or Beast as Surgeons do, to see the parts. Amphitryonide, Hercules, begotten
by Jupiter on Alcmaena, the wife of Amphitryo. Attick, a Province of Greece;
wherein stood the City of Athens. Atropos, look Parcaes. Alecto, look Furies.
Assabine, Jupiter with the Assyrians. Aglaia, look Graces. Architraue, the
crown or chap ter of a Pillar: also a principal beam in any Building. Arabian
bird, the Phoenix. Argolian showers, Jupiters golden Rain in the lap of Danae
daughter of Acrisius, King of Argiues, Argolikes, or Argolians. Aegisthus, look
Clytemnestra. Aspiks, venomous little serpe^ts Anchyses Pheere, is Venus on
whom he begat Aenea^* Abramide, of the race of Abraham.
B
Baltik Ocean, the Danish sea. Baignere, a Bath in Gasconye. Bandans, the
Ilanders of the Moluques, rich in excellent ^^s. Bacchanalian Frowes,
Womenpriests of Bacchus, the God of Cups. Bardes, ancient Poets and Sages.
Barege, a Bath in Gasconie. Barr-Geese and Barnacles, a kind of fowls that
grow of rotten Trees and broken ships. Bek, a Phrygian word, signifying bread.
Belgian, of the Nether-lands. Belgrad, a Town in Hungary, taken by the Turk.
Bellona, Goddess of war. Belus Son, Ninus, first King of Assyria, supposed
to be inuenter of Navigations. Bitumen, a kind of oily, slimie, gummie, or
clammy Clay. Bizantium, Constantinople. Brontes, one of Vulca^s Forgemen.
Briareus, a Gia^t with 100* hands Brutus heirs, Englishmen, Brittans. Bacco^i,
Poisonie confections, Italian figg^^. Bon-iours, Good morrowes* Bonarets, a
kind of Beastplantes. Boo^es, a little star in the North Pole near to
Vrsaminor, used for the North. Boreas, the North-winde. Bosphores, 2* Straicts,
so called of an Oxes wading over: the one surnamed Thracian, the other
Cimmerian. Bo^^i^^, a hungry, or greedy disease in a cold stomach. Bucephalus,
the courageous Horse of Alexander the great* Busiris, a most cruel Tyrant of
Egypt which used to sacrifice strangers ^o Jupiter* Butric, a learned and
eloquent German (of late days) Counsailer to Oassimirus. Bombards, great
Ordinance. Bubastik, that is Egyptian. Bethel, a Mountain in the South
Confines of Israel where Ieroboham set up one of his Calves. Birdene, a
Wilderness in the West of Egypt. Babels, indeed Bables, idle Monuments of
Pomp and Plenty. Belzebut, the God of Accaron the prince of Devils. Brachmans,
Indian Philosophers, Modern writers call them Bramines. Bigaurian Hills, part
of the Pyrene Mountains between France and Spain.
C
CAbalistik, mystical Traditions among the Jews Rabbis. Caesar's, Emperors,
so called from C. Julius Caesar the first Emperor. Cadmus, son of Agenor,
who slew a serpent and pulling out his teeth sowed them in the ground, whereof
instantly there sprung-vp ready armed men. Cairo, a City in the midst of
Egypt, of old called Babylon, and thought one of the greatest in the world.
Calamarie, a fish that may be well called the Sea-Clarke, being furnished with
necessaries for a scribe. Calliorates, an excellent Caruer, especially in small
works. Calpe, a Mountain within the Sraights of Gibaltar* just opposite to
Abila: these two are called the Pillars of Hercule^. Canni^^ls, people in the
South part of America that ^ate mans-flesh. Candia, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea, subject to the Venetians. Cana, a Town in Galile, where
Christ wrought his first miracle; at a marriage. Cantharus, a fish of admirable
chastity. Capharea^ Rock, a most dangerous and rockie Coast of Euboea, now
called Negropont. Carpese, a venomous plant, whose Juice causes deep sleep,
and so strangleth the Patient. Carinthia, a Duchy belonging to the Dukes of
Austria. Carraques, great Spanish Vess^le. Cal^gula, a most wanton and wicked
Emperor of Rome. Cassagale, the City Quinzay, in the East Indies.
Cassi^peia, Mother of Andromeda. Castalian Well, springes, Fount, Springs at
the foot of Parnassus sacred to the Muses. Cathay, a large Country in East
Asia fronting on the Sea, now called Cambalu. Catharact, a violent fall of any
Water, causing deaf^nes with the noise, also a disease in the Eye distilling a
tough humor like gelly. Catiline, a factlous Citizen of Rome, famous for his
dangerous conspirecie against his Country. Cato, a reverent and renowned Roman
both for his temperate life, and resolute death. Caudrets, a Bath in Gascony.
Caucasus, a very high Mountain that diuides Scythia from India. Ceres,
Goddess of Harvest, inuentresse of Tillage and of the use of Corn, sometimes
used for the earth. Cephalus, the husband of P^ocris, the minion of Aurora.
Centaures, half men, half horses, hegotten by Ixion on a Clowd. C^^aste^, a
Serpent of sundry colors, with horns like a Ram. Cerathus, a River in
Candi^ from whence comes the best Mal^isi^. Cerbas, a Tree in the Ind^es, of 15
fadome about. Cerberus, the three-headed dog of Hell, the Porter there.
Celtike, a part of France. Chaos, a confused heap, the matter of the World
before it received form. Chaldea, the Country wherein Babylon stood: where
were great Astronomers, Magicians, and Soothsayers. Charles Martel, K. of
France, ouerthrewe 400000. Turks near unto Tours. Chermez, the grain wherewith
Skarlat and Crimson are dyed. Chymeras, strange Fancies, monstrous
Imaginations, Castles in the Air. Cincinnatus, one called from the Plough (all
dustie and almost naked) to the Roman Dictatorship. Cimmerians, People far
North, that are thought never to see the Sun. Citadel, a Castle built, with a
small Garrison to keep a great Town in awe. Cirques, round Lists to behold
public Races. Chus, Aethyopia. Clio, one of the Muses, re^iting the glorious
Acts of Worcester thinesse. Cli^us, one of Alexa^ders greatest Minions, whom yet in
his drunkenness he slew. Cocos, an admirable Nutte brought from the Indies.
Cocytus, a River in hell. Coichos, Medeas country from whence Jason fetched the
Golden Fleece. Codrus, a King of Athens, that gave his own life for the
safeguard of his Country. Colonies, numbers of People sent to inhabit some
new conquered Country. Colures, ^. Circles in heaven wherein the Sun-stops
are caused. Cochenel, grain wherewith Purple is died. Colosses, huge Statues
erected in honor of any person. Columbus, a Genoese, discouerer of America for
Ferdinando, King of Castile. Comitiall Ill, the Falling sickness. Commodus, a
most vicious Emperor. Cones, geometrical figures, broad beneath, and sharp
above, with a Circular bottom. Concentrik, having one common Copernicus, a
learned German that maintains the heavens to stand still, and the Earth to
turn round about. Coruinus, a Roman Orator, that after a great sickness forgot
his own name. Corfu, an Island in the Ionian Sea, subject to the Venetia^s.
Critik, and Critical, sharp Censurers: all dangerous days for health,
observed by Physicians. Crescent, the Moon increasing Ctesiphon, the builder of
Dianas Temple at Ephesus. Ctesibes, an excellentinuenter of water Engines.
Cubes, geometrical figures foure-square, like a Die. Cucuio, a strange bird
in new Spain. Cupid, the bastard of Mars, and Venus, the little God of love.
Curious, a Citizen of Rome, famous for frugalitie and temperance, who delighted
rather to command the rich, then to be rich. Cylindres, geometrical figures
round and long, consisting from top to toe of two equal parallel-Circles.
Cyclops, Gia^ts with one eye, worcester king in the Forge of Vulcan. Cyprus, a
fruitful Island in the Gulf of Issa, formerly subject to the Venetians, but
now usurped by the Turk, aunciently consecrated to Venus. Cynthia, Phoebe,
Diana, the Moon. Cytharea, Venus. Cynosure, 7 stars in the North pole, the
North Pole, the North-starre. Cymbrians, the people of Denmark and Nor-way.
Cyrus, the great King of Persia, conqueror of the Medes, and after slain by
Tomyris Queen of the Massage^s. Charites, look Graces. Clotho, look Parcae.
Camosh, the Idol of the Moabits Chiron, a Centaur, an excellent both Physician
and Musician the Master of Achilles. Cornaline, look Onyx. Clarian,
Lot-guider. Cornich, look Frize. Crisis, the dangerous, or (as Physicians
call it) critical day for any disease. Clyde, a River running by Dom bertan in
Scotland. Cyclades, floting Islands in the Aegean Sea. Cedron, and Ked^on, a
Brook in Judea. Ciuik-Garland, a crown or chaplet of Oaken sprigges, given to
honor Him that had res^ued a city. Clytemnestra, wife of Agame^non, whom with
the help of her Adulterer Aegis^hus, in a sleeue-les shirt she murdered. Cypris
sap, seed of generation. Castor and Pollux: Twins begot on Laeda, by Jupiter
in the shape of a Swan: and supposed Sea-Gods favorable to Sailours. Crimsin
Gulf: the red Sea. Cecropian that is, Athenian: of Cecrops, first King of
Athens. Cineas, a Thessalian, exceeding eloquent and of admirable memory,
Ambassador from King Pyrrhus to the Romans. Carthaginian, of that famous City
of Africa built by Dido, and by Hanniball undone. Cadmean, by sorn wrighters
used for Carthage. Coronan, that is Lacedemonia^: for Corone, was a city of
the Messenians, who were subject to that State. Cest, in Latin Cestus and
Cestum the Brides Girdle which the Bridegroom took off at night Coloquintida, a
kind of wild Gourd, that purges Choler. Chrysocolle, Boras, gold-soder.
Cibele, look Rhea.
D
DAmon, the most faithful friend of Pythias, both disciples of Pythagoras.
Dana^, daughter of Acrisius, who kept her locked in a brazen Tower; Jupiter
raynde himself in a Golden shower into her lap. Darubius, the greatest River
in Europe, called also Isther. Dardane Ants, Indian Emmets Darius, a King of
Persia, vanquished by Alexander the great. Delian Twins, the Sun and Moon.
Delian Princess. Diana. Delos, an Island, one of the Cyclades, which for a
longtime floated as hidden in the Sea, and after suddenly appeared Delphian
Oracle, the Oracle of Apollo, at Delphos. Delphos God, Apollo. Democritus, the
laughing Philosopher of Abydus. Demosthenes, the best Orator of the Grecians.
Denis, or Dionysius, a Tyrant of Syracusa. Deucalion, son of Prometheus, who
with his wife Pyrrah, escaped the Flood and (as the Poets fain) restored the
world. Diabete, adisease, when one cannot hold his water. Diapason, a Concord
of all. Diarrhaea, a Laske or loosenes of the Belly. Diameter, a strait line
dividing any figure into equal parts, passing through the middle point of any
figure. Dialect, a form of speech diverse from others in any language Diana,
the Goddess of virginity, the Moon. Dirceanwalles, Thebes. Disenteria, the
bloody-flixe: Dodochaedrons, figures of 12. Angles. Druid^s, ancient learned
Priests and Sages of France: supposed, to have first issued out of this I Will of
Britain. Dombertan, a Town in Scotland. Dagon, the Idol of the Philistines.
Demain, Possessions of inheritance, time out of mind continued in the
occupation of the Lord. Duel, single Combat. Demigods, look Heroik. Dorik
music, soft and effeminate music, here opposed to the Phrygian, whtch was
more lofty and full of life, and fitter to stir up a Courageous spirit. Dan,
a Town in the North fro^tier of Judea, where Ietoboam erected his other Calfe.
Ditthyrambik, Song in the Ho nour of Bacchus.
E
ECliptik line, a great Circle in the middle of the Zodiake through which the
Sun runs his proper course in 365. days. Egyptian flood, The River Nilus
Electrum, Amber. Electra, one of the sisters o Phaeton, who in^essantly weeping
for her brothers fall, was turned into a Tree that droppeth Amber. Elixir, an
Arabian word, signifying Quintessence, the Philosophers stone. Elisium, the
feigned Paradise of hethen Poets. Eldebag, a learned Arabian Satyricall Poet.
Embryon, the Child in the mothers Womb before it have received shape.
Encyclopedie, that learning which comprehends all liberal Sciences.
Endimion, a young shephearde the favorite of Cinthya. Engastromith, one
possessed, which seems to speak in his belly. Empyema, an impostume in the
Breast. Enyon, the same that Bellona sister to Mars, and Goddess of Battle.
Enthousiasmos, poetical fury. Eoan Monarke, Alexander the great. Eolian
scoutes, the winds. Ephemerides, Day-books, Registers, Iournals. Ephesian
Temple, the Temple of Diana in Ephesus. Ephesian moan, Heraclitus, weeping at
the worlds miseries. Ephori, a kind of Magistrates, protectors of the people.
Epi^emik il^es, Universal Diseases. Epicicle, a lesser Circle, whose center is
in the circumfere^ce of a greater. Epicurus, a Philosopher that placed man's
felicity in the pleasures of the Sense, belee uing no God but Fortune.
Epilepsis, the Falling Sickness. Epithalamie, a nuptial song. Epitaph, a
funeral song, or an Inscription on a Tomb or Grave. Epithets, additions to
nownes, expressing some quality. Epitome, an Abbridgement. Epirus, a Country
in Greece (now called Albania) famous in late times by the Noble exploites of
G. Castr^ot (sir-named Scanderbeg) against the Turk. Equinoctial, a Circle in
Heaven through which when the Sun passes, the days and nights be of equal
length. Eroetrian soil, medicinable Earth, brought from Eretria. Erebus, a
River in hell: Hell. Erythrean Deep, the red Sea. Erynnis, one of the Furies.
Eridanus, a figu^e in Heaven, the River Po, in Lumbardie. Eurus, the East
wind. Euripus, a narrow Sea, which ebbeth and flows seven times in 24.
hours. Euphrates, one of the Rivers of Eden, that runs through Babylon.
Europa, Christendom, or this Western part of the world. Eccentrik, that has
his center wholly separated from the Center of the Earth. Erysipiles, hot and
red swellings, called S. Anthonies fire. Erycina, Venus. Euphrosyne, look
Graces. Euphorbium, a certain medicinable Plant found and named by Euphorbus,
King Iubas Physician. Eth^ik, see Pagan. Entidorian. Etesian gates, easterly
winds. Ephod, a linen garment worn by the Priests and Levites of Israel.
Edom and Idumea, a part of Palaestine. El^utherian, Deliverer. Epicarpian,
Fruit-keeper.
F
FAbritius, a famous Roman, contemner of Riches, and in extreme poverty most
puissa^t for virtuous valor and integrity. Faustina, a most Ias^iuious Em
press, wife to Marcus Aurelius, and daughter of Antous Pius. Fez. a Kingdom
in Barbary. Finland, a Dukedom under the king of Sweden. Flamine, a
Sacrificer, or high Priest, among the Heathen. Flauio, Melphio a Neapolitan
inuenter of the needle in the Mariners compass, and the use thereof. Foix, a
Country belonging to Nauarr, near the Pyrene Mountains. Flora, a fair and
rich harlot which made the people of Rome her Heir: in respect whereof, they
made her God desse of Flowers: and kept yearly Feasts in honor of of her.
Furies, 3 (viz.) Alecto, Megera, and Tesiphone (sometimes also called
Persyphone) which are said to be Torme^ters of the damned in Hell, wittily
fained to express the fear and Fury of a guilty conscience. Frize and Cornich,
the crests, furniture and finishing at the upper end of a column. Farfalla, a
Candle fly. Fergusius, Euenus, Donaldus, famous ancient Kings of Scotland.
Fanes, Temples, consecrated Places. Funambulant, a Rope-walker. Feretrian,
Peace-bringer or dread-striker.
G
GAlen, a famous Physician born at Pergamus, whose learned works through all
ages have been honored. Galenite, one skillful in Physic, wherein Galen
excelled. Ganges, a great River in India. Gauls, the ancient name of the
French men. Genius, a man's spirit, or natural instinct or inclination.
Gemonide, or Gemonian Ladders: a place in Rome from whence condemned persons
were thrown down. Ghion, one of the rivers in Ede^ Gnidian Idols, Venus and
Cupid: for in Gnidos she was worshipped. Gonorrhaea, a foul and inuolu^tary
Flux of seed, the Running of the Reins. Gordian knot, a knot thought
impossible to be undone, wherewith Gordius had fastened his Oxe-yoake in the
Temple of Apollo. Gorgons, ugly hellish monsters, in form of scaly Dragons,
with crooked teeth, one eye, Iron talents, and mighty wings. Graces, look
Charites. Gymnosophists, Philosophers of India, so called, because they went
naked. Groon-land, an exceeding cold Country, butting upon the Sea, beyond
Izland. Grave, is as much as an Earl with us: but in this place used for the
General and Governor, IOSVAH. Galactite, a kind of white Marble, or Alabaster.
H
HAlcyon, a little water-bird thought to be the kings fisher. Harpies, ravenous
Birds, with faces like women. Hecatombes, Heathen Sacrifices wherein were
offered 100. Beasts. Hebe, Jove's Cup Bearer: the Goddess of youth. Heber, of
whom the Hebrews and Hebrew Tongue are so called, the great -- great --
Grandchild of Sem, the son of Noah. Hecuba, the Frantike and disfigured,
old wythered wife of Priamus King of Troy, and here opposed to the fresh,
young, beautiful Helena, the fatal Prize of their son Paris. Helicon, a
Mountain sacred to Apollo and the Muses. Helena, the wanton wife of Menelaus:
cause of the tedious siege and final sack of Troy. Hemisphear, half the
compass of heaven which we behold. Hercules, the most renowned Monster-Tamer
of Thebes. Hermes, Mercury. Hero, the fair Sestian Nun, for whose sake
Leander was drowned in Hellespont. Heroes, half Gods, excellent Men, for
valor, and virtue. Herophilus, a very ancient Phy sician. Herodotus, an
Eloquent Greek Historiographer. Hesiodus, an ancient Greek Poet Hesperian
Plant, Golden Fruit Trees guarded by a Dragon which was slain by Hercules: but
here it is used for the Sugar Cane, a richer Plant the^ those (feigned) golden
fruits. Hexameters, verses of six feet Hiades, 5. stars (some hold 7.) in
the head of the Bull. Hiero, a king of Sicilia (after Agathocles) greatly
delighted in husbandry. Hieroglyphiks, secret Ciphers, strange characters,
mystical wrighting by sundry forms of things. Hiram, King of Tyrus, remem
bred in the Scripture for sending Timber and workmen to Solomon, to the
building of the Temple in Jerusalem. Homer, so called for his blindness, the
most excellent of all the Greek Poets. Horizon, a Circle dividing the
halfe-spheare of the firmament which we see ^uer us, from the other half
under us, which we see not. Hun furious, Attyla, who surnamed himself the
scourge of God, and Terror of the World. Hyantian Fount, springs sacred to the
Muses. Hydrantik braule, Music artificially made with the fall of waters.
Hyaena, a horrible Beast that counterfaiteth man's voice. Hydrargire,
quicksilver. Hydra, a Serpent with 50. heads slain by Hercules. Hybla, and
Mou^tains abou^ding in bees and honey. Hymetus Mou^tains abou^ding in bees and
honey. Hymen, the God of Marriage. Hyper-borean, above or beyond the blowing of
the Northwinde. Hyppocrates, a most excellent Physician. Hyppolitus, the son
of Theseus, who shunning the wa^ton inticements of his stepdame Phaedra, was
(through her false accusations) torn in pieces. Hyren, a fair Greek Maiden
Captive, on whom Mahom^t the 2. extremely doated. Hesperus, the
Euening-starre, the Evening. Helleborus, an herb whereof be 2. kinds,
supposed our Ling-wort and Bears-foot. Heroik, noble: but anciently appropriate
to those which were counted Demigods, supposed to be born and begot of a
heavenly and an earthly Parent, as Aeneas, of Venus and Anchyses. Hebridian
Wave, the Sea about the Isles Hiberides, to the North from Ireland.
I
IAnus, an ancient King of Italy, whom in respect of his wisdom and
providence, they figured with 2. faces, as looking back into things past, and
foreseeing things to come. Iaffa, (anciently Ioppa) a notable Hauen-Towne in
Syria, where they land that Trauail to Jerusalem. Iapetus, a Thessalian, more
famous by his two sons (Prometheus, and Epimetheus) then for any great worth of
his own. Iaeson, Captain of the Argonau tes, by the favor of Medea,
surmounting all dangers, brought home the golden Fleece. Ibis, a certain high
Bird, with a long Bill and stiff leg^, worshipped by the old Egyptians.
Ibnu-farid, a learned Arabian, Not much known in these parts. Iberians,
Spaniards. Icarus, the son of Dedalus, who presuming to fly, was drowned in
that Sea, which after bore his name. Ichneumon, Pharaohs Ratte: a little Beast,
enemy to the Crocodile. Idalian Fire, the burning heat of Loves desire. Idea,
an Image or Pattern of things conceived in the Fa^cie. Idioma, a proper and
peculiar form of speech. Iessean* Harp, the holy music of David the Son of
Ishai, commonly called Iesse. Iliaca Passio, a kind of Collicke. Illium, and
Ilion: Troy. Imaus, a Hill in India, part of Caucasus. Impartial maids, the
Fatal sisters, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos. I Will of Iron, or Isola di-Ferro,
one of the fortunate Islands now called Canaries. Incubus, a disease oppressing
the stomach in our sleep, which the ignorant have thought to be a spright: it
is commonly called the Night Mare. Indiuidunm, a body that cannot be divided.
Jove's Bird, the Eagle. Iris-bowe, the Rain-bowe. Iunos bird, the Peacocke.
Isleban, glory of Wittinberg: Martin Luther. Isthmus, a narrow-strait of land
between two Seas. Isther, Danubius. Ithacan, Ulysses the prudent husband of the
most chaste Penelope. Jupiter, the chief God of the Pagans. Iubile, a year of
liberty and releafe, which was every fiftieth year. Justinian, a learned
Emperor Compiler of the Civil laws. Iuturna, the North part of Scotland
toward the Orcades. Iaboc, a little Brook running into the River Jordan.
Isis, the wife of Osiris, both Idols of the Egyptians. Iuadan. Jove, Jupiter,
chief of the Heathen Gods. Juno, the sister and wife of Jove: Goddess of
Dominion and wealth, and supposed helper to women in* travail: sometimes
taken for the Air. Iris, the Rainbow. Iaphean (or Iaffian) Seas beat upon
the Coast of Zabulon toward Tire and Sydon, on the farthest North of Judea:
here opposed to Tigris in Mesopotamia, the farthest South of the same. Iaffa,
of old called Ioppa. Isaacians, children of Isaac, Israelites. Izeland, an
Island in the farthest North toward Groonland. Iebusites, the Heathen
inhabitants of Jerusalem, before it came to the Possession of the Israelites.
K
KAros, a drowsy, and stupifying disease in the head. Kennet, a pleasant River
running through Barkshire, near unto whose flowery banks, our callow Cignets
had their nest.
L
LAcedaemo^ (called also Spar ta) a City and a Commonwealth, most famous and
flowrishing under the Laws of Ly^urgus. Laconia, the Country where that City
stood. Lachesis, look Parcae. Laeda, the wife of Tyndarus, who by the help of
Jupiters Swan, laid 2. eggs, whereof were hatched double Twins: of the one,
Pol-lux and Helena, of the other Castor and Clytemnestra. Latmos, a Hill in
Ionia, where Cynthia is said to have embraced her deer Endymion. Latona, the
Mother of Diana and Apollo. Latonian Twins, those Children of hers, the Sun
and Moon. Lais, a beutiful and costly Harlot of Corynth, frequented by many
gallants of Greece. Lee, a neat little Town in Essex, in the mouth of the
Thames. Leander, a young man of Abydus beloved of Hero, drowned in Hellespont
while he was swimming to her. Lers, a river in France, of most strange
quality. Lethe, a river in Hell, which causes forgetfulness. Lethargy, the
sleepy disease. Lestrigons, a cruel people of Campania in Italy, which were
said to feed on Man's Flesh. Lyguria, the Territory of Genoa. Lycurgus, the
famous Lawmakers of the Lacedaemonians. Lemnos, Vulcans Island, Now called
Stalimene. Limbo, Hell. Linus, an excellent ancient Musician, master of
Orpheus. Linx, a beast of exceeding quick and pearcing sight. Leucippus, a
Philosopher that imagined infinite worlds. Leucothoe, a Sea Goddess.
Liquour-God. Bacchus. Lopez, a late Iew-spanish Physician, executed for
infinite Treasons against this State. Lotos, an admirable plant, stra^gely
sympathizing with the Sun. Lucania, a province of Italy, now called Basilicata.
Lucina, Juno, and Diana, supposed of old to be assistant to women in their
travel. Lucr^^ta, the chaste wife of Collatinus, ravished by Tarquin. (Poet.
Lucretius, a very ancient Latin Luna, the Moon^e. Lupercales, Sacrifices and
Feasts solemnized to Pan. Lyceum, the School of Aristotle. Legislator, a
Lawmakers, or a Lawgiver. Lesbian Squire: the Lesbians were so perfect
Workmen, that they made Rules and Squires by their Work, and not their Work
by the Rule. Loumond, a great Lake in Scot land, wherein they say, there is a
floating Island. Luc^for, the Prince of the proud Angels that fell from heaven.
The Devil, also the morning-starre. Lachesis, look Parcaes. Locusts, a kind
of Grasshoppers Libanus and Libanon, a mountain in Syria, famous for the
fairest Cedar Trees.
M
MAdera, one of the Canaries, from whence com excellent Sugars. Malta, an Island
in the Mediterranean Sea, where the Knights (that were) of Rhodes, now keep
their reside^ce Many, a disease in the head causing madness. Martian-field, a
field between Tiber, and the City of Rome, where they used to behold the
fight of condemned men with wild Beasts. Mars, the God of war. Mark Pole, a
not able Venetian Nauigator and Discouerer. Maiz, Indian wheat. Mausole, a
sumptuous Tomb built by Artemisia Queen of Caria, for her husband Mausolus.
Marcellus, a most noble Roman Captain, Conqueror of Syracusa, and five times
Consul. Mah omite, the Turkish Emperor, worshipping Mahomet. Mantuan Muse, the
Poet Virgil Massacres, horrible murders. Medea, a sorceresse, or (as some call
them) a cunningwoman. Meanders, crooked turnings, so called of the River.
Meandex, for his exceeding crookedness. Medices, the late Queen mother of
France, being of the house of Florence. Medusas Tresse, a head with snake-like
hairs, turning the beholders into stones. Mein, a River in Germany, where on
stands Frankfort, the famous Mart of the World. Meonian Bard, Homer. Mecaenas,
a noble Roman, and liberal favorer of Virgil. Megera, one of the Furies.
Melt, an admirable Tree in Mexico, a mighty kingdom of America. Egyptians.
Memphians, Memphites. Memphists. Memphitists.
Mercury, one of the Planets, the God of wit, eloquence, invention, and
subtilty, and the messenger of the Gods. Mercurial (as it were) a Chancerie,
controuling and reuoking false judgments of inferior Courts. Meridian, the
south circle.
Metaphoras, borrowed speeches. Metempsychosis, transmigration of souls from
one body to another: after Pythagoras. Metaphi^icall, supernatural, Milo, a
man of prodigious strength, that carried a Bull on his back, killed him with
his fist, and eat him up in one day. Mince, a River near Mantua, where Virgil
was borne. Minerua, the same that Pallas: Goddess of wit and war. Moly, an
herb brought from heaven by Mercury to Ulysses, supposed to be our Rue, or
herbe-grace. Moloch, the Idol of the Ammonites. Moluques, rich Islands in the
East Indies, plentiful in all kind of excellent Spices, and other Treasures.
Moors, the people of Ethiopia, subjects of Prester John. Morpheus, the God of
Dreams Mummie, a drugg, taken for part of ancient imbalmed bodies. Musculus, a
little Fish most officious to the Whale. Musulmans, Arabians. Mycaena,
Agamemnons Kingdom. Midas, a wealthy King of Phry gia, whose touch (by the
grant of Bacchus) turned all things into Gold: so that at last his Gold-turned
meat in his mouth choked him. Myrmecides, a cunning and curious Caruer in
small works. Myron, an excellent statuarie, or Image-maker. Mount banks,
Iugglers. Meroe, an Island in the River Nilus. Megera, look Furies. Mages,
Sages, Wisemen, Soothsayers. Moris^o, and Mattachine, Antike and fantastike
daunces. Moderatrix, a Regent or Gouernesse. MAGNIFICENCE, Greatness, State,
glory, pomp. Munifice^ce, bounty, liberality Medalls, Images of wood, stone, or
metal. Musaik work, a kind of painting so curiously shadowed, that it seems
in some places imbost, in some carved, in some in-layde, in some graven, etc.
Meteors, or exhalatio^s, strange apparitions of comets, or other figures in the
air. Megarian, where flowrished the Philosopher Euclides, in the same time
that Socrates in Athens.
N
NAcre, the Pearle-shell, or mother of Pearl. Nadir, the point directly under
us, just opposite to the Zenith or point vertical. Natolia, Asia minor, now
whole ly under the Turk. Nectar, the drink of the Gods. Neptune, the Sea.
Nephelian, Crook-horne, the Sign Aries. Nepenthe, an herb which being steeped
in wine, is thought to expel sadness. Nereus, the Sea. Nero, a most cruel
Emperor of Rome, the monster of nature, and shame of mankind. Nestor, a wise
and eloque^t Greek who being nigh 300. years old, came to the siege of Troy.
Nile, and Nilus, the famous River of Egypt, used often for Egypt it self.
Nimrod, the builder of Babel, the first ambitious usurper of sovereignty.
Niphates, a mountain from whence the River Tigris has his source. Nitre, a
light, white, spongie matter, much like salt, which some have (falsely) thought
to be saltpeter. Noremberg, a City in Germany, especially famous for curious
handy-crafts. Nubian, of a Kingdom fronting on the South of Egypt. Numidian^,
people of a part of Africa, accustomed to live continually in the fields with
their flocks, and herds, remoouing often for fresh pastures. Numa Pompileus,
2. from Romulus King of the Romans and their first lawgiver.
O
OBsequies, funeral ceremonies. Ocean, and Oceanus, the Sea. Odipus, a
Riddle-Reader of Thebes. Oedems, thin, waterish, and flegmatik swellings.
Olympius, an Arrian Bishop, struck dead with Lightning for blaspheming the
Deity of Christ. Olympus, a very high hill fronting on Macedonia: it is often
used for Heaven. Ophthalmy, a disease in the Eye through inflammation of the
uttermost tunicle. Optic sinnew, is that which brings sight unto the Eye.
Orgies, Sacrifices to Bacchus. Oracles, Mysteries of the heathen Gods,
delivered by diverse means, and in diverse manners. Orion, a tempest-boading
star. Orpheus, an excellent Poet and Musician of Thrace. Oromene, a Mountain in
India, full of Salt-quarres. Ortygian Delos, a floating Ila^d where Diana, and
Apollo were borne. Orithias love, Boreas, the North-winde. Ottoman, the first
Emperor of Turks. Ouids heirs: wanton Poets. Oxygone, a sharp-Triangle.
Omer, a certain measure among the Hebrews. Ophir, supposed to be Peru. Onyx, a
red precious stone, fit for Seals. (Clear. Orient, the East Sunrising Oran, a
Port-Towne in Barbary, within the Streictes of Gibraltar.
P
PActolus, a river in Lydia, which (after the washing of King Midas) is said to
have Golden sands. Pallas, the Goddess of Arts and Wisdom. Palaemon, a Sea
God, called also Melicertes. Palestine, Judea, the holy land, first called
Cannan. Pan, the God of Shepherds. Pandects, Books treating of all manner of
Arguments. Panchaya^ Fumes, Incense. Pannonia, Hungary and Austria. Panope, a
Sea-Nymph. Pandora, feigned (by Hesiodus) to be the first woman, and made by
Vulcan: endued by all the Gods with several excellent gifts, but afterward by
Jupiter (in his displeasur) sent to her spouse Epimetheus, with a Box full of
al manner of miseries. Paphos Archer, Cupid, the little God of love. Paphian,
Fire or shot his Arrows. Parrhasius, a most excellent painter of Ephesus.
Parthians, a people of Asia, excellent Archers, and notorious enemies to the
Romans. Par^s, an Island in the Archipelago (which divides Europe and Asia
minor) wherein is excellent white Marble or Alablaster. Parcas, Parcae, (a non
parcendo) the Destinies, or 3. fatal Sisters, (viz) Clotho, Lachesis, and
Atropos: Death it self, the eneuitable end of all. Parallels, lines every where
like distant. Paradox, an argument maintained contrary to the common and
received opinion. Pegasus, the flying Horse of Bellerophon, which strayning to
fly up to Heaven, with his hoof rased the top of Helicon, whence immediately
gushed out a spring, which therefore is called Hyppocrene. Penelope, the most
chaste wife of the wandering Prince Ulysses. Peneian Uale, is Tempe a most
pleasant valley in Thessaly, on the verge of the River Peneus. Pentheus, a
young Prince, who for contemning the drunke^ feasts of Bacchus, was by his own
mother ( Agaue) murdered. Peripneumonie, the Impostume of the Lungs. Perige,
that point of Heaven wherein the Sun (or other planet) is nearest to the center
of the Earth. Persiphone, or Proserpine: the Queen of Hell and Horror. Perseus,
a most triumphant Champio^, that rescued Andromeda from the Sea-mo^ster: who
for his prowess is both by Poets and Astronomers magnified as a God, and
placed among the Stars. Pernassus, the mountain of the Muses. Persian Monark
with the heaven of glass, was Sapores. Peru, one of the largest and richest
parts of America. Phaeton, the Son of Phoebus, who presuming to guide his
fathers Chariot, set the world on fire, and fell himself headlong into the
River Eridanus. Phoebus, the Sun. Phalaris, a most cruel Tyrant of Agrigent.
Phalec, the son of Heber. Pharos, a Lantern Tower to bear a light for the
guide of Saylors in a haven by night: also an Island. Phlegon, one of the horses
of the Suns Chariot. Phlegeton, a River in Hell, taken often for Hell it self.
philtre-charmd, enchanted with loue-potions. Phantik, such as are haunted with
strange and illuding Visions. Philirian Scout, the sign Sagittarius.
Philometor, an ancient king of Egypt, much given to husbandry, and delighting
in the Country life. Phlebotomie, Bloodletting. Phlegmons, hot and red
inflammations of blood. Phrygian Skinker, the sign Aquarius. Phrixus sister,
was Hell, drowned in Hellespont, which of her is so called. Phrenzie, a most
violent and dangerous disease of the brain. Phthisik, The consumption of the
Lungs. Phthiriasis, the lousy disease. Pica, the longing disease of women with
child. Physon, one of the Rivers in the garden of Eden. Pigmes, little people
of the North, a Cubit high. Pyrene, a princess from whom Pyrene Mountains
(which divide France and Spain) are so called. Pindus, a Mountain sacred to
the Muses. Pierian Maids, the Muses. Pirrhon, (read Pirrho) a Philosopher
always doubtful of all things, yea even of those subject to our senses.
Plato, Prince of the Academiks, surnamed divine, and indeed the most near
approaching divinity of all the heathen. Pleiades, the 7. Stars, Plessis, a
noble learned Frenchman of our time, a notable defender of the Truth of
Christian religion, against all Jews, Turks, Pagans, Papists, Atheists, and
Infi-Infidels what-soeuer. Pluto, the God of Hell and of Riches, the Devil and
all. Po, the river that watreth Lum* bardy the garden of Italy. Polypes, a
subtle fish called a Manie-feete, or Pourcontrell. Polymnia, manifold memory,
in variety of knowledge. Poles, the imagined Hinges of the Heavens, whereon the
World is turned, commonly used for heaven. Poetasters, Base, Counterfeit,
unlearned, witless, and wanton Poets that pester the World, either with
idlevanities or odious villainies. Porphirie, Marble. Porus, a King of India of
huge stature, overcome by Alexander. Polygamie, the having of many wives.
Polyphem, a huge and cruel Giant, with one ey in his forehead. Pomona,
Goddess of fruits. Pontik heath, Pontus is a region in Asia minor, fronting
Eastward upon Colchis. Progne, Pandions daughter, sister of Philomele, and
wife of Tereus, transformed to a swallow. Proteus, a Sea-god, that takes on
him all shapes. Problems, mathematical propositions, referred especially to
practice. Prometheus, is fained to have made the first man, and to have stolen
fire from heaven, to put life into his Creature. Pryenian Sage, Bias. Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, most famous for his learning and love to the learned, and
especially for his noble Library, erected in Alexandria. Pyramides, exceeding
huge and high Spires, built by the kings of Egypt for fond and idle ostentation
of their riches and pride. Pyrausta, a fier-flye, or winged worm, breeding and
living only in the fire. Python, a horrible Dragon slain by Apollo. Pagan,
Heathen, an Infidel, uncircumcised, unbaptized, that knows not God.
Phydias, a famous Caruer in wood and stone. Persyphone, look Furies. Pirenes,
look Bigaurian. Phrygian Music, look Dorik. Pellean Prince, Alexander the
great, borne in the City of Macedonia called Pella, as was also Philip his
father. Panomphean, all-hearing. Phyxian, fugitive. Proselyte, a stranger
new-conuerted to our faith and fashion. Pharan, a City between Egypt and
Arabia: also a Wilderness which the Israelites passed in their Pilgrimage to
Canaan. Pharus, look Pharos. Pirrhus, a valiant King of the Epirots, a notable
Enemy to the Romans. Pass-Lamb, the Paschal Lamb. Pelusian Foord, Nilus the
great River of Egypt. Pythian Knight, is Apollo, sir-named Pythias, for slaying
the dreadful Serpent Pytho.
Parian Rocks, mountains of white Marble or Alabaster, in the I Will of Paros.
Patagons, Indian Canibals, such as eat man's flesh. Posthumus, one borne after
his Fathers death. Prodigies, extraordinary and miraculous accidents. Picts,
ancient inhabitants of a part of Scotland. Para-Nymphes, Bride-dressers, too
curious prankers of themselves. Pyrrhik Galliard, a kind of dancing in
armor, invented by Pyrrhus. Porphire, a kind of red Marble. Plynth, a part of
the base of a pillar, flat square like a Tyle.
R
RAbbines, great Doctors among the Jews. Rabican, the name of a gallant horse
in Orlando Furioso. Regulus, a noble Consul, and resolute Captain of the
Romans in the Punik-war. Remora, a little fish (which some call a Suck-stone)
that suddenly stops a ship under al her sails in her full course Rendez
vous, an appointed place of meeting. Romes Dragon, the Pope. Ryphean wood,
Forests of Scythia. Rhea, the same that Cibele, Vesta,, Tellus, the Earth.
Rheubarb, an excellent roo^t, and very precious for the purging quality.
Rubric, the Titles and Directions in the old Psalters, or Seruice-Bookes: so
called, because they are written or printed in red Letters.
S
SAba, chief City of the Sabaeans in Arabia, abou^ding in Cinamo^, Cassia,
Frankincense, and Myrrh. Salamander, a spotted beast like a Lizard, whose
extreme coldness quenches the fire. Salmoneus, a King that with certain
violent Engines, counterfaited Thunder. Salust, a notable Roman Histo
riographer, also the surname of our noble and renowned Author du BARTAS. Samian
wise, Pythagoras. Sardanapalus, a most effeminate king, the last of the
Assyrians. Sargus, a Fish strangely lustful. Saturnes door, the end of Time.
Saturnales, feasts kept in December in the honor of Saturn. Satyrs, nipping
Poesies that reprove vice sharply, without respect of persons. Scaliger
Josephus, now living, a Frenchman, admirable in all Languages, for all manner
of learning* Scipio (sir-named Affirican) a most wise, valiant, and virtuous
Captain of the Romans, who being ill requited for infinite honorable
services, sequestered himself to a Country-life. Scirrhes, a kind of hard (yet
paine-lesse swellings in the flesh. Scolopendra, a certain Fish that easleth
forth her bowels, to clear them from the hook. Scopas, a notable Architect,
employed in the building of Mausolus Tomb, which is numbered among the seven
wonders of the world. Syrtes, dangerous sands in the Lybian Sea. Serean
Forests (now Cathay, and Cambalu) are in Asian Scythia, abounding in the best
Silks. Serranus, a worthy Roman fetched from his plough to the Dictatorship,
which was (for the time) an office of King-like Authority. Sentinel, a scout,
or Nightwatch in a Camp or Town of Garrison. Seraphin, an Angel. Sein, the
river of Paris. Shynar, or Sennaar, the plain where Nimrod built the Tower of
Babel. Sibyls, Prophetesses: Varro remembers 10. of them. Semiramis, the proud
and wanton Queen of Babylon, wife of Ninus. Sirius, the Dog star, at whose
rising the Dog-dayes always begin. Skinc Alexandrian, a kind of Serpent, a
land Crocodile. Skinker, the sign Aquarius. Sol, the Sun, one of the 7.
Planets. Solides, 5. regular bodies or figures Geometrical (viz.) the Circle,
Cube, Pyramid, Cilinder and Dodochaedron. Sostrates, a notable Architect
builder of the Lanthorn-Tower in the I Will of Pharos. Stagirian, Aristotle, there
born Hell.
Stix, Stigian strand,
Steropes, one of Vulcans Cyclopes. Stoikes, severe Philosophers, pretending to
condemn al Passions: and esteeming all things to be ordered by an inevitable
necessity of Fate of Destiny. Strymon, a River between Macedon and Thrace.
Suisses (we call them Swizers) the warlike people of the Cantons of Heluetia.
Sulphur, Brimstone. Star-shippe, Argos a sign or Constellation in Heaven,
supposed to have been the Ship that Jason and his fellows fetched the Golden
Fleece in. Synonimas, words of the same signification. Symbolize, to resemble
or agree. Sympathy, consent or resemblance of quality. Symphonie, consent of
time or harmony. Symmetrie, proportion of parts between themselves, and to
their whole. Syracusa, a great, wealthy, and wanton City in Sicilia. Sirens,
Mer-Maydes. Satyr, a wild wood-monster, half man, halfe-goate: also a kind
of nipping Poesy, reproouing vice impartially. Salem, Jerusalem. Spartans,
look Lacaedemon. Sina, or Sinai, a mountain in Arabia, the same that Horeb,
where the Law was given to Moses. Salamina, an Island and City in the Euboik
Sea, now called the Gulf of Negrepont. Stentorian, Homer reports him to have
had the voice of 50. men. Signories, Lordships, Dominions. Sues, a Port in the
East part of Egypt upon the red Sea. Seir, a mountain in Idumaea, between
Asphaltis and Egypt. Siddim, the place where Lot, with the Princes of Sodom,
was taken prisoner by Chedor Laomer. Sanctum Sanctoru^, the inmost Sanctuary,
the Holy of Holies, where only the high Priest might enter once a year.
Stratian, Warlike. Scammonie, alias Diagridium, an herb purging Choler
mightily.
T
TAgus, the River of Lisbone in Portugal. Tanais, a mighty River dividing Asia
from Europe. Tantalus, a King of Phrygia, whom they fained to stand in Hell up
to the chin in water, and to have delicate Fruits, dangling over his vpperlip,
yet can touch neither: either to ease his hunger, or allay his thirs^: Tambut,
A Country of the Negros, which is a part of Africa extending to the uttermost
bounds thereof toward the South and East. Taprobane, An Island under the
Equinoctial (now called Sumatra) Situate between Malaca and Iaua Mayor, above
450. leagues long, and above 120. broad: abounding in Gold, and very
plentiful in other excellent Commodities. Tarentum, a famous City in
Calabria. Tarnasser, is in the East Indies, near the gulf of Bengala. Thebes,
a City in Baeotia where Hercules was borne: it was first built built by
Cadmus, but more beautifully restored by Amphion. Thetis, the Sea. Themis,
Justice. Thersites, the foulest Lubber in all the Grecia^ Camp, who^ Achilles
slew with his fist. Theseus, for valor, another Hercules: but most famous for
his kind and constant friendship to Perithous. Thesiphone, one of the Furies.
Thisbes Tree, the mulberie. Thule, an Island beyond the Orcades, the farthest
North that was known to the Romans, therefore then called Ultima Thule.
Timanthes, one of the most excellent of the ancient Painters. Tindarides,
Castor and Pollux. Tigris, a River in Asia, passing by the East of Mesopotamia,
through Armenia and Media. Titan, the Sun. Tirrhenian, the Tuscan Seas. Tyrians,
Merchant men of Tyrus, a City of Syria, anciently flowrishing in trade, and
famous for the excellent purple-Die. Tiuoli, a village near Rome, where the
Cardinal of Ferrara has a sumptuous house of pleasure, furnished with
infinite Curiosities. Torpedo, the Cramp-fish. Tresor-troue, Gold, money, or
other Riches found under ground. Troglodytes, a people of Aethiopia, that dwell
under ground, go naked, and eat Serpents. Tropicks, two great Circles in
heaven in equal distance from the Equinoctial, the one called the Tropik of
Cancer, the other of Capricorn, at the which the Sun turns either higher
(having been at the lowest) or lower (having been at the highest) whereof they
are so called. Tryto^s* Neptunes Trumpeters. Tuscan, Italian. Tyber, the River
of Rome. Typhis, the master or Captain of the Ship Argos that saild with Jason
to Colchis for the Golden Fleece. Tymothy, an excellent caruer that wrought on
Mausolus Tomb. Typhon, a huge Giant, that in devoured to pull Jupiter out of
Heaven. Type, a figure or stamp of any thing. Tesiphone, or Thesiphone one of
the Furies. TROPHETS, glorious Monuments erected in honor of some famous
victory. Timothius Milesius, an excellent musician, that flowrished under
Philip of Macedon and Alexander his son. Theorie, Contemplation, study. Tullie,
Cicero, the Prince of Roman Orators. Te^yphone, look Furies. Thalia, look
Graces, and Muses. Tabernacle, properly a Tent or Pauilion.
V
VAlois, one of the Royal families of France, extinguished in the late Henry
the third, (slain by a Friar before Paris) who in his Monsieurship (with his
mother and the Duke of Guise) had been too busy an Actor in the bloody
Massacre. Uenus, the Goddess of Love and Beauty, also one of the planets.
Uenus Es^uage, Knights (or Nights) service to Ladies. Venerean mirth, Idem.
Uer, the Spring. Vertumnus, animagined God of the Romans that took on him all
shapes. Vespucio, Americus Vespucius, a Florentine, first discouerer of
America, of whom, it was so called. Viginere, a learned Frenchman of late
times, translator of Caesar, Liuius, and other Latin writers. Vienna, a City
in Austria, where usually the Emperor keeps his Court. Urania, one of the
Muses, especially handling Heavenly things, therefore called the Heavenly Muse.
Vrim, and Thummim, 2. words graven in the Breast Plate of Aaron, signifying
Illumination and integrity. Ulysses, the politic Prince of Ithaca, husband of
Penelope. Vulcan, the God of Fire and forge-men. Vranascopus, a fish always
gazing up to heaven.
X
XAnth, called also Scamander, the River of Troy, there is also an Island in the
Archipelago, so called. Xenian, hospitious, mild-entertainer.
Z.
ZEbut, an Island in the west Indies, exceeding rich in Gold, Sugar, and Ginger.
Zenith, the point vertical, the point of Heaven right over our heads, the
contrary point is called Nadir. Zeno, the chief of the Stoicke Philosophers.
Zeuxis, a most cunning and exceeding rich Painter. Zodiak, a byaz or sloaping
Circle in the Heavens, wherein are the 12. Signs, thorough which all the
planets pass. Zones, Imagined Circles, dividing the World into five parts.
Zopyrus, a Persian that strange ly disfigured himself to do his Prince an
important service. Zephirus, the West, the Westwinde.
FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF IVDITH, IN FORM OF A POEM.

Penned in French, by the Noble Poet, G. SALVST. Lord of BARTAS.

Englished by Tho. Hudson.

Ye learned, bind your brows with Laurer hand:
I prease but for to touch it with my hand.
ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA
printer's or publisher's device

1611.

The Printer to the Reader.
Perceiving our divine du BARTAS so generally applauded, even of the greatest
and the grauest of this Kingdom; and all His works so welcome unto all: to
make the same ( in this second Edition) more complete, I have presumed to annex
This Piece; indeed no part of his incomparable WEEKS (neither here apparalled
by the same Workman) yet doubt-les a Child of the same Parent, and (if I be not
deceived) one of his first borne: which arriving long-since in Scotland, was
there (among the rest) royally received, and thus (as you see) suited, somewhat
to that Country fashion. Whose Dialect and Orthography (considering under what
authority it was first published, and now the rather respecting our happy
union by the same established) I have not dared at all to alter. Accept it
therefore (gentle Reader) as it is: and allow at least of my good will; who,
wishing thee the profit of these happy labors, have adventured (to do thee
pleasure) to incur (I doubt) double displeasure.

Thine, H. L.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES the Sixth, King of Scotland, his
Majesty's most humble Servant, THO. HVDSON, wishes long life with everlasting
felicity.
AS your Majesty, Sir, after your accustomed and virtuous manner was sometime
discoursing at Table with such your Domestiques, as chanced to be attendant;

It pleased your Highness not only to esteem the peereless style of the
Greek Homer, and the Latin Uirgill to be inimitable to us (whose tongue is
barbarous and corrupted): But also to allege (partly through delight your
Majesty took in the Hautie style of those most famous Writers, and partly to
sound the opinion of others) that also the lofty Phrase, the grave indictment,
the facound terms of the French Salust (for the like resemblance) could not be
followed nor sufficiently expressed in our rude and impolished English
language. Wherein, I more boldly then advisedly (with your Majesty's license)
declared my simple opinion; not calling to mind, that I was to give my verdit
in presence of so sharp and clear-eied a Censor as your Highness is: But
rashly I alleged, that it was nothing impossible even to follow the
footesteps of the same great Poet Salust, and to translate his verse (which
nevertheless is of it self exquisite) succinctly, and sensibly in our own
vulgar speech. Whereupon it pleased your Majesty (among the rest of his works)
to assign me, The History of Judith, as an agreeable Subject to your
Highness, to be turned by me into English verse: Not for any special gift or
Science that was in me, who am inferior in knowledge and erudition to the
least of your Majesty's Court: but by reason (paraduenture) of my bold
assertion, your Majesty, who will not have the meanest of your house
unoccupied, would have me to bear the yoke, and drive forth the penance, that
I had rashly procured. Indeed, the burden appeared heavy, and the charge
almost insupportable to me: nevertheless, the fervent desire which I had to
obtemper unto your Majesty's commandment, the earnest intention to verify my
rash speaking, and the assured confidence which I ankred on, your Highness
help and correction, encouraged me so, and lightened on such wise my heavy
burden, that I have with less pain, brought my half despaired work to
final end. In the which, I have so behaved my self, that through your
Majesty's concurrence, I have not exceeded the number of the lines written by
my Author: In every one of the which, he also has two syllables mo then any
English bears. And this notwithstanding, I suppose your Majesty shall find
little of my Authors meaning pretermitted. Wherefore if thus much be done by me,
who am of another profession, and of so simple literature, I leave it to be
considered by your Majesty, what such as are consummate in letters, and knows
the weighty words, the pithie sentences, the polished terms, and full
efficacy of the English tongue, would have done. Receive them, Sir, of your
own servant, this little work at your own commandment enterprised,
corrected by your Majesty's own hand, and dedicated to your own Highness. If
I have done well, let the praise redound to your Majesty, whose censure I have
vnderlyen. If otherwise, let my default of skill be imputed to my self, or at
the least my good entention allowed, whereby others may have occasion to do
better. To your Highness consideration, referring Sir, both my diligence done
in this small translation, and the inueterate affection which I have, and ought
always to bear unto your Majesty, I commit with all humility, your Highness,
your Realm and estate, to the government of God, who governs all the World.

IR

SONNET.
SInce ye immortal sisters nine hes left
All other countries lying far or near,
To follow him who from them all you reft,
And now hes causde your residence be here;
Who though a stranger yet he loved so dear
This Realm and me, so as he spoild his own,
And all the brooks and banks, and fountains clear
That be therein, of you, as he has shawne
In this his work: then let your breath be blawne
In recompense of this his willing mind,
On me; that sine may with my pen be drawn
His praise. For though himself be not inclyn'd
Nor preaceth but to touch the Laurer tree:
Yet well he merits crowned therewith to be.
FINIS.
SONNET:
THe Muses nine have not reueald to me
What sacred seeds are in their garden sown;
Nor how their Salust gains the Laurer tree,
Which throw thy toil in Britain ground is grown:
But, since they see thy travel truly showen
In Virtues school, the expiring time to spend,
So have they to his Highness made it known,
Whose Princely power may dewly thee defend.
Then you, that on the Holy Mount depend
In crystallayr, and drinks the cleared spring
Of Poetry, I do you recommend
To the protection of this godly King:
Who for his virtues, and his gifts divine,
Is only Monark of the Muses nine.
FINIS.
M. V. F.
The Authors admonition to the Reader.
Beloved Reader, it is about fourteen years past, since I was commanded by
the late Illustrate and most virtuous Princess Iean, Queen of Navarre, to
reduce the History of Judith, in form of a Poem Epique. Wherein I have not
so much aimed to follow the phrase or text of the Bible, as I have preased
(without wandering from the verity of the History) to imitate Homer in his
Iliades, and Virgill in his Aenel dos, and others who has left to us works of
such like matter: thereby to render my work so much the more delectable. And if
the effect has not answered to my desire, I beseech thee to lay the fault upon
her who proposed to me so mean a Theme or subject, and not on me who could
not honestly disobey. Yet in so much as I am the first in France, who in a
just Poem has treated in our tongue of sacred things, I hope of thy favor to
receive some excuse; seeing that things of so great weight cannot be both
perfectly begun and ended together. If thou neither allow my style nor
workmanship, at least thou shall be driven to allow the honest pretense and
holy desire which I have to see the youth of France so holily by mine example
exercised.

I may not forget, that they do greatly wrong me, who thinks that in
discriuing the Catastrophe of this History (truly tragical) I am becomne a
voluntary Advocate to these troublesome and sedicious spirits, who (for to
serve their temerarious passions, and private inspiratio^s) conspires against
the lives of placed princes. For, so much do I disassent that this example and
the like ought to be drawn in consequence, that I am verily persuaded that the
act of Ahud, of Iaell, and of Judith, who under color of obeisance and pretext
of ami^y laid their revenging hands upon Aeglon, Sisara, and Holophernes: had
been worthy of a hundredth gallows, a hundredth fires, and a hundredth wheels,
if they had not been peculiarly chosen of God for to unloose the chains, and
break the bands which retained the Hebrew people in more then Egyptian
servitude, and expressly called to kill those Tyrants with a death as shameful
as their lives were wicked and abominable. But seeing this question is so
diffuse that it cannot be absolved in few words, and that my brain is too
weak for so high an enterprise; I send you to those who have spent more oil
and time in turning the leaves of the sacred scriptures, then I have done for
the present. It me suffices for the time to admonish the Reader, to attempt
nothing without a clear and indubitable vocation of God against those whom he
has erected above us; and above all things, not to abuse the law of humane
hospitality, and other holy bands, for to give place to these frenetike
opinions so to abolish a pretended tyranny. I have also to warn thee of two
different sorts of men: of the which one sort is so depraved that they can
hear nothing, but that which is altogether profane; and the other is so
supersticious, that they make conscience not only to write, but also to read
of holy things in verse, as though that the measure and iointure of syllabes
were so constrained as it were impossible to keep the sense vnperuerted, or at
least not excessiuely obscured. Now if I perceive that this my first assay may
be to thee agreeable, I shall continue more gladly my new commenced race, in
such sort that thou shall not repent thine indulgence nor I my passed pains.
But if contrary fall, in time to come I will be ware to lay out my smalpack in
this ample Theater of France, where there is almost as many Judgments as
beholders. A Dieu.

GSSDB.

The Argument of the whole History of Judith.
AFter that the Children of Israel were delivered from captivity and returned
to their land, the City of Jerusalem reedified, the Temple builded and
prepared to the service of the Lord, the multitude of the people, being
scattered in sundry towns and places of the Land, where they lived in peaceable
rest: the Lord knowing man to be negligent of GOD and his salvation, chiefly
when he lives at ease, and all things frames unto his frail desire; to the end
that his people should not fall in such an inconvenience, would exercise them
with a fearful affliction and temptation, sending upon their Country an army
so great in number and puissance, that made the whole earth to tremble. This
expedition was under the Persian Monark, named in the history Nebuchadnezar
(which nevertheless is not his right name). His chief Lieutenant general and
Conducter of the whole Army, was Holophernes, who (wheresoever he came)
ouerthrewe all religion, permitting none to invoke or acknowledge any other
God, but Nebuchadnezar, his Master; whom he enforced to constitute and
establish for the only God. So entered he Judea with intent to destroy it all:
which the people perceiving, and that his power was so great that no nation
could resist him, and also knowing his cruel hatred; were sore affraied, and
almost driven to extreme desperation; seeing none other thing present before
them, but ruin and destruction. And this the Lord suffered, to show (in time)
his work to be more wonderful. For the people being humbled, and having
called to the Lord for mercy and succor at his hand, he both heard and
succored them at need. The mean was not through strength or stoutnesse of
some worthy Captain; but by the hand of Judith, a tender feeble woman, to the
shame of this most proud and cruel tyrant, and all his heathen host. For she
cut off his head, put all his camp to slight, destroyed his men of Arms, in
such wise that they fled here and there; and, seeking to save their lives, left
all their tents and baggage. Thus the Lord, by the weak, and those that are
not regarded, makes his works admirable. By one self mean he saved his
own, and executed his justice against his enemies. In which we have to
consider his singular ptouidence and goodness, and the care which he has in
especial for his faithful, and all his whole Church. This History is
entitled by the name of Judith, because it contains the narration of her
great virtues, and for that the Lord used her as an instrument for the
deliverance of his people. It is not certain who was the first Author hereof:
nevertheless the reading of it has been received in the Church, for the
doctrine and vtility of the same.

THE SVMMARIE OF The I. BOOK.
HOLOPHERN^^, Lieutenant general and chief of the army of Nebuch^dnezza^ K o^
the Assyrians, was in the field for to subdue diverse people, and amongst
others, the Jews. All the Nation is seized with great fear, for the cruelties
committed by the enemy. Then, as it falls out ^n bruits of war, all the whole
people were troubled: some saving themselves in corners for fear, others
attending (in great perplexity) some sad and Tragical end, the last sort
calls upon God. This while IOACHIM the chief Priest governed the people: h^ by
his letters and express commandment recalls those that were fled and
scattered, and made them return to Jerusalem: where, in presence of the
Le^its, he made sacrifice and earnest prayer unto God to withdraw his ire and
to be merciful to his people: which done he enters in counsel and requires
his Princes to consult upon the cause, and consider what i^ most (...): and to
prefer the love of Gods law and the count^ i^, before all private things* the
first that gainstands this exhortation is an hypocrite, and favorer of the
enemy* who gives counsel to render them to HOLOPHERNE^, calling him a Prince
gracious to those that applauds to him, and invincible in battle to those that
dare resist him. But the second Lord replying ^^alously again, detecteth his
false hypocri^ie and careless security, exposing the people to the mercy of a
barbarous godless enemy, before the duty they ought to their God and their
country: and to establish in place of the true God, a wicked N^MROD con^ummat
in all impiety and wickedness, to abolish all virtue and godliness. For he
proves, that if the nations should be rooted out for the right religion, God
should be more honored in the death of the Jews, then in their lives; and that
it is more worthy to die Hebrews, then to live infidels; and free men, then
slaves: Shortly, that they ought to prefer honor and duty before fear and a
vain hope to prolong their doleful days. This reply encouraged all the
a^^ist^ts: whereof IOACHIM gave thanks to God, and (resolving himself upon a
just defense for the onseruation of the service of God, and the freedom of his
nation, and the lives of the innocent against this villainous inuatision) wise
by de^a^^ed the regiments of towns to persons convenient; who past to their
^^^igned places, each one preparing according to their power unto the war
with courage, pain, and diligence.

The first Book of Judith.
I Sing the virtues of a valiant Dame, Proposition and sum of this work.

Who (in defense of Jacob) overcame
The Assyria^ Prince, and slew that Pagan stout,
Who had beset Bethulia walls about.
O thou, who kept thine Izak from the thrall Invocation of the true God.

Of infidels, and steeld the courage small
Of feeble Judith, with a manly strength;
With sacred fury fill my heart at length:
And, with thy Holy spirit, my spirit enspire,
For matter so divine. Lord I require
No humain style; but that the Reader may
Great profit reap, I joy, thou praise always.
And since in vulgar verse I prease to sing Dedicatio^ of the Author altered by
the translatour.

This godly Pooeme to a Christian King,
To him who God in goodness has erect
For princely Pillar, to his own elect:
For lawful Lord, to reign with truth and right:
For louesom Laurer, to the virtuous wight:
Him (I beseech) this travel to defend,
That to his pleasure I the same may end.
When Izrell was in quiet rest and peace,
And fruitfully the ground gave her encreise,
Which seauenty year untilled lay beforne,
And nothing bare but thistle, weed and thorn;
It pleased God (upon his just correction)
T'awake his own, that were of his election;
Least that the longsom peace should them withholde,
And dull their spirits, as does the warrior bold,
Who spoils his horse with pampring in the stable,
That makes him for the manaige more unable*
He spread their land with bands of enemies stout,
Whose clouds of shot bedimd their land about.
Their Hoaste, with arrows, pikes, and standards, stood The Army of Holopherne.

As bristle-pointed, as a thorni^ wood.
Their multitude of men, the rivers dried,
Which throw the wealthy Judah sweet did slide:
So that flood Iordane finding dry his bank,
For shame he blushed, and down his head he shrank^,
For woe that he his credit could not keep,
To send one wave, for tribute to the deep.
Scarce had the Haruest-man, with hook in hand,
Dispoylde the fruit and let the stubble stand:
Scarce had the hungry Gleaner put in bindc
The scattered grain, the Shearer left behind:
And scarce the flapping flaile began to thresh,
When unto Jacob, news was brought afresh,
That Holophern his frontiers did invade,
And past all Rivers, straits, and murders made
So vile, that none he left that drew the breath;
But old and young, he put to sudden death:
The sucking babes, upon their mothers knee,
His cruel cut-throates made them all to dee.
Then like a flock of sheep, that does behold
A wolf come from the wood upon their fold,
Shapes no defense, but runs athwart the lands,
And shortly makes of one, a hundredth bands:
So Isaaks sons, indreading for to feel
This tyrant, who pursued them at the heel, The Hebrews

Dissundring fled, and sought their lives to save
In hills, and dales, and every desert cave.
The sheep heard of his flock had now no care: Fear of the enemy.

But fearing death, fled to some mountain bare.
The Crafts man now his lumes away has laid:
The Merchant lest his traffike and his trade,
To hide himself more safely in a vault,
Then in a Rampire, to sustain the assault.
The Lords esteemde them selfs in surer hold
In Dens of beasts, then castles gilt with gold.
Fear lent the wings for aged folk to fly,
And made them mount to places that were hie.
Fear made the woeful women for to bear
Their cradles sweet to hills that highest were:
Fear made the woeful child to wail and weep,
For want of speed, on foot and hand to creep:
All where was nothing heard but hideous cries,
And pitious plaints that did the hearts agrise.
O Lord (said they) will thou still, day by day,
The arrows of thine anger never stay? Affliction causes prayer.

Will thou that Calde conquer us again?
Shall Judah yet the Heathen yoke sustain?
Will thou again that they make every town,
But stony heaps of houses casten down?
Again shall sacrilegious fire devour
Thy holy house where we do thee adore?
Then Ioachim the priest of God most hie,
Who over Judah then had chief degrie,
Stood like a Pylot stout in tempest great,
Who seeing wind and weather for to threat,
Yet to his mates, his fear no terror draws,
Nor leaves his ship unto the wrackfull wawes;
But, with disguising fear, his face up casts,
And stoutly does gain-stand the balefull blasts:
Right so this prudent prelate sent, in haste,
Two hundredth men to pass where men were placed
In places strong, and thence commanded them
For to repair unto Jerusalem.
Now since the Erernall did reveal his will,
Upon the sacred top of Syna Hill,
The Ark of God which wisdom more did hold,
In Tables two, then all the Greeks have told;
And more then ever Rome could comprehend,
In huge of learned books that they pend: Sam. 1. 4.

Long wandered it throw trybes, throw kin and kin, Sam. 2. 6.

And found no certain place of resting in.
Yea, sometime it the shameful spoil has been
To sacrilegious hands of Palestine,
Until that time, that Iessies holy race,
For ever lodged it in Iebus place.
But, for that David's hands with blood were fi^d, Jerusalem.

Throu infinits of humains he had killed;
The king of peace would have a king of rest
To build his Temple far above the best: Sam. 2. 7.

His house, whose front vpreard so high and eaven,
That lightlied earth, and seemed to threat the heaven,
Until that wicked time a tyrant vile,
Of name and deed that bare the semble style, Nabuchadnezar.

That did this king, that building brave he wrackt,
And to the sacred ground all whole it sacked.
Yet when, long after, Abrahms holy race,
Of Tiger banks had left the captive place, Esd. 6.

With combers great they redified with pain,
That most renowned house of God again.
Which though unto the first it seemd as small,
As to a Princes house, a shepherds hall:
And though the hugenes were not as it was,
Yet sure the height and beauty did surpas
And overseilde the famous work of Pharie,
Ephesus Temple, and the tomb of Carry,
The Rhodian Collos, and the Caldean wall,
That Semirame set up with tourrets tall.
Also the wondrous work of this same Temple
Might serve a C^esiphon for his exemple:
Lysippus eke to carue by square and line,
Or guide Apelles pensile most divine.
Here in this place, all Izrel, most devout,
Withdrew themselves to Salem round about;
As when the Heaven his sluices opens wide,
And makes the floods upon the ground to glide,
The brooks that breaks adoun from diverse hills
With course impetuous till one deep distills.
Amongst the Dames, that there deuoutest were
The holy Judith, fairest did appear:
Like Phoebus that above the star does shine:
It seemed that she was made on moulde divine.
This primate then assisted with the kin
Of great Eleazar (priests whose head and chinne
Was never shav'n) devoutly on he preast:
A pearled Myter on his balmed creast,
And with a holy Alb, with garnettes spread,
And golden Belles, his sacred body cled:
And slew, and burnt, the bulks (as was the guise)
Of many a kid, and kalfe for sacrifise:
And with their blood, the Altars horns he dyed,
And praying thus, to God immortal cried.
"O Lord of Hoastes, we com not unto thee, Prayer.

"To wey our merits with thy majesty:
"Nor to protest before thy heavenly might,
"That sacklesly, thy scourge does on us light:
"But rather we confess (as true it is)
"Our sins have justly merit more then this.
"But Lord if thou thy covenant would forget,
"Which thou with Abrahm made, and so wilt set
"For mercy great, thy justice most seuear,
"Thou should a greater plague upon us rear.
"Change then our process from thy justice seat,
"And save us at thy throne of mercy great.
"Forgive us Lord, and hold, far from us all,
"These plagues, that on our heads are like to fall.
Alas, what helps us thy heavy stroke,
To bind our necks to such a servile yoke,
Wherewith the Assyrian tyrants long have grieved
Thine Izak till their bondage thou relieved;
If so this native ground that new is tild,
If so these Hostries new with folk refild,
If so (alas) our chaste and modest Dames,
Our infants young, our Virgins good of fames,
Should be a pray to Ammon, and to Perse,
To Calde, and the mutine Parthian fierce;
If that we see this Altar made profane,
And witches it abuse with Idols vain:
Yet Lord if thou no pity on us take,
At least great God, do (for thy glories sake)
Have pity on this holy building now,
Where not a God has sacrifice but thou:
Where not a God but thou have residence,
To feel the savor sweet of frankensence.
Hold back (O Lord) the Caldean cressets bright
From these rich Cedar vaults of stately hight.
Preserve these vessels, ornaments of gold,
From sacrilegious hands of neighbors bold:
And let the blood of beasts before thy face,
Thy Justice stay, and grant thy servants grace.
This prayer done, the people went their way,
Then Ioachim conuen'd, that present day,
The princes all of Judah, and them praid,
Against this mischief for counsel, and thus said:
Companions, if your former zeal remain,
If ardent love to God ye still retain:
If wife, or child, may cause your care or love,
Which should the Centers of your senses move:
If in your breasts a noble heart does bide,
Let deed bear witness at this woeful tide.
For, saving God and your foresight, in deed
It Is done, it is done with us, and all our seed:
And after this, the Immortal shall not see
This altar fume before his maiestee.
When the Air is calm, and still; as dead and deaf, Comparison.

And under Heaven quakes not an aspin leaf,
When Seas are calm, and thousand vessels fleet
Upon the sleeping seas with passage sweet,
And when the variant wind is still and lowne,
The cunning Pylot never can be known.
But when the cruel storm does threat the Bark
To drown in deeps of pits infernal dark,
While tossing tears both father, mast, and sail,
While mounting seems the Azur sky to skail,
While drives perforce upon some deadly shore,
There is the Pylot known, and not before.
Alas, I pray you then what care and strifes
Have we to keep our honors, goods, and life's?
Forget not then the care of this same place,
Your countries weal, Gods glory and his grace:
But humbly give your selves into the hand
Of God most high, and with a holy brand
"Repurge your spirits from every hateful sin,
"Which causes God his Justice to begin:
And see what may to God be agreeable,
For Jacobs weal, and for you profitable.
This said: an ancient traitor, from his youth,
Who fostred gall in heart, with honey in mouth,
Enforcing from his eyes some fained tear
(To cloak his malice) spacke as ye shall hear:
My tongue me fails, my hair for dread vp-starts,
My heavy spirit from pensive corpse departs, The oration of a subtle worldling.

When I be think me of yone tyrant stout,
Who has bed round the world with blood about,
Approaching threats our towns with fiery flames,
Our selfs with death, dishonor to our Dames:
Yet when I call to mind the curtsie great,
That this great Lord does use, who does entreat*
Not only those that beastiall are become,
And have their hope in brutall Idols (...)*
But even to zealous folk who do embrace
The faith, and law (like us) of Abrams race:
Who, being well aduisde, did humbly sue
His pardon, and escaped his vengeance due;
Then thank I God, who sends us such a foe,
As plagues the proud, and lets the humble go:
For we as soon shall vanquish him with tears,
As will be long to wrack him with our wears.
Then whilst we may have choice of eitherstate,
Of peace or wars, his favor or his hate;
Let us not follow (seeing skath at hand)
The folly of our fathers, to gainstand:
But rather let us bear another sail,
And serve his king as best for our avail.
But think not yet, that I this counsel give
For craft, or warrant forthy self to live:
For I have else my days so nearly spent,
That for to dye I could be well content.
The Assyrian need not in my breast to strike
His fethred Dart, nor yet his trembling pike:
Yea, if my youth to me should eft return,
And make my youthly blood within me burn,
So honor I my God, and country dear,
That for to dye for them, I would not fear,
As Sampson did, if so my death might yield
The victory of the Uizroy, and the field.
But most I (fear) least we, with curious zeal,
Fight for the law, yet fight against her weal,
Against our selfs, to bring so great a wrack,
That proud, and cruel tyrants shall us sack,
And grow in pride (suppressing Judas strength)
For to contemn the glory of God at length.
For, Israel being lost, who shall ensue,
To render here to God devotions due?
What people spars^d on this earthly ball
From Indian shore to where the Sun does fall,
Or from the Climate of the northren blast,
Unto that place where summer ay does last;
Has God elect, save Israel for his own
Upon this Hill to have his glory shown?
At this the valiant Cambris of renown,
With righteous rage grew pale and began to frown,
And brake the silence with a vehement style,
His courage moved the Princes all the while.
Nay rather where I stand let open the ground
(Quoth he) to swallow me in pit profound:
Yea rather righteous Heaven let fiery blast
Light on my head that thou on Sodom cast,
Ere I my malice cloak or oversile,
In giving Izac such a counsel vile.
For, if the Leader of this folk profane
Upon our bodies only sought to reign,
Although that we have dearly bought always
Our freedom from our first maternall day
(Which dearer is then gold for to be kept)
I would assent, the holy Church except:
But since more pride this tyrants heart enroules
To lay a greater burden on our souls,
Who are the vassels of that only King,
That Thunder sends and scepters down does thring:
'Should we forget him who made us of naught,
'More then all wondrous things that he has wrought,
Who treats and loves us like our Father and King,
Still under shadows of his wondrous wing?
Will he that we receive a Prince ambitious?
For God, a gods contemner, Nemrode vicious?
Whose beastly life is of so vile a fame,
That of a man he merits not the name?
Go to, go to, let men for men assaye
With sword and shot to deal it as we may:
The victory lies not in mortal hands,
Nor barded horse, nor force of armed bands.
These are but second instruments of God;
Who, as him list, may send them even or od.
But if our sovereign God wills such annoy;
That folk vncircumcis'd our land destroy,
Because we him offend while we have breath;
Alas, yet honor, honor him in death:
And if we lose and all be overcome,
Let patience win the glory of martyrdom.
Forsooth, though Assurs soldiers brave and bold
Extinguish quite the race of Izak old,
Yet shall they not deface the living Lord,
As these Apostats falsely do afforde.
For he, who peopled first this world so round,
But with one man, from whom the rest abound:
And who long after, in an arc of wood,
Repaird the waste, made by the genrall flood;
May he not eke transform the hardened stone,
To people who will honor him alone?
And may not he do now, as he has done,
Who gave to Abrams barren wife a son?
Them giving Children more, then in the heaven
Are starrie Circles, light as fiery leaven:
And mo, then Northren winds (that drives the Rack)
Of Cyrene sands in number can compack;
Who will observe his law an hundredth fold
More zealously then we, who should it hold.
'Then, fathers chose you wars: for better tells,
'To lose like Jews, then win like infidels.
'Let not the greede of gain your hearts attame,
'To leave the right: prefer not fear to shame.
Scarce enden was the Oration of this Lord,
When all the Princes (with a sound accord)
By word and deed confirmde his good advise.
The chief Priest, gladdest of this enterprise,
Unto the heaven held up his hands and face,
And said, I thank the Lord, who of his grace
'Conioynes no less our wills, then bolds our hearts:
'A sure presage, that God is on our parts.
This done, unto his princes he diuides
The tribes and towns, and ordaines them for guides;
For fear least some of them led with ambition
In Izrell might stirre-vp some sedition.
So they withdrew, and stoutly did provide,
This furious storm of Mars for to abide.
Then as ye see sometime the honey Bees Comparison.

Exerce themselfs on buddes of sweetest trees,
Where they sometime assault the buzzing waspe,
That comes too near, their flowrs away to claspe;
Or when they honey draw from smelling Time,
Or from the palm, or Roses of the prime:
And how they draw their wax with wondrous art,
Observing iointure just in every part,
Both up and down they build ten thousand shops,
With equal spaceful filled vpto the tops:
Or where the master Be, of thousand bands,
Conducts the rest in legions throw the lands,
Who daily keeps within their Cities wall:
Their house, their work, their laws and manners all:
So thus the sons of Jacob plied their pain,
With hot desire their quarrel to sustain.
Some built the breaches of their broken town, Preparations of defense.

That Heaven, and Panim ire, had casten down.
Some other found a cautell, against the Ram,
To save the wall unbroken where it camme.
Thus Jacobs towns on all sides had their flanks,
With Gabions strong, with bulwarks and with banks.
Some others busy went and came in routs
To terrace towers, some under baskets louts:
Some others also wanting time and might
To strength their towns, yet used all kind of slight,
To dig up ditches deep, for cisterns good,
To draw them to the best and nearest flood.
While the Armorers with hammers hard and great
On sti^hies strong the sturdy steel^ does ^eate,
And makes thereof a corpslet or a ^acke,
Sometime a helm, sometime a mace does make,
While sheepherds they enarme vnus'd to danger,
While simple birds, and whiles the wandering stranger;
Thetilling Culter then aspeare was made,
The crooked Sith became an euened blade:
The people food forgets, no ease they take,
Some on a horse, some on his proper back,
Some on a Cart, some on a Cammell bears
Corn, wine, and flesh, to serve for many years;
As done these Emets, that in summer tide, Comparison.

Comes out in swarms their houses to provide:
In harvest time (their toil may best be seen
In paths where they their carriage bring between)
Their youth they send to gather-in the store,
Their sick and old at home do keep the ^kore,
And over grainels great they take the charge,
Often turning corn within a chamber large
(When it is dight) least it do spro^te or seed,
Or come again, or weevels in it breed.
FINIS.
THE SVMMARIE OF The II. BOOK.
WE have heard before, how the people of God used all diligence to maintain
the liberty of Gods true religion and their Country. Now is set forth the
extreme pride of Ho^ophernes, who thought with one word to overthrow them all.
But to make himself some pastime, he assembleth his Council to understand of
them what people they were, that inhabited the mountains in the Frontieres of
IVDEA, that durst make him resistance. Upon this he is informed by the mouth of
one of his chief captains, of that which he looked not for: to wi^te* a
discourse of the History of the JEWS, from the time of ABRAHAM'S coming out
of Caldea to enter into the land of Promise, unto them deliverance from the
Captivity of Babylon, following the order of the times quoted by the holy
scriptures* with the praises of the providence of the almighty God, in
defending of his Church, and a sharp threatening to those that dare presume to
disquiet the same. The chief Counselors of the Heathen hearing this, became
more truth incen^ing their General to murder this Captain. But HOLOPHERNE
with vain ambition defer^eth their bloody request; and, after that he had
outraged him in words, he further blasphemeth the living Lord. And lastly
caused him to be bound hand and ^oote, and so carried near to the City of
Bethulia: where he is by the bes^oged Soldiers brought into the City, and
there declares his case; exhorting them to continue constant, to God, and
their Country, and promises his assistance to his lives end.

THE SECOND BOOK of IVDITH.
Now Holophern in Scythique Rampire stood,
With standards pight of youthly heathen blood;
Of nothing thinking less, then war and fight,
But in devising pastime day and night:
Till he was war, that Jacob would advance,
Against his Panim force and arrogance.
A pack of what? a pack of country clownes
(Quoth Holophern) that them to battle bownes,
With beggars, bolts, and (...) to arrest
My warriors strong* with whom I have suppressed
Both Tigris swift, and fair Euphrates stream, People of Asia.

With frosty Taurus and rock Niphathoame.
Are they not wrackt? ye Cheefs of Moabits,
And valiant Ephrem, ye strong Ammoni^s:
Ye that as neighbors knows this folk of old,
That scattered thus, do all these mountains hold:
Tell me what men are they, of what offspring,
What is their force, their customs and their king?
'For, wise is he that wots with whom he plays,
'And half is victor, as the Proverb says.
The Lord of Ammon then, with reverence due,
Right wisely spa^k the Duke; and yet, for true,
He was a Panim both of faith, and kind:
But so (with fained tongue) he spoke his mind,
And all the Hebrews acts discourst so well,
That Esdr' and Moses seemd in him to dwell,
As did that sprite that made the Prophet bless Number. 23.

The Israelites, whom Balec did address
To curse them all, and wage his covetous tongue,
Which spoke contrary that he would have soung:
So please it you my Lord, I shall descrie
The story of Izrell: yet, so doing, I
Am like the modest Be, that takes but small
Of every flowr, though she have choice of all:
For where she list, the sweetest off she crops.
These people that ye see on mountain tops, A brief discourse of the estate of
the Jews.

Encamped in these craggs, are of the line
Of Abraham; who (serving God divine,
That mighty God of Gods who creat all,
And firmly knit and built this mighty ball)
Came to this Land that then was tild and sown, Genesis 12.

And by the name of wealthy Canaan known:
Where only God his wealth did multiply,
In goods, and silver, gold, and family.
And when of age he was an hundred year,
His wife eake barren, never child did ^ear;
God gave them Isaac, swearing that his seed
Should many Scepters rule, and Land bespreed:
But, when that holy Abraham was old,
And hoped well the promise made should hold
(O pitious case) The immortal voice him spoke,
And bad him sacrifice his son Isaac.
Then like a ship between two winds beset, Genesis 22.

Upon the raging sea on both sides bet,
In doubtsom fear, ^e wots what way to keep,
Least one of them confound her in the deep:
Makes close her ports, and slides on Neptunes back;
At pleasure of the hoisteous winds to wrack:
So felt this Hebrew, in his heart to fight
Both love, and duty, reason, faith and right.
Nor wist he way to take: his troubled soul,
From this to that continually did roll,
Until the time, his heavenly fear and love
His natural earthly pity did remove.
Then having built the fire and all, anon
His son he laid upon the sacred stone,
And with a trembling hand the curtlasse drew,
With heavied arm the stroke for to ensewe;
When, lo, the Eternal staid the balefull knife,
And down it fell, and spaird the guiltless life.
Then God, content to have so great assaye
Of Abrams faith, defended him always.
Of Isaac, Jacob came, and Jacob than
Of valiant sons had twelve in Canaan,
Who (forced by famine) fled to Egypt Land:
Where for a while, their dwelling good they fand; Exodus 1

And grew so great in number, that they were
A fear to those that had them harbourd there.
And though the Egyptians daily them oppressed,
And burdens on their sweating backs were dressed:
Yet like the valiant Palm they did sustain
Their peisant weight, redressing up again.
This moved King Pharo to command through all
Great Nilus Land, where rain does never fall,
He bad his folk should slay (whereso they came)
All children males the seed of Abraham;
As Soon as they from mothers wombs were free,
Their day of birth should be their day to dee.
O cruel Tiger, thinks thou that this deed
Of Izak may cut off the immortal seed? Exclamatio^.

Well may it stay the sucklings for to live,
And kill the accustomde fruit that heaven does give:
But, spite of this, men Jacobs seed shall see
In flouring state to rule all Cananee:
The first of every house shall feel the hand
And wrath of God against this law to stand.
It fortuned Pharo's daughter, with her train
Of Ladies fair, to play them on the Plain,
Upon the shore where Gossan floode does slide:
Where, after many pastimes they had tried,
She hears an enfant weep amongst the reeds.
Then, judging it for one of Izaks seeds,
As so it was (yet, with Paternall fear)
Against his pitious plaint she closed her ear:
But after, vewing in that infants face
I know not what of favor and of grace,
Which did presage his greatness to ensew;
Love vanquished law, and pity dread withdrew:
So from the floode not only she him caught,
But curiously she causde him to be taught,
As her own son. O son elect of God, Admiration.

That once shall rule the people with thy rod,
Thou haste not found a servant for thy mother,
But even a Queen to nurse thee and none other.
"Now see how God, always for his elect, Note.

"Of wicked things can draw a good effect:
"His providence has made a wicked thing,
"Unto his own, great profit for to bring.
"When Joseph's brether sold him like a slave, Genesis 41

"He after came a kingly place to have.
"Of Haman proud the dark envious hate
"Brought Mardoche the just to great estate.
"For, where his enemy sought his shameful end, Est.

"The same unto the worker he did send.
This Hebrew Moses once as he did keep
On Horeb mount his father Iethro his sheep: Father in Law.

He saw a fearful sight, a flaming fire
Enclose a thorny bush whole and entire:
From whence a mighty voice unto him spoke,
Which made the ground between the Poles to shake:
I am that One, is, was, and ay shall be, Exodus 3.

Who create all of naught, as pleases me:
I can destroy, I am the great, and just,
The fair, the good, the Holy one to trust,
Whose strong right hand this world has set in frame,
I am the Almighty God of Abraham:
I plague my foes, and grant my servants grace,
All those that knowledge me, and all their race.
Then follow thou my will, and quickly go,
From me, to that profane King Pharao,
Who holds the towrs of Memphis and the field,
Of Nilus shore that rich increase does yield;
And bid him let my people freely go:
But, if with hardened heart, he will not so,
Stretch out thy staff for to confirm thy charge,
And it shall turn into a Serpent large.
And this he shortly did, the thing to prove:
It quickened lo, and on the ground began move.
(O Miracle) he saw without all ^aile,
It grew a Serpent fell with head and tail:
Which crangling crept, and ran from trod to trod
In many a knot, till time the Almighty God
Commanded him the same for to retain,
Which to the former shape returned again.
Thus siling humain sight, it changed form,
One while a Rod, one while a creeping worm.
Then armed with this staff, the Lord him sent,
The proud idolatrous princes to torment.
He, in the name of God, full often did pray
The King, to let the Hebrews go their way,
Unto the desert where he did devise,
To offer God a pleasant sacrifise.
But Pharo closed his ear against the Lord,
And to his holy word would not accord.
Then God the Eternal wrought by Moses hand, Exodus 4

To approve his word, great wonders in that Land.
For, he not only Rivers turned to blood, Exodus 7

But also all the heads of Nilus flood
(Which watreth wealthy Egypt with his sources)
Was turned to blood amid their silver courses:
So that the king himself, his life to feed,
Was feign to use such water for his need.
This Moses made the froggs in millions creep, Exodus 8

From floods and ponds, and scrall from ditches deep:
Who cled all Misraim with their filthy fry,
Even on the king and all his family.
To young and old of either Sex that while, Exodus 9

He sent a plage of scalding botches vile:
So that the Memphites, laid on beds to rest,
With uncouth venim daily were oppressed:
To Medciners, the medcine valled not;
So sore the poisond plague did under cot.
He also smote the for rests, herbs, and grase,
The flocks of sheep and every beast that was:
Throw poison of the infected ground so ^ell,
The Morrain made them all to die or swell:
So that the Shepherd, by the river side,
His flock has rather dead then sick espide.
He, earthly dust, to lothly lice did change,
And dimd the Air, with such a cloud so strange
Of flies, grasshoppers, hornets, clegs and clocks, Exodus 10

That day and night throw houses flew in flocks,
That with incisions sharp did sheare the skins
Of Egypt Panims, throw their proudest ynnes.
And when the heaven most quiet seemd and fair,
The Eternal sent a tempest through the air,
And (at this Hebrew's prayer) such a rear
Of thunder fell, that brought them all in fear.
Here lay a Bull, that woodran while he brast:
There lay the Keeper, burnt with thunder blast:
And now the forest high, that hid the air,
With many a spreeding arm, is spoild and bair:
So that the sap that grafters keeps with pain,
Which should restore the stock, and leaf again,
Is lost (alas) in less then half a day,
The husbands hoped fruit gone to decay.
What more? the Eternal darkened so the sky,
For three days space none could another spy:
That cloud, so thick, the Memphis rebels fand,
That they might firmly feel it with their hand:
It seemd that Phoebus left his ancient Round,
And dwelt three days with men of underground.
"And as the sun at one self time is felt,
"With heat to harden clay, and wax to melt:
"So Amrams sacred son, in these proiects,
"Made one self cause, have two contraire effects.
"For, Izak humbly knew the Lord divine:
"But Pharo, more and more, did still repine;
"Like to the corpslet cold, the more it is het
"With hammers hard, more hardness it does get.
Yet when his son was slain by the Angels hand, Exodus 11 Heir.

Amongst the eldest heirs of Egypt Land;
He was afraid, and let them go that night,
Where pleased them to serve their God of might:
Who sent a cloud before them all the day,
By night a Pillar of fire, to guide their way.
But so dainly this tyrant did gainstand
His former grant, and armd all Egypt Land
With hot pursuit against all Jacobs host,
That were encamped on the Red Sea cost.
Such noise was never, since the foraigne tide
Brak throw Gibraltar, when it did divide
The Calp, from Abill, or when Sicill strand
Divorced was from her Italia Land;
As was in these two camps: that one, with boste,
That other with their wailings filled the coast:
It seemd the sounds of furious horse and men,
With horns and pypes, to heaven resounded then. Exodus 14. They murmr.

O Iuggler said the Jews, what hateful strife
Has moved thee to change our happy life?
What? are we fishes, for to swim the seas?
Or are we fowls, to fly whereas we please,
Beyond the Sea? or over hills to soar?
Was there not graves for us on Gossen shore;
But, in this desert here to die, or have
The blood-red Ocean Sea, to be our grave?
Then Moses, with his quickened rod, that tide,
He smote the sea, which (fearful) did divide;
Discovering land that sun had neuerseene,
And staid the sea, as there two walls had been:
Which made a passage dry of ample space,
For all to pass who were of Isaacs race:
But contrary the Red Sea did deuower
The barbrous tyrant with his mighty power,
Who proudly durst himself to that present,
Which opened but to save the innocent.
O happy race, since God does arm for thee,
Both fire and air, the winds, the clouds and see
(Which all unto thy pay have whole inclinde)
Let not consuming time wear out of mind
So rare a grace; but let thine elders show
This to their noble seed that shall ensewe:
And let their sons, unto their sons record
Throw all the world these wonders of the Lord.
God, with Celestial bread (in time of need)
His loved Jacob forty year did feed: Exodus 6.

And gave them water from the solid stone,
Which of it self had never moisture none.
Their caps, their coats, and shoes, that they did wear,
God kept all fresh and new, full forty year.
And farther, least their souls, for want of food, Exodus 20.

Should faint or fail; he, of his mercies good,
Gave them his law, pronounced by his voice,
His spirit to theirs, in him for to rejoice:
So teaching them, and us in precepts ten,
Our duty first to God, and next to men;
To the end that man to man should truly stand,
And join with God, and never break that band.
This mighty Prophet dead; Duke Joshua than, Joshua.

Their Captain stout, this Palmy province wan:
Throw might of God, he Scepters did subdew
Of thirty tyrant Kings, whom all he slew.
At his commandment like the thunder sound,
The Rampers strong fell fearfully to ground;
Before the Tortuse, or the horned Ram,
Had bet, or mined, from their wall a dram:
For, even of horns, full hoarse, their simple blast
An engine was, their towers adoune to cast.
He prayed the heaven for to prolong the day,
And made the horses of the sun to stay;
To the end, the night should not with cloud be cled,
To save the faithles, that before him fled.
Now when this Panim scourge (with age at last)
Had left this life, and unto heaven past;
Then Isaac had of Rulers sundry men,
Whose glorious acts deserves eternal pen.
Who knows not Samgar, Barac, and Othoniell? Judges.

Tha valiant Delbor, Ahud and good Samuel?
What Land (O Sampson) rings not thy renown,
Who sole, unarmed, bet an Army down?
What laud to Iephthe justly might we low,
Had he not hurt his own, through hasty vow?
What hill or dale, what flood or fixed ground,
(...) not the famous Gedeons praise resound?
In later time, their kings some good, some bad,
Of all the Hebrew state the ruling had.
Had I the Harp of David (holy King)
None other sound but David would I sing.
(...)uen as all the deeds that David did,
(...)ot be done by none, but by David:
So none but David, on his yv'rie harp,
The glorious praise of God could only carpe.
But, here, his praise I prease not to proclaim,
Least I throw want of skill obscure the same:
Yet leave I not his Son, whom grace divine Solomon.

Made no lesserich, then wondrous of engine:
Whose doctrine drew to Salem from all wheare,
A hundred thousand wyzards him to hear:
From Araby, from Ynde, to Affrik shore;
His tongue entyste them with his cunning lore. Josias.

Shall I forget the kings, who overthrew
Idolatry, and placed religion dew?
Shall I forget that King, who saw descend Hezekiah. Jerusalem. Asa.

A winged Host, Solyma to defend?
Shall I forget him, who before his eene,
Enchast the bands of Chus on Gerar green?
Shall I forget him, who preparing fight Iosaphat.

Against Ammon, Seir, and Moabs Idol might;
Saw each of their three hoasts on others fall,
And with them selfs their selfs, disconfit all?
Yet, for their sins God gave them in the hands
Of Calde Kings, who conquered all their Lands:
And took King Zedekee, and made an end
Of that Impire; till God did Cyrus send,
Who set them free, and gave them of his grace
Two rulers of their own. And now this place
Is kept by sacred Ioachim, whose powers
Consists not only within Sions towers;
But, Edom, Sidon, Moab, and we all
Do know his strength and knows him principal.
Now Sir, you hear the progress first and last
Of Is^acs race in order as it past.
One while the Lord enhaunst them to the sky:
One while he drew them down in deep to lie.
'But were he Judge, or Prince, or King of might,
'Who reul'd the Hebrews policy aright,
'While they observed the alliance made before
'By their forefathers, who to God them swore,
'In happy state all others they surpast:
'And underfoot their proudest foes were cast.
'And all the world, that their destruction sought,
'Against their state, and name prevailed naught.
'But, contrary, as often as they astraide
'From God their guide, he on their shoulders laid
'The Barbare yock of Mo^b, and oft-times
'Of Palestine and Ammon for their crimes,
'The heavy hand of God was seen to be,
'On their ungrateful infidelity.
Now, if so be that any odious sin
Provoke their Lord his Justice to begin:
Then mine not you their towers and tourets tall,
Nor bring the wrack some engine to their wall:
Nor place thy battries brave, nor yet aduenter,
With thy courageous camp, the breach to enter.
For, if Libanus mount, or Carmell fair
Or Niphathaei should park them from repair:
If Ynde and Nilus with the Rhene and Rhone
To close them round about, should run in one,
For their defense: yet shall they notwithstand
(With all their force) thy flurious fighting ^and*
But if they have not broke the ^and indeed
That God with Abraham made and with his seed;
Beware, my Lord, beware to touch or move
These people that the Lord so much does love.
For, though south Autan would dispeople his Lands,
And bring the blackest Moors to swarm in bands:
If Northren Boreas, under his banners cold,
Would bring to field his hideous Soldiers bold:
If Zephyrus from sweet Hesperia cost,
Would send his chosen armed men to Host:
If Eurus, for to aid thine enterprise,
Would bring his men from whence the sun does rise:
Yet all their numbers hudge, and forces strong,
Can never do to Israel any wrong,
Nor hurt one hair, if their great God say nay*
That God will them defend, because he may
With one small blast confound all Kings that darre
(As thou do now) provoke him unto war.
Then like as ye behold the quiet see
Not raging when the winds ingendring be:
But, blauncheth first, then grows in little space,
In wallowing waves to flow with fomy face,
And lastly beats the banks, and ships vnshrouds,
With wrackfull waves vphoist to highest clouds:
So, almost all the princes of that host,
With inward anger began to be emboste,
As often as they the praise of God did hear;
So to his speech encreast their spiteful cheer:
Which, in the end, to blasphemy them brought,
The immortal God of Gods to set at naught.
Kill and cut off (quoth they) this traitor fine,
Whose subtle talk, with all his whole engine,
Pretends to save these Hebrews from our hands,
And threats us with vain Gods of foreign Lands:
For if it please you (noble prince) to send
But twenty men of value that are ^end,
Within your camp, these recklesse rebels then
Shall be a pray to all your warlike men.
(O wicked wight!) but then the Uizroy stout,
With power, appeasde the murmur of the route:
And to him said: O shameless Prophet thou,
What Sibyll, or what charmer tell me now?
What Devil or Demon so does thee inspire,
That Izrell shall of us have his desire?
Such men, as with no God can be content,
But such as pleased Moses to invent
Of his own head: a God that has no power ^lasphemic.

For to deliver them, nor thee this hour.
Have we an other God, or king of kings,
Then our great Persian Monark now that rigns?
Whose barded horse ore runns the Nations all,
Whose armed men, out of these mountains tall,
Shall rake these Rebels that from Egypt came
To this, where they unjustly keep the same.
Dye, dye, thou shall, O wretch: thy tongue untrue,
And double heart, shall have their wages due.
But, fool, what speak I thus? no haste, a while:
Thy blood (O villain) shall not me defile.
So just a pain, so soon thou shall not have,
For thy deceit, so soon to go to grave.
'For, in a wretches sudden death, at ones
'Their long some ill is buried with their bones.
But, to that end I may prolong thy strife,
In Bethull town I will prolong thy life:
Where every hour, thou shall have such affraye
To dye vndead a thousand times a day,
Till time with them who thou so strong have thought
To shameful end with them thou shall be brought.
What? wherefore temblest thou and art so pale?
What sorrow makes thy heart so soon to fail?
If God be God, as thou right now have said,
Then of thy faith give witness, vndismaid.
A marshall of the camp then being pressed
(Who was not yet so cruel as the rest)
There took this demi Pagan ( Ammons Lord)
And sent him bound to Bethull (with a cord).
Then even as in his claws the kite does bear
The chirping chicken, throu the weather clear,
While that the cackling hen, below on ground,
Bewayles her bird with vain lamenting sound:
So in like woe his worthy men were left,
For that so worthy a chief was them bereft.
The Townsmen then beholding near their wall
These Miscreants, to armor straight they fall,
Y^lad in plate and mail, and runs in bands,
And fearcely fronts their foes with steel in hands;
As fast as done the rivers down the hills,
That with their murmur hudge the deepes vpfils.
The Heathen, seeing this, retirde away,
And left the Lord of Ammon for a pray
To the Hebrew soldiers; who did him constrain,
Though he was willing, with them to remain.
When all the folk with prease about him past,
His eyes and hands up to the pole he cast,
'And thus he spoke: O God that great abides
'Vpon the Immortal seat, and justly guides
'The ruled course of heaven, whose living spreete
'Reuiuing spreds, and through all things does fleet;
'I render thee, O God, immortal praise,
'For that before I end my woeful days,
'Now from the unfruitful stock thou do me race,
'To graft me in thy fruitful tree of grace;
'Where in despite of all contrary strife,
'I shall bring forth the fruits of lasting life.
And ye, O Jacobs sons, think not at all
That I of purpose captive am and thrall,
So that I mean hereby your wrack to bring,
For, God he knows, I think not such a thing:
But I am captive thus, because I told,
What wondrous works the Lord has done of old,
To you and your forefathers ever still,
Deliv'ring them that would obey his will.
Then doubt not you a thousand ^la^^ing flags,
Nor horrible cries of ^^leous heathen hags:
Cool not your hearts. For, if the world about
Would compass you with all their warriors stout
(Providing first ye seek your help at need
At power divine, and not at mortal seed)
You surely shall see Mocmurs renning flood,
Made red, with Assurs host and Ethnique blood:
Ye surely shall see men, not used to fight,
Sub due their foes, that seems of greater might.
The hand of God assailes you not with hate:
But, for your weal, your pride he will abate;
To let you wit, it is within his power,
To leave or to relieve you every hour.
As on the unsavory stock the lilly is borne:
And as the rose grows on the pricking thorn:
So modest life, with sobs of grievous smart
And cries devout, comes from an humbled heart.
For, even the faithful flock are like the ground,
That for good fruit, with weeds will still abound,
If that the share and culter idlelye
That riues the soil, and roots the brambles bye:
But, in the end, God will his ire relent,
As Soon as sinners truly will repent:
And save you from these plagues that present be
In shorter time then ye do think to see.
Take courage, friends, and vanquish God with tears:
And, after, we shall vanquish with our wears
These enmies all. Now, if there rest in me
The former force that once was wont to be:
If elde have not decaid my courage bold,
That I have had with great experience old;
I render me to serve you to my end,
For Jacobs weal, Gods law for to defend.
FINIS.
THE SVMMARIE OF The III. BOOK.
IN this third book, the Poet sets forth the seege of Bethulia, and the
extremity that God permitted them to feel, thereby to give an entry to his
miraculous deliverance; who is accustomed to lead his people to the gates of
death, and from thence to retire them above all humane expectation, to the end
they should confess that the arm of flesh, nor worldly wisdom maintains
not the Church: but the only favor of the Almighty, to whom the whole glory
of duty should be rendered. Father, three principal things are to be noted:
First, the preparations of the beseegers, and the defenses of the beseeged; and
how after, throw the counsel given to Holopberne for the restraint of the
water from the town, ens^wes a furious assault, which the Jews repelled with
great pain: Secondly, the extreme desolation through want of water, whereof
proceeds sundry sorts of death, with lamentations, murmurations, and danger
of muti^e within the City, and how the Governor endeavors himself with wise
and godly admonitions to appease the same: But the Commons, in this hard estate
regarding no reason, required to render the City, rather then to perish in
such apparent misery. The Governor, being carried with a humane prudence,
promises to render the Town within five days, if God send them no succor.
Yet such is the estate of Gods Church in this world, that when all things
fails, God manifests his power. And therefore in the third partis IVDITH
introduced, who (being especially moved by the reading of Holy Scriptures) is
encouraged to deliver her Country: but when she understood the resolution of
the Magistrates, She (being in estimation honorable) modestly reproues them.
After their excuse, she promises to attempt something for the public weal:
not showing her devise, but only desired to have passage by night unto the
enemies camp, and this is granted.

THE THIRD BOOK of IVDITH.
THe Snoring snoute of restles Phlegon blewe
Hot on the Ynds, and did the day renew
With skarlet sky, when Heathen men awooke
At sound of drum: then pike and dart they took,
In order marching, and to combat ^alles
The undaunted sons, within their Cities walls.
The meeds in May with flowers are not so dect,
Of sundry savors, hews, and seere effect,
As in this camp were people different far
In toungs and manners, habits, tents, and war.
Yea Chaos old, whereof the world was founded,
Of members more confuse, was not compounded:
Yet soundly they in union did accord
To wage the war against the Almighty Lord,
Who shakes the Poles, whose only breath does beat
Libanus mount, and makes Caucasus sweat.
There came the Kettrinks wild, of cold Hircania,
Joined with the men of great and less Armania:
With coppintanks: and there the Parthian tall
Assaid to shoot his shafts, and flee withal.
The Persians proud (the Empire was in their hands)
With plates of gold, surbraued all their bands.
The Medes declared through fortunes overthwart*
They lost their Scepter, not for lack of heart:
And that no costly cloth nor rich array,
Nor painting fine, that on their face they lay,
Nor borrowd hair, of fair and comely length,
Might ought impair their ancient power and strength.
There were the happy Arabs, those that buields
In thatched wagons, wandering throu the fields.
The subtle Tyrians, they who first were clarks,
That staid the wandering words in leaves and barks,
The men of Moab, Edom, Ammon, and
The People sparst on large Elimia land.
The learned Memphians, and the men that dwell Engines of War.

Near to the Aethiopians black and fell:
In short, the most of Asia (as it wair)
Encamped was within that army fair.
So that this Duke mo foreign souldierslad,
Then all the Hebrews native people had.
But they, who did the Hebrews greatest wrong,
Were Apost^ts of Ephrem fierce and strong:
Who fought with hateful hearts, them to deface,
Least they should be esteemd of Izaks race.
Then, as in time of Spring the water is warm,
And crowping frogs like fishes there does swarm;
But with the smallest stone that you can cast
To stir the stream, their crouping stays as fast:
So while Judea was in joyful days,
The constancy of them was worthy prays:
For that in every purpose ye should hear
The praise of God, resounding every wheare;
So, that like burning candles they did shine
Among their faithful flock, like men divine.
But, look how soon they heard of Holopherne,
Their courage quailde and they began to dern:
Their ardent zeal with closed mouth they choke;
Their zeal too hot returned to fuming smoke:
The fear of loss of life, and worldly good,
Brought Infidels to shed their brothers blood.
Alas, how many Ephramits have we,
In our unhappy time? all which we see
Within the Church like hypocrites to dwell,
So long as by the same they prosper well:
Who feines a zeal, the Euangill to maintain,
So long as serves their honor, or their gain:
But, turn the chance with some contrary wind,
So that their brows but half a blast do find;
Then faints their hearts, and they seek other way,
Like bankers out their God they disobay,
Discyphring then their malice to be more
To Gods contempt, then was their zeal before;
And fights against the Lord with greater hate,
Then Celsus did, or Julian Apostate.
The Hebrews now, from heights of houses fair,
Who saw so many banners beat the air,
And men to march against their forces small,
Who now might well decerne their feeble wall;
They swoune with fear, and fand none other aid,
But of that God, to whom their fathers praid.
O father (quod they) father, holy king,
Who shields us always underneath thy wing;
Since now the world against us does conspire,
Defend us mighty Lord we thee require.
Thus having humbly prayed the Lord of might,
The Governor renforc't his watches wight,
And fires at midnight built in every way;
Which made the night appear as clear as day;
And wakerife through the corpsgard of the past:
And thought that Phoebe hyed her course too fast
With horses paile to steal away the night,
To leave the Hebrews to their enmies sight.
Again, the Pagan thought she did but creep,
Or that with Latmies son she was on sleep.
"But humain wishes never has the power
"To haste or hold the course of heaven one hour.
Then as Aurora rose with sanguine hew,
And our Horyzon did the day renew;
The Vizroy made a thousand trumpets sound,
To draw his scattred Cornets to ^ Round,
Who from all parts with speed assembled wear
About the Generals tent, his will to hear:
As does the hounds about their hunt at morn
Com gladishing at hearing of his horn.
Now when the town his sommonds did disdain, Engines of War.

To conquer it perforce he plyde his pain:
And their, the Inginers have the Trepan dressed,
And reared up the Ram for battery best:
Here bends the Briccoll, while the cable cracks,
Their Crosbowes were vprent with iron Racks.
Here crooked Coruies, fleeing bridges tall,
Their scathfull Scorpions, that ruynes the wall.
On every side they raise with ioynture meet,
Thetymber towers for to command each street.
The painful Pioners wrought against their will,
With fleaks and fagots, ditches up to fill:
Or under ground they delue in dust with pain,
To raise a mount, or make a mount a Plain,
Or Cauerns cut, where they might soldiers hide,
TO assail the town at sudden vnespide.
Some ladders dressed to seal the wall, or else
To steal upon the sleeping Sentinels.
Some undermines, some other undertook
To fire the gates, or smore the town with smoke:
The greatest part did yet in trenches lurk,
To see what harm their engines first would wurke,
That if the wall were bet, they would not fail
With brave assault the City to assail.
There Mars towre-myner, there Bellona wood,
Enforced feeble Cowards to suck blood.
Their hidious horses braying loud and clear,
Their Pagans fell, with clamor huge to hear,
Made such a dinne as made the heaven resound,
Retented hell, and tore the sixed ground.
Yet, God who keeps his watch above the skies
For his elect, who never ydlelyes;
Took pity on his people in that tide,
Repressing (part) this cruel princes pride,
In causing all the chiefes of Moabites,
Of Edom strong, and awful Ammonites
To speak him thus, and thus him terrors dressed.
O Prince, that Scepter bears above the rest,
And gives them law, and holds the world in thrall,
Set not thy soldiers to assault this wall.
For neither bow, nor sling, nor weapons long,
Nor sword, nor buckler, will be found so strong
And is this threatening rock whose mighty corse
Sustains their wall, of such eternal force,
That thou can make no skallade on no cost,
But on the corpses dead of half thine host.
'The victor can no honor justly clame
'To lose the men who should advance the same.
'O valiant Prince, that fisher is not fine,
'Who for a frog will lose a golden line.
'The holy head band seems not to attire
'The head of him, who in his furious ire
'Preferrs the pain of those that have him teend
'Before the health and safety of one friend.
You may (my Lord) you may, in little fight,
Subdue these Roags, and not to lose a knight.
Surprise me first their chiefest water spring,
From whence these rebels do their conduits bring;
Then drought shall drive them from their whole defense,
In cords to yield them to thine excellence.
'The noble Lion never sleas the least;
'But always prays upon some worthy beast.
'The thunder throws his sulphred shafts adowne
'On Atlaeas high or cold Riphes crown.
'The tempest fell more fervently does fall,
'On houses high, then on the homely hall:
So you my Lord need not to prease your power,
Against such foes as will themselfs deuowre.
Sir, this is not for favor or for meede,
Nor that this Cities sack may causevs dread:
Nor that we mean thy high attempts to stay.
For, ere we from thy standarts stir away,
For thee, the immortal Gods we shall defy:
For thee, we shall break down their altars hie:
For thee, we frankly shall pursue and thole,
The eternal heat and cold of either Pole:
For thee, our hardy hands shall help to tear,
From Jove and Neptune, both their Eagle and spear:
For thee the son for father shall not care,
Nor father son, nor brother, brother spare.
Now, Holopherne to conquest whole enclynde,
And weighing well this counsel in his mind;
Dismissed from his camp a galliard rout
Of men, to guard the Rivers round about.
This stratageme, the Hebrews well might know,
To see their fountains run with passage slow.
Then manfully their soldiers out they send
Against their foes, the water to defend,
There fought the Pagan for to win him fame:
The Hebrew meant, he would not dye with shame.
Together soon they shock with hateful ire,
And first they forced the heathen to retire:
Who (turning face) again do them pursew,
And wins the victory from the victors new.
So doubtful was the fight, none could define
(Save God) to whom the victrie would incline;
Till Izrell was on all sides ouereled
With clouds of short: then to their town they fled.
As does the Pilgrim passing through the Plain,
Who is beset with tempest, hail, or rain,
Who leaves his way, and seeks himself to hide
Within some cave, or hollow mountain side.
The Panims them pursued without all pity,
And Peslmell entered almost in the City
At open gate. Then rose the cry unsweet
Of fearful folk who fled in every street,
And rent their hair and their affrighted face,
As Panims else had won that holy place.
How flee you cowards now, and leaves your Port?
(The Captain says) have ye another Fort?
Think ye to find for safety of your crown
In this Bethulia another Bethull town?
(Alas) if ye make no defense at all,
While time this tyrant is without your wall;
How dare you him resist, when he has wunne
This forte of yours, from which ye feebly run?
The commons with this check, brought to their powers,
Where Cambris and Sir Carmis, like two towers,
Stood at the assaulted gate, and did withstand
The Heathen host with each of them in hand
An iron mace (in stead of lances long)
And brazen bucklers beating back the throng:
Their habergions like stiddies stithe they baire
With helmets high and pennons pight in air:
Of equal age they were, and equal length,
Of equal courage, and of equal strength:
Like Poplers twain that recheth up their tops,
And holds their heads so high that none them crops;
But on the Rivers side do sweetly sway
Like germain brether hailsing often a day.
The Heathen, seeing thus the Jews descend,
With edge of sword their City to defend;
They left the assault* and thence retyring went
(As they commanded were) unto their tent.
But when I think how xxx, days that town
Tormented was with mischief up and down;
Too sad a song I cannot hear invent
So great a sadness right to represent:
My hand for horror shakes, and now no more
Can lead my sacred pen as erst before.
For, now mine eyes, that watered are with tears,
Declares my matter all of mischief bears.
Oh Sprite, from whence all sprit and life does come,
Thou loosde the tongue of Zachary that was do^me;
And sent thy Heralds through the world to preach
Thy name, and in a hundredth tongues to teach;
Guide thou my pen, and courage to me lend,
That to thy honor I this work may end.
Although that Izak saw on every hand
A world of folk against his town to stand;
Yet (tracting time) he thought he would provide
No less to keep, then cool the Assiegers pride:
But, when they fand the conduits cut and rent,
By which, their water to their town was sent;
Their courage bold, and all their craks (alas)
As licour faild, so did their stoutnesse pas.
Their Lords, preferring death to bondage vile,
Made them believe the thing did them beguile:
To wit, they gave men hope that they might keep
Sufficient wat'r in wels and cesterns deep,
Through all the town, the people to relieve,
That thirst should not the soldiers greatly grieve.
The magistrates in deed had great regard
To see this water wisely spent and spared,
That Bottell sweet, which served at the first
To keep the life, but not to slocken thirst. A viue description of Thirst.

When wels grew dry, the Commons ran in rage,
And sought out every sink their thirst t'asswage:
And drank with long some draught the pools in haste,
To quench their thirst with ill contented taste:
Which poisoned air, enfect their purest breath;
Whereby the drinker drank his present death.
O wretched folk who felt so hard a strife!
Drink, or not drink, both ways must lose their life.
For, he that drank, and he that did refrain,
Had of their enmies, both an equal pain.
For why? the water vile slew them throughout,
No less, then did their enmies them about.
That wretched town had never a street nor rewe,
But Parcas there had found some facion new
To murder men, or martyr them with fears,
As moved the most indurate heart to tears:
If so much water in their brains had been,
As might forbear a drop to wete their even.
There plaind the old man, that the soldier strong
Had reft his Bottell from his head with wrong:
But while he spoke, his heart (for thirst) did faint,
And life him left, which frustrate his complaint.
The soldier brave, Oh heart brek for to tell,
His proper vryne drank, thirst to expel.
The woeful mother with her spettle fed
Her little child half dead in cradle bed.
The Lady with her Lord, at point of death.
Embracing falls and yields their latest breath.
"For, cruel thirst came out of Cyren Land,
"Where she was fostred on that burning sand,
"With hot intracted tongue, and sonken even,
"With stomach worn, and wrinkled visage keen,
"With light and meigre corse and pailed vains,
"In stead of blood that brimstone hot retains:
"Her poysond mouth blew, throw that holy town,
"Such hellish air, that stifled up and down
The Arters of the Jews in such a way,
That naught was seen but burials night and day:
So that the heaven, to see their dolours deep,
Could scarsly keep his course, but preasd to weep;
And would have ioind his tears to their complaint,
If God of hosts had made them no restraint.
Yea, I my self must weep, who cannot speak
The woes, that makes my heavy heart to break;
And so will silent rest, and not rehearse,
But counterfeit the painter (in my verse)
Who thought his colors paile could not declare
The special woe, king Look the Table.
Agamemnon bare,
When sacrificed was his only race:
With bend of black, he bound the fathers face.
Now while the people were in this estate,
And with their princes wrangling in debate,
They thus besought the Lord for to decide
Between their simplesse and their princes pride:
The Lord be judge of that which ye have wrought,
And what your wicked counsels has us brought.
If you had offered peace to this great Lord
At first, we might have won him to accord.
Then happy happy days we might have seen,
And not so many soldiers murdered been.
Alas, what hope have we within this hold?
Our enmies are more meek a thousand fold,
Then are our own. They, haps, would us preserve:
Our wilful own, pretends to see us sterue.
Our children do our childrens weal denay,
And headlong hastes unto their own decay.
We know, O Lord, the breaking of thy law,
Has caused thee this sword on us to draw:
And justly thou thine yrefull bow do bend,
On our vnloyall heads the shot to send.
But thou, who does not long retain thine ire
Against thine own, thy mercy we require.
Change thou the purpose of our foolish guides,
And of these Heathen, armed at our sides:
Or else let us upon their weapons fall,
And of their hands to be destroyed all,
Er we this drougth and deadly venim have,
With languishing to send us to the grave.
My brethren dear (the Ruler then began say)
Our whole desire has been, both night and day,
Not for to see the seed of Abrahm lost,
For which we strive against this furious host.
What? have ye pain? so likewise pain have we:
For in one boat we both embarked be.
Upon one tide, one tempest does us toss:
Your common ill, it is our common loss.
The Assyrian plague shall not us Hebrews grieve,
When pleases God our mischief to relieve:
Which he will do if ye can be content,
And not with grudge his clemency prevent.
Then strive not you against that puissant king
Who create all, and gouerns every thing
For comfort of his Church and children dear,
And succors them, though time do long appear.
Sometime an Archer leaves his bow unbent,
And hong upon a nail, to that intent
It may the stronger be to bend again,
And shoot the shot with greater might and main:
Right so the eternal does withholde his ill
A longer time (perchance) for that he will
More egerly revenge him of their crime,
Who do abuse his long for bearing time.
When men applauds to sin, they count it light,
And but a matter small in sinners sight:
But in the end the weight does so increase,
That Justice leaves the sinner no release;
Like the Usurer who lends upon the skore,
And makes the reckles debtors debt the more.
What if the thundering Lord his justice stay,
And (for such sin) do not this tyrant slay?
The waters of the ground and in the aere
Are in the hand of God: then who is there,
That dare sediciously his yoke refuse,
Although he have not water now to use?
No, no, though heaven do seem serene and clear,
On every part, and wete does not appear;
He may with moisture mildly wete the land,
As fell when Saul the Scepter had in hand. Sam. 1. 12.

For, all the stars, that do the heaven fulfill,
Are all but executors of his will.
All this could not the peoples thirst assuage;
But thus with murmurs they their Lords outrage:
What? shall we dye, O sacred soldiers bold,
For pleasure of our Lords these traitors old?
What? shall we dye on credit, for to please
These wyzard fools, who winks at our unease?
Who, with our blood, would win them selfs renown,
So louable, as never shall go down?
Nay, nay, let us cut off this servile chain:
To free our selfs, let us in hands retain
The ruling of this town, the forte and all;
Least we into these deadly dangers fall.
Then like a wise Physician, who persaue*
His patient that in fervent fever raues,
Yet hights him more then Art can well perform:
So Prince Osias in this rural storm,
He promised to the people their intent
If God within five days no succonr sent:
Then Izak left their sorrows all and some,
And present woe and fear of chance to com;
For that if they, through this, gat not their will,
At least they would avoid the greatest ill.
But Judith then whose eyes (like fountains two)
Were never dry, which witnest well her woe;
Right sad in sound the Almighty she besought,
And on the sacred scriptures fed her thought.
Her prayers much auaylde to raise her spreet
Above the sky: and so the scriptures sweet,
A holy garden was where she might find
The medcyne meet for her molested mind.
Then Judith reading there, as was her grace,
She (not by hazard) happened on that place, Iudicum.

Where the lame handed Ahud (for disdain
To see the Jews the Heathen yock sustain)
Sm ote Eglon with a dagger to the heft,
And from his flank the blood and life bereft.
The more she read, the more she wonder had
Of Ahuds act, and hot desire her lad
T'ensue his virtue: yet her feeble kind
Empeached often the purpose of her mind;
Proposing often the horror of the deed,
The fear of death, the danger to succeed,
With haszard of her name: and more then that,
Though she like wise the peoples freedom gat;
Yet for a man, this act more seemly wear,
Than for a wife to handle sword or spear.
While Judith thus with Judith did debate,
A puff of wind blew down that leaf by fate;
Discov'ring up the story of Iaell, how
She drove a nail into Sisaras brow,
And ^lew that Pagan sleeping on her bed,
Who from the Hebrews furious host was fled:
In teaching us albeit a tyrant flee,
Yet can he not auoy de the Lords decree.
This last example now such courage lent
To feeble Judith, that she now was bent,
With wreakfull blade, to slay and to divorce
The Heathen soul from such a sinful corse.
But while she did her careful mind employ
To find some means to murder this Vizroy;
She heard report (that made her heart to swoune)
Of the determination of the town.
Then, all the present perils to prevent,
Unto the Rulers of the town she went;
Reproving them with words of bitter sweet,
What do ye mean, O princes indiscreet?
Will ye the helping hand of God restrain,
And captive it within your counsels vain?
Will ye include him under course of times,
Who made days, years, all seasons and their primes?
Do not abuse your selfs: his power profound
Is not to men's Imaginations bound.
God may all that he wills, his will is just:
God wills all good to them that in him trust.
Now fathers: that which does my hopereuiue
Is only this; There is no wight on live,
Within this town, that has contracted hands
To serve dumme Gods, like folk of foreign Lands.
All sins are sin: but sure this sin exceeds
Our former faults; by which, our blind misdeeds
Offends the heaven; by which, the Lord of might
Is frauded of his honors due and right,
In wresting of the title of his name,
To stocks, and stones, and metalls, men do frame.
Since Izak then from such a fault is free,
Let us to Gods protection cast our ee.
Consider that all Judah rests in fear,
Aspecting only our proceedings hear.
Consider that all Jacob in this tresse
Will follow either our force or feebleness.
Consider that this house and altar stands
(Next under God) vpholden with your hands.
Think, that of Izrell whole ye keep the kaye:
Which if ye quite, and give this tyrant way,
Who more then death hates all of Izaks kin,
Ye shall the name of kin-betrayers win.
Then said the Captain, I cannot deny,
That we offended have the Lord most hye.
Unwise are we, our promises are vain:
But what? we may not call our word again:
But if thou feel thy heart so sore oppressed,
That moves thee to tears for our unrest,
Alas, weep night and day and never tire;
So that thy weepings may appease the ire
Of that hie Judge, who hears in every part
The perfect prayer of the humble heart.
I will, quoth she; and, if God give me grace,
Repel the siege of this afflicted place
By famous stroke. But stay me in no wise,
But bide the end of my bold enterprise:
And let me go, when night his mantle spreeds,
To the enmies Camp. Quoth he, if thou will needs;
The great repressour of oppressors pride,
Preserve thy heart and hand, and be thy guide.
FINIS.
THE SVMMARIE OF The IIII. BOOK.
ACcording to the promis that Judith made to the besieged Captains in
Bethulia, she prepares herself with armor meet for the execution of her
enterprise: to wit, The invocation of the name of God, with a holy
determination to deliver her country from the hand of the Tyrant; whom she
deliberates to overcome with the sweet and fair appearance of her amiable
beutie and behavior. At her departing to the enemies camp, our Poet
introduces one of the chief Captains of the town discriuing, to another, her
stock and up bringing, with the progress of her three estates, Virginity,
Marriage, and Widowhood: Thereby setting forth a singular example of all womanly
behavior and virtue. After her entrance to the Camp, she is brought to
Holophernes, who was curious to know the cause of her coming there. And after
audience given, he is so surprised with her beutie and eloquent language, that
she obtains license to withdraw herself by night to the next valley, there
to pray to God. And, continuing this exercise, she requires strength of the
Highest, that in taking away the chieftaine, she might at one instant destroy all
the Heathen Army. Herein giving example that the beginning, and end of all high
attempts, ought to be grounded upon the favor and earnest calling upon him,
without whom all wisdom, and human force is nothing but wind: and who,
contrariwise, may by the most feeble instruments of the world, execute things
most incredible and incomprehensible to human capacity.

THE FOVRTH BOOK of IVDITH.
THen woeful Judith, with her weeping ees
Beholding Heaven, and prostrate on her knees,
Held up her guiltless hands and God besought,
Discouv'ring him the secrets of her thought.
O God (quoth she) who armed with a spear
Dan Symeon, who revenged his sister dear;
Lend me the blade in hand, that I may kill
This Tyrant, that exceeds all Sichems ill:
Who not contents to soil the sacred bed
Of wedlock chaste; but more with mischief led,
Entends thy holy name for to confound,
And race Solyma temple to the ground;
Ambitious Satrap he, whose hope does stand
In mortal men, led with unrighteous hand:
Who rules a hundredth thousand stalworth steeds,
That combat craves, and in our pastures feeds;
Not dreading thee, who daunts both man and beast,
And kills and captives them when they ween least:
Who strengths the poor, and pridefull men down thrings,
And wracks at once the powers of puissant kings.
Grant, gracious God, that his bewitched wit
May with my crisped hair be captive knit.
Grant, that my sweet regards may gall his heart
With darts of love, to cause his endless smart.
Grant, that these gifts of thine, my beuty small,
May bind his furious rage, and make him thrall.
Grant, that my artificial tongue may move
His subtle craft, and snare his heart in love:
But chiefly Lord grant, that this hand of mine
May be the Pagans scourge and whole ruin;
To the end, that all the world may know, our race
Are shrouded so in rampires of thy grace,
That never none against us durst conspire,
That have not felt at last thy furious ire:
Even so good Lord, let none of these profane
Return to drink of Euphrate, nor Hytane.
Thus Judith prayed, with many-a trickling tear,
And with her sighs her words retrenched wear.
At night, she left her chamber sole and cold,
Attyr'd with Ceres gifts and Ophir gold.
O silver Diane, regent of the night,
Dare thou appear before this lucent light?
This holy star, whose contr' aspect most clear
Does stein thy brothers brightness in his Sphere?
While thus she meant (unseen) away to slide,
Her pearls and Jewels caused her to be spyde:
The musk and ciuet Amber, as she past,
Long after her a sweet perfume did cast.
A Carboncle on her Crystal brow she pight,
Whose fiery gleams expeld the shady night.
Upon her head a silver crisp she pind,
Loose wauing on her shoulders with the wind.
Gold, band her golden hair: her yvry neck,
The Rubies rich, and Saphirs blew did deck.
And at her ear, a Pearl of greater value
There hong, then that the Egyptian Queen did swallew.
And through her collet she shewde her snowie breast:
Her utmost robe was color blew Coelest,
Benetted all with twist of perfect gold,
Beseeming well her comely corpse t'enfolde.
What else she wore, might well been seen upon
That Queen who built the tours of Babylon.
And though that she most modest was indeed,
Yet borrowd she some garments at this need,
From Dames of great estate, to that intent
This Pagan Prince she rather might prevent.
Achior then, who watched at the gate,
And saw this Lady passing out so late,
To Carmis spoke, who warded eke that night,
What is she this? where goes this gallant wight
So trim, in such a time? has she no pity
Of this most wretched persecuted City?
Quod Carmis then, their flowrisht here of late
Merari, one, that was of great estate;
Who had no child but one, and this is she,
The honor of that house and family.
The fathers now do venture body and soul,
That treasures upon treasures they may roll:
But, for the wit or learning, never cairs,
That they should leave to their succeeding hairs:
Like those that charely keeps their rich array
In coffers close, and lets it there decay;
While that the naked bodies dies for cold,
For whom the clothes are dearly bought and sold.
But as the painful plowman plyes his toil, Comparison.

With share and culter shearing through the soil
That cost him dear, and ditches it about,
Or crops his hedge to make it vnder-sprout,
And never stays to ward it from the weed:
But most respects to sow therein good seed;
To the end, when summer decks the meadows plain,
He may have recompense of costs and pain:
Or like the maid who careful is to keep
The budding flower that first begins to peep
Out of the knop, and waters it full often,
To make it seemly show the head aloft;
That it may (when she draws it from the stocks)
Adorn her gorget white, and golden locks:
So wise Merari all his study stilde,
To facion well the manners of this child;
That in his age he might of her retire
Both honor and confort, to his hearts desire.
For, look how soon her childish tongue could chat,
As children do, of this thing or of that;
He taught her not to read inventions vain,
As fathers daily do that are profain:
But in the holy scriptures made her read;
That with her milk she might even suck the dread
Of the most high. And this was not for naught:
Insomuch as in short time she out-brought
Apparent fruits, of that so worthy seed,
Which chaung'd her earthly nature far indeed:
As done the pots that long retains the taste
Of licour such, as first was in them plaste*
Or like the tree that bends his eldren branch
That way where first the stroke has made him launch.
So see we wolfs, and bears, and hearts full old,
Some tamenes from their daunted youth to hold.
Thus ere the Moon twelf dos^n chaunges past, Virginity.

The maidens manners fair in form were cast.
For, as the perfect pylot fears to run
Upon the rocks, with singling sheet does shun
Cyanes straits or Syrtes sinking sands,
Or cruel Capharois with stormy strands:
So wisely she dishaunted the resort
Of such as were suspect of light report:
Well knowing, that the acquaintance with the ill,
Corrupts the good. And though they ever still
Remain upright: yet some will quarrel pike,
And common bruit will deem them all alike.
For, look how your Companions you elect;
For good, or ill, so shall you be suspect.
This prudent Dame delighted not in dance,
Nor sitting up, nor did her self advance
In public place, where plays and banquets been
In every house, to see and to beseen:
But rather understanding such a trade
Had been the wrack of many-a modest maid,
Who following wandering Dina wanton dame,
Have often time put their noble house to shame;
She kept at home her fathers habitation,
Both day and night in godly conversation.
She pitious Nurse applyde her painful thought,
To serve and nourish them that her vpbrought:
Like to the grateful stork that gathers meat,
And brings it to her elders for to eat;
And on a firtree high, with Boreas blown,
Gives life to those, of whom she had her own.
But if she might some hour from travel quite,
At vacant time it was her chief delight
To read the scriptures, where her faithful mind
Might confort of the heavenly Manna find.
Sometime she broyded, on the canuas gall,
Some bird or breast, or A egle, or Elephant tall.
While subtely with silver nedle fine
She works on cloth some history divine.
Here Lot, escaping the devouring fire,
From sinful Zodom shortly does retire
To Segor; where his wife, that was vnwitty,
Cast back her eye to see the sinful City:
And, for her mis-beliefe, God plagued the falt,
Transforming her into a Pillar of salt.
Here she Susannaes story viuely wrought,
How near she was to execution brought;
And yet how God the secret did disclose,
And made the mischief fall upon her foes.
Here Joseph's story stands with wondrous art,
And how he left his cloak, and not his heart,
To his lascivious Dame; and rather chose
The Prison, then her arms him to enclose.
Her cruel I^phte, with his murdring knife,
To keep his vow, bereaues his daughters life.
(Her travel done) her lute she then assayes,
And unto God she sings immortal prays:
Not following those that plyes their thriftles pain
In wanton vearse and wastefull ditties vain;
Thereby to entrap great men, with luring looks:
But, as the greedy fisher lays his hooks
Along the cost to catch some mighty fish,
More for his gain, then holesom for the dish
Of him that byes: even so these sisters brave
Have lovers mo, then honest may dens have.
But none are burnt with their impudent flame,
Save fools and light lunatikes void of shame.
Of virtue only, perfect love does grow:
Whose first beginning though it be more slow
Then that of lust, and quickens not so fast;
Yet sure it is, and longer time does last.
The straw en kendles soon, and slakes again:
But iron is slow, and long will hot remain.
Thus was the holy Iudiths chaste renown
So happily spread, through Israel up and down,
That many a man disdaind the damsels fine,
With Jewels rich and hair in golden twine,
To serve her beuty: yet, Loves fiery dart
Could never vnfriese the frost of her chaste heart:
But, as the Diamant byds the hammer strong,
So she resisted all her suitors, long;
Vnminded ever for to wed, but rather
To spend her days with her beloved father:
Till at the last her parents, with great care,
Withstood her will, and for her did prepare
Manasses, one who was of noble race,
Both rich and fair as well of sprite as face.
Her marriage, then was not a slight contract Marriage.

Of secret bills, but by a willing act
"Before her friends. The chance that once befell
"To wandering Dina, may be witness well,
"That secret marriage, that to few is kend,
"Does never lead the lovers to good end.
"For, of our bodies, we no power may clame,
"Except our parents do confirm the same.
Then see how love, so holily begun,
Between these two, so holy a race they run
(This chaste young man and his most chastest wife)
As if their bodies twain had but one life.
What the one did will, the other willed no less;
As by one mouth, their wills they do express.
And as a stroke, given on the righter eye
Offends the left: even so by Sympathy,
Her husbands dolours made her heart vnglad,
And Iudiths sorrows made her husband sad.
Manasses, then his wife would not control
Tyranniously: but look how much the soul
Exceeds the corse, and not the corse does grieve,
But rather to preserve it and relieve:
So Judith with Manasses did accord,
In tender love and honourde him as Lord.
Their house at home so holy was, to tell
It seemd a Church, and not a private Cell.
No servant there, with villain iestes uncouth,
Was suffered to corrupt the shamefast youth.
No idle drunkard, nor no swearing wight
Unpunished durst blaspheme the Lord of might.
No pleasant skoffer, nor no lying knave,
No daily Dycer, nor no Ruffian brave,
Had there abode: but all the servants wear
Taught, of their Rulers, Gods eternal fear.
Manasses, he who saw that in his time
All justice was corrupt with many-a crime,
And that the most peruers and ignorant,
For money, or favor, would none office want
Of high estate, refusde all public charge;
Contenting him with ease to live at large,
From Court, and Palace, free from worldly pelf:
But, since he thought him borne not for himself,
But also that some charge he ought to bear
For confort of his friends and country dear;
Yet did he more, not being magistrate,
For public weal, then men of more estate:
So that his house was even the dwelling due
Of Justice, and his mouth a sentence true.
The afflicted poor he daily did defend,
And was the widows aid, and tutor kend
To Orphelines, and was the whole support
And chief conforter of the godly sort.
The vain desire of Indian treasures great
Made never his ship to sail nor oar to beat.
The greedy hope of gain, with ventrous danger,
Made never his sword be drawn to serve the stranger.
He never sold, within the wrangling Bar,
Deceitful clatters, causing clients Jar;
But quietly manurde his little field,
And took the increase thereof that time did yeilde.
He sowde and planted, in his proper grange
(Upon some savage stock) some frutry strange.
The ground, our common Dame, he undermines:
On stake and ryce, he knits the crooked vines,
And snoddes their bows: so neither hot nor cold
Might him (from labor) in the chamber hold.
But once as he beheld his harvest train,
With crooked Circle cutting down the grain;
The sun a distillation on him sent,
Whereof he dyed: his soul to heaven it went.
He that the number of the leaves could cast,
That in November falls by winter blast:
He that could tell the drops of rain or slete,
That Hyad, Orion, or Pleiades wete
Sheds on the ground, that man might only tell,
What tears from Iudiths eyes incessant fell.
What treasure and gold, and what he left her tho, VVidowhead.

In place of pleasure, caused all her woe.
The sight of them made her in heart record
Their old possessor, and her loving Lord.
Though she had had as much of gold and good,
As Lydia Land, or Tagus golden flood;
Yet, losing him, of treasure she was bare:
For whom, all other treasures causde her care.
Yet in this state she stoutly did sustain,
Like patient Job (contempning) all her pain.
Three times the Sun returned had his prime,
"Since this befell: and yet the sliding time,
"That wonted is to wear walloes away,
Could never for his death her dolor stay:
But always in some black attire she went
Right modestly, and lived on little rent.
Devout she was, and most times sole and sad,
With dole in heart, and mourning vesture clad,
Out shedding tears, as does the turtle dove
On withred stalk, that wails her absent love*
And widowlike all pleasures does forsake,
And never intends to take a secound make.
Thus Judith chaste within her house abode,
And seldom was she seen to com abroad:
Unless it were to see some woeful wife,
Whose child or husband was bereft of life:
Or for to visit some in sickness rage,
Their longsom pain and dolours to assuage:
Or for to go to Church as God allows,
To pray and offer and to perform her vows.
Thus have I shortly told you, brother dear,
The state of her, on whom our City hear
Have fixed all their eyes: but I can naught
Tell where she goes, much less what is in her thought.
But if we may of passed things collect
The things to come: then may we well aspect
Great good of her, for that even in her face
Is sign of joy, and great presage of grace,
Or some good hap. With this and other talk,
They cut the night as they together walk.
This while, the worthy widow with her maid
Past toward the enmies camp not vnafraid:
For, ere she had two hundredth pases past,
The Syrian Soldiers in her way were cast:
Who spack her thus; O fair excellent wight,
Whence? what art thou? what do thou here this night
In Syrian camp? I am (quoth she) again
An Israelite, whom dolours does constrain
To flee this town, and for my life's relief,
Submits me to the mercy of your Chief.
They took her to the Duke. But who has seen
The throngs of folk where proclamations been
In some great town, or where some monstrous beast
Is brought and wondered at by most and least;
That man might judge what flocks of soldiers came
From every part to see that Hebrew Dame:
To see that fair, so chaste, so amiable.
The more they gasde, she seemd more admirable,
Her wavering hair disparpling flew apart
In seemly shed: the rest with reckles art
With many-a curling ring decor'd her face,
And gave her glashie brows a greater grace.
Two bending bows of Heben coupled right
Two lucent stars that were of heavenly light,
Two geaty sparks where Cupid chastely hides
His subtle shafts that from his quiver glydes.
Tween these two suns and front of equal sise,
A comely figure formally did rise
With draught vnleuell to her lip descend,
Where Momus self could nothing discommend.
Her pitted cheeks aperde to be depaint,
With mixed rose and lillies sweet and saint.
Her dulcet mouth, with precious breath repleat,
Excelde the Saben Queen in savor sweet.
Her Coral lips discov'red, as it were,
Two ranks of Orient pearl with smyling chere.
Her yv'ry neck, and breast of Alabastre,
Made Heathen men, of her, more Idolastre.
Upon her hand no wrinkled knot was seen;
But as each nail of mothet of pearl had been.
In short, this Judith was so passing fair,
That if the learned Zeuxis had been thaire,
And seen this Dame, when he with pensile drew
The Croton Dames, to form the picture true Helen.

Of her, for whom both Greece and Asia sought.
This only patron chief he would have sought;
No sooner Judith entered his Pauilion,
But in her face arose the red vermillion,
With shame fast fear: but then with language sweet
The courteous General mildely began her greet.
My love, I am, I am not yet so fell,
As false report does to you Hebrews tell.
They are my sons, and I will be their father,
That honors me, and them I love the rather,
That worships for their God the Assyrian King:
They shall be well assurde to want nothing.
And this shall Isaac know, if they will render
Unto that bountious king as their defender.
For thy (my love) tell me, withouten fear,
The happy motyf of thy coming hear.
O Prince (quoth she, with an assured face)
Most strong and wise and most in heavens grace,
That draws the sword, with steel upon his breast,
With helm on head, and lance in iron rest:
Since that my feeble Sex, and tender youth,
Cannot long time endure, the cruel drouth,
The wakrife travels, frayes, and haszards great,
That day and night our Burgesses does threat:
Yet nevertheless this is not whole the cause
That from my Cities body me withdrawes.
To this your Camp: but that most grudging grief,
Which burns my zealous heart without relief,
Is this, my Lord; I have a holy fear
To eat those meats that God bids us forbear:
But, Sir, I see that our besieged town
Is so beset with mischiefevp and down,
The people will be forced to eat in the end
The meats that God expressly does defend:
Then will the Lord with just revenge him wreak
Upon all those, that do his statutes break.
Withouten fight their Cities he will sack,
And make one man of thine ten thousand wrack,
That flies his fury, and thy furious face.
Now, I of Bethul am; and in this place
Beseech thy noble Grace, if so thee please,
With courteous aid, to give my dolours ease.
'Of common sense he is deprived cleene,
'That falls with closed eye on danger seen.
'And he that may both pain and hurt eschew,
'Is vain if he his proper death pursew.
Then in this quiet dale if I may bide
(In secret for to pray each evening tide
To God; I shall, as he does me enspyre,
Assure you when enkendled is his ire,
Against our folk. Then shall I take on hand
To lead thine army through all Jury Land,
And streaming standarts set on Syon hill,
Where none with weapons dare resist thy will.
No, not a very dog, in evening dark,
At noise of harness shall against thee bark.
Thy only name shall fray the Armies bold. R
Before thy face the mountain tops shall fold. R
The floods shall dry, and from their running stay, R
To make thine Host a new and uncouth way.
O Jewel of the world (quoth he) O Dame,
For gracious speech and beuty worthy fame,
Now welcome here: would God it might you please
Long time with us to dwell in rest and ease.
For, if your faith and troth concurrent be,
To this your talk, which greatly pleases me;
I will from this time forth with you accord
To serve your only Hebrews God and Lord;
And will my service whole to you enrowle,
Not of my Scepter only, but my soul.
I will your name and honor ay defend
From Hebrew bounds unto the world his end.
This said: with silence, as the moon arose,
This widow* her withdrew, and forth she goes
Unto avalley close on every part,
Where as she washed her corse and clens'd her heart;
And with her weeping eyes the place be^aid,
And to the God of Isaac thus she praide:
O Lord, withdraw not now thy helping hand
From those, that at thy mercy only stand.
O Lord defend them that desire to spend
Their goods and blood, thy cause for to defend.
O Lord grant that the cries of Children may,
With plaints of Oldmen weeping night and day,
And virgins voices sad in shroude of shame,
And lauds of Leuits sounding forth thy fame,
Mount to thy throne, and with dissundring break
Thy heavy sleep. Wherefore do thou awreake
Thy self on Hermon with thy burning blast?
Or why do thou on careful Carmell cast
Thy dreadful darts? forgetting all the space,
These Giants that thy Scepter would displace?
Ah wretch, what say I? Lord apardon me.
Thy burning zeal (and none hypocrisy)
That frets my heavy heart at every hour,
Compels my tongue this language out to power.
O thou, the everliving God and Guide
Of all our race, I know thou will provide
For our relief against this furious boste,
And justly kill the Captain of this host.
I know, that thou will help my only hand,
To be the wrack of all this heathen Band.
FINIS.
THE SVMMARIE OF The V. BOOK.
HOlophernes, being surprised with the sweet language, and excellent beauty
of the chaste Judith, becomes altogether negligent of his charge and
government. Wherein is represented the vnhabilitie of the reprobate, who
cannot withstand such temptations as the Lord sends upon them. But as they
become slaves to their own affections, so by the same they are enforced to
fall into perdition. In place of some faithful servant to warn him of his
vices, Holophernes conferreth with Bagos an Eunuch, who feeds him in his
humor, and brings Judith to his Tent. And here the Poet reprooues all
flatterers and bawdes, with the vices of all Courts in General. Judith seeing
her chastity in peril, and the time unmeet to execute her enterprise:
subtilie draws the Tyrant to talk of other affairs. He thinking to insinuate
himself the more into her favor, takes pleasure to crack of his conquests
and of his special worthiness; discoursing so long till suppertime approached
and she avoided the inconvenience. And here is to be noted, that whilst the
tyrants boast of their cruelty against the Church, God provides for his own,
and preserves them for that work, that he has ordained by them to be done.

THE FIFTH BOOK of IVDITH.
IN stead of marrow-in bone, and blood in veins,
Great Holopherne does feed his cruel pains:
He bootlesse flees, and feels; but he ne knows
The quenched fire that of his ashes grows.
For, so the charming Image of this Dame,
The only mark where at his soul did ame,
Transported him in passions of despair,
That of his mighty camp he quits the care,
And goes no more his matters to dispatch,
Nor vewes his corpsgard, nor relieues his watch,
Nor Council calls, nor sent to spy the cost,
Nor vewes the quarters of his spacious host.
But as the sheep that have no hirde nor guide,
But wandering strayes along the rivers side,
Throw burbling brooks, or throw the forest grene,
Throw meadows closures, or throw shadows shene:
Right so the Heathen host without all bridle,
Runns insolent, to vicious actions idle,
Where none obeyes, each one commanding speaks,
Each one at pleasure from his banner breaks.
What do you Hebrews now within your wall?
Now time to fight, or never time at all,
To pay these Pagans, whose confused corse
Combats against themselfs with deadly force.
Nay, stay a while: of such a great victory,
Your only God will have the only glory.
Before this tyrant was with love yblent,
To win the town he plide his whole intent:
But now, both night and day, his mind does frame
To conquer this most chaste vnconquest Dame.
So lust him led: the undaunted Theban knight,
With weighty mace, had never him affright:
But now a woman's look his heart enfeares,
And in his breast the curelesse wound he bears.
Ambition, erst, so had him ouercumme,
That made him daily rise by sound of drum.
Now Cupid him awaks with hot alarmes,
That him with holds to do the Hebrews harms.
Before, he ruled above both Prince and King:
Now can he not himself in order bring.
Alas (quoth he) what life is this I have, Complaint.

Becoming captive to my captive slave?
(Unhappy chance) what life is this I say?
My virtue gone, my forces falls away.
Nay sure no life it is, more pain I feel,
Then Ixion torn upon the Eternal wheel: Prometheus.

My life is like the theefs that stole the fire,
On whose mortal heart there does always tire
A ravenous foul, that gnawes him to the bone,
Reviving still, bound to the Scythian stone.
What serves it me, to have won where I have haunted?
What serves my victor arm, for to have daunted
The people situate tween Hydaspe large,
And port where Cydnus does in sea discharge;
Since I am vanquished by the feeble sight
Of captive Judith? what auailes my might,
My targe of steel, my Burguinet of Brass,
My guard of warriors stout whereso I pass;
Since her sweet eye has sent the pointed dart
Through men and weapons, pearcing throu my heart?
What serves my coursers, who with swiftnes light
Exceeds the swallow, swiftest bird of flight;
Since I on him cannot avoid, one ynch,
The care that night and day my heart does pinch?
Then change (O Hebrews) change your tears in song,
And triumph ore my host and army strong.
I am no more that Duke, whose name alone
Has made great warriors quake both lim and bone:
But I am he, whose heart was sometime brave;
Now less then naught, the slave but of a slave.
I com not here your Isaac to annoy,
With fire and sword, your houses to destroy:
But to require your Judith, her to render
More mild to me. What? is my wit so slender
(Berapt with love) have I not here my joy,
That only may relieve me from annoy?
Yet nevertheless I clieue the air in vain,
With plaints, and makes mine eyes but fountains twain.
I wretch am like the wretched man indeed, Tantalus.

The more he has the greater is his need.
Although he deeply plonge in water clear,
To quench his thirst: yet he is not the near.
For, so do I respect the heavenly grace,
That largely is bestowde upon her face,
That with mine eyes I dare not her behold,
My tongue does stay and in the palate fold.
Why have not I a heart of Crystal clear,
Tronsparent through, to let my pain appear?
That there she might of all my torments reed,
Which love with holds within my heart in dreed?
Now, since that Judith to this camp arrived,
The light of heaven had thrice his course revived,
And darkened thrice, and began with saffron hew
To light the Ynds, the fourth day to renew;
When thus the Duke, who leftrepast and rest,
Unto his Eunuch this like porpos dressed.
O Bagos, son adoptife, not by chance,
Whom I have chose of naught thee to advance,
By special grace, and made thee (though I boaste)
First of my heart, and second of mine Hoaste;
I rage, I burn, I dye in desperate thought,
Through love, by this same strangers beuty brought,
Go, seek her then, and shortly to her say,
What secret flame torments me day by day:
Show that I shall her to such honors bring,
As he that bears the Scepter of a King:
But chiefly see thy talk be framed thus,
That she do come this night and suppe with us.
Now should it not to me be folly and shame,
To have within my hold the fairest dame,
That ground does hear, if I dare not aspire
To quench the burning flame of my desire?
I should but serve my soldiers for a Jest:
And Judith fair would count me but a beast.
Then Bagos well acquaint with such a cast,
He fed the lamp that brunt but ouerfast.
If private men (quoth he) and people poor,
That goes not over the threshold of their door,
But spends their days in travel and debate,
And never seeks to win a better state,
Lives not content, if that the Cyprian Dame
Do not sometime their frozen hearts inflame;
What slaves are those then, on whose backs are dressed
The burdens of this world, who takes no rest
For Public weal, but wakes with Argus eyes,
For others ease that to no care applies;
If they, among so many great vexations,
May not receive in love some recreations?
Pursue your love my Lord, and make no let
To take the fish that else is in your net.
And as ere this you have me faithful found,
In like Ambassades when ye them propound:
So shall you find me, in this love of new,
To be as faithful, secret, trest, and true.
Alas, how many such are in our times
In princes Courts, that high to honor climes,
More for their handling such an enterprise,
Then for their being valiant, learnde, or wise?
Sometimes the Courts of kings were virtuous schools:
Now find we naught in Court but curious fools.
O you, whose noble hearts cannot accord
To be the slaves to an infamous Lord:
And knows not how to mix, with perlous Art,
The deadly poison of the Amorous dart:
Whose natures, being free, wills no constraint,
Nor will your face with flattring pensile paint,
For well, nor woe, for pity, nor for hire,
Of good my Lords their favors to acquire;
Go not to Court if ye will me believe:
For, in that place where ye think to retreue
The honor due for virtue, ye shall find
Naught but contempt, which leaves good men behind.
Ye worthy Dames, that in your breasts do bear
Of your al-seeing God no servile fear:
Ye that of honor have a greater care,
Then sights of Courts, I pray you come not their.
Let men, that in their purse has not a myte,
Clothe them like kings, and play the hypocrite,
And with a lying tale and feined cheer,
Court-cozen them whom they would see on bear.
Let there the Pandar sell his wife for gain,
With service vile, his noblesse to attain.
Let him that serves the time, change his intent,
With faith unconstant sail at every vent.
Ye sons of craft, bear ye as many faces
As Proteus takes among the Marine places,
And force your natures all the best ye can
To counterfeit the grace of some great man;
Chamaeleon like, who takes to him each hew
Of black or white, or yellow, green, or blew,
That comes him next: So you that finds the facion
To hurt the poor, with many-a great taxacion:
You that do prease to have the princes ear,
To make your names in Provinces appear:
Ye subtle Thurims, sell your fumish wind,
To wicked wights whose senses ye do blind.
Ye fearful Rocks, ye ymps of Achelois,
Who wracks the wisest youth with charming vois:
Ye Circes, who by your enchantment strange,
In stones and swine, your lovers true do change:
Ye Stymphalids, who with your youth vptaks,
You ravens that from us our riches raks:
Ye, who with riches art, and painted face,
For Priams wife, puts Castors sister in place:
Ye Myrrhas, Canaces, and Semirames,
And if there rest yet mo defamed dames,
Com all to Court, and there ye shall re^aue
A thousand gains unmeet for you to have.
There shall you sell the gifts of great provinces,
There shall you sell the grace of graceles princes.
Stay here my Muse: it thee behoues to have
Great constancy and many-a Hercles brave
To purge this age, of vices more notable,
Then was the stals of foul Aegeans stable.
Return to Judith, who to bring to pass
Her high attempt, before her sets her glass,
And ginnes to deck her hair like burnisht gold,
Whose beuty had no peer for to behold.
Then went she to his tent, where she espide
The gorgious tappestries, on every side,
Of Persian Kings, of Meds, and Syrian stories,
How Ninus first (pricked forth with great vain glories)
Subdewd the East: then next in order came
(Disguised in kind) his wife Queen Semirame;
Who took the Scepter and with tourrets hye
Great Babylon erected to the sky.
Lo, how a Prince, with fingers white and fine, Sardanapalus.

In women's weed the tender twist does twine,
Who bare a Rock in sted of Royal mace,
And for a man with woman changes grace
In gestures all: he frisles and he fards,
He oynts, he bathes, his visage he regards
In Crystal glass, which for his sword he wore,
And lost his crown without all combat more.
Amongst his vertugals, for aid he drew,
From his Lieutenant, who did him pursew,
And wan his Scepter. Yet with f^eble ire,
He burnt himself, and ended his empire.
Behold, a Bitch then feeds sucking child,
Amongst the pricking thorns and brambles wild; Cyru^.

Who grew so great and was of such a fame,
That bond, and free, his waged men became,
And afterward subverted, to his law,
The Median scepter under Persians awe.
But what is he that so reformed goze
Before the camp, and wants his ears and noze?
That was that servant true, who by that slight,
Brought Babylon again in Darius might.
While Iud^th fed her eyes with figures vain,
Her heart replete with passions and with pain;
The Genrall came, and with a visage gent,
Saluted her, and by the hand her hent,
And caused her sit down upon a chare,
The more at ease to view her beuties rare.
Then, when he saw himself so near his pleasure,
He brunt in heart, and scarce could bide the leisure
Till Venus with her garland shewde in sight,
On his Horizon to renew the night.
This widow, finding then the time unmeet,
Gods just determination to complete;
Made much delay, and fand full many-a sku^e,
With sundry talk this tyrant to abuse:
And said; my Lord, I pray you show to me,
What fury just has moved your majesty?
What have our people done (please it your Grace)
By whom or when that Izaks holy race
Might so provoke a Prince to wrackfull war,
In toungs, and laws, so separate from us far?
Then said the Duke, discourteous should I be
If I deny (O fair) to answer thee.
Now as the heaven two Suns cannot contain,
So in the earth two kings cannot remain
Of equal state. So does ambition crave,
One king will not another equal have.
My Prince is witness: who at wars did fall,
With king Arphaxat, cause he raisde his wall
Of Ecbatane so high that it did shame
To Niniue, and Babell feared the same:
For which, he undertook to spoil his throne,
And race his Scepter to the lowest stone:
With spite, his buildings brave he cast adown.
Arphaxat then, a man of great renown,
And worthy of his Scepter and his state,
Thought better in the field to make debate,
Then bear a scorn, his Meds to battle drew:
Thus 'tweene them two did cruel war ensew.
Arphaxa^ armed all the yles of Greece,
Where Jason was, but sought no golden fleece,
But golden lingots with abundant gain,
Where Phasis stream bedeawes the pleasant Plain.
The Harmastans, and Albans, strong, and wise,
That sowes but once, and have their harvest thrice:
The men that near to Oxus banks abydes,
And those that Antitaurus horns diuydes:
And those that man's the mount upon whose breast
The ship that escaped the genrall flood did rest:
And those that are (not hid) within the Reame,
Where proud Iaxartes flows with furious stream:
In short; the Medes brought men to aid their plea,
From Pontus far beyond the Caspian sea:
And of this Host Arphaxat was commander,
With hope and heart more high then Alexander.
My prince desirous then to win or die,
Left naught undone that furthred to supply
His troubled state. He armed Syttacene,
And waged Archers out of Osrohene:
Ye Lords of Lands that yelds the hundredth corn,
Leave Euphrates and bounds where ye were borne:
Ye Carmans bold that all on fish do feed,
And of their pelts do make your warlike weed;
Leave Hytan bounds, go seek the golden sands:
Ye Parths, ye Cosses, Arabs, and ye lands,
That of your Magi Prophets thinks ye know
Their spells divine, yourself for p^kmen show.
O Calde, change thine Astrolab and square
To spear and shield: for, we no wight will spare
Of able age, of high or low degrie
That trails the pike, or lance lays on his thie.
Let women, Children, and the burghers old
At home alone, let them their houses hold.
We sommond eke the Persians and Phoenicians,
The soft Egyptians, Hebrews, and Cilicians,
To come in haste, and join their force to ours:
But they disdainfully deteind their powrs;
And, with their wicked hands, and words vnsage,
They did our sacred messengers outrage.
My master for a time, putvp this wrong,
Attending time, to quite these enmies strong;
With purpose, more at leisure, to provide
TO abate this sacrilegious peoples pride.
Two greater kings were never seen beforne, Battle.

Then camped was in Ragau field at morn,
With hauty hearts enarmed all in ire:
Each soldier set another so on fire,
That scarsly they could keep them in their bound,
Till pipe, or Cymball, or the trumpets sound,
Denounce the choke: but with their furious faces,
They thret their foes afar with fell menaces,
And strokes at hand: two thousand Lads forlorn
(To blunt the sword) were down in battle borne.
Upon their flanks flew fervently the stones,
That bet their bucklers to their bruised bones.
The squadrons then steps sternly to the strokes,
With hearts in humain all the battle yokes,
And are supplide with many mighty bands:
Some counters them, and sternly them withstands:
With foot to foot each other over plyes:
Both Meds and Caldes clasp with ghastly cries;
Like Nilus stream that from the rocks does romble,
Or Encelade when he in tomb does tomble.
Here some lies headles: some, that cannot stand,
Trails on his womb, and wants both foot and hand,
Cut off with stroks: some per^'t throu plate and mails:
Some shoulder-^lasht: some panched in the entrails:
Some brains outbet: some in the guts were gored:
Some dying vomit blood: and some were smor'd:
Some neither quick nor dead, do yet attend
What place it pleases God their souls to send:
So loath the little life, that does abide,
Is, from the dying body to divide.
The ground that erst was yellow, green, and blew,
Is ouercled with blood in purpure hew.
While this man gives some one his deadly baine,
He of another gets the like again.
The rage increasing grows with yrefull flame:
The field is spread with bodies dead and lame.
Like as ye see the wallowing sea to strive,
Flood after flood, and wave with vvaue to drive, Comparison.

Then waves with waves, the floods with floods do chase,
And eft returns unto their former place:
Or like the crops of corn in mids of May
(Blown with the vvestren wind) aside does sway,
Both to and fro, as force does them constrain,
And yet their tops redresseth up again:
So, whiles the Syrians are by Medes displaced;
And whiles the Medes by Syrian^ are rechased.
Then, like two raging floods that down do fall,
From two contrary mutine mountains tall;
Down bearing bridge and bank, and all destroys,
And strives which one may do the most annoyes:
So, these two kings, in force and courage stout,
Excels the rest with slaughter them about:
Wherso they'preast, they left on either side,
Behind them, two long opened ways and wide:
For, all their bucklers, Mo^ions, and Quiraces
Were of no proof against their peisant maces.
Yet (for the time) the Mede^ so fearcely fought,
That they the Assyrian bands in terror brought,
And pauld his soldiers hearts, and brak their might;
Who (overcome) took them to shameful flight.
The Medes pursewd, and wounded, in that chase,
Ten thousand men; but none, upon the face.
In short, this day our Scepter had deprived,
Had I not like the thunder dint arrived
In battles brunt. Their male and their vantbras,
Their helm and shield, before my Coutelas,
Were frail as glass: and never a stroke I lent
But deadly was, and them more terror sent
Then all our camp. The soldier then in fear
With trembling hand could scarsly weild his spear.
The pal-hewd knight with heart in breast that quakes,
His thyes in saddle, and feet in stirrops shakes
For dread of me. There some, with trenchant glaiue
From hight of head, to middle down I claiue.
And some so far I foyned through the Jack,
The blade aperde a foot behind his back:
So that the Medes, afraid at such a thing,
In heat of fight they fled and left their king.
Who seeing himself betrayed, his clothes he rent,
And bloody toward Ragau town he went:
Where we him met, yet ( Brave) did him defend,
And sought amongst his foes a famous end:
As does the Tiger wild who sees her den
Beset about with hunters dogs and men,
That turns her fear to furious raging rife
And will not unrevenged lose her life:
So he them thunderbet wherso he went,
That never a stroke in vain his right hand spent:
But er with murdring blade they could him quell,
Full many-a bold precursor he sent to hell.
At last, Arphaxat began of slaughter tire,
And (wounded sore) left both his life and ire,
And fell, as does some huge high planted oak,
That long has bide the winds, and many-a stroke
Of many an axe; yet stoutly does sustain
Their travels long, and frustrats all their pain;
The root does sigh, the dale does roaring sound,
And to the heaven the noise does high rebound;
His head now here, now there, seems to incline,
And threats him here and there with great ruin:
Yet stands upright above the highest oaks,
Till, vanquished with a thousand thousand strokes,
He falls at last, and brings with him to ground
Both trees and cattle to the Plain profound:
So with Arphaxat fell the Medes empire.
My king the king of kings, then in his ire
Rased Ecbatan: and now grows weed and herb,
Where sometime stood his palaces superbe.
So that where erst the lute and loud Haubois
Were wont to sound with sweet concordant nois,
Now shriking owls and other monsters more
In funeral sound fulfils the place with woe.
My potent Prince, when all this war was ceast
Consumed months four in Royal feast,
In Niniue the great: which banquet done,
He me commanded to assemble sone
His Royal host, to punish all and some,
That to his former aid disdaind to come:
And that I shortly should with sword and flame
Revenge his honor: but alas, Madame,
Full far am I from that I would pursew.
For, coming here thy nation to subdew,
I vanquished am by thee; so that deaths might,
Shall shortly close mine eyes with endless night,
If you not (with a loving kiss) to me
Restore my life. O worthy Prince, quoth she,
Continue your discourse, and to me tell
What great adventures to your Host befell.
Then he retooke his tale he left alate,
And made a long discourse of all his state,
Part, true, part false: as do some warriors brave,
Who speaking of their Acts will lie and rave.
My Camp assembled, then began I t'enflame Oration.

My soldiers hearts thus, for to win them fame:
Companions, now, if ever ye pretend
To win renoume that never shall have end,
Go forwards now, plague these inhumain Lands,
That on our sacred Legates laid their hands.
Revenge, revenge, ye men, your most hie Prince,
That ever Scepter bare in rich province,
That ever came adowne with mighty arm,
From circled stars. Alarm' soldats, alarm:
Take blades in hand, and brands of burning ire,
To waste the western world with sword and fire.
With bloody seas bedewe each mount and vvood,
And make your horses fearce to swim in blood.
Receive the Scepter great and crown of might
Of all this world which is to you behight.
Receive this laud, that for your conquest brave,
Shall draw your fames from the forgetful grave.
Receive ye valiant men the noble spoil
Of many-a land that ye shall put to foil.
Let men behold that sees you day by day,
How ye are cloyde with honor spoil and pray:
Thus ended I. And as my words were spent,
They bet their bucklers, showing them content
With courage bold, to fight with me and bide.
Then sixscore thousand men I had to guide,
Or more, and so from Niniue we past
And marched unto ( Bectile) at last,
I through Edessi, Amidi, and Carran came,
Where sometime dwelt your father Abraham:
I wan the mount whose thwarting horns diuyds
All Asie; and serves for bounds on sundry syds,
To many great Empyrs: I ^lew, I brent
All in my way. My fellon soldiers went
Like moawers with their sithes in sowple hands,
Who leaves not after them a straw that stands;
But ample swathes of grass on ground does cast,
And shows what way their sharped sithes have past.
All Lydia knows, that naught now grows in it
But weeds. And Phuli-and Tharsis feels it yet.
I was wel^eare the straits that closes all
Phoenice and the Ishique Rouers, like a wall,
When Rosea, Solea, Mops, Anchiali' and Iscia,
And sweet Egei: and (short) the whole Cilicia,
This passage took before and lay in wait,
To stay my Army for to pass this straight.
If I the harms and has^ards all should tell
Of all the affairs and bloody frayes that fell,
And succors sent; the day should slide away
Before my tale. For that Cilicia I say,
Through great advantage of their ground so narrow,
Defended them from both the spear and arrow:
So that my Host, that gave before the chase,
To puissant kings, now fled with great disgrace. Craking.

Then foming in despite, despair, and ire,
I cast my self where shot flew like the fire:
And though they hurt me in a hundred parts,
And though my buckler bare a wood of darts:
Yet left not I, but with audacious face
I bravely fought, and made them all give place.
My army followde, where my arm made way
With trenching blade, on bodies dead that lay.
The greatest coward, that my captains led,
Pursewd and ^lew the most of them that fled.
The Cidnus stream (who for his silver flood
Esteemd a king) ran now with human blood:
The Pyram fearce, in seas discharged than
Full many-a helm, and sword, and worthy man.
In short as your own river seems to rest,
With swelling tyds and frothy foods represt,
Within his bank: yet furiously him wreaks
With weighty force and banks and bridges breaks,
And stroies the Plains, and makes for many-a day
More wrak, then if his channels open lay:
In semble sort their bands I did enchace,
That kept the entrance of that craggie place.
I brunt, I ^lew, cast down, all that I fand;
And, Asia spoild, I entered the easter Land.
I wan Cele^, and raged pitti-les
Upon the fruitful shore of Euphrates.
I bet the desert Rapse, and Eagria Land,
Who knows the virtue of my conquering hand.
From thence to seaward sewing mine intent
I wasted Madian. Northward then I went
To L^ban-ward, Damascus ouerrinning,
With other towns, Abil^a, and Hippas winning.
From thence, with curious mind my standerds styes
The hill, where sun is seen to set and ryes.
And so from thence I forward led mine host,
To the Occident on the Phoenic^an cost.
Then Sidon, Bible, Beryte, Tire, and Gaze,
With Ascalon, and Assot, in a maze
For fear, sent humbly to my sacred seat,
Wise messengers, my favor to entreat.
We come not here, my Lord said they, with arms
For to resist the chok of thy Gens ^'armes:
But Prince, we come, of thee for to resaue
Both life and death, and what law we shall have.
Our towns are thine, our cities and our hills,
Our fields, our flocks, our wealth is at your wills.
Our service, and our treasures, great and small,
Our selfs, our wives, and our fair children all,
Now only rests to thee, if so thee please
To take us thus, O God what greater ease:
O God what greater good may us befall,
Then unto such a Chief for to be thrall:
Who weilds the valiant lance and balance right,
With virtue, like the Gods of greatest might.
So were to me as gracious to behold
Their towns and Cities both: for, young and old
With crowns, and presents of the Flora sweet,
And costly odours, humbly did me greet.
At sounds of horns and pypes they dancing went,
With goods and bodies me for to present.
Then I, abusing not the law of arms,
Entreated them, and did to them no harms,
Nor to their Lands: But first their forts I mand,
With men of mine, and theirs took in my Band.
For where that I my people farthest drew,
My camp in bands, from bands, to armies grew,
As does the Danow which begins to flow,
By Raurak fields with snakish crangling slow,
Then swells his floods with sixty rivers large,
That in the Golfe Euxinus does discharge.
I vvende Madame that Izrell, like the rest,
Would yield to me, that I should not be strest
Against their breast to move my murdring spear:
But as I came the Scythique rampire near
(The Tomb of her whose milk had such a hap
To feed the twice borne Denis in her lap)
I heard their wilful rage first in that place:
Which doubtless will destroy all Abraham's race.
FINIS.
THE SVMMARIE OF The VI. BOOK.
IVdith, having escaped the peril of her chastity, is brought to a sumptuous
banquet prepared by Holophernes for the in^ert unme^t of her, and farther
provocation of his filthy lust: In which the abominable vice of gluttony is
by the Poet viuely descriued, and sharply reprehended. And whereas the Tyrant
thought by such excess to overcome the chaste widow: himself is so over come
with wine, that upon a very simple delay he lets her go till he was in his
bed. And here is noted that the snares that the wicked lays for others, they
fall in them their selfs. Whiles the Tyrant contemplated his lust, Judith in
trouble called upon her God, who made way for her works through the Tyrants
own wickedness: who heaping sin upon sin, approached at last to the end of his
tragoedy: and mounting upon the skaffolde of the ire of God, falls asleep in
his sinful bed, and is by Judith beheaded in his beastly drunkenness. True it
is that in this execution she felt her great infirmity: but likewise she found
that God was able to strengthen the most feeble for the execution of his
Justice. And as before she was preserved in the midst of her enemies: so the
Lord to make a miraculous end of his work, brings her safe home to her people.
The Bethulians gives thanks to God. The Ammonit ranished with this miracle,
embraced the true religion. The head of Holophernes (that Iudiths servant
brought) being set up for a terrible spectacle to the Heathen encouraged the
Cittezens to give assault upon the camp. Bagos who had been an instrument of
the Tyrants wickedness, is the first that finds his masters headles C^^kas, and
puts the camp in such affray, that they fled all before Israel, in such sort
that scarce one was left to bring news to Niniue, of the fortune of the
battle. And that was Gods Justice, that those that had followed this Tyrant in
his wickedness should be companions of his death. Judith last of all celebrates
the deliverance of God, with a song, to the honor and glory of his almighty
name.

THE SIXTH BOOK of IVDITH.
BEfore the Pagan had his purpose ended,
The night obscure from mountains high descended,
And sewers set the board with costly meat,
Of passing price, so delicate to eat,
That Holopherne unto his joyous feast
Aperd to have called the kings of west and east.
O glutton throtes, O greedy guts profound! Exclamatio^.

The chosen meats, within the world his bound
By the Abderois invented, may not staunch,
Nor satisfy your foul devouring paunch:
But must in Moluke seek the spices fine,
Canary sugar, and the Candy wine.
Your appetits (O gluttons) to content, Gluttony.

The sacred breast of Thetis blew is rent:
The Air must be dispeopled for your mawes:
The Phoenix sole can scarce escape your jaws.
'O plague, O poison to the warrior state!
'Thou makes the noble hearts effeminate.
'While Rome was ruled by Curioes and Fabrices,
'Who fed on roots and sought not for delices:
'And when the only Cresson was the food
'Most delicate to Persia; then they stood
'In happy state, renowmde in peace and ^arre,
'And throu the world their triumphs spread afar:
'But when they after, in the Assyrian hall,
'Had learnd the lessons of Sardanapall:
'And when the other, given to belly cheer,
'By Galbaes, Neroes, Vitells gouernd wear,
'Who gloried more to fill a costly plate,
'Then kill a Phyrrhus or a Mythridate;
'Then both of them were seen for to be sacked
'By nations poor, whom they before had wracked.
'Of little, Nature lives: superfluous meat
'But duls the sprite, and does the stomach freat.
'When they were set, then throw that Royal rout
The Maluesie was quaffed often about.
One drinks out of an Alabastar Cup:
One out of Crystal does the Nectar suppe:
Some out of curious shells of Unicorn:
Some spills the wine, and some to beds were borne,
But namely there the Vizroy would not tire,
But more he drank, the more he had desire:
Like to the Ocean-Sea, though it resaues
All Nilus floods, yea all fresh water craves
From East to West, yet grows he not a grain,
But still is ready for as much, again.
One glass draws on another glass: and when
The butler meant to cease, he but began
To skink god Bacchus: thus this dronken wight
Among his dronkards tippled till midnight:
Then each of them, with stackring steps out went,
And groping hands, retyring to his tent.
This tyrant wished them often away before:
To whom each moment seemd to be a skore.
As Soon as they were gone, then began he prease
The trembling Judith: Cease, great prince, O cease
The widow said: what have need you to make
To reap the flower that none can from you take?
My Lord, go to your bed and take your ease;
Where I your sweet embracings will complease,
As Soon as I my garments may remove,
That binds my body brunt with ardent love.
Now, if that sober wits and wily brains
Cannot avoid the female tricks and trains:
Abash not reader though this reckles Roy
(Bewitched by Semels son, and Venus boy)
Was thus beguilde: considering, both these twain
Confounds the force of those that them retain.
So letting Judith slide out of his arm,
He gins to loose his garments soft and warm:
But throw his have, his hand came lesser speed,
And though he was deceived, yet took no heed,
But wening well t'vntruss his peevish points,
He knits them twyfold with his trembling ioints;
So long till he, with anger discontent,
Cuts me them all, and off his clothes he rent,
And naked went to bed. Then as ye see
The bloody boweman stand behind a tree,
Who warely watches for the wandering dear:
To every part, where de does think to hear
Some trembling bush, some beast or Lezard small,
That motion makes, so turns he withal
His face and hand to shoot, but all in vain
For to relieve his long aspecting pain:
Even so, this foolish tyrant when he hard
Some rat or mouse, then thought he to himward,
His Mistress came: and when he heard no more,
Yet thought (she came) whom most he did adore.
While up he lifts his head, while lets it fall:
While looks about, while counts the pases all,
That she should pass, to come unto his bed.
Thus turning often, as ardent lust him led,
He thought his bed was sown with pricking thorn:
But now the drink, that he had drunk beforne,
Brewd in his brain, and from his mind it took
The sweet remembrance of her loving look.
So fell on sleep: and then to him appears
Ten thousand flames, ten thousand dinnes he hears,
And dreams of Devils, and Demons dark and dim,
Medusas, Minotaurs, and Gorgons grim.
This while, the heart of Judith began to beat
Incessantly, beset with battle great:
One while her fear refeld her first intent:
One while her action just her courage lent.
Then said she, Judith, now is time, go to it,
And save thy people: Nay, I will not do it.
I will, I will not; Go fear not again:
Will thou the sacred gestning then profane?
Not it profane; but holier it shall stand,
When holy folk are helped by my hand.
But shameful lives the tray tour evermore;
No trayt or she who does her town restore.
But murdrers all, are of the heaven forsaken:
All murder-is not for murder always taken.
Alas, are they not murdrers sleyes their Prince?
This tyrant is no prince of my province:
But, what if God will have us under his-awe?
He Is not of God that fights against his law.
For then should Ahud, Iahell, and Iehew,
Be homi^ids, because they tyrants slew.
But what? they were commanded of the Lord:
To such an act, my heart should soon accord.
Alas, my heart is weak for such a deed:
The are strong enough whom God does strength at need.
But when it is done who shall my warrant be?
God brought me here, God will deliver me.
What if the Lord leave thee in Heathen hands?
Were this Duke dead, I fear no death nor bands.
But what if they pollute thee like a slave?
My body with my heart they shall not have.
Thus she resolved in her mind at last,
Her hands and eyes unto the heaven she cast,
And with an humble voice to God she prayed:
O gracious God that always art the aid
To thy beloved Izak, I thee pray
To strength my hand, even my right hand this day,
That I may make this bloody tyrant dye,
That to discepter thee would skale the sky.
But since thy goodness has preserved me,
And brought my bote so near the shore to be;
Grant that some sleepy drink I may provide,
To dull this tyrants heart and daunt his pride,
To the end that I may free thy congregation;
Unto thy honor, and our consolation.
This prayer done, she looked round about,
And heard this dronken prince in sleeping rout:
Then stepped she to his sword that by him stood,
Which often had bathed the world with humain blood:
But as she preast this tyrant for to quell,
Fear reft the sword from her, and down she fell,
And lost at once the strength of heart and corse.
O God (quoth she) now by thy mighty force
Restore my strength. This said (with pale annoy)
She rudly rose, and stroke this sleeping Roy,
So fell, that from his shoulders flew his powle,
And from his body fled his Ethnique ^owle
Hie way to hell. His bulk all blood bestaind
Lay still, his head in Iudiths hand remaind;
The which her maid put up into a sack:
Thus throw the camp they close away do pack,
Empeacht of none. For, those that had her seen,
Supposde she went (as she had wonted been,
The nights before) unto the valley, whear
They thought she went to serve Diana clear.
When Judith chaste came near the Hebrew wall;
Let in (quoth she) for our great God of all
Has broke this night the whole Assyrian power,
And raysd the horn of Izak at this hour.
Then men, amazde of her unhoped state,
About her ran assembling at the gate,
Where holy Judith on a hill was mounted,
And all her chance from point to point recounted;
And there discov'ring drew out of the sack
The bloody head of the enmy of Izak.
The Citizens, that saw how she did stand
With the end of Assurs head in her right hand;
They praised God, who by her hand had slain
And punished that traitor in humain.
'But, most of all Duke Ammon did admire
'The work of God. Then he t'escape their
'Of Jacobs God, who aids the weakest part,
'He shortly circumcised his flesh and heart.
'O God, that rightly by foresight divine
'Repels the purpose of all men's engine:
'Who for to lead the elect to destnyed health
'(Even when it seems them fardest from their wealth)
'Of ill, thou draws the good, and some in ill
'Thou lets them run thy Justice to fulfill;
'(O Lord) the vile desire of blood and sak,
'Made Holopherne to war upon Izak:
'But where that he would Izaks blood have shed,
'He lost his own for Izak, on his bed.
'Thus thy good grace has made his vain invention
'To take effect contrary his intention.
'So Paul became a Saint, who was a Pharisee;
'And, of a tyrant, teacher of thy veritee:
'So was the thief, that hong with our Messiah,
'(For all his sin) preserved with Elias:
'His vicious corpse could have no life here down;
'His soul by grace yet got a heavenly crown.
'Change then (O God) the hearts of christian princes,
'Who sheds the faithfuls blood in their provinces.
'Let thou that sword, that thou gives them to guide,
'Vpon thy enmies only be applyde;
'Vpon those tyrants whose unrighteous horn
'Deteins the Land where thy dear son was borne:
'Not on the backs of those, who, with humility,
'Adores the Triple one great God invnitie.
Then, at commandment of this widow chaste,
A soldier took the tyrants head in haste;
And, for to give the Hebrews heart withal,
He fixed it upon the foremost wall.
Their fathers came, and sons, and wives, and mayds,
Who erst had lost, amongst the Heathen blayds,
Their sons, their parents, maks, and lovers dear;
With heavy hearts and furious raging cheer,
They pild and paird his beard, of paled hew,
Spet in his face, and out his tongue they drew,
Which used to speak of God great blasphemies,
And with their fingers poched out his eyes.
The rife remembrance of so late an ill,
Made vulgar folk such vengeance to fulfill.
This while, Aurora ceased to embrace
Her ancient love, and rose with ruddy face,
Upon the Indian heaven: the warriors strong,
That kept the town, now sorted forth in throng,
Enarmed all, with such a hydeous sound
As seemde the elements four for to confound,
And break the bands that keeps them in their border,
Retyring them unto their old disorder.
The Pagan watches next the Cities side
(Awaked with this din) start up and cryde
Alarm, Alarm, like fearful men aghast:
Then through the Camp, the hot Alarm past.
Some takes his neighbors armor first he finds, Confusion.

And wrong on arms the brace^^ both he binds.
Some takes a staf for have, and leaves his lance:
Some madling runs, some trembles in a trance:
Some on his horse ill sadled ginnes to ride,
And wants his spurs, some boldly do abide:
Some neither wakes nor sleeps, but mazing stands:
Some, brave in words, are beastly of their hands.
This brute from hand to hand, from man to man,
Unto the Pagans Court at last it ran.
Then Bagos, Eunuch, sadly forth he went
T'awake the sleeping Ethnique in his tent;
And knocked once, twice, or thrice, with trembling hand:
But such eternal sleep his temples band,
That he had past already (miserable)
Of Styx so black the flood irrepassable.
Yet Bagos, hearing Izaks cry increase,
He with his foot, the door began to prease,
And entered: where the bed he did behold
All bled with Holophernes carcass cold:
He tore his hair; and all his garments rent,
And to the heaven his howling cries he sent.
But when he mist the Hebrew-Dame away,
Then raging he began a ghastly fray.
And from the bloody tent as he ran out,
Among the Heathen thus began to shout:
Woe, woe, to us, a slave (they Judith call)
In sleaing Holopherne, has slain us all,
That daunted all the world. These nouels last,
Joined to the former fear that lately past,
Affrighted so the soldiers one and all,
That pike and dart, and target they let fall,
And fled through mountains, valleis, and throw heaths,
Where every chance procurde them worser deaths.
Then all the assieged folk in flocks descended,
And on their enmies backs their howes they bended.
Both parties ran: but the one that other chased,
The weary flyers flight, themselfs defaced.
The Hebrews there, in fight not one they lost;
But they bet down and slew the Heathen host:
As does a Lion of Getulia wood
Bespred the land with woried beasts and blood,
So long as he may find a beast abide,
That dare oppone him to his cruel pride.
Some head long throws themselfs from craggie Rocks,
And breaks their bones and all their brains out knocks:
Some has forgot, that Parcas, every whear,
Waits on their end that drown in water clear:
But if that any scapte by some great hap,
He scapte the first, but not the after clap:
Fore all the straits and passages were set,
That none should escape alive where thy were met:
Yea scarsly one was left to tell the king,
At Niniue, of all this wondrous thing.
This battle done, all those whose Sex and age
With held at home (their dolours to assuage)
Came forth out of their fort to see and hear
What God had done for them his people dear.
They found some men dismembered having breath,
That cried in vain a hundredth times for death.
Another gnashes with his teeth, in pains:
Some dead in face their former rage retains.
And some is shot directly throw the heart.
Each soul departs to his appointed part,
According to the value, or the chance,
That fortuned them to dye on sword or lance.
In short: to see this sight so dreadful was,
That even the Hebrews would have said Alas,
If they had vanquished any enmie else.
This while, amongst the corses infidels,
Among a hundred thousand, their was found
The cheftains carcas rent with many-a wound
Of spear and sword, by the Hebrews in their ire.
There was no sinew, Arter, vain, nor lyre,
That was not mangled with their vulgar rage:
No time nor moment might their ire assuage.
If Holopherne had been like Atlas long,
Or like in limbs unto Briarius strong;
Yet should his body been too small a pray,
To sati fie their fury every way.
For, in that Camp was not so small a knave,
But of his flesh some collup he would have.
O tyrant now (quoth they) give thy right hand
To the Cilicians, and to Media Land:
Leave thou thy left. And to Celea sweet,
To Ismaell and Egypt leave thy feet;
To the end that all the world by thee offenced,
With such a present may be recompensed.
But here I fail thy corpse thus to devise
In Attomy: for, it will not suffice.
This thankful widow then who never thought
To smore this wondrous work that God had wrought,
Entun'd her vearse, and sung to sweet consort
Of instruments, and past with gracious port
Before the chosen Dames and virgins their,
That were esteem de for honest chaste and fair.
Sing sing, with heart and voice and sounding strings,
And praise the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
Who does disthrone the great, and in their place
Erects the poor that leans upon his grace.
Who would have thought that in a day one town
Could overcome a camp of such renown,
Who daunted all the world, whose pride was felt
From Indian shore to where the Calpees dwelt?
Great God, who will believe that Holopherne,
Who did a hundred famous princes derne,
Should be disceptred, slain, left in a midow,
By no great Giant, but a feeble widow?
Great God, who will believe that he who raind,
From north to south, and in his hands retaind*
Both East and West; now gets not grace to have
An ynch of Gazon ground to be his grave?
This Conqu'rour, that came with no army small,
Now lies on ground abandond of them all;
Not sole: for, those companions him in death,
That followde him while he had life and breath.
Not now the ground, but Ravens hunger-sterv'd,
Are now his tomb as he has well deserved.
No vaults of Marble rich, nor Porphyr pure,
That he had built, could be his sepulture.
Even so good Lord from hence forth let us find
Thee not our Judge, but for our father kind:
But let all tyrants that against thee gather,
Find thee their Judge; but not their loving father.
Here Judith ends: And also hear I stay, The Translator.

With thanks to God. So, for his state I pray
At whose command I undertook this deed,
To please his Grace, and those that will it reed.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF SIGnification of some words as they are used before.
*

Words. Significations. ABderois, Profane and delicate Epicures. Abile. A hill
in Africa, one of the Pillars of Hercules. Abraham. Father of the Jews or the
faithful. Achelois Ympes. Sirenes or Mermaids. Amram. The father of Moses.
Assure. Assurs head, The Country of Assyria or their king. Assyrian Prince.
Holophernes. Vizroy or General. Agamemnon. The General of the Greeks, being
present at the sacrificing of his only Daughter, was painted with a bend
about his eyes, either for the unskillfulness of the painter, who could not
sufficiently express the fathers special tears, or else for that he thought
it not decent to paint so mighty a Prince weeping; or unnatural, not to weep.
Aconite. A poysonable herb. Autan. The South or south wind. Aurora. The
morning. Arphaxat. Supposed to be Arbactus, King of Medes. Atlas. A great
Giant. Argus. Had a hundredth eyes. Alexander. The great. Apelles. An excellent
painter. Bethull or Bethulia. The City where Judith dwelt. Babell. Babylon, or
the whole country Bellona. Goddess of Battle. Briccoll. An engine of war.
Briarius. A Giant with a hundredth hands. Bacchus. Wine or drunkenness. Boreas.
The North or north wind. Chameleon. A beast that changes his colors.
Ctesiphon. A cunning Architector or builder. Chaos. A confusion before the
worlds creation. Capharois. Two perilous Rocks. Cyanes straits Calpe. A hill in
Spain, one of the pillars of Hercules. Cyprian Dame. Venus, love, or lust.
Cupido. Love or lust. Coruies. Crooked yrons to draw down buildings. Castors
sister. Helen, the dishonest wife of Monelaus. Canaces. Incestuous women.
Circes. Witches, abusers of lovers. Cyrene. A dry sandy country, or drouth.
Carmell. A mountain in Judea, or the whole country. Danow. Danubius, a river
in Germany. Denis twice born. Bacchus. Diana or Cynthia. The Moon. Dina. The
daughter of Jacob. Egyptian Queen. Cleopatra the Concubine of M. Antonius, who
swallowed a rich pearl. Elimia Land. The Elamits. Eurus. The East, or East
wind. Aegeans stable. Where horses devoured men. Encelade. A Giant buried
under mount Aetna. General. Holophernes. Gibraltar. A City in Spain, near to
Calpe-hill* one of the Pillars of Hercules. Holopherne. Vizroy, chief of the
Army. Hermon. A Hill in Judea, or the country of Judea. Hesperian cost. The
west. Hyade. A water nymph or watrie star. Heraults. Apostles, or preachers.
Jacobs sons. The people of Izrell. Izrell or Jacob. The Land of Judea. Izaak.
The people of the Jews. Ismaell. Idumeans or Edom. Ixion. One tormented in
Hell. Iebus place. Jerusalem or Sion. Judith. of Bethulia of the tribe of
Ruben. Iessies race. David and his seed. Iethro. Father in law to Moses.
Latmies son. Endymion, the long sleeper, supposed to lie with the Moon.
Lysippus. A cunning caruer. Monarke. One sole governor. Memphits. Men of that
City in Egypt. Misraim. The Land of Egypt. Mocmur. The river near Bethulia.
Momus. A scornful detractour of all things. Mars. God of strife or battle.
Myrrhaes and Syllaes. Women betrayers of their cou^rey. Minotaurs. Unnatural
monsters. Medusaes. Furies of hell. Neptunes back. The Sea. N^phathai. A mighty
strong Rock or mountain in Syria. Palestine. The Land of the Philistines.
Pharia. A famous tower in Egypt. Phlego^. One of the four horses that was
supposed to draw the sun. Phoebus. The sun. Phoeb^. His sister the moon.
Proteus. A man changing himself in sun dry forms: there is a fish of like
nature. Priams wife. Hecuba the honorable. Pestmell. All mixed confusedly
together. Ram. An ingine of war for battry. Sina-hill. Sinai-hill. Salem.
Jerusalem. Solym^. Jerusalem. Sichem. The rauisher of Dina. Sabean Queen.
Savors of Saba land. Simeon. Dinaes brother. Scythique Rampire. The tomb of
Semele, mother of Bacchus. Styx. A River in hell. Sympathy. Concordance of
natures and things. Sentinelles. Watchmen. Semirames. Women Viragoes. Syrtes.
Dangerous sands. Satrap. Prince. Stymphalides Ravenous fowls with female
faces, Harpyes. Syrian camp. The Host of Holophernes. Semels son. Bacchus or
wine. Transparent. That which may be seen through and whole, like glass.
Tortuse. An engine of war. Trepan. An engine of war. The foreign tide.
Supposed to have been the flood of Noah, or the deluge of Deucalion that
divided Africa from Europe, and Sycilia from Italia. Thetis. The Sea. Thurim^.
Deceitful Aduocats. Theban knight. Captain of the Greeks army. Thief that
stole the fire. Prometheus, who stole fire from Jupiter. Zedechias. Last king
of the Jews. Zephyrus. West or west wind. Zeuxis. A painter of Italy, who
being required to paint the picture of Helen, desired to have all the fairest
women of Creton to be present for his pattern.
FINIS.
1611.

OS ^ HOMINI ^ SVBLIME ^ DEDIT
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Imprinted by H. L. and are to be sold by Arthur Johnson at the
sign of the white horse, near the great North door of Paul's Church.


